 
 
Forests Partnership gets new name, board 
By DAILY SUN STAFF 
05/19/2002 
The Grand Canyon Forests Partnership has a new name and new Board of Directors. 
Now called the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership, the community-based collaborative 
continues working to restore ponderosa pine forest ecosystems and reduce the risk of 
wildfire around the Flagstaff.  
Since 1996, this now 21-member collaborative with the U.S. Forest Service has been 
actively pursuing three main goals: Restoring the natural ecosystem of ponderosa pine 
forests in Flagstaff's urban-wildland interface, managing forest fuels within the interface 
to reduce the risk of catastrophic fire, and researching ecological, economic and social 
dimensions of restoration efforts.  
The Partnership has accomplished on-the-ground restoration including forest thinning 
and burning, activities to maintain cover for wildlife, road closures and obliterations, 
meadow restoration at Chimney Spring north of Flagstaff, and additional restoration work 
and recreation enhancement within designated camping spots along Freidlein Prairie 
Road between Flagstaff and the San Francisco Peaks.  
To date, the Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership has analyzed 24,000 acres around 
Flagstaff for restoration treatments, managed about 10,000 acres for restoration, thinned 
900 acres, burned 500 acres, and has 80 ongoing research projects.  
The formal Partnership was created in 1998 through the signing of a cooperative 
agreement between its associated non-profit foundation and the U.S. Forest Service. It 
comprises 21 members including land management agencies, Northern Arizona 
University, local government, fire departments, businesses, utilities and environmental 
groups.  
Goals of the name change and new board members are to provide a transition in 
leadership and more fully realize the Partnership's goals of gaining added diversity as 
well as greater independence from its original founding partners.  
The previous board members have appointed a representative board comprised of Brad 
Ack of the Grand Canyon Trust; Paul Babbitt with the Coconino County Board of 
Supervisors; Tom Kolb, a member of the Society of American Foresters; Doc Smith of 
the Ecological Restoration Institute at NAU; and Jim Wheeler, with the Flagstaff Fire 
Department.  

"The Partnership is maturing," said outgoing Forests Foundation president, Geoff 
Barnard. "We are following through to ensure its long-term success while continuing to 
respond to community needs."  
The Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership has received financial support through 
Congressional leadership from Arizona Senator Jon Kyl, and was honored as a model for 
collaboration by former Vice-President Al Gore and former Interior Secretary Bruce 
Babbitt.  
Visit www.gcfp.org for more information, including annual plan, projects, organization 
history and structure  
 
