 
April	  11,	  2011	   	  
	  
	  
	  
Contact:	  
bonnie.stevens@gmail.com	  
For	  Immediate	  Release	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
928-­‐380-­‐4349	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
afegan@nmhu.edu	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
|	  
	  
	  
505-­‐426-­‐2081	   	  
	  
Note	  to	  editors:	  HD	  video	  and	  images	  are	  available	  upon	  request!	  	  
	  
Cutting	  Edge	  Jobs	  Supported	  by	  Old	  Wood	  
	  
Albuquerque,	  N.M.	  –	  Hope	  for	  forests	  and	  communities	  at	  risk	  is	  spreading	  like	  wildfire	  in	  an	  isolated	  village	  
south	  of	  Albuquerque.	  Ecologists	  say	  what’s	  happening	  on	  the	  Alamo	  Navajo	  Reservation	  could	  well	  be	  a	  
model	  for	  forest	  restoration	  across	  the	  Southwest	  where	  there	  are	  too	  many	  trees	  and	  not	  enough	  jobs.	  	  	  
	  
In	  a	  small	  lumberyard	  in	  Socorro,	  N.M.,	  young	  adults	  are	  learning	  how	  to	  cut	  down	  trees,	  operate	  logging	  
equipment	  and	  split	  firewood.	  Derek	  Padilla	  is	  the	  crew	  leader.	  “This	  project	  is	  helping	  me	  because	  it’s	  near	  
my	  home	  on	  the	  reservation.”	  	  
	  
The	  Alamo	  Navajo	  Reservation	  consists	  of	  only	  about	  2,000	  people.	  Nearly	  70	  percent	  are	  unemployed	  and	  
most	  are	  living	  below	  the	  national	  poverty	  level.	  Nearby	  is	  the	  Cibola	  National	  Forest,	  unnaturally	  thick	  with	  
pinyon	  and	  juniper	  trees.	  The	  area	  is	  considered	  New	  Mexico’s	  most	  dangerous	  place	  for	  homes	  and	  
businesses	  during	  fire	  season.	  	  
	  
“We’ve	  removed	  natural	  fire	  from	  a	  lot	  of	  the	  ecosystems	  throughout	  the	  West,”	  says	  Wally	  Covington,	  
Arizona’s	  director	  for	  the	  Southwest	  Ecological	  Restoration	  Institutes.	  “That	  has	  allowed	  forests	  to	  build	  up	  
these	  ground	  fuels	  and	  ladder	  fuels	  and	  that’s	  what	  we’re	  trying	  to	  deal	  with	  across	  millions	  of	  acres.	  We’re	  
trying	  to	  mimic	  what	  science	  tells	  us	  would	  be	  a	  more	  natural	  condition.”	  
	  
To	  achieve	  this	  desired	  condition,	  SWERI	  is	  providing	  training	  along	  with	  equipment,	  such	  as	  wood	  splitters	  
and	  yarders.	  The	  collaboration	  also	  includes	  the	  U.	  S.	  Forest	  Service,	  Bureau	  of	  Land	  Management	  and	  the	  
New	  Mexico	  State	  Forestry	  Division.	  
	  
“We	  now	  have	  people	  here	  who	  are	  trained	  in	  felling,	  trained	  in	  primary	  processing	  and	  trained	  in	  restoration	  
monitoring,”	  says	  SWERI’s	  New	  Mexico	  Director	  Andrew	  Egan.	  “They	  are	  really	  making	  New	  Mexico	  forests	  
healthier	  and	  making	  New	  Mexico	  a	  safer	  place	  to	  be	  because	  we	  are	  reducing	  the	  impacts	  of	  potential	  
wildfires.”	  
	  	  
With	  SWERI,	  the	  Alamo	  Navajo	  School	  Board	  has	  created	  a	  wood	  products	  program	  out	  of	  trees	  that	  nobody	  
wanted.	  “We	  sell	  firewood	  all	  over	  the	  country,”	  says	  the	  school	  board’s	  Natural	  Resource	  Specialist	  Bill	  
Ferranti.	  “Our	  biggest	  market	  is	  in	  west	  Texas.	  We	  shipped	  some	  to	  Chicago.	  We	  shipped	  some	  to	  North	  
Carolina.	  We	  shipped	  more	  than	  300	  cords	  last	  year.”	  
	  
It’s	  a	  collaboration	  supported	  by	  Old	  Wood.	  Owner,	  David	  Old,	  is	  building	  a	  business	  out	  of	  sticks	  and	  
branches	  in	  Las	  Vegas,	  N.M.	  “The	  whole	  plant	  is	  really	  scaled	  and	  geared	  for	  making	  flooring	  from	  smaller	  
trees.	  We	  are	  not	  about	  cutting	  down	  the	  big	  trees.”	  
	  
If	  his	  idea	  stacks	  up,	  Old	  will	  construct	  a	  new	  foundation	  for	  some	  50	  employees	  in	  a	  $2-­‐million-­‐dollar	  a	  year	  
operation.	  Old	  Wood’s	  first	  order	  for	  pinyon	  wood	  flooring	  cut	  by	  the	  Alamo	  Navajo	  crew	  is	  scheduled	  to	  go	  
to	  a	  San	  Francisco	  restaurant.	  
	  
###	  
