harvesting & utilization
ThinTool: A Spreadsheet Model to Evaluate Fuel
Reduction Thinning Cost, Net Energy Output, and
Nutrient Impacts
Sang-Kyun Han, Han-Sup Han, William J. Elliot, and Edward M. Bilek
We developed a spreadsheet-based model, named ThinTool, to evaluate the cost of mechanical fuel reduction thinning including biomass removal, to predict net energy
output, and to assess nutrient impacts from thinning treatments in northern California and southern Oregon. A combination of literature reviews, ﬁeld-based studies,
and contractor surveys was used to develop a database and equations that are required to model these three components. The volume to be removed, tree size, slope
steepness, and skidding/yarding distances were identiﬁed as key variables determining fuel reduction thinning treatment cost. The user of this model can estimate fuel
reduction treatment costs for a wide range of thinning prescriptions using those key variables. Alternatively, users can enter their own assumptions to customize the
tool for their own operations. The net energy output function can allow users to assess potential energy contribution for biomass recovery systems by comparing the
amount of energy delivered with the total energy consumed to collect, process, and transport the biomass to an energy plant. Site nutrient removals from thinning
treatments were calculated based on the biomass amounts and nutrient contents for each species and the tree components (e.g., limbs, tops, and/or bolewood) to be
removed. The outputs can help users to examine the environmental effects of biomass recovery and provide nutrient retention information for sustainable woody biomass
production. Additional model validation from future fuel reduction thinning projects would improve user conﬁdence in the model. ThinTool should be a useful analysis
program for forest managers and planners when they are developing fuel reduction treatments that are cost- and energy-effective as well as environmentally sound.
Keywords: mechanical fuel reduction thinning, forest biomass, costing model, nutrient recycling
T
reatments to reduce hazardous fuel accumulations in Cali-
fornia’s forests often involve mechanical thinning because it
effectively addresses high levels of fuel connectivity in high-
density stands and allows the use of prescribed burning with reduced
complexity. Federal land managers have identiﬁed 73 million acres
of national forestlands in the western United States that are charac-
terized as having unnatural or excessive amounts of woody vegeta-
tion, leaving these areas prone to catastrophic wildﬁres and suscep-
tible to insect attack and degradation (US Department of
Agriculture [USDA] Forest Service 2003). Woody biomass (deﬁned
here as small-diameter trees or forest residues that are not acceptable
for solidwood products) from thinning overstocked forest stands
and traditional timber harvesting operations creates an opportunity
for energy generation. It was estimated that in the 15 Western
States, more than 28 million acres of forestlands could beneﬁt from
mechanical fuel reduction treatments, yielding approximately 345
million oven-dry tons from accessible areas (Rummer et al. 2003).
Mechanical fuel treatments use power tools and heavy equip-
ment to mechanically handle trees to reduce ﬁre hazard. Operations
include felling, skidding or yarding, and processing. The economics
of mechanical fuel reduction thinning to reduce wildland ﬁre hazard
is often in question to forestland managers when they evaluate the
practicality of thinning projects. However, there has been a lack of
models to accurately predict costs of fuel reduction thinning treat-
ments. This issue becomes further complicated when forest residues
(i.e., slash and submerchantable whole trees resulting from fuel
treatments) need to be removed from a site. Removal of forest resi-
dues creates opportunities to use them to produce biomass energy,
but forest residue collection and transportation are often cost-pro-
hibitive due to the low market value of woody biomass and the high
harvesting and transportation cost from wildlands (Han et al. 2004).
Several fuel reduction thinning studies involving various machines
and systems have been conducted to address questions related to thin-
ning prescription, biomass removal, and harvesting costs (Hartsough
Manuscript received January 25, 2016; accepted August 9, 2016; published online December 15, 2016.
Afﬁliations: Sang-Kyun Han (hsk5311@korea.kr), Korea National College of Agriculture and Fisheries, Department of Forestry and Landscape Architecture,
Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do, South Korea. Han-Sup Han (hh30@humboldt.edu), Humboldt State University. William J. Elliot (welliot@fs.fed.us), USDA Forest
Service. Edward M. Bilek (tbilek@fs.fed.us), USDA Forest Service.
Acknowledgement: This study was funded by the Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service. The authors thank Dan Blessing and Mark Anderson of
the Klamath National Forest for their support and cooperation in ﬁeld experiments and also appreciate the R&D Program for Forestry Technology (Project No.:
S211316L020110) provided by Korea Forest Service for their support in publication.
APPLIED RESEARCH
For. Sci. 63(1):118–127
http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/forsci.16-018
Copyright © 2017 Society of American Foresters
118
Forest Science • February 2017

et al. 1997, Lowell et al. 2008, Pan et al. 2008, Bolding et al. 2009).
Those studies found that stand condition (e.g., tree size, volume
removed, and slope) and harvesting system (e.g., ground-based and
cable yarding) are critical factors in evaluating the economic feasi-
bility of fuel reduction treatments. The unit cost of harvesting
smaller diameter trees is generally higher than that for larger diam-
eter trees and the unit cost of harvesting low volumes per acre is
higher than for higher per acre volumes. In addition, fuel reduction
thinning with a cable system is typically more expensive than with a
ground-based system.
A review of several previous case studies revealed that they do not
comprehensively address the wide range of possible conditions fac-
ing forest managers including woody material characteristics, equip-
ment used, road standards, hauling distances to markets, and silvi-
cultural or fuel management prescriptions. A modeling technique
that synthesizes past biomass studies and automatically selects useful
information for site-speciﬁc application may be used to effectively
address local conditions when harvesting productivity and costs are
estimated (Jin 1996, Pan et al. 2008). STHarvest (Hartsough et al.
2001) was developed to estimate the cost of harvesting small-diam-
eter trees using productivities developed from a large number of past
studies. Fight et al. (2006) also developed the Fuel Reduction Cost
Simulator (FRCS) to predict costs for fuel reduction treatments
involving removal of trees of mixed sizes in the form of whole trees,
logs, or chips from a forest. In the southwestern United States,
Lowell et al. (2008) also developed the harvest cost-revenue (HCR)
estimator to estimate harvest costs and raw log values of wildﬁre fuel
reduction treatments.
Although ﬁnal cost estimates using STHarvest and FRCS have
been used for the purpose of overall planning of fuel reduction
treatment on a large (e.g., western US) scale (Han et al. 2004, Jain et
al. 2012), these models were often not applicable to estimate accu-
rate harvesting costs for setting up a fuel reduction contract because
the production equations used in those models cover a wide range of
stand conditions. Many equations built in FRCS were sourced from
past studies on “logging” operations, which potentially under- or
overestimate a fuel reduction thinning treatment. In addition,
the model developed by Lowell et al. (2008) was based on pro-
duction equations generated from only one case study that was
conducted in a northern Arizona ponderosa pine stand. For these
reasons, existing harvesting cost models can often lead to a “ball
park” estimate of fuel reduction treatments and may not be ap-
propriate to use in the estimation of fuel treatment costs for
setting up a fair contract in a stand condition and speciﬁc thin-
ning work requirements.
In fuel reduction thinning, mechanical harvesting of forest bio-
mass for energy also raises questions about the net energy contribu-
tion due to the use of fossil fuel. A net energy analysis is often
performed to investigate the net energy ratio comparing the amount
of energy delivered to society by a technology with the total energy
consumed to harvest, extract, process, transport, and comminute for
energy production. Adams (1983) found that net energy ratios
ranged from 18.2 to 25.0 in smallwood harvesting using a cable
system (stump to truck). Pan et al. (2008) estimated the net energy
generated from mechanical fuel reduction thinning treatments us-
ing a ground-based system on a pure ponderosa pine stand in Ari-
zona. They reported that the net energy ratio between energy output
and input was 10.41. These past studies also found that the net
energy contribution in fuel reduction thinning was signiﬁcantly
associated with hauling distance to the market because energy used
for hauling biomass represented the largest part (36%) of the total
input energy. In addition, tree size had a direct effect on net energy
ratio. Harvesting larger size trees should generally improve the net
energy ratio by increasing machine productivity.
An additional limitation of previous biomass harvesting studies is
the lack of integration between woody biomass removal and the
environmental effects of these operations. Removal of woody bio-
mass including small whole trees, limbs, and tops can remove on-site
nutrients at a greater rate than harvesting stem wood only in tradi-
tional logging. In many forest stands, nutrient depletion by whole-
tree harvesting was found, but in other stands, whole-tree harvesting
had little or no effect on total ecosystem nutrients (Mann et al.
1988). In addition, the impacts of stand removal on site productiv-
ity were varied with soil type, tree species, ecosystem, or climatic
regime (Grigal and Vance 2000). Although several past studies
stated that loss of nutrients from fuel reduction thinning could have
negligible short-term impacts on site, it is still important to quantify
the amount of nutrient loss from fuel reduction treatments to mon-
itor the impact of thinning operations on long-term stand produc-
tivity. It would also help forest managers and land owners to deter-
mine tradeoffs between disparate objectives (i.e., nutrient recycling
versus removal of hazardous fuels) that require integration of bio-
mass availability, harvest cost analysis, and environmental effects
simultaneously to facilitate decisionmaking.
Mechanical fuel reduction thinning including biomass removal
is expensive compared with prescribed ﬁre and may cause nutrient
loss, but it creates opportunity for biomass energy. Forest managers
often look for a comprehensive tool to effectively evaluate economic
feasibility of fuel reduction thinning, potential for biomass energy,
and impacts on nutrient recycling from fuel treatments. However,
there has been no tool that effectively simultaneously addresses these
topics in fuel reduction thinning projects. The objective of this
research was to develop a comprehensive spreadsheet-based model
that allows forest practitioners to accurately predict the cost of fuel
reduction thinning treatment using ground-based and skyline thin-
ning systems, to estimate energy contribution, and to assess the
impacts on soil nutrients in fuel reduction thinning treatments in
northern California and southern Oregon. We also conducted a
ﬁeld-based validation of the model to evaluate how accurately it
estimates fuel reduction thinning costs. Our model should directly
beneﬁt land managers who prepare contractual documents of haz-
ardous fuel reduction treatments.
Methods
We developed a spreadsheet-based fuel reduction cost model,
named ThinTool, which incorporates net energy output and nutri-
ent impacts on fuel reduction thinning sites in northern California
and southern Oregon. The model was developed using Microsoft
Excel in conjunction with Visual Basic for Applications (VBA).
ThinTool can be used for ground-based and skyline thinning sys-
tems over a wide range of stand and site conditions, silvicultural
prescriptions, operations requirements, and road standards and dis-
tances. Three components (cost, energy output, and nutrient re-
moval) are directly linked to each other and sensitively respond to
any change in thinning prescriptions (e.g., thinning intensity and
species selection) and operations requirements (e.g., skidding dis-
tance and machine size) (Figure 1).
Forest Science • February 2017
119

Development of a Spreadsheet-Based Model to Estimate a Fuel
Reduction Thinning Treatment Cost
A combination of literature review, ﬁeld-based studies, and a
contractor survey was used to develop a database and set of equa-
tions required to run the model.
Estimation of Tree Volume Removed from Thinning Treatments
ThinTool is a stand-level thinning production and cost predic-
tion model. Production and cost estimates are based on speciﬁc
thinning prescriptions and stand conditions, including total vol-
ume, merchantable trees and energy wood volume removed, stand
density, dbh, tree height, biomass retention amounts on site, and
total harvest area. For volume estimation in the model, individual
tree height was estimated using height-diameter equations devel-
oped by Vitorelo (2011). Species-speciﬁc regional tree biomass
equations (Zhou and Hemstrom 2010) developed in the Paciﬁc
Northwest were used to predict current standing tree volume and
sawlog volumes (cubic foot volume) from 1-ft stump to a 4- or 6-in.
top.
Harvesting System and Machine Cost
Harvesting system and machine type and size are varied with
thinning treatment regions and stand conditions. To estimate more
representative and accurate thinning costs in ThinTool, two repre-
sentative harvesting systems and one representative machine type for
each operation were selected through literature reviews and personal
communications with ﬁve logging contractors working in northern
California and southern Oregon. ThinTool includes ground-based
and cable yarding systems for fuel reduction thinning. Both harvest-
ing systems apply a whole-tree harvesting method because it is com-
mon in fuel reduction units where managers wish to remove residues
from the site to reduce fuel loading. In each harvesting system,
machine cost information was collected from past studies developed
in northern California and southern Oregon (Vitorelo 2011). In
ThinTool, chipper or grinder can be selected to process waste ma-
terial (limbs, tops, chunk, and small whole trees) into a mixture that
can be used for fuel in various power generation plants or conversion
technologies. The model classiﬁes the chippers into two major cat-
egories by their horsepower (hp). Chippers with engine sizes 500
horsepower are deﬁned as small chippers; otherwise, they are treated
as large chippers. Grinders are classiﬁed into three different catego-
ries (i.e., small, 500 hp; medium, 500–900 hp; and large, 900
hp). Machine cost information for chippers and grinders was col-
lected from the database study for biomass recovery costs developed
by Han and Johnson (2012).
Two different biomass operation logistics (i.e., processing at
landing versus centralized biomass processing) and three different
prehauling options (modiﬁed dump trucks, hook-lift truck, and log
truck) were included in the model. Machine cost information for
prehauling was collected through literature reviews (Harrill and
Han 2010, Vitorelo 2011, Han and Johnson 2012). There are two
different biomass loading options applied in the model: hot opera-
tion and cold operation. Hot operation means that chippers and
grinders process forest residues that are directly loaded into a chip
van. In cold operation, chippers or grinders process forest residues
and produce piles on the ground that are then later loaded into a
chip van using a front-end loader.
Preﬁnance and tax machine costs were estimated using a meth-
odology ﬁrst developed by Matthews (1942) that was modiﬁed by
the USDA Forest Service (2007) to incorporate the capital cost
formula to more correctly account for interest when capital costs are
allocated over time. Machine costs, which were calculated per sched-
uled machine hour and per productive machine hour, were com-
bined with other costs to determine the proﬁt or loss on the sawlog
and biomass operations to determine the amount that could be bid
or price that must be received for the logging operations contract.
Machine Productivity Estimation
The most critical part of developing the cost model is determin-
ing how to accurately predict machine productivity for a given stand
condition and harvesting system. There are several approaches for
estimating machine productivity. Rummer (2008) described four
basic approaches to assign a cost to forest operations: expert opinion
method, transaction evidence method, accounting method, and en-
gineering cost analysis. To accurately predict fuel reduction thin-
ning costs on a wide range of local site conditions in southern Ore-
gon and northern California, a new approach was applied in
ThinTool using a combination of the results from literature reviews,
time and motion studies (engineering cost analysis), and expert
opinion surveys conducted in this region. We estimated machine
productivity using three steps.
The ﬁrst step of this approach was to identify key independent
Figure 1.
Fuel reduction thinning cost, net energy contribution, and site nutrient removals calculation model diagram.
120
Forest Science • February 2017

variables affecting the machine productivity through a compre-
hensive literature review. Twelve different fuel reduction thin-
ning studies that include regression equations to predict machine
productivity were categorized based on different biomass recov-
ery systems and machine types (Johnson 1988, Hartsough et al.
1997, Coulter 1999, Keatley 2000, Spinelli and Hartsough
2001, Largo and Han 2004, Halbrook and Han 2005, Han and
Renzie 2005, Adebayo 2006, Lowell et al. 2008, Pan et al. 2008,
Bolding et al. 2009).
The second step of this approach was to obtain representative
machine productivities for mechanical fuel reduction thinning
treatments on three different stand conditions using expert opinion
surveys. The survey was designed to collect representative cost esti-
mates from contractors who have performed mechanical fuel reduc-
tion thinning treatments on National Forests in northern California
and southern Oregon. Initially we contacted potential respondents
to survey, and then we sent out surveys through the mail or e-mail to
contractors who said they were willing to participate in the survey. A
total of 29 contractors participated in the survey. Of these, only ﬁve
cable yarding contractors provided their cost estimates. However,
cable yarding operations are not often implemented with fuel reduc-
tion thinning in this region due to high operation costs (Hochrien
and Kellogg 1988). Cost ﬁgures for sawlog extraction and biomass
extraction were asked to be reported separately for ground-based
and cable yarding systems. Based on key independent variables iden-
tiﬁed from the literature review, three “typical” stand conditions
that are often treated for ﬁre hazard reduction in the study area were
developed for this survey. Each stand consisted of mixed conifers
with an average size sawlog removal of 13 in. dbh. Biomass removal
for each stand consisted of trees ranging in size from 3 to 9 in. dbh
totaling 7 green tons per acre (GT/ac). Average slope and skidding
distance for the ground-based system were set as 15% and 400 ft,
respectively. In the cable yarding system, average slope and yarding
distance were 40% and 500 ft, respectively. The variable that
changed for each stand scenario was sawlog removal volume, which
was 4 thousand board feet (MBF), 7 MBF, and 10 MBF, to ﬁnd the
effect of this variable on machine productivity.
The ﬁnal step was to develop factors to adjust representative
machine productivity to accommodate a wide range of site variables
found in the ﬁrst step, such as average tree size, slope, and
skidding/yarding distances. Time and motion studies on ground-
based and skyline fuel reduction thinning treatments were con-
ducted in Klamath National Forest near Yreka, California. These
studies were to calculate machine productivity (ft3/productive ma-
chine hour [PMH]) and evaluate interactions between equipment,
personnel, and harvesting attributes on each phase of the thinning
treatment. In addition, regression equations were developed to esti-
mate the machine cycle time and to understand how independent
variables might affect thinning productivity. The data set from these
studies allowed us to perform various sensitivity analyses to develop
adjustment factors in estimating thinning operation productivity
that accurately reﬂect stand conditions and thinning operations re-
quirements. For each machine operation, when 1 unit (e.g., 1 in. in
dbh, 1% in slope, and 50 ft in skidding/yarding distance) is changed
from the basic stand condition used in the survey, percent changes of
machine productivity were calculated using a prediction equation
developed in each case study. Percent changes developed from each
case study were averaged and then used to adjust representative
productivity by the user’s entered stand conditions. We believe this
approach allows an accurate estimation of thinning treatment costs
on a wide range of local site conditions in southern Oregon and
northern California because all key variables affecting harvesting
costs were included in cost estimates, based on case studies, expert
opinion surveys, and literature reviews conducted for this region.
Net Energy Output Analysis
Net energy output was estimated by comparing the amount of
energy generated with the total energy consumed from stumps to
energy plants to produce the biomass energy. Direct energy con-
sumption consisted of fuel consumed for harvesting and extracting
small trees, comminuting forest residues including limbs, tops,
chunks, and small trees, and transporting forest residues. Indirect
energy consisted of fuel consumed for moving equipment and for
crew transportation. The amount of diesel used by each machine
was determined from machine productive time, speciﬁc fuel con-
sumption rate, and engine horsepower. The total direct and indirect
diesel consumption amounts were converted to an equivalent heat-
ing value (British thermal units [Btu, BTU]) as the total energy
input. The energy content was taken at 137,000 BTUs per gallon
for diesel and 125,000 BTUs per gallon for gasoline (Adams 1983).
Recoverable energy output was based on the amount of harvested
woody biomass, moisture content, and species. Energy output was
deﬁned as the total recoverable heating value from the forest residues
produced and was calculated using the following formula (Ince
1979):
RHV  HHV  1  MCwb/100  THL
where RHV is recoverable heating value (BTUs/lb of wet fuel),
HHV is higher heating value or the maximum potential energy
(BTUs/lb of oven-dried fuel), MCwb is wet-based moisture content
(percentage), and THL is total heat loss (BTUs/lb of wet fuel).
Total heat loss consisted of conventional heat losses and the sum
of stack gas heat losses caused by moisture, hydrogen, dry gas, and
excess air. Total heat loss was estimated under the following assump-
tions (Ince 1979): the combustion heat recovery system was oper-
ated with 40% excess air and a stack gas temperature of 260° C,
which is typical for an industrial system; and the ambient tempera-
ture of hog fuel before combustion (room temperature) was 20° C.
The conventional heat losses included heat losses resulting from
thermal radiation, conduction and convection of heat, incomplete
combustion, and miscellaneous or unaccounted for heat losses. In
this study, the constant conventional heat loss factor was assumed to
be 4%.
Assessment of Site Nutrient Removal Impacts
The site nutrient removals were calculated based on the biomass
amounts and nutrient concentrations (i.e., nitrogen [N], phospho-
rus [P], potassium [K], calcium [Ca], and magnesium [Mg]) for
each species and tree biomass component (i.e., stem, bark, limbs,
and foliage) removed. Nutrient contents for each species and tree
biomass component were collected from past studies conducted in
northern California and southern Oregon (Pearson et al. 1987,
Ranger et al. 1995). Biomass weight of tree components removed
from thinning treatments was estimated using biomass predicting
equations developed by Jenkins et al. (2003), who compiled their
formulas from the literature for predicting the biomass weight of
tree components from diameter measurements of species found in
North America. However, potential amounts of biomass that could
Forest Science • February 2017
121

be harvested and delivered to energy plants and manufacturing fa-
cilities are actually less than what was estimated using those tools
because of harvesting and handling loss. In particular, limbs and
tops are often broken and left on site during felling and skidding
activities and additional biomass loss occurs at landings. Therefore,
biomass recovery rate in this study was set to 80% of total estimated
biomass volume in a fuel reduction thinning treatment unit (Stokes
1992), but this default value can be changed.
Model Validation
Validation is the process of evaluating how accurately the model
estimates fuel reduction thinning treatment costs and overall eco-
nomics for any given harvesting system and biomass processing
option. A past fuel reduction thinning study conducted in northern
California and southern Oregon was used to validate the model
(Vitorelo 2011). This study involved a ground-based harvesting
system. Stand information in this study was input to ThinTool, and
the model-estimated harvesting costs were compared with the re-
ported harvesting costs. There was no statistical comparison be-
tween ThinTool’s estimates and reported results in this article be-
cause only one past study conducted in southern Oregon and
northern California was available to validate the ThinTool model.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis for data obtained from expert opinion surveys
was performed using SAS 9.2 (SAS Institute, Inc. 2003). Machine
productivity data were sorted by each harvesting system, and each
machine and then average machine productivity was calculated. The
effect on machine productivity of sawlog volume to be removed was
separately tested using one-way analysis of variance for each harvest-
ing system (i.e., ground-based and cable yarding systems) and ma-
chine operation (i.e., felling, skidding/yarding, processing, and
loading). The signiﬁcance levels were set to 5% (  0.05).
Sensitivity Analyses
Sensitivity analyses for the key machine combination input vari-
ables to the harvesting and hauling systems are automatically calcu-
lated. The analyses consider the total maximum contracting bid or
the minimum price that must be received, the ratio of energy output
to energy input, and how that ratio changes for different harvesting
systems. The analyses are located on various worksheets on which
variables are entered. There are a number of sensitivity analyses
displayed in the Input worksheet. However, sensitivity analyses are
also located on Productivity-Sawlog, Productivity-Biomass, Misc.
Costs, and the Cost & Revenue worksheets. Some of the sensitivity
analyses are ﬁxed, based on the variable choices that are allowed
(e.g., the choice of thinning systems is either “ground-based skid-
ding” or “cable yarding”), although some of the sensitivity analyses
allow users to set the midpoint for each analysis along with the
increment for the variable under consideration.
Results and Discussion
ThinTool Model Organization and Use
ThinTool was created to estimate a site-level fuel reduction cost
for varying thinning prescriptions and harvesting systems, covering
a wide range of local site conditions in southern Oregon and north-
ern California. ThinTool allows the user to specify stand conditions,
thinning systems, biomass processing methods, biomass operation
logistics, hauling options, and market values that allow the model to
calculate the production and costs of the speciﬁed thinning treat-
ments. Overhead, proﬁt allowance, and market adjustment are also
included in the cost estimates. The model is constructed with 10
linked worksheets. All of the worksheets include default data devel-
oped from literature reviews, ﬁeld-based studies, and a contractor
survey but also allow users to input their own data (i.e., loading and
unloading time and hauling characteristics) and cost information.
The ﬁrst worksheet is an input page that consists of two parts: the
user input for stand condition and the selection of harvesting and
hauling systems for sawlogs and biomass. In the stand condition
section, the user provides the total number of acres to be thinned for
a forest stand, slope, moisture content for biomass, and a minimum
log top diameter (4- or 6-in.) for sawlog (9 in. trees at dbh)
production. In addition, the anticipated average number of trees to
be cut and present trees per acre by tree diameter at dbh are entered
to generate sawlog volume in ft3/ac and biomass in GT/ac. Biomass
for energy production includes logging slash generated from sawlog
production and energy wood (9 in. trees at dbh) volume.
In ThinTool’s harvesting and hauling system worksheet, a user
selects from a ground-based system or a cable yarding system. In a
ground-based system, trees are felled and bunched using a feller-
buncher. Rubber-tired skidders collect and transport whole trees to
a landing area. Trees are processed mechanically with a single-grip
processor and loaded onto trucks using a loader at a landing. Cable
yarding systems are used where terrain is too steep (e.g., 40%
ground slope) or too wet for ground-based systems. All cable-yard-
ing studies used to develop ThinTool were for uphill yarding only,
so the results are not applicable to downhill yarding operations.
Trees are felled using chainsaws but not limbed. Whole trees are
yarded to the landing for processing and loading onto a log truck.
After harvesting system selection, the user also deﬁnes biomass
processing methods (chipping or grinding) and machine size for
chipper (small or large) or grinder (small, medium, or large) for
biomass harvesting. With selecting the chipping or grinding option,
comminution location is selected from dropdown lists for biomass
processing logistics (i.e., at harvesting sites or centralized biomass
processing sites). Forest residues could be comminuted at the land-
ing if chip vans are able to access the site. However, if ﬁeld sites are
difﬁcult to access areas with lower amounts of available forest resi-
dues, distributed forest residues could be accumulated from harvest
sites to centralized processing areas using modiﬁed dump trucks or
hook-lift trucks. In this model, centralized biomass processing lo-
gistics assume an additional loader is needed for loading forest resi-
dues at the landing. ThinTool has two different options (i.e., hot
operation or cold operation) for biomass loading.
The second, third, and fourth worksheets are the machine cost
information pages for sawlog, biomass, and transportation opera-
tions, respectively. Each worksheet is linked with the input page.
Based on the harvesting and hauling system selected in ﬁrst work-
sheet, machine costs are automatically set to default values in the
program, but ThinTool’s interface allows users to change these de-
fault values to match their machine characteristics.
The ﬁfth and sixth worksheets are machine productivity pages
for sawlog and biomass production, respectively. With linking the
input page, representative machine productivity is estimated by vol-
ume to be removed and then adjusted by key variables affecting
machine productivity for each machine operation. In sawlog pro-
duction, the user can enter skidding/yarding distance to adjust rep-
resentative machine productivity for a skidder or yarder. In biomass
production, machine productivities for chippers, grinders, bundlers,
and loaders are set to default values obtained through literature
122
Forest Science • February 2017

reviews (Han and Johnson 2012), but users can change default
values into their own values for their machine characteristics.
The seventh worksheet is a machine productivity page for trans-
portation. Travel times are determined by travel distance and travel
speed on ﬁve different road classes (i.e., spur road, single-lane dirt
road, single-lane gravel road, double-lane road, highway, and free-
way). Travel speeds on each road class were obtained from literature
review (Pan et al. 2008, Harrill and Han 2010, Han and Murphy
2012) and set as default values. We also provide default loading and
unloading times and payloads for each truck type based on past
studies (Pan et al. 2008, Harrill and Han 2010, Han and Murphy
2012). However, if users do not wish to apply default values in their
analysis, they can input their own times and payloads.
The eighth worksheet includes log defect, biomass recovery rate,
mobilization costs, and other costs such as road and landing con-
struction, dust control, ﬁre trailers, fuel truck, and crew transporta-
tion costs that affect the harvesting cost analysis. To estimate actual
sawlog volume to be harvested, 10% of total sawlog volume was
assumed as log defects and added into biomass volume in this
model. In biomass harvesting, actual amounts of biomass that could
be harvested and delivered to energy plants and manufacturing fa-
cilities are often less than what was estimated using biomass equa-
tions due to harvesting and handling loss. In this model, biomass
recovery rate was set as 80% of total estimated biomass volume
(Stokes 1992). In mobilization cost section, users can provide infor-
mation speciﬁc to the mobilization of equipment to the project site,
specially travel distance (one-way), the number of machines to be
hauled, travel speed, loading and unloading time, and lowboy costs.
In this model, default values for other costs are not suggested be-
cause these costs vary with stand conditions and contractor prac-
tices. Therefore, users need to input speciﬁc values for this part and
enter “0” if other costs do not apply in their cost analyses.
The ninth worksheet is a total harvesting cost and revenue page.
Within this page, estimated machine costs in dollars per scheduled
machine hour ($/SMH) are transferred from machine cost work-
sheets. Estimated production rates (ft3/SMH for sawlog production
and GT/SMH for biomass production) are also presented to show
the machine productivity when individual machines are working in
the system. To facilitate different model users, ThinTool predicts
production cost in terms of dollars per acre ($/ac) and dollars per
thousand board feet ($/MBF) for sawlog harvesting. A production
cost in term of dollars per bone dry ton ($/BDT) is also assigned to
the biomass product. To estimate total fuel reduction thinning
costs, users need to provide contract information and items that
contribute indirectly to harvesting costs. Indirect harvesting costs in
this model included administrative overhead and proﬁt allowance.
All of the indirect harvesting cost items are entered in terms of
percentage of total production costs. Market values for each species
and product type (sawlog or hogfuel) are entered to estimate total
revenue from fuel reduction treatments. Net proﬁt (loss) is the sum
of total fuel reduction thinning cost and total revenue produced
from fuel reduction treatments.
The tenth worksheet is the summary output that is organized
into the total harvesting cost and net proﬁt (loss) summary, net
energy output summary, and site nutrient removal summary. The
total harvesting cost and net proﬁt (loss) summary shows total vol-
ume removed, total production costs, total revenues, and total prof-
its (losses) by product types (sawlogs and biomass). The net energy
output summary includes the amounts of energy generated from
thinning treatments and consumed for thinning operations as well
as the net energy ratio estimated by comparing energy input with
energy output. The site nutrient removal summary shows the
amounts of nutrients removed with the chosen thinning treatments.
Machine Productivity Estimation
Twelve different fuel reduction thinning studies were compre-
hensively reviewed to identify key independent variables affecting
the machine productivity. In ground-based systems, tree size (dbh)
and slope were considered as key independent variables for a feller-
buncher; whereas key variables for a skidder were skidding distance
and slope. Only tree size was identiﬁed as a key variable affecting
processor productivity. In cable yarding systems, only tree size was
identiﬁed as a key variable for hand-felling and processing, whereas
the key variable for yarder was the yarding distance. In addition, the
amount of volume to be removed was identiﬁed as the most signif-
icant factor affecting machine productivity in both harvesting sys-
tems, although this variable was not included in prediction equa-
tions (Johnson 1988, Hartsough et al. 1997, 2002, Lowell et al.
2008, Bolding et al. 2009).
A logging contractor survey was conducted to obtain representa-
tive machine productivities for mechanical fuel reduction thinning
treatments on three different stand conditions (4, 7, and 10 MBF
sawlog removals per acre). From the contractor survey, representa-
tive machine productivities for sawlog removal in fuel reduction
thinning operations for both ground-based and cable yarding sys-
tems are presented in Tables 1 and 2.
In both systems, representative machine productivity for sawlog
removal increases as volume per acre of removal increased. For
ground-based systems, the only operation that signiﬁcantly differs
between treatments is felling (P  0.0154). Therefore, felling costs
in fuel reduction thinning treatments can be signiﬁcantly reduced
with increasing sawlog volume to be removed. Keegan et al. (2002)
also found that travel time between trees marked for removal is
Table 1.
Representative machine productivity of sawlog removal
for each operation in ground-based system (average skidding
distance: 400 ft).
Machine
Productivity of sawlog removal at
df
P valuea
4 MBF/ac
7 MBF/ac
10 MBF/ac
. . . . . . . . . .(ft3/PMH) . . . . . . . . . .
Feller-buncher
1,323 (135)
1,556 (149)
1,696 (154)
38
0.0154
Skidder
906 (101)
1,087 (120)
1,181 (151)
35
0.7845
Processor
1,288 (142)
1,306 (146)
1,352 (146)
37
0.5425
Loader
1,292 (114)
1,292 (121)
1,337 (124)
36
0.5764
Values are means (SE).
a P value is signiﬁcant at 0.05.
Table 2.
Representative machine productivity of sawlog removal
for each operation in cable yarding system (average yarding dis-
tance: 500 ft).
Machine
Productivity of sawlog removal at
df
P valuea
4 MBF/ac
7 MBF/ac
10 MBF/ac
. . . . . . . . . .(ft3/PMH) . . . . . . . . . .
Hand-faller
419 (43)
433 (51)
440 (53)
14
0.7842
Yarder
514 (39)
685 (52)
810 (59)
14
0.3648
Processor
801 (37)
834 (38)
870 (37)
14
0.0278
Loader
775 (73)
804 (81)
835 (82)
14
0.1664
Values are means (SE).
a P value is signiﬁcant at 0.05.
Forest Science • February 2017
123

reduced with increasing sawlog volume removal and results in in-
creased feller-buncher productivity.
In cable yarding systems, only processor productivity was signif-
icantly affected by sawlog volume removal (P  0.0278). Processor
productivity in the cable yarding system was lower than that in
ground-based system due to increases in delay time. In a cable yard-
ing system, the processor must follow the yarder. If the yarder needs
to be frequently moved to different corridors because of smaller
removal volumes, then the processor experiences delay time while
the yarder moves to the next row. If the removal volume is low, then
the processor will be delayed longer.
Representative machine productivity for ground-based biomass
removals is presented in Table 3. In both feller-buncher and skidder
operations, machine productivity tended to increase with increasing
sawlog removal volume, but there are no signiﬁcant changes in
machine productivity between stands with increasing intensity of
thinning (P  0.9454 for feller-buncher; P  0.3445 for skidder).
Similar results were found by Hartsough et al. (1997). Feller-
buncher productivity is higher than skidder productivity. Average
machine productivity for feller-bunchers ranges from 36 to 39
GT/PMH.
To accommodate a wide range of site variables identiﬁed
from literature reviews, such as average tree size, slope, and
skidding/yarding distances, we developed factors to adjust represen-
tative machine productivity determined from logging contractor
surveys. Adjustment factors developed from case studies are pre-
sented in Figures 2 and 3. In the ground-based harvesting system,
bigger trees have higher percent increments in adjustment factor
values. This means feller-buncher productivity increases with in-
creasing tree size for sawlog production. However, the adjustment
factor value does not change with changing slope steepness, al-
though slope was found from literature reviews to be one of the key
variables affecting machine productivity. Slope steepness is inversely
proportional to skidder productivity. That is, skidder productivity
(i.e., the skidder adjustment factor) increases with decreasing slope
steepness. In addition, the adjustment factor for skidder productiv-
ity is reduced with increasing skidding distances (Figure 2). With
cable yarding systems, the effects of slope, distance, and tree size on
productivity are similar to ground-based harvesting systems. Adjust-
ment increments for hand-felling productivity increase with increas-
ing dbh.
Model Validation
Model validation for ThinTool was conducted to evaluate how
accurately it estimates hazardous fuel reduction thinning treatment
Figure 2.
Adjustment factors for a feller-buncher and a skidder
developed to adjust representative machine productivity in sawlog
production for different dbh, skidding distances (ft), and slopes (%).
Figure 3.
Adjustment factors for hand-feller and yarder devel-
oped to adjust representative machine productivity in sawlog
production.
Table 3.
Representative machine productivity of biomass removal
for each operation in ground-based system (average skidding
distance: 400 ft).
Machine
Productivity of sawlog removal at
df
P valuea
4 MBF/ac
7 MBF/ac
10 MBF/ac
. . . . . . . . .(GT/PMH) . . . . . . . . .
Feller-buncher
36 (3.54)
37 (4.01)
39 (4.21)
29
0.9454
Skidder
29 (3.05)
31 (3.58)
31 (4.15)
31
0.3445
Values are means (SE).
a P value is signiﬁcant at 0.05.
124
Forest Science • February 2017

costs for any given harvesting system. In model validation, simu-
lated harvesting costs estimated by ThinTool were compared to
actual harvesting costs developed from a time-motion study that was
conducted at the USDA Forest Service Klamath National Forest in
Yreka, California. The model validation procedures show that saw-
log harvesting costs simulated by ThinTool were 21% higher than
harvesting costs estimated by the actual time-motion study (Table
4). In biomass production, actual biomass harvesting costs were
higher by 15% than ThinTool’s simulated biomass harvesting cost
(Table 5). Although the current cost model produced overestimated
harvesting costs for sawlog production and underestimated harvest-
ing costs for biomass production, it was difﬁcult to evaluate Thin-
Tool’s current accuracy because only one case study was available to
be used in model validation. Therefore, further validation work will
be needed to improve model accuracy using future fuel reduction
thinning projects in the region.
Net Energy Output
A model simulation for net energy output was conducted with
the case study used in model validation. The area of the case study
site was 25 ac. It contained Douglas-ﬁr (Pseudotsuga menziesii
[Mirb.] Franco), white ﬁr (Abies concolor [Gord. & Glend.] Lindl.),
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Dougl.), sugar pine (Pinus lamber-
tiana Dougl.), and incense cedar (Calocedrus decurrens [Torr.] Flo-
rin). Biomass volume removed was 46.4 GT/ac at 55% moisture
content. The harvesting method used was whole-tree harvesting.
The one-way hauling distance to a plant was 45 miles. Indirect fuel
consumption resulting from activities such as moving equipment
and crew transportation was not incorporated in this simulation.
Total direct diesel consumption was 2,638.6 gallons for the harvest-
ing and transport system, equivalent to 367,294,686 BTUs (Table
6). Truck hauling was the largest direct energy input component
(73.9%) because it had the longest operation time with a relatively
high-horsepower engine. The grinder consumed 18.8% of the
total direct input energy, reﬂecting the machine’s large engine
size (900 hp) and had the highest diesel consumption rate
(gal/hr) (Table 6). In this simulation, the total recoverable energy
output was 6,251,031,817 BTUs. Subtracting the energy input,
the net energy output was determined to be 5,883,737,131
BTUs. The net energy ratio between the recoverable energy out-
put and the fossil energy input was 17:1.
Site Nutrient Removal
Site nutrient removal was simulated using the case study for
model validation and net energy output simulation. The nutrient
amounts estimated by ThinTool to be removed from sites by fuel
thinning treatments are presented in Table 7. The greatest nutrient
removal was found to be Ca. A similar result was found by Mann et
al. (1988). They examined 11 forest stands located throughout the
United States looking at site nutrient removals by whole-tree har-
vesting and sawlog harvest. N, P, K, and Ca were reported. They
reported that removals by whole-tree harvesting were 98 to 650
lb/ac N, 9 to 86 lb/ac P, 31 to 291 lb/ac K, and 99 to 972 lb/ac Ca.
In-tree components (i.e., stem and bark, branches, and foliage),
nutrient concentrations of foliage were usually higher than those of
stem and branches. However, N, P, and K at the site were removed
with similar ratios in each tree component because dry mass of stem
and branches was larger than foliage. Removal of stem and branches
contributed to 80% of total Ca removal.
Conclusion
ThinTool is an analytical model designed and developed for use
by forest managers, planners, and project contractors to evaluate the
cost of mechanical fuel reduction thinning including biomass re-
moval, predict net energy output, and assess nutrient impacts from
thinning treatments in northern California and southern Oregon.
Harvesting cost, net energy output, and site nutrient removal are
directly linked together and sensitively responded to any changes in
thinning prescriptions (e.g., thinning intensity and species selec-
tion) and operations requirements (e.g., biomass recovery methods,
Table 6.
Direct diesel consumption in ground-based system estimated by ThinTool.
Parameter
Feller-buncher
Skidder
Loader
Grinder
Chip van
Total
Direct diesel input (gallons)
76.2
65.7
50.4
495.4
1,950.9
2,638.6
Heating valuea (million BTUs)
10.6
9.1
7.0
69.0
271.6
367.3
Average fuel consumption (gal/hr)
6.8
5.0
3.0
30.0
9.9
54.8
Percent total
2.9
2.5
1.9
18.8
73.9
100.0
a Based on 139,200 BTUs per gallon of diesel.
Table 7.
Site nutrient removal estimated by ThinTool.
Nutrient
Amount (lb/ac)
N
129.9
P
17.4
K
91.1
Ca
207.9
Mg
34.2
Table 4.
Sawlog harvesting cost (stump-to-truck) comparison be-
tween actual and simulated study in ground-based harvesting
system.
Machine
Actual study
Simulated study
. . . . . . . . . . . . .($/ft3). . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feller-buncher
0.09
0.12
Skidder
0.17
0.15
Processor
0.11
0.13
Loader
0.05
0.11
Total
0.42
0.51
Table 5.
Biomass harvesting cost (stump-to-truck) comparison be-
tween actual and simulated study in ground-based harvesting
system.
Machine
Actual study
Simulated study
. . . . . . . . . . . .($/BDT) . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feller-buncher
20.72
15.13
Skidder
15.37
14.17
Loader
3.35
3.86
Grinder
12.97
11.49
Total
52.41
44.65
Forest Science • February 2017
125

machine size, and skidding/yarding distance). The model is con-
structed with 12 linked worksheets. All of the worksheets include
default data developed from literature review, ﬁeld-based studies,
and a contractor survey but also allow users to input their own data
(i.e., loading and unloading time and hauling characteristics) and
cost information.
ThinTool can be used to estimate a unit-speciﬁc operational cost
for ground-based and skyline thinning systems over a wide range of
stand and site conditions, silvicultural prescriptions, operational re-
quirements, and road standards and distances. The cost model tech-
nique applied in this study synthesized past thinning and biomass
removal studies limited to southern Oregon and northern Califor-
nia to effectively address local conditions when estimating harvest-
ing productivity and costs. In addition, an expert opinion method
(i.e., survey) was combined with the empirical study information to
reﬂect regional work and wood product market conditions in south-
ern Oregon and northern California.
ThinTool also evaluates nutrient impact and net energy output
caused from thinning and biomass removal in fuel reduction thin-
ning. Forest management activities often have impacts on site nu-
trient budgets in both the short and long term. Therefore, assessing
potential impacts of forest residue removal is important for balanc-
ing residue removal with retention to ensure site productivity. Thin-
Tool can allow users to effectively estimate site nutrient removal in
different harvesting systems, stand conditions, and thinning pre-
scriptions. The outputs help forest managers to examine environ-
mental effects of biomass recovery and provide nutrient retention
information for sustainable production of woody biomass. Net en-
ergy output is estimated by comparing the amount of energy deliv-
ered with the total energy consumed to collect, process, and trans-
port the biomass to an energy plant in fuel reduction thinning
operations. This function allows users to assess potential energy
production and identify energy-effective biomass recovery systems.
ThinTool can be further revised to improve the prediction accu-
racy of the model by incorporating additional results available from
future fuel reduction thinning projects. The model should be a
useful tool for forest managers and planners to conduct fuel reduc-
tion treatments in a cost-effective, energy-effective, and environ-
mentally sound manner.
Literature Cited
ADAMS, T.C. 1983. Operational costs of harvesting logging residues for use
as energy. Final report to US Department of Energy, Bonneville
Power Administration. USDA For. Serv., Interagency Agreement
De-AI51-81R000861, Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Sta-
tion, Portland, OR. 64 p.
ADEBAYO, A.B. 2006. Productivity and cost of cut-to-length and whole-tree
harvesting in a mixed-conifer stand. MS thesis, Univ. of Idaho, Moscow,
ID. 45 p.
BOLDING, M.C., L.D. KELLOGG, AND C.T. DAVIS. 2009. Productivity and
costs of an integrated mechanical forest fuel reduction operation in
southwest Oregon. For. Prod. J. 59(3):35–46.
COULTER, K.M. 1999. The effects of silvicultural treatments on harvesting
production and costs. MS thesis, Univ. of Idaho, Moscow, ID. 117 p.
FIGHT R.D., B.R. HARTSOUGH, AND P. NOORDIJK. 2006. Users guide for
FRCS: Fuel reduction cost simulator software. USDA For. Serv., Gen.
Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-668, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, Port-
land, OR. 23 p.
GRIGAL, D.F., AND E.D. VANCE. 2000. Inﬂuence of soil organic matter on
forest productivity. N.Z. J. For. Sci. 30:169–205.
HALBROOK, J., AND H.-S. HAN. 2005. Costs and constraints of fuel reduction
treatments in a recreational area. USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep.
PSW-GTR-194, Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station, Albany, CA. 13 p.
HAN, H.-S., AND L. JOHNSON. 2012. Biomass feedstock supply: Costs and life
cycle analysis. Forest Products Society Meeting. Washington, DC. 13 p.
HAN, H.-S., H.W. LEE, AND L.R. JOHNSON. 2004. Economic feasibility of
an integrated harvesting system for small-diameter trees in southwest
Idaho. For. Prod. J. 54(2):21–27.
HAN, H.-S., AND C. RENZIE. 2005. Effect of ground slope, stump diameter,
and species on stump height for chainsaw and feller-buncher felling. Int.
J. For. Eng. 16(2):81–88.
HAN, S.K., AND G.E. MURPHY. 2012. Predicting the loaded travel times of
highway woody raw materials hauling trucks for improved forest bio-
mass utilization. West. J. Appl. For. 27(2):92–99.
HARRILL, H., AND H.-S. HAN. 2010. Application of hook-lift trucks in cen-
tralized logging slash grinding operations. Biofuels Vol. 1(3):399–408.
HARTSOUGH, B.R., E.S. DREWS, J.F. MCNEEL, T.A. DURSTON, AND B.J.
STOKES. 1997. Comparison of mechanized systems for thinning Pon-
derosa pine and mixed conifer stands. For. Prod. J. 47(11/12):59–68.
HARTSOUGH, B.R., R. SPINELLI, AND S.J. POTTLE. 2002. Delimbing hy-
brid poplar prior to processing with a ﬂail/chipper. For. Prod. J.
52(4):85–93.
HARTSOUGH, B.R., X. ZHANG, AND R.D. FIGHT. 2001. Harvesting cost
model for small trees in natural stands in the Interior Northwest. For.
Prod. J. 51(4):54–61.
HOCHRIEN, P.H., AND L.D. KELLOGG. 1988. Production and cost com-
parison for three skyline thinning systems. West. J. Appl. For. 3(4):
120–123.
INCE, P.J. 1979. How to estimate recoverable heating energy in wood or bark
fuels. USDA For. Serv., Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, WI.
10 p.
JAIN, T.B., M.A. BATTAGLIA, H.S. HAN, R.T. GRAHAM, C.R. KEYES, J.S.
FRIED, AND J.E. SANDQUIST. 2012. A comprehensive guide to fuel man-
agement practices for dry mixed conifer forests in the northwestern United
States. USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-292. Rocky
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 331 p.
JENKINS, J.C., D.C. CHOJNACKY, L.S. HEATH, AND R.A. BIRDSEY. 2003.
National-scale biomass estimators for United States tree species. For. Sci.
49(1):12–35.
JIN, F. 1996. Simulation of timber harvesting systems using SIMAN/CINEMA. PhD
dissertation, College of Forestry, Wildlife and Range Sciences, Univ. of Idaho,
Moscow, ID. 126 p.
JOHNSON, L.R. 1988. Final report: Summary of production and time studies
of mechanized harvesting equipment in the Intermountain West. Forest
Products Department, Univ. of Idaho, Moscow, ID. 129 p.
KEATLEY, T.A. 2000. Harvesting options in small diameter stands operating on
gentle slopes. MS thesis, Univ. of Idaho, Moscow, ID. 199 p.
KEEGAN, C.E., M.J. NICCOLUCCI, C.E. FIEDLER, J.G. JONES, AND R.W.
REGEL. 2002. Harvest cost collection approaches and associated equa-
tions for restoration treatments on national forests. For. Prod. J.
52:96–99.
LARGO, S., AND H.-S. HAN. 2004. Economics of an integrated harvesting
system in fuel reduction thinning in western Montana. In 2004 Council on
Forest Engineering (COFE) conference proceedings, 2004 April 27–30, Hot
Springs, AR. Council on Forest Engineering, Morgantown, WV. 11 p.
LOWELL, E.C., D.R. BECKER, D. LARSON, R. RUMMER,
AND L.
WADLEIGH. 2008. An integrated approach to evaluating the economic
costs of wildﬁre hazard reduction through wood utilization opportuni-
ties in the southwestern US. For. Sci. 54(3):273–283.
MANN, L.K., D.W. JOHNSON, D.C. WEST, D.W. COLE, J.W. HORNBECK,
C.W. MARTIN, H. RIEKIRK, ET AL. 1988. Effects of whole-tree and
stem-only clearcutting on postharvest hydrologic losses, nutrient capital
and regrowth. For. Sci. 34:412–428.
MATTHEWS, D.M. 1942. Unit costs and machine rates. P. 45–69 in Cost
control in the logging industry. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
126
Forest Science • February 2017

PAN, F., H-S HAN, L.R. JOHNSON, AND W.J. ELLIOT. 2008. Production
and cost of harvesting and transporting small-diameter trees for energy
with a whole-tree system. For. Prod. J. 58(5):47–53.
PEARSON, J.A., D.H. KNIGHT, AND T.J. FAHEY. 1987. Biomass and nutri-
ent accumulation during stand development in Wyoming lodgepole
pine forests. Ecology 68:1966–1973.
RANGER, J., R. MARQUES, M. COLIN-BELGRAND, N. FLAMMANG, AND D.
GELHAYE. 1995. The dynamics of biomass and nutrient accumulation
in a Douglas-ﬁr (Pseudotsuga menziesii Franco) stand studied using a
chronosequence approach. For. Ecol. Manage. 72:167–183.
RUMMER, B. 2008. Assessing the cost of fuel reduction treatments: A critical
review. For. Policy Econ. 10:355–362.
RUMMER, B., J. PRESTEMON, D. MAY, P. MILES, J. VISSAGE, R. MCROB-
ERTS, G. LIKNES, ET AL. 2003. A strategic assessment of forest biomass and
fuel reductiontreatmentsinWesternStates.USDAFor.Serv.,Washington,DC.
18 p.
SAS INSTITUTE, INC. 2003. SAS/STAT user’s guide, version 9.0. SAS Insti-
tute, Inc., Cary, NC. 8640 p.
SPINELLI, R., AND B.R. HARTSOUGH. 2001. Extracting whole short rota-
tion trees with a skidder and a front-end loader. Biomass Bioenergy
21(2001):425–431.
STOKES, J.B. 1992. Harvesting small trees and forest residues. Biomass
Bioenergy 2(1–6):131–147.
US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE FOREST SERVICE 2003. Large ﬁre cost
reduction action plan. Washington, DC. 24 p.
US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE FOREST SERVICE 2007. General ma-
chine rate calculation, version 3.0. Forest Operations Research Unit,
Auburn,
AL.
Available
online
at
www.srs.fs.usda.gov/forestops/
downloads/MRCalculator.xls; last accessed Oct. 5, 2015.
VITORELO, B.D. 2011. Cost and productivity of two mechanical ﬁre hazard
reduction methods: mastication and thinning. MS thesis, Humboldt State
Univ., Arcata, CA. 77 p.
ZHOU, X., AND M.A. HEMSTROM. 2010. Timber volume and aboveground
live tree biomass estimations for landscape analyses in the Paciﬁc Northwest.
USDA For. Serv., Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-819, Paciﬁc Northwest
Research Station, Portland, OR. 31 p.
Forest Science • February 2017
127
