WOOD STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION (S HIZIROGLU, SECTION EDITOR)
Moisture Content in Forest Residues: an Insight on Sampling
Methods and Procedures
Anil Raj Kizha1 & Han-Sup Han2
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Abstract
Purpose of Review Taking moisture content samples from
forest residue stack piles has been a challenge due to numer-
ous factors such as varying shapes of piles, difference in ma-
terial types, and financial constraint of the research.
Additionally, there has been no standard sampling procedure
set for the task encompassing the various constraints, especial-
ly in-wood conditions. For these reasons, samples taken from
forest residue piles may not accurately represent the average
moisture content of the population. This study attempts to
classify the sampling methods commonly used for measuring
moisture contents of forest residue piles for scientific research.
Recent Finding We reviewed over 28 studies focusing on
moisture content in forest residues to develop four general
sampling methods, namely weighing stack piles, weight from
scale ticket, fixed location sampling, and transect sampling.
Advantages and limitations for each sampling method along
with the type of data generated from each were described in
detail. For example, weighing stack piles provided the most
accurate form of continuous data, but could not be used for in-
wood conditions and was usually limited to small pile struc-
tures. On the other hand, fixed location sampling and transect
sampling would be preferred in field experiments and could
detect moisture content variation within layers of the pile.
Attempts were also made to determine the situations in which
each of these sampling methods could be adopted.
Summary This study could assist researchers set up their ex-
perimental designs and provide insight for handling potential
challenges during data collection.
Keywords Bioenergy . Data collection . Renewable energy .
Slash piles . Sampling techniques . Woody biomass
Introduction
With recent trends to incorporate more renewable options into
energy portfolios, forest residues generated from timber har-
vesting operations have been gaining increasing significance
as a valuable feedstock source for bioenergy production.
Around 11 million acres of timberland are harvested annually
in the USA generating approximately 162 million dry ton of
forest residues, which accounts for about 2.01 × 10e15 Btu of
renewable energy [1, 2]. Woody biomass in the form of forest
residues for energy production comes primarily from sources
such as timber harvests, forest restorations, and fuel reduction
thinning treatments.
Forest residues can be classified based on the forms of
storage, material types, and arrangement patterns. It is com-
mon for forest residues destined for bioenergy production to
be temporarily stacked either in open or under roofed condi-
tions. While left open, the storage could be either in-woods or
in the yards of power plants. Stack piles are often covered with
paper or plastic to protect them from rain or snow. Forest
residues can also be left at the harvest site, unstacked over
long periods for drying, referred to as scattered [3, 4].
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Wood Structure and
Function
* Anil Raj Kizha
anil.kizha@maine.edu
Han-Sup Han
Han-Sup.Han@humboldt.edu
1
School of Forest Resources, University of Maine,
Orono, Maine 04469, USA
2
Department of Forestry and Wildland Resources, Humboldt State
University, Arcata, California 95521, USA
Curr Forestry Rep
DOI 10.1007/s40725-017-0060-5

The next form of classification is based on the types of
forest residue material. Whole trees of small-diameter and
non-merchantable species are common forest residue generat-
ed during timber harvest and thinning treatments. Stem wood
and treetops are the next category of material types, which are
typical to timber harvest operations [3, 5, 6••, 7••]. These two
categories of materials can be chipped (instead of
grinded) to produce feedstock with homogenous particle
size distribution [8]. The last material type, namely
slash, includes chunks (off-shoots), broken logs, roots,
branches, and foliage, can be potentially bundled for
feeding to grinders. However, slash materials are usually
left at the harvesting sites for nutrient recycle consider-
ations or burned on site for disposal.
Forest residues can also be classified based on shapes or
arrangement patterns of the stack piles (Fig. 1). This form of
classification originated from fire ecology studies to predict
the potential energy content and burning intensity of the pile.
This technique may be used to estimate weight or volume of
the piles for fire analysis purpose [9, 10•]. Stack pile structures
are constructed by different machines with specific intention.
Some structures are built for production of energy or value-
added bio-based products such as briquettes and biochar,
while others are meant for slash disposal as it would not be
financially or technically viable to utilize them. Forest resi-
dues intended for high-quality feedstock are processed and
sorted into different material types to facilitate the chipping
process [11]. The cost of piling and compactness of materials
within are also dependent on the pile structure, which varies
widely across different regions. The arrangement patterns of
forest residues that are common to the Western United States
are the following:
1.
Teepees: These piles are created by loader and compose
all forest residues generated during timber harvest opera-
tions, such as treetops, chunks, branches, broken logs, and
small-diameter and non-merchantable whole trees. The
shape is usually asymmetrical with some resemblance to
a cone. Even though the sizes of these piles vary, they tend
to accumulate more materials per unit area and are less
costly to construct compared to other pile structures.
Teepees are generally intended for burning but could be
utilized for grinding if appropriate markets are available.
2.
Windrowed: Processor-made piles located on the road-
sides next to the log landing. They are common to steep
grounds (cable yarded unit), where landing space is a
major constraint. Similar to teepees, they comprise of all
types of materials mixed within the same the pile and can
be burned for slash disposal or grinded for utilization.
3.
Stack/processor piled: Uniformly arranged piles created
by the processors with butt ends facing the same direction.
These piles are usually intended for utilization, as they
predominantly consist of treetops and stem wood mate-
rials that could be comminuted (processed) using a chip-
per [12].
4.
Criss-cross: Arrangement of treetops, broken logs, and
stem wood piled to a 90° from each other to promote
airflow between materials and thereby potentially increas-
ing the rate of drying. This arrangement is not commonly
practiced in timber harvesting operations and is currently
restricted to research experiments [13–15••].
5.
Scattered: Forest residues left in a harvest unit (at stump)
unstacked. Drying is promoted as a result of increased
surface area being exposed to the surroundings. These
materials are not brought to the landing during skidding
Fig. 1 Classification of forest
residue piles based on the
geometric shape (Source: Hardy
[10•])
Curr Forestry Rep

or yarding and thereby requires machine re-entry for
collecting the materials later [11].
Controlling Moisture Content of Forest Residues
for Energy Production
From an economic point of view, multiple factors affect the
utilization of forest residues for energy production, among
which high moisture content (MC) is regarded as one of the
major issues [16]. The MC in feedstock affects everything
from energy content to efficiency of transportation and con-
version process. Dry feedstock increases heating value and
improves boiler efficiency. Higher MC leads to lower heating
value as a portion of the combustion energy is used to evap-
orate moisture [17•, 18••]. Energy efficiency of feedstocks
increases by 1% for each 1% drop in MC above 50 and
0.5% for each 1% reduction in MC below 40% [19•, 20].
MC also plays a significant role in determining transporta-
tion costs and subsequent market price of the delivered com-
modity. It has been proven that feedstock with lower MC has a
higher market value; therefore, letting feedstock dry up to
one year is a profitable investment for suppliers as long as
purchasers pay based on MC of the feedstock [7••, 17•, 21].
Additionally, current state-of-the-art biomass conversion tech-
nologies like torrefaction, palletization, and briquetting have a
very narrow MC specification range for their feedstock [22].
On a broader perspective, proper management of MC can lead
to economic gains [23].
Accurate measurement of MC also plays a critical role for
many other applications within the forest product industry. For
example, in chemical pulping, dosing of digestion chemicals
can be more precisely determined if MC of feedstock is
known. In mechanical pulping, MC critically influences the
feedstock processing properties related to fiber quality [24].
All of these suggest that an accurate MC measurement using
efficient sampling methods is pivotal to the forest products
and wood bioenergy industries.
There have been several studies related to the MC in forest
residues. While results and implications of these studies are
well documented, often times, the sampling method (SM) is
not described in explicit detail. Furthermore, most of these
studies have employed different types of SM which shows a
lack of standardized methods, making it difficult for other
researchers to adopt them. One major reason is due to the
varying nature of the residues itself, such as, species compo-
sition, material type, and size and shape of piles. Apart from
this, the local weather and time of the year also contribute to
the variability of the residue pile moisture. Adopting the ap-
propriate SM often governs the applicability of any results
furnished. On the other hand, difference in the SM and mea-
surement techniques can yield a range of results with varying
degrees of accuracies [25••]. Researchers have also been de-
veloping unique SMs to measure MC primarily based on their
objective and other factors, such as type of data required,
financial budget of the study, structural arrangement, and
shape of piles. One of the major reasons for these differences
is due to the lack of a concrete procedural standard to sample
MC in varying stack piles, especially in-woods.
Study Scope
This study attempts to examine and document some common-
ly adopted MC measurement techniques and SMs to monitor
MC for various forest residues in different pile structures in
the research world. SM is defined as the scientific procedure
of selecting samples which would provide the required esti-
mates with associated margins of uncertainty, arising from
examining only a portion of the whole population [26]. For
this study, we reviewed over 28 research articles and found
four major sampling methods, namely weighing stack piles,
weight from scale ticket, fixed location sampling, and transect
sampling, that were most commonly used for MC measure-
ment (Table 1). Attempts were made to identify the purpose
behind using each SM and to classify the conditions in which
they could be adopted. Some of these SMs were either inter-
changeable or could be used in combination; this article close-
ly examined the limitations and advantages of each method in
different scenarios. Sampling methods for comminuted forest
residues such as hog fuels and wood chips were not the focus
for this study; however, common issues related to them were
briefly discussed.
Determining Moisture Content in Piled Forest Residues
There are two approaches adopted to measure MC in forest
residues in the scientific world: (1) indirect measurement and
(2) direct measurement. The indirect approach is defined by
two interpretations. First, indirect measurements have been
defined as the measurement techniques that do not involve
the removal of water present in the wood sample during MC
quantification [27]. Taking this definition into account, all
techniques, other than oven drying, could be potentially clas-
sified as indirect measurement. According to the second inter-
pretation (which was used to interpret indirect measurements
in this article), indirect measurements are based on models
built using results from direct measurements and weather pa-
rameters such as equilibrium moisture content, temperature,
humidity, and precipitation, to predict the drying rates [17•,
25••]. Here, MC readings need to be recorded initially.
In the direct approach, MC data is collected directly from
the population (i.e., forest residue piles). While implementing
direct measurement, it is critical to ensure that samples truly
represent the target population. Every material type within a
pile must have an equal probability of being sampled. In
Curr Forestry Rep

Table 1
A summary of different sampling methods adopted for determining moisture content in the past studies
Study
Geographical
location
Objective
Sampling method
Material type
Pile type/dimension
Gigler et al. [23] Netherlands
Investigate the mechanism of natural wind drying and develop a drying model
Weighing stack piles
Stems
Stack piles,
7 m × 7 m × 3.6 m
Pettersson and
Nordfjell [42]
Sweden
Examine fuel quality of compacted small-diameter trees and both stacked and
scattered logging residues
Comminution (chipping)
Logging residues
Baled, windrowed,
scattered
Casal et al. [21] Spain
Develop a methodology for forest residues to be used as fuel in a co-combustion
plant
Chipped followed by fixed
location sampling
Wood chips
Pyramidal configuration;
3 m × 10.5 m
Filbakk et al. [4] Norway
Model moisture content changes related to species, climate, tree size, harvesting
time, and storage time
Fixed location sampling
followed by chipping
Treetops
Stack piles
2.5 m × 10 m
Brand et al.
[33••]
Brazil
Evaluate the influence of species, harvest season, storage season, and storage span in
the physical and chemical properties of the wood biomass
Fixed location sampling
followed by chipping
Logs (length 2.5 m)
Stack piles
6 m × 2.5 m × 2.5 m
Röser et al.
[18••]
Finland,
Scotland, and
Italy
Investigate the natural drying in different regions
Weighing stack piles and
fixed sample location
Small-diameter trees
Covered pile, ~5 m3
Gautam et al.
[34••]
Canada
Determine a storage regime to enhance the fuel quality
Transect sampling
Logging residues
Teepees and windrow
Kim and
Murphy [19•]
USA
Forecasting air-drying rates of stacked logs
Weighing stack piles
Small logs
Stack piles (2261 kg)
Erber et al. [7•]
Austria, Finland
and Sweden
Develop prototypes for estimating the optimal storage time and sorting of fuel wood Weighing stack piles and
chipping
Fuel wood
Stack piles
(2.5 m × 2.5 m × 2.7 -
m)
Kizha and Han
[31••]
USA
Estimate amount of logging residues
Scale ticket
Small-diameter trees
and logging residues
Teepees and scattered
Kizha et al.
[15••]
USA
Estimate moisture content changes in different arrangement patterns
Transect sampling
Small-diameter trees
and logging residues
Teepees, stack piles,
scattered, and
criss-cross
Curr Forestry Rep

reality, this is not often feasible for non-comminuted forest
residue piles due to the restricted accessibility to the interior
of the pile. Therefore, researchers have developed several
techniques to obtain samples that are representative of the
population. It has been proven that both indirect and direct
measurement approaches complement each other [28].
However, for this study, we focused on the different direct
sampling methods commonly used.
Weighing Stack Piles
Weighing stack piles is a SM employed to obtain MC of the
entire pile over a period of time. With this SM, fluctuations in
total weight of piles can be captured over time, without sam-
ples being drawn from the pile every time [7••, 18••, 23, 29].
Samples are initially drawn from various parts of the pile to
estimate MC and are later used to relate differences in total
weight to the whole pile. This SM offers the best opportunity
to acquire data on a continuous scale. It can be used to com-
pare variation in MC between various attributes such as ma-
terial types and species composition if stacked in respective
piles [30]. This SM has been used to sample both comminuted
and non-comminuted forest residues and is highly recom-
mended for its accuracy [7••].
Forest residues are erected on frames (pallets or metal),
which hold the piles together and facilitate the weighing pro-
cess (Fig. 2). It is important to erect the frames free from
distortive stresses to ensure precision during load
measurement. Additionally, metal frames are preferred over
wooden frames, as the latter can be affected comparatively
more by air temperature and humidity [7••]. This SM can be
carried out by multiple approaches based on the availability of
equipment. The stack piles can be weighed using external
lifting mechanism (like forklift/front-end loaders) or support-
ed by load sensors attached to the frame [18••, 30]. While
using load sensors, the ground pressure is to be evenly distrib-
uted by putting metal plates or square edged logs as a platform
(Fig. 2).
Utilizing external lifting mechanism to weigh the residue
piles provides data in longer fixed time intervals compared to
the load sensor data logger which generate data on a more
continuous level depending on the time interval set. Other
limitations while using forklifts are the possibility of
disrupting pile structure during the weighing process and
weight being limited to measurable load of the scale.
Therefore, this SM is usually restricted to small stack piles
up to 20 metric tons [7••]. In field-based experiments, using
external lifting mechanisms leads to multiple-entry equipment
costs. Hence, this method is often restricted to controlled ex-
periments. Additionally, weighing stack pile SM cannot be
used for determining variation within and across the pile.
Weight from Scale Ticket
Scale ticket is a different version of weight sampling where
MC of forest residues is provided via scale tickets at the end-
use facility. This SM is widely used in forest operations re-
search [31••]. In most cases, measurement is obtained by
weighing loaded trucks on a weighbridge followed by taking
random samples. MC estimation using radio frequency waves
have also been adopted at certain power plants [32]. The main
reasons for measuring MC at the facilities are to determine
price and fuel combustion efficiency. MC provided by scale
tickets are generally very accurate because suppliers are often
paid based on these values. However, as various industries
have adopted different standards for drawing samples and
measurement methods, the procedure adopted by each facility
has to be carefully comprehended to properly interpret the
results. In some cases, the values from scale tickets are further
modified by accounting for specific gravity of the species
delivered [31].
Fixed Location Sampling
Storage of forest residues in piles results in uneven moisture
loss throughout the pile structure. During winter, the best dry-
ing conditions occur inside the pile where there is less expo-
sure to the elements (rain and snow) and no direct contact with
the ground. In summer, this effect is reversed due to lack of air
flow within the pile [6••]. Sampling at fixed locations provides
an opportunity to evaluate variations in MC across the various
Fig. 2 Metal frame (above) and load cells (below) used for weighing
piles (Source: Erber et al. [7••])
Curr Forestry Rep

strata or layers of the pile [4, 21, 33••]. This SM, regarded as a
stratified random sampling technique, identifies sampling lo-
cations prior to sample collection. For example, sampling
points are designated as the top, middle, and bottom of the
stack pile (Fig. 3) [6••, 33••, 34••]. Samples are taken from a
particular point or fixed location using either moisture meters
from freshly cut wood or by extracting wood discs using
chainsaws. The spots are usually marked/flagged on the pile
to help identify sampling locations during re-entry. Another
approach to this SM is to comminute the selected sample
materials prior to MC analysis [33••].
The piles selected for fixed location sampling should pref-
erably have uniform geometric shapes to facilitate extrapola-
tion of data to the intended layers. The samples are usually
collected from designated parts of the pile throughout study.
This method is suited for taking measurements from covered
stack piles, along with large piles (which cannot be weighed).
Forest residue piles are generally arranged with butt ends
aligned together, as it is the easiest way to pile and handle
[23]. In this case, special access to an interior sampling point
should be considered during the construction of the pile.
Thermocouples or other weather data loggers can be set inside
the pile to monitor internal micro-weather conditions. This
data are often compared with external weather conditions
and MC of the interior is estimated using regression models
(indirect measurement). However, in large piles, access to
interior areas is subjected to the safety of the researcher
collecting the data.
Fixed location sampling is often employed to estimate var-
iation in MC within piles that differ in height, length, and
azimuth. This method is best suited for in-woods measure-
ments which lack access to weighing mechanisms. This SM
can also deal with heterogeneous forest residue variables
(such as species, diameter, residue type, etc.). Fixed location
sampling allows for frequent readings without multiple ma-
chine entry costs that are incurred when weighing stack piles
using external lifting mechanism. This SM provides less ac-
curate data compared to weighing stack piles or scale tickets,
due to the low probability of equally sampling all materials in
the population. Even though frequent data can be collected,
these data are not as continuous compared to weighing stack
piles with sensors, in other words, Bsnap shots^ of the drying
behavior are the results from this SM [7••].
Transect Sampling
Similar to fixed location sampling, transect sampling is also
employed to account for MC measurement within the pile.
However, here, no fixed sampling points are plotted prior to
sampling; instead, transects are drawn across the piles.
Transects are created by markings or laying ribbons in a spe-
cific orientation at required intervals/depths. Materials that fall
on the transect are then systematically selected based on the
required number of samples for each class (e.g., diameter
class, tree species) [4]. Selected sample materials are cut with
chainsaws at the point of the intersection with the transect, to
expose the complete diameter for MC estimation [34••].
Appropriate actions are taken to prevent edge effects. The
remaining un-sampled materials are left undisturbed for future
sampling. The sampled wood materials (branches) are
discarded after the diameter is exposed. This approach is most
suitable for teepee, windrowed piles, or scattered trees
(Fig. 4), where the shape and size of the material vary consid-
erably. In such conditions, fixed location sampling would not
provide a true representation of the stack pile.
The advantage of this SM is in its ability to capture varia-
tion across different depths and lengths and increase the prob-
ability of all materials being sampled compared to the fixed
location method. Similar to fixed location sampling, transect
sampling method can also be utilized for comparing various
pile structures and arrangement patterns. Some of the advan-
tages transect sampling has over fixed location sampling are
as follows: (1) it can capture piles with irregular shapes and
structures; (2) the possibility of including different materials
into the sampling population is comparatively higher as
Transects
Fig. 4 Wood disc being extracted for moisture content measurement
from teepees piles using transect sampling method. New transects are
marked every time prior to the data collection with flags or ribbon
Fig. 3 Schematic diagram of drawing samples for fixed point sampling
method (Source: Filbakk et al. [4])
Curr Forestry Rep

transects are not predetermined; (3) interior entry to the piles is
relatively easier by adjusting alignment of the transects,
allowing to capture variation in MC within pile in more detail;
and (4) more applicable in regions with limited woody bio-
mass market where all forest residues generated are usually
piled as teepees. However, this method is more labor intensive
and demands a high attention to safety when compared to
fixed location sampling during sample collections from inte-
riors of pile (Fig. 4).
Sampling Methods for Comminuted Forest Residues (Wood
Chips/Hog Fuel)
Evaluating MC in comminuted forest residues such as wood
chips and hog fuel necessitates adoption of one of the previ-
ously described SM. When comminuted materials are mea-
sured with weighing stack piles, it can provide continuous and
accurate estimates of the average MC, but cannot be used to
show the variation in MC within the pile. Fixed location SM
can be used to determine the variation between different strata
of the comminuted pile. In such cases, probes have to be used
for sampling the interiors. Here, the geometric shape of pile
has to be adjusted to allow access. Sample collection from the
interior of piles has also been done by making vertical cuts at
the sides of pile [21]. A drawback to this approach is that
subsequent sampling results could be impacted due to expo-
sure of sampling point to atmosphere. MC through scale
tickets are also used commonly when the processed forest
residues are sent to end-use facilities.
Factors Affecting Selection of Sampling Methods
Each SM has their own unique advantages and shortcomings
and are designed for specific situations. Some of the factors
affecting the selection of SM are as follows:
1.
Utilization of data derived: Objective of the study and
nature of data required are crucial factors that dictate the
choice of SM. For example, SM will vary based on
whether the study objective focuses on MC variation
within the pile or variation between the piles.
2.
Temporal nature: Data collection techniques employed for
one-time data would be different from that for a continu-
ous scale. Experimental design (e.g., simple random,
stratified random, or purposive sampling) would also af-
fect the choice of the SM.
3.
Field study or controlled experiment: In-wood studies of-
ten have limited access to equipment compared to con-
trolled experiments which are usually near research facil-
ities and have more equipment accessible.
4.
Financial budgets and time needed: Cost of initial exper-
imental setup and measurement varies with each SM.
SMs like weighing stack piles using sensors would incur
higher cost for initial setup followed by lesser price to
collect data periodically. In contrast, the initial setup cost
is often not expensive for transect sampling and fixed
location sampling methods; however, these come with a
high cost for sample collection (due to the involvement of
professional sawyers). Other SMs like weighing using
forklifts may require multiple machine entry cost, for in-
wood data monitoring.
5.
Equipment and drying site availability: Availability of
equipment such as forklift trucks, weight data loggers,
frame works for placing the forest residues, moisture me-
ter, and professional sawyers also plays a major role in the
selection of the SM.
6.
Material type: SM employed for evaluating MC of com-
minuted forest residues (woodchips and hog fuel) will be
different from that of non-comminuted forms such as
tops, chunks, branches, and small-diameter trees.
7.
Material size: Pieces greater than 15 cm in diameter have
to be dealt differently from those with small-diameter ma-
terials (<15 cm). The 15-cm-diameter range was adopted
considering the general market conditions for pulpwood
in Western United States. Twigs less than 5 cm can be
collected in plastic bags, weighed, and later sent to the
lab for drying to get the moisture content. However, for
larger size material, chain saws are used for both
extracting wood discs and ensuring fresh-cut for accurate
moisture meter readings.
8.
Shape and structure of forest residue piles: An important
factor to be considered is the structure of piles along with
its shape. Shapes of forest residues piles have been gen-
eralized by forest fire ecologists for estimating the volume
[10•]. Recently, LiDAR technology is utilized to accurate-
ly model the shape of the pile to predict the quantity of
forest residues [35]. In comminuted forest residues, piles
usually have a pyramidal structure or similar.
9.
Compactness of material: It can be challenging to acquire
samples from the middle of the pile when the materials are
tightly packed. As a solution, special access are created to
sampling points while constructing the pile [21].
Techniques for Moisture Content Measurement
After acquiring samples, the next step is the actual estimation
of MC:
Oven Drying
Oven drying is regarded as the most common method. Here,
samples are taken in the form of disc (cookies) or sawdust by
cutting with a chainsaw. Wood discs are generally preferred,
as sawdust samples can become contaminated with chainsaw
Curr Forestry Rep

lubricants and lose a higher percentage of water due to the heat
generated during sawing [7••]. Wood discs are cut from
branches of the required samples with a thickness ranging
from 2 to 3 cm. Once a branch is selected, the sample should
be cut at least 0.5 m away from the end of the branch because
wood gains and loses moisture very rapidly through the end
grain; a phenomenon referred to as edge effect [36]. MC with-
in the branch varies along the length, with lower MC towards
the ends. Freshly cut disc are weighed in field or immediately
placed in sealed plastic bags to be weighed later in a laboratory
setting [18••]. Samples are then oven dried for 1 to 4 days
(ASTM standard D 2016) depending on the procedure
adopted [15••, 19•]. Dried weight of the disc is later measured,
and MC is calculated on a green basis for woody biomass
[Eq. 1] from the following,
Mositure content% Green basis
ð
Þ
¼
Weight of water
Weight of water þ dry weight of wood


 100 ð1Þ
where weight of water is the difference between fresh weight
and oven dry weight of the wood sample.
Even though oven drying techniques provide very accurate
MC measurement, there are certain inherent limitations, such
as being a destructive sampling method and requiring a min-
imum timeframe of 24 h (depending on the standards used) to
attain results. Additionally, oven drying can drive volatile
compounds out of the wood (ASTM D4442). When volatiles
are removed, the wood weighs less than if only water was
removed, resulting in an overestimation of MC.
Moisture Meters
Moisture meters predominantly come in the form of dielectric
and resistance meters. They are considered a quick, reliable,
and non-destructive way to assess moisture content and are
widely used in both research and commercial practices.
Measurements are taken along the rays and cross section of
the branch. While collecting samples, similar to disc collec-
tion (for oven drying techniques), fresh cuts are made from the
middle of the stem rather than measuring from the exposed
outer portion, to avoid the edge effect. Studies have shown
that it is important to evaluate reliability of the readings ob-
tained from the moisture meter by comparing readings to MC
estimated from oven dry measurements [34••, 37]. Prior to
data collection, a paired t test analysis is done to understand
the variation between the two measurement techniques. The
equality test would involve collecting a number of samples
from various species and diameter classes used in the study.
The difference in the value should also be gauged.
At present, different types of moisture content measuring
instruments are available. Ochoa [25••] tested six different
tools and utilized three different measurement technologies
(acoustic, conductance, and capacitance) on different species
in various forms such as sawlogs and comminuted forest res-
idues. Results showed even the best model/tool combination
was only explaining about 80% of the variability in measure-
ments. Other types of measurement techniques such as
electro-magnetic rays including ultra-violet, near infra-
red, resonance acoustic velocity, and dynamic modulus
of elasticity have also been used to monitor MC with
varying degrees of accuracy [38–40]. Currently, these
methods are still under development and are mostly re-
stricted to laboratories.
Accessory Data: Weather Parameters
Changes in MC are directly associated with weather and cli-
matic conditions under which forest residues are placed. The
ambient temperature (°C), relative air humidity (%), wind
speed (km h−1), wind direction (°), insolation (W m−2), and
precipitation (mm) are usually measured [4, 19•, 41]. The data
can also be taken from nearby meteorological stations [15••,
21]. Thermocouples or atmospheric data loggers have also
been placed in the stack pile at strategic positions to monitor
internal weather condition. These procedures have been
adopted for fixed location sampling and transect sampling.
However, due to the smaller size of the stack pile used in the
weighing stack pile method, internal weather monitoring
would not provide any substantial data.
Comparison of the Sampling Method Techniques
Each SM comes with its own advantages and limitations that
are meant for achieving a specific objective. Apart from mon-
itoring MC, these SM have also been used for sampling ma-
terials for collecting data on other attributes, including energy
content and ash content. The scale ticket method is accurate
and comparatively inexpensive, yet only provides one-time
data. Weighing the stack pile can provide greater accuracy
and is useful in estimating the variation of a pile’s MC over
a given time period. The sampling frequency can range from
monthly to seasonal sampling [21, 33••]. However, the
weighing method is not appropriate to estimate the var-
iation in MC within the pile and involves greater costs
associated with equipment requirements (Table 2).
Weighing stack pile would provide best results for the
following situations:
&
Developing drying models based on weather conditions
&
MC variation in piles differing in material types, species,
etc.
&
Evaluation of drying patterns over time
Curr Forestry Rep

For evaluating the variation of MC across the depth of a
wood stack pile and across various diameter classes, the tran-
sect method and fixed point sampling method are very effec-
tive. In cases where it becomes physically not feasible to ex-
tract samples from the interiors of the pile (especially while
estimating the variation between layers of the pile), regression
models are developed to predict MC variation within the pile.
Here, selected wood pieces from the pile are initially pulled
out and several samples are taken along the length of the piece.
These measurements are used to model the MC variation
within the pile. Additionally, once a sample is taken from a
branch, the remainder of that material is generally excluded
from the study unless the sampling population is small.
Conclusions
Selection of the appropriate SM is pivotal for addressing the
objectives for any research. The scope of this article was to
comprehend the different sampling methods adopted for mea-
suring the MC in forest residue feedstock. As the MC in forest
residues after felling is dependent on several factors including
weather, post-harvest handling, and storage conditions, it is
important to consider the advantages and limitations of the
different SMs. This article reviewed four SMs to sample MC
from a forest residue pile.
Acknowledgements
This project was supported by a grant funded by
the US Department of Energy under the Biomass Research and
Development Initiative program: Award Number DE-EE0006297.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
Drs Kizha and Han declares no conflicts of
interests.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does
not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any
of the authors.
Table 2 Advantages and
limitations of sampling methods
that are commonly used for
sampling moisture content (MC)
in forest residues for energy pro-
duction. The factors for each
sampling methods were ranked
based on comparison
Weighing stack pile
Fixed location
sampling
Transect
sampling
Weight from
scale tickets
Factors
Sensors on
platform
External lifting
mechanism
1. Periodic interval
of data
collectiona
Continuous
Snap shots
Snap shots
Snap shots
One-time
data
2. Multiple-entry
costb
Least
High
Minimal
Minimal
Not
applicable
3. Accuracy in
data
Highest
High
Limited
Limited
high
4. In-woods data
collectionc
Possible
Limited
Preferred
Preferred
Not
applicable
5. MC variation
within forest
residue pile
Not suited
Not suited
Preferred
Most preferred
No
6. Comminuted
forest residuesd
Preferred
Limited (chances in
disrupting pile
shape)
Preferred
Not applicable
Preferred
7. Cost of periodic
sampling
Less
High
Medium
Medium
Minimum
8. Initial cost of
experimental
setup
High
High
Low
Low
Low
9. Controlled
experimentse
Preferred
Preferred
Not suited due
to high
variation
Not suited due
to high
variation
No
a Referring to the temporal continuity of data. Snap shots represents one-time measurement during the data
collection period
b Cost associated with bringing in the machines or equipment required for data collection
c Data collected from piles built during forest harvesting operation. These are typical business as usual and
represent the forest residues piled in real-world conditions
d Processed (grinded or chipped) forest residues
e Studies exclusively designed for estimating moisture content and not typically the piles built during forest
operation activities
Curr Forestry Rep

References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
•• Of major importance
1.
US Department of Energy. 2016 billion ton report: advancing do-
mestic resources for a thriving bioeconomy. Oak Ridge: Oak Ridge
National Laboratory; 2016. p. 448. Report No.: ORNL/TM-2016/
160
2.
EIA (U.S. Energy Information Administration). Short-term energy
outlook [Internet]. Washington DC: US Department of Energy;
2016 Jul. Available from: https://www.eia.gov/forecasts/steo/
report/renew_co2.cfm
3.
Nurmi J. The storage of logging residue for fuel. Biomass
Bioenergy. 1999;17:41–7.
4.
Filbakk T, Høibø O, Nurmi J. Modelling natural drying efficiency
in covered and uncovered piles of whole broadleaf trees for energy
use. Biomass Bioenergy. 2011;35:454–63.
5.
Suadicani K, Gamborg C. Fuel quality of whole-tree chips from
freshly felled and summer dried Norway spruce on a poor sandy
soil and a rich loamy soil. Biomass Bioenergy. 1999;17:199–208.
6.•• Filbakk T, Skjevrak G, Høibø O, Dibdiakova J, Jirjis R. The influ-
ence of storage and drying methods for scots pine raw material on
mechanical pellet properties and production parameters. Fuel
Process Technol. 2011;92:871–8. The authors describes MC re-
duction in stacked piles using a fixed location sampling method.
7.•• Erber G, Routa J, Wilhelmsson L, Raitila J, Toiviainen M,
Riekkinen J, et al. A prediction model prototype for estimating
optimal storage duration and sorting [Internet]. Vantaa, Finland:
Finnish Forest Research Institute. 2014:76. Report No.: ISBN
978-951-40-2476-4. Available from: http://www.metla.fi/
julkaisut/workingpapers/2014/mwp297.htm. The report
discusses some of the advantages and limitations of weighing
stack piles. The report also describes a step-by-step procedure
to set up an experiment.
8.
Bisson JA, Han H-S. Quality of feedstock produced from sorted
Forest residues. Am J Biomass Bioenergy. 2016;5:81–97.
9.
Wright CS, Balog CS, Kelly JW, others. Estimating volume, bio-
mass, and potential emissions of hand-piled fuels [Internet]. US
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest
Research Station Portland, OR; 2010 [cited 2016 Jul 26].
Available from: http://www.arlis.org/docs/vol1/B/588869493.pdf
10.• Hardy CC. Guidelines for estimating volume, biomass, and smoke
production for piled slash. 1998 [cited 2017 Apr 3]; Available from:
http://www.treesearch.fs.fed.us/pubs/download/26244.pdf. The
report classifies forest residues piles based on shape. This data is
essential to determine the type of sampling method when
conducting an in-field study to estimate biomass volume.
11.
Kizha AR, Han H-S. Processing and sorting forest residues: cost,
productivity and managerial impacts. Biomass Bioenergy. 2016;93:
97–106.
12.
Spinelli R, Hartsough B. A survey of Italian chipping operations.
Biomass Bioenergy. 2001;21:433–44.
13.
Golser M, Pichler W, Hader F. Energieholztrocknung (wood energy
and drying). Holzforschung Austria; 2005.
14.
Elber U. Changes in moisture content: fresh wood in forest storage.
Bern: Vision Engineering; 2007 Nov. p. 31. Report No.: 101410.
15.•• Kizha AR, Han H-S, Paulson JS. Techniques to reduce moisture
content of forest residues at the harvest site. Lexington, Kentucky;
2015. The study focusses on MC reduction for four types of pile
arrangements (teepees, stack pile, criss-cross and scattered)
using a transect method.
16.
Jirjis R. Storage and drying of wood fuel. Biomass Bioenergy.
1995;9:181–90.
17.• Roise JP, Catts G, Hazel D, Hobbs A, Hopkins C. Balancing bio-
mass harvesting and drying tactics with delivered payment practice
[Internet]. North Carolina State University; 2013. Available from:
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.639.
8702&rep=rep1&type=pdf. The report analyze the economic
benefit by lowering MC in forest residue piles.
18.•• Röser D, Mola-Yudego B, Sikanen L, Prinz R, Gritten D, Emer B,
et al. Natural drying treatments during seasonal storage of wood for
bioenergy in different European locations. Biomass Bioenergy.
2011;35:4238–47. The authors describes a MC reduction study
conducted in four different parts of Europe using weighing
stack method.
19.• Kim D-W, Murphy G. Forecasting air-drying rates of small
Douglas-fir and hybrid poplar stacked logs in Oregon, USA. Int J
For Eng. 2013;24:137–47. Authors explores the effects of weath-
er parameters on MC reduction.
20.
Liang T, Khan MA, Meng Q. Spatial and temporal effects in drying
biomass for energy. Biomass Bioenergy. 1996;10:353–60.
21.
Casal MD, Gil MV, Pevida C, Rubiera F, Pis JJ. Influence of storage
time on the quality and combustion behaviour of pine woodchips.
Energy. 2010;35:3066–71.
22.
Uslu A, Faaij APC, Bergman PCA. Pre-treatment technologies, and
their effect on international bioenergy supply chain logistics.
Techno-economic evaluation of torrefaction, fast pyrolysis and
pelletisation. Energy. 2008;33:1206–23.
23.
Gigler JK, Van Loon WKP, Van den Berg JV, Sonneveld C,
Meerdink G. Natural wind drying of willow stems. Biomass
Bioenergy. 2000;19:153–63.
24.
Järvinen T. Valtion teknillinen tutkimuskeskus. Rapid and accurate
biofuel moisture content gauging using magnetic resonance mea-
surement technology. 2013;
25.•• Ochoa FAB. Evaluation of six tools for estimating woody biomass
moisture content [Internet]. [Corvallis Oregon]: Oregon State
University; 2012 [cited 2016 Jun 16]. Available from: http://ir.
library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/handle/1957/37209. The study
compares the relative accuracy of MC measurement for six
different tools.
26.
Fairfax County. Overview of sampling procedures. Fairfax County
Department of Neighborhood and Community Services: Fairfax;
2012.
27.
Owens F, Soderlund S, Hi-Bred P, Business AD. Methods for mea-
suring moisture content of grains and implications for research and
industry. Proc. Okla. State Univ. Cattle Grain Process. Symp. Okla.
State Univ. Tulsa OK [Internet]. 2006 [cited 2017 Apr 4]. p. 238–
244. Available from: http://beefextension.com/proceedings/cattle_
grains06/06-32.pdf
28.
Fauchon T, Deleuze C, Chantre G. How to control the variation of
the wood moisture content of logs from the stand to the woodyard?
The contribution of both direct techniques of assessment and
modeling. France: Laboratorie Bois Process (Wood Processing
Lab); 2000. p. 419–63.
29.
Erber G, Kanzian C, Stampfer K. Modelling natural drying of
European beech ( Fagus sylvatica L.) logs for energy based on
meteorological data. Scand J For Res. 2016;31:294–301.
30.
Visser R, Berkett H, Spinelli R. Determining the effect of storage
conditions on the natural drying of radiata pine logs for energy use.
N Z J For Sci. 2014;44:1–8.
31.•• Kizha AR, Han H-S. Forest residues recovered from whole-tree
timber harvesting operations. Eur J For Eng. 2015;1:46–55. The
article estimates MC of the forest residues using weight scales.
32.
Nyström J, Dahlquist E. Methods for determination of moisture
content in woodchips for power plants—a review. Fuel. 2004;83:
773–9.
Curr Forestry Rep

33.•• Brand MA, Bolzon de Muñiz GI, Quirino WF, Brito JO. Storage as
a tool to improve wood fuel quality. Biomass Bioenergy. 2011;35:
2581–8. The study estimates MC using a fixed-location sam-
pling method.
34.•• Gautam S, Pulkki R, Shahi C, Leitch M. Fuel quality changes in full
tree logging residue during storage in roadside slash piles in
Northwestern Ontario. Biomass Bioenergy. 2012;42:43–50. The
authors describe some of the practical situations where transect
sampling can be performed.
35.
Long JJ, Boston K. An evaluation of alternative measurement tech-
niques for estimating the volume of logging residues. For Sci.
2013;60:200–4.
36.
Reeb JE, Milota MR. Moisture content by the oven-dry method for
industrial testing [Internet]. Corvallis, Oregon; 1999 p. 9. Available
from: http://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/handle/1957/5190
37.
Garrahan P, Lavoie V. Evaluation of factors affecting moisture es-
timates from a dielectric type moisture meter. 9 th International
IUFRO wood drying conference. Nanjing, China; 2005.
38.
Carter P, Chauhan S, Walker J. Sorting logs and lumber for stiffness
using director HM200. Wood Fiber Sci. 2007;38:49–54.
39.
Jensen P, Hartmann H, Bohm T, Temmerman M, Rabier F, Morsing
M. Moisture content determination in solid biofuels by dielectric
and NIR reflection methods. Biomass Bioenergy. 2006;30:935–43.
40.
Chan JM, Walker J, Raymond CA. Effects of moisture content and
temperature on acoustic velocity and dynamic MOE of radiata pine
sapwood boards. Wood Sci Technol. 2011;45:609–26.
41.
Belart Lengerich MF. Forest harvest residue moisture management
in the Pacific Northwest, USA [Internet]. [Corvallis Oregon]:
Oregon State University; 2016 [cited 2017 Mar 13]. Available from:
http://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/handle/1957/59544
42.
Pettersson M, Nordfjell T. Fuel quality changes during seasonal
storage of compacted logging residues and young trees. Biomass
Bioenergy. 2007;31:782–92.
Curr Forestry Rep
