 
 
 
Applied Engineering in Agriculture 
Vol. 34(1): 5-10      2018 American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers   ISSN 0883-8542   https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12774 
5 
WASTE TO WISDOM: UTILIZING FOREST RESIDUES  
FOR THE PRODUCTION OF BIOENERGY  
AND BIOBASED PRODUCTS 
H.-S. Han,  A. Jacobson,  E. M. Bilek,  J. Sessions 
ABSTRACT. The Waste to Wisdom project was part of the Biomass Research and Development Initiative (BRDI) and funded 
by the Department of Energy (DE-EE0006297) at an amount of $5.8 million. Our interdisciplinary research team, consisting 
of academics, business professionals, and land managers, worked together for about four years (September 2013 to Decem-
ber 2017) to: 1) conduct field-based experiments to develop innovative tools and systems that improve the economics, ac-
cessibility, and production of quality feedstocks from forest residues, 2) develop and test stand-alone in-woods or near-the-
forest biomass conversion technologies (BCTs) for the production of biochar, torrefied wood, and briquettes, and 3) perform 
analyses to evaluate the economic feasibility of commercial deployment of BCTs and to quantify the life cycle economic and 
environmental benefits of utilizing forest residues with BCTs for the production of bioenergy and bioproducts. The research 
papers presented in this Special Issue cover key aspects of the research efforts and findings made by the project team. We 
encourage the audience to visit the project web site (http://wastetowisdom.com/) to learn more about the team’s research 
on feedstock development, biomass conversion technologies, and the financial and environmental benefits of utilizing forest 
residues for production of bioenergy and biobased products. 
Keywords. Air quality, Biomass conversion technology, Forest harvesting, Woody biomass. 
orest residues, including un-merchantable and 
small-diameter trees, tops, and limbs, produced 
during thinning and timber harvest operations, can 
be used to produce renewable bioenergy and bi-
oproducts. The more efficient utilization of forest residues 
could also help offset the high costs of forest restoration ac-
tivities, fire hazard treatments, post-harvest activities, and 
forest management in general. Forest residues have long 
been underutilized and treated as waste materials because of 
their high collection and transportation costs, as well as their 
low market value. While open burning is often employed to 
dispose of forest residues, this practice generally results in 
substantial negative economic and environmental impacts, 
including increased forest management costs and reduced lo-
cal air quality. 
At present, the greatest obstacle to more effectively uti-
lize forest residues is high transportation cost. The integra-
tion of biomass conversion technologies (BCTs) with new 
in-forest biomass operations could provide a cost-effective 
alternative to the long-distance transport of high moisture 
and low energy density forest residues. However, innovative 
new biomass feedstock technologies that produce high-qual-
ity feedstock materials from low-quality forest residues are 
needed to meet BCT feedstock specifications that include 
particle size and minimal contamination. BCTs can effec-
tively convert comminuted forest residues into high-value 
fuels with desirable market characteristics (i.e., low moisture 
content and high energy density) and soil amendment prod-
ucts (i.e., biochar) in the woods, resulting in significantly-
increased transportation efficiencies. Using a process that is 
either in-woods or near-the-forests would also provide sub-
stantial environmental benefits by displacing fossil fuels, 
improving forest health, reducing catastrophic wildfires, and 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
The primary goal of the Waste to Wisdom project was to 
utilize waste forest residues to produce bioenergy and bi-
obased products as a strategy to: 1) increase energy supply 
from renewable sources, 2) improve the environment, and 
3) promote economic development in rural, forest-dependent 
communities in the western United States. Using forest resi-
dues as a feedstock for BCTs provides substantial social and 
economic benefits for rural, timber-dependent communities, 
including providing jobs for local workers and improving air 
quality through reduced emissions from open pile burns. In 
addition, converting forest residues into biochar is an effective 
strategy for carbon sequestration and improving the produc-
tivity of forest soils while reducing the incidence of cata-
strophic wildfires. 
 
 
 
 
Submitted for review in January 2018 as manuscript number ES 12774; 
approved for publication as part of the Waste to Wisdom Collection by the 
Energy Systems Community of ASABE in January 2018. 
Mention of company or trade names is for description only and does not
imply endorsement by the USDA. The USDA is an equal opportunity
provider and employer. 
The authors are Han-Sup Han, Professor, Ecological Restoration
Institute, Norther Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona; Arne Jacobson,
Professor, Humboldt State University, Arcata, California; E.M. (Ted) 
Bilek, Economist, USDA Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory, 
Madison, Wisconsin; and John Sessions, Professor, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon. Corresponding author: Han-Sup Han, PO 
Box 15017, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011; phone: 928-
523-1049; e-mail: Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu. 
F 

6 
 
APPLIED ENGINEERING IN AGRICULTURE 
This special issue of Applied Engineering in Agriculture 
includes 14 articles that are based on research and findings 
from the Waste to Wisdom project. Three of the articles 
cover topics related to feedstock collection and preparation, 
including coverage of moisture management for forest resi-
dues (Kizha and Han, 2018), moisture content of baled bio-
mass (Dooley et al., 2018), and feedstock preparation using 
screening technologies (Woo and Han et al., 2018). Another 
four articles focus on technical issues related to mobile bio-
mass conversion technology deployment, including articles 
on torrefaction system performance (Severy et al., 2018a), 
commercial biochar production technology (Severy et al., 
2018b; Eggink et al., 2018), and electricity generation from 
a commercial biomass gasification system (Palmer et al., 
2018). Also covered are topics related to the economics and 
logistics of biomass conversion (Berry and Sessions, 2018a, 
2018b), economic demand curves for biomass products 
made from forest residues (Sasatani and Easton, 2018), and 
analysis of bio-product supply chains (Berry et al., 2018). 
The issue additionally includes articles related to the life cy-
cle assessment of greenhouse gas and other emissions from 
biomass briquette production and use (Alanya-Rosenbaum 
et al., 2018), biochar utilization for mine site restoration 
(Page-Dumroese et al., 2018), and public acceptance of for-
est processes related to biomass conversion of residues (Sa-
satani et al., 2018). Together, these articles cover a wide 
range of forestry, technical, and social science topics rele-
vant to the effective and efficient utilization of forest resi-
dues. A summary of key findings from the Waste to Wisdom 
project is covered in the sections that follow. 
PRODUCTION OF QUALITY FEEDSTOCK  
FROM FOREST RESIDUES 
During timber operations, treetops left from sawlog pro-
cessing and small-diameter trees were delimbed and sepa-
rated from the slash pile (Kizha and Han, 2016). There was 
an overall drop of moisture content in forest residues from 
52% (freshly cut) to less than 20% over the 12-month study 
period (Kizha et al. 2018). Processed treetops (i.e., 
stemwood only) were converted into different feedstock 
sizes using three mobile, high-production, comminution ma-
chines (chipper, micro-chipper and sawdust machine; Bisson 
and Han, 2016). The mean geometric lengths for processed 
treetops chipped using a regular chipper are highly uniform: 
more than 95% of the chipped materials were less than 
50 mm in length. Micro-chipper and sawdust machines pro-
duced small sizes of chipped materials (<5mm in length) to 
meet feedstock specification technologies that require small 
particles. All these chipping machines showed high produc-
tion capacity levels (20-30 bone dry metric tons 
(bdmt)/hour), resulting in comminution costs ranging from 
$11 to $13/bdmt. The average bulk densities of chipped ma-
terials ranged between 220 and 322 kg/m3, which is much 
higher than ground materials (137 kg/m3). Further evidence 
of the good-quality feedstock produced from forest residues 
was the low moisture content (<20%) and ash content 
(<1%). 
The Forest Concepts woody biomass baler (Auburn, 
Wash.) can handle all remaining forest residuals including 
low-density tops, branches, and understory brush biomass, 
and create high-density biomass bales that are amenable to 
truck transportation, long-term storage, and grinding at the 
time of use. A lightweight, modular baler was specified for 
mounting on forwarders, trailers, truck chassis and the like. 
A self-propelled, remotely-controlled baler was specified as 
an alternative to in-woods grinders. Finished bales had an 
average volume of 1.36 m3 and a typical bulk density of ap-
proximately 350 kg/m3 at 15% to 29% moisture content 
(Dooley et al., 2018). 
Appropriate biomass operations logistics coupled with the 
production of pre-processed feedstocks such as biochar, bri-
quettes, or torrefied wood chips within a supply chain can en-
hance the economic transportation capacity of a biomass 
recovery operation. Transportable biomass conversion facili-
ties producing biochar, briquettes, and torrefied wood were 
modeled and optimized for five sub-regions within the Pacific 
Northwest to characterize the potential economic viability of 
transportable designs. The optimal transportable design in-
cluded facility movement on a 1- to 2.5-year frequency de-
pending on product and region with biochar being the most 
likely to be economically viable (Berry and Sessions, 2018). 
Biochar is the most likely candidate for a transportable con-
version system given its relatively low power consumption, 
high allowable input moisture content, wider range in its ac-
ceptable feedstock size specifications, and low product trans-
portation cost. 
FOREST RESIDUES CONVERSION INTO  
BIOBASED PRODUCTS 
All three biomass conversion technologies evaluated in 
this study were modified to be suitable for mobile, in-field 
operation with forest residues. By analyzing the quality of 
products from each machine with different feedstocks, spec-
ifications were developed based on moisture content, ash 
content, and particle size distribution of comminuted forest 
residues. The biochar machine could accept the widest range 
of feedstocks up to 100 mm particles sizes, 20% ash, and 
25% moisture; briquettes with the highest density and dura-
bility were produced from feedstock between 8% and 12% 
moisture content and a high fraction (>50%) of fine particles 
or sawdust; the torrefier performed best with feedstock mois-
ture content below 10% but could accept up to 25%; feed-
stock particle size specifications for the torrefier were 
stringent, requiring the majority of the particles to be be-
tween 3 and 25 mm. 
One of the main constraints across all technologies is 
achieving the target moisture content before conversion. 
This was successfully completed by integrating waste heat 
drying. Excess heat from torrefaction or biochar production 
can be recovered to dry incoming residues that can be sent 
to the original BCT or another on-site BCT. BCT plant elec-
trical loads can be met using forest residues with a biomass 
gasifier generator set as an alternative to a diesel generator. 
A mobile biomass gasifier was able to provide electricity to 
unbalanced, highly variable BCT loads with low power fac-
tors. 
Through the Waste to Wisdom project, the three main BCTs 
plus a gasifier generator and a waste heat dryer were tested in-
dividually and within integrated demonstration systems to col-
lect operational performance data for economic and 

 
34(1): 5-10 
 
7 
environmental analyses. Two demonstration systems resulting 
from this project are highlighted in figure 1. 
ECONOMICS OF FOREST-TO-PRODUCT USING THREE 
BIOMASS CONVERSION PATHWAYS 
Forest-to-Product costs depend on feedstock costs to the 
transportable biomass conversion facility, product types to 
be processed, facility scale, BCT facility location on the 
landscape, and the frequency that the transportable facility is 
relocated. Three articles in the collection address the supply 
chain costs from roadside to market for the transportable fa-
cility. Berry and Sessions (2018a) develop a conceptual and 
mathematical strategic model to examine the forest-to-prod-
uct supply chain for a transportable biomass conversion fa-
cility including economics of scale and the costs of facility 
relocation. Berry and Sessions (2018b) focus on the genera-
tion of a tactical-based landscape model to optimize biomass 
extraction, transportation, conversion and product produc-
tion within a market system. Pathways include supply op-
tions at landings (burn, grind, chip, bale), centralized 
landings (grind/chip), biomass conversion facilities (bio-
char, briquettes, torrefied wood) and delivery to final mar-
ket. Berry et al. (2018) apply the strategic model to five sub-
regions in Washington, Oregon, and Califorina to examine 
how biomass availability, biomass characteristics, and state 
regulatory and energy cost structures affect supply chain 
costs for producing biochar, torrefied wood, and briquettes 
using the transportable biomass conversion concept. 
The presence of a local pulpwood market can affect bio-
mass availability and characteristics. State regulations and 
energy cost structures can also affect overall economics. 
Feedstock costs to the biomass conversion facility in five 
sub-regional studies in Washington, Oregon, and California 
varied from $30 to $50/bdmt of feedstock including moving 
the transportable facility around the landscape. Producing 
the biomass products within the facility (the sum of CapEX, 
OpEX, Drying, Conversion and Packaging) was the most-
costly component (fig. 2) and scale dependent (figs. 3 
and 4). 
Regional feedstock composition and availability was the 
largest indicator of feedstock delivery costs. The absence of 
a regional pulp market provided low-cost small logs and logs 
of noncommercial species that could be handled by conven-
tional self-loading log trucks and short trailers. Where local 
pulp markets exist, harvest residuals were primarily 
branches. Feedstock handling and transport were more ex-
pensive, requiring chipping, grinding, or baling at the land-
ing or central landing before transport to the BCT. 
Transportation costs are important, but they are overshad-
owed by the cost of biomass conversion technologies exam-
ined in this research (fig. 2). 
Biomass conversion costs are technology dependent and 
may be the key to lowering supply chain costs to enable mar-
ket viability. Feedstock moisture management was important, 
particularly for those biomass conversion technologies that re-
quire low moisture feedstock. Active drying based on waste 
heat recovery can extend the operational season for the BCT 
equipment, thereby improving system economics. Although 
components of transportable plants are modular, sufficient 
economies of scale exist such that for the range of transporta-
ble plants evaluated (15,000 to 50,000 bdmt annual input), 
larger transportable plants have lower conversion costs than 
smaller plants (figs. 3 and 4). 
Results generally indicate that system costs are largely 
dependent on market pricing, plant assumptions, and conver-
sion estimates. While processing and transportation costs are 
smaller, they are, nonetheless, important contributors for 
small-scale biomass conversion facility design configura-
tions. Using the biomass conversion technologies examined 
in the Waste to Wisdom project, access to electrical grid-en-
ergy could be the difference between an economically-viable 
supply chain operation and one that is not. 
Economics depends not only on supply, but also on mar-
ket demand, which was covered by Sasatani and Eastin 
(2018). They developed models to estimate demand curves 
for Waste to Wisdom products including wood briquettes, 
torrefied briquettes, and biochar that would be placed into 
five selected local markets in the northwestern United States. 
The demand curves were then used to estimate maximum 
factory prices of wood products at these locations over a 
range of production levels. Markets were assumed to be 
smaller residential users. 
Sasatani and Eastin (2018) found that when considering 
the location of a bioenergy production facility, distance to 
market is a critical factor. Locations closer to larger urban 
Figure 1. Integrated biochar system (left) using a waste heat dryer to dry forest residues before conversion and a biomass gasifier generator to 
provide electricity to the plant. The input rate was 320 kg/h (dry basis) with 79 kg/h of biochar production. Torrefied biomass briquettes were 
produced in a continuous flow torrefaction demonstration plant (right) using a dryer, torrefier, and briquetter in series. The input rate was 
650 kg/h with 550 kg/h of torrefied briquette production. 

8 
 
APPLIED ENGINEERING IN AGRICULTURE 
centers offered higher potential profits for smaller solid 
wood energy producers who would essentially be price tak-
ers. On the other hand, in the case of biochar, with smaller 
volumes of higher-margin product, the internet may help to 
overcome problems with market access. 
Market prices will depend on consumer perceptions of the 
products and may also depend on product quality; but there 
are likely to be tradeoffs between quality and production 
cost. However, even high retail prices for these products may 
not guarantee profitability, especially in locations with mar-
ket access issues and limited market potential due to smaller 
nearby populations. Producers in rural areas need to be 
aware of and sensitive to possible oversupply issues. 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS AND PUBLIC PERCEPTIONS 
The Waste to Wisdom concept may not be viable and will 
not be sustainable if there are not positive environmental im-
pacts from it. Environmental impacts were examined from 
three different perspectives. Life cycle analyses (LCA) were 
conducted on the processes and on the products to determine 
the impacts on the carbon cycle. Air quality and human 
health impacts from inhalation of particulate matter from 
burning slash piles was also examined. And the impact of 
applying biochar, particularly on degraded mine sites was 
considered. 
In their life cycle analysis work, Alanya-Rosenbaum 
et al. (2018) found that utilization of post-harvest residues as 
biofuel as opposed to the typical pile and burning practice 
shows a notable environmental advantage; notably that near-
woods bioenergy production systems using power from on-
site wood gasifier showed better environmental performance 
than their fossil fuel alternatives: on-site diesel and in-town 
grid electricity. Residues that are gasified to produce elec-
tricity at a near-woods conversion site reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions by 2.4 times compared with hauling those res-
idues four hours to a larger in-town biomass generation fa-
cility. An on-site diesel generator would have a total global 
warming impact about 2.8 times higher than the gasifier. In 
another example, LCA of biomass briquettes produced from 
biomass waste in substituting for propane in domestic heat-
ing reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 94%. 
 
Cost Component 
Description 
Logistics & Mobilization 
Includes costs associated with transport, processing, and facility mobilization 
Drying 
Cost incurred when reducing residue moisture content to processing specifications. 
Conversion & Packaging 
Conversion cost of producing biochar including cost of the core technology amortized over a 10-year period - excludes 
labor component [within Plant OPEX]. Packaging and loading truck costs from plant to market are also included. 
Plant OpEx 
Plant operational expenses of conversion facility - includes plant labor costs, power, insurance, supplies, maintenance [less 
conversion technology operating expenses beyond labor] 
Plant CapEx 
Plant capital costs related to facility - includes site prep, technology, material receiving, storage, retrieval, and mechanical 
installs [excludes conversion technology capital costs] 
Figure 2. Production cost of product expressed as $/bdmt of feedstock. 

 
34(1): 5-10 
 
9 
Human health impacts were also covered in Waste to 
Wisdom. Sifford et al. (2018) looked at the potential health 
consequences of pile burning by modeling slash piles, loca-
tions, and weather in Washington. They processed piling 
scenarios through a chemical transport modeling system and 
analyzed the results using geographic information system 
(GIS) methods. Particulate matter from burning slash piles 
can travel great distances away from the burns and have det-
rimental health effects on densely-populated urban areas as 
well as smaller rural communities. Sifford et al. (2018) 
found that human intake of particulate matter (PM) heavily 
depends on pile locations and weather. PM from burning a 
large pile in a given location can impact less than 100 people 
on one day or more than 200,000 people on a different day. 
Sifford et al. (2018) suggest that methodologies devel-
oped in air quality modeling work could help policymakers 
to identify best practices in fire management based on site-
specific factors and pre-burn smoke modeling to make better 
decisions for burn dates. Alternatively, policies and actions 
such as utilization that would avoid in-forest pile burning 
would also reduce adverse human health impacts and poor 
air quality. 
The effectiveness of biochar was studied with a focus on 
mine site remediation because abandoned mine sites are an 
issue on remote forest lands and offer a potentially higher-
valued use for biochar produced from nearby forest waste 
(Page-Dumroese et al., 2018). They found that biochar made 
from wood waste in Montana and Idaho can be applied rela-
tively easily to mine sites, where it aids in the site reclama-
tion by increasing site cover and speeding revegetation. 
Application rates of around 22 Mg/ha (9.8 tons/acre) are the 
most effective for changing soil physical, chemical, and bi-
ological properties. 
The forest waste utilization conceived in Waste to Wis-
dom will not be possible if thinning operations and produc-
tion of products from those thinnings are not also socially 
acceptable. Sasatani et al. (2018) evaluated social ac-
ceptance through a survey to determine public perceptions 
Figure 3. Core operational expenses [plant labor costs, power, insurance, supplies, maintenance, etc. (less conversion technology operating 
expenses beyond labor)] vs. plant scale (bdmt/yr). As plant scale increases, operational expenses (per unit input) decrease. Costs are expressed as
$/bdmt equivalent of feedstock. 
 
Figure 4. Core capital expenses [site prep, technology, MRS&R (Material Receiving, Storage, and Retrieval at the BCT site), mechanical installs
(less conversion technology capital costs)] vs. plant scale (bdmt/yr). As plant scale increases, capital expenses (per unit input) decrease. Ten-year 
facility service life. Costs are expressed as $/bdmt equivalent of feedstock. 
 -
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
$/bdmt
Scale (bdmt/yr)
Bio.
Tor.
Briq.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
$/bdmt
Scale (bdmt/yr)
Bio.
Tor.
Briq.

10 
 
APPLIED ENGINEERING IN AGRICULTURE 
of forest waste utilization. While there is general public sup-
port for forest thinning and using those thinnings to produce 
products such as biochar and bioenergy, opposition to thin-
ning generally increases along with increasing population 
density, suggesting different public education strategies and 
messages regarding the role of forest thinning in forest 
health depending on the population density. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Forest residues have long been underutilized and treated 
as waste materials because of their high collection and trans-
portation costs as well as the low market value of forest res-
idues. The Waste to Wisdom project was to improve the 
utilization of forest residues through the use of BCTs that 
operate at or near the forest. The lessons we learned from 
this project include operational logistics to produce quality 
feedstock from forest residues, technical specifications and 
capacity of BCTs, and socio-economic and environmental 
benefits from utilization of forest residues. The production 
of torrefied pellets and briquettes can strengthen energy 
sources by incorporating renewable fuels into current bioen-
ergy and coal-fired energy facilities. In addition, converting 
forest residues into biochar is an effective strategy for carbon 
sequestration and improving the productivity of forest soils 
while reducing the incidence of catastrophic wildfires. The 
14 articles presented in this Special Issue explain in detail 
the outcomes of the project in a number of key research topic 
areas, and we encourage the audience to visit the project web 
site (http://wastetowisdom.com/) to learn about the rest of 
the research outcomes, final reports, webinar presentations, 
and photo essays. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This material is based upon work supported by a grant 
from the U.S. Department of Energy under the Biomass Re-
search and Development Initiative program: Award Number 
DE-EE0006297. 
REFERENCES 
Alanya-Rosenbaum, S., Bergman, R. D., Ganguly, I., & Pierobon, 
F. (2018). A comparative life-cycle assessment of briquetting 
logging residues and lumber manufacturing coproducts in 
Western United States. Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 11-24. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12378 
Berry, M., & Sessions, J. (2018a). The economics of biomass 
logistics and conversion facility mobility: An Oregon case study. 
Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 57-72. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12383 
Berry, M., & Sessions, J. (2018b). A forest-to-product biomass 
supply chain in the Pacific Northwest, USA: A multi-product 
approach. Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 109-123. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12384 
Berry, M., Sessions, J., & Zamora-Cristales, R. (2018). Sub-
regional comparison for forest-to-product biomass supply chains 
on the Pacific West Coast, USA. Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 157-
174. https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12526 
Bisson, J. A., & Han, H.-S. (2016). Quality of feedstock produced 
from sorted forest residues. Am. J. Biomass Bioenergy, 5(2), 81-
97. https://doi.org/10.7726/ajbb.2016.1007 
Dooley, J. H., Wamsley, M. J., & Perry, J. M. (2018). Moisture 
content of baled forest and urban woody biomass during long-
term open storage. Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 223-228. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12281 
Eggink, A., Palmer, K., Severy, M., Carter, D., & Jacobson, A. 
(2018). Utilization of wet forest biomass as both the feedstock 
and electricity source for an integrated biochar production 
system. Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 125-134. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12404 
Kizha, A. R., & Han, H.-S. (2016). Processing and sorting forest 
residues: Cost, productivity and managerial impacts. Biomass 
Bioenergy, 93, 97-106. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2016.06.021 
Kizha, A.R., H.-S. Han, J. Paulson, and A. Koirala. 2018. Strategies 
for reducing moisture content in forest residues at the harvest 
site. Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 25-33. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12427 
Page-Dumroese, D. S., Ott, M. R., Strawn, D. G., & Tirocke, J. M. 
(2018). Using organic amendments to restore soil physical and 
chemical properties of a mine site in northeastern Oregon, USA. 
Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 43-55. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12399 
Palmer, K. D., Severy, M. A., Chamberlin, C. E., Eggink, A. J., & 
Jacobson, A. E. (2018). Performance analysis of a biomass 
gasifier genset at varying operating conditions. Appl. Eng. 
Agric., 34(1), 135-143. https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12414 
Sasatani, D., & Eastin, I. (2018). Demand curve estimation of 
locally produced woody biomass products. Appl. Eng. Agric. 
34(1), 145-155. https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12392 
Sasatani, D., Eastin, I. L., Bowers, C. T., & Ganguly, I. (2018). 
Public acceptance of pre-commercial thinning and energy and 
soil amendment products from post-harvest residues in western 
forests of the U.S. Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 99-108. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12366 
Severy, M. A., Chamberlin, C. E., Eggink, A. J., & Jacobson, A. E. 
(2018a). Demonstration of a pilot-scale plant for biomass 
torrefaction and briquetting. Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 85-98. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12376 
Severy, M. A., Carter, D. J., Palmer, K. D., Eggink, A. J., 
Chamberlin, C. E., & Jacobson, A. E. (2018b). Performance and 
emissions control of commercial-scale biochar production unit. 
Appl. Eng. Agric., 34(1), 73-84. 
https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12375 
Sifford C., Pierobon F., Ganguly I., Eastin I., Alvorado E., and 
Rogers L. (2018), Developing an Impact Assessment of Local 
Air Quality as a Result of Biomass Burns. CINTRAFOR WP 
128. University of Washington, Seattle, pp 65.  
Woo, H., & Han, H.-S. (2018). Performance of screening biomass 
feedstocks using star and deck screen machines. Appl. Eng. 
Agric., 34(1), 35-42. https://doi.org/10.13031/aea.12385 
 
 
 
