logistics
Article
Integrating Biomass Conversion Technologies
with Recovery Operations In-Woods: Modeling
Supply Chain
Jeﬀrey Steven Paulson 1, Anil Raj Kizha 2,*
and Han-Sup Han 3
1
Department of Forestry and Wildland Resources, Humboldt State University, Arcata, CA 95521, USA
2
School of Forest Resources, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469, USA
3
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86011-5018, USA
*
Correspondence: anil.kizha@maine.edu; Tel.: +1-207-581-2851
Received: 18 February 2019; Accepted: 30 May 2019; Published: 1 July 2019


Abstract: Economic potential of feedstock generated low-valued forest residue can be enhanced by
emerging biomass conversion technologies (BCT), such as torrefaction, briquetting, and gasiﬁcation.
However, for implementing these emerging processes within the woods, several hurdles are to be
overcome, among which a balanced supply chain is pivotal. Centralized biomass recovery operation
(CBRO) could be an economically viable solution in accessing harvesting sites and allows integration
of BCT into forest management. The goal of this study was to examine the logistic eﬀects of integrating
a BCT into a CBRO, under diﬀerent in-wood scenarios based on variations in travel time between
the facility locations, amount of raw materials handled, intermediate storage capacity, and duration
(number of days) of annual operations. Speciﬁc objectives included analyzing the eﬀects of forest
residue recoverability (BDMT, bone dry metric ton/ha), total transportation time from the harvest
unit to the market, and the annual number of in-woods production sites on the overall eﬃciency of
the BCT operations. Concurrently, this study examined the forest managerial impacts due to such
an integration. Location-allocation tool (maximize market share problem type) within the ArcGIS
Network Analyst platform was utilized to model the scenarios and generate one-way travel times
from the harvest site to ﬁnal markets. Results from geospatial analysis showed that there were 89–159
and 64–136 suitable locations for the BCT for logistics model (LM) I and II, respectively. Total one-way
travel time for all the models ranged between 1.0–1.7 h. Additionally, the annual numbers of BCT sites
was inversely proportional to the total one-way travel time (i.e., harvest unit to market). Arranging
CBRO and BCT operations to occur at the same in-woods site returned shorter total and average
travel times than arranging the two activities at separate in-woods sites. The model developed for
this study can be used by forest managers and entrepreneurs to identify sites for placing BCTs in the
forest that minimizes transportation times.
Keywords: biomass logistics; briquetting; gasiﬁcation; network analysis; timber harvesting operations;
torrefaction; work plan; woody biomass
1. Introduction
1.1. Biomass Conversion Technology and Forest Operations
Forest residues generated during timber harvesting operation can be viewed as a sustainable
source for energy production. Presently in the United States, woody biomass is considered as one of
the largest and most accessible domestic source of renewable energy, which predominantly comes
from timber harvest operation, forest products industries, and urban wood wastes [1].
Logistics 2019, 3, 16; doi:10.3390/logistics3030016
www.mdpi.com/journal/logistics

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
2 of 14
One major concern regarding the ﬁnancial viability for energy production from forest residues
is the transportation cost, which is often regarded as the single largest cost component of the entire
operation [2–7]. The inherent ineﬃciency of transporting low-value forest residues is the fundamental
economic barrier to increased biomass utilization [8]. Therefore, supply in remote locations may not be
suitable for extraction due to high access costs [9]. When transportation costs are taken into account,
more expensive resources in close proximity may be more economically competitive than low-priced
resources farther away [10].
The feasibility of any wood bioenergy production largely depends on the transportation costs
to extract forest residues from comparatively remote location. Previously, transporting comminuted
forest residues more than 80 km by road was not considered to be economically feasible [11]. Recently,
this distance has gone up to 94 km (average one-way distance) [5,12–14]. However, even at 80 km or
less, transportation costs alone can rise as high as $11 to $33/bone dry metric ton (BDMT) depending
on the road conditions [6]. US Department of Energy [1] estimates around one-third of the recoverable
forest residues (3.7 million BDMT) available throughout the nation can be extracted from the roadsides
at $22/BDMT and the rest (approximately 11.1 million BDMT) at $33/BDMT. The report also states only
60% of the forest residues can be recovered due to inaccessibility.
These situations have necessitated the concept of more value-added products compared to the
conventional hog fuels and/or wood chips for enhanced utilization of the forest residue. These
products can substantiate secondary transportation costs in terms of higher economic values, which is
increasingly becoming an achievable approach [15]. Biomass conversion technologies (BCT) such as
torrefaction, gasiﬁcation, pyrolysis, and densiﬁcation (palletizing and briquetting) can convert forest
residues into more dense energy carriers, which could further enhance handling and transportation [16].
Integrating BCT equipment into the supply chain of regular harvesting operations typically comes
with many stringent requirements set by the process itself (e.g., uniform particle size, low moisture
content, and absence of contaminants in the feedstock) and other spatial attributes related to the
locations of production (such as area, topography, forest managerial constraints, such as watercourse
and lake protection zone (WLPZ)/equipment exclusion zones (EEZ), and access to permanent roads).
Eﬃcient integration of woody biomass into energy generation requires information regarding spatial
and temporal variations on the availability of forest residues. The availability of recoverable forest
residues has been the focal point of various optimization studies [6,17]. Geospatial analysis has
also been applied to identify potential sites for new facilities [18]. Along with these, a logistics
model for work plans have been developed for centralized biomass recovery operation (CBRO) [19].
Spatial datasets along with other attributes, such as facility locations, road networks, hauling time,
time-associated traveling over various road types, vehicles used, operational cost, etc., can be used
to create dynamic and realistic models of wood biomass supply chain logistics in ArcGIS Network
Analyst, which can further predict the cost of transportation in various situations [4,6].
1.2. Network Analysis on Supply Chain
Management of the transportation and logistics network has become major components aﬀecting
the supply chain valuation for industrial production [20]. For planning and managing biomass supply
chains, several practical models have been developed with the help of tools such as operations research
and mathematical optimization based on computer algorithms [21].
Location-allocation resolutions comprise a considerable amount of capital investment and can
aﬀect the long-term production and distribution of products [22]. Several location–allocation models
(including fundamental transportation/assignment and linear programming formulations) have been
developed to optimize spatial patterns with respect to location criteria, including cost, coverage,
and access [21,23–26]. Apart from cost reduction, location-allocation algorithms have also accounted
for several other factors such as availability of labor, proximity to raw materials and markets, market
dimensions, government regulations, and environmental considerations [27].

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
3 of 14
Based on the physical locations of the operational sites involved, models can be broadly classiﬁed
into two main categories based on the sites of operations: Single facility and multi-facility location [28].
The spatial and operational attributes of production facilities, along with workload capacity and
distribution of task among them, inﬂuences transportation eﬃciency and productive machine or delay
time, thereby eﬀecting the overall transportation cost [29]. Therefore, the determination of location
and size of biomass conversion sites is vital to network design [30].
The size and location of CBRO incorporating various BCTs has rarely been examined in terms of the
logistics aspect. Past studies have shown that the mobilization of woody biomass for energy production
demands a high level of integration between the various stakeholders that extract and convert the
feedstock [31]. There is a strong technical merit for identifying and incorporating optimal system
balances in centralized BCT processing. The primary goal of this study was to model two diﬀerent
settings integrating BCT and CBRO based on their physical location (in-woods) and understand the
operational challenges within the workﬂow associated with each case. The speciﬁc objectives were to
examine the eﬀects of forest residue recoverability (BDMT/ha), overall transportation time from the
harvest unit to the market, storage space at the in-wood facility, and the annual number of production
sites (re-location) on the overall eﬃciency of the BCT operations. Furthermore, attempts were made to
evaluate the model with respect to on-ground timber harvesting conditions. These models can equip
forest engineers, procurement foresters, natural resource managers, and entrepreneurs to identify sites
for placing BCTs within the forest that minimizes transportation times, the move in and move out costs,
and increase transportation eﬃciency because high-density energy products are more economical to
haul than green wood chips. Additionally, the model developed could be easily be adapted to other
regions where timberlands are actively managed.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Explanation of Concepts/Terminology Used in the Article
Biomass conversion technology (BCT): Technologies that can create higher value-added
energy-densiﬁed feedstock from forest residues when compared to the traditional chipped material.
The BCTs modeled for the study are operated in-woods and include torrefaction, briquetting,
and gasiﬁcation.
Biomass recoverability: The actual amount of forest residues extracted from the timber harvest
units that will be further processed at BCT locations to generate value added products. The recovered
biomass is delimbed and stored as tree-tops in decks at the landing.
Centralized biomass recovery operations (CBRO): The process in which forest residues from
several log landings are brought into one site (via self-loading short log trucks or modiﬁed dump
trucks), where it will be comminuted to generate feedstock for BCT operation.
Comminution: The procedure of converting wood biomass into smaller particles or fragments,
typically using a chipper, grinder, shredder, hammer, or other equipment. For this study, comminution
attributed to reduction of size by a chipper. The end product of this process becomes the feedstock
for the BCT, which are characterized by uniform size distribution, low contamination, and low
moisture content.
Coupled operation: When one operational task (e.g., BCT) is totally dependent on the task prior to
it. Any delay eﬀecting the former task will have a direct ripple eﬀect on the task following. For example,
in a coupled system if the CBRO operation stalls, this will directly stop the working of BCT as the latter
no longer gets its input feedstock.
Forest residues: Woody materials present on the forest ﬂoor including logging residues generated
from timber harvesting operations that are typically of lesser or no economic value. Forest residues
were further classiﬁed into tree-tops, limbs, chunks, small-diameter trees, and non-merchantable
trees [32,33].

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
4 of 14
Permanent road: Two-lane graveled roads that have low grades and were designed for high-volume
traﬃc. These roads are meant to be used year-long.
Tree-tops: The wood material within bole (main stem) from 15 cm diameter level onwards to
the tip of the crown for both conifer and hardwood trees. Processed tree-tops are delimbed (foliage
removed along the entire length) to the top 5 cm diameter (small-end) [32–34].
Watercourse and lake protection zone (WLPZ)/equipment exclusion zones (EEZ): Areas in which
timber harvesting operations are restricted due to legal aspects or environmental concerns.
2.2. Study Area and Timber Harvesting Operations
The study area is an industrial timberland owned and managed by Green Diamond Resource
Company (GDRC) and encompasses approximately 41,000 ha in Humboldt County, California
(40◦52′13”N, 123◦57′30”W) (Figure 1).
The predominant tree species are Coast Redwood
(Sequoia sempervirens), Douglas-ﬁr (Pseudotsuga menziesii), Western Hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla),
and Tanoak (Notholithocarpus densiﬂorus).
Figure 1. Study area for the integrated centralized biomass recovery operation and biomass conversion
technology model in Humboldt County, California.
Integrated harvesting, generating both forest residues and sawlogs, is the common practice in
the region and even-age stand management is the major silvicultural prescription. The harvesting
system adopted is either shovel logging or cable yarding timber, depending on slope (ranging from 0◦
to 68◦) and environmental constraints. The timber harvesting operations are whole-tree operations
typically consisting of feller buncher or hand fallers (for steep terrains), followed by extraction using
shovel loaders or skidders. Processing is done at the landing by a dangle head processor, pull-through
delimber, or chainsaws (when the landing is restricted by space).

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
5 of 14
2.3. Description of Biomass Recovery Operation
Forest residues generated from the timber harvest were skidded to landings along with the sawlogs.
At the landing, selected forest residues (tree-tops, non-merchantable trees, and small-diameter trees)
are delimbed and piled in decks using a loader. The processed forest residues (from here on referred to
as tree-tops) are assumed to have an average moisture content of 12% after one year of drying [35–37].
Self-loading short log trucks are utilized to haul the tree-tops from the landings (having access to
permanent roads) to CBRO sites where it will be chipped. For landings that had access via seasonal
roads, a modiﬁed dump truck is used to haul to the landing. All CBRO sites had access to permanent
roads. Delivery and comminution were decoupled by a one-day supply. A typical workday for all
equipment in the supply chain was 10 h long. This ensured at least a one-day supply of processed
tree-tops are available for use at the beginning of each work day. Star and deck screener are operated
at the BCT sites to produce uniform sized feedstock. CBRO/BCT operations will only occur at one
site at a time, and each chosen site within the supply chain will represent one potential move for that
season, e.g., two BCT sites represents two moves, ﬁve BCT sites represents ﬁve moves, and so on.
2.4. Models and Scenarios
This study was designed to model an integrated CBRO and BCT operation in northern California
based on the physical location and by incorporating aspects of current timber harvesting techniques
adopted for the region. Based on the amount of forest residues to be processed, as well as if the
operations within the supply chain are coupled or de-coupled, the scenario selected for the models
had spatial requirements that varied quite signiﬁcantly. The models were based on methods using
traditional facility location analysis techniques, such as basic quantitative and quantitative criteria.
Two models were developed to evaluate the logistics of the supply chain based on physical location
of the CBRO and BCT process. Both models began at the harvest units, where processed tree-tops
were picked up from roadside decks, comminuted at the CBRO sites, BCT converted, and ended with
delivery of the BCT converted products to the market. The market (power plant) was 72 km away from
the BCT sites. Logistics model I (LM I) was based on situation that both CBRO and BCT occurred at the
same centralized site. Logistics model II (LM II) described CBRO and BCT activities that occurred at
separate locations. Consequently, here the chipped material moves from CBRO site to BCT conversion
sites in a chip van (Figure 2). The payload for both self-loading log truck and modiﬁed dump truck was
set at 18 MT (Metric tons). Volume of payloads was not considered because the trucks were generally
limited by weight due to a legal weight restriction of 36 MT in California, USA.
Based on information from foresters and BCT experts, LM I and II were based on an annual
biomass recovery operation of 200 and 100 days, respectively. This restriction of 100 days in LM II
(decoupled system) was grounded in the fact that CBROs were conducted oﬀroads (in-woods), which
were closed during mud (non-harvesting) seasons. Both models had BCT operations set at 250 days
annually. The area for the comminution site was 0.22 ha without storage. The space for equipment
and feedstock storage at the BCT sites was based on the amount of feedstock processed (Table 1).
The space for equipment and storage varied between 0.3 and 5.1 ha and depended on whether the
site had a storage space for feedstock or not. As the biomass recovery days were not similar to the
BCT operation days, additional space for storing the biomass at the BCT sites was considered in both
models. Diﬀerent space was allocated for the models and scenarios based on footprint calculations
regarding the needs of a BCT site and assumptions based on ﬁeld-based observations [38].
Three potential scenarios were developed for LM I in terms of recoverable biomass per hectare:
(1) Scenario I—high (112 BDMT/ha); (2) Scenario II—moderate (67 BDMT/ha); and (3) Scenario III—low
(33 BDMT/ha). Similarly, for LM II: (4) Scenario IV—high (112 BDMT/ha); (5) Scenario V—moderate
(67 BDMT/ha); and (6) Scenario VI—low (33 BDMT/ha). The amount of recoverable biomass per
harvest unit was obtained by multiplying the total harvest unit acres by the BDMT/ac of recoverable
biomass for each scenario [39].

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
6 of 14
Figure 2. Graphical representation of the two logistics models (LM) I and II.
Table 1. Spatial requirements (in hectare) associated with each logistics model (LM) and associated
scenarios adopted from Biomass Research Development Initiative ﬁnal report [38]. CBRO and BCT
denotes centralized biomass recovery operation and biomass conversion technology, respectively.
Without Storage 1
With Storage
CBRO Sites
BCT Sites
CBRO Sites
BCT Sites
LM I
Scenario I
N/A 2
0.95
N/A
2.12
Scenario II
N/A
0.59
N/A
1.32
Scenario III
N/A
0.30
N/A
0.66
LM II
Scenario IV
0.09
1.44
0.09
5.10
Scenario V
0.09
0.88
0.09
3.10
Scenario VI
0.09
0.45
0.09
1.55
1 Without storage (coupled operation) implies sites that had only area for stationing machines and space to store
feedstock for one hour of operation. 2 N/A: Not applicable. In LM I; CBRO and BCT operates at the same site.
2.5. Spatial Dataset
The GIS data were comprised of digital elevation model (DEM), hydrology shapeﬁle (distinguishing
Stream Classes I, II, and III), roads shapeﬁle based on surface type (paved, rocked, un-paved),
and harvest-unit (including all silvicultural management plans and boundaries of harvest units
2014–2015). Datasets on road, watercourse, harvest units, and silvicultural prescriptions were provided
by Green Diamond Resource Company (GDRC). DEM were obtained from United States Geological
Survey (USGS).
2.6. Developing Logistics Model
Developing the work plan for CBRO logistics was initiated by identifying the timber harvesting
systems and forest residue collection points (log landings) through spatial analysis and calculation
of forest residues recoverable per hectare. The locations for suitable landings for each harvest units
were based on the distinction between the two harvesting systems (cable logging and shovel logging)
employed to accurately model pre-haul routes and forest residue locations. The harvesting system for
a unit was determined by a series of tasks, which included: (1) Converting DEMs to a slope vector
layer, which was then clipped to the timber harvest unit’s boundary; (2) developing a function of slope

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
7 of 14
hectares to total unit hectares for each unit to determine the harvesting system employed. Slopes less
than 23◦permitted ground-based shovel logging and slopes exceeding 23◦necessitated a cable yarding
system [19].
2.7. Centralized Biomass Recovery Operation Supply Chain
A geo-spatial analysis was performed to identify candidate sites for CBRO that meet the various
footprint and slope requirements for either model based on criteria such as:
1.
Area equal to or more than 0.09 ha (without storage);
2.
Eliminating areas that were included WLPZ: Achieved by drawing buﬀers around the WLPZ and
removing areas which overlapped with the harvest units;
3.
Steepness of the terrain less than or equal to 3% slope: Digital elevation models were classiﬁed;
4.
Access to permanent road: Union function was used to ﬁnd harvest areas that overlapped with
permanent roads.
2.8. Network Analysis
The models were then developed in the Network Analyst (ArcGIS) using the location-allocation
tool to estimate the total and average one-way travel times. Total one-way travel time is deﬁned
as the total time of traveling between demand point (candidate harvest units) and facility location
(CBRO/BCT/market) to haul all ﬁnal products (tree-tops/comminuted feedstock/BCT products). Travel
time was intentionally selected (rather than travel distance) because most forest trucking operations are
limited by the number of daily truck loads. Further, loaded travel time varies considerably based on
the type of roads used [6,40]. Maximize market share function was used to select facilities to maximize
the market share for a given set of demand points in the presence of competing facilities. This assured
that BCT sites were assigned with the most amount of biomass available under the speciﬁed conditions.
Impedance cutoﬀvalues were adjusted to access all demand points from the chosen facilities. Setting
the impedance cutoﬀat “1” minute helped in determining the number of demand points accessed at
that time. The impedance cutoﬀwas then increased until the model was able to access all of the given
demand points.
The number of comminution sites across the project area was selected (based on market location)
as the demand point and comminution sites as the facilities. The model then selected the best facility,
increasing the number until the model returned “redundant results”, which was 20 for this study.
In other words, increasing the number of sites past this number will not return a better solution set.
This number was found to be in line with a similar study, which cited biomass contractors moved the
CBRO locations 24 times per work year [19].
An average travel speed on graveled forest roads was set at 23 km/h [2]. The public road (paved)
had legal speed limits ranging between 24 to 89 km/h and averaged 40 km/h.
3. Results and Discussion
There were 138 candidate timber harvest units that met all the criteria, i.e., sites not within a
WLPZ and EEZ that intersected with road segments, of which 77 and 61 units utilized shovel and
cable logging systems, respectively (Figure 3). These were assigned as the demand points for the
location-allocation analysis (Figure 4). Based on the spatial analysis, LM II had 236 CBRO sites that
were located for all scenarios. There were 89–159 and 64–136 sites located for the BCT for LM I and II,
respectively (Table 2).

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
8 of 14
Figure 3. Centralized biomass recovery operation (CBRO) and biomass conversion technology (BCT)
sites were determined through a series of geospatial process, which were then used to locate, calculate,
and display the locations of recoverable biomass (per harvest unit and CBRO) and harvesting method.
Road distance was used to calculate haul route distance.
 
Landing
G
CBRO
Harvest Units
CBRO to BCT
Landing to CBRO
Figure 4. Network analysis results for location-allocation tool for scenario VI. Straight lines are for
visualization and haul distances are calculated using road distance.

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
9 of 14
Table 2. The number of centralized biomass recovery operation (CBRO) and biomass conversion
technology (BCT) sites for each scenario within logistics models (LM) I and II, respectively.
CBRO Sites
BCT Sites
LM I
Scenario I
N/A 1
89
Scenario II
N/A
114
Scenario III
N/A
159
LM II
Scenario IV
236
64
Scenario V
236
86
Scenario VI
236
136
N/A: Not applicable; In LM I, CBRO and BCT operates at the same site.
Results of the spatial analysis showed that a decoupled operation was not feasible for many
situations due to the large storage space for the feedstock, both at the CBRO and BCT. Therefore,
if tree-tops were to be stored at the combined CBRO and BCT site (LM I), then Scenario I was the only
option that had about 2.12 ha; however, if comminuted forest residues were to be delivered to the BCT
sites from the CBRO sites as needed, then Scenario IV and V (LM II) had a storage space of greater than
2.83 ha at the BCT sites (Table 1). This suggests that both models will have to assume that feedstock
should be forwarded to BCT sites as needed, which couples the supply chain at the CBRO site. In other
terms, as Scenario I, IV, and V generated higher volumes per ha, the space required to store the large
amount of processed feedstock posed as another hindrance for the system to decouple. Further on,
the chipper (at the CBRO, for LM I) is likely needed to match with the production of the BCT, which
would alleviate storage issues in the supply chain.
Eliminating a separate CBRO location within the supply chain (LM I) would also reduce total travel
time, which can be attributed to the additional time required for hauling the comminuted biomass from
the CBRO to BCT sites (LM II) (Table 3). It is to be noted that this travel time would have a drastic impact,
as traveling is done on forest roads [6]. However, this could often be an operational challenge in terms
of the physical space required for the combined BCT and CBRO sites. The most favorable case would
be if the BCT sites were located at the same site as CBRO, or should be placed further down the supply
chain, e.g., closer to the market, in order to avoid the two activities compounding the transportation
time as well as to facilitate extended hours of operations. In general, the models built for all Scenarios
(I–VI) using diﬀerent numbers of BCT sites showed that as the number of BCT sites increased, the total
one-way travel time (i.e., harvest unit to market) was reduced. Even though logistics were modeled
for ﬁve moves per season, for actual working conditions, more than two moves per season was not
feasible due to the expense incurred during machine movement and site preparation.
Table 3. Average and total one-way travel times (in hours) for models having two and ﬁve BCT moves
per work year. CBRO and BCT denotes centralized biomass recovery operation and biomass conversion
technology, respectively.
Harvest Site to CBRO
CBRO to BCT
BCT to Market
Harvest Site to Market
2 BCT
Total
Average
Total
Average
Total
Average
Total
Average
LM I
Scenario I
200
0.64
N/A 1
N/A
0.82
0.41
201
1.05
Scenario II
197
0.65
N/A
N/A
0.92
0.46
198
1.11
Scenario III
510
0.40
N/A
N/A
1.19
0.60
511
0.99
LM II
Scenario IV
1850
0.63
17
0.43
1.18
0.59
1869
1.65
Scenario V
1124
0.51
20
0.51
1.01
0.50
1145
1.52
Scenario VI
1468
0.59
22
0.54
1.15
0.58
1491
1.70
5 BCT
LM I
Scenario I
463
0.61
N/A
N/A
3.15
0.63
466
1.24
Scenario II
278
0.51
N/A
N/A
3.27
0.65
281
1.16
Scenario III
510
0.40
N/A
N/A
3.46
0.69
513
1.09
LM II
Scenario IV
1047
0.50
37
0.37
3.18
0.64
1087
1.51
Scenario V
1017
0.49
55
0.55
2.95
0.59
1075
1.63
Scenario VI
1211
0.52
52
0.52
3.29
0.66
1266
1.69
1 N/A: Not applicable for LM I because CBRO and BCT operates at the same site.

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
10 of 14
3.1. Temporal Nature of the Supply Chain
The supply chains were modeled for 200 (LM I) and 100 days per year (LM II). This represented
the actual annual working timeframe in the Paciﬁc Northwest United States because of operational
windows for the biomass harvesting. The 200-day-per-cycle working frame was practiced if the biomass
cycle was decoupled from the timber harvesting operations. In the 100-days-per-cycle (representing
the coupled biomass and timber harvesting operations) models, the number of biomass collection days
was less than the number of operable BCT days/year. As a result, a large area was needed for storing
the additional volume of feedstock the BCT required to operate. This storage constraint can pose a
signiﬁcant setback in projects that exhibit steep topography such as the Paciﬁc Northwest United
States, and in some cases, can make a project spatially unfeasible.
To address this situation, processed tree-tops can be decked on the permanent roadsides near or
within harvest units. The duration of tree-tops placed at this location shall range 6–11 months, with the
intention of minimizing the moisture content to around 9–12% [35–37]. Past research has shown that
pre-hauling processed tree-tops from harvest units to permanent road sides can eﬀectively accumulate
forest residues at CBRO sites at reduced costs while providing eﬃcient, all year-round access to forest
residues [2]. Additionally, the wood residue transportation was much more cost eﬃcient if trucks
maximized their usage of permanent roads [40]. Results showed that 66% of the harvest units in the
study area had permanent road access. Therefore, if the processed tree-tops could be forwarded to log
decks on permanent roads, the storage constraint could be solved because collection and transportation
with a self-loading log truck was possible year-round. This being the case, managers only need to
store one to two work days of tree top feedstock at the BCT site. This would also signiﬁcantly reduce
the overall footprint of the entire operation. From an operational point of view, this arrangement of
the supply chain can maximize the utilization rates of all equipment, while minimizing the risk of
challenges associated with access, seasonality, and storage of tree-tops.
Regarding workﬂow in such instances, biomass recovery operations in harvest units accessed
by seasonal road only will have to be prioritized, as it is only accessible during appropriate
season. Following which, units next to permanent roads can be harvested because they would
have year-round access.
3.2. Enhancing Eﬃciency of the Supply Chain
Operational eﬃciency for the BCT models developed was dependent on the travel time and roads
types. Past research has shown that the transportation eﬃciency of woody biomass was enhanced if
trucks maximized their usage of highways [6]. The maximization of desired road type also reduced
the repair and maintenance cost for the trucks. However, most of the timberlands were only accessible
by gravel or unpaved roads. On the other end of the spectrum, the ﬁnal markets (i.e., powerplants)
had good access to the highways and paved roads. Furthermore, the DEM revealed of the 15,000 km2
in the county, almost 5300 km2 had a slope of 30% or more, which would further increase travel time.
For this study, the elevation component was not taken into account. Other factors found to inﬂuence
the eﬃciency of supply chain logistics of BCT products are as follows.
3.2.1. Scaling Eﬀects
Reducing unit cost of supplying BCT products by increasing the weight or volume of payload. This
increased payload can substantiate increase in travel time for transportation to the market. However,
total payload weight is subjected to state laws and often acts as an impediment [5,12].
3.2.2. Unit Eﬀect
Reducing cost of transportation by eliminating functions or increasing the economic value of a
function. This can be achieved in two aspects: (a) BCT products have higher economic value compared
to the conventional forest residue products and (b) back hauling opportunities through cooperation

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
11 of 14
between entities, either within the same industry or between diﬀerent industries or with suppliers.
Studies have shown that backhauling could reduce as much as 20% of the total transport costs [41].
3.2.3. Eﬃciency Eﬀect
This method involves lowering supply cost without increasing the volume increasing, but by
increasing eﬃciency of various processes within the supply chain. Utilizing better vehicles and routes
along with reduction in the loading time and delay at the mills can be a major contributor. It has been
conﬁrmed that mill/power plant delay are often very long, especially during peak time, which restricts
the number of loads delivered per day [13,14].
3.3. Implications of the Supply Chain on Timber Harvesting Operations
The raw materials were derived from tree-tops that were processed down to 5 cm diameter
(at small-end) within the timber harvesting unit and sorted at the landing [32–34]. This practice has
been proved to eﬀectively minimize organic contamination and ash content of feedstock, ultimately
improving the ﬁnal quality of BCT feedstock [42].
BCT integrated with CBRO systems can be incorporated into other forest managerial operations
such as salvage, fuel reduction thinning, and stand conversion. Recent massive ﬁre incidents have
prompted many landowners to lower the fuel load on their timberlands. The major obstacle to this
activity can be the cost of operations. In the region, the forest residues supplied to the conventional
markets (power plant) were priced around $55/BDMT [6]. However, the stump-to-truck cost in
industrial timberland operations could range from $29 to 39/BDMT depending on a variety of reasons
including harvesting system, silvicultural prescriptions, and terrain [2,42]. Costs for mobilization of
equipment, overhead, and proﬁt allowance were not included in these stump-to-truck cost ﬁgures
as it can vary between operations and is the standard procedure for estimating harvest operational
cost. Hence, under current market price, the procurement area for traditional feedstock is limited
to less than 130 km unless the operation is compensated by other ﬁnancial resources [6]. Here, BCT
operation becomes a promising option by increasing the economic value of the end products. This
increased value for the BCT converted feedstock can substantiate the increment in trucking distance.
These enhanced values for the energy-densiﬁed products could potentially increase the round-trip up
to 160 km [43]. The improved price will also make biomass recovery operations economically feasible
in previously inaccessible regions.
Historically, forest residues have been used as a “slash mats” for harvesting machines working in
the timberlands to minimize soil compaction [44]. This practice also ensures nutrient recycling. Even
though these slash mats are recoverable, the material would be contaminated, therefore not suitable as
feedstock for value-added BCT products. The model was designed based on typical biomass recovery
operation for the region, which leaves 30–40% of the forest residues on the ﬂoor. Nutrient impacts
from biomass removal were of less concern because, even after the forest residue recovery operation
(especially Scenario I and VI—removing 137 BDMT/ha), there was still about 73 and 79 BDMT/ha of
down woody material left on site for the shovel and cable yard units, respectively [39].
The tree-tops could be shipped using self-loading short log trucks instead of the modiﬁed dump
trucks (commonly used to transport non-comminuted forest residues in the region). Biomass recovery
operations that are seasonal in the region (roughly 100 days per year) are closed for the dump trucks
during rainy seasons. In contrast, timber harvesting operations are year-round for cable logging and
six months for shovel logging. Therefore, using short log trucks could extend the biomass recovery
window for a much longer timeframe. Short log trucks are also more eﬃcient than dump trucks and
can enhance the productivity of the entire operation.
This study considered an exclusively in-woods operations, however it should be highlighted that
in appropriate conditions, tree-tops can preferably be forwarded to existing mill sites or industrial
log yards favoring a permanent BCT location. This can help in scaling up the production, thereby
reducing the total cost of operation. Another beneﬁt of placing BCT equipment at permanent sites

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
12 of 14
is the availability of a power grid, which can support a reliable and continuous power supply. Such
conditions could further avoid the ﬁnancial and environmental costs associated with auxiliary diesel
power generation. Similarly, positioning BCT equipment in such a way avoids many environmental
constraints such as WLPZ/EEZ and ﬁre restrictions, while simultaneously avoiding repetitive and
expensive in-wood moves of BCT equipment.
4. Conclusions
CBRO has the potential to be an economically viable solution to access remote areas and allow
integration of BCTs. Pre-hauling of processed tree-tops from harvest sites to CBRO using self-loading
short log trucks or modiﬁed dump trucks can more eﬀectively accumulate forest residues at reduced
costs while providing eﬃcient access to forest residues for year-round supply of raw material.
Two models, within which were six scenarios, were tested to determine the optimal biomass recovery
systems in order to reduce costs and increase productivity of biomass recovery for BCTs. Conclusive
results show that all scenarios within each logistics model exhibit either more or less travel time than
the other. However, LM I eliminated additional travel time on forest roads between the CBRO and
BCT sites. A decoupled operation was not feasible for many scenarios due to the large storage space
for the forest residues at both the CBRO and BCT locations. However, arranging the CBRO and BCT
operations at the same in-wood location reduced the average travel time.
Author Contributions: J.S.P. and A.R.K. processed and analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. A.R.K. and
H.-S.H. designed the study. H.-S.H. acquired funding and helped in data analysis, formatting, and editing
the manuscript.
Funding: This material is based upon work supported by a grant from the U.S. Department of Energy under the
Biomass Research and Development Initiative program: Award Number DE-EE0006297. Additional support was
obtained from USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture, McIntire-Stennis project number #ME041909
through the Maine Agricultural and Forest Experiment Station, and the Cooperative Forestry Research Unit
(CFRU), University of Maine, Orono, ME.
Acknowledgments: Authors would like to thank Alex Kunnathu George for reviewing the manuscript.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The founding sponsors had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the
decision to publish the results.
References
1.
Langholtz, M.; Stokes, B.; Eaton, L. 2016 Billion-Ton Report: Advancing Domestic Resources for a Thriving
Bioeconomy, Volume 1: Economic Availability of Feedstocks; U.S. Department of Energy: Oak Ridge, TN, USA,
2016; p. 448.
2.
Harrill, H.; Han, H.-S. Productivity and Cost of Integrated Harvesting of Wood Chips and Sawlogs in Stand
Conversion Operations. Int. J. For. Res. 2012, 2012, 1–10. [CrossRef]
3.
Pan, F.; Han, H.-S.; Johnson, L.R.; Elliot, W. Net energy output from harvesting small diameter trees using a
mechanized system. For. Prod. J. 2008, 58, 6.
4.
Koirala, A.; Kizha, A.; De Hoop, C.; Roth, B.; Han, H.-S.; Hiesl, P.; Abbas, D.; Gautam, S.; Baral, S.; Bick, S.; et al.
Annotated Bibliography of the Global Literature on the Secondary Transportation of Raw and Comminuted
Forest Products (2000–2015). Forests 2018, 9, 415. [CrossRef]
5.
Koirala, A.; Kizha, A.R.; Roth, B.E. Perceiving Major Problems in Forest Products Transportation by Trucks
and Trailers: A Cross-sectional Survey. Eur. J. For. Eng. 2017, 3, 23–34.
6.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.-S.; Montgomery, T.; Hohl, A. Biomass power plant feedstock procurement: Modeling
transportation cost zones and the potential for competition. Calif. Agric. 2015, 69, 184–190. [CrossRef]
7.
El Hachemi, N.; Gendreau, M.; Rousseau, L.-M. Solving a Log-Truck Scheduling Problem with Constraint
Programming. In Integration of AI and OR Techniques in Constraint Programming for Combinatorial Optimization
Problems; Perron, L., Trick, M.A., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2008; Volume 5015, pp. 293–297.
ISBN 978-3-540-68154-0.

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
13 of 14
8.
Windisch, J. Process Redesign in Development of Forest Biomass Supply for Energy; University of Eastern Finland:
Joensuu, Finland, 2015.
9.
Fischer, G.; Schrattenholzer, L. Global bioenergy potentials through 2050. Biomass Bioenergy 2001, 20, 151–159.
[CrossRef]
10.
Langholtz, M.; Carter, D.R.; Marsik, M.; Schroeder, R. Measuring the economics of biofuel availability.
ArcUser 2006, 9, 22–25.
11.
Paine, L.K.; Peterson, T.L.; Undersander, D.J.; Rineer, K.; Bartelt, G.; Temple, S.; Sample, D.W.; Klemme, R.;
Wisconsin, T. Some ecological and soicio-economic considerations for biomass energy crop production.
Biomass Bioenergy 1996, 10, 231–242. [CrossRef]
12.
Koirala, A.; Kizha, A.R.; Roth, B. Forest trucking industry in Maine: A review on challenges and resolutions.
In Proceedings of the DEMO International Conference, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 20 September 2016; p. 10.
13.
Koirala, A.; Kizha, A.; De Urioste-Stone, S. Policy Recommendation from Stakeholders to Improve Forest
Products Transportation: A Qualitative Study. Forests 2017, 8, 434. [CrossRef]
14.
Koirala, A.; Kizha, A.R.; Urioste-Stone, S.M.D. Improving Maine’s forest trucking enterprises: A qualitative
approach. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Council on Forest Engineering, Bangor, ME, USA,
30 July–2 August 2017; p. 11.
15.
Han, H.-S.; Halbrook, J.; Pan, F.; Salazar, L. Economic evaluation of a roll-oﬀtrucking system removing forest
biomass resulting from shaded fuelbreak treatments. Biomass Bioenergy 2010, 34, 1006–1016. [CrossRef]
16.
Uslu, A.; Faaij, A.P.C.; Bergman, P.C.A. Pre-treatment technologies, and their eﬀect on international bioenergy
supply chain logistics. Techno-economic evaluation of torrefaction, fast pyrolysis and pelletisation. Energy
2008, 33, 1206–1223. [CrossRef]
17.
Perpiñá, C.; Alfonso, D.; Pérez-Navarro, A.; Peñalvo, E.; Vargas, C.; Cárdenas, R. Methodology based on
Geographic Information Systems for biomass logistics and transport optimisation. Renew. Energy 2009, 34,
555–565. [CrossRef]
18.
Krukanont, P.; Prasertsan, S. Geographical distribution of biomass and potential sites of rubber wood ﬁred
power plants in Southern Thailand. Biomass Bioenergy 2004, 26, 47–59. [CrossRef]
19.
Montgomery, T.D.; Han, H.-S.; Kizha, A.R. Modeling work plan logistics for centralized biomass recovery
operations in mountainous terrain. Biomass Bioenergy 2016, 85, 262–270. [CrossRef]
20.
Bhattacharya, A.; Kumar, S.A.; Tiwari, M.K.; Talluri, S. An intermodal freight transport system for optimal
supply chain logistics. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol. 2014, 38, 73–84. [CrossRef]
21.
Atashbar, N.Z.; Labadie, N.; Prins, C. Modeling and optimization of biomass supply chains: A review and a
critical look. IFAC PapersOnLine 2016, 49, 604–615. [CrossRef]
22.
Badri, M.A. Combining the analytic hierarchy process and goal programming for global facility
location-allocation problem. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 1999, 62, 237–248. [CrossRef]
23.
Comber, A.; Dickie, J.; Jarvis, C.; Phillips, M.; Tansey, K. Locating bioenergy facilities using a modiﬁed
GIS-based location—Allocation-algorithm:
Considering the spatial distribution of resource supply.
Appl. Energy 2015, 154, 309–316. [CrossRef]
24.
Damgacioglu, H.; Dinler, D.; Evin Ozdemirel, N.; Iyigun, C. A genetic algorithm for the uncapacitated single
allocation planar hub location problem. Comput. Oper. Res. 2015, 62, 224–236. [CrossRef]
25.
Vukašinovi´c, V.; Gordi´c, D. Optimization and GIS-based combined approach for the determination of the
most cost-eﬀective investments in biomass sector. Appl. Energy 2016, 178, 250–259. [CrossRef]
26.
Moheb-Alizadeh, H.; Rasouli, S.M.; Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R. The use of multi-criteria data envelopment
analysis (MCDEA) for location–allocation problems in a fuzzy environment. Expert Syst. Appl. 2011, 38,
5687–5695. [CrossRef]
27.
Klimberg, R.K.; Ratick, S.J. Modeling data envelopment analysis (DEA) eﬃcient location/allocation decisions.
Comput. Oper. Res. 2008, 35, 457–474. [CrossRef]
28.
Zhang, F.; Johnson, D.M.; Sutherland, J.W. A GIS-based method for identifying the optimal location for a
facility to convert forest biomass to biofuel. Biomass Bioenergy 2011, 35, 3951–3961. [CrossRef]
29.
Ishfaq, R.; Sox, C.R. Design of intermodal logistics networks with hub delays. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2012, 220,
629–641. [CrossRef]
30.
Lin, B.; Liu, S.; Lin, R.; Wang, J.; Sun, M.; Wang, X.; Liu, C.; Wu, J.; Xiao, J. The location-allocation model
for multi-classiﬁcation-yard location problem. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2019, 122, 283–308.
[CrossRef]

Logistics 2019, 3, 16
14 of 14
31.
Antti, A.; Ikonen, T.; Routa, J. Challenges and Opportunities of Logistics and Economics of Forest Biomass.
In Mobilisation of Forest Bioenergy in the Boreal and Temperate Biomes. Challenges, Opportunities and Case Studies;
Elsevier: London, UK, 2016; p. 229. ISBN 978-0-12-809689-5.
32.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.-S. Processing and sorting forest residues: Cost, productivity and managerial impacts.
Biomass Bioenergy 2016, 93, 97–106. [CrossRef]
33.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H. Cost and productivity for processing and sorting forest residues. In Proceedings of the
2015 Council on Forest Engineering Annual Meeting, Lexington, KY, USA, 19–22 July 2015; p. 13.
34.
Sahoo, K.; Bilek, E.; Bergman, R.; Kizha, A.R.; Mani, S. Economic analysis of forest residues supply chain
options to produce enhanced-quality feedstocks: Economic analysis of forest residues supply chain options
to produce enhanced-quality feedstocks. Biofuels Bioprod. Bioreﬁning 2019, 13, 514–534. [CrossRef]
35.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.-S.; Paulson, J.; Koirala, A. Strategies for Reducing Moisture Content in Forest Residues
at the Harvest Site. Appl. Eng. Agric. 2018, 34, 25–33. [CrossRef]
36.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.-S. Moisture Content in Forest Residues: An Insight on Sampling Methods and
Procedures. Curr. For. Rep. 2017, 3, 202–212. [CrossRef]
37.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.; Paulson, J. Techniques to reduce moisture content of forest residues at the harvest
site. In Proceedings of the 2015 Council on Forest Engineering Annual Meeting, Lexington, KY, USA,
19–22 July 2015; p. 12.
38.
Han, H.-S.; Jacobson, A.; Bilek, E. Waste to Wisdom: Utilizing Forest Residues for the Production of Bioenergy and
Biobased Products; U.S. Department of Energy: Arcata, CA, USA, 2018; p. 80.
39.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.-S. Forest residues recovered from whole-tree harvesting operations. Eur. J. For. Eng.
2015, 1, 46–55.
40.
Han, S.-K.; Murphy, G. Predicting Loaded On-Highway Travel Times of Trucks Hauling Woody Raw Material
for Improved Forest Biomass Utilization in Oregon. West. J. Appl. For. 2012, 27, 92–99. [CrossRef]
41.
Palander, T.; Väätäinen, J. Impacts of interenterprise collaboration and backhauling on wood procurement in
Finland. Scand. J. For. Res. 2005, 20, 177–183. [CrossRef]
42.
Bisson, J.; Han, H.-S.; Han, S.-K. Evaluating the System Logistics of a Centralized Biomass Recovery Operation
in Northern California. For. Prod. J. 2016, 66, 88–96. [CrossRef]
43.
Mayhead, G.; Shelly, J. Electricity from Woody Biomass; University of California Berkeley: Berkley, CA,
USA, 2012; p. 8.
44.
Soman, H.; Kizha, A.R.; Roth, B.E. Impacts of silvicultural prescriptions and implementation of best
management practices on timber harvesting costs. Int. J. For. Eng. 2019, 30. [CrossRef]
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
