Review
A Decade of Forest Engineering: Achievements and
Future Directions
Raﬀaele Spinelli 1,2,*
, Rien Visser 3 and Han-Sup Han 4
1
CNR IBE, Via Madonna del Piano 10, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy
2
University of the Sunshine Coast, Sippy Downs, QLD 4556 Brisbane, Australia
3
University of Canterbury, 8140 Christchurch, New Zealand
4
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86011, USA
*
Correspondence: spinelli@ivalsa.cnr.it; Tel.: +39-055-5225641
Received: 22 July 2019; Accepted: 19 August 2019; Published: 23 August 2019


Abstract: Research highlights: Through a broad review of literature and practices, this paper has
helped conﬁrm Forest Engineering as a unique discipline by providing deﬁnition, highlighting
achievements of the last decade and suggesting future directions. Background and Objectives:
Forest Engineering is a study program oﬀered by many universities worldwide. It is also the main
subject of three international scientiﬁc journals, three important scientiﬁc conferences and a division of
the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations. That points at a strong interest, a general
common understanding and a strong local diversiﬁcation. The paper aims to suggest generally
valid deﬁnitions, while oﬀering a description of the main achievements and a hypothesis about
future directions. Results: The review identiﬁed examples that include higher-level mechanization,
commencement of automation and system optimization, and speciﬁcally the emerging ﬁeld of
biomass and bioenergy integration as examples of major forest engineering achievements of the last
decade. Higher levels of automation including autonomous machine operation, and integration
of intelligent and linked technology are examples of future directions.
Conclusions: As with
other disciplines, most Forest Engineering teaching, research or applications are multi-disciplinary.
However, the review has highlighted speciﬁc achievements and future directions that helps deﬁne
Forest Engineering as a unique discipline and one that can make a major contribution to the broader
ﬁeld of forest management practices.
Keywords: operations; education; research; technology
1. Introduction
Forest Engineering is a term and discipline commonly associated with the broader ﬁeld of Forestry
Science and forest operations, but a deﬁnition for Forest Engineering is often ambiguous and may
not be interpreted as describing a unique discipline. At universities, Forest Engineering may refer
to a separate program or qualiﬁcation, or it may be used to place an operational emphasis within
a broader program. In the industry practice, Forest Engineering can refer to a relatively unique set
of activities, sometimes limited to just infrastructure development and equipment design, or can
expand to include harvesting, safety and environmental management. In some regions of the world a
Forest Engineer is a uniquely qualiﬁed and certiﬁed individual that has legal status for planning and
oversight requirements.
There are 500 Forestry University and Colleges in the world [1], oﬀering higher education to
prospective forest managers. Although environmental subjects seem to have been the main focus
for most such institutions in the recent past [2], forest operations are often part of the curricula and
several of these institutions oﬀer dedicated Forest Engineering degree programs. In essence, a Forest
Forests 2019, 10, 724; doi:10.3390/f10090724
www.mdpi.com/journal/forests

Forests 2019, 10, 724
2 of 12
Engineering degree can be pursued with two diﬀerent approaches: In some universities (e.g., Oregon
State University in the USA, University of British Columbia in Canada, University of Canterbury in
New Zealand, etc.). Forest Engineering students are ﬁrst and foremost educated within the engineering
discipline, and then receive Forest Engineering speciﬁc course material to distinguish them from
Civil or Mechanical Engineers [3]; elsewhere, Forest Engineering programs are based on a core Forest
Science curriculum, reinforced in its the operational components, such as survey, harvest planning,
roadbuilding and harvesting system selection.
While over 100 journals are identiﬁed as being forestry speciﬁc [4], at the international level,
three scientiﬁc journals are speciﬁcally devoted to the discipline of forest engineering and publish
high-quality peer-review papers in English. These are: The Croatian Journal of Forest Engineering,
the European Journal of Forest Engineering and the International Journal of Forest Engineering.
Furthermore, forest engineering papers are published in many other journals that deal with a number
of diﬀerent subjects, including forestry, agricultural engineering and energy.
Forest Engineering is also the focus of at least three regular international scientiﬁc conferences:
Forestry Mechanization (FORMEC), held every year in Europe: Council on Forest Engineering (COFE)
held every year in the US; Forest Engineering Conference (FEC) held every three or four years on a
rotating seat throughout the world. In fact, FORMEC and COFE will join forces in 2019 and 2020 to
combine their annual conferences in order to increase their respective networks and impacts, which
represents an important step towards establishing a global platform for collaboration. At the same
time, the International Union of Forest Research Organization (IUFRO) already oﬀers a global meeting
place with its group devoted to Forest Engineering subjects (Division 3), which has the purpose of
strengthening research, fostering strategic cooperation, and promoting communication with non-Forest
Engineering specialists [5].
All the above points at the existence of some general agreement about the importance of Forest
Engineering, along with a strong local diversiﬁcation. This should be regarded more as an opportunity
than an obstacle to communication. Furthermore, forest engineering is inherently diverse as a discipline
as it does not just comprise Engineering and Forestry subjects, but also requires a comprehensive
knowledge of such matters as ecology, environmental impacts, occupational safety and health,
and management. Researchers and practitioners from those disciplines are working closely with forest
engineers to address a wide range of topics in today’s forest management. The importance of such
complexity and collaboration is indirectly demonstrated by the existence of several Forest Engineering
glossaries, both printed [6,7] and on-line [8].
It has been noted that the recognition of Forest Engineering has declined over the past few decades,
and this in turn has resulted in decreased funding and in a dwindling number of Forest Engineering
graduates [5]. On the contrary, Forest Engineering specialists are increasingly demanded to accomplish
various forest management objectives such as forest restoration and fuel reduction thinning operations,
which are designed to improve forest ecosystem functions and reduce wildﬁre hazards.
The goal of this paper was to oﬀer a contribution to help deﬁne the challenges and demands for
forest engineering professionals and produce a set of deﬁnitions and terms related to Forest Engineering,
oﬀering them to the scientiﬁc community so that they can contribute to the basis for further debate.
The paper also produced a summary list of the main achievements of Forest Engineering in promoting
scientiﬁc and social progress in forestry, and in the human society at large. Finally, and as a logical
consequence of analyzing past achievements, the authors also oﬀered a condensed list of the most
promising current research trends and future milestones.
2. Materials and Methods
Signiﬁcant literature relevant to Forest Engineering and Operations was located using the
“Google Scholar” search engine, along with the “Web of Science” and “Scopus” databases. Additional
material was obtained directly from the authors’ ﬁles and experiences, since all authors have a long-time
experience with Forest Engineering. A literature synthesis method was used for organizing, categorizing

Forests 2019, 10, 724
3 of 12
and interpreting the results of the search, eventually leading to the present review papers, which
summarize the extensive discussions conducted within the author panel. As a consequence, the criteria
use for this review are strongly subjective, and reﬂect one of the many possible interpretations of the
available material: That of the authors.
No structured quantitative method was used for analyzing the literature data and the authors
acknowledge upfront the subjective perspective of this review, which is consistent with the stated
goals of the paper. The authors never aspired to provide the ultimate deﬁnitions and achievement list
in Forest Engineering and operations: They rather tried to oﬀer a tentative reference to the scientiﬁc
community that may serve as a basis for further discussion. Based on the literature and essential
information extracted, this was organized into a logical framework to produce a narrative that should
be useful to practitioners and scholars alike. Addressing such a wide audience is the main reason why
the authors endeavored to draft an agile text and refrained from a more scholarly paper structure.
At this point, the authors also want to apologize for the many inevitable omissions, which are not
meant to downplay the valuable work of many of their esteemed colleagues. It is simply the result of a
very rich production that can, contrary to a decline experienced in the recent past, show that interest in
Forest Engineering is alive and well.
3. Deﬁnitions
Forest Engineering has been variably deﬁned, but the most consistent deﬁnition and the one
obtaining the largest agreement states that “forest engineering is the application of engineering
principles and techniques to the management of forest lands” [9]. This includes working to ensure the
health and sustainability of wildlands, timberlands and watersheds while allowing for such economic
activities as timber harvesting and recreational use. For instance, the University of Canterbury Forest
Engineering program deﬁnes the discipline as a hybrid of engineering, forestry and management science.
Forest engineers are then professionals who can combine skills to solve engineering problems in the
natural environment, with a focus on balancing societal, environmental and economic requirements [10].
Engineering programs in most western Countries are certiﬁed by the Washington Accord signed in
1989 that recognizes and accepts the engineer qualiﬁcation from member countries and allows them to
practice as certiﬁed engineers [11].
Another deﬁnition used in the past states that “Forest engineering includes all the management
and administration activities that are necessary to transfer the standing tree into a product that is
suitable for further processing or woodworking [12]. This deﬁnition also reﬂects forest engineering
values, but in its form may engender some confusion with the term Forest Operations, which is
often used interchangeably with Forest Engineering [13]. However, the two are not synonyms, as
Forest Operations is just one component of Forestry Science programs and includes such elements
as: harvesting system evaluation (including productivity and costing), infrastructure planning and
construction (roading, surveying, stream crossings, etc.) and harvest planning/layout, including
ﬁeldwork, mapping and the application of geospatial technologies. Such operational aspects must be
balanced with consideration of the environment, such as minimising erosion, and watershed protection
through the implementation of Best Management Practices (BMPs) and certiﬁcation programs, as well
as safety and ergonomics.
Most Forest Engineering speciﬁc degrees have a range of topics but typically include forest
management, wood science, soils (geotechnical), spatial technologies such as GPS, GIS, spatial analyses
and optimization, natural resource utilization and ecology, economics and ﬁnance. This shows the
strong overlap with Forestry Science programs. Visser [3] suggested there was a large range of Forest
Engineering speciﬁc topics, including:
•
Mechanics of Machines (design, improvements, attachments)
•
Harvesting Systems (options, evaluation, costing)
•
Operational Management (system design, time studies and evaluation concepts)
•
Strategic, Tactical and Operational Harvest Planning

Forests 2019, 10, 724
4 of 12
•
Surveying (boundaries, roads, stands, buildings, etc.)
•
Forest Roads/Infra-Structure Design (roads, bridges speciﬁcations, costs)
•
Transportation (logistics, networks, optimization)
•
Operational Impacts (stand damage, regeneration impacts)
•
Value Recovery (wood quality, conversion, optimization)
•
Forest Certiﬁcation (SFI, FSC, ISO, etc.)
•
Bio-energy (biomass production, storage, conversion)
•
International Forestry (practices in other countries, comparisons)
•
Forest watershed management (cumulative impacts, rivers, stream crossings)
•
People/workforce management (safety, ergonomics, safety systems)
•
Applications of new technologies (data capture integration)
Industry deﬁnitions can also shed light on the role of the Forest Engineer. As commercial forestry
developed in the 1800s in North America, the ‘Forest Engineer’ was typically the person in charge of
all engineering and operational aspects within a forestry company—a quite senior position. Duties
could include designing and laying out roads and or railroad networks, supervising the construction
of bridges and buildings, earth work projects including development of quarries, surveying land
boundaries, as well as modiﬁcation of mechanized equipment to serve in the rugged forest environment.
Quite unique to the Paciﬁc Northwest, Forest Engineers are certiﬁed through State entities and their
oversight and signature is required for major infrastructure and harvest plans/harvesting operations.
4. Progress in Forest Engineering
Like most other disciplines, forest engineering has evolved over time in order to incorporate
new knowledge and methods as they became available.
Forest Engineering began integrating
other disciplines as attention was set on additional subjects besides technology and economics.
This progress has been conceptualized in many diﬀerent ways, increasingly inclusive of many
disciplines. In particular, one can describe this process as based on an enlargement of the original
focus of Forest Engineering, or on a growing integration of other disciplines together with Forestry
and Engineering. These are two ways to look at the evolution of the discipline and they both suﬀer
from excessive simpliﬁcation, once we recognize that reality is indeed complex. In fact, both “theories”
basically describe a path that moves towards increasing complexity and integration, in recognition of
such basic notion that can be expressed in at least two ways, as follows.
4.1. Paradigm Shift View in Forest Engineering
Heinimann [5] described the evolution of Forest Engineering as a series of paradigm shifts, leading
to increased complexity as a result of the evolving notion of science, together with the emergence
of new needs and the availability of better tools. According to him, four main general approaches
have developed within modern Forest Engineering starting at the beginning of the 20th century.
From an original Tayloristic approach aimed at increasing human productivity (Tayloristic paradigm),
the focus of Forest Engineering shifted towards mechanization after World War II, when machines
became commonplace in agriculture and forestry (Mechanization paradigm). Then, in the 1970s the
attention moved from single machines to whole systems, expanding into a wider strategic view that
had to cope with the complexity of real-world scenarios (System paradigm). This may have acted
as a general warm-up for what was to follow, namely: The latest shift to the network paradigm [5].
This change occurred in the late 1990s, favoured by the widespread availability of powerful and
aﬀordable computers. Since then, Forest Engineering has followed the developments of intelligent
technology, which is shaping the way in which we all think and work, in all disciplines and domains
of life.
In short, the paradigm shift theory presumes a technology-driven evolution that has expanded
the focus of our discipline from the detail to the whole, as soon as new and more powerful instruments

Forests 2019, 10, 724
5 of 12
became available to the scientists (and to the operator on the ground). Of course, the role of technology
in this evolutionary path may have not been that of a mere physical enabler but must have resonated
through the new ideas prompted by the technology development.
Shifting to a new paradigm does not mean that all other approaches are phased out: They remain
useful and therefore they are maintained. The new approach simply represents an increment, not a
replacement. As a result, the toolbox of the modern forest engineer still includes many and valuable
techniques that follow more or less the same Tayloristic approach dating back to the early 1900s,
such as time and motion studies, with good results [14].
4.2. Disciplinary Integration to Adapt to the Changing Needs and Views
Another way to look at the evolution of Forest Engineering considers the growing integration of
other disciplines besides Forestry and Engineering. This runs alongside the paradigm shift theory,
because the new disciplines co-opted within the realm of Forest Engineering generally reﬂect its
shifting focus. The Tayloristic approach, for instance, has an ultimate economic goal [15,16], which has
led to the early integration of Economics within Forest Engineering [17].
Later on, and along with the Mechanization and System approaches, came the integration
of Ergonomics, Medicine, Psychology and Social Sciences, which were necessary to explore the
human-machine interface and solve the new problems derived from increased mechanization of all
forest operations.
More recently, the focus on networks and the widespread availability of information technology
(IT) has generated new interests and created additional opportunities. Hence, the growing integration
with new branches of Economics and Engineering, including Management and Programming.
This perspective is reﬂected on new techniques when it comes to Forest Engineering science, especially
for what concerns sensors and data processing. While retaining their crucial role, conventional statistics
are increasingly bolstered by new analytical techniques better suited to reﬂect the complexity of the
systems under investigation. As interest expanded beyond the productivity and cost of a single machine
or team, so did the toolbox of the Forest Engineer, which has led to the widespread use of multi-criteria
approaches, including Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) [18], sustainability impact assessment [19,20] and
multi-criteria analysis [21]. As they reﬂect the complexity of strategic issues, the insights obtained
with these methods are of speciﬁc interest to policy-makers, which illustrates a steady shift in terms of
intended users.
Overall, these few examples show that Forest Engineering evolved over time, and that this
evolution concerned the focus, the methods and the intended users. As they look at one dimension
only, all diﬀerent theories are partial by deﬁnition. Suﬃce to say that over a century, Forest Engineering
has proved capable of adapting to the changing needs and views of our society, and as such is a living
component of its culture, albeit small.
5. Main Achievements and Future Directions
Placed right within the Network Paradigm period, the past decade has seen many important
developments to beneﬁt a rapidly evolving industry that sets the demands for new tools and knowledge.
Therefore, one way to structure a summary description of these developments is to start from the main
new trends in the forest industry, such as:
-
the ever-increasing mechanization, aimed at reducing direct human input and exposure
-
the growth of the bio-economy, with its demand for innovative bio-based products
-
the “Internet of things”, which preﬁgures a connected world, where large volumes of data are
made available and exchanged within and between networks in real time.

Forests 2019, 10, 724
6 of 12
5.1. Increased Mechanization
Incremental improvements are continuously being made to existing forestry machines. Embedded
electronics (e.g., sensors, measuring tools, video feeds) are commonplace and can help to automate
speciﬁc functions such as processing stems to logs by moving the head to predetermined positions
according to the log grade. The data captured during felling and processing can be augmented by
geospatial information to analyse and optimise machine performance, as well as use this to implement
the concept of precision forestry [22,23]. Another example of the software aiding machine control is the
new John Deere ‘Intelligent Boom Control’ system that allows the operator to control the movement
of the head directly, as opposed to moving each individual component of the boom. It has already
been shown that the use of such technology makes it easier to learn to operate harvester or forwarder
machines and to achieve sustained productivity within a shorter learning time [24,25]. Komatsu
recently published a vision of using drones, including communication technologies and cloud services
to improve harvesting eﬃciency.
Information on robotics in forest operations is primarily found in the ‘grey literature’,
i.e., websites [26]. However, examples of journal articles start in the late 1980s with Courteau [27]
providing an overview of developments of robotics in forestry. Guimier [28] concluded that a new
technology in machines would be equipped with ‘intelligent’ control systems that allow them adapt to
their working environment. Thor noted that mechanised systems would continue to be automated
until robots could be used for harvesting operations [29]. More advanced concepts are presented
for speciﬁc elements, such as development of unmanned forwarders [30] or summary papers that
investigated a range of robotic options [31,32].
Successful implementation of autonomous equipment will be driven by their productivity and
operational cost [33,34]. Given that labour is typically about 30% of operating costs [31], an autonomous
machine can be less productive but still be more cost eﬀective [35]. However, there are other factors
to consider; a study by McEwan [36] highlighted the consideration of additional beneﬁts relating to
health and safety, environment, quality (in terms of increasing value or reducing waste), but also social
aspects [37]. While modern machines are well designed with regard to ergonomics, this has led to many
operators working longer hours per day [38] and has created diﬀerent health risks to the traditional
manual physical risks. For example, harvester operators can quickly fatigue, or a forwarder operator
might spend many hours a day traversing the same trails, which can lead to monotony. A higher
degree of machine autonomy could readily decrease these types of occupational health and safety risks.
5.2. Biomass for the Bioeconomy
Forest management activities, including timber harvesting and fuel reduction thinning treatments,
generate forest residues, such as branches, chunks, and small-diameter trees (referred to as biomass
hereafter). While limited in other uses, this woody biomass is a good source for energy production.
The energy that is produced from the woody biomass in the form of electricity, heat, or a combination
of both is considered “renewable”, as trees re-grow after forest harvesting [39]. Each year, there are
103 million bone dry tons (BDT) of biomass that are available to harvest sustainably in the United
States, if markets pay $60 per BDT [40]. As the market value of this biomass increases, the more it
becomes economical to recover. Similarly, large amounts are available in Europe and in the other
continents [41].
Utilizing biomass is an ideal option for not only the production of renewable energy, but also
for the disposal of forest residues that would otherwise hinder the growth of new trees or need to
be removed via more harmful methods (i.e., open-air burning). Forest engineering and operations,
therefore, are central to both biomass energy and forest management. In recent years, this sector has
become increasingly advanced in its systems and technologies for harvesting and transportation, while
addressing key issues in forest residue disposal.
The role of forest engineers in biomass utilization is to supply biomass feedstock, for example
in the form of wood chips or hog fuel. When working with forest residues that are typically mixed

Forests 2019, 10, 724
7 of 12
with variable material sizes and types, forest engineers have put considerable eﬀort into selecting the
right machines and analyzing logistics and transportation eﬃciency to deliver the highest quality
biomass feedstock at the lowest cost, year-round [42–44]. They must use this expertise to design
systems that are tailored to the region in which they are operating. For example, the system based on
a feller-buncher, skidder, and loader is commonly used to harvest energy wood in forested areas in
the southeastern region of the United States [45]. In the western United States, a centralized forest
residue recovery operation consisting of a grinder/loader, oﬀ-road trucks/loader, and chip vans is
routinely implemented [46,47]. Furthermore, forest engineers must also designate optimal landing
locations along with eﬃcient skidding trails that are linked to well-developed forest roads to eﬀectively
manage biomass operations. In short, a wide range of variation in biomass harvesting systems has been
developed to address an equally wide range of unique operations conditions, such as steep slopes and
long distance to markets. In Europe, the dominance of cut-to-length harvesting technologies require
diﬀerent recovery methods and an equally accurate knowledge of the capabilities of the equipment at
hand, and of the speciﬁc characteristics of the sites [36].
In recent years, researchers and engineers have strived to design systems that will deliver biomass
feedstock that are compatible with speciﬁc biomass conversion technologies, such as torrefaction,
gasiﬁcation, and pyrolysis [48,49]. While these newer technologies create exciting opportunities for
utilizing forest residues and small-diameter trees that might otherwise go to waste, they present a
challenge: Each biomass conversion technology requires narrow feedstock speciﬁcations for eﬃcient
operation. For example, a mobile torrefaction system requires wood chips that are 0.5 mm−2 cm in
length, relatively dry (<20% moisture content), and works with high (>15%) ash content materials [50].
To meet those feedstock speciﬁcation requirements, forest engineers have been working with companies
that manufacture chipping and grinding machines to produce smaller wood chips with lower moisture
and ash contents. Producing micro- chips [51,52] and sawdust [53], separating stem-wood from forest
residues [54], and screening feedstock materials [55–57] are just some of the strategies that can be used
to produce feedstock that are uniform in size and low in moisture and ash contents, and therefore
compatible for these novel biomass technologies.
From a forest management perspective, forest residue removal/utilization is more important than
the production of energy. The mechanical removal of forest residues eﬀectively facilitates the process
of tree planting on harvesting sites, minimizes forest ﬁre hazard, reduces habitats for harmful and
invasive insects, and improves the aesthetic value of forests [58]. For example, mechanical removal and
utilization of forest residue piles on the timber harvesting sites can potentially reduce the cost of slash
disposal at an amount of around $1000/ha [54] and it will speed up the planting work. These piles
do not decompose for an extended time period (>30 years) [59], posing ﬁre risks, providing habitats
for insects [60], and negatively impacting the timberland’s aesthetic values. A common method
of addressing these issues is pile burning or prescribed burning, but this method is deleterious to
air quality, costly to implement, and limited to the window of the burning season [61]. Therefore,
the mechanical removal of forest residues is the ideal option for forestland managers. In this way,
forest operations that harvest and process residues into biomass feedstock not only fulﬁlls the needs of
energy production but addresses other signiﬁcant concerns and issues in today’s forestry.
5.3. IT Technology and the Internet of Things
With the Internet of Things (IOT) any number of agents—machines, humans and objects—are
uniquely identiﬁed and are remotely connected within the same network in order to automatically
exchange information [62]. This ﬁts very well within the current network paradigm and opens a wealth
of possibilities [5].
In everyday practice, machine connectivity is used for operational management, through the
remote collection of machine status and production data [63,64]. The availability of these data
allows monitoring and improving machine performance, planning machine maintenance and often
executing maintenance interventions when issues arise with on-board electronics. Similarly, production

Forests 2019, 10, 724
8 of 12
instructions can be sent directly to the machines in real time, so as to maximize production ﬂexibility.
Remote machine monitoring was explored already many years ago—more than a decade in Northern
Europe, for instance—but it is now quite common with modern forest machines used worldwide. In
fact, the use of smart phones now allows real-time communication and the automatic collection of
production data from manual operations, as well [65].
A more recent example, and something that promises to become generalized in the near future,
is the introduction of augmented reality, whereby several data streams are combined and fed to
machine operators so as to facilitate their tasks [66]. In Forest Engineering the use of augmented
reality is at an experimental stage on a number of diﬀerent devices and is most often integrated with
visualization tools that feed additional information otherwise unavailable. That is the case of tree
quality information appearing on the screen when an operator selects a tree for cutting, or of an
operator being fed repeat visualizations of the same object in front of them, each taken from a diﬀerent
angle, so that they can better evaluate spatial conditions. In the US, the application of tablet technology
in forest operations is gaining a strong interest, allowing feller-buncher and harvester operators to
make their felling decisions without painting trees to cut or leave. The progress of in-woods operations
is reported to the oﬃce through the combination of a computer system installed on the machine and
GPS technologies, so that operational work plans can be updated on a real time basis.
Finally, the biggest opportunity lays with the large amount of production data now available for
customized processing, which can be used for many purposes besides the monitoring of an individual
machine. In particular, these data can be used to maximize the technical, economic and allocative
eﬃciency of any single team or ﬂeet. The on-board computers of modern machines deliver a constant
stream of extremely valuable information, which can be combined with remote sensing data and
market information for additional impact [67]. Whether they are combined or not, these data sets are
too large for traditional processing applications, and conﬁgure as Big Data [68], which is considered as
one of the main opportunities for innovation and eﬃciency gains over the future [69]. Today 50% of
internet traﬃc is not generated by human input, but directly by machines that connect to each other.
Similarly, the number of devices connected globally now exceeds 30 billion—that is, six times the
number of humans [70]. Machines therefore talk to each other, and connectivity is and will increasingly
be a fundamental element in production eﬃciency. Machine generated data can be used with proﬁt
by everyone, from the large company to the single contractor. A typical use is that of monitoring the
productivity of all the elements in a ﬂeet and matching that of each against benchmarks extracted from
the ﬂeet as a whole. Once this data is available, moving benchmarks can be estimated with suitable
statistical techniques, such as the Data Envelopment analysis or Stochastic Frontier Analysis [71,72].
On-line platforms are already available for the purpose, which have been developed by the individual
companies, contractors’ associations and public agencies [73,74].
The ability to generate and manage real-time data is also critical in the ﬁeld of certiﬁcation and
training: Automatic data collection is often combined with the Chainblock technology to produce
indelible records, and constitutes the basis of a large number of apps used by certiﬁcation agencies that
work with sustainable forest management as well as logger training [75].
6. Conclusions
Forest Engineering must be recognized, deﬁned, and better understood as a unique discipline.
Today’s forest management practices demand a broader application of Forest Engineering within
the interdisciplinary context of forestry. Key accomplishments in and the future direction of Forest
Engineering include increased mechanization, contributions to bioenergy and biomass economy,
and real-time decision-making and optimization using IT and internet applications. In particular,
Forest Engineering is a remarkably adaptable discipline that has expanded its toolbox to match the
changing needs of human society. As a result, Forestry Engineering can be deﬁned in diﬀerent ways
according to context. Due to the strong association with forestry and forest management, the role of
Forest Engineering may change with that of forest management. In that regard, one may make a critical

Forests 2019, 10, 724
9 of 12
distinction between industrial plantation forestry and conventional forestry. Since the primary goal of
most industrial plantation forests is ﬁber production, the demands made on Forest Engineering are
still largely technical and economical and place a great emphasis on the more traditional components
of the discipline as exempliﬁed in the Tayloristic and Mechanization paradigms. On the other hand,
conventional forestry is taking up a variety of roles besides ﬁber production. The additional demands
made on conventional forestry range from soil protection to biodiversity and recreation and require
forest engineers to expand their competence beyond purely technical and economical matters. That is
a strong driver of future developments, possibly leading to the evolution of Forest Engineering
into an increasingly complex discipline. Within such context, this manuscript aims at deﬁning the
unique identity of Forest Engineering, while providing thoughts and ideas for further discussion.
To accomplish these goals, the authors reviewed and synthesized literature covering academic, research,
and industry practice. Hopefully, this study oﬀers at least a glimpse of the pivotal achievements of
Forest Engineering from the last decade and identiﬁes some of the major issues that can be addressed
only through the eﬀective use of Forest Engineering in the near future.
Author Contributions: As a lead author, R.S. contributed a coordinating role in the conceptualization and
development of methodology for this manuscript. All three authors made an equal contribution in preparing and
writing the original draft, and subsequent review and editing.
Funding:
This research received funding from the Bio Based Industries Joint Undertaking under
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No
720757—Project TECH4EFFECT.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Wikipedia. List of Forestry Universities and Colleges. 2019. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
List_of_forestry_universities_and_colleges (accessed on 10 June 2019).
2.
Clawson, M. Forests for Whom and for What? RFF Press: New York, NY, USA, 2011; 174p. [CrossRef]
3.
Visser, R. What can forest engineering do for forestry in New Zealand? N. Z. J. For. 2007, 52, 4–5.
4.
Omics. Updated List of High Journal Impact Factor Forestry Journals. Available online: https://www.
omicsonline.org/forestry-journals-conferences-list.php (accessed on 10 June 2019).
5.
Heinimann, R. Forest operations engineering and management: The ways behind and ahead of a scientiﬁc
discipline. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2007, 28, 107–121.
6.
Stokes, B.; Ashmore, C.; Rawlins, C.; Sirois, D. Glossary of Terms Used in Timber Harvesting and Forest Engineering;
Gen. Tech. Rep. SO-73; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southern Forest Experiment Station:
New Orleans, LA, USA, 1989; 33p.
7.
Wang, L.; Li, Y. Terminology of Forest Engineering and Timber Harvesting; Science Press: Beijing, China, 1991;
124p, ISBN 13 9787030294012.
8.
USDA. Glossary of forest Engineering Terms: Forest Operations Research.
2019.
Available online:
https://www.srs.fs.usda.gov/forestops/glossary/ (accessed on 29 April 2019).
9.
Study.com. 2019. Available online: https://study.com/directory/category/Engineering/Forest_Engineering.
html (accessed on 10 June 2019).
10.
UC. University of Canterbury Website. 2019. Available online: https://www.canterbury.ac.nz/study/subjects/
forest-engineering/ (accessed on 10 June 2019).
11.
IEA. International Engineering Alliance Website. 2019. Available online: http://www.ieagreements.org/
accords/washington/ (accessed on 10 June 2019).
12.
Wartkotsch, W.; Engelbrecht, R.; Hacker, F. The South African Harvesting Code of Practice. 1987. Available
online: http://www.fao.org/3/W3646E/w3646e0c.htm (accessed on 21 August 2019).
13.
Sundberg, U. The Emergence and Establishment of Forest Operations and Techniques as a Discipline in Forest Science;
Communication of the Norwegian Forest Research Institute 41.8: Ås, Norway, 1988; 137p.
14.
Košir, B.; Magagnotti, N.; Spinelli, R. The role of work studies in forest engineering: Status and perspectives.
Int. J. For. Eng. 2015, 26, 160–170. [CrossRef]

Forests 2019, 10, 724
10 of 12
15.
Taylor, F.W. A piece-rate system being a step toward partial solution of the labor problem. Trans. Am. Soc.
Mech. Eng. 1895, 16, 865–903.
16.
Taylor, F.W. The Principles of Scientiﬁc Management; Harper & Brothers: New York, NY, USA; London, UK,
1911; 77p.
17.
Nyland, C. Taylorism, John R. Commons, and the Hoxie Report. J. Econ. Issues 1996, 30, 985–1016. [CrossRef]
18.
Berg, S. Some aspects of LCA in the analysis of forestry operations. J. Clean Prod. 1997, 5, 211–217. [CrossRef]
19.
Schweier, J.; Magagnotti, N.; Labelle, E.; Athanassiadis, D. Sustainability impact assessment of forest
operations: A review. Curr. For. Rep. 2019. [CrossRef]
20.
Lindner, M.; Suominen, T.; Palosuo, T.; Garcia-Gonzalo, J.; Verweij, P.; Zudin, S.; Päivinen, R. ToSIA—A tool
for sustainability impact assessment of forest-wood-chains. Ecol. Model. 2010, 221, 2197–2205. [CrossRef]
21.
Kuehmaier, M.; Stampfer, K. Development of a multi-criteria decision support tool for energy wood supply
management. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2012, 33, 181–198.
22.
Mousazadeh, H. A technical review on navigation systems of agricultural autonomous oﬀ-road vehicles.
J. Terramech. 2013, 50, 211–232. [CrossRef]
23.
Olivera, A.; Visser, R. Using the harvester on-board computer capability to move towards precision forestry.
N. Z. J. For. 2016, 60, 3–7. [CrossRef]
24.
Löfgren, B. Kinematic Control of Redundant Knuckle Boom with Automatic Pathfollowing Functions.
Ph.D. Thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2009.
25.
Manner, J.; Gelin, O.; Mörk, A.; Englund, M. Forwarder crane’s boom tip control system and beginner-level
operators. Silva Fennica 2017, 51, 1717. [CrossRef]
26.
Christensen, H. A Roadmap for US Robotics from Internet to Robotics, 2016th ed.; Christensen, H., Ed.; University
of California: San Diego, CA, USA, 2016; Available online: http://jacobsschool.ucsd.edu/contextualrobotics/
docs/rm3-ﬁnal-rs.pdf (accessed on 21 August 2019).
27.
Courteau, J. Robotics in Forest Harvesting Machines; FERIC: Pointe Claire, QC, Canada, 1989.
28.
Guimier, D.Y. Canadian Perspective on Mechanized Harvesting Development. In Mechanized Harvesting:
The Future Is Here; Proceedings; Department of Forest Engineering, Oregon State University: Corvallis, OR,
USA, 1991; pp. 1–6.
29.
Thor, M. Prospects and Challenges for Forest Harvesting technologies in Europe. In Proceedings of the 5th
Forest Engineering Conference, Gerardmere, France, 23–25 September 2014; Available online: http://fec2014.
fcba.fr/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2014/11/k1_magnusthor_2014-09.pdf (accessed on 21 August 2019).
30.
Ringdahl, O.; Hellström, T.; Lindroos, O. Potentials of possible machine systems for directly loading logs in
cut-to-length harvesting. Can. J. For. Res. 2012, 42, 970–985. [CrossRef]
31.
Hellström, T.; Lärkeryd, P.; Nordfjell, T.; Ringdahl, O. Autonomous Forest vehicles: Historic, envisioned,
and state-of-the-art. Int. J. For. Eng. 2009, 20, 31–38. [CrossRef]
32.
Parker, R.; Bayne, K.; Clinton, P. Robotics in Forestry. N. Z. J. For. 2016, 60, 8–14.
33.
Ziesak, M.; Marques, A.F.; Rasinmaki, J.; Rosset, C.; Nummila, K.; Scholz, J. Advances in forestry control
and automation systems in Europe—FOCUS: The concept idea in a multinational EU research project.
In Proceedings of the 6th Precision Forestry Symposium: The Anchor of Your Value Chain; Ackerman, P.,
Gleasure, E., Ham, H., Eds.; Faculty of AgriSciences, Stellenbosch University: Stellenbosch, South Africa,
2014; p. 114.
34.
Visser, R. Next Generation Timber Harvesting Systems: Opportunities for Remote Controlled and Autonomous
Machinery; Report Project No: PRC437-1718; Forest Wood and Products Australia (FWPA): Melbourne,
Australia, 2018; ISBN 978-1-925213-78-2.
35.
Bergkvist, I.; Norden, B.; Lundstrom, H. The Beast, a remote controlled harvester. In Proceedings of the
Sustainable Forest Operations—The Future is Now! 3rd Forest Engineering Conference, COFE 30th Annual
Meeting, Mont-Tremblant, QC, Canada, 1–4 October 2007.
36.
McEwan, A. Forecasting the Technology Drivers of Harvesting Systems for Fast Growing Eucalyptus and
Acacia Plantation Forestry. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2017.
37.
Acemoglu, D.; Restrepo, P. Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets (17 March 2017). MIT
Department of Economics Working Paper No. 17-04. 2017. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=
2940245 (accessed on 21 August 2019).
38.
Nicholls, A.; Bren, L.; Humphreys, N. Harvester Productivity and Operator Fatigue: Working Extended
Hours. Int. J. For. Eng. 2004, 15, 57–65. [CrossRef]

Forests 2019, 10, 724
11 of 12
39.
Van Stralen, J.N.P.; Uslu, A.; Dalla Longa, F.; Panoutsou, C. The role of biomass in heat, electricity,
and transport markets in the EU27 under diﬀerent scenarios. Biofuel Bioprod. Bioref. 2013, 7, 147–163.
[CrossRef]
40.
U.S. Department of Energy. 2016 Billion-Ton Report: Advancing Domestic Resources for a Thriving Bioeconomy,
Volume 1: Economic Availability of Feedstocks; Langholtz, M., Stokes, B., Eaton, L., Eds.; ORNL/TM-2016/160;
Oak Ridge National Laboratory: Oak Ridge, TN, USA, 2016; 448p. [CrossRef]
41.
Verkerk, P.J.; Anttila, P.; Eggers, J.; Lindner, M.; Asikainen, A. The realisable potential supply of woody
biomass from forests in the European Union. For. Ecol. Manag. 2011, 261, 2007–2015. [CrossRef]
42.
Nicholls, D.L.; Halbrook, J.M.; Benedum, M.E.; Han, H.-S.; Lowell, E.C.; Becker, D.R.; Barbour, R.J.
Socioeconomic constraints to biomass removal from forest lands for ﬁre risk reduction in the western U.S.
Forests 2018, 9, 264. [CrossRef]
43.
Koirala, A.; Kizha, A.R.; De Hoop, C.; Roth, B.; Han, H.S.; Hiesl, P.; Abbas, D.; Gautam, S.; Baral, S.; Bick, S.;
et al. Annotated bibliography of the global literature on the secondary transportation of raw and comminuted
forest products (2000–2015). Forests 2018, 9, 415. [CrossRef]
44.
Bisson, J.; Han, S.K.; Han, S.H. Evaluating the system logistics of a biomass recovery operation in northern
California. For. Prod. J. 2016, 66, 88–96. [CrossRef]
45.
Ghaﬀariyan, M.; Brown, M.; Acuna, M.; Sessions, J.; Gallagher, T.; Kühmaier, M.; Spinelli, R.; Visser, R.;
Devlin, G.; Eliasson, L.; et al. An international review of the most productive and cost eﬀective forest biomass
recovery technologies and supply chains. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 74, 145–158. [CrossRef]
46.
Montgomery, T.; Han, H.S.; Kizhakkepurakkal, A. A GIS-based method for locating and planning centralized
biomass grinding operations. Biomass Bioenergy 2016, 85, 262–270. [CrossRef]
47.
Han, S.K.; Han, H.S.; Bisson, J. Eﬀects of grate size on grinding productivity, fuel consumption, and particle
size distribution. For. Prod. J. 2015, 65, 209–216. [CrossRef]
48.
Spinelli, R.; Pari, L.; Magagnotti, N. New biomass products, small-scale plants and vertical integration as
opportunities for rural development. Biomass Bioenergy 2018, 115, 244–252. [CrossRef]
49.
Han, H.S.; Jacobson, A.; Bilek, E.M.; Sessions, J. Waste to Wisdom: Utilizing forest residues for the production
of bioenergy and biobased products. Appl. Eng. Agric. 2018, 34, 5–10. [CrossRef]
50.
Severy, M.; Chamberlin, C.; Eggink, A.; Jacobson, A. Demonstration of a pilot-scale plant for torrefaction and
briquetting. Appl. Eng. Agric. 2018, 34, 85–98. [CrossRef]
51.
Spinelli, R.; Cavallo, E.; Facello, A. A new comminution device for high-quality chip production.
Fuel Proc. Tech. 2012, 99, 69–74. [CrossRef]
52.
Bisson, J.; Han, H.S. Quality of feedstock produced from sorted forest residues. Am. J. Biomass Bioenergy
2016, 5, 81–97. [CrossRef]
53.
Lee, E.; Bisson, J.; Han, H.S. Evaluating the production cost and quality of feedstock produced by a sawdust
machine. Biomass Bioenergy 2017, 104, 53–60. [CrossRef]
54.
Kizha, A.R.; Han, H.S.; Paulson, J.; Koirala, A. Strategies for reducing moisture content in forest residues at
the harvest site. Appl. Eng. Agric. 2018, 34, 25–33. [CrossRef]
55.
Kizha, A.; Han, H.S. Processing and sorting forest residues: Cost, productivity and managerial impacts.
Biomass Bioenergy 2016, 93, 97–106. [CrossRef]
56.
Spinelli, R.; Visser, R.; Björheden, R.; Roser, D. Recovering energy biomass in conventional forest operations:
A review of integrated harvesting systems. Curr. For. Rep. 2019, 5, 90. [CrossRef]
57.
Woo, H.; Han, H.S. Performance of screening biomass feedstocks using Star and Deck screen machines.
Appl. Eng. Agric. 2018, 34, 35–42. [CrossRef]
58.
Spinelli, R.; Ivorra, L.; Magagnotti, N.; Picchi, G. Performance of a mobile mechanical screen to improve the
commercial quality of wood chips for energy. Bioresour. Technol. 2011, 102, 7366–7370. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Wagener, W.; Oﬀord, H. Logging Slash: Its Breakdown and Decay at Two Forests in Northern California; PSW-83;
USDA Forest Service: Berkeley, CA, USA, 1972; 11p.
60.
Ranius, T.; Hämäläinen, A.; Egnell, G.; Olsson, B.; Eklöf, K.; Stendahl, J.; Rudolphi, J.; Sténs, A.; Felton, A.
The eﬀects of logging residue extraction for energy on ecosystem services and biodiversity: A synthesis.
J. Environ. Manag. 2018, 209, 409–425. [CrossRef]
61.
Jones, G.; Loeﬄer, D.; Calkin, D.; Chung, W. Forest treatment residues for thermal energy compared with
disposal by onsite burning: Emissions and energy return. Biomass Bioenergy 2010, 34, 737–746. [CrossRef]

Forests 2019, 10, 724
12 of 12
62.
Müller, F.; Jaeger, D.; Hanewinkel, M. Digitization in wood supply—A review on how Industry 4.0 will
change the forest value chain. Comp. Electron. Agric. 2019, 162, 206–218. [CrossRef]
63.
McDonald, T.; Fulton, J. Automated time study of skidders using global positioning system data.
Comp. Electron. Agric. 2005, 48, 19–37. [CrossRef]
64.
Palander, T.; Nuutinen, Y.; Kariniemi, A.; Väätäinen, K. Automatic time study method for recording work
phase times of timber harvesting. For. Sci. 2013, 59, 472–483. [CrossRef]
65.
Keefe, R.; Wempe, A.; Becker, R.; Nagler, E.; Gilbert, S.; Caudill, C. Positioning methods and the use of
location and activity data in forests. Forests 2019, 10, 458. [CrossRef]
66.
Palonen, T.; Hyyti, H.; Visala, A. Augmented Reality in Forest Machine Cabin. IFAC-PapersOnLine 2017, 50,
5410–5417. [CrossRef]
67.
Magagnotti, N.; Kanzian, C.; Schulmeyer, F.; Spinelli, R. A new guide for work studies in forestry. Int. J.
For. Eng. 2013, 24, 249–253. [CrossRef]
68.
Naganathan, V. Comparative Analysis of Big Data, Big Data Analytics: Challenges and Trends. Int. Res. J.
Eng. Technol. 2018, 5, 1948–1964.
69.
Manyika, J.; Chui, M.; Brown, B.; Bughin, J.; Dobbs, R.; Roxburgh, C. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation,
Competition, and Productivity; McKinsey Global Institute: New York, NY, USA, 2011; p. 20.
70.
Flood, M. The future of telematics in the manufacturing and management of forest machines. In Proceedings
of the Conference “Focus on Forestry 2019”, White River, Mpumalanga, South Africa, 10–12 April 2019.
71.
LeBel, L.; Stuart, W. Technical eﬃciency evaluation of logging contractors using a nonparametric model.
Int. J. For. Eng. 1998, 9, 15–24.
72.
Ottaviani-Aalmo, G.; Baardsen, S. Environmental factors aﬀecting technical eﬃciency in Norwegian steep
terrain logging crews: Astochastic frontier analysis. J. For. Res. 2015, 20, 18–23. [CrossRef]
73.
Bogetoft, P.; Thorsen, B.; Strange, N. Eﬃciency and Merger Gains in the Danish Forestry Extension Service.
For. Sci. 2003, 49, 585–595.
74.
Yin, R. DEA: A New Methodology for Evaluating the Performance of Forest Products Producers. For. Prod. J.
1998, 48, 29–34.
75.
Schreuder, P. New trends in the integration of software into the corporate environment. In Proceedings of
the Conference “Focus on Forestry 2019”, White River, Mpumalanga, South Africa, 10–12 April 2019.
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
