Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration  
Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program Projects
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
November 2019

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been signiﬁcantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity ﬁre regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale ﬁres. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to signiﬁcantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildﬁre and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program began as an innovative experiment 
to work at landscape scale, and with collaborative stakeholders, to increase the pace and scale of forest 
restoration. Monitoring at the landscape scale is important to assess how well land management agencies 
can meet policies to accelerate the restoration of ﬁre-adapted systems. Photo courtesy of ERI
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: November 2019
Authors: Bryce E. Esch and Amy E.M. Waltz
Reviewers: Lindsay Buchanan, Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
Coordinator, USDA Forest Service; Marin Chambers, Research Associate, Colorado Forest 
Restoration Institute, Colorado State University; Zachary Wurtzebach, Conservation Social 
Scientist, Center for Large Landscape Conservation
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Esch, B.E., and A.E.M. Waltz. 2019. Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Projects. ERI White Paper—Issues in 
Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 12p.
Northern Arizona University is an equal opportunity provider.
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from 
discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) To ﬁle a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Ofﬁce of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten 
Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-5964 
(TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
This publication made possible through a grant from the USDA Forest Service.

Table of Contents
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
Questions and Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
Recommendations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11

2 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary
The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) provided an opportunity to examine the 
challenges and success of collaborative monitoring to understand the effects of forest restoration at a landscape 
scale. We reviewed the monitoring documentation of CFLRP projects and talked with representatives from 
17 of 23 projects to understand landscape-scale monitoring deﬁnitions, techniques, and the current status. 
While collaborative groups have implemented project-scale monitoring, very few were monitoring landscape-
scale progress of forest restoration. Progress was limited as a result of several factors, including the slow pace of 
restoration treatments, limited availability of landscape ecology technical expertise, and limited availability of 
guidance on landscape monitoring approaches. Sites prioritized project-level monitoring over landscape-level 
monitoring to match stakeholder interests and the available Forest Service skill sets. We found that available 
technical expertise was key in developing appropriate monitoring questions, metrics, and approaches for 
monitoring at any scale, but particularly for landscape-scale monitoring. Monitoring at the landscape scale is 
important to assess how well land management agencies can meet policies to accelerate the restoration of ﬁre-
adapted systems. To better integrate landscape-scale monitoring efforts within CFLRP, we suggest identifying 
knowledge gaps where landscape-scale monitoring information would be most useful, providing landscape 
ecology expertise to projects, encouraging coordinated innovation and training in technical tools for Forest 
Service staff, supporting research efforts into landscape level change in ﬁre-adapted forests, and providing 
support for coordination between research and collaborative landscape projects. 
Introduction
The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) was created through the Omnibus 
Public Lands Act of 2009 to “encourage the collaborative, science-based ecosystem restoration of priority 
forest landscapes” (Omnibus Public Lands Act 2009). As a response to the large, 100,000-acre wildﬁre events 
observed in the 2000s, this innovative legislation mandated collaborative forest restoration on US Forest Service 
lands at landscape scales to increase the resiliency and sustainability of ﬁre-adapted forested ecosystems to 
wildﬁre. The CFLRP legislation built on the previous 10 years of wildﬁre risk reduction legislation, such as the 
Healthy Forest Restoration Act (2003) and the National Fire Plan (2000), but added the need for a “landscape 
strategy” to meet forest restoration needs beyond community protection. Under the program, the Forest Service 
funded 23 projects, ranging from 150,000 acres to more than 2 million acres. It was an innovative experiment to 
work at landscape scale, and with collaborative stakeholders, to increase the pace and scale of forest restoration. 
However, approaches to work at large scales was new to Forest Service and collaborative multi-stakeholder 
participation efforts. Although collaboration is not new to the Forest Service, successful collaborative efforts 
historically focused on project-level planning at 10,000 to 30,000 acres in size, with treatments implemented in 
smaller stand-level units. In these cases, the Forest Service and their stakeholders used stand-level monitoring 
methods with the desired conditions as deﬁned in forest plans to understand current conditions and develop 
expected desired future conditions (Tabor et al. 2014). Historically, there has been limited federal capacity to 
monitor federal land management treatment effectiveness at these project scales. Landscape assessments of forest 
conditions and ﬁre risk have been used on federal lands to deﬁne the scope of the forest restoration need, and assist 
in budgeting requests, but have been applied infrequently in planning and monitoring approaches. The CFLRP 
provided an opportunity for collaborative public land projects to develop and test landscape-level monitoring for 
forest assessment and restoration success, and led to identifying and initiating landscape research needs.
As the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program nears the end of its initial 10-year authorization 
in Fiscal Year (FY) 2019, there is an opportunity to assess the challenges and successes of the landscape-level 
program. For this white paper, we assessed the landscape monitoring of forest restoration success developed 
by the 23 individual CFLRP projects over the last 10 years. There were two broad purposes for this analysis: 

                    Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Projects 
3
1) to document the innovations and challenges the CFLRP projects incurred while developing landscape-
scale monitoring for desired conditions and management effectiveness monitoring, and 2) to assess similarity 
in these methods for future opportunities to synthesize landscape results of the CFLRP across all projects. 
This summary is intended to inform land managers and their collaborative partnerships for future efforts in 
collaborative landscape restoration. We provide recommendations for current and future CFLRP projects in 
developing and implementing landscape-level monitoring. 
Monitoring Requirements and 
Landscape Metrics 
The CFLR authorizing act mandated 
multi-party monitoring for at least 
15 years after implementation 
commences to assess the ecological, 
social, and economic effects of 
restoration treatments (Sec. 4003 (g)
(4)). The purpose of this monitoring 
was to support an adaptive planning 
and management cycle to inform 
local decision-making, but also to 
demonstrate the lessons learned across 
the CFLR program (Schultz et. al 2012). 
While the intent of the program was to 
work at landscape scale, funded projects 
were not provided speciﬁc guidance 
or requirements for how to monitor restoration progress at the landscape scale. Historically, monitoring is 
an underfunded requirement in the Forest Service; thus, the agency focuses primarily on implementation 
monitoring to measure operations and activities on an annual basis (Wurtzebach et. al 2019). To meet the 
broader CFLRP monitoring requirements, each CFLRP project developed its own set of monitoring indicators 
(the Forest Service and national partners developed an additional set of overarching metrics to track project 
progress; more information can be found at https://www.fs.fed.us/restoration/CFLRP/guidance.shtml). 
In order to understand landscape change as a result of CFLRP activities, rigorous effectiveness monitoring is 
needed to evaluate if treatment activities result in progress toward a restored landscape. Metrics for landscape 
monitoring may include coarse scale descriptors of forest structure, such as canopy cover and openings, or 
indices of a forest or landscape conditions. These landscape metrics have been developed and used in federal 
management, the most common being landscape-level indices for assessment and monitoring that are derived 
from national-level, coarse-resolution data. For example, the Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) assessment 
was designed to measure landscape ecological departure at multiple scales (Landﬁre 2019). The use of FRCC 
was challenging at several sites due to a lack of conﬁdence in the national vegetation layers created for this 
purpose (e.g., M. Lata, personal communication on southwestern layers, 2013), and the decadal time scale 
needed to return ﬁre and restore ﬁre regimes. The FRCC index did not include an explicit ﬁre risk. Departure 
from historic ﬁre regime was combined with known ﬁre behavior to infer ﬁre risk. The Watershed Condition 
Framework (WCF) is a landscape evaluation tool to assess and prioritize at a watershed level to achieve a 
particular goal of watershed health (USDA 2011). Fire risk was a component to the watershed assessment, but 
was not a highly rated value informing the WCF index. Frequent-ﬁre forest restoration did not always spatially 
align with watershed restoration priorities. Federal and academic research continues to inform the body of 
science through landscape-scale burn probability and ﬁre risk assessments (e.g., Calkin et al. 2011, Thompson 
et al. 2011, Dillon et al. 2015). However, there is an opportunity with the CFLRP to determine how local 
Photo by Andrew Sánchez Meador

4 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Forest Service units and their collaborators address landscape forest restoration needs, measure their landscape 
progress, and assess the effectiveness of treatments.
Questions and Approach
To capture the innovations and challenges in landscape metrics development, and document the methods for 
future opportunities, we developed the following questions:
1) What process and governance was associated with landscape restoration monitoring?
a. What is the role of collaborative partners and the Forest Service in planning the monitoring and data 
collection?
b. How, and by who, are data managed?
c. Who is responsible for data analysis, summary, and reporting?
2) What landscape data sets and/or metrics did CFLRP projects use to:
a. Justify the ecological need for landscape restoration?
b. Develop the restoration strategy?
c. Assess landscape restoration success?
To assess these questions, we reviewed written materials from all 23 CFLRP projects and interviewed 
stakeholders and Forest Service staff from 17 of the 23 CFLRP pilots in March and April 2019 with the 
above questions. All CFLRP projects were contacted; only 17 responded. Interviews covered the same sets 
of questions, but did not use a standardized script. Additionally, we asked every interviewee how they had or 
why they had not yet developed landscape-scale monitoring approaches; and how they intended to address the 
question of landscape-scale progress even if speciﬁc approaches had not been developed. We added the latter 
questions as interviewees began to suggest that many projects had either dropped the focus on landscape-scale 
metrics, or not developed these questions. As a result of these initial ﬁndings, the focus of this paper shifted and 
we do not answer all questions as anticipated. Instead, conversations were summarized and general patterns of 
responses categorized into broad themes. Individual projects identiﬁed are with the permission of the technical 
partners. Other interviewees asked to remain anonymous.
By comparing early foundational documents to the current state of landscape-scale monitoring at each 
project, we were able to observe the evolution of landscape-level metrics, following 8–10 years of trial 
and error. The original proposals, foundational documents, and monitoring plans were assessed for details 
on desired landscape-level conditions, metrics and indicators of landscape-level success, and proposed 
monitoring approaches. Where possible, these were lumped into basic topics like “ﬁre behavior” and “landscape 
heterogeneity.” Additionally, detailed notes from each interview were analyzed for common themes, which were 
then summarized to form the core of our ﬁndings. Because all projects were in different stages of developing 
or implementing landscape-scale monitoring, there was a signiﬁcant amount of variability in approaches, 
deﬁnitions, and expected outcomes. We did not set speciﬁc standards as to what was or was not landscape-level 
monitoring. We asked projects to tell us what they were doing and what challenges they had faced, and we 
summarize those ﬁndings below.

                    Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Projects 
5
Findings 
Findings from Original Proposals, Foundational Documents, and Monitoring Plans
The CFLRP projects all used a collaborative process to develop proposals to meet criteria of the Act. Once 
funded, many of the projects developed foundational documents that discussed landscape-level restoration goals. 
The collaboratively developed landscape restoration goals presented in proposals and foundational documents 
were broad and often aspirational in nature. The original proposals did not explicitly list landscape metrics. 
The most consistently referenced landscape metrics across projects were expected changes in ﬁre behavior, 
assessed through ﬁre modeling and expected changes to ﬁre modeling inputs (e.g., fuel models, forest structural 
attributes). Because these landscape monitoring goals were not explicit, no mention of process or governance 
was found in the proposals, justiﬁcation, or landscape strategies.
However, projects did capture landscape-level questions, metrics, and indicators in monitoring plans, which 
were developed within a few years of the initial CFLRP award. Of the 23 projects, we were able to ﬁnd 19 
with monitoring plans or reports, which ranged from very broad and informal documents to very speciﬁc and 
formal plans. Of the 19 sites with monitoring documents we had access to, 14 developed speciﬁc and detailed 
monitoring plans in collaboration with academic, non-proﬁt, or agency researchers. Most of these monitoring 
plans included monitoring questions, indicators, metrics, or plans for implementing monitoring. Of those 14 
monitoring plans, only nine integrated questions, metrics, indicators, or potential approaches for assessing 
landscape-scale change. Some sites developed landscape monitoring metrics as part of other efforts, such as 
landscape assessments or strategies. Most landscape-level monitoring questions focused on changes in forest 
structure heterogeneity, tree densities, and canopy cover, and modeled ﬁre behavior outcomes. Remote sensing 
tools and modeling were the most commonly proposed approaches (See Box 1, page 7). 
Adaptively Managing Monitoring Metrics – Current Status and Findings as of Spring 2019 
As of 2019, most CFLRP sites had not implemented their landscape-level monitoring plans. Most of the sites 
with detailed landscape-scale monitoring plans said that the pace of treatments had been slower than expected, 
and it was too early to try to measure landscape-scale change. Additionally, the ability of collaborative groups 
to implement landscape-level monitoring plans was limited by staff and budget capacity and landscape ecology 
technical expertise. 
A few sites found that as time went on, their monitoring priorities changed, either because of changes in 
stakeholder participation, such as less technical partner engagement, or because of changes in conditions on 
the landscape, like large-scale disturbance (e.g., ﬁre or beetle kill). Several sites noted that conversations about 
these approaches stalled, with both Forest Service staff and stakeholders unclear about the best approach to 
monitoring landscape metrics. Some interviewees attributed this to the lack of technical expertise in landscape 
ecology in collaborative groups and within the Forest Service, and a lack of clear direction or guidance on what 
an effective approach to landscape-scale monitoring should look like. A few projects have some landscape-scale 
monitoring underway, such as pre-treatment data collected, pilots at small scales, or detailed methodologies 
developed with partners and plans to do the work (See Box 1, page 7). 
Some sites completed landscape-level analyses for stakeholder education or project prioritization before the 
CFLRP proposal or early in the project, but these assessments were not being used as part of their monitoring 
programs. Some thought it would be informative to conduct landscape assessments in the future, but at longer 
time scales, such as 10 years from now. Landscape-scale metrics were also developed as part of the CFLRP ﬁve-
year reporting process required by the Forest Service and a subset of partners. Many interviewees stated that this 
reporting process seemed separate from the multi-party monitoring process, and was done most often solely by 
Forest Service staff without engagement from collaborative groups. Some interviewees said they did not ﬁnd 
these national indicators in the ﬁve-year report very helpful for understanding landscape-scale change. 

6 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Sites have deprioritized landscape-level monitoring for a variety of reasons. Many CFLRP projects have 
focused monitoring on what stakeholders are most interested in and in areas that Forest Service staff have the 
expertise and capacity to implement, such as monitoring wildlife habitat, project-level forest structure, and 
watershed condition. These monitoring priorities can be accomplished with project-level monitoring. In lieu of 
dedicated landscape-level efforts, some of those sites have informal plans to aggregate project-level monitoring 
to understand progress across the larger landscape. Some sites hope to leverage networks of vegetation plots 
to understand forest structure and composition changes at a landscape scale. These include local efforts using 
protocols like the Common Stand Exam, and larger monitoring networks like the Fire Learning Network. 
Many sites also mentioned that tracking acres treated is currently their best tool for understanding change at the 
landscape scale, especially as it is a part of regular Forest Service reporting requirements.  
Nearly all the sites mentioned using the remote sensing method aerial Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) 
as a tool for assessing and monitoring landscape condition and change. Many sites that intend to collect or 
already have collected LiDAR do not have speciﬁc plans for how the data will be used. As the expense of 
collecting LiDAR data can be prohibitive, some sites mentioned that it would not make sense for them to 
collect that data until they had more of the landscape treated. A few sites plan to use LiDAR data that is 
collected and analyzed as part of a separate forest or regional level effort. 
Capacity and Governance
Governance, or leadership of monitoring efforts, by non-Forest Service technical partners was the key to 
successful development of landscape-level goals, monitoring questions, and metrics when they were observed. 
All sites with landscape metrics had technical partners involved in their development, and at many sites, these 
technical partners led the process to develop monitoring plans and approaches. This expertise is typically 
provided by partners from non-proﬁt organizations, academia, and Forest Service research stations, in the form 
of scientiﬁc information and translation to other collaborative stakeholders and land managers. Many sites 
had a decrease over time in participation from technical experts. Nearly all sites said they had limited ability to 
deﬁne landscape-level approaches or implement the monitoring approaches they developed because they lacked 
the skillset and/or the capacity. Several sites acknowledged that this expertise is not readily available among 
Forest Service practitioners, especially at the forest and district level. Lack of technical partners hampered 
a site’s ability to plan and implement landscape-scale monitoring. Additionally, interviewees mentioned the 
difﬁcultly in coordinating monitoring projects across a single CFLRP project and a forest, as there is both forest 
monitoring and CFLRP monitoring, and different forest level and district level staff involved with each. 
Many sites said stakeholders are more interested in verifying outcomes of collaboratively planned treatments 
through qualitative, project-level monitoring, and speciﬁc ecosystem components, like changes to wildlife 
habitat at a local level. Some interviewees said there was a general lack of understanding of the purpose and 
utility of landscape-level monitoring and how it differs from project-level monitoring among stakeholders. 
Some technical partners and agency staff said that when landscape ecology technical expertise was engaged, 
they still had difﬁculty convincing stakeholders of the utility of landscape-scale monitoring. 
A few sites also attributed the lack of landscape-scale monitoring to high levels of trust within the 
stakeholder group, implying that for some, the primary utility of monitoring is veriﬁcation of Forest Service 
work, not monitoring ecological outcomes and change. Some sites mentioned that the primary utility of 
landscape-scale monitoring would be telling the story of their CFLRP project, rather than understanding 
ecological outcomes.

                    Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Projects 
7
Northeast Washington (NEWA) Forest Vision 2020, Colville National Forest
Question: Did we shift the pattern, structure, and composition of vegetation at the stand, watershed, 
and CFLR project scale toward desired targets?
Methods: Use of remote sensing tools, speciﬁcally pre and post-treatment LiDAR, with plot data, to 
assess pattern and forest structure; LANDFIRE data to assess changes in Fire Regime Condition Class.
Metrics: LiDAR-derived forest canopy cover, height, cover by strata, basal area (BA), and density (trees 
per acre, TPA). 
The NEWA project had extensive engagement with landscape ecology technical expertise, with 
participation from the University of Montana, the University of Washington, and the Missoula Fire 
Lab. This question and approach were part of their 2013 monitoring plan, and adjusted as tools and 
available data changed. 
Colorado Front Range
Desired condition: Establish a complex mosaic of forest density, size, and age (at stand and landscape 
scales) (Barrett et al. 2018).
Methods: Common Stand Exam (CSE) plots/ modiﬁed CSE plots, understory plots, and remote 
sensing including LiDAR data
Metrics: Basal area (BA), tree density (TPA), canopy cover by species, quadratic mean diameter 
(QMD), tree group size, proportion of stand represented in canopy, edge openings, large openings.
“Metrics such as percent openings in edge versus large openings, which were easier to interpret 
than more complex spatial heterogeneity metrics used previously (e.g., FragStats). However, some 
complex spatial heterogeneity metrics (e.g., those related to connectivity) may prove useful for 
monitoring changes in potential wildlife habitat” (Cannon and Barrett 2016).
Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI)
Question: Is forest structure heterogeneity increasing across treated and untreated landscapes at the 
landscape scale? Is there increasing heterogeneity in landscape structure?
Methods: Remote sensing and spatial pattern analysis tools, such as Fragstats.
Metrics: Percentage of landscape, largest patch index, patch density, patch area (mean, median, 
range, standard deviation, and coefﬁcient of variation), area-weighted mean patch area, edge 
density, clumpiness index, aggregation index, Euclidean nearest neighbor mean, correlation length, 
mean patch shape index, perimeter—area ratio mean, median, range, standard deviation, and 
coefﬁcient of variation. 
The collaborative partnered with Northern Arizona University for spatial analysis, using imagery 
acquired by the Forest Service in 2014 (Zachmann 2017). Analysis of patch size, density, and 
conﬁguration was completed for a large portion of the pre-treatment landscape. In 2019, the 4FRI 
multi-party monitoring board was developing methods for landscape analysis using UAV imagery and 
reﬁning methods for spatial analysis.
BOX 1. Examples of sites with research partnerships  
contributing to landscape monitoring methods and tools.

8 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Discussion
Landscape-level monitoring was less ubiquitous than we expected, given the purpose and intent of the CFLRP. 
Less than half of the sites with available monitoring documentation included or developed landscape-level 
monitoring, which led to our project to change our primary objectives from summarizing the landscape metrics 
used, to capturing the barriers and gaps in landscape monitoring. Our most common ﬁnding across CFLRP 
projects was the lack of fully implemented landscape treatments eight (2012 projects) and ten (2010 projects) 
years after the program initiation. This was not surprising. The proposed actions were ambitious across all of 
the awarded landscapes. Landscape-level change occurs over decades and requires a commitment to monitoring 
similar metrics on long time scales. Landscape change literature has been largely focused on decadal changes 
due to multiple factors, both social (urbanization, agriculture) and environmental (ﬁre, ﬂooding, aridiﬁcation). 
The landscape data currently available and the associated tools do not lend themselves easily to parsing out 
change detection by disturbance or management at less than 10-year time scales.
Early CFLRP documentation lacked speciﬁc landscape metrics. Broad goals, such as restoration of the 
“sustainability and resiliency of forested ecosystems” or a “natural ﬁre regime,” were appropriate for the 
program proposals, which did not require speciﬁcity. Additionally, the complexity of landscape-level change 
makes setting speciﬁc and actionable goals difﬁcult, and collaborative groups found consensus more easily on 
an overarching vision rather than speciﬁc metrics (Antuma et al. 2014). Perhaps most important, landscape 
metrics of forest restoration success are mostly being explored in the peer-reviewed literature. These metrics 
for success do not exist in standardized, easy-to-adopt methodologies that are readily used or easily stored in 
federal corporate data sets. The CFLRP projects provided a yet unrealized opportunity for this research to 
expand (Churchill et al. 2013, Hamilton et al. 2013, Zachmann 2017, Cannon et al. 2018, Maher et al. 2019).   
Lack of technical expertise in landscape ecology has been a signiﬁcant barrier to the development of landscape-
scale monitoring strategies across many CFLRP projects. This expertise gap was most obvious in post-proposal 
documentation. In collaborative groups with landscape ecology technical expertise, monitoring plans were 
more robust and included landscape questions, metrics, and indicators. Most groups did not adapt their broad 
goals into speciﬁc actionable strategies or approaches. Of those projects that developed landscape questions and 
metrics, many found that their plans were not feasible or too complex. 
There was an observed decline in scientiﬁc and/or technical partner engagement throughout the CFLRP sites. 
One factor for this may be the mismatch between the Forest Service planning process and implementation 
timelines and scientiﬁc study timelines. As landscapes require an additional 5–10 years until treatments are 
fully implemented, researchers on grant-funding timelines move to other projects. Additionally, the Forest 
Service planning process can be resistant to best available science. Planning documents prepared in one to ﬁve 
years can be used for 10 to 20 years, and the agency can be reluctant to update them. The Forest Service’s 2012 
Planning Rule seeks to resolve this, but the plan revision process has been slow, with only four national forests 
completing revision under the 2012 rule as of September 2019. Some research partners expressed frustration 
with how the Forest Service receives, or does not receive, scientiﬁc contributions. It may be that some technical 
partners step away from collaborative processes when the agency or collaborative group is not receptive to 
particular scientiﬁc contributions, or some technical partners may be impatient with the slow process of 
balancing other values with the relevant science.
Without technical or research partners, there was also broad misunderstanding as to what questions should 
be asked, what metrics are appropriate, and how to answer those questions. For example, many sites conﬂate 
spatial heterogeneity and landscape metrics. Spatial heterogeneity may be an appropriate indicator for 
landscape-scale change, but there are differences between a meaningful measurement of spatial heterogeneity 
at the project level versus the landscape level. Spatial heterogeneity is important at all scales, but treatments in 

                    Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Projects 
9
frequent-ﬁre forests suggest the most change in heterogeneity occurs at stand and project-level scales (Sánchez 
Meador et al. 2011, Cannon et al. 2018). At landscape-scale, spatial heterogeneity metrics may be assessed 
at a grain that masks any changes due to treatments. It is necessary for sites to deﬁne what aspects of spatial 
heterogeneity they intend to measure and the appropriate scale. 
Although less explicitly stated in the interviews, it was observed that the landscape-level data sets were difﬁcult 
to acquire and manage. Remotely sensed, large-scale data have become cheaper and more efﬁcient to collect, 
and available at higher resolution; however, pre-treatment data at the landscape scale may be limited to early 
2000s technology, availability, and storability.  Uncertainty regarding which data to use and how best to use it 
is a barrier to many sites’ commitment to landscape metrics. Unlike with project-based monitoring, CFLRP 
projects do not have many good models for landscape-scale monitoring. 
Moving forward, there is a need to monitor treatment effectiveness over the long term. While tracking acres 
treated was used by many projects as their best means of understanding large-scale impact, it provides no 
understanding of the effectiveness or longevity of treatments. One project representative we spoke to asked, 
“When have we restored something?” These landscapes are so large that while increasing acres treated suggests 
increasing impact, the treatment effectiveness decreases with time (Yocom et al. 2013). A combination of project 
effectiveness monitoring and landscape-scale assessment can provide a more complete picture of landscape-scale 
change. This could also contribute to out-year planning, timing for strategic re-entry, and use of wildﬁre to meet 
and maintain landscape goals. 
The collaborative nature of CFLRP monitoring programs resulted in trade-offs among monitoring goals. For 
example, monitoring stakeholder’s values, such as large tree retention, for increased trust in land management 
actions may not inform landscape change, or long-term adaptive management. In these cases, the CFLR 
projects met their collaborative monitoring intent, even if landscape-scale monitoring was de-prioritized. 
Prioritization of local stakeholder group monitoring needs is effective for maintaining collaborative and 
project support (Antuma et al. 2014). However, one goal of this CFLRP-wide assessment was to inform 
the potential for an across-site assessment of CFLRP project effectiveness. For this question, our results 
suggest that the limited use of landscape assessments in projects, combined with the variety of metrics under 
development, would not support a “bottom-up” aggregation of treatment effectiveness at this time. There is 
greater potential for a research-driven, across-site landscape change assessment. A beneﬁt to this process would 
be better incorporation of the decadal timeframe needed to show true landscape change. While it may not be 
as important for local collaborative success, this would have high value for both US Department of Agriculture 
and Department of Interior land management agency landscape condition assessments, management evaluation, 
and future prioritization of efforts.
The innovative legislation that funded the CFLRP projects mandated restoration and change at landscape 
scales, but did so at a time when speciﬁc landscape-scale metrics were novel, and were in limited use and 
availability in federal land management. Our research demonstrates how this gap provided opportunity to grow 
the development and use of landscape metrics, but also resulted in a lack of landscape measurements across the 
CFLRP projects. 

10 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Recommendations 
Measuring landscape-scale change and restoration success would beneﬁt from coordinated efforts within and 
across Forest Service regions. Because partners and researchers currently develop landscape metrics and conduct 
analyses, coordination across several landscape projects would inform and create efﬁciencies for research and 
Forest Service projects. However, coordination is time consuming, and projects are already struggling with 
coordinating across a single CFLRP project and forest. CFLRP sites have different access to federal or partner 
researchers. There may be monitoring efforts at the regional level that forests are unaware of, efforts at the forest 
level that districts are not aware of, or both. Speciﬁcally, these results suggest the following recommendations:
1. Identify key gaps in collaborative or practitioner understanding that should be ﬁlled by landscape 
monitoring with adaptive management consequences. By identifying gaps and monitoring needs, 
practitioners and stakeholders ensure landscape-scale monitoring is useful and applicable. This also provides 
an opportunity to identify gaps that can be ﬁlled by best available science other than monitoring.
2. Invest in Forest Service staff with appropriate monitoring skillsets and provide them with time to support 
collaborative and forest-level monitoring. For example, Forest Service staff with appropriate skillsets 
at the regional ofﬁce could provide context, data, and tools for collaboratives and forests interested in 
understanding landscape-level change. Forest Service regional ofﬁces have an opportunity to provide a 
consistent strategy across regions, which would provide helpful guidance to forests and potentially help 
regions understand region-wide conditions as directed in the 2012 Planning Rule using broad-scale 
monitoring.
3. Encourage coordinated innovation and training in technical tools for agency staff. Increasing agency staff 
understanding of landscape-level land management and planning supports current agency directives for 
landscape-level work and helps ﬁll local knowledge gaps. 
4. Support concerted research efforts to develop and make available landscape-level metrics that describe 
ﬁre-adapted forest conditions and treatment effectiveness, all while accounting for the long time scales to 
understand landscape-level ecosystem change. These efforts would be very similar to federal research efforts 
to standardize ﬁre hazard and risk across the US (Thompson et al. 2011, Dillon et al. 2015) and are key to 
successful landscape-level forest management.
5. Provide support for coordination and efﬁciencies between research and landscape-level projects at the 
collaborative and project scale. Encouraging coordination with research efforts can help projects meet 
landscape-level monitoring goals when capacity and expertise are not readily available otherwise.

                    Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Projects 
11
References
Antuma, J., B. Esch, B. Hall, E. Munn, and F. Sturges. 2014. Restoring forests and communities: lessons from 
the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. A report for the National Forest Foundation. 
School of Natural Resources and the Environment. University of Michigan. April 22, 2014.
Barrett, K.J., P.M. Brown, J. Clement, J.B. Cannon, B. Wolk, and A.S. Cheng. 2018. Front Range Roundtable 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Project: 2018 Ecological, Social and Economic Monitoring 
Plan. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute. CFRI-1705.
Calkin, D.E., A. Ager, M.P. Thompson, M.A. Finney, D.C. Lee, T.M. Quigley, C.W. McHugh, K.L. Riley, 
and J.M. Gilbertson-Day. 2011. A comparative risk assessment framework for wildland ﬁre management: 
the 2010 cohesive strategy science report. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-262. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 63 p.
Cannon, J.B., and K.J. Barrett. 2016. Front Range CFLRI Monitoring: Progress, Outcomes, and 
Recommendations. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute. CFRI-1603.
Cannon, J.B., K.J. Barrett, B.M. Gannon, R.N. Addington, M.A. Battaglia, P.J. Fornwalt, G.H. Aplet, A.S. 
Cheng, J.L. Underhill, J.S. Briggs, P.M. Brown. 2018. Collaborative restoration effects on forest structure in 
ponderosa pine-dominated forests of Colorado. Forest Ecology and Management, 424, 191–204. 
Churchill, D.J., A.J. Larson, M.C. Dahlgreen, J.F. Franklin, P.F. Hessburg, J.A. Lutz. 2013. Restoring forest 
resilience: From reference spatial patterns to silvicultural prescriptions and monitoring. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 291, 442–457
Dillon, G., J. Menakis, and F. Fay. 2015. Wildland ﬁre potential: a tool for assessing wildﬁre risk and fuels 
management needs. In: Keane, R.E., M. Jolly, R. Parsons, K. Riley. Proceedings of the large wildland ﬁres 
conference; May 19-23, 2014; Missoula, MT. Proc. RMRS-P-73. Fort Collins, CO: US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. p. 60-76. (Vol. 73, pp. 60-76).
Hamilton, R., S. Cushman, K. McCallum, N. McCusker, T. Mellin, M. Nigrelli, M. Williamson. 2013. 
Multiscale landscape pattern monitoring using remote sensing: The four forest restoration initiative. 
RSAC-10022-RPT1. Salt Lake City, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Remote Sensing 
Application Center. 24 p.
Landﬁre. “Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC).” Accessed <September, 9, 2019>, https://www.landﬁre.gov/
frcc/frcchome.php
Larson, A.J., and D. Churchill. 2012. Tree spatial patterns in ﬁre-frequent forests of western North America, 
including mechanisms of pattern formation and implications for designing fuel reduction and restoration 
treatments. Forest Ecology and Management, 267, 74–92. 
Maher, C.T., E. Oja, A. Marshall, M. Cunningham, L. Townsend, G. Worley-Hood, ... and E.E. Schneider. 
2019. Real-time monitoring with a tablet app improves implementation of treatments to enhance forest 
structural diversity. Journal of Forestry, 117(3), 280-292. 
Omnibus Public Lands Act of 2009, P.L. 111-11
Sánchez Meador, A.J., P.F. Parysow, and M.M. Moore. 2011. A new method for delineating tree patches and 
assessing spatial reference conditions of ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona. Restoration Ecology, 19, 
490–499. 

12 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Schultz, C.A., T. Jedd, and R.D. Beam. 2012. The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program: a 
history and overview of the ﬁrst projects. Journal of Forestry, 110(7), 381-391.
Tabor, G.M., A. Carlson, and T. Belote. 2014. Challenges and opportunities for large landscape-scale 
management in a shifting climate: The importance of nested adaptation responses across geospatial and 
temporal scales. In: Sample, V. Alaric, R. Bixler, R. Patrick, eds. Forest conservation and management in the 
Anthropocene: Conference proceedings. Proceedings. RMRS-P-71. Fort Collins, CO: US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service. Rocky Mountain Research Station. p. 205-227. (Vol. 71, pp. 205-227).
Thompson, M.P., D.E. Calkin, M.A. Finney, A.A. Ager, and J.W. Gilbertson-Day. 2011. Integrated national-
scale assessment of wildﬁre risk to human and ecological values. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk 
Assessment, 25(6), pp.761-780.
USDA Forest Service. 2015. The Rising Cost of Wildﬁre Operations: Effects on the Forest Service’s Non-ﬁre 
Work. 17 pages. https://www.fs.fed.us/sites/default/ﬁles/2015-Rising-Cost-Wildﬁre-Operations.pdf
USDA Forest Service. 2011. Watershed Condition Framework: a framework for assessing and tracking changes 
to watershed condition. FS-977. 34 Pages. 
Wasserman, T.N., J.S. Andrew, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2019. Grain and Extent Considerations Are Integral for 
Monitoring Landscape-Scale Desired Conditions in Fire-Adapted Forests. Forests, 21 p. 
Wurtzebach, Z., C. Schultz, A.E.M. Waltz, B.E. Esch, and T.N. Wasserman. 2019. Broader-Scale Monitoring 
for Federal Forest Planning: Challenges and Opportunities. Journal of Forestry, 117(3), pp.244-255.
Yocom, L. 2013. Fuel Treatment Longevity. Ecological Restoration Institute Working Paper No. 27. https://
cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/335/rec/29
Zachmann, L.J., and B.G. Dickson. 2017. 4FRI Landscape Pattern Analysis. Conservation Science Partners. 
https://lzachmann.github.io/4fri-lpa-report/ and data available at https://four-fri-lpa.appspot.com/.

                    Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Projects 
13

14 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines 
ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with 
respect to its health, integrity and sustainability… Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic 
trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to 
damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers 
on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural 
processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research 
and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every forest 
restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does 
not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1. Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and 
Surveys
4. Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forests
5.  Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern 
Arizona
7. Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for 
Practitioners
11. Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest 
Lands
15. Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16. Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
23. Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
1003338
