 
 
 
 
Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans 
(CWPP) in Arizona and Communities-at-Risk throughout 
the West Project Report  
 
December 2019  
 
Prepared for 
Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
1110 W Washington St #100 
Phoenix, AZ 85007 
 
Prepared by 
Dr. Melanie Colavito, Melanie.Colavito@nau.edu  
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017  
 
 
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
This research was funded by a grant from the Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management. 

 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................1 
Introduction ..........................................................................................................................6 
Project Approach and Demographics ..................................................................................8 
Key Project Findings..........................................................................................................11 
Arizona CWPP Results ..........................................................................................12 
West-Wide CWPP Results ......................................................................................18 
Arizona CWPP Focus Group Results ....................................................................21 
Lessons Learned and Recommendations for Effective CWPPs ........................................27 
Conclusion .........................................................................................................................31 
References ..........................................................................................................................32 
Appendix A. Status of Arizona CWPPs as of December 2019 .........................................33 
Appendix B. CWPP Resources ..........................................................................................34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
Executive Summary  
The purpose of the “Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona 
and Communities-At-Risk throughout the West” project was to assist the Arizona Department of 
Forestry and Fire Management (DFFM) in providing direction to communities-at-risk from 
wildfire in Arizona and communities throughout the West in developing and implementing 
effective CWPPs in order to improve wildfire preparedness. The assessment was conducted by 
the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University (NAU) in 
collaboration with DFFM. The project objectives included:  
 
1. Collaborate with DFFM to determine the status of existing CWPPs in Arizona to determine 
whether they are active, inactive, and/or in need of updating; 
2. Collaborate with DFFM to assess the effectiveness of existing CWPPs in the state of Arizona 
and determine whether existing plans have led to action; 
3. Assist DFFM to identify communities-at-risk that would benefit from a CWPP, and to the 
extent practicable, identify barriers that prevent communities from preparing a CWPP;  
4. Review assessments, guidelines, illustrative examples, best practices, and recommendations 
for CWPPs in western states; and  
5. Identify and communicate lessons learned and recommendations to key audiences, including 
contacts on Arizona CWPPs, DFFM, other western State Foresters, and the Forest Service 
Washington Office.   
  
This project included six phases to assess CWPPs in Arizona, as well as explore CWPP 
programs, illustrative examples, and recommendations from other western states. The phases 
included outreach to CWPP contacts and document review in Arizona, an online survey of 
Arizona CWPPs, interviews with DFFM staff and other partners in Arizona, an online survey 
and review of CWPPs in other western states, follow-up interviews in Arizona and other western 
states, and focus groups with select Arizona CWPPs. The focus groups, as well as additional 
discussion with DFFM partners, were used to generate lessons learned and recommendations for 
effective CWPP development and implementation in Arizona and throughout the West. 
 
The results in this report are divided into three sections: Arizona CWPP Results (from the 
Arizona CWPP survey and interviews), West-Wide CWPP Results (from the West-wide survey), 
and Arizona CWPP Focus Group Results. Overall, we found that CWPPs are often trying to be 
many things to many audiences but may not always be effectively facilitating action on the 
ground. Furthermore, in many cases, collaboration and attention on a CWPP falls off once the 
plan development is complete, but ensuring ongoing communication and collaboration during 
implementation of a CWPP is critical. The lessons learned and recommendations from this 
assessment may help to shift new CWPPs and future plan updates toward more focused and 
strategic implementation that is appropriate to the unique local context in which it occurs. 
 
 
 

2 
 
It is challenging to create guidance that is simultaneously specific and flexible, but the lessons 
learned and recommendations from this assessment may help to shift new CWPPs and future 
plan updates in a more actionable direction and provide ideas for the kinds of guidance that 
collaborators in CWPPs and other community wildfire planning efforts would like to see. 
 
CWPP Purpose, Use, and Audience 
• Lesson Learned: Many CWPPs lack clarity in their purpose, use, and audience and try 
to accomplish too many things at once.  
• Recommendation: Any good plan must be relevant and understandable to those who 
are intended to use it. Partners working together to develop or update a CWPP should 
reach a common understanding of their CWPP’s intended purpose and use. CWPPs 
should not be solely focused on one entity, but they should also clearly define their 
audience and describe how the intended audience should use the document or what 
portions of it are intended for different potential users.  
 
CWPP Scale 
• Lesson Learned: In Arizona and throughout the West, many CWPPs have evolved 
from a community scale to a county scale. There are tradeoffs at different planning 
scales. For example, smaller-scale CWPPs are often more tactical, while larger-scale 
are often more programmatic. 
• Recommendation: There is no “correct” CWPP scale. Tradeoffs at each scale should 
be thoroughly considered with respect to a CWPP’s intended purpose, use, and 
audience. For example, county-scale plans may not be detailed enough to guide action 
at the community scale and support local community needs, but they can provide 
cover to communities without the capacity to develop their own plans. Nested-scale 
or overlapping CWPPs can be effective, as long as there is some attention to how 
plans are linked and what information is needed at what scale, as well as how the 
plans are linked with other documents like county hazard mitigation plans. A 
CWPP’s scale should also determine the level of detail and specific content needed.  
 
CWPP Guidance and Content  
• Lesson Learned: The expectations of agencies, required plan contents, and processes 
or steps for creating an “official” CWPP are often unclear. 
• Recommendation: Clear expectations appropriately tailored to a given CWPP can 
facilitate planning and implementation. States should develop a description of 
expectations for CWPPs, minimum required plan contents or a plan template, 
optional enhanced or more detailed plan contents, and required steps for developing 
and updating “official” CWPPs. Minimum and enhanced plan contents should be 
clear and specific but also allow for local communities to develop responses 
appropriate to their local context. Guidance and requirements should be achievable by 
communities with a wide range of capacities. Effective plans are not always the 
longest, and it is important to require communities to include only the information 
that is absolutely required for successfully carrying out a plan’s recommendations.  

3 
 
CWPP Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization  
• Lesson Learned: There are numerous methods for conducting wildfire risk assessment 
and treatment prioritization processes, but many communities lack the capacity to 
effectively select methods and interpret the outputs without outside assistance.  
• Recommendation: States should provide direction on how to conduct risk assessment 
and treatment prioritization for CWPPs. Such direction could take the form of a basic 
overview of the different assessment tools available in a given state, as well as 
contact information for experts who can assist communities in developing risk 
assessment and treatment prioritization outputs. Once risk assessment and 
prioritization processes are complete, the outputs should be translated for the intended 
users so that they can be actionable by a wide range of audiences, especially in cases 
where there is turnover in participants from CWPP development to implementation.    
 
CWPP Implementation, Leadership, and Accountability  
• Lesson Learned: Engagement in CWPPs tends to be largely focused on the plan 
development process. Although the collaborative process of developing a CWPP is 
often cited as one of its biggest benefits, a lack of momentum into implementation 
may be creating the sense that CWPPs just “sit on shelves.” Furthermore, many 
CWPPs lack leadership in the implementation phase to help maintain accountability 
and facilitate communication among partners. 
• Recommendation: During plan development, CWPP developers should reverse 
engineer the plan’s recommendations and ensure that the steps to implement the 
recommendations are clear and have associated owners. CWPP developers should 
form an implementation group with a leader or champion to guide action, maintain 
momentum, and facilitate communication. An implementation group and leader can 
also assist in tracking accomplishments and facilitating plan reviews and updates.  
 
CWPP Accomplishments  
• Lesson Learned: There is uneven tracking of CWPP-related accomplishments, which 
makes it difficult to determine whether a given CWPP’s recommendations were 
achieved. This also inhibits understanding of how treatments related to a CWPP may 
have affected wildfires that occurred in the CWPP area.  
• Recommendation: CWPPs should be expected to conduct accomplishment tracking, 
including information about treatments, fires, and improvements to community 
wildfire protection. Tracking accomplishments can facilitate interagency coordination 
and communication, as well as maintain information about progress that can be used 
in CWPP updates. Accomplishment tracking can also help partners celebrate 
successes and sustain ongoing collaboration.  
 
CWPP Repository 
• Lesson Learned: It is often difficult to find the final, “official” versions of CWPPs 
with the necessary signatures. 

4 
 
• Recommendation: States or counties should consider the creation of a CWPP 
repository to store the final, signed plans in a public location that can be accessed on 
the Internet.  
 
CWPP Updates 
• Lesson Learned: CWPPs need to be updated periodically to ensure they are relevant 
to conditions on the ground. The majority of respondents felt that 5-year plan updates 
are reasonable, though 6–8-year updates may be appropriate for some CWPPs.  
• Recommendation: States should clearly list the steps, requirements, and timeline for 
CWPP updates. If accomplishment tracking is also required, it should be used to 
provide information for the CWPP update. States may also want to consider whether 
there should be an amendment or addendum process for CWPPs depending on how 
frequently they are updated or when particular issues need to be addressed. 
 
CWPP Community Engagement  
• Lesson Learned: Community engagement in CWPPs varies widely, and many 
CWPPs lack clear plans for community outreach and engagement.   
• Recommendation: CWPPs should include some public-facing materials, such as a 
story map, to help translate the information and recommendations. They should also 
include some kind of community outreach plan. Active community groups can also 
help to engage the public in the CWPP and community wildfire planning more 
broadly.  
 
CWPP Contractors 
• Lesson Learned: Contractors can provide much needed capacity and experience for 
developing and updating CWPPs, but CWPP processes that are not community-led 
tend to have less participation from the public.  
• Recommendation: When using contractors, consider ways to assist them in 
community engagement, as it is often more difficult to engage the public without 
active community representatives.   
 
Other Recommendations  
• Funding for CWPP development and implementation is an important consideration in 
effective CWPPs. Funding can greatly facilitate a given CWPP and implementation 
of its recommendations, and a lack of funding can bring progress to a halt. Because 
CWPPs are often required for hazardous fuel reduction grants, it would be helpful to 
build accountability into those funding mechanisms for accomplishing the 
recommendations in CWPPs. If CWPPs are required to track their progress for 
funders, it will help streamline the development of effective accomplishment tracking 
mechanisms.  
• CWPPs are one of many forms of planning documents that address natural hazards, 
and more specifically, wildfire. However, planning documents are often not explicitly 

5 
 
connected or integrated. As more states develop Shared Stewardship and Good 
Neighbor Authority Agreements, as well as continue to maintain County Hazard 
Mitigation Plans and Forest Plans, it is important to make clear connections between 
plans and identify what types of information are necessary in which plans. The 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has created guidance for 
integrating CWPPs and Natural Hazard Mitigation Plans (Appendix B), and similar 
guidance could also be developed for integrating CWPPs with Shared Stewardship 
Agreements and other collaborative planning documents related to wildfire. Creating 
clear content expectations for CWPPs and other planning documents can also help to 
streamline what information is necessary in a given plan.   
 
These lessons learned and recommendations can help create clarity in the development and 
implementation of CWPPs that are meaningful to and actionable by their intended users. In an 
era of shared stewardship among partners to address common goals across jurisdictional 
boundaries to manage wildfire risk and improve ecosystem health, it is important to consider 
these recommendations to effectively develop plans that do not just “sit on shelves” but that can 
be effectively implemented on the ground. These plans are applicable to collaborative planning 
processes beyond CWPPs. Furthermore, one of the most highly cited benefits of CWPPs was the 
collaborative process, rather than the plans themselves. This suggests that CWPPs and efforts to 
develop plans such as Shared Stewardship Agreements are a critical way to bring people together 
around wildfire planning. The nature of these planning efforts must be adapted to their unique 
context and scale, but they should all acknowledge the critical role that people play in effective 
wildfire planning and adapting community wildfire planning to the broader ecological systems in 
which they reside.    
 
 

6 
 
Introduction 
The purpose of this project was to identify best practices and recommendations for the effective 
preparation, revision, and implementation of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs) in 
Arizona and throughout the West. CWPPs are documents that communities can develop to 
address wildfire planning, response, and recovery. CWPPs were created as part of Title I of the 
2003 Healthy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA) (P.L. 108-148), which identified the importance 
and need for at-risk communities to lower their vulnerability to catastrophic wildfire. In addition, 
HFRA created new pathways to reducing wildfire risk, as communities with an approved CWPP 
have greater access to federal and state funds for hazardous fuel reduction. 
 
CWPPs are a key planning link to a chain of programs that have developed over the last 15-plus 
years to translate landscape-scale planning into action on the ground. In recent years, numerous 
concepts and initiatives have emerged to advance landscape-scale management and working 
across jurisdictional boundaries in recognition of the fact that ecological disturbances like 
wildfires have impacts across boundaries. This is also referred to as “all lands, all hands,” which 
acknowledges that management affects landscapes and that common goals and strategies are 
needed across management boundaries. For example, the National Cohesive Wildland Fire 
Management Strategy is designed to advance cross-boundary collaboration to address wildfire 
through three interrelated goals: 1) resilient landscapes; 2) fire-adapted communities; and 3) safe 
and effective fire response that promotes landscape-scale planning and action. Recently, the 
Forest Service’s Shared Stewardship Strategy promotes doing the “right work in the right place 
at the right time” collaboratively by prioritizing treatment needs at landscape scales. CWPPs 
have been a building block of many of these recent initiatives as they are meant to be 
collaborative and action-oriented plans that can facilitate work on the ground. At the same time, 
CWPPs are part of a broad constellation of approaches to creating and sustaining resilient, fire-
adapted communities (Fire Adapted Communities Network 2019).   
 
In the 15-plus years since HFRA, a wide range of approaches have been used to develop CWPPs 
with variable effectiveness (Ellison et al. 2015). CWPPs have only three general requirements: 1) 
they must be developed collaboratively with key federal, state, and local partners; 2) they must 
include some assessment of wildfire risk and treatment prioritization to identify key areas for 
reducing hazardous fuel; and 3) they must identify ways to reduce structural ignitability. Beyond 
those requirements, HFRA is relatively open-ended in terms of its direction for communities 
developing a CWPP, and its vagueness has been described as part of its brilliance (Jakes et al. 
2011). There are multiple guidance documents that provide communities with broad, flexible 
recommendations for developing plans, including the 2004 Preparing a Community Wildfire 
Protection Plan Handbook, the 2008 Community Guide to Preparing and Implementing a 
Community Wildfire Protection Plan, the CWPP Planning Process Quick-Guide, and the Fire 
Service Leader’s Guide to Preparing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan (Appendix B). There 
is also guidance on evaluating CWPPs, such as the 2008 Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
Evaluation Guide. Nonetheless, many communities still lack clarity on how to design actionable 
plans. Although the importance of allowing planning to adapt to local context is widely 
recognized as a critical element to successful wildfire planning, there is a wide range of capacity 
among communities to become fire-adapted, and more specifically, to develop effective CWPPs. 

7 
 
Furthermore, the lack of clarity around CWPPs has led to a wide range of plans that are often 
trying to accomplish many objectives at once. Now that many CWPPs are being updated and 
revised, there is a need to better conceptualize their purpose and design and determine how to 
most effectively develop and implement actionable recommendations that support resilient, fire-
adapted communities and landscapes.  
 
Although the treatments described in CWPPs mainly focus on lowering fire risk through 
hazardous fuel reduction in the wildland urban interface (WUI), the collaborative process of 
developing CWPPs can facilitate ecological restoration at larger landscape scales by creating and 
sustaining pathways for coordination and communication across jurisdictional boundaries. This 
project contributes to forest restoration and fire risk reduction activities on private forest land, in 
communities-at-risk from wildfire, and across multi-jurisdictional landscapes by identifying 
ways to increase the effectiveness of community wildfire planning, which is one element of 
landscape-scale restoration and resilience and the central focus of Shared Stewardship.  
 
The main question driving this project was: what can be done to improve CWPPs and CWPP 
management in Arizona? Although the main focus of this project is on Arizona CWPPs, we also 
explored how other western states manage their CWPPs to determine best practices across states. 
The information generated from this project provides information about the design of CWPPs 
and the elements they need be effective tools for helping communities-at-risk from wildfire in 
becoming more fire-adapted.  
 
This project was designed to assist the Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
(DFFM) in providing direction to communities-at-risk from wildfire in Arizona and communities 
throughout the West in developing and implementing effective CWPPs in order to improve 
wildfire preparedness. The assessment was conducted by the Ecological Restoration Institute 
(ERI) at Northern Arizona University (NAU) in collaboration with DFFM. The project 
objectives included:  
 
1. Collaborate with DFFM to determine the status of existing CWPPs in Arizona to determine 
whether they are active, inactive, and/or in need of updating; 
2. Collaborate with DFFM to assess the effectiveness of existing CWPPs in the state of Arizona 
and determine whether existing plans have led to action; 
3. Assist DFFM to identify communities-at-risk that would benefit from a CWPP, and to the 
extent practicable, identify barriers that prevent communities from preparing a CWPP;  
4. Review assessments, guidelines, illustrative examples, best practices, and recommendations 
for CWPPs in western states; and  
5. Communicate lessons learned and recommendations to key audiences, including Arizona 
CWPPs, DFFM, other western State Foresters, and Forest Service Washington Office.    
 
 

8 
 
Project Approach and Demographics  
This project included six key phases to assess CWPPs in Arizona, as well as explore CWPP 
programs, illustrative examples, and recommendations from other western states.  
 
1. Outreach to CWPP contacts and CWPP document review in Arizona  
The first step was to identify key points of contact and determine the status of Arizona CWPPs. 
Working with DFFM, we acquired CWPPs, including original plans and updates. We then 
contacted county emergency management offices to identify key points of contact, determine the 
current status of CWPPs in each county, identify plans that were being updated or had planned 
updates, and gather other relevant information in each county. We were not able to establish key 
contacts for the CWPPs in La Paz County. Next, we reviewed CWPPs to identify date written, 
date(s) updated if applicable, state forester signature and approval date, area encompassed by 
plan, plan scale (e.g., single community, multiple communities, or county), page length, 
collaborators, plan goals, treatment types, structural ignitability measures, institutional strategies, 
and other notes. This allowed us to compare similarities and differences among plans. 
  
2. Online survey of Arizona CWPPs  
Next, we conducted a survey that was sent to county emergency management offices, fire 
districts and departments, and other key partners in August and September 2018. The survey was 
designed so that respondents could select only one CWPP for which to answer questions. This 
was done to ensure that respondents who had participated in multiple CWPPs only answered 
questions from the perspective of the CWPP with which they were most familiar. The survey 
included five key sections: 1) CWPP development; 2) CWPP content; 3) CWPP implementation; 
4) CWPP effectiveness; and 5) CWPP improvement. Although the survey had 102 possible 
questions, respondents were only asked to answer questions about plan elements with which they 
were familiar. For example, if a respondent had participated in CWPP development but not 
implementation, they could skip the implementation section. There were 84 survey respondents 
but only 71 respondents answered the self-reported demographics question (Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Arizona CWPP Survey Respondents 
Organizational Affiliation 
Number of Respondents 
Percent  
Federal Government 
8 
11.27% 
State Government 
8 
11.27% 
County Government  
22 
30.99% 
City Government 
17 
23.94% 
University 
1 
1.41% 
Non-profit Sector 
1 
1.41% 
Private Sector 
1 
1.41% 
Other  
13 
18.31% 
Total 
71 
100% 

9 
 
3. Interviews with DFFM staff and other partners in Arizona  
Next, we conducted interviews with DFFM staff and other agency partners in Arizona to better 
understand what constitutes an effective CWPP from the agency perspective. The interviews 
were conducted in September and October 2018 in-person or over the phone. A list of open-
ended questions was used to guide interviews, which were recorded and transcribed for analysis. 
One interviewee elected not to be recorded. There were 17 interview respondents (Table 2).  
 
Table 2. Arizona CWPP Interview Respondents  
Organizational Affiliation 
Number of Respondents 
Percent 
ADFFM 
14 
82% 
BLM 
1 
6% 
Consultant 
1 
6% 
County 
1 
6% 
Total 
17 
100% 
 
 
4. Online survey and review of CWPPs in other western states 
In order to assess CWPP programs in other Western states and develop recommendations for 
possible use in Arizona, we conducted another online survey. The survey was designed for key 
respondents in state forestry departments in the 17 Western states who were most knowledgeable 
about CWPPs in their state. We asked that state forestry departments select only one or two 
respondents per state. There were 24 questions in the survey, which was open from November 
2018 to March 2019. There were 29 respondents (Table 3).  
 
Table 3. Western CWPP Survey Respondents  
Organizational Affiliation 
Number of Respondents 
Percent 
Federal Government  
0 
0.00% 
State Government  
27 
93.10% 
County Government 
1 
3.45% 
Non-profit sector 
1 
3.45% 
Total 
29 
100% 
 
 
We also gathered guidance documents, templates, illustrative CWPPs, and other information to 
enhance our understanding of best practices for CWPPs throughout the West. These documents 
were compiled and reviewed for key themes and recommendations.   
 
 
 
 

10 
 
5. Follow-up interviews in Arizona and other western states 
After we gathered and analyzed the data from the first 4 phases of the project, we sought 
clarification where needed and began validating the key recommendations that had emerged. We 
conducted two additional formal interviews in Arizona and numerous informal interviews, which 
were not transcribed or analyzed, with CWPP experts in Arizona and other western states.  
 
6. Focus groups with select Arizona CWPPs 
Lastly, we refined recommendations by gathering community member perspectives on CWPPs. 
We conducted five focus groups with select CWPPs in Arizona, including Flagstaff, Mohave 
County, Yavapai County, Cochise County, and Santa Cruz County, which did not have a county-
wide CWPP but was considering developing one. The focus group participants were presented 
with preliminary findings and recommendations and were asked to provide reactions and help 
refine recommendations. The focus groups were conducted in-person in April and May 2019 and 
recorded and transcribed for analysis. DFFM staff also attended the focus groups (Tables 4–8).  
 
 
Table 4. Flagstaff CWPP Focus Group Respondents 
Organizational Affiliation 
Number of Respondents 
Percent 
Fire Department 
1 
17% 
Forest Service 
1 
17% 
DFFM 
1 
17% 
Non-Profit Sector 
2 
32% 
County  
1 
17% 
Total 
6 
100% 
 
 
Table 5. Mohave County CWPP Focus Group Respondents 
Organizational Affiliation 
Number of Respondents 
Percent 
BLM 
1 
17% 
DFFM 
2 
33% 
County  
3 
50% 
Total 
6 
100% 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Table 6. Yavapai County CWPPP Focus Group Respondents 
Organizational Affiliation 
Number of Respondents 
Percent 
Fire Department/ District 
1 
14% 
DFFM 
3 
44% 
County  
1 
14% 
PAWUIC 
1 
14% 
Forest Service 
1 
14% 
Total 
7 
100% 
 
Table 7. Santa Cruz County Focus Group Respondents 
Organizational Affiliation 
Number of Respondents 
Percent 
Consultant 
1 
8% 
Fire Department  
7 
53% 
Forest Service 
2 
15% 
BLM 
1 
8% 
DFFM 
1 
8% 
County 
1 
8% 
Total 
13 
100% 
 
Table 8. Cochise County CWPP Focus Group Respondents 
Organizational Affiliation 
Number of Respondents 
Percent 
Fire Department/ District 
2 
28% 
ADFFM 
1 
14% 
County  
3 
44% 
Community Group 
1 
14% 
Total 
7 
100% 
 
Key Project Findings  
The results in this section are a summary of the key project findings and are divided into three 
sections: Arizona CWPP Results (from the Arizona CWPP survey and interviews), West-Wide 
CWPP Results (from the West-wide survey), and Arizona CWPP Focus Group Results (from the 
Arizona focus groups).   
 

12 
 
Arizona CWPP Results  
Arizona CWPPs and Geographic Scale 
There are 30 CWPPs in Arizona, and two new CWPPs—Yarnell Fire District and Santa Cruz 
County—are starting plan development with recent funding from the Bureau of Land 
Management (BLM). A number of Arizona CWPPs are also in the process of being updated. A 
complete list of Arizona CWPPs can be found in Appendix A. Currently, 9 of Arizona’s 13 
counties are covered by county-wide CWPPs. The other 21 CWPPs in Arizona are sub-county-
scale CWPPs, which includes a mixture of single and multiple-community CWPPs (Figure 1).  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Geographic Coverage of Arizona CWPP Areas That Were Developed from 2004 to 2018 

13 
 
Over time, the total number of new CWPPs being developed and updated has decreased in 
Arizona (Figure 2). This is largely because plans have migrated from the sub-county scale, 
including single and multiple community CWPPs, to the county scale. A number of community 
and sub-county-scale CWPPs developed immediately following the passage of HFRA in the 
mid-2000s have not been updated but are now covered by county-scale CWPPs. As such, many 
of Arizona’s communities-at-risk are covered, at a minimum, by county-scale CWPPs. Overall, 
the county-scale CWPPs in Arizona tend to be developed by consultants and use geographic 
information system (GIS) analysis to identity wildfire risk and priority treatment areas. These 
plans are often less specific in recommendations than sub-county-scale CWPPs in Arizona, 
which tend to be developed by local community representatives using local knowledge and 
qualitative assessments to identify wildfire risk and priority treatment areas.  
 
 
Figure 2. New CWPPs and CWPP updates in Arizona from 2004 to 2018 
 
Arizona CWPP survey respondents were asked to indicate their preferred geographic scale for a 
CWPP. The majority of respondents prefer CWPPs at the multiple-community scale, followed by 
county-scale CWPPs (Figure 3). However, only half of the Arizona survey respondents felt that 
their CWPP’s geographic extent adequately addressed the issues of the area it encompassed.   
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
New County-Scale CWPPs
New Community-Scale CWPPs
Updated County-Scale CWPPs
Updated Community-Scale CWPPs

14 
 
 
Figure 3. Preferred Geographic Size for CWPPs from Arizona Survey 
 
Arizona CWPP Development 
The results in this section were provided by Arizona CWPP survey respondents (Table 1). In 
Arizona, 55 percent of respondents said it took 1–2 years to complete the CWPP development 
and planning process and 40 percent said it took less than 1 year. The majority (53 percent) of 
respondents were extremely satisfied with the development of their CWPP, while 30 percent 
were somewhat satisfied and only 5 percent were somewhat dissatisfied. The most commonly 
cited participants (in order from most to least common) in CWPP development in Arizona 
included: 1) fire department or district; 2) county government; 3) DFFM; 4) Forest Service; and 
5) city government representatives.  
 
The most commonly cited informational resources (in order from most to least common) in 
Arizona CWPPs included: 1) CWPP templates; 2) FireWise plan information; 3) agency 
expertise; 4) county hazard mitigation plans; 5) existing community assessments; 6) CWPP 
guidance documents; 7) technical/scientific expertise; and 8) the Arizona Wildfire Risk 
Assessment Portal (AZ WRAP). However, it should be noted that AZ WRAP was not in 
existence when many of the CWPPs in Arizona were written, as the West Wide Wildfire Risk 
Assessment from which the AZ WRAP risk assessments are derived was not completed until 
2013 (Oregon Department of Forestry 2013). The most commonly cited information types (in 
order from most to least common) in Arizona CWPPs included: 1) local government knowledge; 
2) experience with previous wildfires; 3) state agency knowledge; 4) fuel and vegetation models; 
5) local fire defense knowledge; 6) federal agency knowledge; 7) fire behavior models; 8) fire 
risk models; 9) scientific knowledge; and 10) forest ecology.  
 
More than half of the survey respondents (53 percent) indicated that a consultant or consulting 
company was involved in the development of their CWPP. Of those respondents, 46 percent said 
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
40.00%
Neighborhood
Single
community
Multiple
communities
County
Other
No opinion

15 
 
the consultants were extremely effective and 38 percent said they were very effective. Only 33 
percent of respondents said a facilitator was involved in the development of their CWPP. Of 
those respondents, 33 percent said they were extremely effective and 50 percent said they were 
very effective. 
 
Although CWPP planning in Arizona is open to the public, it was noted in the surveys and 
interviews that public participation was not common. However, the ways in which community 
members did engage in CWPPS (in order from most to least common) included: 1) CWPP core 
team meetings; 2) community meetings; 3) other unspecified methods; 4) one-on-one meetings; 
5) homeowner association meetings; 6) CWPP core team field trips; and 7) demonstration 
projects.  
 
In terms of CWPP updates, 51 percent of survey respondents felt that CWPPs should be updated 
every 4–5 years, 34 percent felt that updates should occur every 2–3 years, and 10 percent felt 
that updates should be done annually.  
 
Arizona CWPP Funding  
CWPPs are often used to support applications for hazardous fuel reduction funding, as most 
hazardous fuel reduction grants require the existence of a CWPP. In Arizona, 63 percent of 
survey respondents said they had used their CWPP to apply for funding. Of those respondents, 
74 percent said that funding had been obtained and that the funding had been used for fuel 
reduction, protection of critical infrastructure, and community outreach. The most commonly 
cited CWPP funding mechanisms included, DFFM grants (e.g., Wildland Fire Hazardous Fuels 
(WFHF) grants, Western Bark Beetle Initiative (WBBI) grants, and State Fire Assistance (SFA) 
grants), FEMA grants (e.g., Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP) Fire Management 
Assistance Grant (FMAG)), Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) Environmental 
Quality Incentives Programs (EQIP) grants, and other grants (e.g., International Association of 
Fire Chief’s (IAFC) grants, National Forest Foundation (NFF) grants, and Fire Adapted 
Communities (FAC) grants). More recently, communities in Arizona, including Flagstaff and 
Pinetop-Lakeside have received Community Planning Assistance for Wildfire (CPAW) grants 
that have provided support for the CWPPs that encompass those communities.   
 
CWPP Content  
The approved CWPPs in Arizona generally meet the key requirements of HFRA. They are 
developed collaboratively, they identify fuel treatment priorities, and they address how to reduce 
structural ignitability. A number of Arizona’s CWPPs were prepared by the consulting company 
Logan Simpson. Those CWPPs tend to be more consistent with each other. However, the rest of 
the CWPPs in Arizona vary widely in content.  
 
The following results in this section were also provided by Arizona CWPP survey respondents. 
In Arizona, 75 percent of respondents said their CWPP included an implementation plan. 
However, only 27 percent of respondents said their CWPP had an implementation coordinator, 
while 37 percent were unsure. Only 38 percent of respondents said their CWPP included an 

16 
 
implementation schedule, and 40 percent of respondents said their CWPP included an 
implementation budget.  
 
In terms of topical focus, the most commonly cited types of risk (in order from most to least 
common) that CWPPs sought to address included: 1) untreated areas; 2) fire response capacity; 
3) community accessibility; 4) homeowner treatment needs; 5) structural ignitability; and 6) 
building codes. The most commonly cited treatment activities (in order from most to least 
common) included: 1) thinning of hazardous fuel; 2) creation of defensible space; 3) creation of 
fuel breaks; 4) use of prescribed fire; 5) restoration of forested areas; 6) other unspecified 
activities; and 7) use of herbicide. The most commonly cited structural protection measures (in 
order from most to least common) included: 1) introduction of FireWise guidelines; 2) 
improvement of emergency response access; 3) introduction of fire-resistant landscaping; 4) 
introduction of fire-resistant building materials; and 5) improvement of access to water. Lastly, 
the most commonly cited institutional strategies (in order from most to least common) included: 
1) education and outreach; 2) improvement of interagency coordination and communication; 3) 
improvement of emergency preparedness; 4) improvement of protection capabilities; 5) passing 
new zoning and building codes; 6) volunteer recruitment; and 7) changes to policy.  
 
Few CWPPs in Arizona include a post-fire recovery plan. Only 9 percent of survey respondents 
said their CWPP included a post-fire recovery plan, although 43 percent of respondents were 
unsure. Some CWPPs in Arizona reference county hazard mitigation plans with respect to post-
fire response, but overall, this is not a major emphasis in most CWPPs.  
 
CWPP Implementation 
Many interview respondents in Arizona indicated that CWPPs are often too vague to guide 
implementation of specific projects. In many cases, these respondents described CWPPs as being 
indirectly linked to implementation. For example, a CWPP may allow an organization to get 
grants for projects that were subsequently implemented but not necessarily described in the 
CWPP itself or tracked after completion for subsequent CWPP updates. For example, only 40 
percent of survey respondents said progress or accomplishments of their CWPP were being 
tracked and only 37 percent said monitoring of treatment effectiveness was being done following 
implementation related to the CWPP. In many cases, tracking of treatments or accomplishments 
is done within agencies but not necessarily in association with a CWPP. Nonetheless, 53 percent 
of survey respondents said that their CWPP was being used to drive decision making about 
treatment activities in the area encompassed by the CWPP, but when asked for specific 
examples, many of them referred primarily to the use of the document as a reference for grant 
funding opportunities. Other common examples of CWPP use included as a reference or support 
to county hazard mitigation plans and outreach and education activities.  
 
The majority of survey respondents (69 percent) said that a significant wildfire (e.g., one or more 
loss of structures) had occurred in the area encompassed by the CWPP since it was completed. 
However, only 47 percent of respondents knew whether any of these wildfires had burned 
through areas that had been treated as a result of the CWPP and tracking of such information is 
spotty. This begs the question of who should be responsible for monitoring “all lands” activity.   

17 
 
CWPP Effectiveness 
Overall, both survey and interview respondents in Arizona were somewhat torn about the 
effectiveness of CWPPs. Survey respondents, when asked if their CWPP had achieved its 
purpose, tended to either think it was a great product or that it had many shortcomings, such as 
not being specific enough to achieve any purpose, only being used to secure funding, being too 
limited in scope, not being followed, or just “sitting on a shelf.” However, in terms of CWPP 
effectiveness in addressing the required plan elements of facilitating collaboration, reducing 
hazardous fuel, and increasing structural protection measures, survey respondents felt that 
CWPPs were most effective at reducing hazardous fuel and facilitating collaboration. In terms of 
CWPPs compared to other wildfire planning efforts, 25 percent of survey respondents felt the 
CWPP was much more effective, 32 percent felt it was moderately more effective, 10 percent 
said it was not more effective, and 25 percent were unsure.  
 
Arizona CWPP survey respondents were also asked to cite the top CWPP benefits, factors that 
contribute to and limit CWPP success, resources that facilitate or are lacking for CWPPs, and 
skills needed for CWPP planning and implementation. The factors that respondents were 
provided within the survey were generated from existing research on CWPPs and provide insight 
into how respondents view Arizona CWPPs, as well as help to validate the key factors that 
facilitate or inhibit CWPP effectiveness. The top five factors in each category are listed in Box 1, 
each in order from most to least common.  
Box 1. Top five key factors for Arizona CWPP effectiveness in each category surveyed 
CWPP benefits: 1) increased community capacity; 2) identification of new resources; 3) 
new social networks; 4) development of new skills; and 5) expanded social networks.  
Factors that contribute to CWPP success: 1) existing relationships; 2) shared understanding 
of wildfire risk reduction measures; 3) shared understanding of wildfire risk; 4) sustained 
communication; and 5) shared willingness to act to reduce wildfire risk.  
Factors that limit CWPP success: 1) lack of funding; 2) lack of political support; 3) lack of 
community involvement; 4) lack of time for planning; and 5) lack of time for 
implementation.  
Resources that facilitate effective CWPPs: 1) more funding; 2) better access to agency 
expertise; 3) CWPP templates; 4) better access to technical/ scientific expertise; and 5) 
CWPP guidance specific to Arizona. 
Resources that are lacking for CWPPs: 1) funding; 2) public, stakeholder, community 
involvement; 3) capacity to manage grant writing and administrative costs of dealing with 
grants; 4) updated, easy-to-access GIS information; and 5) getting the right resources in 
place to provide a workable CWPP.  
Skills needed for CWPP planning and implementation: 1) planning; 2) fire management; 3) 
communication; 4) grant writing; and 5) previous experience in community wildfire 
planning.  

18 
 
Survey and interview respondents were also asked to describe what they felt constitutes an 
effective CWPP. The major themes from their responses included the collaborative process, an 
actionable plan design, strategic implementation, public and community engagement, and 
funding. For example, one respondent noted, “What is effective? The CWPP I am referring to 
has been successful in securing grant funding, but I feel there is no real other benefit from it. If 
guiding treatment on the ground is the desire, they have been fairly ineffective.” Another 
respondent emphasized, “Once the plan is completed there needs to be an action plan and a 
committee that oversees the implementation of selected actions.” 
 
West-Wide CWPP Results  
State forestry departments in other western states take a 
variety of approaches to managing their CWPPs. For 
example, 59 percent of West-wide CWPP survey 
respondents said their state has a formal program for 
managing CWPPs. Some states review and approve CWPPs 
for established criteria and funding requirements, while 
other states use external review programs for CWPPs. For 
example, New Mexico’s Fire Planning Task Force and 
Nevada’s Network of Fire Adapted Communities review 
CWPPs. Some states have established a single point of 
contact within their state forestry department that deals with 
CWPPs, while others only maintain a repository of CWPPs 
or just do basic tracking of documents. Other states require 
CWPPs for participation in state fire management systems, 
while some require that CWPPs meet minimal standards or 
provide templates. On the other hand, 28 percent of 
respondents said their state does not have a formal program for managing CWPPs. Of these 
states, some noted that CWPPs are managed by counties but may be housed on state forestry 
department websites. Other states have non-profit entities that help develop and manage CWPPs, 
such as the Hawaii Wildfire Management Organization.   
 
In terms of CWPP development, 34 percent of West-wide survey respondents said that state 
forestry department employees lead CWPP development and only 10 percent of respondents said 
that consultants develop CWPPs. Other commonly cited CWPP developers in other western 
states include a mix of federal, county, city, non-profit, and interagency staff and local 
community leaders. According to survey respondents, the most common geographic scope for 
CWPPs in other western states is the county scale, followed by the single community scale, 
multiple community scale, and other scales (e.g., multiple county regions).  
 
Many other western states require that CWPPs meet minimum requirements and contain specific 
elements. The most commonly cited types of CWPP guidance (in order from most to least 
common) in other western states included: 1) guidance documents; 2) verbal communication of 
expectations; 3) checklist of required CWPP elements; 4) CWPP templates; 5) risk analysis tools 
(e.g., WRAP); 6) single webpage with resources; and 7) multiple webpages or websites with 
Once the plan is 
completed, there needs 
to be an action plan 
and a committee that 
oversees the 
implementation of 
selected actions. 
— Survey respondent 

19 
 
resources. The most commonly required CWPP elements (from most to least common) included: 
1) identified points of contact for each plan; 2) prioritized treatment areas; 3) reporting of 
accomplishments; 4) implementation schedules; 5) use of wildfire risk assessment models; 6) use 
of statewide WRAP outputs; and 7) other (e.g., community self-assessments). Finally, approved 
CWPPs in other western states were most likely to require the following elements (in order from 
most to least common): 1) applicable local government signatures; 2) applicable local fire 
department signatures; 3) state forester signature; 4) required plan elements (collaboration, 
prioritized fuel reduction, treatment of structural ignitability) addressed; and 5) other 
participating entity signatures. In some cases, nothing specific was required.  
 
Formal evaluation of CWPPs in other western states was less common. Only 39 percent of 
survey respondents said that their state evaluates CWPPs. Of those states that do, examples of 
evaluation metrics included federal guidelines and standards, required plan elements 
(collaboration, hazardous fuel reduction, structural ignitability), measurable and achievable goals 
and objectives, implementation plans, community-based map of risk, critical infrastructure, 
WUI, evaluation of fuel hazards and prioritization of fuel reduction treatments, county plan 
adoption, and inclusion of action plan and assessment strategy.  
 
CWPP updates are required in some other western states. Only 38 percent of survey respondents 
said their state requires CWPP updates, and of those that do, the most common update period 
was every five years. On the other hand, 45 percent of respondents said their state does not 
require CWPP updates, and the rest of the respondents were unsure.  
 
West-wide survey respondents were also asked to describe the top CWPP benefits, limitations, 
and factors that constitute an effective CWPP, and recommendations for CWPPs. Survey 
respondents were asked to answer open-ended questions on these factors, and the results 
represent the most common themes in the responses. The top four to five factors in each category 
are provided in Box 2, each in order from most to least common.  
Box 2. Key benefits, limitations, factors, and recommendations for West-wide CWPP 
effectiveness 
CWPP benefits: 1) fuels reduction; 2) identifying risk; 2) collaborative process; 4) new funding 
streams; and 5) foundational document. 
CWPP limitations: 1) funding; 2) lack of clear leader; 3) plans out dated; 4) plans do not use 
the best available science and risk assessments; and 5) lack of community interest. 
What constitutes an effective CWPP: 1) the collaborative process; 2) action-oriented plans with 
clear requirements; 3) community buy-in; and 4) funding for treatment. 
CWPP recommendations: 1) ensure ongoing collaboration; 2) emphasize the “why” to build 
community support; 3) keep the plan design simple and usable; 4) share lessons learned; and 5) 
find and develop consistent funding sources. 

20 
 
Many of these themes can be illustrated by the survey responses themselves. For example, with 
respect to ongoing collaboration and partnership, one respondent stated, “Find ways to encourage 
and support the effort in partnership with the local entities. 
Doing it all for them does not inspire them to become 
involved and own their challenges, become educated during 
the process, form true community bonds, which is the only 
way that a community can become fire-adapted.” Another 
respondent, in reference to the importance of emphasizing 
the “why” of a CWPP said, “Don’t just complete a CWPP 
because it’s the thing to do, have a purpose and need and 
get community buy-in, not just agency and fire department 
support.” Finally, with respect to creating measurable goals, 
another respondent said, “Do not complete them [CWPPs] 
for the sake of funding eligibility as they will become old 
and unused. Complete them with measurable goals in mind 
that can assess fire threat and aid communities through 
actionable tasks.” 
 
In our review of CWPPs in other western states, a number of illustrative CWPP examples and 
CWPP strategies emerged. A few examples are highlighted below and provide reference for 
different approaches that can be taken in developing, implementing, and sustaining CWPPs.  
 
Illustrative CWPP Examples in Other Western States 
• Humboldt County, California: This county recently finished an extensive CWPP update 
with what was praised as a very successful collaborative process. 
• Summit County, Colorado: Leaders in Summit County worked together to ensure that 
planning documents were effectively connected, including the CWPP. They also worked 
with Community Planning Assistance for Wildfire (CPAW) to make changes to the Land 
Use and Development Code.  
• Hawaii CWPPs: The Hawaii Wildfire Management Organization, which is a 501(c)(3) 
non-profit, develops CWPPs in Hawaii and helps maintain collaboration and 
accountability.  
• Missoula County, Montana: The Missoula County CWPP, which was updated in 2018, 
included an interactive story map that supplements the detailed CWPP document. They 
also incorporated the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy themes into 
their CWPP. 
• Santa Fe, New Mexico: Leaders in Santa Fe have worked together to nest different 
wildfire planning documents, including the statewide risk assessment, the Santa Fe 
County CWPP, a risk assessment done by the City of Santa Fe, and planning done by the 
Greater Santa Fe Fireshed Coalition.  
• Upper Deschutes River CWPP, Oregon: In Oregon, a community-driven CWPP that 
covers an all lands, multijurisdictional landscape was developed with assistance from 
Project Wildfire.  
Don’t just complete a 
CWPP because it’s the 
thing to do, have a 
purpose and need and get 
community buy-in, not 
just agency and fire 
department support. 
— Survey respondent 

21 
 
• Salt Lake City, Utah: Leaders in Salt Lake City broke the city out into separate focus 
areas, completed separate risk assessments for each area, and created specifics objectives 
for each area. This CWPP was also generated using the CWPP template created by the 
Utah Division of Forestry, Fire, and State Lands. 
 
Examples of CWPP Guidelines and Standards in Other Western States  
• In California, the California Fire Safe Council, a California non-profit, provides resources 
and assistance to communities working on CWPPs. California is also mandated by law to 
make meaningful connections between emergency management plans, including CWPPs.  
• In New Mexico, CWPPs are reviewed by the New Mexico Fire Planning Task Force and 
recommends CWPPs for approval to the New Mexico Energy, Minerals, and Natural 
Resources Department Forestry Division. The state also as a CWPP Summary and 
Checklist and CWPP Update Guidelines from 2015.    
• The Texas A&M Forest Service created a WUI and CWPP Guide that includes 
recommendations and instructions for developing a CWPP, as well as using Texas 
WRAP (TxWRAP).  
• The Utah Division of Forestry, Fire, and State Lands requires that participating entities in 
the Utah Cooperative Wildfire System must create CWPPs with the use of Utah WRAP 
(UWRAP).  
• The State of Washington created a Wildland Fire Protection 10-Year Strategic Plan that 
illustrates the state’s goals, associated strategies, and intended outcomes in wildland fire 
management. It emphasizes the importance of risk assessment to enhance CWPPs.  
 
Arizona CWPP Focus Group Results  
The final phase of this project were the five focus groups conducted with key areas in Arizona to 
validate the preliminary findings and refine our recommendations for CWPPs in Arizona and 
throughout the West. The participants in each focus group were presented with the same 
preliminary lessons learned and recommendations. Overall, many respondents in all phases of 
the study felt that there is a lack of clarity about the real intent and purpose of CWPPs. The key 
themes and associated recommendations stemming from those concerns and discussed by the 
focus groups are listed below. This section combines both results and recommendations. Final 
lessons learned and recommendations are provided in the next section.  
 
Purpose and Use: Many respondents agreed that there is a lack of clarity about the ideal purpose 
and use of a CWPP. CWPPs have been described as a mechanism for communities to prepare 
for, react to, and recover from wildfire. But oftentimes, they are trying to accomplish multiple 
functions at once and tend to reflect interagency agreement rather than community perspectives, 
though these are not necessarily in conflict. CWPPs have value because they provide expanded 
funding opportunities for fuel reduction. But it is important to ask if, other than a document that 
reflects areas of agreement and opens the door to funding opportunities, what is the intended 
purpose and use of a CWPP? How can it be an actionable document that does not just “sit on a 
shelf?” Overall, most respondents agreed that the purpose and use should be determined on a 

22 
 
case-by-case basis by collaborators, but that this should be one of the first items of discussion 
when developing or updating a CWPP.  
 
Audience: Many respondents said that they thought the key audience for CWPPs should be the 
communities encompassed by the CWPP, but that in reality, most CWPPs reflect interagency 
agreement and are written for agency audiences. This begs the question of who is the intended 
audience of a CWPP? CWPPs are often trying to reach multiple audiences at once, and if that is 
the goal, it should be clearly articulated within the document. The various pieces relevant to 
different audiences should be highlighted or noted so that it is clear to each type of reader. 
Another option is for multiple versions of a CWPP to be produced for different audiences. For 
example, the Missoula County CWPP has an interactive story map for a public audience, as well 
as a more formal document written for agency audiences. Yavapai County in Arizona is also 
working on a similar format for their next CWPP update.  
 
Scale: Once a CWPP’s intended purpose, use, and audience are clearly articulated, it is easier to 
determine the most appropriate geographic scale. CWPPs in Arizona and throughout the West 
come in a variety of scales, and there are tradeoffs among different scales. For example, most 
CWPPs in Arizona are at the county scale. On the one hand, respondents noted that a benefit of 
county-scale CWPPs—especially in Arizona, where counties are very large geographically—is 
that a plan can provide cover to all of the communities within the county, as well as tie into a 
county’s hazard mitigation plan. On the other hand, large-scale CWPPs can limit community and 
public engagement, as well as be too indirectly linked with implementation on the ground unless 
there are implementation or active community groups to downscale the plan’s recommendations.  
 
Nested CWPPs: A number of agency study respondents articulated that one approach to 
increasing CWPP effectiveness in Arizona would be to create some form of nested, tiered, or 
multiple-scale CWPPs. FEMA takes a similar approach for Hazard Mitigation Plans with 
specific guidelines for “standard” and “enhanced” plans. Enhanced plans may be eligible for 
funding not available to standard plans. A similar approach could be developed for nested 
CWPPs. For example, county-scale plans could be required to include certain elements for a 
broad geographic area, while smaller geographic areas such as single or multiple communities 
and fire districts or departments could reference the broad information in the county-scale plan 
and then include additional elements and details relevant at the smaller scale. Some focus group 
respondents were concerned about the capacity needed to fulfill the potential requirements of 
smaller-scale CWPPs, as capacity to develop and implement CWPPs varies widely. Nonetheless, 
most respondents agreed that having clear CWPP requirements at different scales would help 
provide direction, as well as assist states, counties, and agencies in better nesting various 
planning and emergency management documents, which are often not connected in an explicit 
way. Smaller-scale planning processes can also be connected easily with local communities.  
 
Guidance and Required Content: Respondents largely agreed that states should identify 
minimum requirements—in addition to the three requirements of HFRA—for CWPP content that 
helps counties and communities develop effective plans that meet their intended purpose, use, 
and audience and that reflect any nested requirements at different scales. Respondents also 

23 
 
expressed interest in a clear articulation of minimum requirements for CWPP updates if they 
differ from the requirements of new plans. Any required content should be developed in such a 
way that communities can tailor a CWPP to their local context, which is an important element of 
successful community wildfire planning. What works for one community may not work for 
another. Nonetheless, due to the time and capacity limitations many communities face when 
developing and implementing CWPPs, clear expectations that can be appropriately tailored to a 
given CWPP area can facilitate the planning and implementation phases.    
 
There are various ways in which expectations and required plan elements for CWPPs could be 
articulated. For example, some states have developed CWPP templates that help guide counties 
or communities through plan development. Each of the Arizona focus groups was presented with 
possible content for a CWPP template or guidelines and asked to refine them. The overall trends 
and proposed elements common across the focus groups are listed below.  
 
Proposed CWPP Content from Arizona Focus Groups 
• All CWPPs 
o Statement of “why” the plan is needed and “who” it is written for 
o Current conditions (overview of area/community, fuel types, condition class, fire 
history, etc.) 
o Fire risk assessment and treatment prioritization (consider a story map or 
interactive web component for the public) 
o Proposed implementation plan/actions/constraints (consider example photos)  
o Past accomplishments with maps and visuals, including any benchmarking or 
monitoring information 
o Outreach plan  
o Key point of contact(s) listed  
o Glossary 
 
• Optional items 
o Summaries of plan sections to communicate technical elements in a succinct way 
o Roadmap for community with graphics  
o Training and equipment needs 
o Response capability to fires and available resources 
o Evacuation plans  
o Fire recovery plans  
o Public information section (use social media, use narratives to engage public) 
o Resources/funding options 
 
Another way to think about required content or CWPP templates is in terms of different 
geographic scales. For example, CWPP content that might be managed at the county scale could 
include GIS data and associated risk assessment and treatment prioritization processes, as well as 
concerted integration with county hazard mitigation plans and other planning efforts such as 

24 
 
Shared Stewardship Agreements, Good Neighbor Authority Agreements, or Forest Plans. On the 
other hand, CWPP elements that might be managed at smaller geographic scales such as single 
or multiple communities and fire districts or departments could include information about local 
response capability, evacuation plans, and community outreach.  
 
Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization: One of the biggest challenges that 
respondents articulated about the development of CWPPs is the wildfire risk assessment and 
treatment prioritization process. Prioritizing treatments is a key requirement of HFRA and 
requires some understanding of wildfire risk. While respondents did not question the importance 
of doing risk assessment and treatment prioritization, the capacity to do so varies widely. In 
Arizona, a variety of methods, some qualitative, some quantitative, have been used over the 
years to address this key CWPP requirement. For example, the consulting company Logan 
Simpson has developed a proprietary GIS method for risk assessment and prioritization that is 
integrated into their CWPPs. A number of older CWPPs in Arizona used more qualitative risk 
assessment measures that incorporate local knowledge. Additionally, DFFM hosts AZ WRAP, 
which provides risk assessment information at the state scale. However, the methods and 
assumptions behind the different risk assessment and prioritization models in Arizona CWPPs 
vary, which can make it difficult to compare within and among CWPPs depending on the 
methods used. Overall, focus group respondents did not tend to prefer one risk assessment or 
prioritization approach over another and many felt that a given CWPP should be able to select its 
preferred method as long as the rationale was clearly articulated. However, many respondents 
did feel that having guidance and direction on risk assessment and prioritization from the state 
would help counties and communities navigate this process in a way that produces meaningful 
outputs usable by a CWPP’s audience.  
 
With respect to prioritization, many respondents felt that project-level details are not appropriate 
in a CWPP because they should be sorted out during the implementation process and that too 
much detail can be misleading to the public. There was some reluctance from focus group 
respondents to include implementation plans or schedules in CWPPs. CWPPs should have a 
transparent and feasible articulation of the proposed implementation strategy but specific details 
about location and timing need not be included. Many respondents felt that implementation 
details should be somewhat general so that the implementation process can be nimble based on 
conditions on the ground. Nonetheless, respondents agreed that both the risk assessment and 
treatment prioritization processes used in a given CWPP need to be clear to the intended 
audience and local community.  
 
Accomplishment Tracking and Reporting: One of the biggest concerns expressed by 
respondents throughout all phases of this study was that the work completed as part of a CWPP 
is often not tracked or reported in a consistent way or even at all. In many cases, it is not possible 
to track what work actually occurred as a result of a given CWPP, including fuel treatments, 
structural protection measures, community outreach, and other CWPP recommendations. As 
such, one of the most common suggestions from the focus group respondents was that CWPPs 
should be required to do some basic accomplishment tracking and reporting. In Yavapai County, 
there is an ad hoc interagency fuel coordination group that meets twice a year to share updates on 
treatment progress, and when available, fuel treatment layers are viewed together on a common 

25 
 
map. This is one approach for accomplishment tracking. Accomplishment tracking could also be 
done in a more qualitative manner and provided to an entity like DFFM for tracking and future 
reference. When capacity exists, tracking could be managed using a GIS database.  
 
Accomplishment tracking provides a number of advantages. For example, it facilitates 
interagency coordination and communication, as well as keeps multiple audiences informed of 
progress and helps partners celebrate success and sustain ongoing collaboration. Monitoring and 
evaluation of work done through a CWPP is another layer of tracking that could be added in 
cases where there is capacity to collect and evaluate monitoring data. 
 
Accountability and Leadership: Many of the illustrative CWPP examples that were described 
as successful have champions who provide leadership, help to organize partners, sustain 
momentum, and provide accountability for implementation of the CWPP. Champions can take 
the form of individuals or organizations, but they are often critical for getting work done. For 
example, in the Flagstaff area, the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership runs regular meetings that 
keep relevant partners engaged and aware of ongoing work, including work related to the 
Flagstaff CWPP. There are many examples of CWPPs where leadership was strong during the 
plan development process but was not maintained into implementation. This contributes to the 
notion that CWPPs are just documents that “sit on shelves,” as they often do not have leadership 
and accountability after plan completion. This could be addressed through active community 
groups or implementation teams focused on the CWPP. 
 
CWPP Repository: Many respondents noted that finding an “official” version of a CWPP can 
be challenging depending on who ended up with the final, signed version. One solution would be 
to create a repository of final, approved CWPPs, including new plans and updates, where all 
partners can easily find the latest version. DFFM could provide this service for CWPPs at the 
state scale or counties could provide this service at the county scale. This would also reduce the 
need for local entities to maintain copies of final CWPPs, which can often get lost in turnover.  
 
Signature Process: A handful of respondents noted that one of the lengthiest steps of CWPP 
development or updates is the signature process when the relevant local, county, and state 
partners review and sign the document for approval before it is passed on to the State Forester 
for a final approval and signature. In some cases, this process was even described as holding up 
implementation or requiring participants to be brought back up to speed after the signatures were 
collected. One respondent noted that the signature process has taken up to a year on some 
CWPPs. Therefore, it should be clearly stated what specific signatures are required, and the 
individuals in those positions should be brought into the process as early as possible.   
 
Update Period: There was no question among respondents that CWPPs need to be updated 
periodically to ensure that the information they contain is relevant to the current conditions. The 
majority of respondents felt that a 5-year CWPP update period is sufficient. Many respondents 
also felt there should be some sort of check-in accomplishment reporting and documentation of 
significant progress every 1–2 years to help streamline the longer-term, formal update process. 
However, there were exceptions. Some respondents argued that because plan development can 
take up to 2 years, that a 5-year update period is too frequent and preferred that updates be done 

26 
 
every 8–10 years. In cases where new plans or update processes are lengthy, that is reasonable. 
Therefore, a clear articulation of what CWPP updates need to accomplish and contain could help 
facilitate the update process and establish reasonable timelines. In all cases, CWPP updates 
should include some level of accomplishment reporting that illustrates whether the 
recommendations made in the CWPP were implemented.  
 
Community Outreach and Marketing: As noted earlier, many respondents felt that one of the 
key audiences for a CWPP is the local community. For example, a CWPP can be a tool to engage 
with a homeowner’s association that may have rules that prohibit tree thinning. However, there is 
often a gap between the type of information that CWPPs contain and the type of information that 
will engage a public audience. As mentioned earlier, one solution is to create public-facing 
elements of the CWPP, such as a story map, that can engage a broader audience. Another 
solution that focus group respondents discussed was creating outreach and marketing 
recommendations or plans as part of the CWPP itself. Indeed, both of these approaches could be 
incorporated into the same plan. Of course, community outreach and marketing take time and 
capacity, so it is important to encourage CWPPs to address outreach but also allow a given plan 
to develop outreach approaches that are locally feasible. Outreach needs to be multi-pronged and 
engage not just the community members but also community leaders and elected officials. Fire 
districts and departments can be a great bridge to the local community but often need help with 
outreach, and in some cases, examples of good models for connecting with communities. 
 
Community Groups: Active community groups can play an important role in maintaining 
partnerships and communication that can facilitate both CWPP development and 
implementation. For example, groups like the Prescott Area Wildland Urban Interface 
Committee (PAWUIC) in Yavapai County convene regular meetings that are open to the public 
and agency partners, assist in grant writing, and sustain ongoing communication with the public, 
as well as among agency partners. Groups like this can also help to provide support in CWPP 
development and updates. Other groups that have networks across the state and county, such as 
Fire Adapted Learning Networks and community FireWise groups, can also help coordinate 
CWPP development, implementation, and outreach. Active community groups should be 
supported and facilitated where they already exist, and the creation of new groups that serve this 
purpose should be encouraged.  
 
Contractors: Respondents had mixed reactions to the use of contractors for developing and 
updating CWPPs. For survey respondents who indicated that their CWPP had been developed by 
a contractor, they generally indicated that they were satisfied. Focus group respondents 
expressed concerns that plans created and updated with the assistance of contractors often lack a 
local champion or leader, though this is not always the case. Contractors often bring much 
needed capacity to plans through robust GIS analyses for risk assessment and treatment 
prioritization, but sometimes the outputs can be difficult for local partners or communities to use 
if they do not understand the modeling process and assumptions. Contractor services can also be 
expensive. Nonetheless, respondents generally appreciated their experience and capacity and 
recommended that they be engaged in developing expectations and guidelines for CWPPs.   
 

27 
 
Lessons Learned and Recommendations for Effective CWPPs 
CWPPs are planning documents that can assist communities in the preparation for, response to, 
and recovery from wildfire. Ideally, they provide a clear depiction of wildfire risk, identification 
of where treatment is needed to reduce that risk, and implementation strategy to reduce that risk. 
However, in many cases, the intended purpose, use, and audience of CWPPs are unclear, making 
it challenging for implementors to use these documents to guide treatments on the ground, as 
well as for local communities to use them to communicate about wildfire risk and community 
wildfire adaptation strategies. Some CWPPs act as high-level guiding documents, while others 
act more as documents that are meant to identify specific, prioritized treatments in detail. Some 
CWPPS are largely written for interagency audiences, while others are trying to reach local 
community members and the public. There are many instances where CWPPs are trying to be 
many things to many audiences but may not always be effectively facilitating action on the 
ground. Furthermore, in many cases, collaboration and attention on a CWPP falls off once the 
plan development is complete, but ensuring ongoing communication and collaboration during 
implementation of a CWPP is critical.  
 
It is important to emphasize that context matters in community wildfire planning. One-size-fits-
all processes often tend to not fit well anywhere. Furthermore, one of the biggest cited benefits of 
CWPPs in both Arizona and throughout the West is the collaborative process of developing and 
updating the documents, rather than the documents themselves. The lessons learned and 
recommendations presented here are done so with the caveat that any CWPP development or 
update process should be tailored to the unique context of each CWPP area and should honor the 
people who are engaging in collaboration with the CWPP and other community wildfire 
planning efforts. Indeed, one of the most important elements of successful community wildfire 
planning are the people who engage in the planning and implementation processes, so 
developing strategies that are people-centered will further facilitate community wildfire planning 
(Evans et al. 2015). Any guidance developed by agencies should be specific enough to facilitate 
a clear, action-oriented planning and implementation process but flexible enough to allow 
individual CWPPs to develop plans that are adapted to their unique local context. 
 
It is challenging to create guidance that is simultaneously specific and flexible, but the lessons 
learned and recommendations from this assessment may help to shift new CWPPs and future 
plan updates in a more actionable direction and provide ideas for the kinds of guidance that 
collaborators in CWPPs and other community wildfire planning efforts would like to see. 
 
CWPP Purpose, Use, and Audience 
• Lesson Learned: Many CWPPs lack clarity in their purpose, use, and audience and try 
to accomplish too many things at once.  
• Recommendation: Any good plan must be relevant and understandable to those who 
are intended to use it. Partners working together to develop or update a CWPP should 
reach a common understanding of their CWPP’s intended purpose and use. CWPPs 
should not be solely focused on one entity, but they should also clearly define their 
audience and describe how the intended audience should use the document or what 
portions of it are intended for different potential users.  

28 
 
CWPP Scale 
• Lesson Learned: In Arizona and throughout the West, many CWPPs have evolved 
from a community scale to a county scale. There are tradeoffs at different planning 
scales. For example, smaller-scale CWPPs are often more tactical, while larger-scale 
are often more programmatic. 
• Recommendation: There is no “correct” CWPP scale. Tradeoffs at each scale should 
be thoroughly considered with respect to a CWPP’s intended purpose, use, and 
audience. For example, county-scale plans may not be detailed enough to guide action 
at the community-scale and support local community needs, but they can provide 
cover to communities without the capacity to develop their own plans. Nested-scale 
or overlapping CWPPs can be effective, as long as there is some attention to how 
plans are linked and what information is needed at what scale, as well as how the 
plans are linked with other documents like county hazard mitigation plans. A 
CWPP’s scale should also determine the level of detail and specific content needed.  
 
CWPP Guidance and Content  
o Lesson Learned: The expectations of agencies, required plan contents, and processes 
or steps for creating an “official” CWPP are often unclear. 
o Recommendation: Clear expectations appropriately tailored to a given CWPP can 
facilitate planning and implementation. States should develop a description of 
expectations for CWPPs, minimum required plan contents or a plan template, 
optional enhanced or more detailed plan contents, and required steps for developing 
and updating “official” CWPPs. Minimum and enhanced plan contents should be 
clear and specific but also allow for local communities to develop responses 
appropriate to their local context. Guidance and requirements should be achievable by 
communities with a wide range of capacities. Effective plans are not always the 
longest, and it is important to require communities to include only the information 
that is absolutely required for successfully carrying out a plan’s recommendations.  
 
CWPP Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization  
• Lesson Learned: There are numerous methods for conducting wildfire risk assessment 
and treatment prioritization processes, but many communities lack the capacity to 
effectively select methods and interpret the outputs without outside assistance.  
• Recommendation: States should provide direction on how to conduct risk assessment 
and treatment prioritization for CWPPs. Such direction could take the form of a basic 
overview of the different assessment tools available in a given state, as well as 
contact information for experts who can assist communities in developing risk 
assessment and treatment prioritization outputs. Once risk assessment and 
prioritization processes are complete, the outputs should be translated for the intended 
users so that they can be actionable by a wide range of audiences, especially in cases 
where there is turnover in participants from CWPP development to implementation.    
 
 

29 
 
CWPP Implementation, Leadership, and Accountability  
• Lesson Learned: Engagement in CWPPs tends to be largely focused on the plan 
development process. Although the collaborative process of developing a CWPP is 
often cited as one of its biggest benefits, a lack of momentum into implementation 
may be creating the sense that CWPPs just “sit on shelves.” Furthermore, many 
CWPPs lack leadership in the implementation phase to help maintain accountability 
and facilitate communication among partners. 
• Recommendation: During plan development, CWPP developers should reverse 
engineer the plan’s recommendations and ensure that the steps to implement the 
recommendations are clear and have associated owners. CWPP developers should 
form an implementation group with a leader or champion to guide action, maintain 
momentum, and facilitate communication. An implementation group and leader can 
also assist in tracking accomplishments and facilitating plan reviews and updates.  
 
CWPP Accomplishments  
• Lesson Learned: There is uneven tracking of CWPP-related accomplishments, which 
makes it difficult to determine whether a given CWPP’s recommendations were 
achieved. This also inhibits understanding of how treatments related to a CWPP may 
have affected wildfires that occurred in the CWPP area.  
• Recommendation: CWPPs should be expected to conduct accomplishment tracking, 
including information about treatments, fires, and improvements to community 
wildfire protection. Tracking accomplishments can facilitate interagency coordination 
and communication, as well as maintain information about progress that can be used 
in CWPP updates. Accomplishment tracking can also help partners celebrate 
successes and sustain ongoing collaboration.  
 
CWPP Repository 
• Lesson Learned: It is often difficult to find the final, “official” versions of CWPPs 
with the necessary signatures. 
• Recommendation: States or counties should consider the creation of a CWPP 
repository to store the final, signed plans in a public location that can be accessed on 
the Internet.  
 
CWPP Updates 
• Lesson Learned: CWPPs need to be updated periodically to ensure they are relevant 
to conditions on the ground. The majority of respondents felt that 5-year plan updates 
are reasonable, though 6–8-year updates may be appropriate for some CWPPs.  
• Recommendation: States should clearly state the steps, requirements, and timeline for 
CWPP updates. If accomplishment tracking is also required, it should be used to 
provide information for the CWPP update. States may also want to consider whether 
there should be an amendment or addendum process for CWPPs depending on how 
frequently they are updated or when particular issues need to be addressed. 
 

30 
 
CWPP Community Engagement  
• Lesson Learned: Community engagement in CWPPs varies widely, and many 
CWPPs lack clear plans for community outreach and engagement.   
• Recommendation: CWPPs should include some public-facing materials, such as a 
story map, to help translate the information and recommendations. They should also 
include some kind of community outreach plan. Active community groups can also 
help to engage the public in the CWPP and community wildfire planning more 
broadly.  
 
CWPP Contractors 
• Lesson Learned: Contractors can provide much needed capacity and experience for 
developing and updating CWPPs, but CWPP processes that are not community-led 
tend to have less participation from the public.  
• Recommendation: When using contractors, consider ways to assist them in 
community engagement, as it is often more difficult to engage the public without 
active community representatives.   
 
Other Recommendations  
Funding for CWPP development and implementation is an important consideration in effective 
CWPPs. Funding can greatly facilitate a given CWPP and implementation of its 
recommendations, and a lack of funding can bring progress to a halt. Because CWPPs are often 
required for hazardous fuel reduction grants, it would be helpful to build accountability into 
those funding mechanisms for accomplishing CWPP recommendations. If CWPPs are required 
to track their progress for funders, it will help streamline the development of effective 
accomplishment tracking mechanisms.  
 
CWPPs are one of many forms of planning documents that address natural hazards, and more 
specifically, wildfire. However, planning documents are often not explicitly connected or 
integrated. As more states develop Shared Stewardship and Good Neighbor Authority 
Agreements, as well as continue to maintain County Hazard Mitigation Plans and Forest Plans, it 
is important to make clear connections between plans and identify what types of information are 
necessary in which plans. FEMA has created guidance for integrating CWPPs and Natural 
Hazard Mitigation Plans (Appendix B), and similar guidance could also be developed for 
integrating CWPPs with Shared Stewardship Agreements and other collaborative planning 
documents related to wildfire. Creating clear content expectations for CWPPs and other planning 
documents can also help to streamline what information is necessary in a given plan.   
 
Finally, CWPPs should adhere to best practices in land use planning more broadly. For example, 
CWPPs should consider the three C’s of planning: 1) identify the most compelling reason to plan 
in your community; 2) rely on collaborative approaches; and 3) foster regional connections 
(McKinney and Harmon 2002).   
 
 

31 
 
Key Considerations for DFFM  
Following lessons learned and recommendations from this assessment, and as DFFM and other 
state agencies explore new ways to manage CWPPs and develop templates, guidance, required 
contents, and required steps to complete an “official” CWPP, consider the following questions. 
 
• What expectations does DFFM have for CWPPs? What purpose should CWPPs serve? 
• Who is the primary audience(s) for a CWPP? 
• What does DFFM need and want to see in CWPP documents?  
• What would a multi-scale or tiered CWPP process look like and how would it be 
implemented? 
• What risk assessment or prioritization expectations does DFFM have for CWPPs? 
• What constitutes an “official” CWPP and what are the steps to accomplishing that? 
Where do tribal or federal land CWPPs fit in? 
• What constitutes ownership of a CWPP by the collaborators involved in developing or 
updating a given plan? What processes are necessary to establish ownership of a CWPP 
(e.g., signatures or other mechanisms)? 
• Are there differences between a CWPP update and an original CWPP? If so, what are they? 
• How often should CWPPs be updated? How often should CWPP accomplishments be 
reported, in what format, and to whom? 
• Who maintains CWPPs in Arizona? Who is the main point of contact? Where can 
CWPPs be accessed? 
 
Conclusion 
The purpose of this project was to identify best practices and recommendations for the effective 
preparation, revision, and implementation of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs) in 
Arizona and throughout the West. Through a detailed assessment of CWPPs in Arizona, as well 
as a broader review of CWPPs in other western states, we learned that CWPPs take a variety of 
forms, are often trying to be many things to many audiences at once, and experience a drop-off 
in participation and attention after plan completion. As a result, CWPPs may not always be 
effectively reaching or assisting their potential audiences in meaningful ways. Therefore, we 
developed lessons learned and recommendations that acknowledge the importance of local 
community context but that can help create clarity in the development and implementation of 
CWPPs that are meaningful to their intended users.  
 
In an era of shared stewardship among partners to address common goals across jurisdictional 
boundaries to manage wildfire risk and improve ecosystem health, it is important to consider 
these lessons learned and recommendations to effectively develop plans that do not just “sit on 
shelves” but that can be effectively implemented on the ground. These plans are applicable to 
collaborative planning processes beyond CWPPs. Furthermore, one of the most highly cited 
benefits of CWPPs was the collaborative process, rather than the plans themselves. This suggests 
that CWPPs and efforts to develop plans such as Shared Stewardship Agreements are a critical 
way to bring people together around wildfire planning. The nature of these planning efforts must 
be adapted to their unique context and scale, but they should all acknowledge the critical role 
that people play in effective wildfire planning and adapting community wildfire planning to the 
broader ecological systems in which they reside.   

32 
 
References 
Ellison, A., M. Knapp, J. Abrams, M. Nielsen-Pincus, T. Paveglio, and C. Moseley. Spring 2015.
 
Community Experiences with Wildfire: Actions, Effectiveness, Impacts, and Trends.
 
Ecosystem Workforce Program Working Paper #56. 20pp. Available online:
 
https://ewp.uoregon.edu/sites/ewp.uoregon.edu/files/WP_56.pdf  
Evans, A., S. Auerbach, L. Wood Miller, R. Wood, K. Nystrom, J. Loevner, A. Aragon, M. 
Piccarello, and E. Krasilovsky. 2015. Evaluating the Effectiveness of Wildfire Mitigation 
Activities in the Wildland-Urban Interface. Forest Stewards Guild. Available Online: 
http://forestguild.org/publications/research/2015/WUI_effectiveness.pdf. 
Fire Adapted Communities Network. 2019. Fire Adapted Communities Graphic and Facilitator’s 
Guide. Available Online: https://fireadaptednetwork.org/resource/fire-adapted-
communities-graphic-and-facilitators-guide/.  
Jakes, P. J., K. C. Nelson, S. A. Enzler, S. Burns, A. S. Cheng, V. Sturtevant, D. R. Williams, A. 
Bujak, R. F. Brummel, S. Grayzeck-Souter, and E. Staychock. 2011. Community Wildfire 
Protection Planning: Is the Healthy Forests Restoration Act’s Vagueness Genius? 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 20 (3): 350–63. Available online: 
https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/38474 
McKinney, M., and W. Harmon. 2002. Land Use Planning and Growth Management in the 
American West. Land Lines. Available online: 
https://www.lincolninst.edu/publications/articles/land-use-planning-growth-management-
american-west 
Oregon Department of Forestry. 2013. West Wide Wildfire Risk Assessment Final Report. 
Prepared by the Sanborn Map Company. 108pgs. Available online: 
https://www.thewflc.org/sites/default/files/WWA_FinalReport_3-6-2016-1.pdf 
 
 
 

33 
 
Appendix A. Status of Arizona CWPPs as of December 2019  
County 
CWPP Name 
Scale 
First Written 
Last Update 
Most Recent Plan 
Prepared By 
Most Recent Plan 
Document Size 
Apache 
Apache National Forest Communities 
Multiple Communities 
August 2004 
Upcoming 
Logan Simpson 
 
110 pages 
Cochise 
Cochise County 
County 
December 2014 
Upcoming 
Logan Simpson 
143 pages 
Cochise 
Bisbee 
Single Community 
February 2007 
- 
Logan Simpson 
107 pages 
Cochise 
Cascabel 
Single Community  
April 2006 
- 
Logan Simpson 
74 pages 
Cochise 
Palominas 
Single Community  
November 2004 
- 
Local Group 
15 pages 
Cochise 
Upper San Pedro Watershed Communities 
Single Community 
March 2008 
- 
Anchor Point Group 
83 pages 
Coconino 
Blue Ridge 
Single Community 
January 2010 
Upcoming? 
Wildwood Consulting  
53 pages 
Coconino  
Flagstaff and Surrounding Communities 
Multiple Communities 
January 2005 
May 2018 
GFFP & PFAC 
12 pages 
Coconino 
Tusayan 
Single Community 
February 2005 
Upcoming? 
Local Group 
21 pages 
Coconino 
Williams Communities 
Multiple Communities 
March 2005 
Upcoming? 
Local Group 
62 pages 
Gila  
Southern Gila 
Multiple Communities 
November 2010 
November 2015 
 
Local Group 
64 pages 
Gila  
Northern Gila (formerly Rim Country 
CWPP) 
Multiple Communities 
October 2004 
January 2016 
Local Group 
78 pages 
Graham 
Graham County 
County 
November 2005 
- 
Local Group 
66 pages 
Greenlee 
Greenlee County  
County  
September 2005 
- 
Logan Simpson  
113 pages 
La Paz 
La Paz Desert Communities 
Multiple Communities 
2006 
- 
Local Group 
23 pages 
La Paz 
La Paz River Communities 
Multiple Communities 
2006 
- 
Local Group 
29 pages 
Maricopa 
Maricopa County 
County 
April 2010 
Upcoming? 
Logan Simpson 
46 pages 
Mohave 
Mohave County 
County 
July 2008 
June 2019 
Logan Simpson 
145 pages 
Navajo 
Sitgreaves National Forest Communities 
Multiple Communities 
May 2004 
June 2016 
Logan Simpson 
109 pages 
Navajo 
Central Navajo County 
Multiple Communities 
June 2016 
- 
Logan Simpson 
101 pages 
Pima  
Pima County 
County 
July 2013 
Upcoming? 
Logan Simpson 
223 pages 
Pima  
Arivaca Sasabe 
Multiple Communities 
January 2007 
- 
Logan Simpson 
108 pages 
Pima  
Catalina 
Single Community 
October 2007 
- 
Logan Simpson 
94 pages 
Pima  
Mt. Lemmon 
Single Community 
July 2004 
- 
Local Group 
76 pages 
Pinal 
Pinal County 
County 
February 2009 
August 2018 
Logan Simpson 
226 pages 
Pinal  
Oracle 
Single Community 
August 2004 
- 
Local Group 
? 
Santa Cruz 
Santa Cruz County 
County 
Upcoming / New 
- 
- 
- 
Santa Cruz 
Sonoita-Elgin 
Multiple Communities 
February 2007 
Upcoming 
Logan Simpson 
117 pages 
Yavapai  
Yavapai County 
County 
November 2004 
Upcoming 2020 
Local Group 
64 pages 
Yavapai  
Groom Creek 
Single Community 
December 2014 
- 
Local Group 
59 pages 
Yavapai 
Yarnell Fire District 
Fire District 
Upcoming / New 
- 
- 
- 
Yuma  
Yuma County 
County 
June 2010 
Upcoming 
Anchor Point 
131 pages 

34 
 
Appendix B. CWPP Resources 
Plan Preparation  
• Preparing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan: A Handbook for Wildland-Urban 
Interface Communities. March 2004. Available online: 
https://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/documents/resources/communities/cwpphandbook
.pdf 
• Community Guide to Preparing and Implementing a Community Wildfire Protection 
Plan. A supplemental resource 2004 Preparing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
Handbook (above). August 2008. Available online: 
https://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/documents/resources/communities/CWPP_Report
_Aug2008.pdf 
• The Community Wildfire Protection Planning Process: A Quick-Guide Series on 
Collaboration. Available online: 
https://secureservercdn.net/198.12.145.239/l40.06e.myftpupload.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/CWPP-Quick-Guide.pdf 
• A Fire Service Leader’s Guide to Preparing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan. 
Available online: https://www.iafc.org/topics-and-tools/resources/resource/community-
wildfire-protection-plan-leaders-guide 
• Best Management Practices for Creating a Community Wildfire Protection Plan. May 
2011. Available online: https://www.nrs.fs.fed.us/pubs/gtr/gtr_nrs89.pdf 
Plan Evaluation  
• Community Wildfire Protection Plan Evaluation Guide. August 2008. Available online: 
https://www.oregon.gov/ODF/Documents/Fire/CWPPEvalGuide.pdf 
Wildland Urban Interface Planning 
• Planning the Wildland Urban Interface. 2019. Available online: 
https://www.planning.org/publications/report/9174069/ 
• Multihazard Planning Framework for Communities in the Wildland Urban Interface. 
2018. Available online: https://www.planning.org/publications/document/9155699/ 
• Community Planning Assistance for Wildfire (materials on website). Available online: 
https://planningforwildfire.org/resources/cpaw-training-materials/ 
Linking CWPPs and Hazard Mitigation Plans  
• FEMA Integrating Community Wildfire Protection Plans and Natural Hazard Mitigation 
Plans. Available online: https://mil.wa.gov/asset/5ba4211239e1e  
Post-Fire Recovery Information  
• After Fire: Toolkit for the Southwest. Available online: https://postfiresw.info/ 
