View this email in your browser
Fact Sheet: 
Understanding LiDAR for
Forest Applications
 
FACT SHEET: Understanding LiDAR
for Forest Applications  
The use of remote sensing for assessing current
forest conditions, treatment planning and project
implementation has a long and extremely
productive history in forestry and natural resource
management. Over the past 20 years, managers
and specialists have transitioned from ﬁlm-based
aerial photography to digital remote sensing and
have grown dependent on products (or derived-
products) like Landsat and Sentinel satellite
imagery, National Agricultural Imagery Program
(NAIP) and Color-Infrared Resource Photography
—and most recently, airborne LiDAR (Light
Detection And Ranging). 
To help land managers better understand the use
of LiDAR for forest applications, researchers
Andrew Sánchez Meador and Jonathon Donager
developed a fact sheet that describes the types of
data LiDAR provides and the potential
applications of LiDAR products.
LiDAR Fact Sheet
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

Modernizing 4FRI Implementation:
Progress After Two Years Workshop
The ERI hosted a two-day modernization
workshop on Oct. 29 and 30, 2019 in Flagstaff to
mark two years since Forest Service staff, The
Nature Conservancy and industry partners were
convened by the ERI in Phoenix to identify
efﬁciency and modernization actions that could
be tested during 4FRI implementation. More than
100 people attended for a peer-to-peer, in-
classroom learning session—one of the many
topics discussed was LiDAR. Attendees also took
part in a half-day ﬁeld trip to understand what
forest features, like drainages and trees, look like
through LiDAR data on tablets.
 
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
View More ERI Fact Sheets

NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2019 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
