 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Pinaleño Ecological Restoration Project  
and Demonstration Unit: 
 
Effects of restoration treatment and wildfire in  
a mixed-conifer forest 
 
 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared for  
Coronado National Forest 
USDA Forest Service 
 
Authors 
Amy Waltz – Amy.Waltz@nau.edu 
Caleb Stotts – Caleb.Stotts@nau.edu 
Joe Crouse – Joseph.Crouse@nau.edu 
Michael Stoddard – Mike.Stoddard@nau.edu 
The Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017 
 
 
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service 

 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Introduction ..........................................................................................................................1 
Methods................................................................................................................................5 
Results ..................................................................................................................................8 
Discussion ..........................................................................................................................16 
Recommendations Moving Forward..................................................................................19 
References ..........................................................................................................................20 
Appendix A. 2009 Report on Hospital Flat and Treasure Park Restoration 
Demonstrations ..................................................................................................................22 
Appendix B. Hospital Flat Pre and Post-Fire Tree Composition and Diameter Distribution
............................................................................................................................................39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
Introduction 
Background 
In 2008, the Coronado National Forest invited the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) 
as a collaborator for the Pinaleño Ecosystem Restoration Project. Together with then-
Coronado National Forest Silviculturist Craig Wilcox, the ERI initiated a forest 
restoration demonstration project in a dry mixed-conifer stand within the Pinaleño 
Mountains. This report briefly summarizes the work in 2008–2009, but focuses on results 
from the mechanical treatments initiated in 2016–2017, and more opportunistically, the 
fire effects of the Frye Fire in 2017. 
The Pinaleño Mountains are part of a range of sky islands in southeastern Arizona 
that contain high biodiversity levels, due to steep elevational gradients and vegetation 
types from the Sonoran-Chihuahuan desert to sub-alpine forests at over 10,000 foot 
elevation. The Pinaleño Mountains contain southwestern forest types that evolved with 
fire, and are home to multiple conifer and deciduous species at their northern or southern 
distribution limits. Additionally, the sky islands support isolated populations of 
threatened Mexican spotted owls and an endangered subspecies of red squirrel, the 
Mount Graham red squirrel. The Pinaleño Mountains are home to the Mount Graham 
International Observatory, a multi-million-dollar research facility managed by the 
University of Arizona.  
Prior to the late 1800s, fires frequently burned through the long-leaf pine and dry 
mixed-conifer forests in the Pinaleño Mountains, and more rarely through the spruce and 
fir forests found at the highest elevations (O’Connor et al. 2014, Swetnam 2006). These 
fires regulated the forest conditions and understory vegetation. Similar to other sky 
islands of the Southwest, the disruption of frequent fire for over the last 140 years 
allowed forest conditions in the lower dry mixed-conifer and pine forests to become 
denser and favor shade-tolerant tree species. The sky islands today have a more uniform, 
high canopy fuel model that places them at risk of uncharacteristically severe wildfire, 
insect and disease outbreak, and subsequent increased threats to the endangered squirrel 
and research infrastructure.  
In collaboration with other agencies, the Coronado National Forest designed the 
Pinaleño Ecosystem Restoration Project to restore forest structure and resiliency to 
natural fire across the Pinaleño Mountains. Ecological restoration-based forest 
management is an approach suitable for addressing these detrimental changes in the 
forests of the Pinaleño Mountains. Using historical forest remnants, including live, old 
trees, cut stumps, and downed logs, an ecological restoration-based thinning approach 
attempts to create forest composition, density, and spatial patterns similar to those present 
at the site prior to the exclusion of fire from the ecosystem. While ecologists have applied 
this approach to sites in northern Arizona, New Mexico, and southwest Colorado, the 
Hospital Flat Ecological Restoration Demonstration Project was the earliest attempt to 
use a similar approach in mixed-conifer forests of the Pinaleño Mountains (Tuten 2009). 
The goal of a restoration demonstration project was to assess pre-settlement forest 
conditions using forest remnant material, provide a local and visible example of a dry 

 
 
2 
 
mixed-conifer restoration prescription and management approach, and to assess this 
method for suitability elsewhere in the Pinaleño Mountains. 
This report updates the 2009 data analysis on the Hospital Flat Ecological 
Restoration project (Tuten et al. 2009, Appendix A) with prescription guidelines used for 
the adjacent Treasure Park Restoration Demonstration. We summarize data collected at 
both Hospital Flat and Treasure Park in 2018, following partial mechanical treatment in 
Treasure Park in 2016–2017, and the Frye Fire, which burned both units in June 2017. 
The treatment and wildfire allowed us to opportunistically ask 1) How did wildfire 
change forest conditions in the untreated Hospital Flat?; 2) How did Treasure Park 
mechanical treatments and subsequent Frye Fire change the forest structure?; and 3) How 
was wildfire severity distributed across the Pinaleño Mountains? We further explore how 
these data may inform visitor interpretation for the popular area, a long-time objective for 
the Pinaleño Ecosystem Restoration Project. 
 
Study Sites 
Potential demonstration areas were selected within the Pinaleño Ecosystem Restoration 
Project area in dry to wet mixed-conifer forest. Criteria also included ease of access, to 
meet public education goals. Coronado and ERI staff selected sites near Hospital Flat and 
Treasure Park campgrounds, located at 9,000 feet in the Pinaleño Mountains of the 
Coronado National Forest, approximately 15 miles southwest of Safford, Arizona (Figure 
1). 
 

 
 
3 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Ecological restoration demonstration areas, located in the Pinaleño Mountains 
southwest of Safford, AZ. The Fry Fire impacted demo areas. The Frye Fire boundary is 
shown to the southwest of Safford. 
 
 
Hospital Flat 
In 2008, ERI and Coronado staff identified a 22-acre study site, called Hospital Flat, 
(Figure 1). The Hospital Flat study area is located at the western edge of a relatively flat 
meadow, and within the mixed-conifer forest type dominated by Douglas fir, white fir, 
and Southwestern white pine, with aspen, Engelmann spruce and ponderosa pine present 
to a lesser extent. Full methods and analysis are included in Appendix A, but forest 
density results are included here as well. In March 2010, the Forest Service completed an 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and published a final Record of Decision for the 
PERP in 2011. The Pinaleño Ecosystem Restoration Project encompasses an area of 
approximately 5,754 acres. The EIS decision memo included approval to implement this 
22-acre restoration demonstration project. However, surveys found presence of the 
Mount Graham red squirrel, including middens and nest sites within the proposed 
restoration demonstration site, and removed proposed mechanical thinning in that area.   
 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
Treasure Park 
In 2014, ERI and Coronado staff identified the Treasure Park Restoration Demonstration 
Project, just 1 mile from the Hospital Flat Demonstration area (Figure 1) as a replacement 
demonstration unit. This site is adjacent to the western edge of Treasure Park, an open 
meadow that is the site of the nation’s first Civilian Conservation Camp established on 
May 24, 1933. This area continues to be a popular dispersed recreation site with excellent 
road and trail access. It is well placed to facilitate the original demonstration objectives. 
 
Frye Fire 
The Frye Fire ignited June 7, 2017 and burned more than 48,000 acres across several 
vegetation types and with variable fire severity (Figures 1 and 5). The mixed-severity fire 
had significant impacts in the highest elevation spruce-fir forest, which had a bark beetle 
outbreak at the time.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Frye Fire Rapid Assessment Vegetation (RAVG) Severity and Restoration 
Demonstration Units. Points represents lot locations in Treasure Park. 
 

 
 
5 
 
Methods 
Hospital Flat (Question 1) 
For this report, we used forest structural data collected in 2008 on a 3.1-acre rectangular 
plot within the 22-acre Hospital Flat demonstration area. Appendix A records data 
collection methodology for Hospital Flat in more detail. The 2008 tree inventory included 
dead pre-settlement remnants to estimate the historical forest condition. In 2017, we 
relocated the 3.1-acre plot and stem-mapped all living trees. We also included trees 
recently dead with evidence of fire damage that were assumed killed by the Frye Fire. We 
did not track the fate of individual trees, as the 2008 inventory did not tag trees. We did 
not remeasure older stumps/logs, as those data were collected in 2008. Trees taller than 
breast height and recently dead trees, were mapped to the nearest .33 feet using a local 
coordinate system. Tree species, condition, and diameter (either at breast or stump 
height) were collected for all mapped trees. Tree height and crown base height was 
collected for all living trees.  
 
Treasure Park (Question 2) 
The Treasure Park Restoration Demonstration was marked in fall 2014 using a 
presettlement marking guide (see Box 1). The unit had a series of 10 photo points 
collected in 2016, marked with rebar, but no quantitative data were collected. The unit 
was mechanically thinned the winter of 2016– 2017, however, the contract was not 
complete due to lack of market (C. Wilcox, personal communication). In addition to tree 
top slash, small log decks were scattered throughout the unit the spring of 2017. Photo 
points (nine of 10, one could not be found) were relocated in May 2017 and photos taken. 
 
Following the Frye Fire, ERI staff coordinated to relocate and establish forest 
monitoring plots at the photo point plots. Staff relocated a total of nine and a 1/10-acre 
plot established. Overstory trees (greater than 4.5 feet) were measured, including live 
trees, trees killed due to fire, and recent cut stumps, attributed to the mechanical thinning 
winter of 2016–2017. We collected tree diameter at breast height (DBH, 4.5 feet) or 
stump height for cut stumps, for all recorded trees. For live trees, total height and height 
to live crown was recorded. In addition, regeneration was counted on a smaller, 1/100th-
acre plot. 
  
Frye Fire Severity (Question 3) 
Rapid Assessment Vegetation (RAVG) fire severity information for the Frye Fire was 
assessed to better understand the spatial distribution of fire severity across multiple 
vegetation types. RAVG data estimate the percent basal area (BA) loss due to fire (Miller 
and Thode 2007); the downloaded raster was reclassified from 10 fire severity classes 
into four classes, (0–25 percent, 25–50 percent, 50–75 percent, and 75–100 percent BA 
loss) and converted to a vector layer.  
We used Landfire Biophysical site (BpS) information to determine the vegetation 
types of the area burned. We reclassified the 39 biophysical site categories into 11 
categories based on ecosystem type and fire regime: shrubland, grassland, 

 
 
6 
 
oak/pinyon/juniper, pine/oak, ponderosa pine, dry mixed-conifer, wet mixed-conifer, 
spruce/fir, and riparian. Biophysical site categories under 500 acres were excluded from 
analysis. Ecosystem types were converted to vector and dissolved. We quantified the 
level of fire severity for each ecosystem type by overlaying the fire severity information 
and the ecosystem types. For ponderosa pine, dry mixed-conifer, and wet mixed-conifer 
ecosystem types, we calculated the percent of area burned at a moderate to high severity 
(>50 percent BA loss) for each aspect direction.           
 

 
 
7 
 
 
Box 1. Dry Mixed-Conifer Restoration  
These guidelines were developed for dry mixed-conifer forests that evolved with frequent fire. 
Objectives: Regain ecosystem resiliency and healthy ecological conditions that more closely 
resemble those that prevailed under a natural frequent-fire disturbance regime. Remnant tree 
structures (e.g., live old trees, large snags, logs, and old stumps) present before the disruption of 
frequent fire with Euro-American settlement (i.e., “pre-settlement”) form the foundation and 
guide the restoration prescription.   
Goals:  
1. Restore tree density within the range characteristic of pre-settlement conditions by conserving 
all living trees established prior to fire exclusion and replacing dead pre-settlement remnants 
with an appropriate number of live post-settlement trees. 
2. Restore species composition that reflects the pre-settlement forest. 
3. Restore historic spatial patterns by locating post-settlement replacement trees near pre-
settlement remnants. 
4. Restore characteristic natural disturbances including frequent surface fire.  
Specific Prescription Guidelines: 
1. Retain all living pre-settlement trees, as well as species-appropriate replacement trees as 
described below. All snags will be marked for retention. 
2. Use pre-settlement remnants to guide replacement tree selection with regard to total density, 
species composition and spatial patterns. Use a replacement ratio of 1.5 post-settlement 
replacement trees for each pre-settlement remnant found (1:1.5), to account for expected 
mortality in leave trees.  
• 
Retain post-settlement “replacement” trees for all dead pre-settlement remnants 
including large stumps and snags, dead and downed logs, and stump holes.  
• 
Replace all pre-settlement remnants with same species at a 1:1.5 ratio within 30-foot 
search radius. If none, go to 60-foot search radius. 
• 
Post-settlement replacement trees should exhibit resilient characteristics (i.e., thicker 
bark, high branches) with high probability of surviving first-entry fire. Leave trees of 
all age classes will be considered to increase age class diversity. When possible, leave 
trees that are not in the most prevalent age classes, such as seedlings and saplings, if 
they exhibit resilient characteristics. 
3. Retain all live deciduous trees (e.g., oak, maple, aspen, and locust). 
 
Modification(s): when desired replacement species is not present: 
• 
Step 1. Locate suitable replacement tree (within 30-foot radius) of different species 
based on hierarchical tree replacement scheme: ponderosa pine/Douglas-
fir/southwestern white pine/white fir. If no replacement found, go to Step 2.  
• 
Step 2. Carry over replacement(s) to next remnant of same species. At new location, 
replacements must be within 30 feet of remnant. If there are not enough replacement 
trees within 30 feet at new location, expand search to 60-foot radius. Return to 
marking guidelines when carryover numbers are fulfilled.  
• 
Upon completion of marking a treatment unit, cease carrying over replacement trees 
and begin marking the next unit. 
 

 
 
8 
 
Results 
Hospital Flat Forest Structure 
Estimates of historical tree density and the 2008 tree density data are from Tuten et al. 
2009 (Appendix A., Table 1). The estimated historical forest had lower tree density 
(around 100 trees per acre (TPA)) than the current stand conditions. The estimated 
historical Hospital Flat stand was a mixed forest stand, with Douglas fir (approximately 
35 percent), southwestern white pine (20 percent), ponderosa pine (17 percent) and white 
fir (20 percent). By 2008, an irruption of shade tolerant trees (primarily white fir, 50 
percent of stems) led to a four-fold increase in density. In 2018, we estimated pre-fire live 
tree density by combining live tree density with recent, fire-killed tree density. Pre-fire 
density showed a total increase from 2008 by 30 percent, but that was entirely due to 
white fir and a small increase in Englemann spruce, both fire intolerant species. White fir 
in 2017 dominated the forest stand at 64 percent of tree stems. All other tree species 
showed small declines between 2008 and 2017, and proportionately were only between 3 
percent and 17 percent of the stand.   
 
The Frye Fire burned through Hospital Flat with a low–moderate severity (Figure 
2). Total estimate tree mortality due to the fire was 166 TPA. Mortality was seen in all 
species, but highest in the white fir which was reduced by 38 percent; Engelmann spruce 
was reduced by 29 percent and southwestern white pine by 21 percent. About 15 percent 
of Douglas fir were killed, and no ponderosa pine were killed. 
 
 
Table 1: Hospital flat tree density, basal area, and quadratic mean diameter by species. 
 
Tree Species 
Tree Density (trees/acre) 
  
Est. Historical* 
2008* 
Est. pre-
fire 
2018 post-
fire 
White fir (Abies concolour) 
18-22.8 
208.4 
342.8 
210.6 
Douglas fir (Psuedotsuga 
menziesii) 
30.5-36.6 
104.7 
98.4 
83.3 
Aspen (Populous tremuloides) 
6.7 
15.4 
11.6 
9.3 
Engelmann Spruce (Picea 
engelmannii) 
1 
12.2 
17 
11.9 
Southwestern white pine (Pinus 
strobiformus) 
19.6-22.5 
62.3 
57.2 
45.3 
Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) 
16.4 
3.5 
2.3 
2.3 
Total 
92.8-106.6 
406.6 
529.6 
363 
 
*Tuten et al. 2009 
 
 
 
 

 
 
9 
 
 
 
Species and Diameter Distributions of Fire Mortality 
The Hospital Flat demonstration area has an east-to-southeast aspect. Prior to the Frye 
fire, the dominant species was white fir. In Figure 3, color and dot diameter denote tree 
species and diameter; white fir are blue dots. Note that the majority are small diameter, 
younger trees. Following the Frye Fire, the majority of mortality occurred in the smaller 
diameter, white fir trees (Figure 4). Other trees less tolerant of fire include aspen and 
Engelmann spruce; however, the low to moderate severity fire removed only small 
proportions of those. 

 
 
10 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Hospital Flat tree species and diameter, estimated prior to Frye Fire. 
 
 

 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 4. Hospital Flat tree species and diameter, post Frye Fire. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
12 
 
Treasure Park Forest Structure 
Treasure Park thinning reduced tree density; however, the thinning resulted in tree 
densities about twice the estimated historic density, compared with estimates from 
adjacent Hospital Flat (Table 2). Similar to other dry mixed-conifer sites, ponderosa pine 
densities were much lower today than historic densities.  
The Frye Fire moved through Treasure Park with high and moderate severity 
(Figure 2). The high-severity patch was almost half the unit, approximately 20 acres. 
Four of the nine plots had 100 percent tree mortality, and the Frye Fire reduced the 
average total tree density from 225 TPA to 68 TPA. At the project scale, the Treasure 
Park post-fire tree densities were the most similar to the historical estimates found at 
adjacent Hospital Flat. Regeneration data collected on 1/100th acre plots one year after 
fire were highly variable. However, seedlings were present on most of the plots, 
dominated by aspen trees (average 3,200 TPA), which re-sprout quickly after fire. An 
Englemann spruce seedling was found on one plot, Douglas fir seedlings on one plot, and 
white fir seedlings were observed on two plots.  
 
 
Table 2. Treasure Park tree density: estimated pre-thin, post-thin and post-Frye Fire. 
 
Tree Species 
Tree Density (trees/acre) 
 
  
Est. Pre-thin 
Post-thin 
2018 
post-fire 
Hospital 
Flat 
Historic 
White fir (Abies concolour) 
76.7 
47.8 
3.3 
18-22.8 
Douglas fir (Psuedotsuga 
menziesii) 
136.7 
77.8 
36.7 
30.5-36.6 
Aspen (Populous 
tremuloides) 
24.4 
21.1 
0 
6.7 
Engelmann Spruce (Picea 
engelmannii) 
5.6 
5.6 
2.2 
1 
Southwestern white pine 
(Pinus strobiformus) 
146.7 
62.2 
22.2 
19.6-22.5 
Ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) 
11.1 
8.9 
3.3 
16.4 
Total 
401.1  
223.3  
67.8 
92.8-106.6 
 
 
Frye Fire Burn Severity 
The Frye Fire burned 48,000 acres on Mount Graham, from low elevation grass and 
shrublands, through pinyon and juniper woodlands, and up through higher elevation 
forests, including spruce and fir at the highest elevations. In 2018, the ERI assessed fire 
vegetation severity across the multiple vegetation types found in the Frye Fire footprint. 
Figure 5 shows RAVG fire severity. We lumped Landfire Biophysical Settings into nine 
classification to better group vegetation with similar historic fire regimes (Figure 6 and 

 
 
13 
 
Table 3). Box 2 lists fire regime classifications. The Frye 
Fire footprint burned vegetation representative of all fire 
regimes except fire regime two. High-severity fire (>75 
percent BA loss) was observed in all vegetation types, but 
the majority of (82 percent, 9,215 acres) of the high-severity 
fire occurred in ecosystems in which mixed or high-severity 
fire is characteristic of the historical system, such as pinyon 
juniper, shrubland, spruce/fir, and wet mixed-conifer forests. 
Of the 14,225 acres of wet mixed-conifer and spruce/fir 
forests that burned in the Frye Fire, only 18 percent (2,538 
acres) burned at high severity. Most of the high-severity fire 
occurred in shrubland and oak/pinyon/juniper ecosystems 
where moderate and high severity fire behavior is 
characteristic of the evolutionary history. While high-
severity fire may be characteristic in these ecosystem types, 
high-severity fire behavior likely took place at much smaller 
scales historically than compared to contemporary fires 
(O’Conner et al., 2014).  
The remaining 17 percent (1,871 acres) of the high-
severity fire could be termed “uncharacteristic,” and burned 
in forest ecosystems that are characterized by a low-
intensity fire regime one, including ponderosa pine, dry 
mixed-conifer, and pine/oak forests. Approximately 800 
acres of dry mixed-conifer forests burned at a high severity. 
Low and mid-severity fire (<75 percent BA loss) was the 
dominant severity in the frequent-fire adapted forested 
systems, with the majority in the lowest BA loss category 
(25 percent BA loss). Low and mid-severity fire accounted 
for 85 percent (9,676 acres) of the fire behavior in these 
ecosystems. 
 
It is important to note that the Landfire BpS categories are broad-scale vegetation 
classification based on plot data interpolated to remotely sensed data. At fine scales, 
vegetation types may not represent what is on the ground (Rollins and Frame 2006). For 
example, the Hospital Flat and Treasure Park sites are classified primarily as wet mixed-
conifer. Both sites, however, had historical evidence of ponderosa pine trees with signs of 
frequent fire, which is a distinctive feature of dry mixed-conifer types and lower severity 
fire regime (Margolis et al. 2013).        
 
 
 
Box 2. Fire Regimes 
Fire Regimes are 
classified into five 
categories based on fire 
frequency and severity: 
 
I – Fire return intervals of 
0–35 years and low 
severity, e.g., 
southwestern ponderosa 
pine. 
 
II – Fire return intervals of 
0–35 years and high 
severity, e.g., grasslands. 
 
III – Fire return intervals 
of 35–100 years and 
mixed severity, e.g, wet 
mixed conifer.  
 
IV – Fire return intervals 
of 35–100 years and high 
severity, e.g., lodgepole 
pine. 
 
V – Fire return intervals of 
150+ years, and high 
severity, e.g., spruce and 
fir forests.  

 
 
14 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Rapid Assessment Vegetation (RAVG) severity analysis for the Frye Fire 
perimeter.  
 
 

 
 
15 
 
 
Figure 6. LANDFIRE Biophysical site ecosystem types within the Frye Fire perimeter. 
 
 
Table 3. Area of ecosystem type affected by different levels of fire severity. 
 
Ecosystem type 
Fire 
Regime 
0–25% 
BA loss 
25–50% BA 
loss 
50–75% BA 
loss 
75–100% BA 
loss 
Shrubland 
IV,V 
1,755 
2432 
3469 
3326 
Grassland 
I 
58 
134 
173 
212 
Oak/ pinyon/ 
juniper 
III 
3,085 
2051 
2468 
3139 
Pine/oak 
I 
2,648 
834 
572 
745 
Ponderosa pine 
I 
1,207 
357 
277 
332 
Dry mixed-conifer 
I 
2,685 
538 
371 
794 
Wet mixed-conifer 
III 
7,059 
1049 
693 
2102 
Spruce/fir 
IV, V 
602 
99 
83 
436 
Riparian 
III, V 
732 
156 
96 
111 
Total 
 
19,831 
7,650 
8,202 
11,197 

 
 
16 
 
Discussion 
The restoration demonstration work in the Pinaleño Mountains provided a cross-
organization learning site for the Coronado National Forest and the ERI. The site is 
representative of much of southwestern dry mixed-conifer forest management concerns. 
It has a high degree of change from historical conditions; uncertainty in the variability of 
historical conditions and disturbance regimes; high importance for endangered wildlife; 
high risk of wildfire; difficulty in accessibility; and limited merchantability of restoration 
by-products. In our examination of the Hospital Flat and Treasure Park demonstration 
areas, we gain insight into these management challenges. 
 
Hospital Flat 
The stem-mapped area of Hospital Flat provided important information about historical 
composition and structure of a dry mixed-conifer stand in the Pinaleño Mountains. 
Consistent with other studies, relatively fire-tolerant trees such as ponderosa pine, 
Douglas-fir, and southwestern white pine were major components of the forest (Heinlein 
et al. 2005, Matonis et al. 2014, Rodman et al. 2016, Fulé et al. 2009). Historical stand 
density of approximately 100 TPA was near the maximum range of the natural range of 
variability (NRV) for southwestern dry mixed-conifer forests, which ranges from 21–99 
TPA (Reynolds et al. 2013). In dry mixed-conifer forests throughout the West, dramatic 
increases in more shade tolerant species (e.g., white fir, Douglas-fir, and spruce/fir at the 
higher elevations) has occurred at the expense of ponderosa pine and “mini-meadows,” 
which contain a diverse herbaceous understory (Abella and Springer 2015, Matonis et al. 
2014). Also common to these forests, current ponderosa pine densities are lower than 
historical densities. Loggers selectively removed ponderosa pine in much of the 
Southwest dry mixed-conifer forest, and an irruption of less fire-tolerant species curtailed 
subsequent ponderosa pine regeneration, which is higher in open sites. The current-day 
dry mixed-conifer stands have little canopy openings and less light filtering to the forest 
floor than historical stands maintained by frequent fire.  
 
As illustrated in Figure 2, the Hospital Flat site experienced low-severity fire 
behavior, and maintained uncharacteristically dense conditions. The fire effects in this 
stem-mapped area show that the fire killed few mature trees (see Appendix B). The fire 
removed some of the fire-intolerant white fir under 14 inches DBH putting the site on a 
trajectory more similar to historical conditions. However, forest density remains more 
than three times higher than historical conditions. Since this area is critically important 
for Mount Graham red squirrel habitat, managing for higher tree densities is important. 
The post-fire landscape adjacent to Hospital Flat may add some resistance to a future 
high-severity fire in this stand.  
 
Treasure Park 
The Frye Fire created a high-severity patch in about half of the restoration demonstration 
thinned at Treasure Park. This high-severity patch size may be larger than what was 
found post-fire in restored dry mixed-conifer forests (O’Connor et al. 2014). Thinning, in 

 
 
17 
 
combination with follow-up burning maintenance, is considered the most effective 
method for reducing the risk of high-severity wildfire in degraded frequent-fire forests 
(Fulé et al. 2012). However, even after thinning occurred at Treasure Park, forest density 
remained more than double the historical density at Hospital Flat, at 225.6 TPA; photo 
points also indicate a large amount of post-thinning slash on the ground, although those 
data were not quantified. In combination with severe fire weather, the high post-thinning 
density and surface fuels likely contributed to the high-severity fire behavior in Treasure 
Park. The large patch of high-severity fire behavior reduced the overall tree density in 
Treasure Park to 68 TPA, which is within the NRV for dry mixed-conifer forest types; 
however, the contiguous 20-acre opening changes the spatial characteristics of the 
system. While forest density is within NRV, the spatial distribution found today in 
Treasure Park is very different from the historical small groups and clumps that were 
stem-mapped by Tuten (2009). The large opening, however, may contribute to ponderosa 
pine natural regeneration. At only 3.3 TPA, ponderosa pine occurs at densities well below 
the estimates at Hospital Flat, and found in dry mixed-conifer NRV. Research shows 
ponderosa pine to be the dominant tree species in many historical southwestern dry 
mixed-conifer forests and important for forest resiliency (Reynolds et al. 2013, Strahan et 
al. 2016). Additionally, aspen occupied a portion of Treasure Park restoration site that 
had 100 percent mortality in the fire. Aspen is fire-adapted tree and the re-sprouting 
regeneration were already evident in high numbers by 2018, one year post-fire. 
 
Frye Fire Severity 
The Frye Fire burned 48,000 acres on Mount Graham, from low elevation grass and 
shrublands, through pinyon and juniper woodlands, and up through higher elevation 
forests including spruce and fir at the highest elevations. Most of these systems evolved 
with fire, however even in such close proximity, the evolutionary history of fire varied 
widely between the low elevation grasslands and the high elevation spruce fire. Evidence 
from the forested regions show historical fire return intervals varied from as high as 250 
years in the spruce-fir forests to as frequent as every 10 years in the mid-elevation 
ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir forests (O’Connor et al. 2014). Lower elevation 
woodlands and desert shrubs also have history of less frequent fire. Current conditions 
prior to the Frye Fire were consistent with much of the West, where fire exclusion since 
European settlement resulted in a densification of the frequent-fire forest, and a more 
contiguous canopy fuel load across the mountain. Fire extent and severity occurring 
today may be inconsistent with the historical role of fire. However, in southwestern sky 
islands where thinning treatments are limited by operational hurdles, ecologists have 
suggested that fire could potentially be used as a management tool to help managers 
address the threat posed by uniform and heavy fuel accumulations (Cocke et al. 2005).  
In the absence of thinning treatments, low and moderate severity fire in dense 
ponderosa pine forests can have beneficial impacts to forest structure. Recent research 
has shown that compared to low and high-severity fire, moderate-severity fire in 
ponderosa pine forests is the most effective at moving forest structure closer to the NRV 
(Huffman et al. 2017). While low-severity fire may have some positive effects for 

 
 
18 
 
reducing surface fuels, even multiple entries of low-severity fire may not be effective for 
adequately altering forest structure enough to meet restoration objectives of reduced tree 
densities (Huffman et al. 2018). In the Frye Fire footprint, moderate-severity fire 
behavior in the frequent-fire forest types likely had some beneficial impacts for moving 
stand densities closer to the NRV, while low-severity fire in these forest types (as 
illustrated in the Hospital Flat demo) may have had minimal impact on forest structure. 
 
While fire may have beneficial impacts to forest structure in some circumstances, 
the impacts to important habitat structures and erosion on steep slopes is a major concern. 
It is also important to note that fire is a blunt tool. Any use of fire to restore structure and 
composition would not result in the closest possible approximations of natural forest 
conditions, which is a common goal for ecological restoration. As much as possible, the 
use of thinning treatments along with the use of low-intensity fire is recommended to 
help facilitate the restoration of important ecosystem processes and functions in the 
frequent-fire forest types (Reynolds et al. 2013).  
 
Management Strategies in Areas Affected by High-Severity Fire 
For areas that have experienced high severity fire, the Forest Service may conduct 
artificial re-forestation (planting); often prior to establishment of natural regeneration. 
While meeting the intent of the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 U.S.C. 
1601-1610), re-planting in forests with uncharacteristically high densities adjacent to 
open patches may not meet the best available science management recommendation. Re-
planting can lead to dense fuels that are at elevated risk of future high severity fire and 
require thinning to alleviate the hazard (Ouzts et al. 2015, Thompson et al. 2007). 
Allowing for the system’s natural, episodic regeneration, with an assessment at 5 and 10 
years may be more cost effective, and more appropriate for frequent-fire forest 
management. If nearby stands are unnaturally dense, then thinning is recommended to 
protect those adjacent seed sources from additional fire, and promote seed set (Owen et 
al. 2017, 2019). There are advantages for a natural recovery processes in areas affected 
by high severity fire, such as heterogeneous regeneration patterns, increased plant 
diversity, and more resilient vegetation types (Fornwalt and Kauffman 2014, Owen et al. 
2017, Thompson et al. 2007). Naturally regenerating pines in high-severity patches may 
grow with more vigor than in surrounding dense forests (Owen 2019). In southwestern 
post-fire landscapes, both natural and artificial re-forestation methods are subject to wide 
variation in survival rates (Ouzts et al. 2015). Allowing observational assessment for a 
minimal of 5 years may be necessary to assess successful natural regeneration prior to 
investment. Additionally, thinning treatments may still be needed in the burned area. 
Thinning treatments could be prioritized in frequent-fire forest types that survived the 
Frye Fire and remain denser than NRV. In particular, forests that are adjacent to openings 
created by the Frye fire would be good candidates for prioritization of thinning treatments 
to provide consistent and sustainable seed sources. 
 
 
 

 
 
19 
 
Recommendations Moving Forward 
The ERI appreciates the opportunity to partner with Coronado National Forest staff to 
follow this demonstration area through the last decade. We would like to continue that 
relationship and the project. The potential next steps are captured below: 
 
1. Educational outreach for the Treasure Park, key messages to include: 
a. Restoration goals in dry mixed-conifer. 
b. Implementation hurdles in sky island country. 
c. Wildfire effects. 
2. Educational outreach for Hospital Flat, key messages to include:  
a. Restoration goals in dry mixed-conifer. 
b. Management for multiple-resources (e.g., wildlife). 
c. Wildfire effects. 
3. Restoration demonstrations units: 
a. Allow for natural reforestation and exclude planting in these areas.  
b. Controlled re-forestation studies in adjacent, non-demo areas, with 
monitoring. 
c. Continue ERI monitoring every five years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
20 
 
References 
Cocke, A.E., P.Z. Fulé, and J.E. Crouse. 2005. Forest change on a steep mountain 
gradient after extended fire exclusion: San Francisco Peaks, Arizona, USA. Journal 
of Applied Ecology, 42:814–823. 
Fornwalt, P.J., and M.R. Kaufmann. 2014. Understory plant community dynamics 
following a large, mixed-severity wildfire in a Pinus ponderosa-Pseudotsuga 
menziesii forest, Colorado, USA. Journal of Vegetation Science, 25:805–818. 
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012. Do thinning and/or 
burning treatments in western USA ponderosa or Jeffrey pine-dominated forests help 
restore natural fire behavior? Forest Ecology and Management, 269:68–81.  
Huffman, D.W., J.E. Crouse, A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.D. Springer, and M.T. Stoddard. 
2018. Restoration benefits of re-entry with resource objective wildfire on a 
ponderosa pine landscape in northern Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 408:16–24.  
Huffman, D.W., A.J. Sánchez Meador, M.T. Stoddard, J.E. Crouse, and J.P. Roccaforte. 
2017. Efficacy of resource objective wildfires for restoration of ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa) forests in northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management, 
389:395–403. 
Margolis, E.Q., D.W. Huffman, and J.M. Iniguez. 2013. Southwestern Mixed-Conifer 
Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration 
Treatments. Working Paper No. 28. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University. 
Matonis, M.S., D. Binkley, M. Tuten, and T. Cheng. 2014. The forests they are a-
changin’—Ponderosa pine and mixed conifer forests on the Uncompahgre Plateau in 
1875 and 2010–13. Technical Brief. Colorado State University, Colorado Forest 
Restoration Institute, Fort Collins, CO. 27 pp.  
Miller, J.D., and A.E. Thode. 2007. Quantifying burn severity in a heterogeneous 
landscape with a relative version of the delta Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR). 
Remote Sensing of Environment, 109:66–80. 
O’Connor, C.D., D.A. Falk, A.M. Lynch, and T.W. Swetnam. 2014. Fire severity, size, 
and climate associations diverge from historical precedent along an ecological 
gradient in the Pinaleño Mountains, Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 329:264–278.  
Owen, S.M., C.H. Sieg, A.J. Sánchez Meador, P.Z. Fulé, J.M. Iniguez, L.S. Baggett, P.J. 
Fornwalt, and M.A. Battaglia. 2017. Spatial patterns of ponderosa pine regeneration 
in high-severity burn patches. Forest Ecology and Management, 405:134–149.  
Owen, S.M. 2019. Tree regeneration and fungal communities following large wildfires in 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. PhD Dissertation, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, AZ, US. 
Ouzts, J., T. Kolb, D.W. Huffman, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2015. Post-fire ponderosa 
pine regeneration with and without planting in Arizona and New Mexico. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 354:281–290.  

 
 
21 
 
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. 
Jackson, D.G. DeLorenzo, and A.D. Graves. 2013. Restoring composition and 
structure in Southwestern frequent-fire forests: A science-based framework for 
improving ecosystem resiliency. General Technical Report. RMRS GTR-310. Fort 
Collins, CO: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 76 p.  
Rollins, M.G., and C.K. Frame, tech. eds. 2006. The LANDFIRE Prototype Project: 
nationally consistent and locally relevant geospatial data for wildland fire 
management. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-175. Fort Collins: US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 416 p. 
Strahan, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, and D.C. Laughlin. 2016. Shifts in 
community-level traits and functional diversity in a mixed-conifer forest: a legacy of 
land-use change. Journal of Applied Ecology, 53:17–55.  
Thompson, J.R., T.A. Spies, and L.M. Ganio. 2007. Reburn severity in managed and 
unmanaged vegetation in a large wildfire. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 104:10743–10748.  
 

 
 
22 
 
Appendix A. 2009 Report on Hospital Flat and Treasure Park Restoration Demonstrations 
 
 
The Hospital Flat Ecological Restoration Demonstration Project: 
Past, Present, and Future 
 
Prepared by Matt Tuten 
2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
23 
 
Introduction 
 
Context 
 
Before settlement, wildfires in the Pinaleño Mountains probably burned on the forest floor, with less 
frequent crown fires, especially at the high elevations. These fires regulated forest floor fuels and tree densities, 
tempering extreme fire behavior and the size of crown fires (Grissino-Mayer et al. 1994). This led to a mix of fire 
resistant and fire intolerant tree species and created forest spatial patterns that provided habitat for endemic 
wildlife species. Grazing, logging and active fire suppression in the late 1800s throughout the majority of the 20th 
century led to an exclusion of fire from the Pinaleño landscape (Grissino-Mayer et al. 1994, PERP). Since the 
exclusion of these fires, overall tree densities have likely increased, and tree densities of shade tolerant and fire 
intolerant species have likely increased relative to shade intolerant and fire resistant tree species. These changes 
have led to a continuous densely stocked forest landscape susceptible to large and severe wildfires of the type 
experienced in the area during 1996 and 2004. 
Ecological restoration-based forest management is an approach suitable for addressing these detrimental 
changes in the forests of the Pinaleño Mountains. Using historical forest evidences in the form of old trees, cut-
stumps, and downed logs, an ecological restoration- based thinning approach attempts to create forest 
composition, density and patterns similar to those present at the site prior to the exclusion of fire from the 
ecosystem. While this approach has been applied at sites in northern Arizona, New Mexico, and southwest 
Colorado, the Hospital Flat Ecological Restoration Demonstration Project is the first attempt to use a similar 
approach in mixed-conifer forests of the Pinaleño Mountains (Moore et al. 1999). The goal of the Hospital Flat 
Ecological Restoration Demonstration project is to provide a local and visible example of the application of this 
management approach and to assess its suitability for use elsewhere in the Pinaleño Mountains. 
 
Study Site 
 
The Hospital Flat study site is a 22-acre area located at 9,000 feet in the Pinaleño Mountains of the 
Coronado National Forest, approximately 15 miles southwest of Safford, Arizona (Figure 1). As the name 
implies, the Hospital Flat study area is located at the western edge of a relatively flat meadow, a rarity compared 
to the steep slopes of the surrounding areas. Big Creek, a shallow perennial stream, borders the southern edge of 
the study area. This site is located within the mixed-conifer forest type dominated by Douglas fir, white fir and 
Southwestern white pine, with aspen, Engelmann spruce and ponderosa pine present to a lesser extent. 

 
 
24 
 
 
Figure 1: Hospital Flat Ecological Restoration Demonstration Site. 
 
Methods 
Local Fire History Assessment 
 
Several of cut stumps within and around the study site appear to have been scarred by past wildfires. In 
order to generally assess the local historical fire regime, cross-sections were collected from these fire-scarred 
stumps whenever an intact cross section could be collected. Due to the relative scarcity of fire-scarred stumps and 
the high degree of decay of remaining material only two scarred cross sections were collected. These sections 
were cross-dated using standard dendrochronological methods to determine the dates of historical fires and a 
range and average interval between fires was computed (Stokes and Smiley 1968). 
 
Treatment Marking 
 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) staff completed tree marking at the project site was completed by 
during the months of May and June in 2008. A historical evidence-based prescription developed for ponderosa 
pine forests was modified as the prescription for this project. 
In order to apply this prescription, tree marking staff made a coarse estimate of the historical settlement 
date (1880) and diameter cut-off between presettlement and post-settlement era trees. Staff used field increment 
boring tests to determine a coarse age-diameter relationship to determine the average size of presettlement 
(<1880) era trees. All trees larger than the following DBH were retained using the modified ecological restoration 
prescription: 
 
• White Fir, Douglas Fir and Ponderosa Pine: 16 inches DBH 
• Engelmann Spruce: 20 inches DBH 
• Southwestern White Pine: 14 inches DBH 
 
Marking personnel then replaced all historical forest evidences, typically cut stumps and snags, with 1.5 

 
 
25 
 
trees of the same species. When leave-trees within the entire project area were marked, markers realized that 1) 
Few replacement trees were available to replace ponderosa pine cut-stumps and, 2) Conditions were likely too 
dense and sunlight-poor to promote establishment of ponderosa pine regeneration. An adjustment to the initial 
mark was made in order to promote more open conditions suitable for ponderosa pine regeneration. This 
adjustment included: 
 
• Retention of any and all ponderosa pines present within the study area. 
• An increase in the minimum DBH for retention by 2 inches for all other species. 
 
This adjustment has not been used in previous ERI-led ecological restoration projects, but was used 
specifically for the Hospital Flat demonstration project to promote establishment of ponderosa pine. 
 
Mapping and Measurement 
 
A 3.1-acre rectangular plot was established within the 22-acre Hospital Flat demonstration area to assess 
current and expected post- thinning tree densities and spatial patterns. Trees taller than breast height and historical 
forest evidences, primarily cut-stumps, were mapped to the nearest tenth meter using a local coordinate system. 
Tree species, condition and diameter (either at breast height or stump height) were collected for all 
mapped trees or evidences; crown base height was collected for all living trees. In addition to the mapped trees, 
tree regeneration (i.e., trees shorter than breast height) density and composition was measured within 15 circular 
0.025-acre subplots located on a systematic grid within the mapped plot. 
 
Analysis 
 
Tree and historical forest evidence location patterns were assessed using Ripley’s K function. This 
function compares mapped tree patterns to simulated random patterns of equivalent density to determine to assess 
tree aggregation across a range of spatial scales. The output from Ripley’s K analysis indicates whether measured 
tree spatial patterns are uniform (i.e., evenly spaced) or aggregated (i.e., “clumped”) at a range of distances. See 
Figure 2. 
 
 

 
 
26 
 
Example Forested Stand 
 
 
 
 
 
Mapped locations of trees 
within forested stands 
 
Simulated 
random 
pattern 
(simulated 
99 times) 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 
Ripley’s K compares the density of tree locations within various 
concentric circles of radius t (scales) around each mapped 
location to the density of simulated locations resulting from 
99 simulations of random locations. 
 
Range of 99 
simulated 
random 
patterns 
 
 
Mapped tree 
location pattern 
 
 
 
 
2. The output from Ripley’s K point pattern is shown above. Dotted lines 
around zero indicate the range of spatial randomness; functions resulting 
from mapped trees that lie within this envelope indicate random 
patterns. Functions resulting from mapped tree locations positively 
exceeding this envelope indicate significantly aggregated (“clumped”) 
trees. Those negatively exceeding this envelope indicate significantly 
uniform (uniformly spaced) tree patterns. 
 
 
Figure 2: Ripley’s K point-pattern analysis explained
 
 t
 
2.5 
 2
 
 
1.5 
 1
 
 
0.5 
 0
 
 
-0.5 
 
-1 
 
-1.5 
 
-2 
 
-2.5 
Lag distance (t) in meters 
L (t) -t 048121620242832364044485256606468

 
 
27 
 
Results 
 
Historical Conditions 
 
Analysis of the two fire-scarred tree cross-sections collected within the HF site indicates a fire free 
interval ranging from 13 to 81 years (mean 31) between historical fires. The last dated fire present on a cross 
section occurred in 1928. 
Historical tree density estimates from old living trees and cut stumps indicate this site had a mixed-conifer 
composition, with overall tree density ranging from 92 to 106 trees per acre, depending upon diameter cut-offs 
used to determine the age of living trees (Table 1). Our estimates indicate that Douglas fir was the most prevalent, 
with roughly equal densities of white fir and southwestern white pine next most common, followed by slightly 
lesser densities of ponderosa pine. While aspen and Engelmann spruce were present historically, their densities 
were fairly low compared to the other four conifer species. 
Overall historical stand patterns at this site were aggregated at the very finest scales (0–2 meters) random 
at the fine scales (<16 meter lag distances), but significantly aggregated at broader scales (Figure 3). This overall 
pattern describes most of the four most common species with a few exceptions. First, southwestern white pine 
was aggregated at all distances, and the only species individually aggregated at the finest scale. Also, white fir and 
Douglas fir exhibited random spatial patterns at nearly all scales, with peaks of significant uniformity at fine 
scales. 
 
 
Table 1: Tree Density, Basal Area and Quadratic Mean Diameter by Species 
     
Tree Species 
Tree Density 
Basal Area 
QMD 
 
(trees/ acre) 
(ft2/ acre) 
(inches) 
 
Current 
Post-
Thinning 
Est.  
Historical 
Current 
Post-
Thinning Current 
Post-
Thinning 
White fir 
208.4 
66.9 
18-22.8 
59.1 
32.1 
7.2 
17.1 
Douglas fir 
104.7 
33.6 
30.5-36.6 
96.2 
69.4 
13.0 
19.6 
Aspen 
15.4 
15.4 
6.7 
11.8 
11.8 
11.9 
11.9 
Spruce 
12.2 
3.9 
1 
5.1 
2.8 
8.8 
15.2 
Southwestern 
white pine 
62.3 
20.0 
19.6-22.5 
45.9 
29.0 
11.6 
16.2 
Ponderosa 
pine 
3.5 
1.1 
16.4 
4.5 
4.5 
15.2 
15.2 
Total 
406.6 
141.1 
92.8-106.6 
222.6 
149.6 
10.0 
17.4 

 
 
28 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Plotted Ripley’s K functions (transformed to L(t)-t) for all historical evidences 
and the top 4 most prevalent species. Plotted function (dark line) within 95 percent 
confidence interval (dotted line) indicates spatial randomness, values positively 
exceeding this interval indicate significant aggregation and those negatively exceeding it 
indicate significant uniformity. ABCO= white fir, PIPO = ponderosa pine, PIST = 
southwestern white pine, PSME = Douglas fir. 

 
 
29 
 
Contemporary Conditions 
 
Tree composition within Hospital Flat demonstration site is currently dominated by white fir and Douglas 
fir trees, and to a lesser extent, southwestern white pine. Aspen, spruce, and ponderosa pine is also found within 
the site, although their density combined is only about half that of southwestern white pine, the third most dense 
species (Table 1, Figure 4). 
Douglas fir, then white fir and southwestern white pine dominated the BA. A very small contribution to 
overall basal area (BA) was made by the remaining three species (Table 1). While a large portion of white fir BA 
is made up of a high density of small diameter trees, Douglas fir BA is comprised of some small diameter trees, 
but mostly by large diameter trees within the site (Table 1). The high density of small diameter white fir, Douglas 
fir and southwestern white pine trees within the site skew the overall diameter distribution within the site towards 
the smaller size classes. 
Tree regeneration within the site was dominated by white fir (Figure 5). This species was found on all of 
15 subplots throughout the site. Second in prevalence at approximately 1/10th the density of white fir was aspen 
regeneration found at 10 of the 15 subplots. While white fir regeneration was found distributed across all height 
classes (0–54 inches), aspen regeneration was typically suppressed (<15” in height). 
Current tree spatial patterns could be most easily described as “one large clump” or, more accurately, 
significantly aggregated at all scales. The high density and close spacing is significantly more aggregated than 
simulated random patterns. Ponderosa pine is the exception to this finding. At fine scales (<12 meters), this 
species is randomly to uniformly spaced, with significant aggregation occurring at broader scales (Figure 6). 

 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Current and “leave-tree” (marked trees) diameter distributions. Note 
differences in Y-axis scaling (trees per acre) between graphs. ABCO= white fir, PIEN 
= Engelmann spruce, PIPO = ponderosa pine, PIST = southwestern white pine, POTR 
= aspen, PSME = Douglas fir. Diameter Class (inches)
 40
 35
 30
 25
 20
 15
 10
 5
 0
 50
 PIST
 PIEN POTR PSME
 ABCO
 150
 
 
 100
 PIPO
 200
 250
 
Current Diameter Distribution 
Diameter Class (inches) 
40 
35 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
5 
 
 
0 
PIPO 
PIST 
PIEN 
POTR 
PSME 
ABCO 
30 
 
 
25 
 
 
20 
 
 
15 
 
 
10 
Leave-tree Diameter Distribution 
Trees per acre 
Trees per Acre 

 
 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Tree regeneration (trees shorter than breast height) per acre. ABCO= white fir, 
PIEN = Engelmann spruce, PIPO = ponderosa pine, PIST = southwestern white pine, 
POTR = aspen, PSME = Douglas fir. 
 
Post-treatment or marked trees (“leave-trees”) 
 
An approximately 65 percent reduction could be expected in overall tree density within the site if it is 
thinned as marked by ERI personnel in 2008. The majority of this density reduction occurs in White fir, Douglas 
fir, and to a lesser extent, southwestern white pine. No reductions in ponderosa pine and aspen are expected, 
Overall BA reductions of about a third were seen within the site from estimates of marked trees. The 
majority of this BA reduction was seen in the small to mid-size diameter classes, as the restoration prescription 
attempted to retain all large “presettlement-era” trees within the site. This resulted in an increase in average 
quadradic mean diameter and a shift in the diameter distribution from smaller trees towards the middle diameter 
classes (Table 1, Figure 4). This shift is also associated with a change in average crown base height (height to 
living crown), a variable associated with crown fire hazard (Fulé et al. 2001). Crown base height before thinning 
averaged 11.8 feet, but could be expected to increase to an average of 24.9 feet if the site is thinned as marked. Tree Species
 PSME
 POTR
 PIST
 PIPO
 PIEN
 ABCO
 0
 46
 0
 111
 81
 240
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2220
 2500
 
Regeneration Density by Species 
Trees shorter than BH per Acre 

 
 
32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Plotted Ripley’s K functions (transformed to L(t)-t) for all contemporary trees 
and the top 4 most prevalent species. Plotted function (dark line) within 95% confidence 
interval (dotted line) indicates spatial randomness, values positively exceeding this 
interval indicate significant aggregation and those negatively exceeding it indicate 
significant uniformity. ABCO= white fir, PIPO = ponderosa pine, PIST = southwestern 
white pine , PSME = Douglas fir 

 
 
33 
 
Post-thinning spatial patterns estimated from marked trees indicate that restored forest conditions have 
some similarities and differences to estimated historical patterns. First, while overall broad scale historical and 
post-thinning patterns are similar, fine scale patterns differ. Historically, at fine scales (< 16 meters), trees 
exhibited mostly random patterns, while thinning treatments resulted in aggregated patterns. Second, restored 
white fir and Douglas fir patterns are very similar to historical patterns, with mostly random patterns 
predominating across all scales. Lastly, restored southwestern white pine patterns appear to be random at all 
scales, in contrast to estimated historical patterns indicating aggregation at all scales. 
 
 
Discussion 
 
Historical Fire Regimes 
 
Fire regimes in southwestern mixed-conifer forests have been shown by many researchers to have a high 
degree of variation in fire severity, size and frequency (Wu 1999; Kaufmann et al. 2000). The limited evidence 
available from fire-scarred tree cross sections and historical species mix present at this site indicates that fires 
were probably less frequent, and more severe than fires in lower elevation ponderosa pine forests described by 
ecological restoration researchers at Northern Arizona University (Covington and Moore 1994, Fulé et al. 2003), 
and other Pinaleño forests assessed by researchers from the University of Arizona (Grissino-Mayer 1994). This 
could be due to the relatively mesic (moist) character of the area surrounding Hospital Flat and Big Creek. 
Nevertheless, this site appears to have not burned since 1928, making the current fire free interval set to exceed 
the longest observed within the fire scar record in 2010. 

 
 
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Plotted Ripley’s K functions (transformed to L(t)-t) for all marked trees and the 
top 4 most prevalent species. Plotted function (dark line) within 95% confidence 
interval (dotted line) indicates spatial randomness, values positively exceeding this 
interval indicate significant aggregation and those negatively exceeding it indicate 
significant uniformity. ABCO= white fir, PIPO = ponderosa pine, PIST = southwestern 
white pine, PSME = Douglas fir. 

 
 
35 
 
Restoring Species Composition 
 
Since the HF site is relatively mesic, cut stumps are subject to higher decay rates than many sites where 
ecological restoration-based thinning prescriptions have been described in published literature. (Fulé et al 1997; 
Mast et al. 1999; Fulé et al. 2002, Moore et al. 
2004). The six species found at this site make the species-specific replacement of the decaying stumps 
inherently more complicated than pure ponderosa pine restoration projects. Further, the HF site has an abundance 
of regeneration, making stumps often difficult to see during tree marking. 
Despite the dense stand conditions, the applied mark came close to restoring individual tree species 
densities similar to those observed historical evidence densities, although we do recognize several areas where the 
mark could be improved. First, the mark resulted in an overabundance of trees (141 per acre) versus what would 
be expected from the prescription if all live presettlement era trees were retained and dead presettlement 
evidences were replaced with 1.5 younger, post-settlement era trees (127 per acre). This surplus may account for 
presettlement forest evidences that have fully decomposed and are not included in historical density estimates or 
replaced with post- settlement trees during tree marking. White fir comprised the majority of this surplus, as 67 
white fir were marked versus 26-27 expected per acre based upon live and dead presettlement forest estimates 
(using a 1.5 to 1 replacement rate). This shortcoming may be related to the current high densities of this species, 
making their retention during tree marking more probable. It may also be partly due to a misidentification of 
Douglas fir and white fir stumps. Stumps of these species can be identified by cross sections of remaining bark. 
Marking personnel may require additional training and assessment time to ensure correct cut-stump species 
identification. 
Marking staff indicated there were not enough living ponderosa pine trees present at the site to replace the 
cut stumps of this species. It is essential that all of the ponderosa pine trees within the site are retained since this 
shade intolerant species is unlikely to establish in the shade produced by dominant tree species. While all 
ponderosa pines encountered during measurement were included for analysis, only 4 of 11 trees present at the site 
were actually flagged for retention by marking personnel.  Trees of this species that were missed were relatively 
small in diameter (mean <1 inch DBH) and were often surrounded by competing tree species. While it is possible, 
if not likely, that these trees will be overtaken by competing tree species, taking steps to avoid removing any 
remaining individuals will make the persistence of this locally rare species more likely. Extra care in searching for 
and marking these small trees and specific instructions for thinning contractors to avoid cutting any ponderosa 
pines may be useful steps to help accomplish this end. 
 
Spatial Patterns 
 
The tree spatial patterns observed at the study site are a complex product of seed dispersal and 
regeneration mechanisms and the effects of disturbance, competition, herbivory and succession (Oliver and 
Larson 1996). Jays and rodents probably play an important role in dispersing the large and nutritious southwestern 
white pine seeds through seed-caching behavior, resulting in the fine scale aggregation patterns observed at this 
site (Pavek 1993). The restoration prescription did not result in similar significantly aggregated patterns of 
residual trees, but did result in consistently random patterns. In future thinning treatments, care should be taken to 
leave finely aggregated patterns of this tree species. 
Douglas and white fir species are primarily wind dispersed (Steinberg 2002; Zouhar 2001). At this site, 
large old trees and stumps of this species appear to exhibit a random spatial distribution at all scales. The 
evidence-based restoration approach in large part, succeeded in restoring these random spatial patterns. 
Infrequent stand replacing fires, surface fires, and tree-fall gap dynamics probably helped to produce 
conditions suitable for the establishment of ponderosa pine at this site. Historical ponderosa pine spatial patterns 
at this site were significantly uniform at the very finest scales, but were aggregated at scales corresponding to 
patches of approximately 1/10th of an acre and larger. This is a similar finding to research in other ponderosa pine 
forests (Cooper 1961, White 1985). The prevalence and spatial patterns of ponderosa pine are important because 
they provide habitat for small mammal species, and provide a valuable seed crop that is a food source for bird and 
mammal species (Howard 2003). 

 
 
36 
 
The relatively abundant moisture at this site probably makes tree competition for moisture less important 
and competition for sunlight more important for coniferous regeneration at this site than in lower and drier 
ponderosa pine forests (Oliver and Larson 1996). This is the basis for the approach used by ERI marking 
personnel to regenerate ponderosa pine. While this approach may not succeed in recruiting new pines it is 
probably the most suitable method, short of more drastic canopy removal. Broadcast burning to expose areas of 
bare mineral soil may also help to promote ponderosa pine seedling establishment (Larson 1961). To assess the 
effectiveness of these approaches and the resulting pine spatial patterns, pine establishment in the area should be 
reassessed in 5 to 10 years following thinning and/or burning treatments. 
Lastly, aspen is currently a very small component of the Hospital Flat forest structure. Aspen suckers are 
present in patches throughout the area, but due to dominant forest tree species, and perhaps browsing by ungulates 
(deer) this regeneration is suppressed. It is likely that disturbance, either through thinning or thinning and burning 
will stimulate aspen. Future monitoring is essential to understand the impacts of ecological restoration treatments 
upon this species in the Pinaleño Mountains. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Ecological Restoration of forests at the Hospital Flat site presents a management challenge. The 
complexity of historical stand conditions here was the result of many ecological processes operating across 
multiple spatial scales over hundreds of years. No thinning treatment is capable of restoring the exact structure of 
the forests prior, to grazing, logging and fire suppression. ERI tree marking staff attempted to preserve dominant 
shade-tolerant coniferous canopy species while promoting low densities of shade intolerant aspen and ponderosa 
pine. Accomplishing this objective may not be possible given the requirements of these shade intolerant species. 
To maintain and promote these species, broader scale temporal and spatial processes such as tree fall gap 
dynamics and mixed-severity wildfire (or management replicating these processes) may be necessary. The 
limitations of the project size and scope make assessment of these broad scale patterns and processes impossible. 
The prescription applied at the HF site succeeded in recreating the species composition, density and 
approximate spatial patterns of the presettlement forest remnants. If thinned as marked, this approach will reduce 
overall tree density, small diameter tree density and increase crown base height, forest structure variables 
correlated with crown fire hazard. In a region that may experience a longer, more extreme fire season with 
predicted future climate change, this approach may have provided some protection against the loss of valuable 
wildlife habitat loss due to wildfire. While there is still much to be learned about restoring and managing the 
forests the Pinaleño Mountains, the Hospital Flat Ecological Restoration Demonstration project is an important 
first step. This project demonstrates how to develop a locally appropriate thinning prescription and provides an 
example of a restored Pinaleño Mountain mixed-conifer forest stand. 

 
 
37 
 
References 
Cooper, C.F. 1961. Pattern in Ponderosa Pine Forests. Ecology. 42, 493-499. 
 
Covington, W.W. and Moore, M.M. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: changes 
since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry. 92, 39-47. 
 
Grissino-Mayer, H. D., C. H. Baisan, and T. W. Swetnam. 1994. Fire history and age structure 
analyses in the mixed conifer and spruce–fir forests of Mount Graham. Final Report, Mount 
Graham Red Squirrel Study Committee, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Phoenix, Arizona, 
USA. 
 
Fulé, P.Z., M.M. Moore, and W.W. Covington. 1997. Determining reference conditions for 
ecosystem management in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Applications 
7(3), 895-908 
 
Fulé, P.Z., A.E.M. Waltz, W.W. Covington, and T.A. Heinlein. 2001. Measuring forest 
restoration effectiveness in hazardous fuels reduction. Journal of Forestry 99(11), 24-29. 
 
Fulé, P.Z., T.A. Heinlein, W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 2003. Assessing fire regimes on 
Grand Canyon landscapes with fire scar and fire record data. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire 12(2):129-145. 
 
Howard, Janet L. 2003. Pinus ponderosa var. scopulorum. In: Fire Effects Information System, 
Online. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/. 2009, 
July 24] 
 
Kaufmann, M.R., Regan, C.M., and P.M. Brown. 2000. Heterogeneity in ponderosa 
pine/Douglas-fir forests: Age and size structure in unlogged and logged landscapes of central 
Colorado. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 30, 698-711 
 
Larson, M. M. 1961. Seed Size, Germination Dates, and Survival Relationships of Ponderosa 
Pine in the Southwest. Research Note No. 66. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 4 p. 
 
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A. Waltz. 1999. Restoration of 
presettlement age structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ecological Applications 9 
(1), 228-239. 
 
Moore, M. M., Covington, W. W. and Fulé, P. Z. 1999. Reference conditions and ecological 
restoration: A Southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications. 9, 1266-
1277. 
 
Moore, M.M., Huffman, D.W., Fulé, P.Z., Covington, W. W., and Crouse, J.E. 2004. Comparison 
of presettlement and contemporary forest structure and composition on permanent plots in 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Forest Science. 50 (2), 162-176. 
 
Oliver, C.D. and Larson, B.C. 1996. Forest Stand Dynamics, John Wiley & Sons, New York. 520 
pp. 
 
Pavek, Diane S. 1993. Pinus strobiformis. In: Fire Effects Information System, Online. U.S. 

 
 
38 
 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.  July 24, 2009. 
 
Steinberg, Peter D. 2002. Pseudotsuga menziesii var. glauca. In:Fire Effects Information System, 
Online. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ 2009, 
July 24. 
 
Stokes, M. A. and Smiley, T. L. 1968. An Introduction to Tree Ring Dating. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois. 
 
White, A.S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa pine stand. 
Ecology. 66, 589-594. 
 
Wu, R. 1999. Fire History and Forest Structure in the Mixed Conifer Forests of Southwest 
Colorado. Thesis, Master of Science. Colorado State University, Fort Collins CO. 168 pp. 
 
Zouhar, Kris. 2001. Abies concolor. In: Fire Effects Information System, Online. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory (Producer). Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/. 2009, July 24. 
 
 
 

 
 
39 
 
Appendix B. Hospital Flat pre and post-fire tree composition and diameter distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                       
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2
6
10
14
18
22
26
30
34
38
Trees per acre
Diameter class midpoint (inches)
Hospital Flat pre-fire diameter distribution
ABCO
ACGR
PIEN
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
0
50
100
150
200
250
2
6
10
14
18
22
26
30
34
36
Trees per acre
Diameter class midpoint (inches)
Hospital Flat post-fire diameter distribution
ABCO
ACGR
PIEN
PIPO
PIST
POTR
PSME
