Chip & Ship:  
Testing the Logistics of Supplying Wood Chips Over Long 
Distances Using Intermodal Railroad Transportation 
December 2019 
Prepared for 
Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
 1110 W Washington St #100  
Phoenix, AZ 85007 
Prepared by 
Jeff Halbrook, Jeffrey.Halbrook@nau.edu 
Han-Sup Han, Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017  
Photo courtesy of NAU Marketing 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 

Table of Contents 
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................1 
Introduction ..........................................................................................................................3 
A Brief History of US Railway Transportation ...................................................................4 
Project Initiation and Study Methods ..................................................................................7 
Data Collection and Analysis.............................................................................................11 
Results ................................................................................................................................13 
Discussion ..........................................................................................................................16 
Conclusions ........................................................................................................................24 
Acknowledgments..............................................................................................................25 
References ..........................................................................................................................26 
List of Figures 
Figure 1. Land ownership in Coconino County ...................................................................9 
Figure 2. A five-well railcar with double-stacked intermodal shipping containers ...........11 
Figure 3. Rough terrain container handler (RTCH) offloading empty intermodal 
shipping container from railcar ..........................................................................................12 
Figure 4. Intermodal shipping containers with bulkheads installed ready for wood 
chips ...................................................................................................................................15 
Figure 5. Log loader feeding logs into the tracked chipper ...............................................20 
Figure 6. Chart relating shipping cost per container to unit cost ($/ton) ...........................23 
List of Tables 
Table 1. One-way log hauling drive time based on road type and distance ......................14 
Table 2. Machines and operations needed to fill 22 containers per day for a full-scale 
operation ............................................................................................................................22 

Executive Summary 
Due to an overabundance of low-value, small-diameter woody biomass, many communities 
across the US West face catastrophic wildfire and post-fire flooding. Forest restoration thinning 
treatments can restore forest ecosystem health, lower the risk of severe fire, and enhance 
ecosystem services that include watershed function, aesthetics, carbon sequestration, and wildlife 
habitat. The predominant markets for restoration thinning biomass is fuel for energy or heat; 
however, many communities are not located near biomass facilities and shipping biomass long 
distance is frequently cost prohibitive.  
 
The lack of markets or facilities that utilize low-value woody biomass is one of the biggest 
barriers to accelerating the pace and scale of restoration treatments needed to address the forest 
health crisis. Railroad transportation combined with underutilized (empty) intermodal shipping 
containers may open the possibilities of shipping wood chips and other forest products such as 
sawdust and lumber long distances to forest products business clusters and foreign markets once 
thought economically infeasible when considering truck transportation alone. 
 
A solution is needed to address the high transportation cost associated with trucking low-value 
woody biomass long distances when local markets are not available. Selling a large volume (e.g., 
>500,000 tons/year) of wood chips domestically or internationally using railroad transportation 
may be an option, particularly if these markets are willing to pay higher prices. However, 
railroad transportation is not commonly used to supply wood chips over long distances (>500 
miles) in the US West, and railroad operations logistics needed to handle wood chips are not well 
understood or tested. 
 
Researchers at the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University initiated a 
pilot study to send wood chips from Arizona to South Korea to:  
 
• Test the logistics of using railroad transportation to send woody biomass to oversea markets. 
• Investigate loading times, weights to fill intermodal containers with wood chips. 
 
Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) railroad was interested in growing its business by 
shipping woody biomass from Arizona, but there was an issue with using intermodal containers. 
Intermodal trains, which typically carry 220 double-stacked containers, do not stop in between a 
starting station and a final destination. Our request for <100 intermodal containers for the pilot 
project was not a full unit train and not a typical business practice undertaken by BNSF. Interest 
by Hyundai Merchant Marine (HMM) and community support for the project facilitated 
discussions with BNSF corporate headquarters, allowing 58 intermodal containers to be 
delivered for the pilot project by August 2019.  
 
We began a controlled experiment by filling 58 intermodal shipping containers with wood chips 
at Camp Navajo, near Flagstaff, Arizona. Once filled, BNSF delivered them to the Port of Long 
Beach, California to await shipment by marine transportation to South Korea. Containers were 
delivered to Camp Navajo from Memphis, Tennessee and consisted of eight railcars totaling 
1

1,891 feet in length. The railcars varied from one to five wells (spaces for containers) with a 
variety of single and double-stack containers.   
 
During the six-day pilot project, researchers examined the productivity and logistics associated 
with moving intermodal containers into Camp Navajo, offloading the containers, filling them 
with chips produced from small-diameter logs by an on-site chipper, and reloading the filled 
containers back onto railcars. We observed activities on log loading, hauling, log 
offloading/piling, equipment mobilization requirements, intermodal container delivery, container 
offloading, placement, chipping/filling containers, and reloading filled containers onto railcars.  
 
We evaluated productivity for a 22-container-per-day operation (220-container unit train filled 
once every two weeks or 22 containers per day) (Table 1).  
 
Table 1. Machines and operations needed to fill 22 containers per day for a full-scale operation 
  
Work activities 
Operational productivity 
# machines needed to fill 
22 containers per dayb 
(Tons/hour) (#containers/day)a 
Log loader (loading logs) 
Log truck (hauling logs) 
Log loader (unloading logs) 
RTCH (moving empty containers) 
Crew (building bulkheads) 
RTCH (setting containers for chipping) 
Chipper/loader (filling containers) 
RTCH (loading containers on train) 
10.2 
5.1 
4.3 
10.2 
5.1 
4.3 
25.8 
13.0 
1.7 
144.0 
60.0 
0.4 
180.0 
75.0 
0.3 
195.0 
81.3 
0.3 
26.7 
13.5 
1.6 
112.0 
46.8 
0.5 
a Number of containers filled based on a 10-hour/day shift and operational productivities observed during the pilot study 
b Number of machines to support a full-scale (220 containers/every two weeks) estimated based on operational productivities 
observed during the pilot study 
 
The equipment selected for the pilot project may not be practical for a large-scale operation due 
to limited infrastructure for chipping and railroad transportation. Additional research should 
evaluate the benefits of using a dedicated chipping facility using larger, permanent facilities that 
store logs, debark, and chip logs into large piles. Multiple conveyors could then take the piled 
chips and fill multiple containers at one time, greatly increasing filled container productivity. 
Rail infrastructure, including 8,000 feet of new track and electronic rail switches, need to be 
completed prior to BNSF delivering a unit train to Camp Navajo. Site improvements, such as a 
reinforced concrete pad for the container loader, will also need to be completed. Camp Navajo is 
located on Department of Defense lands. Additional approvals will need to be obtained. 
 
Long distance delivery of woody biomass using railroad transportation may be a viable use of 
forest restoration material. Additional demand for wood products could increase forest industry 
development, employment, and economic stability for communities. Along with these benefits, 
delivering biomass both domestically and internationally can successfully accelerate the pace 
and scale of restoration treatments needed to address the forest health crisis in the US. 
 
 
2

Introduction 
It is widely recognized that ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests across the western US 
manifest degraded forest conditions that lead to unnatural and often catastrophic fire, as well as 
increased vulnerability to insect and disease outbreaks (Graham et al. 2004, Pollet and Omi 
2002, Covington et al. 1997). A combination of past logging and grazing practices, fire 
suppression activities, and continued forest growth have resulted in highly dense forests (>1,000 
trees per acre) consisting of many small-diameter trees (Larson 2001). Three decades of rigorous 
scientific research demonstrates that it is possible to restore forest ecosystem health, lower the 
risk of severe fire, and enhance ecosystem services that include watershed function, aesthetics, 
carbon sequestration, and wildlife habitat through forest restoration thinning treatments 
(Kaufmann et al. 1994, Covington and Moore 1994). Unfortunately, the staggering volume of 
negative value (i.e., cost of harvest > value of wood) small-diameter trees that must be removed 
to reduce fuel loads in the forest is one of the biggest barriers to successfully accelerating the 
pace and scale of restoration treatments needed to address this forest health crisis (Hjerpe et al. 
2009). Arizona and New Mexico are home to the world’s largest contiguous stand of ponderosa 
pine, spanning over 4 million acres across both states. Forest uses in Arizona historically focused 
on providing lumber, railroad ties, firewood, and grazing opportunities. In the early 1990s, the 
timber industry began to decline nationwide and more focus was placed on environmental issues 
(AZ State Forestry 2010). The forest industry in northern Arizona continued to fail becoming 
almost nonexistent as sawmills closed and workers left the state to find other positions. Today, 
much of the historic forest products industry infrastructure has been rezoned and replaced with 
other uses.  
 
Currently, Arizona is home to the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI), a Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Project covering portions of four national forests (Tonto, 
Coconino, Kaibab, and Apache-Sitgreaves). Within this project, forest managers and 
stakeholders have a vision of “… restored forest ecosystems that support natural fire regimes, 
functioning populations of native plants and animals, and forests that pose little threat of 
destructive wildfire to thriving forest communities, as well as support sustainable forest 
industries that strengthen local economies while conserving natural resources and aesthetic 
values” (4FRI 2019). The goal of 4FRI is to perform fuels reduction treatments across 50,000 
acres per year, estimated to have more than 1 million tons of small-diameter roundwood each 
year in addition to sawlog materials (Fleishman 2019).  
 
The economics of forest restoration are challenging (Lynch 2001, Nicholls et al. 2018). Forest 
harvest machines used during forest restoration activities are expensive to operate (i.e., 
>$180/hour), also the cost of treatments is a direct result of the amount of time spent to fell, 
extract, and process trees. It takes more time (and therefore more money) to handle many small-
diameter trees, compared to handling large diameter trees for the same harvested volume of 
wood. The low value of small-diameter logs and a lack of markets using restoration materials 
add to the difficulty of economic viability. Due to the economics of removal and lack of 
manufacturing facilities in western Arizona, small-diameter logs, limbs, and branches are often 
left on site and/or burned due to the high cost of collecting and hauling them long distances to a 
market. Piling and burning biomass is expensive and only allowed during limited months each 
3

year due to the negative impacts on air quality and the risk of fire escaping (Sifford et al. 2018). 
Locally, small-diameter logs are often chipped and hauled to markets in Phoenix, Arizona where 
wood chips are converted into colored mulch products used for landscaping. A round-trip 
between a typical harvesting site located in northern Arizona and a market in Phoenix takes 
about seven hours, yet the market value of raw wood chips is less than $40/green ton, which is 
not enough to cover the costs of harvesting and transportation. Federal, state, counties and/or 
cities often subsidize or pay for thinning operations to accomplish the objectives of forest 
restoration and hazardous fuel reduction in order to lower the risk of catastrophic fire. A solution 
is needed to address the high transportation cost associated with trucking low-value woody 
biomass long distances when local markets are not available. Selling a large volume (e.g., 
>500,000 tons/year) of wood chips either domestically or internationally using railroad 
transportation may be an option, particularly if these markets are willing to pay higher prices. 
However, railroad transportation is not a common method to supply wood chips over long 
distances (>500 miles) in the US West and railroad operations logistics that are needed to handle 
wood chips are not well understood or tested. 
 
A Brief History of US Railway Transportation  
Prior to today’s local and interstate roads, railroad transportation was once the dominant method 
of shipping products in the US. Shipping by rail was faster, more reliable, and required less fuel 
compared to the primitive trucking industry of early America (Stover 1997, Weingroff 2017). 
Road improvements began to occur during World War I, as the demand for goods and 
transportation of military personnel outpaced supply-chain logistics and railroad capacity. By 
1916 there were more than 254,000 miles of railroad in the US (Stover 1997). As consumers 
began to purchase Henry Ford’s Model T, there was an increased demand for additional roads 
and less requirement for passenger service by the railroads (Weingroff 2017). The Great 
Depression further changed how manufacturers transported goods, which favored the use of both 
short and long-distance trucking since federal job creation programs helped build road 
infrastructure (Stover 1997). This downturn was short lived, as World War II began. Railroads, 
having learned lessons from the previous war, streamlined delivery by cooperating with 
competing railroads and solved logistical challenges by planning railcar deliveries based on 
anticipated regional transportation needs (Stover 1997). In addition, transcontinental railroads 
proved valuable since military supplies were now needed on the east and west coasts. The end of 
World War II meant the end of rationing of rubber, fuel, and metal, and once again allowed the 
trucking industry to develop (Stover 1997).  
 
The trucking industry enjoyed the benefit of newly built roads located outside rail lines that 
connected cities and markets, as well as an ample driver workforce trained during the war. With 
increased travel and transportation choices, America’s reliance on railroads drastically 
diminished, favoring highway and air travel. Following the Second World War, railroads scaled 
back and consolidated operations, reduced passenger service, and abandoned excess or high 
maintenance tracks (Weingroff 2017, Stover 1997). Deregulation of the railroads came in the 
1980s, allowing railroads more control of the rates charged and other business practices like 
whether to own their own railcars or charge fees to transport a company’s privately owned 
railcar (Stover 1997).  
4

Today, truck and trailer combinations are the predominant method of transporting logs from the 
woods to a manufacturing facility (Latutala et al. 2012, Koirala et al. 2017). There are, however, 
several issues associated with truck transportation that make this mode of transportation 
economically challenging; particularly as transportation distances increase (Koirala et al. 2017). 
It is also agreed that finding and retaining skilled truck drivers is a problem in the US (Koirala et 
al. 2017, Conrad 2018). Conrad (2018) further stated that rising insurance rates for companies 
transporting forest products adds to the costs of wages and higher fuel prices aggravating the 
economics of trucking. Weight limits (e.g., 80,000 lb maximum) on interstate paved highways 
are also perceived by the forest industry as a challenge to economically hauling forest products 
(Koirala et al. 2017). These are significant challenges as truck transportation often accounts for 
more than 50 percent of the total forest biomass (logs and residues) supply cost (stump-to-
facility) in today’s forest operations (Pan et al. 2008, Koirala et al. 2017). Multimodal 
transportation possibilities that use a combination of truck and rail are available, which may 
provide an economical and environmental alternative to single mode truck transportation 
(Lautala et al. 2012, Sbihi and Eglese 2007).  
 
Multimodal transportation is not a new concept. Goods often require transportation to a location 
and then must be transloaded to another means of transport. Usually, it is a combination of 
trucking followed by marine or rail transportation. Shippers historically used stevedores (workers 
that load/unload ships) to manually move individual crates and boxes from the primary (e.g., 
trucking) to secondary (e.g., marine) mode of transportation. Referred to as “breakbulk 
shipping,” it takes a considerable amount of time to transload goods. When loading ships, cranes 
would lift nets filled with goods stacked by stevedores on shore; these goods would then have to 
be re-stacked onboard the ship. It often required just as many days to load and unload a ship as it 
took the ship to travel to its destination (Levinson 2016). Intermodal methods were developed to 
minimize the time required to transload freight.  
 
Literature shows that industrious entrepreneurs in 1844 configured stagecoach bodies that lifted 
off their chassis, which were then stacked onto train cars for long distance transportation 
(AKG_Images 2019, Levinson 2016). This intermodal method was improved over the next 
decades, as war again stimulated improvements in transportation logistics. Toward the end of 
World War II, the US army experimented with standardized crating (US Army 2013). 
Standardization allows shippers to know the exact dimensions of a crate/container, greatly 
assisting them to plan how to fill and design equipment to move these crates/containers. In 1948, 
the US Army Transportation Corps developed a reusable steel crate (8’6” long, 6’3” wide, and 
6’10” high) capable of carrying 9,000 pounds (US Army 2013). Having a double door on one 
end and hooks on each of the top four corners, the “Transporter,” or officially known as the 
“Transporter, Household Goods, Shipboard,” resembles the shortened intermodal shipping 
container seen today (US Army 2013). The Transporter was further evaluated during the Korean 
War to solve the issue of local stevedores dropping or damaging an estimated 90 percent of 
crates offloaded by hand (US Army 2013). In 1952, the Army developed the Container Express, 
commonly referred to as CONEX, to ship parts from a Georgia depot to waiting ships at the port 
of San Francisco followed by marine transportation to Japan and South Korea (US Army 2013).  
 
5

While intermodal containers are still referenced as CONEX containers, Malcom McLean 
improved the logistics and commercialized the intermodal shipping concept seen today 
(Levinson 2016). Levinson (2016) described how McLean converted two war surplus oil tanker 
ships to carry 33-foot aluminum “boxes” built by the Brown Company located in Spokane, 
Washington that could be transported by truck and trailer with the box being lifted off the trailer 
and loaded onto the converted tankers. The Brown Company built these boxes to transport 
freight (double-stacked) by barge from Seattle, Washington to ports in Alaska (Levinson 2016). 
In 1956, the first loaded container was placed on the converted tanker, followed by additional 
containers every seven minutes (Levinson 2016). Comparatively, if this ship had been loosely 
packed (breakbulk), according to McLean, the cost would have been $5.83 per ton; actual costs 
using this new container method was placed at $0.158 per ton (Levinson 2016). The era of 
intermodal transport had begun, but true refinement of the process came when McLean’s 
company solved shipping/receiving issues during the Vietnam War (Levinson 2016). 
   
Intermodal shipping has greatly advanced since its inception. Early container ships could handle 
500–800 20-foot equivalent units (TEUs), while todays largest ships can stack containers seven 
high and handle over 18,000 TEUs (TRAC 2015). Container sizes vary, but the most common 
size intermodal container measures 8 feet wide x 9.5 feet tall x 40 feet long (commonly referred 
to as a 40-foot-high cube). It was estimated in 2015 that over 37.6 million intermodal TEU’s 
were in service around the world, handling 90 percent of the global non-bulk cargo (Rodrigue 
2017, TRAC 2015). Railroads move most intermodal containers in the US from marine ports to 
inland rail terminals; intermodal volume (both domestic and international) was a record 14.5 
million TEUs in 2017, with about half of that consisting of imports and exports (AAR 2018).  
 
Using rail-to-ship goods has additional benefits. Rail transportation is three to four times more 
fuel-efficient (moving one ton of freight 468 miles per gallon of fuel) than truck-based 
transportation, potentially removing more than 280 long-haul trucks from roadways per 
intermodal train (AAR 2018, BNSF 2015). In Arizona, there are over 1,800 miles of freight rail, 
primarily consisting of Burlington Northern Santa Fe’s (BNSF’s) Transcontinental and Union 
Pacific’s Sunset Route (AAR 2017). Freight statistics provided by the Association of American 
Railroads (2017) indicated that, “It would have taken approximately 7.1 million additional trucks 
[trucking cycles] to handle the 127.8 million tons of freight that originated in, terminated in, or 
moved through Arizona by rail in 2017.” The association goes on to report that of this 127.8 
million tons, just under three million tons (~75,100 carloads) originated within Arizona with 21.3 
million tons (~288,300 carloads) terminating in the state (AAR 2017).  
 
While intermodal is the primary means of railroad freight travel across the transcontinental line, 
there are issues. When there is a trade imbalance, containers must return to their origin empty, 
which can be costly. In the US, due to current trade and shipping mode imbalances, it is 
estimated that more than 50 percent of all intermodal containers return to foreign ports empty. Of 
the remaining 50 percent, 45 percent return to a marine terminal prior to locating cargo with only 
5 percent being loaded with export cargo immediately after initial unloading (Rodrigue 2017).  
6

Project Initiation and Study Methods 
In 2018, researchers at the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University 
(NAU) began to investigate if empty intermodal containers may open the possibilities of 
shipping woody biomass long distances to business clusters once thought economically 
infeasible when considering truck transportation alone. This paper documents the conception and 
ultimate success shipping 1,150 tons of wood chips from Arizona to the Port of Long Beach, 
California using 58 intermodal shipping containers (40-foot-high cube) on the BNSF 
transcontinental rail line that runs through northern Arizona.   
 
Project Concept and Initialization 
In 2018, a South Korean businessman came to northern Arizona to inquire about the feasibility 
of exporting wood products from Arizona to a port in South Korea through a combination of 
railroad transportation and ocean shipping. While this was not the first time he looked at 
Arizona’s woody biomass feedstock availability, the demand for over 500,000 tons of woody 
biomass in South Korea coupled with knowing that Arizona needed to restore their overstocked 
forests brought him back. Following the visit, the Korean businessman requested a 66-lb (30 kg) 
sample of wood chips be sent to perform an energy content analysis of the material to ensure that 
ponderosa wood chips from Arizona met the Korean standards as a biomass energy feedstock.  
 
While county, state, federal and local support was exceedingly supportive of the idea, there were 
unanswered questions associated with the logistics and economic feasibility of sending woody 
biomass from low-value, small-diameter material to oversea markets. However, it was noted that 
the BNSF transcontinental rail line transports railcars carrying thousands of intermodal 
containers through the town of Flagstaff, Arizona every day. Realizing that the intermodal 
containers were full while heading to cities in the eastern US from the Port of Long Beach, 
California but the majority returned to the port empty after delivering its cargo, the NAU-ERI 
researchers, along with local research partners and collaborators, developed the idea of filling 
them with wood chips using the concept of a low-cost backhaul transportation option. If the 
concept of sending wood chips long distance using intermodal containers was successful, other 
products derived from small-diameter restoration material may be possible as well (sawdust, 
shavings, cants, boards, pellets, torrefied briquettes). South Korean markets are interested in 
these products; however, there has been no viable economic shipping method to make this 
happen.  
 
Researchers began looking into information about shipping woody biomass in shipping 
containers. While there were cases of companies filling shipping containers with logs and 
sending them to markets abroad, no papers describing the logistics or economics were located. 
Local stakeholders and researchers interested in evaluating the concept used their network of 
industry contacts to set a meeting with companies, non-profit organizations, state and federal 
government agencies, BNSF, and ERI researchers to discuss the idea of sending 100 intermodal 
containers with wood chips from Arizona to South Korea as a pilot project. Our goal for this 
project was to 1) test the logistics of using railroad transportation, 2) investigate the loading 
times and weights associated with filling intermodal containers with wood chips.    
7

Intermodal vs Manifest Shipping 
During our first meeting with BNSF, they were interested in building additional business by 
shipping woody biomass from Arizona using rail; however, there was an issue with using 
intermodal containers. At this meeting, we began to realize the difference between intermodal 
and manifest shipments. Manifest occurs when the customer calls the railroad and requests one 
to several railcars be delivered to an area serviced by the railroad. Typically, railcars are dropped 
off on a scheduled day and picked up later once they are filled. Manifest shipping allows 
different numbers of railcars with different cargos and final delivery locations to be collected and 
moved to railyards where they are combined with other railcars for efficient delivery across the 
country. While this takes time and effort, it allows small numbers of railcars to be combined and 
the customer does not have to build a full train (5,000–6,000+ feet) themselves. Intermodal on 
the other hand is a completely different business model. Intermodal only has shipping containers 
and travels from point of loading to point of unloading (e.g., full containers from Port of Long 
Beach to Chicago). Intermodal does not stop in between a starting station and a final destination 
and contains a full unit train typically carrying 220 (double-stacked) containers. Our request for 
100 intermodal containers for our pilot project was not a full unit train and therefore not a typical 
business practice BNSF would undertake. 
 
Following this meeting, we looked into the possibility of trucking intermodal containers from an 
intermodal depot in Phoenix to Flagstaff, filling the containers (while on a trailer) with wood 
chips and trucking them back to Phoenix where they would be loaded onto Union Pacific railcars 
and then shipped to the Port of Long Beach. This over-the-road solution ultimately was dropped 
as it was impractical to scale up to shipping the 500,000 tons per year requested by the South 
Korean purchaser. BNSF suggested we look into manifest shipments for our pilot project, filling 
coal cars with wood chips and then trans-loading the chips into intermodal containers at the Port 
of Long Beach. While this typically would not be a method of choice, as trans-loading adds 
additional cost to the project, it was a way to test railroad logistics and find out how many tons of 
wood chips a container may hold. But, coal cars were small in size and would result in high 
railroad transportation costs. An alternative was large capacity railcars, known as wood gondolas 
by forest products companies, which have historically used them to move wood chips by rail. 
These are open-top, bottom-dumping cars capable of transporting 7,500 cubic feet of wood chips 
(roughly the volume of ~2.8 shipping containers). Although wood gondolas are not common, 
researchers did locate a company that would lease several for $500 per car on a long-term (5-
year) contract. This was an issue as the project only aimed to fill 100 shipping containers and 
would not have a long enough lease to justify a rental. Researchers agreed to continue pursuing 
the use of smaller coal cars readily available in Arizona for the pilot project. 
 
An important problem related to operations logistics is locating a business operation site that 
provides a direct connection to railroads. Most land in Coconino County is tribally or federally 
owned and vacant industrial lands within the Flagstaff area are rare (Fig. 1); particularly lands 
with railroad sidings. Our initial assessments suggested two locations that potentially could be 
used to test railroad logistics for the pilot project. The number one choice was Camp Navajo, 
operated by the Arizona National Guard as a training site and munitions storage depot. 
Originally built to provide storage and shipment of explosives and ammunition during World 
8

War II, the 28,000-acre installation has over 38 miles of rail and four locomotives. The ERI, as 
well as local, county, city, and state officials, have been involved with the Northern Arizona 
Military Affairs Council (NAMAC) for many years. For almost 20 years, NAMAC has 
entertained the idea of using a portion of underutilized land within Camp Navajo as a forest 
products industrial center to assist local communities dealing with small-diameter biomass from 
forest restoration treatments to reduce catastrophic wildfire and post-wildfire flooding. Members 
of the community considered this pilot project a first step in demonstrating that a forest products 
industry could be compatible with the Department of Defense’s national security mission at 
Camp Navajo.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Land ownership in Coconino County (Coconino County Comprehensive Plan 2015) 
 
Growing Support for the Pilot Project 
As the pilot project concept made progress, thoughts turned to how the project might be funded. 
Even with the South Korean company willing to pay market value ($80/green ton wet basis) for 
the chips free alongside ship (FAS) at the Port of Long Beach, the project would need to be 
subsidized for implementation due to the low volume (100 shipping containers) associated with 
the pilot project and high costs associated with equipment mobilization and unique railroad 
shipping logistics. Researchers approached the USDA Forest Service Southwest Region Biomass 
Coordinator and obtained a $100,000 Statewide Wood Energy Team (SWET) grant through the 
Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management. A “Chip & Ship” implementation team 
was formed. The team consisted of ERI staff, Camp Navajo leadership, industry, The Nature 
Conservancy, and other federal/county/state agencies to discuss key items and logistics for 
9

implementation and how to move forward with shipping wood chips using railroad infrastructure 
available at Camp Navajo. The ERI research team facilitated several group meetings to develop a 
work plan for implementation and acquire approvals required to carry out operations. Camp 
Navajo Garrison Commander Colonel Ray Garcia made significant progress by opening the 
possibility that as a research project, NAU could apply for an easement to allow workers to use 
areas within Camp Navajo to load woodchips into coal railcars. The main issue, however, was 
that even if chips were able to be delivered to the Port of Long Beach, the cost of trans-loading at 
the port would be exceedingly high and this would not be the method used to ship 500,000 tons 
per year. Filling intermodal containers, rather than coal cars, at Camp Navajo appeared to be the 
only feasible method.  
 
Finding a Shipping Company and Obtaining a Research Easement 
With the renewed idea of intermodal deliveries to Camp Navajo, researchers once again met with 
BNSF to discuss the possibility of a one-time delivery of intermodal containers to learn about the 
logistics of chipping and transporting wood chips using intermodal containers on rail. While they 
were impressed with our progress, this still was not compatible with the current business 
practices of BNSF or the shipping companies that owned the shipping containers. They 
suggested we contact one of the shipping companies and discuss the idea with them. While 
discussing our progress with the South Korean businessman, he put us in contact with 
management from Hyundai Merchant Marine (HMM). This started a string of conference calls as 
well as site visits to Camp Navajo, allowing HMM to understand our pilot project. HMM was 
interested in the full project of filling underutilized intermodal containers with wood chips, as 
this idea would help create a new business item for them and reduce the intermodal container 
shipping imbalance. With growing community and shipping company support, an appeal was 
made to BNSF corporate headquarters to allow a one-time delivery of intermodal containers to 
Camp Navajo. Although many logistical challenges would remain, BNSF and HMM agreed to 
work with us to obtain 58 intermodal containers allowing the pilot project to move forward. 
 
While Camp Navajo was interested in participating in the pilot project, NAU researchers 
underestimated the levels of permissions needed for NAU to obtain a research easement. 
Ultimately, permission is needed from the Adjunct General (TAG) at the Arizona Department of 
Emergency and Military affairs (AZDEMA). In order to bring the TAG’s staff up to date on the 
many facets of the project, the NAU research team and Camp Navajo staff members worked 
together to develop a Concept of Operations, which explains how the project would be carried 
out and who would be working on it. The NAU researchers also worked with the Arizona 
Department of Forestry and Fire Management to issue a contract for a local chipping contractor 
who would transport logs and chip and fill intermodal containers at Camp Navajo. Final 
approvals were issued by the US Army Corps of Engineers on July 12, 2018. 
 
 
 
10

Data Collection and Analysis 
The pilot project was initiated to test the logistics of using rail infrastructure to move intermodal 
containers into Camp Navajo, offload the containers, fill them with chips produced from small-
diameter logs by an on-site chipper, and reload the filled containers back onto railcars. We 
observed activities on log loading, hauling, log offloading/piling, equipment mobilization 
requirements, intermodal container delivery, container offloading, placement, chipping/filling 
containers, and reloading of filled containers onto railcars. The study was a controlled 
experiment implemented for six days of chipping and handling 40-foot-high cube shipping 
containers. As the learning curve was refined, methods did change. However, it still provided a 
good initial estimation of the productivity associated with railroad logistics and filling intermodal 
shipping containers with wood chips. For the study, 58 intermodal shipping containers were 
delivered to Camp Navajo from Memphis, Tennessee. The delivery consisted of eight railcars 
totaling 1,891 feet in length. The railcars varied from one to five wells (spaces for containers) 
with a variety of single and double stack containers (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. A five-well railcar with double-stacked intermodal shipping containers 
 
For the measurement of time to supply logs to the Camp Navajo project site, a researcher used a 
pick-up truck to follow the single log truck from the Chimney Springs restoration treatment site 
(north of Flagstaff) to Camp Navajo and recorded loading times and travel distances. A 750 
horsepower self-propelled tracked chipper filled containers with wood chips using an onboard 
chute. Container movement was performed by a Rough Terrain Container Handler (RTCH); data  
collection included the offloading of containers from railcars, as well as placing, and reloading  
11

filled containers back onto railcars (Figure 3). The RTCH’s onboard weight sensor displayed the 
gross weight of individual containers including both the container and wood chips. This was 
recorded by a data collector as well as the container number, and tare weight of the container. 
Once the doors of the container were closed, a plastic seal was placed on the door lock. This seal 
contained a unique eight-digit number and was a requirement for exporting. In addition to 
container load information, the railcar location where containers were placed was recorded as 
well. NAU undergraduate forestry interns assisted with container fill, log unloading, and 
container bulkhead construction times. For each work activity timed, trigger points were 
determined to signal the end of each work element within a cycle. In addition to measurements 
of time for each activity, other data collected included the number of logs, loading cycles, and 
weight to determine productivity.  
 
In addition, the interns assisted with collecting wood chip samples for moisture measurements. 
Wood chip samples were collected from 29 intermodal containers using a four-inch acrylonitrile 
butadiene styrene (ABS) pipe capped with a 90-degree fitting. A team of two would place the 
pipe in front of the discharge shoot on the chipper partially filling a five-gallon plastic bucket 
with chips. A total of three randomly selected samples were obtained during chipping for 28 of  
 
 
Figure 3. Rough terrain container handler (RTCH) offloading empty intermodal shipping container from 
railcar 
12

the 58 containers in the study. All three samples were mixed together and four to five handfuls of 
wood chips were placed in a one-gallon Zip Lock freezer bag marked with the date, container 
number, and container weight. Two Garmin Etrex 30 GPS units were used. One was placed in 
the RTCH and the other in the locomotive to collect movement and distance over time. The GPS 
units would be started prior to each workday and collected following the end of the shift. 
 
Machines used to implement the pilot project include: 
 
• Two diesel electric locomotives for moving railcars within Camp Navajo 
• Peterbilt over-the-road semi-truck with sleeper and log trailer 
• Prentice eight-wheel forwarder used to unload logs 
• Terex TBL440 750hp chipper on a self-propelled tracked undercarriage 
• Cat 519 log loader on a Pierce self-propelled undercarriage 
• RT240 Rough Terrain Container Handler (RTCH) 
 
The personnel involved with running the Camp Navajo chipping and container handling 
operations include: 
 
• One locomotive engineer 
• Two railcar attendants unlocking twist-locks on containers, guiding the RTCH operator, 
and acting as spotter while containers traveled under high voltage powerlines 
• One RTCH operator 
• One field guide directing the placement of containers at chipping location 
• One data recorder documenting container numbers, weight, seal number, and railcar 
location where filled container was placed 
• Two carpenters installing container bulkheads 
• One log truck driver 
• One log loader (chipper) 
• One forwarder operator unloading logs 
• One chipper operator 
• Three mechanics (one RTCH and two for chipping contractor’s equipment) 
• One rail crew supervisor  
 
Results 
Log Loading at Chimney Springs 
Log trailers were set out near the pavement at the Chimney Springs treatment site located 
approximately five miles north of downtown Flagstaff. Once on site, it took an average of 24 
minutes (n=3) to connect to an off-road truck, pull the trailer 2.4 miles, and position the trailer 
for loading logs. The log truck-trailer carried between 134–172 logs (155 logs average; n=7) 
each trip. After loading, the trailer was moved from the in-woods site back to the pavement for 
transport using an on-highway truck. The total time to hook up an empty trailer and drop off a 
full one at the pavement took between 1.73–2.62 hours (n=7) although a typical time, according 
to the contractor, would take two hours.    
13

Hauling Logs to Camp Navajo 
A highway log truck hauled one loaded trailer after dropping off an empty trailer. The one-way 
haul mileage (n=7) to Camp Navajo from Chimney Springs was fairly consistent, as the driver 
typically traveled the same route (Table 1). The observed round trip average, including trailer 
connection and binding logs was slightly under 1.25 hours. 
 
Table 1. One-way log hauling drive time based on road type and distance  
Road type 
Travel 
distance 
(miles)a 
Time (minutes) 
Native surface (~11 MPHb)  
0.76 
4.07 
Two-lane paved (~38 MPH) 
3.83 
6.03 
In-town (~17 MPH) 
3.76 
13.14 
Interstate (~60 MPH) 
12.84 
12.77 
Totals 
21.19 
36.01 
a one-way travel distance 
b miles per hour 
 
A forwarder unloaded logs from a loaded set-out log trailer at Camp Navajo. The time to unload 
(n=7) an average 155 logs was 47.5 minutes. Using an average log weight of 263.3 lbs per log, 
the typical loaded truck contained 20.41 tons of logs.   
 
Equipment Mobilization 
Data was not collected on most equipment moved into Camp Navajo, but it was assumed the 
typical transport truck would spend a full 10-hour day and would move two pieces of equipment 
(e.g., loader and forwarder). Costs associated with a lowbed truck and trailer would run around 
$1,000–$1,500 per day. The chipper and RTCH required significant transportation and special 
trailers to move them. For example, the RTCH required pilot vehicles and an 11-axle truck and 
trailer to transport it. The cost to transport the RTCH (round trip between Camp Navajo, Arizona 
and Cibolo, Texas) was approximately $51,000. Once onsite, the transport crew and mechanic 
configured, offloaded, and had the RTCH capable of moving containers within 20 minutes.  
  
BNSF Delivers Shipping Containers to Camp Navajo 
While originally scheduled to arrive on Tuesday, August 6, the containers were rescheduled for 
delivery on Wednesday, August 7. Notice was given on the 6th that the train would arrive on that 
day and deliver the containers within a four-hour window. Camp Navajo positioned their 
locomotives on site in preparation for an evening delivery. BNSF positioned the eight railcars at 
the front end of a full unit train. Once on site, the train parked on the west-bound transcontinental 
line, set the brakes on the unit train and disconnected the airlines. Once the Camp Navajo-bound 
cars were disconnected from the unit train, BNSF locomotives moved the railcars forward and 
backed into the Camp Navajo rail spur. Once again, the brakes were set and the BNSF 
locomotives returned to the parked unit train on the transcontinental line. Once connected, the 
airlines were charged and brakes were released. It took just over two hours total to drop the unit 
train, deliver the pilot project containers, and reconnect to the westbound unit train.  
14

Empty Shipping Containers are Offloaded 
An RTCH lift was required to offload the intermodal containers from the railcars. Two railcar 
attendants unlocked the containers from the railcars and guided the RTCH operator into position. 
A guide assisted the RTCH operator by directing where containers were placed at the slab. The 
average distance from the chipping site on the existing slab to the intermodal containers on the 
railcars was 1,500 feet. On average, the RTCH moved one container from the railcars to the slab 
every 10.47 minutes (n=10). This cycle consisted of average empty travel times from the slab to 
the railcars (2.05 minutes); positioning the machine (0.82 minutes); connecting to the container 
(hooking) and lifting (2.20 minutes); traveling backward from the railcar, under a set of 
powerlines, to a turning point (2.52 minutes); forward travel to the setoff location at the slab 
(1.42 minutes); and releasing the container and resetting the boom of the RTCH (1.45 minutes). 
When unloading a double-stack container, it was noted that the top container took an average of 
0.82 minutes longer to hook and lift from the railcar. 
 
Building Bulkheads 
BNSF required bulkheads to be placed in the containers to prevent chips from pressing against 
the container doors and to allow workers to safely open the doors without chips falling out. A 
local handyman and their assistant were contracted to manufacture and install the bulkheads. The 
workers typically cut materials (three 2x6-foot boards and one 4x8-foot sheet of Oriented Strand 
Board (OSB) per container) for eight bulkheads. Cutting the material averaged 3.32 minutes per 
bulkhead (n=28). Once cut, the workers inserted the three 2x6 boards into grooves in the 
containers adjacent to the doors (Figure 4). The sheet of OSB was fixed to the boards using a 
pneumatic stapler for easy removal at the South Korean destination. Installing the bulkheads 
averaged 4.67 minutes per container (n=28).   
 
Figure 4. Intermodal shipping containers with bulkheads installed ready for wood chips 
15

Shipping Containers Placed on Trailers for Loading 
Three flatbed semi-trailers were staged adjacent to chipping locations on the slab. The trailers 
were needed to raise the height of the intermodal container to match the height of the chipper 
discharge chute. Typically, the RTCH operator would move a filled container from the flatbed 
trailers to the railcars, traveling back empty to the slab to move an empty container to the trailer 
for filling. Containers ready to be filled were staged 50–100 feet from the flatbed trailers. A 
guide assisted the RTCH operator by adjusting the boom into position over the container and 
guiding them onto the flatbed trailer. Moving containers to the flatbed trailers (including empty 
travel back from railcars) averaged 7.35 minutes (n=10). This average cycle time consisted of 
empty travel (2.50 minutes); connecting/hooking/lifting container (1.80 minutes); traveling with 
container to the flatbed trailer (1.70 minutes; and setting/releasing container on flatbed trailer 
(1.35 minutes).  
 
Chipping and Loading Wood Chips into Shipping Containers 
The time required to fill a container with chips was wide-ranging (36–97 minutes), averaging 54 
minutes (n=24). This included 13.5 minutes for positioning chipper/loader and moving logs 
before chipping and 41.6 minutes to fill the container with chips. The number of logs needed for 
filling the container with chips varied between 130–224 with an average of 185.5 logs. Filled 
containers varied in weight (including container weight) from 42,400–55,000 lbs with the 
average observed filled container weighing 47,900 lbs. Moisture samples collected during 
chipping operations ranged from 28.7 percent to 50.8 percent with an average of 37.9 percent.   
  
Moving Shipping Containers Back to Railcars 
Moving a loaded container back to the railcars averaged 12.83 minutes (n=15). With this cycle, 
containers were lifted off the trailer and weighed, doors were closed, and a plastic tag (seal) was 
placed on the door locks (4.63 minutes); the container was moved three quarters of the way to 
the railcars (2.78 minutes); maneuvering under a high voltage powerline (1.60 minutes); moved 
the remaining distance to the railcars (1.12 minutes); and finally placed on the railcar with the 
RTCH reset for travel (2.70 minutes). 
 
Discussion 
Planning for Pre-Project Logistics 
The equipment used to move intermodal containers is specialized, large, and has limited 
availability outside of marine shipping or intermodal hubs near railways. While the cost to 
mobilize this equipment over long distance can be recouped through large quantities of shipped 
material or longer duration projects, a short-term, low-volume project may not justify the move-
in costs for these machines. Close to 60 percent of the rental cost for the RTCH used for this 
project was transportation from Texas to Arizona. Furthermore, the trailering systems needed to 
haul this equipment over highways to meet road capacity and weight limits can also constrain 
site accessibility due to maneuverability issues. During this project, a significant delay was 
16

experienced during the delivery due to a concrete barrier and part of a steel fence needing to be 
moved for the truck and trailer to access the site.  
 
Site selection is also a critical component for a successful wood chipping operation because 
access to railcars can be limited in many areas. Camp Navajo has over 38 miles of rail. Of these 
miles, track length, rail switches, and flat terrain close to a chipping site was limited to only a 
few locations that did not require site improvements. In addition to location, site infrastructure is 
important. Intermodal containers filled with wood chips can weigh 28 tons or more; coupled with 
the weight of the RTCH (118,500 lbs) this can significantly impact roads and other 
infrastructure. This project’s location was a concrete slab built during World War II. The slab 
was partially broken into rubble due to previous tracked machines working over it. When 
containers filled with chips approached 25 tons, a noticeable impact was seen when the front 
tires of the RTCH created ruts in the rubble and often broke through sections of concrete. Due to 
the four-wheel drive system on the RTCH, traction was not an issue; however, the rocking action 
of the wheels going over ruts caused clay soils under the slab to liquefy creating larger ruts. 
Additional gravel was needed to fill ruts as well as maintain the road leading to the railcars. A 
combination of watering for dust abatement and many trips over the same area caused additional 
rutting that would have been an issue had the project continued. Snow, rain, or thawing of frozen 
ground can make this a significant issue when moving containers. While the RTCH is designed 
to be driven off-road, other container handlers may need to have a smooth surface to travel on. 
Should an all-weather or smooth slab be needed, a 12-inch thick reinforced concrete slab is 
recommended (Mott 2019).  
 
Site selection is also an important consideration when working with a railroad. Camp Navajo is 
located adjacent to the BNSF transcontinental railway. While this is optimal for intermodal 
container transportation to marine terminals, it does pose logistical challenges due to the number 
of trains going through every day (we observed trains running every 7–15 minutes). One of the 
main issues BNSF had with delivering a small quantity of intermodal containers for the pilot 
project was that it tied up the transcontinental line while the train offloaded and delivered the 
shipping containers to Camp Navajo. We observed this delivery taking over two hours to 
complete, which shut down one transcontinental line for the duration. For the railroad to take 
interest in a full-scale project, additional railroad infrastructure would be needed. BNSF 
suggested that 8,000 feet of siding would be required to get a full unit train of containers off the 
transcontinental line. In addition, with the anticipated amount of traffic, two electronic switches 
would need to be installed (one at each end of the new siding). This would allow the train to 
enter and exit the siding without having to manually activate the switch. Cost estimates for this 
infrastructure begins at $250 per foot of track and $1.5 million per electronic switch ($5 million 
total without including engineering costs) (Hjertstedt 2019). Once environmental and planning 
approvals were obtained, it would take one year to engineer and install this infrastructure.    
 
Railroad logistics are also important within the site selected. Two locomotives were used from 
Camp Navajo. This allowed rail cars to move from the BNSF drop-off site since BNSF does not 
deliver outside their right-of-way. While planning the project, it was anticipated that six railcars, 
each containing five wells (slots for containers), would be delivered to Camp Navajo for a total 
17

of 60 double-stacked containers. With the average five-well container railcar being between 
265–300 feet, we anticipated this would require 1,700 feet of rail. However, only 58 containers 
were delivered for the project. In addition, a mix of five, three, and one-well railcars were used 
with some containers arriving single stacked. This railcar arrangement measured 1,891 feet in 
length. The added length caused a logistical issue within Camp Navajo. With the train pushed 
out to the BNSF right-of-way pick-up location, the extra length “trapped” the Camp Navajo 
locomotives because the switch connecting to other rails was blocked by the train length. This 
could have been an issue if the two locomotives were needed for other work. 
 
Chipping and Loading Logistics 
It required more time than anticipated to obtain the required easements and permits to operate at 
Camp Navajo, which resulted in a delay delivering logs to the project site. Truck drivers are 
difficult to obtain in northern Arizona, and only one driver was available for the contractor. In 
addition, part way through the project a wildfire shut down log hauling operations. These issues 
resulted in logs being delivered to Camp Navajo throughout the chipping operation. Logs were 
loaded at Camp Navajo using set-out trailers, which resulted in delayed interactions between 
loading and trucking. At times, the truck driver would wait for a load while other times the 
loader would wait for a trailer. Although the average time recorded for a one-way trip to Camp 
Navajo was approximately one and a half hours, the contractor noted that the average including 
wait time was two hours. Additional truck drivers and trailers could reduce this haul time. 
 
A new operator unloaded logs at Camp Navajo. This required additional time to unload a log 
truck and resulted in delays associated with operator-induced hydraulic hose breakage. Due to 
the length of time needed to deliver a truckload of logs and an onsite mechanic ready to repair 
machinery, this did not contribute to any noticeable log delivery delays. In addition, logs were 
decked parallel to the anticipated chipping location. While this did not affect unload times, we 
noticed that decking logs at a slight angle facilitated feeding logs into the chipper.  
 
The project was designed to allow a side-loading container handler to access all railcars without 
moving the train. Unfortunately, a switch issue required moving the train to an adjacent track 
approximately 1,500 feet away. This required the RTCH to move containers to the chipping 
location over an aggregate surfaced road and under a set of high voltage powerlines. Ideally, 
operations would occur where there were not overhead hazards because going under the 
powerlines required the RTCH operator to lower the container and an observer to monitor the 
clearance. This challenge increased travel times when moving containers. While the overhead 
hazard affected the empty container unloading process, it did not impact loaded container 
movement because the RTCH operations were completed and the machine was parked well 
before a new container was ready to be loaded back on the railcars. 
 
There are areas where productivity may be enhanced by semi-autonomous machine control 
versus operator control. Parker et al. (2016) state that machine productivity can often be limited 
by operators. They illustrate this through smart boom technology developed by John Deere 
where a computer automatically adjusts the hydraulic rams on the boom based on where the 
operator positions the boom tip; this reduces the operator’s learning curve and workload and 
18

improves cycle times and fuel efficiency (Parker et al. 2016). This example may be useful for 
RTCH operators aligning the boom of the handler over a container. Of the 10 minutes on average 
that it took to hook and offload empty containers from the railcars to the staging area, 22 percent 
was hooking and lifting while 29 percent was placing and releasing the container. In addition, it 
was noted that double-stacked top containers took on average an additional 49 seconds to hook 
due to the operator’s limited visibility. A semi-autonomous control that aligns the boom with the 
container locks and assists the operator space containers at the staging area may increase 
productivity and reduce the number of human assistants needed to guide the RTCH operator. 
 
We had not anticipated the need to install bulkheads within the intermodal containers. The doors 
on conventional chip trailers usually act as a bulkhead for trailers in the US. Bulkhead 
installation, however, allowed additional chips to be loaded and increased the weight of the 
loaded container. A container was typically volume-limited (filled to capacity), averaging 39,700 
lbs of chips per container. There was one instance where the container and chip volume 
approached the limit of the RTCH capacity of 29 tons.  
 
Moisture samples collected during chipping operations ranged from 28.7 percent to 50.8 percent, 
with an average of 37.9 percent. Researchers anticipated a much lower average because the logs 
had been cut and decked for close to a year prior to the project. Additional moisture content 
measurements were collected from wood cookies cut from logs (n=28) at the Chimney Springs 
site to compare the results to those from the chip samples. Results indicated that log moisture 
varied from 14.7 percent (ends of log) to 55.6 percent toward the center of the log (average log 
moisture=35.9 percent). Researchers believe that a combination of increased snow depths during 
the spring and bark on the logs while decked caused the increase in moisture. 
 
Chipping was the single most influential operation when looking at overall operational 
productivity. Researcher questions were: 1) how easily could the chips be loaded into containers, 
2) whether weight or volume limited container filling, and 3) what was the time required to fill 
these containers. The contractor, anticipating the need for continuous travel between container 
loading areas, selected a tracked mobile chipper for the project (Figure 5). The chipper was 
equipped with a loader arm and grapple, but the contractor elected not to rely on this feature 
because the loader arm did not have the reach of a typical log loader, the boom was not as 
powerful, and the hydraulic controls were too sensitive at the high idle needed for chipping. The 
contractor elected to use a wheeled log loader to feed the chipper. There were several instances 
where the log loader was down due to hydraulic repairs, which required the use of the chipper 
log loader instead. In these instances, the time to fill a container almost doubled from an average 
of 54 minutes to 97 minutes. This average included both chipping and positioning logs from the 
deck to facilitate chipper loading.  
 
19

 
 
Figure 5. Log loader feeding logs into the tracked chipper  
 
Lessons learned indicate that the chipper had to be angled into the log deck. Decked logs had to 
be turned slightly for more efficient loading into the chipper. Future operations can account for 
this during initial placement of logs in the deck. Due to a lack of venting from a sealed container, 
there was concern that chips may blow back and out from the container as it was filled. But, this 
was not an issue. Bulkheads allowed for loading additional volume into the container and were 
typically filled to capacity before weight became a concern. After a significant number of logs 
were needed to fill the container, the contractor only asked that two containers be weighed before 
final filling. One of these containers approached the weight limit of the RTCH. It weighed 
55,000 lbs, including the container. The average container weighed 48,000 lbs (39,700 average 
net green chip weight). There was close to a 1:1 ratio of log truck loads to filled container, with 
the average log truck containing 155 logs and the average container requiring 150 logs to be 
chipped.  
 
The short duration of the project did not allow the contractor to develop an average loading 
rhythm. The first few days consisted of a learning curve including designing a method of loading 
the container. The selected chipper had a curved chute that was designed to fill trailer-height 
vehicles. A single shipping container placed on the ground was too low for the chipper, while 
double-stacked container was too high. The chipper only reached three feet above the floor of the 
double-stacked container. As a solution, the contractor obtained three flatbed trailers. To match 
the height the chipper was designed for, containers were placed on the flatbed trailers. By the 
20

fourth day, the contractor reached its best productivity by filling 13 containers in one day. 
However, the long workdays were not sustainable and productivity fell over the next two days 
due to worker fatigue.  
 
There were some issues to consider when handling individual containers.  Occasionally, uneven 
terrain would cause a loaded container frame to twist causing difficulty when closing the door. 
Workers found that placing a small log under a corner of the container (on the side where the 
door was jammed) twisted the frame back into place and allowed for closing the door.  
 
A data collector recorded all data attributed to individual containers. This data recording was 
essential both for exporting (shipping company records) as well as a requirement by the railroad. 
Each container was tracked by the railroad in terms of weight as well as where containers were 
placed on individual wells on a railcar. This data can be cumbersome and difficult to keep track, 
but it is essential for exporting and railroad logistics. Once loading was finalized and railcars 
released for pickup, BNSF entered the data and notified us that three wells were overloaded. 
Workers had missed that one of the railcars had a well capacity much lower than the others. The 
computer showed which wells were overloaded, the railcars were returned to the loading site, 
and three double-stacked containers were moved to other locations. As important as the container 
information is, data management required careful review to ensure accuracy. The use of scan 
codes on containers, railcars, wells, and seal tags could simplify data collection and reduce 
errors. 
 
After closing and sealing the containers and recording container data, the RTCH moved the filled 
container back to the railcars. Similar to the offloading of empty containers, connecting to and 
placing containers required the most time and effort by the operator (36 percent and 21 percent, 
respectively). When connecting to the container, additional time was spent weighing, closing, 
and sealing the container. During loading operations, it was noted that one of the well cars 
delivered was different from the others. It had longer wells that could accommodate 53-foot 
domestic intermodal containers. As such, the guides used to align the bottom container onto the 
railcar well existed for the sides, but the 40-foot container had to be guided onto four pins used 
to keep the smaller container in place. This took longer for the RTCH operator to accomplish 
because the other well cars had side to side guides as well as end guides. The semi-autonomous 
controls discussed in the unloading section may have similar benefits in this area. 
 
Project Moves to Full-Scale Operational  
There are several items that need to be addressed to move the project from pilot to full scale. As 
discussed earlier, site improvements and infrastructure are essential. Rail infrastructure will need 
to be developed and an all-weather surface capable of holding up to heavy traffic by a container 
handler will be needed. In addition, log transportation and storage will need to be addressed. A 
sufficient inventory of logs should be stored at the chipping and loading site to maintain 
consistent chipping and shipping operations through winter, fire season, and possible wildlife 
restriction periods that can limit deliveries to the chipping site. Secondly, a workforce will need 
to be developed—one that includes forest equipment operators who cut trees and move logs, 
truck drivers to haul logs, and equipment repair technicians who maintain a variety of equipment 
21

needed for a successful forest restoration and chipping operation. Additional workers will be 
needed to move railcars and containers, chip logs and fill containers, and load filled containers 
back onto railcars.  
 
Productivity data can be used to balance equipment needs and productivity goals. For the full- 
scale project to materialize, a full unit train containing 220 containers needs to be filled every 10 
working days. Using productivity calculations developed from observations of equipment 
working during the pilot project, the estimated number of machines needed to fill 22 containers 
per day was created (Table 3). This information can be helpful when balancing the number of 
pieces of equipment working with the output of wood chips, ensuring that equipment interaction 
and feedstock delays are minimized.  
 
Table 2. Machines and operations needed to fill 22 containers per day for a full-scale operation 
 
Work activities 
Operational productivity 
# machines needed to fill 
22 containers per dayb 
(Tons/hour) (#containers/day)a 
Log loader (loading logs) 
Log truck (hauling logs) 
Log loader (unloading logs) 
RTCH (moving empty containers) 
Crew (building bulkheads) 
RTCH (setting containers for chipping) 
Chipper/loader (filling containers) 
RTCH (loading containers on train) 
10.2 
5.1 
4.3 
10.2 
5.1 
4.3 
25.8 
13.0 
1.7 
144.0 
60.0 
0.4 
180.0 
75.0 
0.3 
195.0 
81.3 
0.3 
26.7 
13.5 
1.6 
112.0 
46.8 
0.5 
 
a Number of containers filled based on a 10-hour/day shift and operational productivities observed during the pilot study 
b Number of machines to support a full-scale (220 containers/every two-week) estimated based on operational productivities 
observed during the pilot study 
 
The most prominent challenge is economics. The current market value of chips free-alongside-
ship (FAS) at the Port of Long Beach is approximately $80 per ton (at 25 percent moisture 
content). For example, if chips were loaded into containers for $45 per ton, railroad 
transportation must come in below $35 per ton for intermodal containers to be cost competitive 
(Figure 6). This means the container shipping cost using railroad from Camp Navajo to the Port 
of Long Beach needs to be less than $800 per container. It should be noted that railroad 
transportation cost is a major cost item and needs to be minimized to make the operations 
economically feasible.   
 
22

 
 
  
Figure 6. Chart relating shipping cost per container to unit cost ($/ton) 
 
Pilot Project Limitations  
The equipment selected for the pilot project may not be practical for a large-scale operation. 
Additional research should evaluate the benefits of using a dedicated chipping facility. Large-
scale chipping operations often use these facilities, which are designed for high speed and 
productivity, to supply pulp and paper industries. Chipping facilities often have cranes with a 
large grapple that unload and deck entire truckloads of logs in one cycle. The crane also feeds 
decked logs into a drum debarker, producing clean logs and bark that can be used for high-value 
products such as landscape bark. Logs travel from the debarker through a large electric disk 
chipper that produces large quantities of chips that are then piled for delivery. There are 
significant benefits to using electricity. It lessens the demand for fluctuating and expensive diesel 
fuel and reduces emissions. By decoupling operations, equipment operators are not waiting for 
other machines to complete their work cycle, and a breakdown may not immediately affect 
productivity. If a chipping facility were used, multiple high-speed conveyors can take chips from 
the pile and fill several containers at once, thus increasing the number of filled containers 
returning to the railcars. This is extremely important when scaling up to a larger project (22 
containers per day). As container movement increases, infrastructure design should include plans 
for handling inbound railcars filled with empty containers as well as railcars loaded with full 
containers ready to be released for pickup.  
 
 
23

Significant policy modifications need to be made to use Camp Navajo as a commercial location. 
If this is not possible, other areas need to be explored, or the size and scale of the project needs to 
be evaluated. If chips could be used domestically or shipped in open-top wood gondolas to 
neighboring countries or a port with bulk ship loading capabilities, a full unit train may not be 
needed. Delivery could be manifest, adding these cars to other railcars passing through town. 
The bulk ship concept was considered during the planning stages; however, a bulk ship requires 
30,000 tons of wood chips. To appeal to a company at the Port of Long Beach in loading ships, 
they would need a long-term contract for 45,000 tons of wood chips per month (Horner 2018). 
These options may be useful if a site cannot be located or delivery of full unit trains cannot be 
realized. 
 
Conclusions 
A pilot project was initiated to test the logistics of using railroad transportation and to investigate 
the loading times and weights associated with filling intermodal containers with wood chips. The 
project succeeded in sending 58 intermodal containers filled with wood chips to the Port of Long 
Beach for further marine shipment to South Korea. Throughout this study, researchers learned 
valuable information regarding productivity and logistics associated with using railroad 
infrastructure to deliver wood chips long distances outside of Arizona. The project tested the 
ability to fill containers with wood chips, finding that containers can be filled to volume capacity 
(at 37.9 percent) prior to reaching the maximum weight capacity. Furthermore, researchers found 
that logs can be chipped directly into intermodal shipping containers without the need for 
venting. While the equipment used during was appropriate for the scale of the pilot project, 
scaling to a full project may require other equipment such as a dedicated chipping facility to 
meet full unit train (220 container) productivity requirements. In addition, site improvements like 
an all-weather reinforced surface will likely be needed to facilitate container handler traffic.  
 
Challenging logistical and site improvement requirements will be needed at Camp Navajo for a 
full-scale chipping operation to begin including: installation of an 8,000-foot siding to facilitate 
railcar transfer off the BNSF transcontinental line, the addition of electronic switches, and policy 
needs to allow for this use. In addition to site improvements, additional workforce development 
will be required to cut, transport, and handle logs removed from forest restoration treatments. 
While there remain many hurdles to overcome, results from this project indicate that empty 
intermodal containers may open the possibilities of shipping wood chips and other forest 
products such as sawdust and lumber produced from small-diameter forest restoration materials. 
This may allow forest restoration products to be transported long distances to forest products 
business clusters and foreign markets, once thought economically infeasible when considering 
truck transportation alone. Additional demand for wood products can open the possibilities of 
increasing forest industry development, employment, and economic stability for communities. 
This industry development brings an added benefit of increased acres of restored forests, which 
reduces catastrophic wildfire, enhances watershed functions, prevents post-fire flooding, 
supports natural fire regimes, and improves wildlife habitat. 
 
24

Acknowledgments 
This project was financially supported by the USDA Forest Service, Arizona Department of 
Forestry and Fire Management, and Northern Arizona University. We would also like to express 
our gratitude to Northern Arizona Military Affairs Council, Camp Navajo Ordinance Engineers 
and rail crew for planning, logistics, and hard work during the project, The Nature Conservancy, 
USDA Forest Service, Campbell Global Co., Coconino County, Hyundai Merchant Marine 
(HMM), Burlington Northern Santa Fe, chipping contractor Richard Haliburton with XBS 
Enterprises, and J.A. International for their interest and cooperation on the operational aspect of 
the study, Diane Vosick and Patrick Rappold (ERI, NAU) for facilitating meetings and 
assistance during the project, and Tayloe Dubay (ERI, NAU) for valuable comments, edits, and 
suggestions throughout the report preparation process, and  ERI and NAU staff for contract 
management and assistance with the Chip and Ship media and VIP day at Camp Navajo. 
 
 
25

References 
4FRI. 2019. Four Forest Restoration Initiative website. Accessed via the World Wide Web on 
November 8, 2019 at: https://4fri.org/ 
AAR. 2018. Association of American Railroads: Rail intermodal keeps America moving 
factsheet. Accessed via the World Wide Web on November 8, 2019 at: 
https://www.aar.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/AAR-Rail-Intermodal.pdf 
AAR. 2017. Association of American Railroads: Arizona state fact sheet. Accessed via the 
World Wide Web on November 8, 2019 at: https://www.aar.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/AAR-Arizona-State-Fact-Sheet.pdf 
AKG-Images. 2019. Obtained from the World Wide Web on November 14, 2019 at: 
https://www.akg-images.de/archive/Maschine-zum-Ubersetzen-der-Diligencen-auf-
Eisenbahnwaggons-2UMDHUHXOU8B.html 
AZ State Forestry. 2010. Arizona Forest Resource Assessment. Report prepared for the Arizona 
State Forestry Division and U.S. Forest Service. Accessed via the World Wide Web on 
October 10, 2019 at: 
https://dffm.az.gov/sites/default/files/documents/files/Arizona%20Forest%20Resource%
20Assessment-2010.pdf 
BNSF. 2015. Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) corporate responsibility and sustainability 
report 2015. Accessed via the World Wide Web on August 19, 2018 at: 
http://www.bnsf.com/in-the-community/pdf/corporate-responsibility-report-2015.pdf 
Covington, W., and M. Moore, 1994. Post settlement changes in natural fire regimes and forest 
structure: ecological restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine forests. J. Sustain. For. 2, 
153-181. 
Covington, W., P. Fule, M. Moore, S. Hart, S. Hart, T. Kolb, J. Mast, S. Sackett, and M. Wagner. 
1997. Restoring Ecosystem Health in the Ponderosa Pine Forests of the Southwest. 
Journal of Forestry. 95(4):23-29 
Coconino County Comprehensive Plan, 2015. Obtained from the World Wide Web on 
November 14, 2019 at: 
https://www.coconino.az.gov/DocumentCenter/View/10608/Coconino-County-
Comprehensive-Plan---2017-Approval?bidId. 
Conrad IV, J. 2018. Costs and challenges of log truck transportation in Georgia, USA. Forests, 
9(10) 650. 14 p. 
Fleishman, D. 2018. 4FRI Operations Coordinator, USDA Forest Service. Personal 
communication at the Coconino National Forest Supervisors Office. May 30, 2018. 
Graham, R., S. McCaffrey, and T. Jain. 2004. Science basis for changing forest structure to 
modify wildfire behavior and severity. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. Fort Collins, 
CO: U.S. Dept of Agri., For. Serv., Rocky Mt. Res. Sta. 43 p. 
Hjerpe, E., J. Abrams, and D. Becker. 2009. Socioeconomic barriers and the role of biomass 
utilization in southwestern ponderosa pine restoration. Ecological Restoration. 27(2):169-
177. 
Hjertstedt, P. 2019. Regional Manager of Economic Development, BNSF Railway. Personal 
communications at Camp Navajo planning meeting July 17, 2019. 
26

Horner, S. 2018. Area Manager, Campbell Global. Personal communications during project 
development, June 2018. 
Kaufmann, M., R. Graham, D. Boyce, Jr., W. Moir, L. Perry, R. Reynolds, R. Bassett, P. 
Mehlhop, C. Edminster, W. Block, and P. Corn. 1994. An ecological basis for ecosystem 
management. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM 246. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Dept of Agri., For. Serv., 
Rocky Mt. Res. Sta. 22 p. 
Koirala, A., A. Kizha, and B. Roth. 2017. Perceiving major problems in forest products 
transportation by trucks and trailers: A cross-sectional survey. European Journal of 
Forest Engineering. 3, 23–34. 
Larson, D. 2001. The suitability of various markets for using small-diameter ponderosa pine to 
sustain forest health and fire-risk reduction programs in Northern Arizona.: Department 
of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northern Arizona Univ. Flagstaff, Arizona. 46 
pages. 
Lautala, P., H. Pouryousef, R. Handler, and S. Chartier. 2012. The role of railroads in 
multimodal woody biomass transportation in Michigan, in: 2012 Joint Rail Conference. 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, p. 465–473. 
Levinson, M. 2016. The Box: How the Shipping container made the world smaller and the world 
economy bigger (2nd ed.). Princeton University Press. 544 pages. 
Lynch, D. 2001. Financial results of ponderosa pine forest restoration in southwestern Colorado. 
In: Vance, Regina K.; Edminster, Carleton B.; Covington, W. Wallace; Blake, Julie A., 
comps. Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and conservation: steps toward 
stewardship; 2000 April 25-27; Flagstaff, AZ. Proceedings RMRS-P-22. Ogden, UT: US 
Dept of Agri., For. Serv., Rocky Mt. Res. Sta. p.141-148. 
Mott, W. 2019. Director of Customer Solutions, Independent Rough Terrain Center. Personal 
communications at Camp Navajo during chipping operations, August 8, 2019. 
Nicholls, D., J. Halbrook, M. Benedum, H.-S. Han, E. Lowell, D. Becker, and J. Barbour. 2018. 
Socioeconomic constraints to biomass removal from forest lands for fire risk reduction in 
the western U.S. Forests. 9(264): 1-22. 
Pan, F., H.-S. Han, L. Johnson and W. Elliot. 2008. Production and cost of harvesting and 
transporting small diameter (≤ 5”) trees for energy. For. Prod. J., Vol. 58(5):47-53. 
Parker, R., Bayne, K., and P. Clinton. 2016. Robotics in Forestry. New Zealand Journal of 
Forestry. 60(4):8-14 
Pollet, J., and P. Omi. 2002. Effect of thinning and prescribed burning on crown fire severity in 
ponderosa pine forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 11:1-10. 
Rodrigue, J., Comtois, C., and B. Slack. 2017. The geography of transport systems. New York: 
Routledge, 440 pages. ISBN 978-1138669574. 
Sbihi, A. and R. Eglese. 2010. Combinatorial optimization and green logistics. Annals of 
Operations Research, 175, 159-175 
Sifford C., Pierobon F., Ganguly I., Eastin I., Alvorado E., and Rogers L. 2018. Developing an 
impact assessment of local air quality as a result of biomass burns. CINTRAFOR WP 
128. University of Washington, Seattle, pp 65. 
Stover, J. 1997. American Railroads. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 324 pages. 
27

TRAC. 2015. Intermodal industry overview presentation. Accessed via the World Wide Web on 
October 10, 2019 at:  https://www.tracintermodal.com/wp-
content/uploads/PDFs/Introduction%20to%20Intermodal%20Industry%20-
%20TRAC.pdf 
US Army. 2013 History and development of the container. US Army Military Museum. 
Accessed via the World Wide Web on October 10, 2019 at: 
https://web.archive.org/web/20150720104152/http://www.transportation.army.mil/museu
m/transportation%20museum/CONEX.htm 
Weingroff, R. 2017. Moving the Goods: As the interstate era begins. Obtained from the World 
Wide Web on December 8, 2019 at: https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/interstate/freight.cfm 
 
 
 
 
 
28
