View this email in your browser
The Pinaleño Ecological Restoration Project and
Demonstration Unit   
In 2008, the Coronado National Forest in southeastern Arizona invited the
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) to collaborate on the Pinaleño Ecosystem
Restoration Project. Together with the forest’s silviculturist, the ERI initiated a
forest restoration demonstration project in a dry mixed-conifer stand within the
Pinaleño Mountains. Prior to completion of the restoration demo, the Frye Fire
burned almost 50,000 acres across the Pinaleño Mountains. In a rapid
assessment report for the Coronado NF, the ERI summarized data collected at
two demo sites in 2018. The partial treatment and wildﬁre gave us the
opportunity to ask 1) How did wildﬁre change forest conditions in the untreated
unit?; 2) How did the mechanical treatments and subsequent Frye Fire change
forest structure?; and 3) How was wildﬁre severity distributed across the
Pinaleño Mountains?
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

 
The report brieﬂy summarizes the early work in 2008–2009, but focuses on
results from the mechanical treatments initiated in 2016–2017, and more
opportunistically, the ﬁre effects of the Frye Fire in 2017.
 
READ THE FULL REPORT:
The Pinaleño Ecological Restoration Project and Demonstration Unit: Effects of
Restoration Treatment and Wildﬁre in a Mixed-Conifer Forest
 
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2020 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
View More ERI Reports

