The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in  
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program Projects 
 
By Bryce E. Esch, Program Coordinator, Sr. 
 
Introduction 
The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) began in 2009 as an innovative 
experiment to work at landscape scale with collaborative stakeholders to increase the pace and scale of 
forest restoration. The CFLR authorizing act mandated multi-party monitoring for at least 15 years af-
ter beginning implementation to assess the ecological, social, and economic effects of restoration treat-
ments (Sec. 4003 (g)(4)). As the CFLRP neared the end of its initial 10-year authorization, we took the 
opportunity to assess the challenges and successes of monitoring landscape-level metrics of success.  
 
To meet the broader CFLRP monitoring requirements, each CFLRP project developed its own set 
of monitoring indicators (the Forest Ser-
vice and national partners developed an 
additional set of overarching metrics to 
track project progress; more information 
can be found at www.fs.fed.us/restoration/
CFLRP/guidance.shtml). Metrics for land-
scape monitoring commonly include coarse 
scale descriptors of forest structure, such as 
canopy cover and openings, or indices of a 
forest or landscape conditions. We used 
social scientific methods to examine the 
development and use of landscape scale, 
collaboratively derived monitoring metrics. 
 
Methods 
To capture the innovations and challenges in landscape metrics development, and document the meth-
ods for future opportunities, we reviewed written materials from all 23 CFLRP projects, and inter-
viewed stakeholders and Forest Service staff from 17 of the 23 CFLRP projects. By comparing early 
foundational documents to the current state of landscape-scale monitoring at each project, we were 
able to observe the evolution of landscape-level metrics and monitoring, following 8–10 years of trial 
and error. The original proposals, foundational documents, and monitoring plans were assessed for de-
tails on desired landscape-level conditions, metrics and indicators of landscape-level success, and pro-
posed monitoring approaches. Additionally, detailed notes from each interview were analyzed for 
common themes, which were then summarized to form the core of our findings. 
 
 
 
 
January 2020 

Findings 
Of the 23 projects, we were able to find 19 with monitoring plans or reports, which ranged from very broad, 
informal documents to very specific, formal plans. Of the 19 sites with monitoring documents we accessed, 
14 developed specific and detailed monitoring plans in collaboration with academic, non-profit, or agency 
researchers. Of those 14 monitoring plans, only nine integrated questions, metrics, indicators, or potential 
approaches for assessing landscape-scale change. Some sites developed landscape monitoring metrics as part 
of other efforts, such as landscape assessments or strategies, but with little connection to future monitoring 
efforts. Most landscape-level monitoring questions focused on changes in forest structure heterogeneity, tree 
densities, and canopy cover, and modeled fire behavior outcomes. Remote sensing tools and modeling were 
the most commonly proposed approaches. 
 
As of 2019, most CFLRP sites had not implemented their landscape-level monitoring plans. Most of the 
sites with detailed landscape-scale monitoring plans said that the pace of treatments had been slower than 
expected, and it was too early to try to measure landscape-scale change. Additionally, the ability of collabo-
rative groups to implement landscape-level monitoring plans was limited by staff and budget capacity and 
landscape ecology technical expertise. Most sites also experienced a decline in scientific and/or technical 
partner engagement over time. 
 
Discussion 
Landscape-level monitoring was less ubiquitous than we expected, given the purpose and intent of the 
CFLRP. Less than half of the sites with available monitoring documentation included or developed land-
scape-level monitoring. The complexity of landscape-level change made setting specific and actionable goals 
difficult, and collaborative groups found consensus more easily on an overarching vision rather than specific 
metrics. Without technical or research partners, there was broad misunderstanding as to what questions 
should be asked, what metrics are appropriate, and how to answer those questions. 
 
The innovative legislation that created the CFLRP mandated restoration and change at landscape scales, 
but did so at a time when specific landscape-scale metrics were novel, largely unavailable, and in limited use 
in federal land management. Our research demonstrates how this gap provided an opportunity to develop and 
use landscape metrics, but how it also led to a lack of landscape measurements across the CFLRP projects. 
 
Recommendations 
Measuring landscape-scale change and restoration success would benefit from coordinated efforts within and 
across Forest Service regions. However, coordination is time consuming, and projects are already struggling 
with coordinating across a single CFLRP project and forest. Based on our results, we suggest the following 
recommendations: 
 
) Identify key gaps in collaborative or practitioner understanding that should be filled by landscape moni-
toring with adaptive management implications.  
) Invest in Forest Service staff with appropriate monitoring skillsets and provide them with time to support 
collaborative, forest-level, and landscape-scale monitoring.  
) Encourage coordinated innovation and training in technical tools for agency staff.  
) Support concerted research efforts to develop and make available landscape-level metrics that describe 
fire-adapted forest conditions and treatment effectiveness, all while accounting for the long time scales to 
understand landscape-level ecosystem change.  
) Provide support for coordination and efficiencies between research and landscape-level projects at the 
collaborative and project scale. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication:  
Esch, B.E., and A.E.M. Waltz. 2019. Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program Projects. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restora-
tion Institute, Northern Arizona University. 12 p. 
Contact: Bryce Esch, Bryce.Esch@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
