The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Chip & Ship: Testing the Logistics of Supplying Wood Chips Over  
Long Distances Using Intermodal Railroad Transportation 
 
 
Introduction 
Due to an overabundance of low-value, small-diameter trees and woody biomass, many communities 
across the US West face catastrophic wildfire and post-fire flooding. Forest restoration thinning treat-
ments can restore forest ecosystem health, lower the risk of severe fire, and enhance ecosystem services 
that include watershed function, aesthetics, carbon sequestration, and wildlife habitat. The predominant 
markets for restoration thinning biomass is fuel for energy or heat; however, many communities are not 
located near biomass facilities and shipping biomass long distance is frequently cost prohibitive.  
 
The lack of markets or facilities that utilize low-value woody biomass is one of the biggest barriers to 
accelerating the pace and scale of restoration treatments needed to address forest health issues. Railroad 
transportation and empty intermodal shipping containers may open the possibilities of shipping wood 
chips and other forest products like sawdust and lumber long distances to forest products business clus-
ters and foreign markets once thought economically infeasible. 
 
A solution is needed to address the high transportation cost associated with trucking low-value woody 
biomass long distances when local markets are not available. Selling a large volume (e.g., >500,000 
tons/year) of wood chips domestically or internationally using railroad transportation may be an option, 
particularly if these markets are willing to pay higher prices. However, railroad transportation is not 
commonly used to supply wood chips over long distances (>500 miles) in the US West, and railroad 
operations logistics needed to handle wood chips are not well understood or tested. 
 
Chip and Ship Pilot Project 
Researchers at the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University initiated a pilot 
study in 2019 to send wood chips from Arizona to South Korea to:  
 
• Test the operational logistics of sending wood chips to oversea markets, including log procurement, 
chipping, loading, and railroad operations. 
• Investigate railroad infrastructure and business requirements needed to implement full-scale ship-
ping operations that utilize railroad transportation. 
 
Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) railroad was interested in growing its business by shipping 
woody biomass from Arizona, but there was an issue with using intermodal containers. Intermodal 
trains, which typically carry 220 double-stacked containers, do not stop in between a starting station 
and a final destination. Our request for <100 intermodal containers for the pilot project was not a full 
unit train and not a typical business practice of BNSF. Interest by Hyundai Merchant Marine (HMM) 
and community support for the project facilitated discussions with BNSF corporate headquarters, al-
lowing 58 intermodal containers to be delivered for the pilot project by August 2019.  
 
 
February 2020 

We began a controlled experiment by filling 58 intermodal shipping containers with wood chips at 
Camp Navajo, near Flagstaff, Arizona. Once filled, BNSF delivered them to the Port of Long Beach, 
California to await shipment by marine transportation to South Korea. Containers were delivered to 
Camp Navajo from Memphis, Tennessee and consisted of eight railcars totaling 1,891 feet in length. The 
railcars varied from one to five wells (spaces for containers) with a variety of single and double-stack 
containers.   
 
During the six-day pilot project, researchers examined the productivity and logistics associated with log 
loading, hauling, log offloading/piling, equipment mobilization requirements, intermodal container de-
livery, container offloading, placement, chipping/filling containers, and reloading filled containers onto 
railcars. While the study did validate the ability to move and load containers, the equipment selected for 
the pilot project may not be practical for a large-scale operation due to limited productivity and infra-
structure needs for chipping and railroad transportation. Additional research should evaluate the benefits 
of using a dedicated chipping facility using larger, permanent facilities that store logs, debark, and chip 
logs into large piles. Multiple conveyors could then take the piled chips and fill multiple containers at 
one time, greatly increasing filled container productivity. Rail infrastructure, including 8,000 feet of new 
track and electronic rail switches, need to be completed prior to BNSF delivering a unit train to Camp 
Navajo. Site improvements, such as a reinforced concrete pad for the container loader, will also need to 
be completed.  
 
Conclusion 
Long distance delivery of woody biomass using railroad transportation may be a viable use of forest res-
toration material. Additional demand for wood products could increase forest industry development, em-
ployment, and economic stability for communities. Along with these benefits, delivering biomass do-
mestically and internationally can successfully accelerate the pace and scale of restoration treatments 
needed to address the forest health issues in the US.  
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication:  
Halbrook, J., and H.-S. Han. 2019. Chip & Ship: Testing the Logistics of Supplying Wood Chips Over Long Distances 
Using Intermodal Railroad Transportation. ERI Technical Report. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University. 28 p. 
Contact: Han-Sup Han, Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
 
Figure 1. Rough terrain container handler (RTCH) offloading containers from railcars (left). Tracked machine chipping small
-diameter logs into intermodal shipping container (right). 
