The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
How the Natural Range of Variability of Frequent-Fire  
Forests Informs Restoration Treatments 
 
 
 
Past land use and fire exclusion have transformed frequent-fire forests into dense and unhealthy conditions. 
Today’s forests have increased fuel loads, less diverse understory communities, degraded wildlife habitat, 
and increased susceptibility to high-severity fire, insects, and disease. Efforts to restore forests are underway. 
Restoration treatments include thinning out small, young trees followed by prescribed fire. Land managers 
and forest ecologists work to gain an understanding of a forest’s natural patterns and processes when design-
ing restoration treatments that will help a forest withstand and recover from disturbances like wildfires. A 
forest’s natural range of variability, commonly referred to as NRV, is used by ecologists to understand the 
natural ecological conditions and processes on a landscape that existed over broad lengths of evolutionary 
time and space, before intensive human alteration. The NRV, also referred to as historical range of variability 
(HRV), quantifies the natural and historical disturbance processes, e.g., the natural fire regime, and ecosys-
tem variability that these disturbances create.  
 
To construct a forest’s NRV, researchers collect and analyze site-
specific data on forest structure (i.e., trees per acre, tree size, 
height, and distribution, etc.) and composition (i.e., all plant spe-
cies of a stand or landscape, including trees, shrubs, forbs, and 
grasses) and establish a set of reference conditions. Reference con-
ditions can be determined by locating trees or tree remains—which 
generally include living pines or snags with yellowed bark as well 
as large downed logs, stumps, and stump holes—that were present 
before Euro-American settlement. Tree-ring records can help doc-
ument past forest structure and fire history, as can historic photo-
graphs, Forest Service records, and other written records.  
 
Restoration treatments are then designed and implemented based 
on this information, in addition to the management goals of the 
landscape, which incorporate multiple resource objectives. These treatments are designed to reduce fire risk 
to communities, improve wildlife habitat, and restore forests to be resilient to future disturbances under 
changing precipitation and temperature conditions. Ecological systems managed within their natural range of 
variability of stand structure and composition are thought to provide the best chance for recovery from degra-
dation and disturbance and an increased resilience to climate changes. 
 
Climate change impacts in southwestern forests are expected to exacerbate forests’ current susceptibility to 
uncharacteristically severe disturbances, like high-severity wildfire, intense rains, and flash floods. Long-
term shifts in forest cover types and vegetation patterns are predicted to occur, and decreased forest produc-
tivity is expected. In the highly departed fire-adapted forests of the Southwest, the NRV reflects the evolu-
tionary history of the system. Land management actions informed by NRV have the best opportunity to in-
corporate ecological variability, and therefore enhance biodiversity, recognize the role of disturbance, and 
maintain ecosystem resilience. 
To restore this stand, ecologists used NRV to 
guide a thinning design based on the pre-
1870 pattern of tree species composition and 
spatial arrangement.  
