The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Ecosystem Management Applications of Wildfires in  
Forests of Grand Canyon National Park 
 
By Mike Stoddard, Sr. Research Specialist 
Introduction 
Forest managers are increasingly using naturally ignited wildfires to achieve management objectives 
and promote landscape-scale resilience. Using wildfires, managers hope to accomplish a range of ob-
jectives, from maintaining intact, functioning ecosystems, to ecological restoration, and playing a vi-
tal role in natural disturbance events yet, few studies have evaluated long-term outcomes of wildfire 
applications across various forest types. In 2003, several wildfires were allowed to burn across an ele-
vation gradient on the North Rim of Grand Canyon National Park (GCNP) where there are permanent 
monitoring plots. We remeasured these plots 12 years after the National Park Service managed the 
wildfires to accomplish a suite of resource objectives (hereafter “RO” fires) in ponderosa pine-
Gambel oak (pine-oak), dry mixed-conifer, and spruce-fir forest types. Our objectives were to quanti-
fy the long-term fire effects on forest structure and composition. 
  
Research Findings  
The 2003 RO fires in GCNP were similar to one another in the short-term with respect to reducing 
density of smaller-diameter trees; however, long-term outcomes differed by forest type. By 2015 (12 
years following the fires), total tree density was near pre-fire levels at both the pine-oak and mixed-
conifer sites due to substantial regeneration and subsequent recruitment (i.e., ingrowth) of trees into 
the overstory. Tree density exceeded pre-fire density at the spruce-fir site. Ingrowth and regeneration 
were generally dominated by sprouting species, such as aspen and Gambel oak, regardless of forest 
type.   
 
 
 
 
March 2020 
Pine-Oak Site (Powell Fire)  
• The Powell Fire burned primary as a surface fire (87% low-severity and unburned). 
• Twelve years following the fire (2015), basal area, tree density, 
and canopy cover were similar to pre-fire values. 
• Fine-scale (plot level, 1/5 acre) heterogeneity did not change over 
the study period. 
• Species composition remained stable over the study period. 
• Mortality of old trees (> 140 years) over the study period was 
19%. 
• By 2015, tree regeneration occurred on 82% of the plots. 
 
Pine-oak site 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions and Implications 
• Overall, the 2003 RO fires showed suitable application for several ecosystem management strate-
gies. Fires maintained conditions in an intact pine-oak forest, brought forest structure in a fire-
excluded mixed-conifer forest closer to its natural range of variation, and created open and hetero-
genous conditions in a spruce-fir forest. 
• Effects of the fires may promote more fire and climate-resilient structural characteristics.  
• Loss of old trees in mixed-conifer and spruce-fir forests is a concern.  
 
Recommended Reading 
Aplet, G.H., and B. Wilmer. 2010. The potential for restoring fire-adapted ecosystems: exploring opportunities to expand 
the use of wildfire as a natural change agent. Fire Management Today, 70:32–46.  
Covington, W.W. 2000. Helping western forest heal: the prognosis is poor for Untied States forest ecosystems. Nature, 
408:135–136. 
Fulé, P.Z., and D.C. Laughlin. 2007. Wildland fire effects on forests structure over an altitudinal gradient, Grand Canyon 
National Park, USA. Journal of Applied Ecology, 44:136–146. 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication 
Stoddard, M.T., P.Z.  Fulé, D.W. Huffman, A.J. Sánchez Meador, and J. P. Roccaforte. 2020. Ecosystem management ap-
plications of resource objective wildfires in forests of the Grand Canyon National Park, USA. International Journal 
of Wildland Fire, https://doi.org/10.1071/WF19067 
 
Contact: Mike Stoddard, Mike.Stoddard@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Mixed-Conifer Site (Rose Fire) 
• The Rose Fire burned primary as a low-severity fire (60% low and 25% moderate and high-
severity) 
• The RO fire moved forest structure within ranges of historical   
patterns.  
• Fine-scale heterogeneity in basal area, tree density, and canopy 
cover increased. 
• Species dominance shifted away from white fir toward ponderosa 
pine.  
• Mortality of old trees was 32%, with high aspen mortality fol-
lowed by Douglas-fir and white fir. 
• Tree regeneration was found on 100% of the plots and included 
significant increases in ponderosa pine seedlings.  
 
Spruce-Fir Site (Poplar Fire) 
• The Poplar Fire burned with a mix of surface (42% low-severity) and crown fire (31% moderate 
and 25% high-severity). 
• Twelve years after the fire, basal area and canopy cover were sig-
nificantly lower than pre-fire values. 
• Fine-scale heterogeneity in basal area, tree density, and canopy 
cover more than doubled compared with pre-fire conditions.  
• Post-fire species dominance shifted toward aspen. 
• Mortality of old trees over the study period was 47%; all old 
spruce, subalpine fir, and Douglas-fir on sample plots died.   
• Tree regeneration was found on 100% of the plots. 
 
Mixed-conifer site 
Spruce-fir site 
