Journal of Forestry, 2020, 1–11
doi:10.1093/jofore/fvaa006
Research Article - social sciences
Received May 20, 2019; Accepted February 6, 2020
Advance Access publication March 12, 2020
1
© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of American Foresters. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Research Article - social sciences
Managing for Resilience? Examining 
Management Implications of Resilience in 
Southwestern National Forests
S. Michelle Greiner, Kerry E. Grimm,  and Amy E.M. Waltz
S. Michelle Greiner (smg464@nau.edu), Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, 1472 Campus Delivery, 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523. Kerry E. Grimm (kerry.grimm@nau.edu), School of Earth and 
Sustainability, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. Amy E.M. Waltz (amy.waltz@nau.edu), Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University Flagstaff, AZ 86011.
Abstract
The United States Forest Service 2012 Planning Rule prioritizes making lands resilient to climate 
change. Although researchers have investigated the history of “resilience” and its multiple interpret-
ations, few have examined perceptions or experiences of resource staff tasked with implementing 
resilience. We interviewed Forest Service staff in the Southwestern Region to evaluate how man-
agers and planners interpret resilience as an agency strategy, execution of resilience in manage-
ment, and climate change’s impact on perception of resilience. Interviewees identified resilience 
as a main driver of agency response to land management but, when applying the concept, ex-
perienced barriers including ambiguity; scale; management specificity versus broad, adaptive 
landscape approach; and lack of metrics or examples. Interviewees found restoring ecosystem 
function to promote resilience while planning for future changed landscapes difficult. They desired 
landscape-scale collaboration to understand how to operationalize the resilience directive. Our 
findings revealed obstacles and opportunities for resilience in a managerial context.
Keywords:  resilience, US Forest Service, forest policy, forest planning, Southwest
Sustaining ecological health, integrity, and diversity 
to meet the needs of present and future generations 
is the top priority of the US Forest Service (USFS). 
“Resilience” is a leading pillar of recent USFS land-
management planning regulations, namely the 2012 
Planning Rule (36 CFR §219). This national policy dir-
ects forests to develop plans and incorporate resilience 
to climate change into management strategies.
Resilience is a systems’ ability to persist, adapt, and 
transform with changing conditions and ecosystem dis-
turbance (Folke 2016). Significant research has chron-
icled the conceptual evolution of resilience; the term is 
ambiguous in ecological literature and holds question-
able utility (Carpenter et al. 2001, Walker and Salt 2006, 
Brand and Jax 2007, Bone et al. 2016, Folke 2016). 
Research in forest ecosystems has explored operational 
indicators and metrics to quantify ecological resili-
ence (Millar et al. 2007, Larson et al. 2013, Seidl et al. 
2016, Stephens et al. 2016, van Mantgem et al. 2018, 
Halofsky et al. 2018, Keane et al. 2018). For example, 
GTR-310 (Reynolds et al. 2013) emphasizes restoring 
characteristic composition, structure, and function to 
improve resilience of frequent-fire forests. Waltz et al. 
(2014) express a need for more effort on operational-
izing resilience by defining metrics of forest resiliency. 
In a recent content analysis, Bone et al. (2016) focused 
on the growing presence of the term resilience in USFS 
planning, budgeting, and public relations documents. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

2
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
However, little research has looked at how managers 
and planners define and interpret this term that they 
encounter and are directed to use in USFS documents 
(Timberlake and Schultz 2017).
A valuable area for further research is under-
standing how National Forest System managers and 
planners interpret, plan for, and implement resilience. 
The primary disturbance agent prompting manage-
ment efforts toward resilience is fire (Reynolds et al. 
2013). Therefore, the Southwestern Region of the 
Forest Service (Region 3), a fire-prone forest ecosystem 
dominated by ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer 
forests at higher elevations, provides a strong case 
study to examine USFS perspectives of resilience, how 
the term is operationalized, and challenges faced with 
trying to incorporate resilience into forest plans as dir-
ected by the 2012 Planning Rule.
A Brief History of Forest Policy and 
Planning
In 1976, Congress passed The National Forest 
Management Act (NFMA) requiring each National 
Forest to develop and uphold a land-management plan 
(forest plan), guided by subsequent and separate plan-
ning rules. USFS staff are mandated to follow require-
ments provided in the planning rule; failure to do so 
is subject to litigation. NFMA mandates plan revision 
as new scientific information and opportunities are 
learned, as well as accounts for shifts in national direc-
tion. The 2012 Planning Rule is the first planning rule 
approved and upheld in court since 1982 and the most 
extensive federal forest policy change in over 30 years 
(Schultz et al. 2013).
Since 1982, understanding of land-management 
planning has evolved considerably. Advancements in 
conservation biology and ecology, as well as shifting 
societal values, prompted the need for a revised rule 
(36 CFR §219). The 2012 Planning Rule (2012 Rule) 
emphasizes eight key management needs consistent 
with the USFS mission. The first need states: “empha-
size restoration of natural resources to make our NFS 
lands more resilient to climate change, protect water 
resources, and improve forest health” (36 CFR §219, 
21164). Given the rule requires National Forests to 
consider resilience when developing forest plans, par-
ticularly resilience to climate change, the directive has 
led the term to appear throughout forest plans (Bone 
et al. 2016). The forests of the Southwestern Region are 
at various stages of revising plans using the 2012 Rule1.
Resilience: What Is It?
With the focus of resilience in the 2012 Rule, it is ad-
vantageous to understand the development of the term 
in ecological literature. Holling (1973) defined it as “a 
measure of the persistence of systems and their ability 
to absorb change and disturbance and still maintain 
the same relationships between populations or state 
variables” (p.  14). The concept has since undergone 
several developments and is conceptualized as follows:
Engineering resilience is the rate at which a system 
returns to equilibrium following a disturbance (Holling 
1996). Often referenced as systems that bounce back, 
this perspective frames resilient ecosystems as linear, 
static systems (Gunderson 2000). If a disturbance oc-
curred, an ecosystem would be considered less resilient 
if it crossed a threshold transitioning into a new state. 
This definition is minimally used by the USFS (Bone 
et al. 2016).
Ecological resilience is “the capacity of a system to 
absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing 
change so as to still retain essentially the same function, 
structure, identity, and feedbacks” (Walker et al. 2004, 
p. 2). This conceptualization suggests resilient systems 
can exist in multiple states without compromising 
Management and Policy Implications
New directives and recent policy instruct federal land managers to use the concept of resilience. Our research 
explored how resilience policy has shaped management actions on federal lands. We identified gaps in under-
standing the policies and directives that mandate personnel to manage for resilience. Our research is directly 
applicable to staff in the US Forest Service and cooperators working to amend and implement forest plans 
under the 2012 Planning Rule. It is further pertinent to land-management organizations using resilience as a 
stewardship objective. Findings from our research suggest that the Forest Service collaborate with internal 
departments, external cooperators, and stakeholders to coproduce resilience metrics and goals. Metrics of re-
silience need to be defined within a context. At these broad policy scales, an example would be resilience to 
uncharacteristically large disturbances expected with climate change. We conclude with a series of observations 
and recommendations for how managers and planners might ensure policy direction leads to clear actions and 
suggest where to concentrate future studies examining resilience.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

3
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
characteristics and system properties that define the 
community. Managing for ecological resilience focuses 
on maintaining or restoring key functions (Millar et al. 
2007, Bone et al. 2016).
Social–ecological resilience emphasizes the link be-
tween social (e.g., economic, political, cultural) and 
ecological systems (SES) (Gunderson and Holling 
2002, Folke 2006, Bone et al. 2016). An SES approach 
recognizes how communities, cultures, and economies 
both shape and depend on the ecosystem (Cumming 
et al. 2012). To be resilient is to support capacity for 
reorganization and adaptation, striking a balance be-
tween sustaining and developing amidst change (Folke 
et al. 2010, Folke 2016). A social–ecological resilience 
perspective is distinguished from previous conceptu-
alizations because elements of a system are examined 
across temporal and spatial scales (Bone et al. 2016). 
It can be useful to establish resilience of what [system 
state, variable] to what [disturbance] to operationalize 
resilience (Carpenter et al. 2001).
Why Resilience?
USFS documents emphasize the ecological resilience 
framework, with an aim to restore or improve eco-
system structure and function after disturbance (Bone 
et al. 2016, Falk 2016). In the Western US, fire sea-
sons have grown longer, and fire size, severity, and fre-
quency have increased. Scientists claim that restoring 
fire regimes in frequent-fire-adapted ecosystems will 
build resilience (Millar et al. 2007, Fulé 2008, Hurteau 
et al. 2014, Stephens et al. 2016). Restoration in these 
ecosystems includes mechanical fuels reduction, pre-
scribed fire, and/or the management of natural igni-
tions (Falk et al. 2019). Reference conditions and the 
historic range of variation are used to evaluate resili-
ence because they demonstrate forests’ evolutionary 
ecology (Reynolds et al. 2013).
In the Southwest, historically open forests dom-
inated by large, fire-adapted trees have experienced 
human-caused interruptions of their natural fire regimes 
(Covington and Moore 1994, Swetnam and Baisan 
1996). Today these forests are drastically altered in 
structure, composition, and disturbance regimes com-
pared with presettlement conditions leading to increas-
ingly large, high-severity fire (Covington and Moore 
1994, Fulé et al. 1997, Allen et al. 2002, Hurteau et al. 
2014). High-severity fire can have significant damaging 
effects on hydrologic functioning, habitat quality, carbon 
storage, and soil erosion, to name a few, resulting in de-
creased recovery potential (Hurteau et  al. 2014, Falk 
et al. 2019). Departure from fire as a keystone process 
has resulted in less ecologically resilient systems (Larson 
et  al. 2013, Waltz et  al. 2014, Stephens et  al. 2016, 
Halofsky et al. 2018, Keane et al. 2018).
Wildfire is a greater stress on ecosystem stability 
when coupled with a changing climate (Westerling 
et  al. 2006, Hurteau et  al. 2014, Falk et  al. 2019). 
Longer wildfire duration and greater size, severity, and 
frequency are exacerbated by rising seasonal temper-
atures and earlier spring snowmelt (Westerling et al. 
2006). These trends may catalyze ecosystem reorgan-
ization (e.g., type conversion) in Southwestern for-
ests, along with the growing risk to homes, natural 
resources, and other countless values (Hurteau et al. 
2014, Coop et al. 2016, Falk 2016, Stevens-Rumann 
and Morgan 2016, Davis et al. 2019). The efficacy of 
using reference conditions on the basis of future eco-
logical uncertainty has been questioned, and restoring 
processes alone may not be sufficient to restore resili-
ence (Millar et al. 2007, Fulé 2008).
Challenges of Using Resilience
Despite the USFS’s increasing use of the term, research 
reveals employing resilience is concerning because it 
is a vague, ambiguous concept (Brand and Jax 2007, 
Bone et al. 2016, Falk 2016). The variety of definitions 
can dilute the meaning and use of the term (Brand 
and Jax 2007). To meet land-management objectives, 
operationalization of resilience is dependent upon con-
ceptual clarity (Bone et al. 2016).
Developing and quantifying metrics of resilience is 
not an easy task. Resilience as a system property cannot 
be reduced to a single objective indicator (Allen et al. 
2011, Folke 2016). Other challenges arise with policy 
directing managers to manage for resilience under cur-
rent and future conditions (Lin and Petersen 2013, 
Timberlake and Schultz 2017), as “it is clearly not pos-
sible to achieve this objective under both current and 
future climate, with species in their current locations” 
(Falk 2016, p. 155). Stephens et al. (2016) illustrate 
that land-management agencies oversimplify resilience 
accomplishments rather than actual improvement in 
forest resilience as a result of these difficulties.
Although there is no shortage about conceptual 
theory of resilience and debate on the term’s role in 
natural-resource 
management 
(Gunderson 
2000, 
Carpenter et  al. 2001, Walker and Salt 2006, Brand 
and Jax 2007, Millar et  al. 2007, Bone et  al. 2016, 
Folke 2016), interpretations of this complex concept 
have been understudied and remain an important re-
search need (Timberlake and Schultz 2017). To ad-
dress this need, our research examines how directives 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

4
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
for resilience in the 2012 Rule are interpreted and 
executed by plan implementers. This research offers 
insight into the USFS’s efforts to use resilience by ad-
dressing the following research questions:
	1)	 How is resilience defined and interpreted under the 2012 Rule? 
What similarities and differences, if any, exist among USFS plan-
ners and resource managers’ perceptions of resilience?
	2)	 In what ways are USFS staff planning for and/or implementing 
resilience as directed by the 2012 Rule?
	3)	 How are projections and/or observations of climate change 
impacting perceptions of resilience among USFS staff?
Methods
This study focused on the USFS Southwestern Region, 
which includes National Forests located in Arizona 
and New Mexico. This site was selected because the 
Southwest has focused management efforts toward 
resilience, and authors of this paper are familiar with 
the region offering credibility to gain participant ac-
cess and trust. To address the research questions, we 
conducted interviews with 26 USFS staff members. We 
used purposive and snowball sampling to identify USFS 
staff based on their knowledge of and involvement in 
interpreting the 2012 Rule to implement directives of 
resilience. Given our focus was on implementation, 
our sample drew from Forest and Ranger District ad-
ministrative units, where plan implementation occurs. 
These criteria led us to USFS planners and managers2. 
There was some overlap among these populations (see 
ID groups below).
Interviews lasted 30–60 minutes and followed a 
semistructured format. In line with protocol approved 
by our university’s Institutional Review Board, inter-
views were recorded and transcribed. To maintain 
confidentiality, staff positions and forests are not 
linked. An ID was assigned to each participant type: 
FP = Forest Planner (n = 6), RM = Resource Manager 
(n = 9), FPRM = Forest Planner and Resource Manager 
(n = 6), RMP = Resource Manager on plan revision 
team (n = 5).
Transcripts were coded to identify trends and emer-
gent themes aligned with our research questions. 
Subheadings used in our Results section were our top-
level codes (Creswell 2014). We determined themes 
based upon repetition, unusual terms, and evidence of 
conflict (Bernard 2006). Findings were organized and 
reorganized through inductive analysis. This iterative 
process of querying the data provides stronger cer-
tainty of results by generating familiarity with the data 
(Bernard 2006). We report our results and provide 
illustrative quotes from interviews to demonstrate ex-
amples of summarized data. We concluded interviews 
upon reaching data saturation on our primary re-
search questions, or when no new themes were raised 
(Creswell 2014).
Results
Definitions and Interpretations of Resilience
Interviewees emphasized resilience as a primary man-
agement objective. As one FPRM noted, “In recent 
years, resilience has become a hallmark of all our 
planning efforts.” Participants involved with planning 
highlighted that the term is incorporated into plan re-
visions as directed in the 2012 Rule. Interviewees com-
monly described resilience as an overused buzzword 
and expressed apprehension using the term because it 
holds ambiguous connotations. For example, an RMP 
said, “Is resilience just another word we are throwing 
around to put a new outfit on the same stuff we’ve 
been doing? I really am struggling with that.”
The majority of interviewees defined resilience as the 
ability for a system to recover structure and function. 
As an FPRM attested, “If you were to ask this question 
a few years ago, I would say resilience is the ability of 
a system to come back to a preexisting set of dynamics. 
Now, it’s not necessarily that you get back to those fa-
miliar things, successional sequences and so forth, but 
[…] back to a level of function that allows that system 
to re-align.” Some also said resilience involves restoring 
the ecosystem to its historic range of variability fol-
lowing a disturbance. Most definitions aligned with the 
ecological resilience (Walker et al. 2004) conceptualiza-
tion as illustrated in the following quotes:
• “The ability to regain or recover from disturbance structurally, 
compositionally and functionally” (FP).
• “Ecosystems that come back to structural condition […] 
Maintaining all of the pieces to have a fully functioning eco-
system” (RMP).
• “I operate off of a concept of functional restoration, which 
will increase our resiliency and our resistance” (RM).
• “The ability of an ecosystem to take a disturbance without col-
lapsing and not permanently lose its structure and function” 
(FP).
A few described engineering resilience or social–eco-
logical resilience. For example, one FP said resilience 
means, “making management decisions and designing 
projects not just for what the existing conditions are 
but what we expect future conditions to be as well,” 
capturing the timescale component of social–ecological 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

5
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
resilience. No responses focused on the resilience of 
human communities embedded in forest ecosystems.
Although there was collective agreement over the 
definition, when we asked participants about oper-
ationalizing resilience, there was a diversity of opin-
ions. Resilience of what (Carpenter et al. 2001) held 
various meanings across participants. One RM ex-
plained that resource managers are “biased towards 
their resource sustainability.” We also found managers 
framed resilience around their specialty:
• “My perspective on resilience has to do with the capability of 
the soil, because that’s my key resource […] resilience in this 
context is ensuring that soil returns to a state from which you 
can still derive some ecosystem services” (RM).
• “In terms of resiliency for wildlife, one of the things that we 
are looking for is this whole concept of habitat connectivity” 
(RM).
• “For fire, [resilience] is an ecosystem or forest type that falls 
underneath its historic regime” (FPRM).
Planners also recognized that resilience of what varies 
across projects, resulting in difficulties when using 
resilience to meet goals for whole ecosystems across 
projects. As an FPRM claimed, “Resilience is very chal-
lenging because each program area has their own goals, 
but we are all working towards the ultimate end goal. 
We have to find common middle ground to satisfy pro-
gram area needs, but also the greater forest needs.”
Perspectives on the 2012 Planning Rule 
and Resilience Implementation
Planners referenced the 2012 Rule as the directive 
prompting them to include resilience in forest plans. 
They expressed drive to disseminate resilience in forest 
plans but have experienced challenges in doing so. One 
FP said, “Managing for resiliency on the landscape is 
one of the big objectives of the 2012 Rule. I’ll be honest 
with you, we are still wrestling with what managing 
for resiliency on the landscape looks like … how do 
we codify that in actual plan direction?” Planners 
also mentioned The National Cohesive Wildland Fire 
Management Strategy (USDA Forest Service et  al. 
2014) and GTR-310 (Reynolds et al. 2013) as docu-
ments that prompted resilience discourse in Region 3.
Overall, planners welcomed the 2012 Rule’s flexible 
nature because it allows greater license in determining 
what is done on the ground. They felt this new autono-
mous approach diverged from the nature of the 1982 
Rule, under which directives did not support as much 
room for adjustment. Planners highly valued flexibility, 
yet they claimed the adaptable style of the 2012 Rule 
has led to a lack of specificity posing innate challenges 
for including resilience prescriptions in forest plans. 
For example, one FP grappled with the tension of 
being obligated to incorporate key concepts in the plan 
without strict guidelines:
[Planning rules] are purposefully written to give a 
lot of latitude and decision-making ground to each 
individual forest. On one hand, we have the flexi-
bility to do what makes sense for our forests. On 
the other hand, it means when you’re out there, 
there aren’t a lot of examples of how other people 
are doing this. That can be really hard to wrangle 
big ideas, like resiliency, into actual plan guidance.
Participants commonly expressed a key difficulty of 
incorporating resilience into policy is meeting land-
scape objectives with site-specific focus. Creating clear 
resilience directives in the forest plan was strained 
by desires to be prescriptive, yet efficient when im-
plemented on the ground. An RMP summarized the 
difficulty of striking this balance: “The challenge is 
to identify some sort of process that is both inform-
ative and somewhat easy to collect, so it’s not so in-
tensive that you’re measuring and sampling hundreds 
of different characteristics out in the field.” Similarly, 
another RM described two difficulties with resilience 
directives:
“Number one, addressing the diversity that exists 
at a broad spatial scale. And then number two, 
managing in a sufficiently site-specific way that you 
can respond to that diversity that exists across the 
landscape. Doing that in a single decision docu-
ment, or single analysis, is pretty new and pretty 
daunting.”
Managers struggled with translating resilience policy 
into action. Most were uncertain of what resilience is 
in practice. As one RMP claimed, “I know the textbook 
dictionary definition … but what does [resilience] actu-
ally mean in terms of land management?” Another RM 
agreed, “We talk the talk, but I don’t know that we are 
walking the walk. I don’t know that we’re not either, 
because how do you measure resilience?”
Fire and fuels specialists had less difficulty providing 
examples of managing for resilience. Interviewees com-
monly expressed, “[Resilience is] pretty clear-cut … [in] 
the frequent-fire forest types, we know that if we can 
manage towards more characteristic forest structure, 
density, composition, and reinitiate some natural func-
tions, then we feel like they are going to be very re-
silient” (RM). Fire/fuels specialists also frequently 
cited fuel reduction or the Four Forests Restoration 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

6
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
Initiative (Four Forest Restoration Initiative, n.d.), a 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
(Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program, 
n.d.) project, as illustrations of operationalizing resili-
ence. Nonfire specialists commonly listed examples of 
projects restoring fire to the landscape indicating that 
resilience implementation appears more straightfor-
ward for a project reintroducing fire. One RM sug-
gested, if “you reintroduce fire into an ecosystem in 
which fire suppression has occurred for a long period 
of time, it may be a little bit easier to implement resili-
ence that way. In other areas it’s going to be a lot more 
challenging.”
Interviewees also revealed that navigating com-
peting resource desires and limited capacity were 
factors complicating resilience implementation. For 
example, an RMP expressed how focus on fire has 
been damaging to other resource areas trying to im-
plement resilience: “The region has had some pretty 
huge fires with both positive and negative effects. 
A lot of the negatives affect the other resources and 
it has really done damage to our relationship. It’s al-
ways been almost combative. That gets in the way 
of trying to integrate resilience into our manage-
ment.” Other RMs questioned how resilience direct-
ives would be prioritized to different resource areas 
and the risks of doing so, such as fire overshadowing 
other resource needs. Some interviewees said limited 
staff capacity and funding were additional barriers to 
implementing resilience.
Management for Resilience in a Changing 
Climate
Most interviewees identified resilience as a pri-
mary component of managing for climate change, 
demonstrating salience of the directive to manage for 
resilience to climate change under the 2012 Rule. One 
RMP said, “I don’t think you can talk about resili-
ence without talking about climate change.” However, 
many stated that managing for resilience to climate 
change was a challenging paradox, given the focus on 
historical reference conditions as a restoration base-
line. For example, an RMP illustrated, “Planning for 
climate change is a conundrum […] we are tasked with 
trying to restore reference conditions knowing that 
future conditions are going to be greatly different.” 
Interviewees commonly agreed with this sentiment, 
expressing confusion of managing for resilience to cli-
mate change. An FPRM explained, “Climate change is 
definitely going to impact resilience. But it’s hard for 
me to wrap my head around because, when you think 
of resilience you think of the ability for an ecosystem 
to recover from a natural disturbance, but if that eco-
system changes with climate change  …  then I  don’t 
know.” In other words, is restoring historic processes 
for resilience also meeting climate-change-resilience 
goals? Is a forest’s adaptive capacity to climate change 
considered resilience?
Desired Strategies: Metrics, Examples, 
Partnerships
Several participants felt examples or metrics could 
help clarify resilience. As one FP said, “I would be 
really interested in knowing how other forests are 
interpreting resilience and if they are struggling with 
the same things that I’m struggling with.” Another 
FPRM attested, “The use of the term is very im-
portant. The way to get there is to have folks de-
velop examples of the context of resilience and how 
that varies across land management scenarios. That 
would be educational and enlightening for a lot of 
folks.” Many participants also desired metrics to 
measure resilience.
The benefit of collaboration emerged as a best 
practice for forest management and to better use re-
silience. For example, one RMP revealed, “Having 
stakeholder groups involved from the beginning [of 
plan revision] and participating in the discussions of 
how best to tackle resilience challenges is really im-
portant.” Participants said partnerships provide ac-
cess to shared databases and help develop tools and 
new technology. Those involved with planning com-
monly said collaborating with internal and external 
partners is also closely tied to developing resilience 
policy. As an RMP claimed, “Some of the new plan 
that we’ve started to draft specifically addresses 
trying to increase resiliency at the landscape level. 
The biggest part of [landscape resilience] is working 
in collaboration across jurisdictions with some of the 
other agencies, as well as collaborating with the ad-
jacent forests.”
Discussion
Summary of Key Findings and Implications 
for Managers
A primary contribution of this project is examining 
USFS planner and manager interpretations and strat-
egies for resilience. Findings revealed three consistent 
areas of implementation and reporting difficulties: 
Resilience Definitions and Scale, Flexibility versus 
Specificity, and Resilience to Climate Change.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

7
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
Resilience Definitions and Scale
Although resilience is a mandated objective, the con-
cept remains challenging to effectively interpret and 
apply. Resilience is at risk of becoming an empty buzz-
word because it is vague and overused, with unclear 
utility. Most participants defined ecological resilience, 
focusing on improving or recovering forest function 
after disturbance.
The distinction of framing resilience to site-specific 
elements is logical; staff are most familiar with their 
specialty. However, Folke (2016) cautions against em-
phasizing resilience in one part of the ecosystem or 
reducing resilience to a single metric, as specified re-
silience is not easily tiered to inform landscape-level 
trajectories. Such tailored approaches may narrow 
options when dealing with novel changes and block a 
deeper understanding of resilience where other areas 
have been overshadowed (Bone et  al. 2016, Folke 
2016). For example, overemphasis on resilience to 
wildfire may leave a forest at risk to other forms of 
disturbance such as invasive species (Bone et al. 2016). 
Our research supports this finding by illustrating that 
staff had an easier time explaining how to operation-
alize resilience in a wildfire context than in other areas.
Planners understood resilience at the landscape 
level, recognizing that the concept varies across pro-
ject type. Generalized resilience is equally cautionary, 
as it could further contribute to the concept’s ambi-
guity, compromising its effectiveness (Folke 2016). 
Inherently, planners are pulled in two directions by en-
suring that the resilience directive in the plan is broad 
to encompass a variety of land-management contexts 
across scales while determining how detailed to get in 
each management scenario.
Our findings support past scholars suggesting re-
silience operates and must be considered at different 
levels of space and time (Gunderson and Holling 2002, 
Millar et al. 2007, Falk et al. 2019). Scientists suggest 
that scaling dimensionalities are critical for under-
standing how ecosystems respond to disturbance, 
which governs resilience (Falk et  al. 2019). For ex-
ample, resilience may depend on whether the disturb-
ance occurred in many small patches or over an entire 
watershed. Did the event influence individuals within 
a population or entire communities? Temporally, it 
is important to consider the duration of the disturb-
ance event and possible lingering effects, such as ero-
sion after a fire. Scaling resilience across space, time, 
and levels of biological organization can identify pri-
mary mechanisms that will help ecosystems adjust to 
changes (Falk 2016). Strategies that address diversity 
of ecological systems and resources at a landscape 
scale while supporting site-specific management were 
favorable to staff and could be included in forest plan 
amendments.
Flexibility versus Specificity
Although resilience was consistently identified as a 
key pillar of the USFS, interviewees expressed that it 
has not reached the point of clear operation. Coupled 
with challenges embedded in the conceptual unclarity 
of the term, our results demonstrated that further bar-
riers to implementing resilience were attributed to the 
high level of autonomy in the 2012 Rule. Participants 
welcomed latitude in the 2012 Rule, which provides 
individual forests considerable discretion in how pro-
visions are implemented and modified (Schultz et al. 
2013). However, managers expressed desire for con-
crete direction, metrics, and/or examples of how to 
operationalize the resilience directive. Interviewees felt 
that they could incorporate additional knowledge to 
better understand and develop resilience metrics, and 
thought that developing partnerships within the USFS, 
other agencies, researchers, and stakeholders would 
help use resilience.
Planners debated how to best incorporate resilience 
into forest plans. As a broad concept, resilience can be 
used as an all-encompassing tool, open to interpret-
ation and malleability, yet it begs for specificity when 
operationalized (Brand and Jax 2007). Resilience 
policies and management approaches must be adap-
tive to support the dynamic, unpredictable nature of 
ecosystems (Folke 2016). USFS staff are tasked with 
achieving the balance between flexibility in a plan in-
tended to guide forest management into the future 
while providing prescriptive standards to effectively 
use resilience.
Resilience to Climate Change
Repeated throughout the 2012 Rule is: “Emphasize 
restoration of natural resources to make our NFS 
lands more resilient to climate change.” Interviewees 
considered resilience to climate change a salient issue. 
However, restoring lands to be resilient to climate 
change presents a difficult management paradox. 
Participants felt that restoring historic conditions to 
achieve resilience conflicts with planning for resilience 
to climate change. Challenges interpreting the mandate 
for resilience to climate change has limited the devel-
opment of clear on-the-ground approaches.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

8
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
Future Research
The goal of our study was to gather preliminary 
understandings of how plan implementers inter-
pret and apply the directive to manage for resilience. 
Interviewees included specialists overlapping in a var-
iety of areas, but not all expertise (e.g., social sciences) 
were captured because of participant availability, will-
ingness to participate, and forest-level involvement. 
Our findings are a function of, and limited to, our 
set of interview subjects. However, our research pro-
vides findings on relatively new terminology that is not 
addressed broadly in the literature (Timberlake and 
Schultz 2017). As an initial exploration in a developing 
research field, our work can provide a foundation for 
future work on this topic.
Given that our findings show there are challenges with 
managing for resilience, analogous research is needed to 
study contextual nuances of these challenges. For ex-
ample, future work could examine a broader diversity 
of disciplines, regions, and/or the influence of demo-
graphic characteristics on resilience interpretations. 
A survey would be a useful way to explore these factors. 
Although future research considering additional fac-
tors may show more detailed findings, the overarching 
theme that we highlight—USFS staff experience chal-
lenges with managing for resilience—provides valuable 
insight for scholars examining resilience perspectives.
Social–Ecological Resilience Framework 
and Staff Opportunities
Using the social–ecological resilience framework is one 
way to assist challenges with managing for resilience. 
Interviewees commonly used the ecological resilience 
framework to define resilience, whereas none men-
tioned social elements of resilience, such as economic 
considerations. Thus, interviewees’ perceptions of re-
silience are not in step with literature conceptualizing 
social–ecological resilience. The lack of focus on social–
ecological resilience is concerning because managing 
forests under dynamic variability (e.g., climate change) 
requires understanding cross-scale interdependencies in 
both ecological and social systems (Allen and Holling 
2010, Allen et al. 2011, Bone et al. 2016, Falk 2016, 
Folke 2016). For example, structures in the wildland–
urban interface may make restoring natural fire regimes 
socially and economically challenging.
Social–ecological resilience differs from ecological 
resilience, where management approaches are focused 
on restoring ecosystem components (Bone et al. 2016). 
Instead, social–ecological resilience emphasizes adap-
tive capacity of recovering and reorganizing through 
disturbance, as well as the persistence of function, 
structure, and feedbacks (Walker et  al. 2006, Folke 
2016). Research also distinguishes the consideration of 
scale in social–ecological resilience (Bone et al. 2016). 
Ecological resilience does not focus on adaptive cap-
acity or cross-scale dynamics; nor does it consider how 
social systems are embedded in management and plan-
ning (Folke 2006, Bone et al. 2016).
Interviewee focus on ecological resilience begs us 
to examine what effects might occur from the lack of 
attention on social–ecological resilience. For instance, 
our findings demonstrate that staff are finding prob-
lems meeting ecological resilience goals in a changing 
climate. A  social–ecological framework can help fill 
this void in addition to taking into account the so-
cial elements of ecosystems, an important aspect that 
lacked mention by interviewees.
The first useful component of a social–ecological 
framework is the focus on adaptive capacity over time. 
In the Southwest, major disturbances make it increas-
ingly unlikely that ecosystems can be maintained in 
their current or historic form forever (Hurteau et al. 
2014, Falk 2016, Davis et al. 2019). The ecological re-
silience framework does not provide clear direction for 
adjusting forest management for future conditions in 
a changing climate because scales of space and time 
are not incorporated, and neither is the capacity for 
system reorganization or adaptability. Our results val-
idate there is limited opportunity to use the ecological 
resilience framework when managing for resilience 
to climate change. Social–ecological resilience better 
suits climate-change strategies because it embraces 
ecosystem capacity for adaptation and the increasing 
probability of reorganization across scales of space, 
time, and levels of biological organization.
The other useful element of social–ecological resili-
ence is the emphasis of human systems embedded in 
ecological systems. Social components are integral to 
climate change approaches (Gunderson and Holling 
2002, Folke 2016). For example, patterns of land use 
and municipalities depend on forests’ carbon sink abil-
ities. As the 2012 Rule emphasizes resilience to climate 
change, it is reasonable to presume that social elem-
ents are included; yet, our findings show that social 
factors are not what comes to participants’ minds 
when managing for resilience. In its conceptualization, 
a social–ecological framework elevates the importance 
of social components into management and planning 
(Bone et al. 2016).
Another way that a social–ecological resilience 
framework can assist in management is through its 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

9
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
focus on collaborative learning to operationalize cross-
scale, partnership-integrated principles (Gunderson 
and Holling 2002, Olsson et  al. 2004, Folke 2016). 
One form of collaborative learning is knowledge 
coproduction, which is “the process of producing us-
able, or actionable, science through collaboration be-
tween scientists and those who use science to make 
policy and management decisions” (Meadow et  al. 
2015, p.  179). Knowledge coproduction emphasizes 
the joining of stakeholders in learning how to inter-
connect goals and leverage capacity across scales by 
integrating a variety of expertise, values, and insights. 
Coproduced projects have resulted in the development 
of more useful products, tailored to management needs 
(Djenontin and Meadow 2018).
Knowledge coproduction serves as a structure for 
staff to iteratively learn about and develop ways to 
make resilience more pragmatic, as interviewees de-
sired. Given interviewees’ desire for knowledge and 
examples of how resilience has been applied in other 
forests, coproduction can allow partners to collabora-
tively confront the intricacy of how to apply, monitor, 
and evaluate resilience. Coproduction might also pro-
vide space for personnel to share apprehensions, such 
as the overemphasis of resilience to wildfire, a con-
cern expressed by some interviewees. For example, 
involving multiple stakeholders and diverse specialists 
could encourage the consideration of overlooked re-
silience components. Furthermore, coproduced ap-
proaches are critical for producing usable climate 
science, which is helpful given interviewees’ challenges 
with managing for resilience to climate change (Dilling 
and Lemos 2011, Wall et al. 2017).
Dynamics of social–ecological resilience contribute 
to social capacity for learning about ecosystem dy-
namics and allow managers to actively adapt man-
agement and policies (Olsson et al. 2004). Systems of 
governance and institutions that enable comanagement 
and shared learning processes, such as knowledge 
coproduction, have the potential to enhance capacity 
to deal with uncertainty and change (Olsson et  al. 
2004). Interviewees championed using partnerships to 
plan for and operationalize resilience, therefore USFS 
staff may be interested in coproduction approaches to 
assist social–ecological resilience.
Adjusting current governance to support partner-
ships for resilience is not a simple task (Folke 2016, 
Timberlake and Schultz 2017). Coproduction, while 
appropriate for complex issues involving multiple spa-
tial and temporal scales, can be initially expensive and 
taxing (Beier et al. 2016). Some vehicles for knowledge 
sharing are already in place and could serve as useful 
organizational structures for coproduced knowledge 
(Kemp et  al. 2015). For example, the USFS-funded 
CLFRP encourages collaborative and science-grounded 
ecological restoration. Knowledge coproduction is one 
platform to support the interdisciplinary focus in a so-
cial–ecological resilience framework. Although shifting 
to the social–ecological framework may seem abstract, 
our intention is to broaden the arena of thinking about 
resilience. Researchers might expand on our work by 
exploring how to apply the coproduction of know-
ledge to resilience.
Conclusion
Scientific research provides grounding for the con-
ceptualization and concerns of resilience in a land-
management context (Carpenter 2001, Brand and 
Jax 2007, Folke et al. 2010, Bone et al. 2016, Falk 
2016). Use of resilience is required by 2012 Rule, 
but the term is difficult to operationalize. Building 
upon the growing body of research investigating re-
silience, this paper fills a gap in examining insight 
directly from USFS managers and planners tasked 
with incorporating resilience into land manage-
ment. Considering the term’s ambiguous roots and 
ecological complexities, it is not unexpected that 
implementing resilience is muddy, hindering oppor-
tunities for effective management.
Our findings suggest there is a need to better inform 
resilience directives to be pragmatic to USFS staff. There 
is no silver bullet approach to managing for resilience 
to climate change. Strategies will require engaged part-
nerships and malleable tactics. The USFS could collab-
orate with internal departments, external agencies, and 
stakeholders to coproduce resilience knowledge and 
metrics. With resilience continuing to permeate USFS 
management, it is crucial to develop intentional strat-
egies to clarify esoteric connotations of resilience in ef-
forts to enhance meaningful forest stewardship.
Supplementary Materials
Supplementary data are available at Journal of Forestry 
online.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank US Forest Service staff in 
the Southwestern Region for sharing their knowledge, ex-
periences, and time. The authors also gratefully acknow-
ledge four anonymous reviewers for their suggestions and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

10
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
helpful insights, which substantially improved this paper. 
This project was supported in part by Northern Arizona 
University’s School of Earth & Sustainability Henry Hooper 
Student Fund.
End notes
1.	In Region 3, Carson, Cibola, Gila, Lincoln, Santa Fe, and Tonto 
are in the process of revising plans under the 2012 Rule. Kaibab, 
Apache-Sitgreaves, Coconino, Coronado and Prescott have 
completed plan revision under 1982 Planning Rule provisions. 
Forests revised under the 1982 Rule proactively incorporated 
principles from the 2012 Rule. They are making amendments 
to update compliance with 2012 Rule but, more importantly, 
were required to do monitoring provisions that met 2012 Rule 
requirements. The Coconino, Coronado and Prescott forest 
plans were approved after this research was conducted.
2.	Resource areas included: biology, soil science, silviculture, 
wildlife, ecology, watershed, climate-change monitoring, and 
fire and fuels specialists.
Literature Cited
Allen,  C.D., M.  Savage, D.A.  Falk, K.F.  Suckling, 
T.W.  Swetnam, T.  Schulke, P.B.  Stacey, P.  Morgan, 
M.  Hoffman, and J.T.  Klingel. 2002. Ecological res-
toration of Southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: 
A broad perspective. Ecol. Appl. 12(5):1418–1433.
Allen, C.R., and C.S. Holling. 2010. Novelty, adaptive cap-
acity, and resilience. Ecol. Soc. 15(3):1–15.
Allen, C.R., G.S. Cumming, A.S. Garmstaini, P.D. Taylor, and 
B.H. Walker. 2011. Managing for resilience. Wildl. Biol. 
17(4):337–349.
Beier, P., L.J. Hansen, L. Helbrecht, and D. Behar. 2016. A 
how-to-guide for coproduction of actionable science. 
Conserv. Lett. 10(3):288–296.
Bernard,  H.R. 2006. Research methods in anthropology: 
Qualitative and quantitative approaches. 4th ed. AltaMira 
Press, Lanham, MD. 803 p.
Bone,  C., C.  Moseley, K.  Vinyeta, and R.P.  Bixler. 2016. 
Employing resilience in the United States Forest Service. 
Land Use Policy. 52:430–438.
Brand, F.S., and K. Jax. 2007. Focusing the meaning(s) of 
resilience: Resilience as a descriptive concept and a 
boundary object. Ecol. Soc. 12(1):23.
Carpenter, S., B. Walker, J.M. Anderies, and N. Abel. 2001. 
From metaphor to measurement: Resilience of what to 
what? Ecosystems 4:756–781.
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. (n.d.). 
Available online at https://www.fs.fed.us/restoration/
CFLRP/index.shtml; last accessed October 15, 2019.
Coop, J.D., S.A. Parks, S.R. McClernan, and L.M. Holsinger. 
2016. Influences of prior wildfires on vegetation response 
to subsequent fire in a reburned southwestern landscape. 
Ecol. Appl. 26(2):346–354.
Covington,  W.W., and M.M.  Moore. 1994. Southwestern 
Ponderosa forest structure. J. For. 92(1):39–47.
Creswell,  J.W. 2014. Research design: Qualitative, quanti-
tative, and mixed methods approaches. 4th ed. SAGE 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Cumming, G.S., P. Olsson, F.S. Chapin III, and C.S. Holling. 
2012. Resilience, experimentation, and scale mis-
matches in social–ecological landscapes. Landsc. Ecol. 
28(6):1139–1150.
Davis,  K.T., S.Z.  Dobrowski, P.E.  Higuera, Z.A.  Holden, 
T.T.  Veblen, M.T.  Rother, S.A.  Parks, A.  Sala, and 
M.P. Maneta. 2019. Wildfires and climate change push low-
elevation forests across a critical climate threshold for tree re-
generation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116(13):6193–6198.
Dilling, L., and M.C. Lemos. 2011. Creating usable science: 
Opportunities and constraints for climate knowledge use 
and their implications for science policy. Glob. Environ. 
Change 21(2):680–689.
Djenontin,  I.N.S., and A.M.  Meadow. 2018. The art of 
coproduction of knowledge in environmental sciences 
and management: Lessons from international practice. 
Environ. Manag. 61:885–903.
Falk,  D.A. 2016. The resilience dilemma: Incorporating 
global change into ecosystem policy and management. 
Ariz. Law J. 48(1):145–156.
Falk, D.A., A.C. Watts, and A.E. Thode. 2019. Scaling eco-
logical resilience. Front. Ecol. Evol. 7:Article 275.
Folke, C. 2006. Resilience: The emergence of a perspective 
for social–ecological system analyses. Glob. Environ. 
Change 16:253–267.
Folke, C., S.R. Carpenter, B. Walker, M. Scheffer, T. Chapin, 
and J. Rockström. 2010. Resilience thinking: Integrating 
resilience, adaptability and transformability. Ecol. Soc. 
15(4):20.
Folke, C. 2016. Resilience (Republished). Ecol. Soc. 21(4):44.
Four Forest Restoration Initiative. (n.d.). Available online at 
4FRI.org; last accessed October 15, 2019.
Fulé,  P.Z., W.W.  Covington, and M.M.  Moore. 1997. 
Determining reference conditions for ecosystem manage-
ment of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecol. Appl. 
7(3):895–908.
Fulé, P.Z. 2008. Does it make sense to restore wildland fire in 
changing climate? Restor. Ecol. 16(4):526–531.
Gunderson, L.H. 2000. Ecological resilience in theory and 
application. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 31:425–439.
Gunderson, L.H., and C.S. Holling (eds.). 2002. Panarchy: 
Understanding transformations in human and natural 
systems. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Halofsky, J.E., D.L. Peterson, S.K. Dante-Wood, L. Hoang, 
J.J. Ho, and L.A. Joyce (eds.). 2018. Climate change vulner-
ability and adaptation in the Northern Rocky Mountains. 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRSGTR-374, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. Part 
1. 1–273 p.
Holling, C.S. 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological sys-
tems. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 4:1–23.
Holling, C.S. 1996. Engineering resilience versus ecological 
resilience. P. 31–44 in Engineering within ecological 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020

11
Journal of Forestry, 2020, Vol. XX, No. XX
constraints, Schulze,  P. (ed.). National Academy Press, 
Washington, DC.
Hurteau, M.D., J.B. Bradford, P.Z., Fulé, A.H. Taylor, and 
K.L. Martin. 2014. Climate change, fire management, and 
ecological services in the southwestern United States. For. 
Ecol. Manag. 327:280–289.
Kemp,  K.B., J.J.  Blades, P.Z.  Klos, T.E.  Hall, J.E.  Force, 
P. Morgan, and W.T. Tinkham. 2015. Managing for cli-
mate change on federal lands of the western United States: 
Perceived usefulness of climate science, effectiveness of 
adaptation strategies, and barriers to implementation. 
Ecol. Soc. 20(2):17.
Keane,  R.E., R.A.  Loehman, L.M.  Holsinger, P.  Higuera, 
S.M. Hood, and D.A. Falk. 2018. Use of landscape simu-
lation modeling to quantify resilience for ecological appli-
cations. EcoSphere 9(9):1–8.
Larson,  A.J., R.T.  Belote, C.A.  Cansler, S.A.  Parks, and 
M.S.  Dietz. 2013. Latent resilience in ponderosa pine 
forest: Effects of resumed frequent fire. Ecol. Appl. 
23(6):1243–1249.
Lin,  B.B., and B.  Petersen. 2013. Resilience, regime shifts, 
and guided transition under climate change: Examining 
the practical difficulties of managing continually chan-
ging systems. Ecol. Soc. 18(1):28.
Meadow,  A.M., D.B.  Ferguson, A.Z.  Guido, A.  Horangic, 
and G.  Owen. 2015 Moving toward the deliberate 
coproduction of climate science knowledge. Weather 
Clim. Soc. 7(2):179–191.
Millar,  C.I., N.L.  Stephenson, and S.L.  Stephens. 2007. 
Climate change and forests of the future: Managing in the 
face of uncertainty. Ecol. Appl. 17(8):2145–2151.
National Forest System Land Management Planning, 36 
C.F.R. §219. 2012.
Olsson,  P., C.  Folke, and F.  Berkes. 2004. Adaptive 
comanagement for building resilience in social–ecological 
systems. Environ. Manag. 34(1):75–90.
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, 
M.S.  Matonis, P.L.  Jackson, D.G.  DeLorenzo, and 
A.D. Graves. 2013. Restoring composition and structure 
in Southwestern frequent-fire forests: A  science-based 
framework for improving ecosystem resiliency. USDA 
Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-310, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 76 p.
Schultz, C., T. Sisk, B. Noon, and M. Nie. 2013. Wildlife con-
servation planning under the United States Forest Service’s 
2012 planning rule. J. Wildl. Manag. 77(3):428–444.
Seidl,  R., T.A.  Spies, D.L.  Peterson, S.L.  Stephens, and 
J.A. Hicke. 2016. Searching for resilience: Addressing the 
impacts of changing disturbance regimes on forest ecosys-
tems services. J. Appl. Ecol. 53:120–129.
Stephens, S.L., B.M. Collins, E. Biber, and P.Z. Fulé. 2016. 
U.S. federal fire and forest policy: Emphasizing resilience 
in dry forests. Ecosphere 7(11):1–19.
Stevens‐Rumann, C., and P. Morgan. 2016. Repeated wild-
fires alter forest recovery of mixed‐conifer ecosystems. 
Ecol. Appl. 26(6):1842–1853.
Swetnam, T., and C. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime pat-
terns in the southwestern United States since AD 1700. P. 
11–32 in Fire effects in Southwestern Forest: Proceedings 
of the 2nd La Mesa Fire Symposium, Allen, C.D. (ed.). 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-286, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Timberlake,  T.J., and C.  Schultz. 2017. Policy, practice, 
and partnerships for climate change adaptation on US 
National Forests. Clim. Change 144:257–269.
USDA Forest Service; Department of the Interior, Office of 
Wildland Fire Coordination. 2014. The national strategy, 
the final phase in the development of the national cohe-
sive wildland fire management strategy. Wildland Fire 
Leadership Council, Washington, DC. 93 p.
van Mantgem, P.J., D.A. Falk, E.C. Williams, A.J. Das, and 
N.L. Stephenson. 2018. Pre‐fire drought and competition 
mediate post‐fire conifer mortality in western US National 
Parks. Ecol. Appl. 28(7):1730–1739.
Walker, B., C.S. Holling, S.R. Carpenter, and A. Kinzig. 2004. 
Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social–
ecological systems. Ecol. Soc. 9(2):5.
Walker, B., and D. Salt. 2006. Resilience thinking: Sustaining 
ecosystems and people in a changing 887 world. Island 
Press, Washington, DC. 192 p.
Walker,  B.H., L.H.  Gunderson, A.P.  Kinzig, C.  Folke, 
S.R. Carpenter, and L. Schultz. 2006. A handful of heur-
istics and some propositions for understanding resilience 
in social–ecological systems. Ecol. Soc. 11(1):13.
Wall,  T.U., A.M.  Meadow, and A.  Horganic. 2017. 
Developing evaluation indicators to improve the process 
of coproducing usable climate science. Weather Clim. Soc. 
9(1):95–107.
Waltz,  A.E.M., M.T.  Stoddard, E.L.  Kalies, J.D.  Springer, 
D.W.  Huffman, and A.  Sánchez  Meador. 2014. 
Effectiveness of fuel reduction treatments: Assessing 
metrics of forest resilience and wildfire severity after the 
Wallow Fire, AZ. For. Ecol. Manag. 334:43–52.
Westerling, 
A.L., 
H.G. 
Hidalgo, 
D.R. 
Cayan, 
and 
T.W. Swetnam. 2006. Warming and earlier spring increase 
western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313:940–943.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvaa006/5804702 by Northern Arizona University user on 18 March 2020
