ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Adaptive governance and the administrative state: knowledge
management for forest planning in the western United States
Zachary Wurtzebach1
& Courtney Schultz1 & Amy E. M. Waltz2 & Bryce E. Esch2 & Tzeidle N. Wasserman2
Received: 5 June 2018 /Accepted: 9 October 2019
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2019
Abstract
Scholarship on adaptive governance emphasizes the importance of institutional flexibility, collaboration, and social networks for
linking knowledge to action across scales of socio-ecological organization. However, a major gap in our knowledge exists around
the design of policies that can support the generation and application of knowledge across levels of decision-making in natural
resource management agencies such as the US Forest Service. To address this gap, we conducted a qualitative study, consisting of
interviews with Forest Service staff and external partners, to investigate challenges and opportunities for improved knowledge
management in the context of ecological monitoring for federal forest planning in the western United States. We found that
decentralized decision-making structures, limited formalization for knowledge management processes, and scarce institutional
resources interact to create barriers for effective knowledge management and adaptive decision-making. However, we also found
there are opportunities for improving knowledge management through administrative policy tools such as partnerships, central-
ized budgetary authority and coordination, formal administrative and collaborative processes, and investment in administrative
knowledge brokers at different levels of the agency. Our findings underscore the importance of bureaucratic organization and
research on administrative policy design for operationalizing elements of adaptive governance in state institutions.
Keywords Knowledge management . Adaptation . Governance . Scale . Policy design
Introduction
Meeting social-ecological goals in environmental governance
requires integrating knowledge of ecological processes and
conditions from multiple scales of assessment into decision-
making processes across levels of government (Cash et al.
2006; Lindenmayer and Likens 2010). However, environmen-
tal managers often lack credible and relevant knowledge at
appropriate scales (Archie et al. 2014; Fazey et al. 2013),
creating a disconnect between knowledge and action as a re-
sult of epistemic boundaries, “mismatches” between the scale
of knowledge generation and that of decision-making, and
rigid legal and bureaucratic structures that limit flexibility
for learning and adaptive decision-making (Cash et al. 2006;
Chaffin et al. 2014; McNie 2007). Given these issues, adap-
tive governance has emerged from scholarship on resilience,
adaptive management, and socio-ecological systems as an im-
portant theoretical and practical concept for improving the
knowledge to action linkage in environmental governance
(Chaffin et al. 2014; Wyborn 2015). Adaptive governance
emphasizes “the ability to observe and interpret essential pro-
cesses and variables in ecosystem dynamics to develop the
social capacity to respond to environmental feedback and
change” (Folke et al. 2005, 490). Multilevel institutions that
provide flexibility for experimentation, collaboration, and par-
ticipatory decision-making, and networks that link people and
Communicated by Diana Sietz
* Zachary Wurtzebach
zack@largelandscapes.org
Courtney Schultz
Courtney.schultz@colostate.edu
Amy E. M. Waltz
Amy.waltz@nau.edu
Bryce E. Esch
Bryce.esch@nau.edu
Tzeidle N. Wasserman
Tzeidle.wasserman@nau.edu
1
Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State
University, 1472 Campus Delivery, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA
2
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ, USA
Regional Environmental Change
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-019-01569-6

knowledge across scales of socio-ecological organization, are
key elements of the adaptive governance paradigm (Folke
et al. 2005; Chaffin et al. 2014; Wyborn 2015).
Despite its normative appeal for both academics and
policymakers, research on legal and policy frameworks is
needed to operationalize elements of adaptive governance in
practice (Chaffin et al. 2014; Sharma-Wallace et al. 2018).
Adaptive governance has been critiqued for its emphasis on
generalizable design principles that neglect the role of power
and politics, institutional path dependencies, and situated so-
cial processes in shaping governance dynamics in specific
contexts (Cleaver and Whaley 2018). Context-dependent
socio-cultural values and institutional arrangements are partic-
ularly relevant for the design of knowledge processes that lie
at the heart of the adaptive governance paradigm (Fazey et al.
2013; Wyborn 2015; Clark et al. 2016). However, while
existing research emphasizes the importance of intermedi-
aries, networks, and social processes for the co-production
of useable knowledge in specific decision-making venues,
less attention has been given to policy frameworks and capa-
bilities needed to systematically support knowledge processes
among actors operating across multiple levels of governance
(Bruckmeier 2014; Cvitanovic et al. 2015; Nguyen et al.
2016). Specifically, we have limited knowledge of policies
that can systematically improve knowledge management pro-
cesses for adaptive governance at the “meso-level” of multi-
level public organizations, where challenges such as generat-
ing useable knowledge from data come into focus (Rashman
et al. 2009; Timmerman et al. 2010; Wyborn and Dovers
2014). Given that the availability of useable knowledge on
ecological processes from multiple scales is a precondition
for adaptive governance, the development of policies that sup-
port effective environmental knowledge management in
existing state agencies therefore represents an important op-
portunity for operationalizing adaptive governance in practice
(Wyborn and Dovers 2014). Indeed, as the vectors for state
resources and authority, and the locus for second-order
policymaking and implementation, state bureaucracies around
the world play a critical role in environmental governance
(Biesbroek and Peters 2018).
In this article, we investigate barriers and policy opportu-
nities for improved knowledge management in the context of
ecological monitoring for federal forest planning in the west-
ern United States. Formal ecological monitoring (i.e., moni-
toring that involves the iterative collection and analysis of
data) is a foundational source of knowledge for adaptive gov-
ernance that is receiving greater emphasis in recent years from
land management agencies and policymakers around the
world (Wurtzebach and Schultz 2016; Sharma-Wallace et al.
2018; Waylen et al. 2019). In the USA, the U.S. Forest Service
has recently developed new regulations for land management
planning that emphasize the importance of generating and
integrating monitoring information from multiple scales into
iterative forest planning processes (U.S. Forest Service 2015).
As a large multilevel bureaucracy of enduring importance for
regional environmental governance (Abrams et al. 2017), the
US Forest Service therefore represents an excellent case study
in which to investigate knowledge processes and policy
frameworks of relevance for adaptive governance in state in-
stitutions. Our research was guided by two questions: (1)
What are the institutional barriers (i.e., laws, organizational
structures and procedures, political interests, and resources)
to effective knowledge management in the context of ecolog-
ical monitoring for federal forest planning? (2) What admin-
istrative policy tools (i.e., budgeting strategies, partnerships,
staffing structures, and administrative procedures) can im-
prove knowledge management for forest planning? To struc-
ture our analysis, we embrace calls for theoretical multiplicity
in studies of adaptive governance (Karpouzoglou et al. 2016),
and introduce a conceptual framework for ecological knowl-
edge management in multilevel agencies that synthesizes con-
cepts and insights from scholarship on public sector organiza-
tional learning and knowledge management, ecological mon-
itoring, and knowledge co-production. In the next section, we
outline and summarize the elements of our conceptual frame-
work. We then provide an overview of the Forest Service
context and a description of our research methods. After ad-
dressing our research questions, we then discuss our findings
and their implications for future research on adaptive
governance.
Literature review: knowledge management,
public organizations, and ecological
monitoring
Knowledge management processes in public
organizations
Knowledge is information that has been interpreted in light of
context, experience, or theory and may be mobilized for action
(in contrast to data, which are raw facts and numbers that are
processed or analyzed to produce information) (Tsoukas and
Vladimirou 2001). Knowledge management refers to the
“process of generating, storing and circulating new knowl-
edge, and identifying, bringing together and applying existing
knowledge to achieve a specific objective” (Reed et al. 2013
pg311; Alavi and Leidner 2001). Knowledge management
processes are shaped by sociocultural values and institutional
arrangements—the rules, structures, roles, and dynamics that
mediate the relationship between science and policy.
Institutional arrangements and knowledge management pro-
cesses influence the degree to which knowledge is salient (i.e.,
relevant for decision-making), legitimate (unbiased and fair to
relevant stakeholders), and credible (scientifically and techni-
cally robust)—criteria that increase the chances it will be
Z. Wurtzebach et al.

useable for decision-making (Cash et al. 2003; Clark et al.
2016). Within the context of environmental governance,
scholars emphasize the importance of different types of
knowledge (i.e., local/experiential, scientific) from multiple
scales (i.e., local to global) for decision-making processes at
different levels of governance (Cash et al. 2006; Raymond
et al. 2010). Scale refers to the temporal, spatial, or quantita-
tive dimensions of a phenomenon, and level refers to the units
of analysis located at different positions on a scale (Gibson
et al. 2000). In this article, we focus on knowledge manage-
ment processes and institutional arrangements that can gener-
ate useable knowledge on ecological processes operating at
different temporal and spatial scales (i.e., annual to multi-de-
cadal, and local to regional spatial extents), for different levels
and spatial scales of administrative decision-making (i.e., a
national forest or forest service administrative region).
Generating useable knowledge from monitoring data at
appropriate spatial and temporal scales for decision-making
in specific venues requires several iterative processes and ca-
pabilities (Doremus 2008; Lindenmayer and Likens 2010).
Effective design sets the stage for all subsequent steps and
involves the identification of goals, objectives, and informa-
tion needs; specific resources or ecological attributes to be
targeted for monitoring; and data collection strategies (e.g.,
measurement protocols and sampling design) that can gener-
ate relevant information at appropriate scales with sufficient
statistical power for reliably informing decision-making
(Niemi and McDonald2004; Lindenmayer and Likens
2010). Effective design requires significant expertise in eco-
logical systems and statistical design, as well as knowledge of
social values, administrative processes and budgetary con-
straints. Since no individual or single group holds all this
knowledge, prior research suggests collaborative processes
and structured decision criteria that promote deliberation
among scientists, managers, agency specialists, and public
stakeholders are important for ensuring that monitoring infor-
mation will be salient, scientifically credible, and feasible to
implement (see Cash et al. 2003; Tulloch et al. 2011). Once
designed, data must be collected consistently over time and
space, a particularly important consideration for long-term
monitoring associated with slow ecosystem processes
(Lindenmayer and Likens 2010). Effective data management
and timely analysis are then needed to generate interpretable
information (Lovett et al. 2007).
There are also several important processes and capabilities
associated with the transfer or exchange of existing data and
information across organizational boundaries and spatial
scales. While interorganizational data and information sharing
may be facilitated by information technology, social networks
and relationships are often essential for identifying informa-
tion needs, navigating legal and proprietary issues, and coor-
dinating data and information transfer (Dawes et al. 2009;
Yang and Maxwell 2011). Once data or information has been
acquired, it must often be analyzed or synthesized with other
data to generate useable information and alleviate “mis-
matches” between the scale of monitoring and the scale of
decision-making. This might involve aggregating information
collected at fine scales, which often requires the use of stan-
dardized or compatible measurement protocols at smaller
scales—an undertaking that requires coordination, particular-
ly across jurisdictions—or the use of statistical models and
decision support tools (see Veblen et al. 2014). By contrast,
the interpretation of coarse resolution regional or broader-
scale data at local scales of decision-making requires down-
scaling data.
After analysis, information must often be effectively com-
municated to decision-makers and managers within institu-
tional contexts and, again, often at different spatial scales; this
is particularly important if these individuals were not involved
in data collection design, execution, or translation (Dilling
et al. 2011). Once information from different scales and re-
sources has been generated or acquired, integration into
decision-making requires effective synthesis and interpreta-
tion (Doremus 2008). While timely documentation and writ-
ten reporting is essential, structured and deliberative processes
are important for integrating ecological knowledge with
knowledge of administrative, political, and social issues of
relevance for decision-making (Edelenbos et al. 2011).
Decision-makers also often prefer to acquire and evaluate in-
formation through qualitative discussions rather than quanti-
tative reports, and dialog is often essential for constructing
useable knowledge out of often ambiguous data and informa-
tion (Moynihan 2005; Brown and Brudney 2003). Discussion
and deliberation—ideally with stakeholders—may be partic-
ularly important for integrating local knowledge with ecolog-
ical monitoring information and evaluating the relevance of
information and the costs or risks associated with applying
knowledge in practice (Gregory et al. 2006). Therefore, effec-
tive multiscale knowledge management involves a complex
set of iterative processes that typically require coordination
and collaboration among managers, scientists, and stake-
holders across organizational boundaries and levels of
governance.
Institutional arrangements for knowledge
management
Knowledge management processes are heavily influenced by
the specific institutional and organizational context in which
they are embedded (Contandriopoulos et al. 2010; Fazey et al.
2013). One important institutional variable of relevance for
knowledge management processes is human, technological,
and financial resources. Within public organizations, the de-
velopment of proactive knowledge management strategies,
such as robust data collection and analysis procedures, is often
dependent on the availability of “slack” organizational
Adaptive governance and the administrative state: knowledge management for forest planning in the western...

resources not dedicated to critical organizational tasks. When
resources are scarce, organizations react to emergent issues
and problems, focus on legal compliance, and emphasize core
activities associated with future budgetary allocation (Berends
et al. 2003; Brown and Brudney 2003). Funding limitations
also often create temporal inconsistencies in monitoring.
Technological resource limitations, such as cumbersome da-
tabases, constrain effective storage, transmission, and analysis
(Lindenmayer and Likens 2010). Land management staff
members often lack the scientific or technical expertise and
training needed to design monitoring programs, develop or
utilize databases, and analyze or translate monitoring informa-
tion (Hutto and Belote 2013). The availability of external hu-
man and organizational resources is also important for knowl-
edge management processes. Collaboration with citizens and
stakeholder organizations, for instance, is often dependent up-
on the presence of conducive socioeconomic factors and so-
cial capital (Reed 2008).
Laws, organizational structure and culture, and politics also
have important implications for knowledge management pro-
cesses. Administrative laws that emphasize prediction and
stability over learning and adaptation are thought to compli-
cate the generation and application of knowledge in iterative
decision-making processes (Chaffin et al. 2014; Garmestani et
al. 2013). Elements of organizational structure such as central-
ized decision-making structures, siloed departments, and
highly formalized practices and procedures can limit the flex-
ibility of staff and units to develop new knowledge through
experimentation, collaborate and share information across de-
partments and organizations, and integrate new into knowl-
edge decision-making processes (Pee and Kankanhalli 2016;
Kim and Lee 2006; Tsai 2002). Within the context of forest
management, for instance, organizational culture, laws, and
organizational incentives created barriers to adaptive manage-
ment in the Pacific Northwest (Stankey et al. 2003). Program-
focused budget lines have been found to affect coordination
and collaboration between staff areas (Schultz et al. 2015).
The temporal scales of budgetary, promotion, and decision-
making cycles, which include annual appropriations and per-
formance review cycles, limit the incentives to build enduring
monitoring efforts. In addition, there are few incentives to
coordinate data collection across jurisdictional boundaries,
even within the same organization (Cash and Moser 2000;
Biber 2013). Collaboration with academic researchers is often
complicated by cultural barriers and researchers’ structural
incentives to generate publishable research (Dilling et al.
2011). Political interests at different levels are also relevant.
In public organizations, otherwise credible and relevant
knowledge is often ignored given the “endemic priority of
politics” (Weiss 1999). The legitimacy of different sources
of information is shaped by perceptions of political bias
(Cash et al. 2003). At local levels, elite actors may exert po-
litical pressure to limit the collection or dissemination of data
and information that threatens their economic interests, and
managers may be unwilling to generate information that re-
veals management failures (Biber 2013).
In the face of many institutional challenges, strategies exist
to improve knowledge management and application across
scales and levels of decision-making. Cash and Moser
(2000) highlight the importance of enabling policies for
exploiting “scale dependent comparative advantages” for
knowledge management across levels of governance (Cash
and Moser 2000). Scale-dependent comparative advantages
refer to the benefits of exploiting (a) the technical capabilities
of different organizations for specific knowledge management
processes at different scales, and (b) functional specialization
in policy functions, such as budgeting or coordination at dif-
ferent levels of governance (Cash and Moser 2000). While
collaboration is often cited as an enabler of scale-dependent
comparative advantages (Hill et al. 2015), scholars also high-
light the importance of enabling laws and policies such as the
reform of administrative law, the decentralization of decision-
making authority, or the creation of boundary organizations
(Garmestani et al. 2013; Cash et al. 2003). However, less
attention has been given to administrative policy tools imple-
mented under the authority of existing statutes. One potential
and underexplored opportunity for administrative policy de-
sign in public organizations is investment in functionally spe-
cialized positions focused on knowledge brokering.
Knowledge brokers provide several critical functions for ef-
fective knowledge management, such as facilitating collabo-
ration, building capacity, and linking and supplying knowl-
edge and expertise to end users (Turnhout et al. 2013). For
instance, Burgess and Currie (2013) highlight the importance
of knowledge brokers at “middle manager” levels of public
health organizations who are knowledgeable of both medical
practice and management decision-making. They leverage
this knowledge, and skills in networking, translation, and me-
diation, to facilitate knowledge management across occupa-
tional disciplines, levels of an organization, and across orga-
nizations. Within the context of public organizations, leader-
ship is the most frequently cited enabler of administrative
policies for organizational knowledge management
(Rashman et al. 2009; Yang and Maxwell 2011). Leadership
is essential for allocating resources, developing organizational
structures for knowledge management initiatives, promoting
interorganizational knowledge sharing, and communicating
the value of knowledge management for achieving organiza-
tional goals and objectives (Dawes et al. 2009; Moynihan and
Landuyt 2009).
Multi-scale monitoring and land management
planning in the US Forest Service
In public land management agencies, monitoring has often
failed to generate credible and relevant information about
Z. Wurtzebach et al.

critical ecological processes at temporal or spatial scales ap-
propriate to the variable of interest (Biber 2013; Lindenmayer
and Likens 2010). In federal forest management, land man-
agement plans that guide all subsequent project level planning
and implementatoin are required under the National Forest
Management Act of 1976 (NFMA) and must include moni-
toring plans to evaluate plan implementation. However, the
US Forest Service has struggled to implement consistent and
credible monitoring and evaluation strategies for forest plan-
ning (Nylen 2011). In recognition of these challenges, the
agency promulgated new regulations for forest planning in
2012 designed to “inform integrated resource management
and allow the Forest Service to adapt to changing conditions,
including climate change, and improve management based on
new information and monitoring” (36 CFR § 219.5 (a)).
Under the new regulations, the Forest Service is required to
develop monitoring strategies that address eight required
topics, including “key characteristics” of ecological integrity;
attributes of ecological structure, function, process, and com-
position associated with ecosystem resilience and biodiversity
conservation (Wurtzebach and Schultz 2016). Monitoring
strategies are intended to allow forest staff to evaluate and
change plan components on administrative planning units
(i.e., national forests and administratively combined national
forests). Plan components include desired social and ecologi-
cal conditions, management objectives for achieving desired
conditions, standards and guidelines that regulate manage-
ment implementation, and zoning delineations that specify
suitable resource uses for different forest areas. Monitoring
data associated with forest structure, function, and composi-
tion, for instance, are essential for evaluating progress towards
achieving desired conditions across the planning area (e.g.,
increasing late seral forest structure), and evaluating the effec-
tiveness of standards for mitigating detrimental impacts dur-
ing project implementation (e.g., timber harvesting).
Monitoring data associated with climatic variables, rangeland
and riparian conditions, wildlife species and habitat, and water
quality and stream flow are likewise important for evaluating
plan components for other resources under the agency’s pur-
view (U.S. Forest Service 2015). There are also two comple-
mentary tiers of ecological monitoring in the new planning
rule: monitoring on each national forest within the land man-
agement plan, and, in addition, “broader-scale monitoring pro-
grams” developed by each of the nine US Forest Service re-
gions, the administrative level above national forests (Fig. 1).
Broader-scale monitoring is intended to generate efficiencies
and complement forest plan monitoring; it is specifically
meant to be applicable for resources that should be assessed
consistently and at a scale greater than the individual national
forest (36 CFR § 219.12 (b)). Broader-scale monitoring ap-
proaches may involve new monitoring initiatives, the transla-
tion of existing broader-scale datasets, or the aggregation of
data collected by forests. The rule also calls on the agency to
collaborate with “other Forest Service units, Federal, State or
local government agencies, scientists, partners, and members
of the public” (36 CFR § 219.12 (b)), to utilize “best available
scientific information” (36 CFR § 219.3), and to ensure that
monitoring results are integrated back into planning and
decision-making cycles through biennial reporting cycles
(36 CFR § 219).
Conceptual framework
Our synthesis of the literature provides a conceptual frame-
work for investigating institutional barriers and opportunities
for improved knowledge management for forest planning pro-
cesses in the US Forest Service (Fig. 2). One element of our
framework is “knowledge management processes.” This ele-
ment highlights iterative processes associated with the gener-
ation and integration of useable knowledge of ecological sys-
tems in administrative agencies. It should be noted that this
element represents a heuristic or “ideal-type” meant to support
analysis and inquiry of knowledge management processes and
the variables that affect them, rather than provide an accurate
representation of reality. In addition, many of the steps, such
as data and information sharing, may occur across levels of
governance or organizational boundaries as shown in the mul-
tilevel dynamics component. The blue lines in that element
represent flows of resources, data, and information among
different institutional actors and levels of administrative gov-
ernance linked by networks and information technology. The
other element of our framework is the ”institutional context.”
This component highlights institutional variables and arrange-
ments drawn from the literature on adaptive governance, eco-
logical monitoring, knowledge co-production, and public sec-
tor knowledge management that have been found to influence
knowledge management processes at the organizational level
of governance. It should be noted that our list of variables is
not exhaustive, and our conceptual model is embedded within
larger systems of socio-cultural values and civic epistemol-
ogies that shape institutional arrangments, actor roles, and
knowledge processes (see Van Kerkhoff and Pilbeam 2017).
Our framework can therefore be used to identify and investi-
gate process-related barriers for generating useable knowl-
edge, and the institutional variables that influence them in
natural resource agencies.
Methods
This paper draws on a project funded by the Washington of-
fice of the US Forest Service between August 2014 and
December 2016 to collaboratively develop a strategy for the
Rocky Mountain and Southwestern Regions of the Forest
Service for meeting the broader-scale monitoring implemen-
tation requirements in the 2012 NFMA regulations. These
Adaptive governance and the administrative state: knowledge management for forest planning in the western...

regions were chosen because of their interest in participating
in the project and adjacency, which allowed for the possibility
that they might coordinate or share strategies and information
in developing their broader-scale monitoring strategies. As
part of this agreement, researchers at the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERIs) collected semi-
structured interviews with 93 respondents to understand chal-
lenges and opportunities associated with monitoring imple-
mentation under the 2012 planning rule. These interviews
were the primary source of data for this paper. Interviewees
were identified through a purposive, snowball sampling strat-
egy that led to a network sampling of interview subjects
(Creswell 2009). We first worked with agency cooperators
to identify and interview staff in the research branch of the
forest service (n = 5), and planners and resource program leads
(i.e., forest vegetation, rangelands, wildlife and fish, hydrolo-
gy, air, and soil) from regional offices in Regions 2 and 3 (n =
17), and the Washington office of the US Forest Service (n =
5). These interviewees were selected based on their location in
the Forest Service hierarchy, and their ability to provide a
national and regional perspective on monitoring implementa-
tion processes for forest planning across different agency pro-
gram areas. Based on the recommendations of interviewees in
our initial sample, we then identified and interviewed planners
(n = 4), program specialists (n = 14), and line officers (n = 2) in
forest supervisor’s offices on administrative planning units
(i.e., national forest and administratively combined national
forests) in Regions 2 and 3 who could provide insight on
monitoring challenges and successes at the forest level.
These individuals were identified based on their expertise
and knowledge of monitoring for different resources and pro-
gram areas, or their role in leadership and decision-making.
We also used snowball sampling techniques to identify re-
spondents from academic institutions (n = 4), state-level orga-
nizations (n = 9), and NGOs (n = 13) who have been involved
with or have extensive familiarity with forest service monitor-
ing and land management planning. External partner organi-
zations included state-level wildlife and forestry agencies, and
natural heritage programs in Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado,
and Wyoming. NGOs included non-partisan and science de-
livery focused organizations, such as the Nature Conservancy
and Conservation Science Partners, and advocacy focused
groups such as Western Watersheds Project. Respondents
were also asked to identify examples of successful agency
monitoring programs in other forest regions and other federal
land management agencies (i.e., the National Park Service, the
Fig. 1 Scales of Forest Service planning. The map on the left shows the
extent of lands associated with different Forest Service regions and the
interagency Northwest Forest Plan. The map on the right shows the scale
of an administrative planning unit, the Rio Grande National Forest, and a
scale for project level planning and implementation (e.g., a grazing
allotment)
Z. Wurtzebach et al.

Bureau of Land Management, and the Fish and Wildlife
Service), and we subsequently interviewed respondents who
were familiar with those initiatives (n = 20).
Interviews were conducted in person and over the phone
and lasted approximately one hour. Interview guides included
questions regarding respondents general perceptions of forest
service monitoring efforts, institutional barriers associated
with specific steps needed to generate and integrate monitor-
ing information into forest planning decisions (i.e., design,
data management, analysis), and changes to forest service
structure, culture, and administrative procedures needed to
support monitoring implementation and adaptive planning un-
der the 2012 Planning Rule. Interviewees familiar with suc-
cessful monitoring programs in the US Forest Service and
other land management contexts were also asked supplemen-
tary questions about administrative structures and processes
that have supported effective implementation. Interviews were
conducted until we reached saturation, meaning no new infor-
mation associated with barriers and opportunities was being
identified by respondents (Creswell 2009).
We also used the information we gained from these inter-
views to design four inter-agency workshops in Arizona, New
Mexico, Colorado, and Wyoming that we hosted in
partnership with the agency; these in total involved partici-
pants from over 20 federal, state, and non-governmental agen-
cies (for more details on workshop design, see Waltz et al.
2017). At the workshops, we documented key barriers, issues,
and strategies for success that emerged in group discussions.
Interviews were recorded and transcribed, and interview tran-
scripts and notes from workshops were subsequently analyzed
through coding (Saldana 2005). We used the qualitative data
analysis software RQDA to attach codes to excerpts of text,
allowing for the grouping of excerpts by code, and by respon-
dent occupation and affiliation. Codes were developed for
themes such as institutional barriers for specific knowledge
management processes (i.e., design, data collection, analysis),
and administrative policies and processes associated with suc-
cessful knowledge management for ecological monitoring.
We coded several transcriptions together to ensure inter-
coder reliability, and frequently discussed our perceptions of
relevant findings (Creswell 2009). In the next section, we
utilize our conceptual framework to structure the reporting
of our findings. We first report on institutional barriers for
each step in the knowledge management process at forest
and regional levels of administration (i.e., design, data collec-
tion, etc.), before discussing administrative policy tools
Design
Data 
collecon
Analysis
Decision-
making
Informaon 
Reporng
Polics
•
Interests of administrave actors
Organizaonal structure and culture
•
Mission
•
Degree of centralizaon, formalizaon, 
departmentalizaon,
•
Incenves
•
Informal rules/norms
•
Staﬀ funcons
•
Administrave policies (e.g 2012 planning rule)
Resources
•
Experse and knowledge, funding, 
informaon technology, social capital
Organizaonal Variables
Leadership 
Characteriscs of 
External Organizaons
Cizens and 
Stakeholders
Resources and Interests
Naonal Laws
•
Substanve laws (e.g. ESA)
•
Procedural laws (e.g. NFMA, NEPA)
Instuonal context
Characteriscs of 
Ecological Systems or 
Resources
Spaal and temporal 
dimensions, ease of 
measurement
Naonal Polics
•
Interests/preferences 
of governing coalion
Synthesis -
Interpretaon
Data 
management
Data sharing
Data
Informaon
Knowledge
Middle management level
Operaonal level units
Mullevel dynamics
Execuve level
Constuonal level
Context speciﬁc
Boundary 
organizaon
External 
organizaon
Local 
stakeholders
Knowledge management processes
Naonal
Regional
Local
Knowledge
Academic 
Researchers
Generalizable
Fig. 2 Conceptual framework for environmental knowledge managment in public organizations
Adaptive governance and the administrative state: knowledge management for forest planning in the western...

associated with successful monitoring initiatives. For the sake
of brevity, we report on findings for which there was a general
consensus among respondents.
Results
Knowledge management challenges
When asked about their challenges in designing and
implementing monitoring programs in general, participants
highlighted problems that originate at the design stage.
Respondents noted that forest staff often lack the funding,
expertise, and social relationships needed to design integrated
forest plan monitoring strategies on their own or in collabora-
tion with partner organizations. This was especially true for
remote and poorly funded forests that are limited in human
and financial capacity and often lack strong local constituen-
cies for monitoring or local partner organizations with whom
they can effectively collaborate. In addition, respondents from
across the agency noted that forest-wide monitoring plans are
often developed at the end of the planning process, with min-
imal evaluation or documentation of cost, roles, and responsi-
bilities for implementation, monitoring data’s potential rele-
vance to forest plan decision-making, or scientific credibility
and accuracy. As a result, forest monitoring plans often con-
tain numerous monitoring strategies that represent “pet pro-
jects” of individual staff that cannot be feasibly implemented.
As one regional specialist noted “A lot of our resources are so
underfunded, resource specialists see that as an opportunity to
leverage funding. That’s why you see a lot of the monitoring
items.”
In addition to poor design, respondents also cited several
challenges for consistent data collection. While there is a ded-
icated budget line item for landscape level forest plan level
monitoring, forest staff have discretion for how it will be
spent, and agency respondents noted that it is often used to
support non-monitoring related initiatives. According to a re-
gional planning employee “Once money goes out to our for-
ests, it can be a little bit hit-and-miss on how it gets used
compared to how we think it should be used. That's just the
reality of the responsible official's jurisdiction and authority
and everything else.” Several program managers and planners
from forest and regional levels of the agency indicated that
budgetary allocation for implementation is often determined
per the short-term priorities of line officers or through conten-
tious interdepartmental politics involving different program
staff—an issue that complicates continuity for monitoring
over time. Pressure to meet performance targets associated
with management outputs, and the cost of complying with
legal procedural requirements associated with NEPA were al-
so commonly cited by line officers, planner, and specialists,
and external partners as factors that significantly reduce
funding and incentives for collecting monitoring data.
A consistent theme from respondents was that even when
data is collected consistently at the forest level, data manage-
ment and analysis represent critical choke-points for generat-
ing useable information. While databases associated with for-
est vegetation and performance measurement are used rela-
tively consistently, databases associated with other resources
and program areas lack accessibility. Forest Service staff con-
sistently said it is relatively easy to enter data into agency
databases, but difficult to get data out, or use them for analysis.
In addition, staff said they often lack the time, resources, and
expertise in statistics or database management needed to ef-
fectively perform these tasks. Integrating data from different
resources or program areas is also complicated by the “siloed”
nature of program or resource specific databases, according to
many respondents. The consistent utilization of agency data-
bases also varies with unit level funding, turnover, and the
interest and capacity of individual specialists, with some say-
ing they simply store data on paper or personal hard-drives. As
summarized by an external partner who has worked with the
Forest Service on data exchange initiatives, “Relevant data is
kind of buried in reports, in closets and file cabinets and card-
board boxes. And the Forest Service has a fair amount of
turnover, and they shift positions a lot, so there's a lot of times
a lack of institutional memory.”
Data and information exchange across forests and with
other organizations is also limited by capacity. Almost all
forest staff noted that the demands of day-to-day management
implementation limited their ability to acquire, evaluate, or
exchange data and information produced by other organiza-
tions. Indeed, many staff noted that they were unaware of the
existence of innovative and robust monitoring strategies de-
veloped on other forests, or monitoring guidance and re-
sources developed at national levels of the organization.
Respondents from national and regional levels of the agency
also noted they were unable to utilize credible data collected
by organizations who were perceived to have a political agen-
da. Similarly, several respondents from NGOs cited a lack of
transparency and challenges for acquiring agency data, which
they perceived to be a product of the agency’s fear of litiga-
tion. As one respondent noted “I don’t know how much of that
[monitoring data] genuinely needs to be proprietary. That’s
something that the agency has to think about… scientists or
analysts maybe could give them back a useful product if there
is a way that they could actually work with that data a little
more freely.”
Issues associated with resource scarcity, organizational
structure, and culture were also cited by interviewees as bar-
riers to the implementation of regionally coordinated broader-
scale monitoring strategies. For instance, while the new plan-
ning rule directs regions to develop broader-scale approaches,
there is no additional provision of funding to support
Z. Wurtzebach et al.

implementation, and respondents from regional offices said
regional leadership is often unwilling to fund new monitoring
initiatives unless they are associated with legal requirements.
Respondents from external organizations and staff from across
all levels of the agency noted also that the agency’s culture of
autonomy and local decision-making are a significant imple-
mentation barrier to regionally coordinated or centralized
strategies. Referencing these challenges, a respondent from
the Washington office said “Because we place such a strong
cultural value on that decentralized model, that local decision
making, those things that really should be centralized, such as
databases and those sorts of things, we don't value [or] put the
resources towards… making those systems more effective”.
Indeed, a few agency and external respondents noted that
directives and guidance from higher levels are often ignored
by unit level staff. For instance, regional staff respondents
from Region 3 noted that when they attempted to create stan-
dardized forest vegetation measurement protocols, forest staff
simply modified them to save money and meet basic assess-
ment needs for specific projects. Agency and external respon-
dents said that without regional office coordination, unit-level
discretion for monitoring implementation means that there is
significant variation in measurement protocols, sample de-
signs, and database management strategies for common and
cross boundary resources—an issue that complicates the de-
velopment of strategies that would “aggregate” and analyze
forest level data to produce useable information at regional
levels of administration.
Respondents from national and regional offices also noted
that limited capacity and database management challenges at
regional levels pose barriers to the identification, exchange,
analysis, and communication of existing data and information
from partner organizations; issues that may particularly ham-
per broader-scale efforts. In Region 2, persistent vacancies in
vegetation analysis positions have meant there is little to no
use of data and information generated by US Forest Service
Research’s Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program, a
robust national inventory and monitoring program that col-
lects detailed long-term monitoring data on forest resource
conditions across the entire USA (Tinkham et al. 2018).
While the relatively low intensity of plots mean that FIA data
is not relevant for management scale decision-making, re-
spondents from FIA noted that it is the agency’s best source
of information on ecological processes, trends, and conditions
that is relevant to forest planning.
Challenges associated with the generation, exchange, anal-
ysis, and translation of both internal and externally sourced
monitoring information are particularly evident in forest mon-
itoring reports—the “output” of forest plan monitoring imple-
mentation. Forest monitoring reports are essentially narrative
“accomplishment reports” compiled by individual program
staff that detail management outputs associated with budget-
ary targets, with little to no evaluation or interpretation of
ecological trends and conditions. As one forest planner noted,
“the old [monitoring report] was just a lot of bean counting…
It's kind of a ‘did you check the box’ kind of thing. It wasn't
really setup in a way to inform any type of adaptive manage-
ment.” Forest and regional staff respondents noted that re-
source limitations and the quotidian demands of project im-
plementation and analysis are significant barriers to effective
analysis and interpretation, and even if there was sufficient
monitoring information and capacity for analysis and interpre-
tation, there would be challenges with using information to
make adaptive changes. Monitoring plans also are often
viewed as “operating licenses” that are “written in stone” rath-
er than tools for adaptive decision-making, and the cost of
complying with procedural requirements for plan amendment,
including public participation, reduces incentives to use mon-
itoring information to change them over time.
Knowledge management opportunities and examples
of success
Despite noted challenges, workshop participants and respon-
dents also highlighted several opportunities and examples of
successful monitoring programs. Respondents from the inter-
agency Northwest Forest Plan monitoring program (NWFP)
highlighted the importance of specialized field crews, and
dedicated positions for program coordination, database man-
agement, analysis, and communication for efficiency and con-
sistency for monitoring and reporting over time—a structure
National Park Service staff noted was a model for their nation-
al program (see Ringold, 1999; Fancy et al. 2009). A respon-
dent from the NWFP also emphasized the importance of col-
laborative funding and “service first” interagency staffing
structures: “Having it multi-funded, that means both agencies
are committed because they're providing money, and they're
also providing people, and so we're coordinating and collab-
orating together with this information. I think that's one of the
biggest successes.” Other respondents highlighted the exam-
ple of Region 1’s vegetation analysis program. Over the past
15 years, Region 1 vegetation analysts have developed infor-
mation technology and analytical tools that integrate forest
and non-forest vegetation data from local units, the FIA pro-
gram, and remote sensing products that allow regional staff to
provide tailored information to forest level end-users and gen-
erate information for regional strategic planning decisions
(Berglund et al. 2009). Respondents noted that regional lead-
ership’s decision to invest in capacity for vegetation monitor-
ing and analysis was driven by litigation associated with stan-
dards for old growth forest, and the region’s inability to dem-
onstrate compliance due to insufficient data. However, lead-
ership subsequently recognized the benefits of initial staff po-
sitions, making additional staff investments over time.
Regional staff are also working on strategies for utilizing
broader-scale riparian and aquatic data collected by the
Adaptive governance and the administrative state: knowledge management for forest planning in the western...

Pacific Inland Biological Opinion monitoring program
(Kershner and Roper 2010), and have developed a collabora-
tive broader-scale monitoring strategy for carnivores that will
soon be expanded to Region 4 (Golding et al. 2018). Region 1
also developed a policy that directs forests to evaluate and
document the cost of forest plan monitoring strategies so they
can be held accountable for the allocation of the dedicated
inventory and monitoring budget line, and is examining ways
to leverage broader-scale monitoring strategies to inform re-
gional strategic planning decisions. Many of these strategies
lead to efficiencies, according to interviews, but require lead-
ership to take an interest in monitoring, invest in initial posi-
tions with enough time and capacity to create a visible effect,
and to exert some authority to require or incentivize units to
participate in regionally led efforts.
Formal collaborative processes also were identified as es-
sential to developing successful forest plan monitoring strate-
gies. For instance, in developing a new monitoring plan as part
of the plan revision process, the Kaibab National Forest un-
dertook significant internal interdisciplinary deliberation and
collaboration with stakeholders and worked with one of the
SWERI organizations to identify efficient vegetation monitor-
ing strategies (Ray et al. 2012). Similarly, the development of
effective forest plan monitoring strategies on Wyoming’s
Bighorn National Forest was facilitated by a state mandated
collaborative forest plan steering committee composed of state
and county officials, and representatives from state resource
management agencies. On both forests, respondents noted the
value of collaborative and deliberative processes to augment
capacity, improve communication, and ensure that monitoring
was scientifically credible, feasible to implement, and relevant
to management—with the additional benefit of improved so-
cial relationships, a reduced threat of litigation, and stakehold-
er investment in monitoring. Respondents from collaborative
forest restoration projects in New Mexico and Arizona also
highlighted the importance of annual “monitoring jams” (in-
volving Forest Service resource specialists and line officers,
external partners, and stakeholders) for sharing and
interpreting monitoring information.
At regional scales, formal collaborative structures and pro-
cesses have also been important for the development of
broader-scale monitoring strategies. Respondents from the
NWFP monitoring program highlighted the importance of le-
gally mandated organizational structures and processes for
design, including iterative deliberation among a steering com-
mittee made up of interagency line officers from participating
land management organizations, a US Forest Service manage-
ment committee composed of line-officers, and a technical
committee composed of interagency specialists, and agency
and external scientists. In addition to effective design, respon-
dents from the NWFP monitoring program highlighted the
importance of these structures for communicating manage-
ment relevant information and demonstrating the value of
the program to line-officers over time. Similarly, within
Region 1, broader-scale monitoring strategies identified by a
technical steering committee in collaboration with external
partners and scientists are sent to an executive committee
composed of regional and forest line-officers.
Respondents from Regions 2 and 3 also highlighted the
importance of leveraging the capabilities of partner organiza-
tions for data collection, data management, analysis, and com-
munication to augment agency capacity and overcome persis-
tent challenges. According to a regional program manager,
“We simply do not have the capacity, whether it's capacity in
getting people on board, technical capacity of the people who
are on board, or the time of people once they are here to
actually do the work. I think there is a real need to rely on
partner networks in a manner that far exceeds what we can do
independently”. On some forests, funded partnerships with
local and state-level organizations, such as the Mountain
Studies Institute in southern Colorado and the Wyoming
Natural Diversity Database, have supported the development
of collaborative citizen science monitoring initiatives associ-
ated with amphibians, ungulates, and alpine ecosystems. At
regional levels, numerous respondents highlighted the impor-
tance of multi-year agreements for partner monitoring funded
“off the top” of the inventory and monitoring budget line at
regional levels that allow the agency to ensure consistent im-
plementation over multiple fiscal years and multiple
jurisdictions.
A consistent theme from both agency and external partners
was that leveraging partner capabilities and managing and
coordinating internal knowledge management capabilities
and processes requires investment in organizational positions
dedicated to knowledge management for ecological monitor-
ing. While regions and forests often have dedicated monitor-
ing coordinators, these roles are often just another “duty as
assigned” to staff with existing responsibilities, such as plan-
ners or resource specialists, which complicates their ability to
effectively coordinate and provide oversight for monitoring
implementation.
Discussion
Institutional challenges
Scholarship on adaptive governance and organizational
knowledge management emphasizes the importance of insti-
tutional flexibility for collaboration, learning, and adaptive
decision-making (Chaffin et al. 2014; Tsai 2002). In our find-
ings, however, we found that scarce resources interact with
decentralized decision-making structures and a lack of formal-
ization for knowledge management processes—both elements
of flexibility—to create challenges for generating useable in-
formation for forest planning processes. Given scarce
Z. Wurtzebach et al.

financial resources and political pressure for management out-
puts, forest and regional line officers often use their discretion
to allocate human and financial resource to activities associat-
ed with management implementation, rather than knowledge
management. Limited formalization for monitoring proce-
dures (such as structured decision-making process to identify
appropriate monitoring strategies, or standardized data collec-
tion and data management procedures) also means that deci-
sions about what to monitor at forest levels, and how, are left
to the discretion of individual resource specialists. External
organizational resource capacity and social capital are also
critical contextual factors for knowledge management
(Dawes et al. 2009; Fazey et al. 2013; Nguyen et al. 2017).
Despite the emphasis on co-production within the literature on
adaptive governance, the scarce and uneven distribution of
both internal and external capacity is a significant barrier for
collaboration and knowledge co-production on many remote
and poorly funded forests (see Wyborn 2015; Sutherland et al.
2017). There are also limited constituencies for ecological
monitoring and evaluation in many areas. This is a critical
variable, as line-officers are often highly sensitive to local
interests and constituencies (Sabatier et al. 1995).
Decentralized decision-making structures and limited formal-
ization, in other words, mean that the politics around knowl-
edge management “flow to the points of discretion” on indi-
vidual forests (cf. Lowi 1986 p. 297), and are shaped by top-
down and politically driven incentives, and locally unique
variables such as available resources, and staff and stakehold-
er interests.
These issues create significant challenges for generating
useable information on ecological processes over time and
space, a precondition for adaptive governance (Folke et al.
2005; Wyborn 2015). At present, local monitoring often fo-
cuses on poor indicators of ecological health and is designed
at project scales, associated with short-term legal obligations,
or discontinued when there is turnover. Interviewees noted
that capacity for knowledge management is highly variable
across forests and information is fragmented, limiting oppor-
tunities for the exchange and aggregation of data. At regional
levels, decentralized decision-making structures, limited ca-
pacity, and the agency’s culture of local autonomy create bar-
riers to the development of broader-scale monitoring strate-
gies that can match the scale of monitoring to relevant
resources.
Institutional opportunities
Despite considerable challenges, our findings indicate that
there are significant opportunities for improving multiscale
knowledge management in the US Forest Service through
policy tools such as partnerships, centralized budgetary au-
thority, investment in internal positions dedicated to knowl-
edge brokering, and formalized administrative procedures. A
primary opportunity lies with collaborative knowledge man-
agement partnerships that leverage the scale dependent tech-
nical capacity of different institutional actors (Cash and Moser
2000). Partnerships allow the agency to leverage information
and capabilities they lack and exploit economies of scale for
knowledge management. Monitoring programs such as the
Bird Conservancy of the Rockies and the Rocky Mountain
Research Station’s NorWeST program, for instance, utilize
sophisticated sample designs, consistent measurement proto-
cols, and centralized analytical capacity to generate economies
of scale for data collection, data management, and analysis
that can be efficiently exploited by the US Forest Service
(Pavlacky et al. 2017; Isaak et al. 2017). In our findings,
science-focused and non-partisan NGOs, state and federal
agencies, and policy-focused research institutes (rather than
academic researchers) were highlighted as the most important
partners because they often have staff with relevant and spe-
cialized scientific expertise, capabilities for multiple knowl-
edge management processes, and compatible organizational
goals and priorities.
Our findings also reveal that leveraging external expertise
and coordinating internal knowledge management processes
requires several administrative policy tools. One important
administrative policy tool is centralized budgetary authority.
While some degree of budgetary discretion and flexibility for
monitoring implementation is important for addressing locally
unique and management relevant issues at unit levels, region-
ally funded monitoring strategies allow the agency to match
the scale of monitoring to the scale of resources, ensure con-
sistent funding across multiple budgetary cycles, and create
efficiencies for data collection, partnership coordination, and
analysis. Regional budgetary authority also provides an op-
portunity to promote accountability for the use of the dedicat-
ed inventory and monitoring line item at unit levels—an im-
portant consideration given top-down incentives and local po-
litical pressure for management outputs at unit levels.
Another important policy tool is investment in organi-
zational structures dedicated to knowledge brokering activ-
ities. While existing research often emphasizes the impor-
tance of boundary organizations and training and engage-
ment for researchers (Clark et al. 2016), our findings un-
derscore the importance of investing in administrative staff
with functional specialization in specific knowledge
brokering repertoires at different levels of public adminis-
tration (Cash and Moser 2000; Bolson and Broad 2013).
On administrative forests, for instance, investment in posi-
tions dedicated to monitoring coordination is important for
supervising agency monitoring implementation across pro-
gram areas, and facilitating data and information exchange
with local partners. However, our findings indicate there
may be significant opportunities for leveraging “scale-de-
pendent comparative advantages” for knowledge manage-
ment processes by investing in dedicated administrative
Adaptive governance and the administrative state: knowledge management for forest planning in the western...

knowledge brokers at regional levels of the US Forest
Service. One important function at “middle management”
levels of the agency is steering and project management
(Turnhout et al. 2013). This function requires social net-
working and managerial skills, and includes participating
in networks, identifying internal and external capabilities
for knowledge management processes, coordinating part-
nerships, developing policy frameworks and guidance for
staff, and promoting interdisciplinary and interdepartmen-
tal knowledge integration. Interagency “service first” posi-
tions may also be particularly important for reducing trans-
action costs and facilitating collaborative knowledge man-
agement initiatives across agency boundaries. Staff with
expertise in statistics, ecology, and information technology
are important for more technical knowledge functions, in-
cluding capacity building activities, such as training and
technical assistance for monitoring design, and “supply-
ing” functions, such as analysis and translation of external
information for end users on forests. Again, while boundary
organizations may have capacity for translation, investment in
internal capacity at regional levels has benefits for both effi-
ciency and effectiveness—two often conflicting values for
knowledge management (Fazey et al. 2013). For instance, it
is far easier for forest staff in Region 1 to acquire tailored
information derived from the Forest Inventory and Analysis
program through the regional office than it is for each forest to
coordinate individually with FIA or contract with a boundary
organization for specific information needs.
Formal administrative procedures for knowledge manage-
ment processes such as design, data collection and manage-
ment, and interpretation are another important administrative
policy tool for improved knowledge management. At regional
levels of the agency, our findings highlight the importance of
formal steering committees and structured decision-making
processes for identifying monitoring strategies that mediate
and integrate the interests, knowledge, and expertise of di-
verse administrative staff and external experts. At this level,
there are also scale-dependent comparative advantages for
leveraging the expertise of external institutional actors, such
as scientific researchers. In administrative national forest of-
fices, structured and deliberative decision-making processes
that utilize criteria to identify appropriate monitoring strate-
gies are likewise essential for ensuring monitoring will be
relevant to decision-making, and cost-effective to implement.
At this level, monitoring and plan development can draw on
the local knowledge of staff or other actors to focus on local or
sub-regional issues not covered by broader-scale monitoring
programs (see Raymond et al. 2010). There are also scale
dependent advantages for collaboration with local stake-
holders at this level (Fraser et al. 2006). Formal and iterative
processes such as interdisciplinary “learning forums” in which
specialists, line officers, and stakeholders evaluate monitoring
information may likewise support effective monitoring
evaluation and informed decision-making (Moynihan 2005).
Standardized data collection and data management protocols
for common resources can create efficiencies for data manage-
ment and analysis, support information generation across
scales, and help to ensure continuity in implementation when
there is staff turnover.
We suggest these structural and procedural considerations
represent an important path forward for generating and inte-
grating knowledge from multiple scales into decision-making
processes. However, systematic implementation will likely
require strong leadership at national levels of the agency.
Indeed, respondents from other federal land management
agencies emphasized the importance of executive leadership
for the development of similar structural and procedural pol-
icy tools which have significantly improved the availability of
ecological knowledge for decision-making within their own
organizations (see Toevs et al. 2011; Fancy and Bennetts
2012).
Implications for future research on adaptive
governance
Our findings suggest research on administrative policy tools
for knowledge management in public sector organizations
represents an important and complementary focus for schol-
arship on the legal and institutional dimensions of adaptive
governance. To date, scholarship on the policy dimensions
of adaptive governance has focused on legal tools that provide
flexibility and authority for iterative and participatory
decision-making processes (DeCaro et al. 2017; Craig et al.
2017). However, the effective use of such tools is predicated
on the assumption that institutional actors have the capacity
and commitment to generate and integrate knowledge into
decision-making processes (see Schneider and Ingram
1990). Indeed, scarce institutional resources and managerial
discretion, rather than rigid legal standards, are the primary
barrier for effective knowledge management in the US Forest
Service. And even if new legal frameworks should come to
pass, administrative policy design will nonetheless be essen-
tial for operationalizing legal tools in specific contexts
(Howlett 2009). Legislation often unavoidably provides sig-
nificant discretion to implementing agents, such as forest su-
pervisors; vague and discretionary statutes are often product
of political compromise and/or legislators lack of technical
expertise (May 2012). In the US context, legislative gridlock
means the development of administrative policies under
existing statutes is far easier to pursue then legal reform at
constitutional levels of governance.
Given these considerations, we suggest our knowledge
management framework can be used to diagnose barriers
and identify opportunities for improving knowledge manage-
ment and adaptive governance in state bureaucracies through
administrative policy design. One benefit of our framework is
Z. Wurtzebach et al.

that it provides a more nuanced model of co-production that
can be used to evaluate the specific capabilities of different
actors for complementary knowledge management processes,
and support a more context-dependent assessment of individ-
uals’ roles, needs, and potential contributions (see Cvitanovic
et al. 2015). Indeed, there are often numerous actors involved
in Forest Service knowledge management processes, and dif-
ferent actors at different levels of administration—either inter-
nal or external to the agency—may have the requisite social
and technical skills needed for specific processes. Our frame-
work can also be used to investigate the influence of context
specific variables such as laws, organizational structure, cul-
ture, and politics on knowledge management processes.
Within the US Forest Service, for instance, managerial discre-
tion and limited formalization for knowledge management
processes mean that bureaucratic politics influence the design
of monitoring strategies, the allocation of funding for imple-
mentation, data sharing and exchange, and the application of
knowledge in practice.
The application of our framework also highlights the im-
portance of bureaucratic organization and administrative pol-
icy tools for operationalizing elements of adaptive governance
in practice. While adaptive governance emerged as a response
to the perceived limitations of hierarchical and bureaucratic
natural resource governance (Chaffin et al. 2014), our findings
suggest that administrative policy tools such as formalized
implementation procedures, centralized funding and over-
sight, and specialized staff positions at different levels of
organization—archetypal features of bureaucratic
organization—are needed to generate and integrate knowl-
edge from multiple scales into decision-making processes.
While networks and external intermediaries are important,
administrative knowledge brokers are needed to steer net-
works, match internal and external capabilities to specific pro-
cesses, and facilitate knowledge management processes.
Indeed, networking and collaboration functions are signifi-
cantly influenced by organizational variables (McGuire and
Agranoff 2011). Bureaucratic organizations also have com-
parative advantages over networks for routinized processes,
such as data collection and data management (Pollitt 2009).
Our findings suggest that hierarchically coordinated govern-
ment monitoring programs may have advantages for address-
ing scalar challenges for knowledge management given it is
far easier to downscale data collected consistently over broad
scales than it is to aggregate and upscale data collected using
disparate methods across diverse jurisdictions. This is an im-
portant consideration for adaptive governance given that vul-
nerabilities to climate change are unequally distributed, and
credible and “scalable” information on ecological trends and
conditions across jurisdictions is essential for informing poli-
cy decisions, such as resource allocation, at higher levels of
governance. However, while hierarchical coordination and
formalized procedures may be needed to coordinate
knowledge management processes across multiple scales,
managers and other institutional actors may still retain flexi-
bility for the application of knowledge in practice. This sug-
gests investment in internal organizational structures and pro-
cesses dedicated to knowledge management coupled with
flexibility for substantive management implementation may
represent a “top-down and bottom up” approach for adaptive
governance in state agencies (Cash and Moser 2000).
As these considerations are derived from exploratory re-
search focused on one land management agency, we suggest
future research on knowledge dynamics in public organiza-
tions involved in environmental governance is needed in other
contexts. It should be noted that given the broad scope of our
research, we were unable to substantively assess the diverse
variables that shape knowledge management on individual
forests, citizen perceptions of monitoring, or the ways in
which local and experiential knowledge can inform and com-
plement formal monitoring strategies and decision-making in
public sector organizations. We suggest future research on
these topics is of growing importance, particularly as land
managers are increasingly paying attention to climate driven
changes that require assessment across scales. In an era of
rapid change, effective knowledge management is essential
for adaptive land management planning and decision-
making in administrative agencies, and more work is needed
to identify actionable policies and administrative strategies
that can support it.
References
Abrams JB, Huber-Stearns HR, Bone C, et al (2017) Adaptation to a
landscape-scale mountain pine beetle epidemic in the era of
networked governance: the enduring importance of bureaucratic in-
stitutions. Ecol Soc 22. doi: https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-09717-
220422
Alavi M, Leidner DE (2001) Knowledge management and knowledge
management systems: conceptual foundations and research issues.
MIS Q 25:107. https://doi.org/10.2307/3250961
Archie KM, Dilling L, Milford JB, Pampel FC (2014) Unpacking the
“information barrier”: comparing perspectives on information as a
barrier to climate change adaptation in the interior mountain West. J
Environ Manag 133:397–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.
2013.12.015
Berends H, Boersma K, Weggeman M (2003) The structuration of orga-
nizational learning. Hum Relat 56:1035–1056. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0018726703569001
Berglund D, Bush R, Barber J, Manning M (2009) R1 Multi-level vege-
tation classification, mapping, inventory, and analysis system. USFS
Region 1, Missoula, MT. Available online at: https://www.fs.usda.
gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5363894.pdf
Biber E (2013) The challenge of collecting and using environmental
monitoring data. Ecol Soc 18:art68. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-
06117-180468
Biesbroek R, Peters BG (2018) Public bureaucracy and climate change
adaptation. 35:776–791. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/ropr.12316
Adaptive governance and the administrative state: knowledge management for forest planning in the western...

Bolson J, Broad K (2013) Early adoption of climate information: lessons
learned from South Florida Water Resource Management. Weather
Clim Soc 5:266–281. https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-12-00002.1
Brown MM, Brudney JL (2003) Learning organizations in the public
sector? A study of police agencies employing information and tech-
nology to advance knowledge. Public Adm Rev 63:30–43. https://
doi.org/10.1111/1540-6210.00262
Bruckmeier K (2014) Problems of cross-scale coastal management in
Scandinavia. Reg Environ Chang 14:2151–2160. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10113-012-0378-2
Burgess N, Currie G (2013) The knowledge brokering role of the hybrid
middle level manager: the case of healthcare. Br J Manag 24:132–
143. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.12028
Cash DW, Moser SC (2000) Linking global and local scales: designing
dynamic assessment and management processes. Glob Environ
Chang 10:109–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-3780(00)
00017-0
Cash DW, Clark WC, Alcock F et al (2003) Knowledge systems for
sustainable development. Proc Natl Acad Sci 100:8086–8091.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1231332100
Cash DW, Adger W, Berkes F, Garden P, Lebel L, Olsson P, Pritchard L,
Young O (2006) Scale and cross-scale dynamics: governance and
information in a multilevel world. Ecol Soc 11(2):8 http://www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss2/art8/
Chaffin BC, Gosnell H, Cosens BA (2014) A decade of adaptive gover-
nance scholarship: synthesis and future directions. Ecol Soc 19:
art56. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-06824-190356
Clark WC, Van Kerkhoff L, Lebel L, Gallopin GC (2016) Crafting usable
knowledge for sustainable development. Proc Natl Acad Sci 113:
4570–4578. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1601266113
Cleaver F, Whaley L (2018) Understanding process, power, and meaning
in adaptive governance: a critical institutional reading. Ecol Soc 23: .
doi: https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-10212-230249
Contandriopoulos D, Lemire M, Denis JL, Tremblay É (2010)
Knowledge exchange processes in organizations and policy arenas:
a narrative systematic review of the literature. Milbank Q 88:444–
483. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0009.2010.00608.x
Craig RK, Garmestani AS, Allen CR, et al (2017) Balancing stability and
flexibility in adaptive governance : the new challenges and a review
of tools available. 22:1–31. doi: https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-08983-
220203
Creswell JW (2009) Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed
methods approaches. Sage Publications Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA.
ISBN 9781412965569, 9781412965576
Cvitanovic C, Hobday AJ, van Kerkhoff L et al (2015) Improving knowl-
edge exchange among scientists and decision-makers to facilitate the
adaptive governance of marine resources: a review of knowledge
and research needs. Ocean Coast Manag 112:25–35. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2015.05.002
Dawes SS, Cresswell AM, Pardo TA (2009) From “need to know” to
“need to share”: tangled problems, information boundaries, and the
building of public sector knowledge networks. Public Adm Rev 69:
392–402. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2009.01987_2.x
Decaro D, Chaffin BC, Schlager E et al (2017) Legal and institutional
foundations of adaptive environmental governance. Ecol Soc 22:
1689–1699. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004
Dilling L, Lemos MC, Carmen M et al (2011) Creating usable science:
opportunities and constraints for climate knowledge use and their
implications for science policy. Glob Environ Chang 21:680–689.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.11.006
Doremus H (2008) Data gaps in natural resource management: sniffing
for leaks along the information pipeline. Indiana Law J 83:407–463
Edelenbos J, van Buuren A, van Schie N (2011) Co-producing knowl-
edge: joint knowledge production between experts, bureaucrats and
stakeholders in Dutch water management projects. Environ Sci Pol
14:675–684. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2011.04.004
Fancy SG, Bennetts RE (2012) Institutionalizing an effective long-term
monitoring program in the U.S. National Park Service. In: Gitzen
et al. (eds) Design and analysis of long-term ecological monitoring
studies. Cambridge University Press, pp 481–487
Fancy SG, Gross JE, Carter SL (2009) Monitoring the condition of nat-
ural resources in US national parks. Environ Monit Assess 151:161–
174. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-008-0257-y
Fazey I, Evely AC, Reed MS et al (2013) Knowledge exchange: a review
and research agenda for environmental management. Environ
Conserv 40:19–36. https://doi.org/10.1017/S037689291200029X
Folke C, Hahn T, Olsson P, Norberg J (2005) Adaptive governance of
social ecological systems. Annu Rev Environ Resour 30:441–473.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.30.050504.144511
Fraser EDG, Dougill AJ, Mabee WE et al (2006) Bottom up and top
down: analysis of participatory processes for sustainability indicator
identification as a pathway to community empowerment and sus-
tainable environmental management. J Environ Manag 78:114–127.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2005.04.009
Garmestani AS, Allen CR, Benson MH (2013) Can law foster social-
ecological resilience? Ecol Soc 18:. doi: https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-05927-180237
Gibson CC, Ostrom E, Ahn TK (2000) The concept of scale and the
human dimensions of global change: A survey. Ecol Econ 32:217–
239. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8009(99)00092-0
Golding JD, Schwartz MK, McKelvey KS, et al (2018) Multispecies
mesocarnivore monitoring: USDA Forest Service multiregional
monitoring approach. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Research Station General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-388. Fort
Collins, CO.
Gregory R, Failing L, Ohlson D, Mcdaniels TL (2006) Some pitfalls of an
overemphasis on science in environmental risk management deci-
sions. J Risk Res 9:717–735. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13669870600799895
Hill R, Davies J, Bohnet IC et al (2015) Collaboration mobilises institu-
tions with scale-dependent comparative advantage in landscape-
scale biodiversity conservation. Environ Sci Pol 51:267–277.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2015.04.014
Howlett M (2009) Governance modes, policy regimes and operational
plans: a multi-level nested model of policy instrument choice and
policy design. Policy Sci 42:73–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-
009-9079-1
Hutto RL, Belote RT (2013) Distinguishing four types of monitoring
based on the questions they address. For Ecol Manag 289:183–
189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2012.10.005
Isaak DJ, Wenger SJ, Peterson EE, et al (2017) The NorWeST summer
stream temperature model and scenarios for the western U.S.: a
crowd-sourced database and new geospatial tools foster a user-
community and predict broad climate warming of rivers and
streams. Water Resour Res 1–25 . doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/
2017WR020969
Karpouzoglou T, Dewulf A, Clark J (2016) Advancing adaptive gover-
nance of social-ecological systems through theoretical multiplicity.
Environ Sci Pol 57:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2015.11.
011
Kershner JL, Roper BB (2010) An evaluation of management objectives
used to assess stream habitat conditions on federal lands within the
interior Columbia Basin. Fisheries 35:269–278. https://doi.org/10.
1577/1548-8446-35.6.269
Kim S, Lee H (2006) The impact of organizational context and informa-
tion technology on employee knowledge-sharing capabilities.
Public Adm Rev 66:370–385. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.
2006.00595.x
Lindenmayer DB, Likens GE (2010) The science and application of eco-
logical monitoring. Biol Conserv 143:1317–1328. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biocon.2010.02.013
Z. Wurtzebach et al.

Lovett GM, Burns DA, Driscoll CTet al (2007) Who needs environmen-
tal monitoring ? Front Ecol Environ 5:253–260. https://doi.org/10.
1890/1540-9295(2007)5[253:WNEM]2.0.CO;2
Lowi TJ (1986) Two roads to serfdom: liberalism, conservatism and
administrative power. Am Univ Law Rev 36:295–322
May PJ (2012) Policy design and implementation. In: Peters BG, Pierre P
(eds) The Sage handbook of public administration. Sage Publication
Inc, Thousand Oaks
McGuire M, Agranoff R (2011) The limitations of public management
networks. Public Administration 89 (2):265-284
McNie EC (2007) Reconciling the supply of scientific information with
user demands: an analysis of the problem and review of the litera-
ture. Environ Sci Pol 10:17–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.
2006.10.004
Moynihan DP (2005) Goal-based learning and the future of performance
management. Public Adm Rev 65:203–216. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1540-6210.2005.00445.x
Moynihan DP, Landuyt N (2009) How do public organizations learn?
Bridging cultural and structural perspectives. Public Adm Rev 69:
1097–1105. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2009.02067.x
Nguyen VM, Young N, Cooke SJ (2016) A roadmap for knowledge
exchange and mobilization research in conservation and natural re-
source management. Conserv Biol 00:n/a-n/a. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1111/cobi.12857
Nguyen VM, Young N, Cooke SJ (2017) A roadmap for knowledge
exchange and mobilization research in conservation and natural re-
source management. Conservation Biology 31 (4):789-798
Nylen NG (2011) To achieve biodiversity goals, the new Forest Service
Planning Rule needs effective mandates for best available science
and adaptive management. Ecol Law Q 38:241–229. https://doi.org/
10.15779/Z384Z8B
Niemi GJ, McDonald ME (2004) Application of Ecological Indicators.
Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 35 (1):89-
111
Pavlacky DC, Lukacs PM, Blakesley JA et al (2017) A statistically rig-
orous sampling design to integrate avian monitoring and manage-
ment within Bird Conservation Regions. PLoS One 12:e0185924.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0185924
Pee LG, Kankanhalli A (2016) Interactions among factors influencing
knowledge management in public-sector organizations: a resource-
based view. Gov Inf Q 33:188–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.
2015.06.002
Pollitt C (2009) Bureaucracies remember, post-bureaucratic organizations
forget? Public Adm 87:198–218. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
9299.2008.01738.x
Rashman L, Withers E, Hartley J (2009) Organizational learning and
knowledge in public service organizations: a systematic review of
the literature. Int J Manag Rev 11:463–494. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1468-2370.2009.00257
Ray CT, Williamson MA, Zachmann LJ, Wang O, Dickson BG (2012)
Rapid plot monitoring design for the Kaibab National Forest.
Interim report to the Kaibab National Forest. Lab of Landscape
Ecology and Conservation Biology, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ
Raymond CM, Fazey I, Reed MS et al (2010) Integrating local and
scientific knowledge for environmental management. J Environ
Manag 91:1766–1777. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.03.
023
Reed MS (2008) Stakeholder participation for environmental manage-
ment: A literature review. Biological Conservation 141 (10):2417-
2431
Reed MS, Fazey I, Stringer LC et al (2013) Knowledge management for
land degradation monitoring and assessment : an analysis of con-
temporary thinking. L Degrad Dev 24:307–322. https://doi.org/10.
1002/ldr.1124
Ringold PL, Mulder B, Alegria J, Czaplewski RL, Tolle T, Burnett K
(1999) Establishing a Regional Monitoring Strategy: The Pacific
Northwest Forest Plan. Environmental Management 23 (2):179-192
Sabatier PA, Loomis J, McCarthy C (1995) Hierarchical controls, profes-
sional norms, local constituencies, and budget maximization: an
analysis of U.S. Forest Service Planning Decisions. Am J Polit Sci
39:204–242. https://doi.org/10.2307/2111764
Saldana J (2005) The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage
Publication Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA. ISBN 9781446247365,
9781446247372
Schneider A, Ingram H (1990) Behavioral assumptions of policy tools. J
Polit 52:510. https://doi.org/10.2307/2131904
Schultz CA, Moseley C, Mattor K (2015) Striking the balance between
budgetary discretion and performance accountability: the case of the
US Forest Service’s approach to integrated restoration. J Nat Resour
Policy Res 37–41. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/19390459.2015.
1027533
Sharma-Wallace L, Velarde SJ, Wreford A (2018) Adaptive governance
good practice: show me the evidence! J Environ Manag 222:174–
184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.05.067
Stankey GH, BormannBT RC, Shindler B, Sturtevant V, Clark RN,
Philpot C (2003) Adaptive management and the Northwest Forest
Plan: rhetoric and reality. J For 101:40–46
Sutherland WJ, Shackelford G, Rose DC (2017) Collaborating with com-
munities: co-production or co-assessment? Oryx 51:569–570.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605317001296
Timmerman JG, Beinat E, Termeer K, Cofino W (2010) Analyzing the
data-rich-but-information-poor syndrome in dutch water manage-
ment in historical perspective. Environ Manag 45:1231–1242.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-010-9459-5
Tinkham WT, Mahoney PR, Hudak AT, Domke GM, Falkowski MJ,
Woodall CW, Smith A.M.S. (2018) Applications of the United
States Forest Inventory and Analysis dataset: a review and future
directions. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 48 (11):1251-1268
Toevs GR, Karl JW, Taylor JJ et al (2011) Consistent indicators and
methods and a scalable sample design to meet assessment, invento-
ry, and monitoring information needs across scales. Rangelands 33:
14–20. https://doi.org/10.2111/1551-501X-33.4.14
Tsai W (2002) Social structure of “coopetition” within a multiunit orga-
nization: coordination, competition, and intraorganizational knowl-
edge sharing. Organ Sci 13:179–190. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.
13.2.179.536
Tsoukas H, Vladimirou E (2001) What is organizational knowledge? J
Manag Stud 38:973–993. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-6486.00268
Tulloch A, Possingham HP, Wilson K (2011) Wise selection of an indi-
cator for monitoring the success of management actions. Biol
Conserv 144:141–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2010.08.
009
Turnhout E, Stuiver M, Judith J (2013) New roles of science in society:
different repertoires of knowledge brokering. Sci Public Policy 40:
354–365. https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scs114
U.S. Forest Service (2015) FSH 1909.12. Land management planning
handbook, chapter 30—monitoring. Available at https://www.fs.
usda.gov/detail/planningrule/home/?cid=stelprd3828310.
van Kerkhoff L, Pilbeam V (2017) Understanding socio-cultural dimen-
sions of environmental decision-making: a knowledge governance
approach. Environ Sci Pol 73:29–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2017.03.011
Veblen KE, Pyke DA, Aldridge CL et al (2014) Monitoring of livestock
grazing effects on Bureau of Land Management land. Rangel Ecol
Manag 67:68–7768. https://doi.org/10.2111/REM-D-12-00178.1
Waltz A, Wurtzebach Z, Esch B, Wasserman T, Schultz C (2017)
Developing a framework for the U.S. Forest Service Broader-Scale
Monitoring Strategy: processes and outcomes. Northern Arizona
University Ecological Restoration Institute. Flagstaff, AZ
Adaptive governance and the administrative state: knowledge management for forest planning in the western...

Waylen KA, Blackstock KL, van Hulst FJ et al (2019) Policy-driven
monitoring and evaluation: does it support adaptive management
of socio-ecological systems? Sci Total Environ 662:373–384.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.12.462
Weiss CH (2016) The Interface between Evaluation and Public Policy.
Evaluation 5 (4):468-486
Wurtzebach Z, Schultz C (2016) Measuring ecological integrity: history,
practical applications, and research opportunities. Bioscience 66:
446–457. https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biw037
Wyborn C (2015) Co-productive governance: a relational framework for
adaptive governance. Glob Environ Chang 30:56–67. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.10.009
Wyborn C, Dovers S (2014) Prescribing adaptiveness in agencies of the
state. Glob Environ Chang 24:5–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2013.11.020
Yang TM, Maxwell TA (2011) Information-sharing in public organiza-
tions: a literature review of interpersonal, intra-organizational and
inter-organizational success factors. Gov Inf Q 28:164–175. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2010.06.008
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Z. Wurtzebach et al.
