View this email in your browser
Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored
Ponderosa Pine Forests 
This month’s ERI Science Flash is a ﬂash from the past. We are sharing a
working paper on restoration and small mammals from 2010, because small
mammals are important in forest ecosystems. They recycle nutrients by
processing vegetation, dispersing fungal spores and seeds, and aerating and
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

turning soils and are prey for predators including the northern goshawk,
Mexican spotted owl, and other avian and mammalian species. Although small
mammal species may serve similar functional roles in the ecosystem, their
habitats differ. Land managers have to consider both forest structural
differences and ﬁne-scale habitat features when treating ponderosa pine
forests for small mammal-habitat relationships.
 
The working paper presents results from a study that assessed small mammal
responses to restoration treatments, which at the time, had been previously
unexamined at the community level or at large temporal and spatial scales in
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. NAU researchers focused on eight
species of small mammals to determine how they would react to ecological
restoration thinning treatments. 
 
To ﬁnd out how each species responded to the treatments, read the
full WORKING PAPER.
 
And a Flash of Fun …
In support of small mammals, we will be following along in this year’s March
Mammal Madness, a tournament focused on simulated combat between
mammals instead of basketball. The popular bracket is run by a team of
evolutionary biologists who use science and probability to determine to
outcome of the ﬁghts. Their goal is to have fun while raising awareness of
animal conservation. Last year’s winner was the Bengal tiger. Could this year’s
winner be the intrepid … Mexican woodrat?
 
To learn more or to participate in March Mammal Madness 2020, click here.
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
View More ERI Working Papers

Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2020 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
