Assessment of Community 
Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) 
in Arizona and Throughout the West
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
April 2020

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been significantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: CWPPs are part of a broad constellation of approaches to create and sustain resilient,  
fire-adapted communities. In the cover photo, fire department recruits from the Greater Flagstaff Regional 
Response System undergo wildfire training during a planned live-fire event. Photo courtesy of the  
City of Flagstaff
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: April 2020
Author: Melanie M. Colavito
Reviewers: Chris Bockey, Environmental Planner, SWCA Environmental Consultants; Neil 
Chapman, Forest Health Supervisor, Flagstaff Fire Department; Zander Evans, Executive 
Director, Forest Stewards Guild
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Colavito, M.M. 2020. Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in 
Arizona and Throughout the West. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 14 p.
 
Northern Arizona University is an equal opportunity provider.
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from 
discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten 
Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-5964 
(TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
This publication made possible through a grant from the USDA Forest Service.

Table of Contents
Executive Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2
Introduction . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2
Methods. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4
Results . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4
Lessons Learned and Recommendations. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7
Conclusions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
References . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13
CWPP Resources. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14

2	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary 
Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) are important mechanisms for communities to address wildfire 
risks and facilitate collaboration. However, in the 15 years since CWPPs were created as part of the Healthy Forest 
Restoration Act of 2003, there have been a wide range of approaches used to develop plans with varying outcomes. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute worked with the Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
to conduct an in-depth assessment of CWPPs in Arizona, as well as review the management of CWPPs in other 
western states. We used document review, surveys, interviews, and focus groups to better understand the content 
of CWPPs, the processes used to develop and implement plans, and perspectives on CWPP effectiveness and 
lessons learned in Arizona and throughout the West. CWPPs take a wide range of forms, but overall, many plans 
are trying to be multiple things to multiple audiences. This results in many plans that are not easy to translate into 
action on the ground. At the same time, one of the most frequently cited benefits of CWPPs is the collaborative 
process of developing the plan, which facilitates communication and coordination across multiple stakeholder 
groups. However, many CWPP processes lose steam after plans are completed, and it is difficult to sustain 
collaboration and communication throughout plan implementation. Therefore, we developed and tested a set of 
lessons learned and recommendations that may help to shift the development and implementation of CWPPs 
toward more focused and strategic implementation designed for each plan’s unique local context. The lessons 
learned and recommendations span the plan development and implementation process and address matters such 
as CWPP purpose, audience, and scale, required plan elements, risk assessment and treatment prioritization, 
plan implementation and accountability, accomplishment tracking, plan repositories, plan updates, community 
engagement, and the role of contractors. We hope that these lessons learned and recommendations can provide 
direction and clarity in the development and implementation of CWPPs that are collaborative, relevant, and 
action-oriented and that help to facilitate effective community wildfire planning. 
Introduction
In 2018 and 2019, the Ecological Restoration Institute worked with the Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire 
Management (DFFM) on a project to identify best practices and recommendations for the effective preparation, 
revision, and implementation of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs) in Arizona and throughout the 
West. CWPPs are documents that communities can develop to address wildfire planning, response, and recovery. 
CWPPs were created as part of Title I of the 2003 Healthy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA) (P.L. 108-148), which 
identified the importance and need for at-risk communities to lower their vulnerability to catastrophic wildfire. 
In addition, the HFRA created new pathways to reducing wildfire risk, as communities with an approved CWPP 
have greater access to federal and state funds for hazardous fuel reduction.
CWPPs are a key planning link to a chain of programs that have developed over the last 15-plus years to translate 
landscape-scale planning into action on the ground. In recent years, numerous concepts and initiatives have emerged 
to advance landscape-scale management and working across jurisdictional boundaries in recognition of the fact that 
ecological disturbances like wildfires have impacts across boundaries. This is also referred to as “all lands, all hands,” 
which acknowledges that management affects landscapes and that common goals and strategies are needed across 
management boundaries (Vilsack 2009). For example, the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy 
is designed to advance cross-boundary collaboration to address wildfire through three interrelated goals: 1) resilient 
landscapes; 2) fire-adapted communities; and 3) safe and effective fire response that promotes landscape-scale 
planning and action. Recently, the Forest Service’s Shared Stewardship Strategy promotes doing the “right work in 
the right place at the right time” collaboratively by prioritizing treatment needs at landscape scales. CWPPs have been 
a building block of many of these recent initiatives as they are meant to be collaborative and action-oriented plans 
that can facilitate work on the ground. At the same time, CWPPs are part of a broad constellation of approaches to 
creating and sustaining resilient, fire-adapted communities (Fire Adapted Communities Network 2019).  

Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West         3
In the 15-plus years since the HFRA, a wide range of approaches have been used to develop CWPPs with 
variable effectiveness (Ellison et al. 2015). CWPPs have only three general requirements: 1) they must be 
developed collaboratively with key federal, state, and local partners; 2) they must include some assessment of 
wildfire risk and treatment prioritization to identify key areas for reducing hazardous fuel; and 3) they must 
identify ways to reduce structural ignitability. Beyond those requirements, the HFRA is relatively open-ended 
in terms of its direction for communities developing a CWPP, and its vagueness has been described as part 
of its brilliance (Jakes et al. 2011). There are multiple guidance documents that provide communities with 
broad, flexible recommendations for developing plans, including the 2004 Preparing a Community Wildfire 
Protection Plan Handbook, the 2008 Community Guide to Preparing and Implementing a Community 
Wildfire Protection Plan, the CWPP Planning Process Quick-Guide, and the Fire Service Leader’s Guide to 
Preparing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan. There is also guidance on evaluating CWPPs, such as the 
2008 Community Wildfire Protection Plan Evaluation Guide. Nonetheless, many communities still lack clarity 
on how to design actionable plans. Although the importance of allowing planning to adapt to local context is 
widely recognized as a critical element to successful wildfire planning, there is a wide range of capacity among 
communities to become fire-adapted, and more specifically, to develop effective CWPPs. Furthermore, the lack 
of clarity around CWPPs has led to a wide range of plans that are often trying to accomplish many objectives 
at once. Now that many CWPPs are being updated and revised, there is a need to better conceptualize their 
purpose and design and determine how to most effectively develop and implement actionable recommendations 
that support resilient, fire-adapted communities and landscapes. 
Although the treatments described in CWPPs mainly focus on lowering fire risk through hazardous fuel reduction 
in the wildland urban interface (WUI), the collaborative process of developing CWPPs can facilitate ecological 
restoration at larger landscape scales by creating and sustaining pathways for coordination and communication across 
jurisdictional boundaries. Information from this project can contribute to forest restoration and fire risk reduction 
activities on private forest land, in communities-at-risk from wildfire, and across multi-jurisdictional landscapes by 
identifying ways to increase the effectiveness of community wildfire planning, which is one element of landscape-scale 
restoration and resilience and the central focus of Shared Stewardship. 
CWPPs often require the establishment of collaborative relationships with federal and state agencies and local stakeholders, like those pictured in a 
meeting for the development of the Santa Clara County CWPP in California. Photo courtesy of SWCA

4	
Ecological Restoration Institute
The project was designed to assist DFFM in providing direction to communities-at-risk from wildfire in 
Arizona and communities throughout the West in developing and implementing effective CWPPs in order 
to improve wildfire preparedness. The main question driving this project was: what can be done to improve 
CWPPs and CWPP management in Arizona? Although the focus of this project is on Arizona CWPPs, we 
also explored how other western states manage their CWPPs to determine best practices across states. The 
information generated from this project provides information about the design of CWPPs and the elements 
they need be effective tools for helping communities-at-risk from wildfire in becoming more fire-adapted. 
Methods
This project included six phases to assess CWPPs in Arizona, as well as explore CWPP programs, illustrative 
examples, and recommendations in other western states. 
The phases included: 
1)	 Outreach to contacts listed on or associated with Arizona CWPPs and document review of CWPPs in 
Arizona; 
2)	 An online survey of Arizona CWPPs; 
3)	 Interviews with DFFM staff and other partners in Arizona; 
4)	 An online survey and review of CWPPs in other western states; 
5)	 Follow-up interviews and phone calls with CWPP experts in Arizona and other western states who had not 
participated in other phases of the study; and 
6)	 Focus groups with select Arizona CWPPs. 
The focus groups, as well as additional discussion with DFFM partners, were used to generate lessons learned and 
recommendations for effective CWPP development and implementation in Arizona and throughout the West.
Results
This assessment resulted in findings that cover three topics: 
1)	 Arizona CWPP results (from the Arizona CWPP survey and interviews);
2)	 West-wide CWPP results (from the West-wide survey); and 
3)	 Arizona CWPP focus group results.
The complete results can be found in the full report available at https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/
collection/p17192coll1/id/1018/rec/2. Results specific to CWPP effectiveness in Arizona and West-wide are 
included here. 
Overall, we found that CWPPs are often trying to be many things to many audiences but may not always 
be effectively facilitating action on the ground. Furthermore, in many cases, collaboration and attention on a 
CWPP falls off once the plan development is complete, but it is important to ensure ongoing communication 
and collaboration during implementation of a CWPP to maintain momentum and progress. 
Arizona CWPP Effectiveness
Overall, both survey and interview respondents in Arizona varied in their perceptions of CWPP effectiveness. 
Survey respondents, when asked if their CWPP had achieved its purpose, tended to either think it was a great 
product or that it had many shortcomings, such as not being specific enough to achieve any purpose, only 

Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West         5
being used to secure funding, being too limited in scope, not being followed, or just “sitting on a shelf.” When 
asked how effective CWPPs were in addressing the plan elements required by HFRA, including collaboration, 
hazardous fuel reduction, and structural protection, survey respondents felt that CWPPs were most effective at 
reducing hazardous fuel and facilitating collaboration. In terms of CWPPs compared to other wildfire planning 
efforts, 25 percent of survey respondents felt the CWPP was much more effective, 32 percent felt it was 
moderately more effective, 10 percent said it was not more effective, and 25 percent were unsure.
Arizona CWPP survey respondents were also asked to cite the top CWPP benefits, factors that contribute 
to and limit CWPP success, resources that facilitate or are lacking for CWPPs, and skills needed for CWPP 
planning and implementation. The factors that respondents were provided in the survey were generated from 
existing research on CWPPs and provide insight into how respondents view Arizona CWPPs, as well as help to 
validate the key factors that facilitate or inhibit CWPP effectiveness. The top five factors in each category are 
listed in Box 1 (see page 6), each in order from most to least common. 
Survey and interview respondents were also asked to describe what they felt constitutes an effective CWPP. 
The major themes from their responses included the collaborative process, an actionable plan design, strategic 
implementation, public and community engagement, and funding. For example, one respondent noted, “What 
is effective? The CWPP I am referring to has been successful in securing grant funding, but I feel there is no 
real other benefit from it. If guiding treatment on the ground is the desire, they have been fairly ineffective.” 
Another respondent emphasized, “Once the plan is completed there needs to be an action plan and a committee 
that oversees the implementation of selected actions.”
Navajo Nation leadership, Coconino National Forest district personnel, and City of Flagstaff staff review planned forest treatments in an “all lands, all 
hands” approach to achieve common goals and strategies across management boundaries. Photo courtesy of the City of Flagstaff

6	
Ecological Restoration Institute
CWPP benefits: 1) fuels reduction; 2) identifying risk; 2) collaborative process; 4) new funding streams; 
and 5) foundational document.
CWPP limitations: 1) funding; 2) lack of clear leader; 3) plans outdated; 4) plans do not use the best 
available science and risk assessments; and 5) lack of community interest.
What constitutes an effective CWPP: 1) the collaborative process; 2) action-oriented plans with clear 
requirements; 3) community buy-in; and 4) funding for treatment.
CWPP recommendations: 1) ensure ongoing collaboration; 2) emphasize the “why” to build 
community support; 3) keep the plan design simple and usable; 4) share lessons learned; and 5) find 
and develop consistent funding sources.
Box 2. Key benefits, limitations, factors, and recommendations for West-wide CWPP effectiveness
CWPP Effectiveness in Other Western States
Survey respondents in other western states were also asked to describe the top CWPP benefits, limitations, and 
factors that constitute an effective CWPP, and recommendations for CWPPs. Survey respondents were asked to 
answer open-ended questions on these factors, and the results represent the most common themes in the responses. 
The top four to five factors in each category are provided in Box 2, each in order from most to least common. 
Many of these themes can be illustrated by the survey responses themselves. For example, with respect to 
ongoing collaboration and partnership, one respondent stated, “Find ways to encourage and support the effort 
in partnership with the local entities. Doing it all for them does not inspire them to become involved and own 
their challenges, become educated during the process, form true community bonds, which is the only way that 
CWPP benefits: 1) increased community capacity; 2) identification of new resources; 3) new social 
networks; 4) development of new skills; and 5) expanded social networks. 
Factors that contribute to CWPP success: 1) existing relationships; 2) shared understanding of wildfire 
risk reduction measures; 3) shared understanding of wildfire risk; 4) sustained communication; and  
5) shared willingness to act to reduce wildfire risk. 
Factors that limit CWPP success: 1) lack of funding; 2) lack of political support; 3) lack of community 
involvement; 4) lack of time for planning; and 5) lack of time for implementation. 
Resources that facilitate effective CWPPs: 1) more funding; 2) better access to agency expertise;  
3) CWPP templates; 4) better access to technical/ scientific expertise; and 5) CWPP guidance specific  
to Arizona.
Resources that are lacking for CWPPs: 1) funding; 2) public, stakeholder, community involvement;  
3) capacity to manage grant writing and administrative costs of dealing with grants; 4) updated, easy-
to-access GIS information; and 5) getting the right resources in place to provide a workable CWPP. 
Skills needed for CWPP planning and implementation: 1) planning; 2) fire management;  
3) communication; 4) grant writing; and 5) previous experience in community wildfire planning. 
Box 1. Top five key factors for Arizona CWPP effectiveness in each category surveyed

Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West         7
a community can become fire-adapted.” Another respondent, in reference to the importance of emphasizing the 
“why” of a CWPP said, “Don’t just complete a CWPP because it’s the thing to do, have a purpose and need and get 
community buy-in, not just agency and fire department support.” Finally, with respect to creating measurable goals, 
another respondent said, “Do not complete them [CWPPs] for the sake of funding eligibility as they will become 
old and unused. Complete them with measurable goals in mind that can assess fire threat and aid communities 
through actionable tasks.”
Arizona CWPP Focus Group Results 
Five focus groups conducted with key areas in Arizona to validate the preliminary findings and refine our 
recommendations for CWPPs in Arizona and throughout the West. The participants in each focus group were 
presented with the same preliminary lessons learned and recommendations. Overall, many respondents in all phases 
of the study felt that there is a lack of clarity about the real intent and purpose of CWPPs. 
The key themes stemming from those concerns and discussed by the focus groups are listed below, while final 
lessons learned and recommendations are provided in the next section. 
• 
Purpose and use
• 
Audience
• 
Scale
• 
Nested CWPPs
• 
Guidance and required content 
• 
Wildfire risk assessment and treatment prioritization
• 
Accomplishment tracking and reporting 
• 
Accountability and leadership
• 
CWPP repository
• 
Signature process
• 
Update period
• 
Community outreach and marketing 
• 
Community groups
• 
Contractors
Lessons Learned and Recommendations
CWPPs are planning documents that can assist communities in the preparation for, response to, and recovery 
from wildfire. Ideally, they provide a clear depiction of wildfire risk, identification of where treatment is needed to 
reduce that risk, and implementation strategy to reduce that risk. However, in many cases, the intended purpose, 
use, and audience of CWPPs are unclear, making it challenging for implementors to use these documents to guide 
treatments on the ground, as well as for local communities to use them to communicate about wildfire risk and 
community wildfire adaptation strategies. Some CWPPs act as high-level guiding documents, while others act 
more as documents that are meant to identify specific, prioritized treatments in detail. Some CWPPS are largely 
written for interagency audiences, while others are trying to reach local community members and the public. 
There are many instances where CWPPs are trying to be many things to many audiences but may not always be 
effectively facilitating action on the ground. Furthermore, in many cases, collaboration and attention on a CWPP 
falls off once the plan development is complete, but ensuring ongoing communication and collaboration during 
implementation of a CWPP is critical. 
It is important to emphasize that context matters in community wildfire planning. One-size-fits-all processes 
often tend to not fit well anywhere. Furthermore, one of the biggest cited benefits of CWPPs in both Arizona and 

8	
Ecological Restoration Institute
throughout the West is the collaborative process of developing and updating the documents, rather than the 
documents themselves. The lessons learned and recommendations presented here are done so with the caveat 
that any CWPP development or update process should be tailored to the unique context of each CWPP area 
and should honor the people who are engaging in collaboration with the CWPP and other community wildfire 
planning efforts. Indeed, one of the most important elements of successful community wildfire planning are 
the people who engage in the planning and implementation processes, so developing strategies that are people-
centered will further facilitate community wildfire planning (Evans et al. 2015). Any guidance developed by 
agencies should be specific enough to facilitate a clear, action-oriented planning and implementation process 
but flexible enough to allow individual CWPPs to develop plans that are adapted to their unique local context.
It is challenging to create guidance that is simultaneously specific and flexible, but the lessons learned and 
recommendations from this assessment may help to shift new CWPPs and future plan updates in a more 
actionable direction and provide ideas for the kinds of guidance that collaborators in CWPPs and other 
community wildfire planning efforts would like to see.
CWPP Purpose, Use, and Audience
• 
Lesson Learned: Many CWPPs lack clarity in their purpose, use, and audience and try to accomplish too 
many things at once. 
• 
Recommendation: Any good plan must be relevant and understandable to those who are intended to use it. 
Partners working together to develop or update a CWPP should reach a common understanding of their 
CWPP’s intended purpose and use. CWPPs should not be solely focused on one entity, but they should 
also clearly define their audience and describe how the intended audience should use the document or what 
portions of it are intended for different potential users. For example, the public can be targeted in certain 
sections of the document, while agency cooperators can be targeted with more technical language in other 
sections of the document, as long as there is a clear identification of the audience for each section. 
CWPPs are a key planning link to a chain of programs that have developed over the last 15-plus years to translate landscape-scale planning into action on 
the ground. Photo courtesy of SWCA

Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West         9
CWPP Scale
• 
Lesson Learned: In Arizona and throughout the West, many CWPPs have evolved from a community scale 
to a county scale. There are tradeoffs at different planning scales. For example, smaller-scale CWPPs are 
often more tactical, while larger-scale CWPPs are often more programmatic.
• 
Recommendation: There is no “correct” CWPP scale. Tradeoffs at each scale should be thoroughly considered 
with respect to a CWPP’s intended purpose, use, and audience. For example, county-scale plans may not be 
detailed enough to guide action at the community scale and support local community needs, but they can provide 
cover to communities without the capacity to develop their own plans. Nested-scale or overlapping CWPPs 
can be effective if there is some attention to how plans are linked and what information is needed at what scale, 
as well as how the plans are linked with other documents like county hazard mitigation plans. A CWPP’s scale 
should also determine the level of detail and specific content needed. 
CWPP Guidance and Content 
• 
Lesson Learned: The expectations of agencies, required plan contents, and processes or steps for creating an 
“official” CWPP are often unclear.
• 
Recommendation: Clear expectations appropriately tailored to a given CWPP can facilitate planning 
and implementation. States should develop a description of expectations for CWPPs, minimum required 
plan contents or a plan template, optional enhanced or more detailed plan contents, and required steps 
for developing and updating “official” CWPPs. Minimum and enhanced plan contents should be clear 
and specific but also allow for local communities to develop responses appropriate to their local context. 
Guidance and requirements should be achievable by communities with a wide range of capacities. Effective 
plans are not always the longest, and it is important to require communities to include only the information 
that is absolutely required for successfully carrying out a plan’s recommendations. 
CWPP Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization 
• 
Lesson Learned: There are numerous methods for conducting wildfire risk assessment and treatment 
prioritization processes, but many communities lack the capacity to effectively select methods and interpret 
the outputs without outside assistance. 
• 
Recommendation: States should provide direction on how to conduct risk assessment and treatment 
prioritization for CWPPs or where to find assessments that already exist. Such direction could take 
the form of a basic overview of the different assessment tools available in each state, as well as contact 
information for experts who can assist communities in developing or interpreting risk assessment and 
treatment prioritization outputs. Once risk assessment and prioritization processes are complete, the 
outputs should be translated for the intended users so that they can be actionable by a wide range 
of audiences, especially in cases where there is turnover in participants from CWPP development to 
implementation.   
CWPP Implementation, Leadership, and Accountability 
• 
Lesson Learned: Engagement in CWPPs tends to be largely focused on the plan development process. 
Although the collaborative process of developing a CWPP is often cited as one of its biggest benefits, 
a lack of momentum into implementation may be creating the sense that CWPPs just “sit on shelves.” 
Furthermore, many CWPPs lack leadership in the implementation phase to help maintain accountability 
and facilitate communication among partners.
• 
Recommendation: During plan development, CWPP developers should line out the plan’s 
recommendations and ensure that the steps to implement those recommendations are also stated clearly 
and have associated owners. CWPP developers should form an implementation group with a leader or 

10	
Ecological Restoration Institute
champion to guide action, maintain momentum, and facilitate communication. An implementation group 
and leader can also assist in tracking accomplishments and facilitating plan reviews and updates. 
CWPP Accomplishments 
• 
Lesson Learned: There is uneven tracking of CWPP-related accomplishments, which makes it difficult to 
determine whether a given CWPP’s recommendations were achieved. This also inhibits understanding of 
how treatments related to a CWPP may have affected wildfires that occurred in the CWPP area. 
• 
Recommendation: CWPP implementors should be expected to conduct accomplishment tracking, 
including information about treatments, fires, and improvements to community wildfire protection. 
Tracking accomplishments can facilitate interagency coordination and communication, as well as maintain 
information about progress that can be used in CWPP updates. Accomplishment tracking can also help 
partners celebrate successes and sustain ongoing collaboration. 
CWPP Repository
• 
Lesson Learned: It is often difficult to find the final, “official” versions of CWPPs with the necessary 
signatures.
• 
Recommendation: States or counties should consider the creation of a CWPP repository to store the final, 
signed plans in a public location that can be accessed on the Internet. 
CWPP Updates
• 
Lesson Learned: CWPPs need to be updated periodically to ensure they are relevant to conditions on the 
ground. Many respondents felt that 5-year plan updates are reasonable, though 6–8-year updates may be 
appropriate for some CWPPs. 
• 
Recommendation: States should clearly list the steps, requirements, and timeline for CWPP updates. If 
accomplishment tracking is also required, it should be used to provide information for the CWPP update. 
States may also want to consider whether there should be an amendment or addendum process for CWPPs 
depending on how frequently they are updated or when particular issues need to be addressed.
CWPP Community Engagement 
• 
Lesson Learned: Community engagement in CWPPs varies widely, and many CWPPs lack clear plans for 
community outreach and engagement.  
• 
Recommendation: CWPPs should include some public-facing materials, such as a story map, to help 
translate the information and recommendations. They should also include a community outreach plan. 
Active community groups can also help to engage the public in the CWPP and community wildfire 
planning more broadly. 
CWPP Contractors
• 
Lesson Learned: Contractors can provide much needed capacity and experience for developing and 
updating CWPPs, but CWPP processes that are not community-led tend to have less participation from 
the public. 
• 
Recommendation: When using contractors, consider ways to assist them in community engagement, as it is 
often more difficult to engage the public without active community representatives.  
Other Recommendations 
• 
Funding for CWPP development and implementation is an important consideration in effective CWPPs. 
Funding can greatly facilitate a given CWPP and implementation of its recommendations, and a lack 

Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West         11
of funding can bring progress to a halt. Because CWPPs are often required for hazardous fuel reduction 
grants, it would be helpful to build accountability into those funding mechanisms for accomplishing 
the recommendations in CWPPs. If CWPPs are required to track their progress for funders, it will help 
streamline the development of effective accomplishment tracking mechanisms. 
• 
CWPPs are one of many forms of planning documents that address natural hazards, and more specifically, 
wildfire. However, planning documents are often not explicitly connected or integrated. As more states 
develop Shared Stewardship and Good Neighbor Authority Agreements, as well as continue to maintain 
County Hazard Mitigation Plans and Forest Plans, it is important to make clear connections between plans 
and identify what types of information are necessary in which plans. For example, CWPPs surrounded 
by National Forest System lands should consider their ties to existing Forest Service plans on those lands. 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has created guidance for integrating CWPPs 
and Natural Hazard Mitigation Plans (Appendix B), and similar guidance could also be developed for 
integrating CWPPs with Shared Stewardship Agreements and other collaborative planning documents 
related to wildfire. Creating clear content expectations for CWPPs and other planning documents can also 
help to streamline what information is necessary in each plan.
• 
Funding for CWPP development and implementation is an important consideration in effective CWPPs. 
Funding can greatly facilitate a given CWPP and implementation of its recommendations, and a lack 
of funding can bring progress to a halt. Because CWPPs are often required for hazardous fuel reduction 
grants, it would be helpful to build accountability into those funding mechanisms for accomplishing CWPP 
recommendations. If CWPPs are required to track their progress for funders, it will help streamline the 
development of effective accomplishment tracking mechanisms. Similarly, capacity and resources to support 
CWPP development and implementation are also critical to success. For example, some state forestry 
departments have staff and resources dedicated to CWPP development and implementation, which helps 
provide an important bridge from the state to communities-at-risk from fire.
• 
Finally, CWPPs should adhere to best practices in land use planning more broadly. For example, CWPPs 
should consider the three C’s of planning: 1) identify the most compelling reason to plan in your community; 
2) rely on collaborative approaches; and 3) foster regional connections (McKinney and Harmon 2002).  
Key Considerations for State Forestry Agencies 
Following from the lessons learned and recommendations from this assessment, and as state forestry agencies 
explore new ways to manage CWPPs and develop templates, guidance, required contents, and required steps to 
complete an “official” CWPP, consider the following questions.
• 
What expectations does your state forestry agency have for CWPPs? What purpose should CWPPs serve?
• 
Who is the primary audience(s) for a CWPP?
• 
What does your state forestry agency need and want to see in CWPP documents? 
• 
What would a multi-scale or tiered CWPP process look like and how would it be implemented?
• 
What risk assessment or prioritization expectations does your state forestry agency have for CWPPs?
• 
What constitutes an “official” CWPP and what are the steps to accomplishing that? Where do tribal or 
federal land CWPPs fit in?
• 
What constitutes ownership of a CWPP by the collaborators involved in developing or updating a 
given plan? What processes are necessary to establish ownership of a CWPP (e.g., signatures or other 
mechanisms)?
• 
Are there differences between a CWPP update and an original CWPP? If so, what are they?
• 
How often should CWPPs be updated? How often should CWPP accomplishments be reported, in what 
format, and to whom?
• 
Who maintains CWPPs in your state? Who is the main point of contact? Where can CWPPs be accessed?

12	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Conclusion 
The purpose of this project was to identify best practices and recommendations for the effective preparation, 
revision, and implementation of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs) in Arizona and throughout 
the West. Through a detailed assessment of CWPPs in Arizona, as well as a broader review of CWPPs in 
other western states, we learned that CWPPs take a variety of forms, are often trying to be many things to 
many audiences at once, and experience a drop-off in participation and attention after plan completion. As 
a result, CWPPs may not always be effectively reaching or assisting their potential audiences in meaningful 
ways. Therefore, we developed lessons learned and recommendations that acknowledge the importance of local 
community context but that can help create clarity in the development and implementation of CWPPs that are 
meaningful to their intended users. 
In an era of shared stewardship among partners to address common goals across jurisdictional boundaries 
to manage wildfire risk and improve ecosystem health, it is important to consider these lessons learned and 
recommendations to develop plans that do not just “sit on shelves” but that can be effectively implemented 
on the ground. These lessons learned and recommendations are applicable to collaborative planning processes 
beyond CWPPs. Furthermore, one of the most highly cited benefits of CWPPs was the collaborative process 
of developing plans, rather than the plans themselves. This suggests that CWPPs and efforts to develop plans 
such as Shared Stewardship Agreements are a critical way to bring people together around wildfire planning. 
The nature of these planning efforts must be adapted to their unique context and scale, but they should all 
acknowledge the critical role that people play in effective wildfire planning and adapting community wildfire 
planning to the broader ecological systems in which they reside.  

Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West         13
References
Ellison, A., M. Knapp, J. Abrams, M. Nielsen-Pincus, T. Paveglio, and C. Moseley. Spring 2015.	 Community 
Experiences with Wildfire: Actions, Effectiveness, Impacts, and Trends. Ecosystem Workforce Program 
Working Paper #56. 20pp. Available online:	 https://ewp.uoregon.edu/sites/ewp.uoregon.edu/files/WP_56.
pdf 
Evans, A., S. Auerbach, L. Wood Miller, R. Wood, K. Nystrom, J. Loevner, A. Aragon, M. Piccarello, and 
E. Krasilovsky. 2015. Evaluating the Effectiveness of Wildfire Mitigation Activities in the Wildland-
Urban Interface. Forest Stewards Guild. Available Online: https://foreststewardsguild.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/WUI_effectiveness.pdf.
Fire Adapted Communities Network. 2019. Fire Adapted Communities Graphic and Facilitator’s Guide. 
Available Online: https://fireadaptednetwork.org/resource/fire-adapted-communities-graphic-and-
facilitators-guide/. 
Jakes, P. J., K. C. Nelson, S. A. Enzler, S. Burns, A. S. Cheng, V. Sturtevant, D. R. Williams, A. Bujak, R. F. 
Brummel, S. Grayzeck-Souter, and E. Staychock. 2011. Community Wildfire Protection Planning: Is the 
Healthy Forests Restoration Act’s Vagueness Genius? International Journal of Wildland Fire 20 (3): 350–63. 
Available online: https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/38474
McKinney, M., and W. Harmon. 2002. Land Use Planning and Growth Management in the American West. 
Land Lines. Available online: https://www.lincolninst.edu/publications/articles/land-use-planning-growth-
management-american-west
Oregon Department of Forestry. 2013. West Wide Wildfire Risk Assessment Final Report. Prepared by the 
Sanborn Map Company. 108pgs. Available online: https://www.thewflc.org/sites/default/files/WWA_
FinalReport_3-6-2016-1.pdf
Vilsack, T. 2009. Agriculture Secretary Vilsack presents national vision for America’s forests. USDA Office of 
Communications Release No. 0382.09

14	
Ecological Restoration Institute
CWPP Resources
Plan Preparation 
• 
Preparing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan: A Handbook for Wildland-Urban Interface 
Communities. March 2004. Available online: https://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/documents/
resources/communities/cwpphandbook.pdf
• 
Community Guide to Preparing and Implementing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan. A 
supplemental resource 2004 Preparing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan Handbook (above). 
August 2008. Available online: https://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/documents/resources/communities/
CWPP_Report_Aug2008.pdf
• 
The Community Wildfire Protection Planning Process: A Quick-Guide Series on Collaboration. 
Available online: https://secureservercdn.net/198.12.145.239/l40.06e.myftpupload.com/wp-content/
uploads/2011/07/CWPP-Quick-Guide.pdf
• 
A Fire Service Leader’s Guide to Preparing a Community Wildfire Protection Plan. Available online: https://
www.iafc.org/topics-and-tools/resources/resource/community-wildfire-protection-plan-leaders-guide
• 
Best Management Practices for Creating a Community Wildfire Protection Plan. May 2011. Available 
online: https://www.nrs.fs.fed.us/pubs/gtr/gtr_nrs89.pdf
• 
USDA Forest Service, Wildfire Risk to Communities Website and Maps: https://wildfirerisk.org/
Plan Evaluation 
• 
Community Wildfire Protection Plan Evaluation Guide. August 2008. Available online: https://www.
oregon.gov/ODF/Documents/Fire/CWPPEvalGuide.pdf
Wildland Urban Interface Planning
• 
Planning the Wildland Urban Interface. 2019. Available online: https://www.planning.org/publications/
report/9174069/
• 
Multihazard Planning Framework for Communities in the Wildland Urban Interface. 2018. Available 
online: https://www.planning.org/publications/document/9155699/
• 
Community Planning Assistance for Wildfire (materials on website). Available online: https://
planningforwildfire.org/resources/cpaw-training-materials/
Linking CWPPs and Hazard Mitigation Plans 
• 
FEMA Integrating Community Wildfire Protection Plans and Natural Hazard Mitigation Plans. 
Available online: https://mil.wa.gov/asset/5ba4211239e1e 
Post-Fire Recovery Information 
• 
After Fire: Toolkit for the Southwest. Available online: https://postfiresw.info/


16	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines 
ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with 
respect to its health, integrity and sustainability… Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic 
trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to 
damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers 
on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural 
processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every 
forest restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers 
elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does 
not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1. 	 Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. 	 Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. 	 Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and 
Surveys
4. 	 Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forests
5. 	 Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study 
of Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. 	 Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern 
Arizona
7. 	 Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. 	 Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. 	 Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. 	What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for 
Practitioners
11. 	Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. 	Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. 	Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. 	Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest 
Lands
15. 	Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16. 	Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. 	A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. 	Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. 	The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. 	Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. 	Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. 	The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
23. 	Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West
24. 	Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Projects

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
