View this email in your browser
Long-Term Efﬁcacy of Managed Wildﬁres Focus of New
ERI Study
 
To learn more about the effectiveness of managing wildﬁres to meet restoration
goals, ecologists at the Ecological Restoration Institute have been working to
better understand the ecological outcomes of wildﬁre applications and the
conditions under which practitioners can expect beneﬁcial results.
 
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

A new article in the International Journal of Wildland Fire contributes to this line
of research. In the study, a team of ERI-NAU ecologists tested the long-term
effects of managed wildﬁre on three different forest types (pine-oak, mixed-
conifer, and spruce ﬁr). The researchers analyzed data from a remeasurement
of permanent monitoring plots on the North Rim of Grand Canyon National
Park 12 years after three wildﬁres were allowed to burn to meet resource
objectives in 2003. The ecologists evaluated ﬁre outcomes and measured
effects on forest structure and species composition. 
Overall, the 2003 resource objective wildﬁres in Grand Canyon National Park
achieved several beneﬁcial management outcomes, but researchers say there
is much more to learn about the effectiveness of wildﬁres at accomplishing
restoration objectives and promoting resilient forest conditions, particularly in
less-remote areas where human communities and other values at risk may
necessitate a more cautious approach to managing ﬁres.
 
Read the journal article and summary fact sheet.
 
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
View More ERI Fact Sheets

 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2020 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
