ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Working Paper 43
Fires and Soils in  
Frequent-Fire Landscapes  
of the Southwest
April 2020
SOUTHWEST 
FIRE     SCIENCE 
CONSORTIUM

Authors: Dan Binkley, Adjunct Faculty, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University
Reviewers: Matt Busse, Research Soil Microbiologist, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research 
Station; Dale W. Johnson, Emeritus Professor of Forest Soils, University of Nevada, Reno;  
Paul C. Selmants, Research Physical Scientist, United States Geological Survey
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Cover photo: Forests and soils interact so strongly that any major change in one of them leads to a reshaping of the other. 
Impacts of restoration treatments and fires on soils always depend strongly on site-specific details, but too many factors make 
forest soils complex and variable and there is no one-size-fits-all prescription. Photo by ERI
Please use the following citation when referencing this working paper:
Binkley, D. 2020. Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest. ERI Working Paper No. 43. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 11 pp.
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological
Restoration International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or 
accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability … 
Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration 
International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last 150 
years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and lack 
their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible 
to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests 
centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of the Intermountain West. 
By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to 
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and policy makers 
to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science used to make management 
decisions and scientists working on the questions managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring 
together localized efforts to develop scientific information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the 
ground through an inclusive and open process.	
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and practitioners 
in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide guidance on management decisions 
surrounding ecological restoration topics. This publication would not have been possible without funding 
from the USDA Forest Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products 
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Table of Contents
Executive Summary...............................................................................1
Introduction..........................................................................................1
How Fires Affect Soils..........................................................................3
Burning Duff is Burning Soil.............................................................. 3
Erosion After Fire Ranges from Very Little to Massive......................... 5
Fires Are the Major Cause of Nutrient Loss from  
Frequent-Fire Landscapes................................................................... 7
How to Consider Forest Soils When Planning  
Restoration Treatments and Managing Fires........................................8
References...........................................................................................10

Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43
1
Executive Summary
Forests and soils interact so strongly that any major change in 
one of them leads to a reshaping of the other. Fires consume 
fuels in a few hours that it took vegetation years or decades to 
produce. Forest soils are both sensitive and robust in relation 
to forest restoration treatments and fires. Fires change soils 
in major ways, including direct consumption of some of the 
organic matter that forms soils, and heating and altering 
the physical, chemical and biological features within the 
soil. The impacts of fires tend to increase with the quantity 
of fuels consumed, with high spatial variation across a site. 
Erosion typically increases slightly after fires, but sometimes 
the increases are so large that downstream roads, bridges, and 
homes are threatened. Erosion risk depends strongly on the 
consumption of the forest soil O horizon (sometimes called 
“duff ”), because high-intensity rain falling on mineral soil 
surfaces can easily exceed the absorption capacity of the soil. 
The absorption capacity of mineral soils can also be reduced 
after fire by the development of water-repelling (hydrophobic) 
microsites. Fires burn organic matter that contains carbon 
and nitrogen, oxidizing them to gaseous forms. The loss of 
nitrogen (N) from burning fuels equals about ten pounds 
of N lost for every ton of fuel consumed. The impacts of 
restoration treatments and fires on soils always depend strongly 
on site-specific details, such as soil type, moisture conditions 
at the time of the fire, and spatial variation across landscapes. 
Prescriptions for local situations can be improved over time 
if each operational unit includes a learning opportunity, with 
a pocket-science approach of varying treatment intensities 
in small areas to find out what happens when a treatment is 
omitted (a control) or intensified (with extra fuel or burning 
under more extreme weather conditions).
Introduction
Soils are the foundation of forest ecosystems, and variations 
in soils across landscapes and through time lead to major 
differences in forest composition, structure and growth. Pre-
settlement ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona that 
developed on soils with basalt parent material supported 50% 
more trees per acre than stands on limestone-derived soils 
(Abella and Denton 2009). Stands on both soil types had 
clumped spatial distributions, but clumps averaged almost 
twice as many trees on basalt-derived soils. Limestone-derived 
soils had double the understory plant diversity and cover found 
on basalt-derived soils (Abella et al. 2015). These differences 
likely resulted from interacting legacies of soils on overstory 
and understory vegetation, and the vegetation influenced fire 
behavior, which in turn affected soils and vegetation. The 
responses of forests to restoration treatments also depends 
heavily on soils. Thinning dense stands led to greater increases 
in understory diversity on limestone-derived soils, but greater 
understory cover on basalt-derived soils (Abella et al. 2015).
Forest management and forest fires occur at scales of 
patches, stands and landscapes, and soils may be characterized 
at the same scale. For example, an old-growth forest of 
ponderosa pine in central Colorado had an average of 2.2% 
carbon (C; carbon comprises about half of the structure of 
organic matter, so 2.2% C would be about 4.4% organic matter) 
in the top 6 inches of the mineral soil (Figure 1), or about 15 
tons of carbon per acre. This single value accurately represents a 
22-acre stand, but great variation underlies the average. About 
20% of the stand had almost twice this average soil C, and 5% 
of the stand had half the average amount. The intensity of fires 
and the ecological impacts may show similar variations across a 
stand. These numbers can also be examined in a spatial context, 
Figure 1.  The C content of soils was sampled in a 50 ft. x 50 ft. grid across a 22-acre old-growth stand of ponderosa pine in the Manitou experimental forest 
in central Colorado. The information might be condensed into a single average (A, without information on variation or spatial patterns), or represented as a 
distribution of values (B, with no spatial pattern), as an average tendency across the stand (C), or with full information (D, data from S. Boyden).

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43    
Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
2
and one corner of the stand averaged double the C of another 
corner. The average spatial trend across the stand is comprised 
of great variations at a scale of 50 feet, and 3-fold variations in 
soil C are common at this finer scale. These fine-scale details 
would be difficult to include explicitly in any management 
scheme, but it’s important to keep in mind that average stand 
values do not mean low variability within stands (in soils, in 
vegetation, and in fires).
Forest tree roots may be found in the organic horizons 
(O horizons) that forms the topmost layer of forest soils, and 
in the underlying mineral horizons that have organic matter 
mixed with particles of clay, sand, and rocks. Forest in frequent-
fire landscapes typically have most of their roots confined 
to the mineral soil, as the O horizons are often dry. But O 
horizons are important to roots even where roots only within 
the mineral soil. The air-spaces within the O horizon moderate 
temperature fluctuations in the mineral soil, and act as a mulch 
layer to reduce evaporation. The O horizon is a major sponge 
with high infiltration rates during severe rainstorms, preventing 
erosion. A large portion of the nutrients taken up by roots are 
released by decomposition within the O horizon. The terms 
“duff ” or “forest floor fuels” are used in the fire community to 
describe the soil O horizons, but it’s important to recognize 
that burning duff is burning soil. 
The variability of soils is similar to the variability in fire 
behavior and fire impacts when frequent-fire landscapes ignite. 
Patchy variations in fuels combine with variations in space and 
time in wind, temperature and humidity to lead to very non-
uniform fire behaviors and post-burn conditions (Figure 2). Of 
course, some very intense fires (particularly in forests with long 
intervals between fires) may lead to more uniform post-burn 
conditions. This variation includes impacts of legacies created 
by surviving plants and seeds. Surviving plants, both trees and 
understory vegetation, can facilitate rapid post-burn recovery 
of the forest mosaic of overstory trees and understory grasses 
and forbs. Fires may burn for longer periods and at higher 
sustained temperatures where dry woody fuels are present, such 
as stumps and downed logs, and where O horizons are deep 
(such as around the bases of trees). The time for recovery tends 
to increase with the intensity of fires.
Figure 2. An intense fire burned most of the 
ponderosa pine crowns and the soil O horizon in 
this patch of forest, but the vagaries of the flames 
left some small patches of unconsumed O horizon 
where some plants survived (A), and the seed 
bank can rapidly provide new plants. Under dry 
conditions, stumps (B) and downed logs (C) flame 
and smolder for longer periods, sending more heat 
into the soil, sterilizing seed banks and altering 
soils in ways that may not recover for many 
years (D). Burning fuels in slash piles (E) restricts 
the impacts of fire to patches within a site, but 
increases severity of effects within the patches.

Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43
3
How Fires Affect Soils
Fires release tremendous amounts of heat, essentially 
converting the energy accumulated from years (or centuries) of 
plant production into heat in a matter of minutes or hours. A 
typical light surface fire in frequent fire landscapes might burn 
about 7 tons/acre of wood and soil organic matter, releasing 
the equivalent heat of about 1 quart of gasoline on every square 
yard of a forest. The energy release is much higher under large 
woody material and piles of slash, with energy release rising to 
the equivalent of 4 to 6 gallons of gasoline per square yard.
The effect of all this energy depends on a variety of 
factors, including how much fuel burns, how long the burning 
lasts, and the moisture content of the soil (Figures 3, 4, 5). 
Fine fuels, such as grasses and pine needles, burn quickly 
with too little heat release to have much effect on soils. Piles 
of slash (needles and branches) provide more fuel that takes 
longer to burn, releasing large amounts of heat over hours. Soil 
temperatures under slash piles with small-diameter materials 
may reach temperatures of 900 oF for a few hours (Figure 
4). Piles of coarser woody material may not reach as high a 
maximum temperature in the soil, but the heat penetrates more 
deeply and lasts longer. 
Fires under dry conditions raise soil temperatures much 
more than fires would under moister conditions (Figure 5). 
The presence of water keeps temperatures below 200 oF as 
energy is consumed in evaporating water. Soil water is also a 
good conductor of heat, so more heat is transferred out of the 
topmost soil into deeper layers (which heat up, but maybe not 
to lethal levels).  
High soil temperatures kill roots, microbes, and seeds, 
but there does not seem to be a clear threshold of temperature 
that applies broadly. As a rule of thumb, temperatures above 
about 140 oF may kill most tree roots (Neary et al. 1999, 
Busse et al. 2010), so the regions of Figure 4 that are green 
may be relatively safe for roots. Where the color in Figure 4 
shifts to yellow-green, most roots would die. Temperatures 
above 200 oF may come close to sterilizing the soil (though 
absolute sterilization would take higher temperatures). The 
biological impacts depend on both temperature and duration of 
temperature, and a general expectation might be that heating 
soil to 140 oF for half an hour would kill most (or all) plant 
roots, bacteria, and soil fauna (Pingree and Kobliar 2019). 
The ecological importance of this biotic loss may not be high, 
however, as recolonization seems to be common within a year 
or so.  Fungi may be more resistant, or recover more quickly; 
in some cases, fungi even showing positive growth responses 
after this degree of heating (responding to increase availability 
of resources, and reduced competition). Temperature of 900 oF 
can also alter the minerals in soils, breaking apart clay particles 
into component pieces (Ulrey et al. 1996). 
Burning Duff is Burning Soil
The fuel characteristics of a forest are fundamentally important 
for fire behavior and impacts, and major “surface” fuels include 
woody materials, fallen branches, and decaying needles. 
Thinking of these materials as fuels may miss the importance 
they have as components of the forest soil. Soil science includes 
O horizons as a major characteristic feature of forest soils, 
not as a forest floor or a duff layer. Harvesting experiments 
that removed the soil’s O horizons have often found larger 
impacts on future site productivity than from removing tree 
boles or post-logging slash (Binkley and Fisher 2020). Typical 
O horizons in frequent-fire landscapes range from 10 to 25 
tons/acre, and low-intensity surface fires generally consume 
about 10 to 25% of these horizons. Experiments with fire 
return intervals as short as a few years have shown large 
reductions in O horizon mass, coupled with increased organic 
matter in the upper mineral soil (A horizons). The spatial 
pattern of fires within stands leads to variable consumption 
of O horizons (Figure 1A). The recovery time for O horizons 
partially consumed in fires typically range from a few years to a 
decade (or more), as litterfall from surviving and reestablishing 
vegetation rebuild the horizon. 
Fire intensities can be extreme in some frequent-fire 
landscapes, as a result of unusually high accumulations of fuels 
during fire-free intervals, or in response to very severe fire 
Figure 3. The heat transferred into the mineral soil from burning soil O horizons (also called duff or forest floor fuels) increases with the increasing amount 
of consumption (left). The impacts on soil seed banks and microbial communities may increase with the amount of time the soil is heated beyond 140 oF, and 
of course that time is longer when more of the O horizon is consumed (right; based on data from Kreye et al. 2020 for longleaf pine forests).

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43    
Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
4
Figure 4. Temperature profiles differed substantially when slash piles of different diameter materials were burned. The left X axis shows soil depth, and the 
right X axis shows the time since the fire started. Piles of small-diameter slash (left) burned quickly, and the rapid rate of energy release heated the top 2 
in of mineral soil to over 900 oF. Rapid consumption of the small material led to cooling over a period of several hours, minimizing the opportunity for heat 
to reach deeper into the soil. Burning of coarser woody material took longer for soil to heat, as well as lower maximum temperatures (right). However, the 
heating impacts reached much deeper into the soil, and lasted for two days (from data of Busse et al. 2013, photos from Matt Busse).
Figure 5. Fires under dry conditions lead to greater transfer of heat into soils (from data of Busse et al. 2010). 

Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43
5
weather. The most intense fires not only consume virtually all 
surface fuels (and O horizons, Figure 6), but they also burn 
organic matter within the upper mineral soil. It is difficult 
to determine the amount of organic matter that is burned 
within the mineral soil during intense fires. The 2002 Biscuit 
Fire in southeastern Oregon burned through pine-dominated 
landscapes, removing all of the O horizon over large areas. 
Careful attention to sampling of the mineral soil revealed that 
organic matter losses from the A horizon were even larger than 
the losses from the O horizon (Bormann et al. 2008). Post-fire 
wind losses of fine mineral material were about 55 tons/acre, 
which would be near the upper end of water-erosion losses 
after fires. The recovery period for soil organic matter after very 
severe fires remains unclear (Neary et al. 1999), but the time 
scale would be decades and more likely centuries.
Erosion After Fire Ranges from  
Very Little to Massive
Most fires in frequent-fire landscapes generate too little erosion 
for concern. However, a minority of cases have huge erosion 
losses with major impacts on down-stream ecosystems and 
communities. The most common rates of erosion after forest fires 
are a few tons/acre, but about 10% of fires led to more than 80 
tons/acre of erosion (Figure 7). The loss of soil from forests may 
have impacts on the recovery of the forests, but this issue has 
not received much research. If the nitrogen (N) concentration 
of eroded sediments was a typical 0.02%, then even 70 tons/
acre of soil erosion would be a loss of about 30 to 40 pounds of 
N per acre, less than the direct losses of N from combustion in 
high-intensity fires (see Figure 7). Some of the eroded material is 
deposited down slope, and the amount of charcoal, ash and other 
fire-modified forms of organic matter may be twice as great 
in lower-slope (depositional) areas as compared to the average 
across a burned site (Abney et al. 2017).  
Concerns about erosion deal mostly with off-site issues. 
Post-fire erosion is a major geomorphologic agent, renewing 
downstream riparian terraces and changing steam ecology 
(Benda et al. 2003). Severe erosion after a fire in the Tahoe 
Basin (Carroll et al. 2007) led to the addition of more than 
200 tons/acre of sediments onto a floodplain, along with 
800 pounds of N per acre, illustrating the key role of post-
fire erosion and deposition in shaping productive riparian 
ecosystems. Of course, floodplains are also common sites for 
homes, roads, bridges and other infrastructure, and post-fire 
erosion and floodwaters cause substantial damage. 
The primary driver of post-fire erosion is the intensity of 
rainfall in the period before vegetation reestablishment. The 
primary soil factor determining the response to intense rainfall 
is the presence or absence of the O horizon. The organic matter 
in the O horizon is a very absorptive sponge, rapidly absorbing 
water and retaining large volumes that are released slowly 
over period of hours and days. Indeed, most studies of the 
Figure 6. The Dome area in the Jemez Mountains in northern New Mexico burned severely in 1996 (Dome Fire), and then again in 2011 (Las Conchas Fire). 
The fire weather in 2011 was so severe that the O horizon and downed woody material were completely consumed over large areas. The “ghosts” of logs 
from trees killed in the 1996 fire are evident across the landscape. Three years later, rapidly resprouting of Gambel oak and nitrogen-fixing New Mexican 
locust dominated the revegetating plant community. Photos by Craig Allen
Figure 7. Most forest fires do not lead to high rates of erosion; about 
80% have less than 8 tons/acre of erosion in the first year after fire (from 
data compiled by Robichaud et al. 2000). Some sites have much higher 
rates, especially with the combination of factors such as intense fire, 
steeper slopes, and highly erodible soils (with coarse texture and low 
organic matter). All three of those factors combined to generate high 
erosion after this fire in a ponderosa-pine forest on granite-derived soils 
in central Colorado. The curtains established to gauge erosion had to be 
shoveled out repeatedly. 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43    
Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
6
infiltration rates of forest soils begin by removing the highly 
absorptive O horizon to examine the more limited infiltration 
rates of mineral soils. When fires consume this high-infiltration 
sponge, the exposed mineral soils may allow water infiltration 
too slowly to keep up with intense rainfall, leading to overland 
flow and erosion. 
A secondary factor in the susceptibility of post-fire soils to 
intense rainfall is the development of water-repellent microsites 
(hydrophobicity). The process of combustion involves the heat-
driven breakdown of large organic molecules into smaller ones. 
The small organic molecules evaporate (volatilize) and ignite 
when temperature and oxygen concentrations are high enough. 
The burning of the small, volatile organic molecules gives light 
to flames. Some of the molecules diffuse downward into the 
soil, where conditions are too cool for them to ignite. Instead, 
the organic molecules cool and condense onto soil surfaces, 
and the organic coatings make it difficult for water drops to be 
absorbed into the soil. This hydrophobicity issue accounts for 
a typical decrease in mineral soil infiltration rates of 40 to 80% 
after fires (Robichaud et al. 2000, Martin and Moody 2001). 
The spatial and temporal variability in forest soils 
emphasized above is especially important in the connection 
between hydrophobicity and erosion. An assessment of the 
spatial distribution of hydrophobicity in central Colorado 
found that burned sites did have a higher prevalence of 
hydrophobic points in a 50 ft. x 50 ft. grid (Figure 8). The 
unburned site also showed some hydrophobicity in about 
5-10% of the sample points, increasing to about 30% in 
the burned site. The spatial arrangement of soil infiltration 
capacities (Figure 9) may be more important than the 
average, because a hydrophobic point adjacent to a point with 
high infiltration capacity would have low erosion potential. 
Overland runoff would be likely only for large patches of 
spatially contiguous hydrophobic soils.
Hydrophobicity varies in time as well as space. Dry soils 
are more hydrophobic (whether burned or not) than moist soils, 
and post-fire hydrophobicity typically declines to background 
levels within a year or two (MacDonald and Huffman 2004). 
Figure 8. Most points within a 50 ft. x 50 ft. grid in central Colorado 
showed no hydrophobic tendencies. About 5-10% of points in the 
unburned plot were hydrophobic, compared to about 30% for a plot 
within the Hayman Fire (Woods et al. 2007). 
Figure 9. The spatial pattern of hydrophobicity influences how water moves during heavy rain events. Adjacent points that are hydrophobic foster overland 
flow and erosion, whereas hydrophobic points surrounded by high-infiltration points pose less risk. Although the Hayman Fire increased the prevalence of 
hydrophobic sites (right, same data as in Figure 8), the risk of overland flow was increased less than if the soils were more uniform (from data in Woods et 
al. 2007).

Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43
7
Fires Are the Major Cause of Nutrient Loss from 
Frequent-Fire Landscapes
Many studies have examined rates of nutrient loss in water 
leaching from forests into streams, but in the frequent-fire 
landscapes of the Southwest the major losses of nutrients occur 
with fires (Johnson et al. 2008). The two major pathways of 
nutrient losses in fire are direct combustion of organic matter, 
and post-fire erosion.
Fires burn off large amounts of organic matter, carbon 
(C), and nitrogen (N) from soils, and some of the material 
left after the fire is substantially altered. Heating of organic 
matter affects the bonds holding large molecules together, 
producing smaller compounds that may later be more accessible 
to microbial decomposition. Large amounts of organic matter 
may be burned only partially, leaving behind a wide range 
of materials in soot, ash, and charcoal. Soil organic matter 
generally lasts for a period of decades in soils, but fire-altered 
materials may have turnover times of a few centuries (though 
the actual rates of charcoal decomposition in forest soils may be 
higher than previously thought, Abney and Berhe 2018).
Soil nutrient supplies commonly limit the growth of 
forests and understory vegetation around the world, with 
the most critical nutrient stress varying among soil types 
and vegetation. Surprisingly little information is available on 
the extent of nutrient limitations in frequent-fire forests of 
the Southwest, but low soil nitrogen (N) limited growth of 
both trees and understory vegetation in some experiments 
(Powers 1982, Binkley et al. 2003, Boyden and Binkley 
2016). The major form of N stored in vegetation and soils 
is in organic molecules, where N is bound with C. The fate 
of N in burning organic matter mirrors that of C. Fires 
combust the organic matter, with C being oxidized to form 
gases (primarily carbon dioxide, CO2) while the N is also 
oxidized to form various gases (NO, N2O, N2). Sometimes 
the combustion loss of N has been mistakenly called 
“volatilization,” but just like C, the loss of N is a burning 
process (oxidation) not an evaporating process.
Organic matter is typically comprised of about 0.5% 
nitrogen, and the loss of N in fires averages about 0.5% of 
the fuel consumption (Figure 10). Typical surface fires in 
frequent-fire landscapes would have 5 to 15 tons/acre of fuel 
consumption, with N losses of 50 to 150 pound/acre. High-
intensity fires occur in frequent-fire landscapes where fuel 
accumulations are atypically high, or when weather conditions 
support intense fire behavior. Fuel consumption in high-
intensity fires can exceed 50 tons/acre, with N losses of more 
than 500 pounds/acre. 
Figure 10. The loss of nitrogen (N) in fires 
results from the same burning reactions 
that consume organic matter, so the loss 
of N matches the N content of the fuel 
consumed. A compilation of 42 estimates 
of N losses in fires showed a loss of about 
10 pounds of N per ton of fuel consumed 
(r2 = 0.89). The darker shaded region is 
the 95% confidence interval for the highly 
significant overall trend, and the light 
shade shows that individual cases vary 
substantially around the average trend 
(95% of the cases would occur within the 
bounds of the light-shade area; based on 
data compiled in Binkley and Fisher 2020).

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43    
Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
8
The N lost from fires is replaced only very slowly, from 
N deposited in rainfall, and from N fixation (the conversion 
of atmospheric N2 into organic-N forms). Typical rates of N 
addition to southwestern forests are so low (on the order of 2 
to 5 pounds of N per acre annually) that decades or centuries 
would be needed to restore the N lost in combustion.
Although N is always lost when organic matter burns, 
the supply in the soil available to plants usually increases 
after fire. This would be analogous to losing money from a 
bank account, but increasing the amount of cash on hand 
for immediate use. A global review of fire effects concluded 
that N supply to plants after fires generally increases by about 
1/3 (and phosphorus (P) supply by 1/2; Dijkstra and Adams 
2015). Losses of P in fire are generally small (unless substantial 
erosion occurs), but the various pools of P-containing 
molecules tend to increase substantially (Butler et al. 2018). 
These increases result from direct chemical effects of heating, 
the release of nutrients from cells of microbes killed in the fire, 
and the alteration of the physical environment (soils are often 
wetter and warmer after fire). The availability of nutrients to 
surviving or establishing plants would also be high owing to an 
initial lack of competition with other plants. 
Fires also alter the chemistry of cation nutrients, such as 
calcium, magnesium, and potassium. These elements are not 
burned (oxidized) by the fire (as C and N are), and they remain 
behind in the soil unless wind or water erosion physically 
removes them. The burning of organic matter containing cation 
nutrients entails consumption of acidity (H+) to form water, 
resulting in alkaline (high pH) ash and soils. The rise of soil 
pH can be quite large after fires, from one to two units. The 
leaching of ash into the soil, combined with reestablishment 
of plants and nutrient cycles gradually lowers soil pH over a 
period of years to decades. 
The combined effects of high temperatures, changing 
chemistry, and altered environmental conditions after fires 
means that almost every aspect of soil biology changes after 
fires. Forest soils contain large banks of seeds that might 
germinate after fire, but intense fires (such as burning slash 
piles) can kill more than 95% of the seeds stored in soil (Korb 
2004). Bacterial communities are more sensitive to fire effects 
than fungal communities, and the diversity of the communities 
after fire decrease for bacteria and may or may not increase for 
fungi (Hart et al. 2005, Reazin et al. 2016). Generalizations 
about post-fire changes in soil biology may not be very useful 
for two major reasons. Soils vary hugely at relatively small 
scales, from less than a millimeter in soil aggregates to feet 
and yards across stands. The behavior of fires also varies across 
scales, leading to a very wide array of biological impacts. 
The second reason is that the state-of-knowledge does not 
provide strong insights into the connections between changes 
in soil biology and implications for plants or other ecosystem 
components. Soil biology is fundamentally important, but not 
yet linkable to broader forest connections.
How to Consider Forest Soils When 
Planning Restoration Treatments and 
Managing Fires
A former outreach director for ERI, 
Doc Smith, was fond of saying that 
people want “a solution that’ll work 
everywhere, all the time, starting right 
now.” It would be easy to recommend 
general approaches to sustaining soils 
as part of restoration treatments or 
fire operations. Unfortunately, too 
many factors make forest soils so 
complex and variable that no one-
size-fits-all prescription could be very helpful. Three general 
ideas might be broadly useful to keep in mind.
1. Forest Soils Are Sensitive, Flexible, and Robust
There is no single way for a forest soil to be. Soils differ 
substantially across space and over time, and most soils 
function quite well. Some soils grow trees better than others, 
and some respond to events such as fire or restoration 
treatments more strongly than others. If a single goal happened 
to be important, such as maximizing tree growth regardless 
of understory vegetation or fire risk, then some soils would be 
clearly “better” than others. Forests in frequent-fire landscapes 
of the Southwest rarely fit into categories of maximizing 
single uses, so a wide array of soil conditions is not a problem. 
When fires or restoration treatments change vegetation, soils 
generally are well suited for growing more grasses or shrubs 
while dominance of trees is low (Figure 5). Long periods with 
less fire may lead to soils supporting more trees, and all of these 
variations seem to work.
If forest soils can be so variable in time and space, do 
soils need to be considered when thinking about fire impacts 
or prescriptions for restoration treatments? The good news is 
that there’s no reason to expect that only one outcome would 
be acceptable or desirable for soils. The cautionary news is 
that some changes might be quite undesirable, and worth 
avoiding. A productive approach might be to identify potential 
“undesirable outcomes” (Matonis et al. 2016) for soils, and 
to consider what precautions might be built into plans and 
operations to reduce risks of undesirable outcomes. 
2. Key Decisions Focus on Fire Intensity and  
Spatial Heterogeneity
The typical condition of forest soils includes high variation 
at scales of feet and yards. Intense fires might override that 
background variation, removing legacies of large trees or 
patches dominated by grasses, or where the O horizons were 
thick or thin. Historical low-intensity, frequent fires may 
have promoted soil diversity within patches of trees and 
other vegetation. Mixed-severity fires may have promoted 
diversity at scales of acres and stands. Decisions about forest 
restoration treatments, fire prescriptions, and responses to 
natural fire ignitions may have opportunities to influence 
whether soils end up more diverse or more homogenized. 
Diversity of soils likely increases when outcomes foster 

Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43
9
spatial diversity in plants at scales of feet and patches within 
stands (focused research might be needed to give confidence 
to this expectation). Uniformity of treatments would not be 
an important goal from the perspective of sustaining soils, and 
may be counter-productive if forest diversity is a goal.
Intense fires change soils more than less-intense fires, but 
there is no general reason to foster either level of intensity. 
The ecological legacies of fires depend in part on intensity of 
burning, but the outcomes are not automatically more or less 
undesirable. High-intensity fires on highly erodible slopes 
may lead to floods that deposit sediments in riparian areas 
(rejuvenating the ecosystems), or floods that take out bridges 
and homes. Decisions about fire intensities need to consider the 
heterogeneity of off-site land uses.
Decisions can also consider whether management actions 
would be helpful for amelioration of undesirable outcomes of 
fires. Slash-pile burning reduces fuels that might otherwise 
support uncontrolled intense fires, but the tremendous release 
of heat kills seeds stored in soils and partially sterilize microbial 
communities. Management options that include burning 
slash in piles could also include ameliorative practices such 
as mulching, scarification, seeding (of trees, grasses, or forbs), 
and fertilization (Rhoades et al. 2015, Miller et al. 2015). 
Prescriptions for ameliorative treatments might depend on 
earlier decisions about size and numbers of slash piles to be 
created and burned within a stand. Small piles are cheaper 
to create and have less impact on underlying soils, and large 
piles are more expensive to create and leave larger impacts on 
soils. But larger piles also mean fewer piles within a stand, 
and operational logistics could lead to decisions to use larger 
piles (which means fewer piles to ignite and monitor) with 
amelioration treatments at fewer locations within each stand.
3. Each Management Unit Can Be a School-House:  
Pocket Science
Extrapolating insights from one site to another would be powerful 
if local variation weren’t important, but forest soils are at least as 
variable as the forests that grow on them. The responses to fires or 
restoration treatments on one site may not apply very well to other 
sites. This is the same problem faced by health care providers: 
medical science provides great general insights, but every patient 
needs to be evaluated carefully for a unique set of history, 
symptoms, and opportunities. Resource management needs to be 
tailored for specific cases, and the outcomes of decisions may not 
always provide the hoped-for outcomes. 
A pocket-science approach can ensure that learning is a 
central goal of management, and that operations are designed 
with simple features that foster learning (Binkley et al. 2018). 
If an entire management unit is treated consistently from 
corner to corner, there is little opportunity to gain insight about 
“what would have happened if we had …?” Why not provide 
a learning opportunity by prescribing that one corner will be 
left untreated, or another small plot will receive double the 
intensity of the overall unit? The pocket science approach gives 
opportunity to see if the outcomes would have been different 
if the treatment had been different. Expensive experimentation 
might be needed to establish strong confidence in the 
response levels to treatments, but a simple pocket science 
approach might be strong enough to identify misconceptions 
or to highlight unanticipated risks (Figure 11). Managers 
typically would not have much time for intensive monitoring 
measurements, but most of the outcomes that would be 
important to recognize might show up in carefully planned 
repeat photography. A set of pocket science locations also 
provides a valuable school for touring colleagues, encouraging 
productive conversations and innovative thinking. 
Pocket science opportunities for forest soils and fires might 
be relatively easy to develop. The layout of restoration treatments 
that include fire could include portions where fire is not applied. 
More creatively, a uniform treatment could be applied across 
a unit with an untreated portion left in the center; after fuels 
and fire risks were lowered for the whole unit, the residual plot 
could be burned at a higher intensity. Should land managers 
be concerned about the nutrient losses associated with low- or 
high-intensity fires? Small plots (such as 50 ft. x 50 ft.) could 
be fertilized to see how much the recovering vegetation might 
be influenced by nutrient supplies. Post-fire erosion control 
treatments could be applied to small areas even when budgets 
don’t allow widespread application. The possibilities for pocket 
science projects are large, as are the opportunities for gaining 
both case-specific and general insights about how forest soils 
respond to restoration treatments and fires.
Figure 11. A large forest restoration area on the Kaibab Plateau used repeated fires to reduce fuel loads and change forest structure (left). Retention of an 
adjacent, untreated control (right) ensured future opportunities to learn from the restoration project, and to help visiting colleagues understand what was 
accomplished by the restoration treatment.

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43    
Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
10
Abella, S.R., and C.W. Denton. 2009. Spatial variation in 
reference conditions: historical tree density and 
pattern on a Pinus ponderosa landscape. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research, 39:2391–2403.
Abella, S.R., J.E. Crouse, W.W. Covington, and J.D. Springer. 
2015. Diverse responses across soil parent materials 
during ecological restoration. Restoration Ecology, 
23:113–121.
Abney, R.B., and A.A. Berhe. 2017. Pyrogenic carbon erosion: 
implications for stock and persistence of pyrogenic 
carbon in soil. Frontiers in Earth Science, 10.3389/
feart.2018.00026.
Abney, R.B., J. Sanderman, D. Johnson, M.L. Fogel, and A.A. 
Berhe. 2017. Post-wildfire erosion in mountainous 
terrain leads to rapid and major redistribution of 
soil organic carbon. Frontiers in Earth Science, doi: 
10.3389/feart.2017.00099.
Benda, L., D. Miller, P. Bigelow, and K. Andras. 2003. Effects 
of post-wildfire erosion on channel environments, 
Boise River, Idaho. Forest Ecology and Management, 
178:105–119.
Binkley, D., M. Adams, T. Fredericksen, J.-P. Laclau, H. 
Mäkinen, and C. Prescott. 2018. Connecting 
ecological science and management in forests for 
scientists, managers and pocket scientists. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 410:157–163.
Binkley, D., and R.F. Fisher. 2020. Ecology and Management 
of Forest Soils. Wiley Blackwell, Hoboken.
Binkley, D., F. Singer, M. Kaye, and R. Rochelle. 2003. 
Influence of elk grazing on soil properties in 
Rocky Mountain National Park. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 185:239–245.
Bormann, B.T., P.S. Homann, R.L. Darbyshire, and B.A. 
Morrissette. 2008. Intense forest wildfire sharply 
reduces mineral soil C and N: the first direct evidence. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Science, 38:2771-2783.
Boyden, S., and D. Binkley. 2016. The effects of soil fertility 
and scale on competition in ponderosa pine. European 
Journal of Forest Research, 135:153–160.
Busse, M.D., C.J. Shestak, K.R. Hubbert, and E.E. Knapp. 
2010. Soil physical properties regulate lethal heating 
during burning of woody residues. Soil Science Society 
of America Journal, 74:947–955.
Busse, M.D., C.J. Shestak, and K.R. Hubbert. 2013. Soil 
heating during burning of forest slash piles and wood 
piles. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 22:786–
796.
Butler, O.M., J.J. Elser, T. Lewis, B. Mackey, and C. Chen. 
2018. The phosphorus-rich signature of fire in the 
soil–plant system: a global meta-analysis. Ecology 
Letters, 21: 335–344.
Carroll, E.M., W.W. Miller, D.W. Johnson, L. Saito, R.G. 
Qualls, R.F. Walker. 2007. Spatial analysis of a large 
magnitude erosion event following a Sierran Wildfire. 
Journal of Environmental Quality, 36:1105–1105.
Dijkstra, F.A., and M.A. Adams. 2015. Fire eases imbalances of 
nitrogen and phosphorus in woody plants. Ecosystems, 
18:769–779.
Hart, S.C., T.H. DeLuca, G.S. Newman, D. MacKenzie, and 
S.I. Boyle. 2005. Post-fire vegetative dynamics as 
drivers of microbial community structure and function 
in forest soils. Forest Ecology and Management, 
220:166–184.
Johnson, D.W., R.B. Susfalk, R.A. Dahlgren, and J.M. 
Klopatek. 1998. Fire is more important than water 
for nitrogen fluxes in semi-arid forests. Environmental 
Science and Policy, 1:79–86.
Korb, J.E., N.C. Johnson, and W.W. Covington. 2004. Slash 
pile burning effects on soil biotic and chemical 
properties and plant establishment: recommendations 
for amelioration. Restoration Ecology, 12:52–62.
Kreye, J.K., J.M. Varner, and L.N. Kobziar. 2020. Long-
duration soil heating resulting from forest floor duff 
smoldering in longleaf pine ecosystems. Forest Science, 
doi: 10.1093/forsci/fxz089.
Martin, D.A., and J.A. Moody. 2001. Comparison of 
soil infiltration rates in burned and unburned 
mountainous watersheds. Hydrological Processes, 
15:2893–2903.
MacDonald, L.H., and E.L. Huffman. 2004. Post-fire water 
repellency: persistence and soil moisture thresholds. 
Soil Science Society of America Journal, 68:1729–1472.
Matonis, M.S., D. Binkley, J. Franklin, and K.N. Johnson. 2016. 
Benefits of an “undesirable” approach to natural resource 
management. Journal of Forestry, 114:658–665.
Miller, S., C.C. Rhoades, L. Schnackenberg, P.J. Fornwalt, E. 
Schroder. 2015. Slash from the Past: Rehabilitating 
Pile Burn Scars. Science You Can Use Bulletin July/
August 2015, Issue 15. USDA Forest Service Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, https://
www.fs.usda.gov/rmrs/publications/science-you-can-
use-bulletin-slash-past-rehabilitating-pile-burn-scars 
Morris, R.S., J.E. Smith, A.D. Cowan, and A. Jumpponen. 
2016. Fires of differing intensities rapidly select 
distinct soil fungal communities in a Northwest US 
ponderosa pine forest ecosystem. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 377:11–127.
Pingree, M.R.A., and L.N. Kobziar. 2019. The myth of the 
biological threshold: A review of soil heating and 
biological responses. Forest Ecology and Management, 
432:1022–1029. 
 
References

Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  working paper 43
11
Powers, R.F. 1983. Forest fertilization research in California. 
Pp. 388-397 in:  IUFRO Symposium on Forest Site 
and Continuous Productivity, USDA Forest Service 
GTR PNW-163, Portland.
Reazin, C., R.S. Morris, J.E. Smith, A.D. Cowan, and A. 
Jumpponen. 2016. Fires of differing intensities rapidly 
select distinct soil fungal communities in a Northwest 
US ponderosa pine forest ecosystem. Forest Ecology 
and Management, 377:118–127.
Rhoades, C.C., P.J. Fornwalt, M.W. Paschke, A. Shanklin, and 
J.L. Jonas. 2015. Recovery of small pile burn scars in 
conifer forests of the Colorado Front Range. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 347:180–187.
Robichaud, P.R. 2000. Fire effects on infiltration rates after 
prescribed fire in northern Rocky Mountain forests, 
USA. Journal of Hydrology, 231–232:220–229.
Robichaud, P. R., J.L. Beyers, and D. Neary. 2000. Evaluating 
the effectiveness of post-fire rehabilitation treatments. 
USDA Forest Service General Technical Report 
RMRS-GTR-63, Fort Collins.
Ulrey, A.L., R.C. Graham, and L.H. Bowen. 1996. Forest fire 
effects on soil phyllosilicates in California. Soil Science 
Society of America Journal, 60:309–315.
Woods, S.W., A. Birkas, and R. Ahl. 2007. Spatial variability 
of soil hydrophobicity after wildfires in Montana and 
Colorado. Geomorphology, 86, 465–479.

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1.	
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2.	
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3. 	 Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4. 	 Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5. 	 Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6. 	 Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7. 	 Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8. 	 Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9. 	 Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10. 	The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11. 	Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12. 	Restoring Forest Roads
13. 	Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14. 	Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15. 	Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16.	 Snags and Forest Restoration
17. 	Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18. 	Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter?
19. 	Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20. 	Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
21. 	Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-Fire Southwestern Forests
22. 	Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23. 	Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24. 	Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
25. 	Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and Habitat 	
	
Destruction in the Intermountain West
26. 	Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27. 	Fuel Treatment Longevity
28. 	 Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
29. 	Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and  
	
Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
30. 	Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
31. 	Climate Change Impact on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
32. 	An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods
33. 	The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
34. 	Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest
35. 	Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management
36. 	 Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildfire Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in Southwestern Coniferous Forests
37. 	The Influence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
38. 	Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
39. 	Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
40. 	Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
41. 	Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
42. 	A Summary of the Natural Range of Variability for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Forests
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182 or nau.edu/eri.

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
