The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Fire Regimes and Structural Changes in Oak-Pine Forests of the  
Mogollon Highlands Ecoregion: Implications for Ecological Restoration  
 
By David W. Huffman, Director of Ecology 
Introduction 
The Mogollon Highlands ecoregion (MHE) is a geologic transition zone that lies between the montane 
and high desert environments of the Colorado Plateau and the lowlands and basins of the Sonoran  
Desert. Ponderosa pine forests here occur at their warmer, drier limits, and are often found with dense, 
shrubby understory plant communities. These forests are vulnerable to rapid change from drought and 
wildfire as climate warming progresses. There 
is increasing interest in understanding restora-
tion needs and conservation options for ponder-
osa pine forests of the Mogollon Highlands 
ecoregion, and information on historical  
conditions — those that predominated before 
industrial land uses — plays a central role in 
developing science-based management strate-
gies. In this study, we used demographic data 
from field plots, fire scar samples, and dendroe-
cology to reconstruct historical fire regimes and 
landscape structure at ponderosa pine-
dominated sites that spanned a range of envi-
ronmental conditions on the Prescott and Tonto 
national forests. 
 
Methods 
Five sites ranging from 425 to 818 acres each were selected for study. Two sites were on the Prescott 
National Forest, and three sites were located on the Tonto National Forest. Field plot grids were estab-
lished at the sites to sample overstory structure and understory characteristics. Measurements were 
taken related to tree species, sizes, and conditions, and shrub abundance. Increment cores were collect-
ed from large and old trees occurring on the plots, and entire sites were systematically searched for 
trees showing fire scars. Fire scar samples were cut with chainsaws, and these, along with tree incre-
ment cores, were brought back to the Ecological Restoration Institute’s ecology lab for analysis.  
Historical tree sizes and years of fire occurrence were determined using standard techniques of den-
drochronology. In addition, decomposition and tree growth models were used to estimate historical 
sizes of dead trees found on the field plots. Taken together, these analyses allowed us to characterize 
forest density, species composition, and fire regimes in the late 1800s, prior to widespread changes 
related to modern land uses.     
 
May 2020 

Results 
• Historically, forests at all MHE sites were open 
with tree densities ranging from 34 to 55 trees 
per acre on average. Basal area averaged 20 to 
37 ft2 per acre across the five sites. 
• Most sites showed historical co-dominance of 
ponderosa pine and tree-form oak species such 
as Arizona white oak, Emory, and Gambel oak. 
• Surface fires at all sites were frequent histori-
cally until 1879 when fire regimes abruptly 
changed. Mean fire intervals ranged 1.3 to 15.6 
years for the five sites. Very few fire scars later 
than 1879 were found on MHE wood samples.  
• Contemporary tree densities at the sites are 359 
to 703% greater than historical densities, with 
clear increases in numbers of ponderosa pine, 
oak, and alligator juniper.  
 
Implications and Recommendations 
• Changes related to disruption of historical fire regimes have increased susceptibility of pondero-
sa pine forests in the MHE to rapid shifts in structure and composition that may come about 
with climate change and high-intensity wildfire.  
• Meeting fuels reduction and ecological restoration goals will be challenging for land managers 
due to vigorous regeneration responses of shrubs to tree thinning, prescribed burning, or other 
management activities.  
• Managers of these forests will be required to balance attention to historical reference conditions, 
conservation of biological diversity, and needs for fuels management. 
 
Recommended Reading 
Dieterich, J.H., and A.R. Hibbert. 1990. Fire history in a small ponderosa pine stand surrounded by 
chaparral. Pp. 168–173 in Krammers, J.S. (ed.). Effects of fire in management of southwestern 
natural resources: proceedings of the symposium, Nov. 15–17, 1988, Tucson, Arizona. USDA 
Forest Service General Technical Report RM-191.  
Fleischner, T., D. Hanna, and L. Floyd-Hanna. 2017. A preliminary description of the Mogollon 
Highlands ecoregion. The Plant Press (Arizona Native Plant Society) Fall 2017:3–6. 
Parks, S.A., S. Dobrowsji, J.D. Shaw, and C. Miller. 2019. Living on the edge: trailing edge forests at 
risk of fire-facilitated conversion to non-forest. Ecosphere, 10:1–17. 
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication:  
Huffman, D.W., Floyd, M.L., Hanna, D.P., Crouse, J.E., Fule, P.Z., Sanchez Meador, A.J., Springer, J.D. 2020. 
Fire regimes and structural changes in oak-pine forests of the Mogollon Highlands ecoregion: implica-
tions for ecological restoration. Forest Ecology and Management, 465:118087. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.foreco.2020.118087 
Contact: David Huffman, David.Huffman@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
ERI undergraduate research assistant, Elena Schaefer, 
admires a large “catface” with numerous fire scars on 
a ponderosa pine log. Fire scar samples like this one 
were cut with chainsaws and analyzed in ERI’s Ecology 
lab to determine the historical fire regimes of field sites 
on the Prescott and Tonto national forests in Arizona. 
