View this email in your browser
ERI Awarded Wood Innovations Grant to Expand Wood
Products Industry in the Southwest
 
The Ecological Restoration Institute’s Dr. Han-Sup Han received a $260,000
grant from the US Forest Service’s Wood Innovations Grant program to lead a
Wood Utilization Team across three states. Over the next three years, the team
will focus on increasing forest restoration efforts through the expansion of forest
products business clusters in the Southwest.
 
With this funding, Dr. Han plans to build on the research and development
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

infrastructure of three university-based research units that comprise
the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes—the New Mexico Forest and
Watershed Restoration Institute, the Colorado Forest Restoration Institute and
the ERI at Northern Arizona University—to support the expansion of forest
products business clusters through focused workshop training events, applied
research studies, and forest product marketing efforts.
 
Across the Southwest, projects that thin and remove small-diameter trees to
restore forest health and prevent catastrophic wildﬁre are often hindered by a
lack of markets for the low-value wood and biomass needed to fund operations.
For several years, the Forest Service, industry partners, ecologists, and
stakeholders have worked to overcome this barrier to reinvigorate the regional
forest products industry and spur forest restoration efforts. 
 
“Funding from the Forest Service’s Wood Innovations Grant program allows us
to creatively grow the forest products industry sector and associated markets,”
Dr. Han said, “which in turn supports forest restoration activities in the
Southwest.”
 
To learn more about the Forest Service’s 2020 Wood Innovations Grant
awards, click here. And, visit ERI’s Forest Operations and Biomass Utilization
program page to learn more about Dr. Han’s work.
 
Sharing the News on Twitter
ERI Forest Operations and Biomass Utilization Page

What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.

Copyright © 2020 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
