The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Wood Properties of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine:  
Implications for Utilization of Forest Restoration Byproducts  
By Damon Vaughan, David Auty, and Kurt Mackes 
Introduction 
In response to the growing risk of catastrophic wildfire in the western United States, numerous landscape-
scale restoration projects are underway to bring forests closer to historical conditions. In northern Arizona, 
this has resulted in an accumulation of mostly small-diameter and 
low-value ponderosa pine biomass consisting of tree stems, branch-
es, and tops (Figure 1). Processing this woody material into products 
could provide a source of revenue and promote economic develop-
ment; however, the lack of a wood processing industry and percep-
tions about the quality of ponderosa pine wood have so far been an 
impediment. To address this problem, we researched key wood 
properties of southwestern ponderosa pine, investigating variation 
among different stands across the region as well as patterns of varia-
tion within and among trees. We tested pith-to-bark and stump-to-
crown variation in wood density using X-ray densitometry, and 
wood stiffness using static bending tests on small (1 x 1 x 16-inch), 
defect-free samples. Both properties are very important for structural 
wood products. 
  
How can knowledge of wood properties help increase value? 
The location of wood within a tree stem influences its density, stiffness, and uniformity, and thus is im-
portant to consider in conversion to forest products (Figure 2). Across the northern Arizona landscape, we 
found that ponderosa pine trees had predictable within-tree patterns of wood stiffness, with a sharp in-
crease outward from the pith before reaching more stable values in the outer, or mature, wood. Patterns 
were not so strong for wood density, 
but in general the mature wood was 
denser than the wood near the pith 
(i.e., juvenile wood). Higher in a 
tree, there were smaller differences 
between juvenile wood and mature 
wood density, resulting in wood 
with greater uniformity. The best 
economic strategy to use the differ-
ent parts of the tree for the most ap-
propriate product is to co-locate pro-
cessors in a wood processing busi-
ness cluster.  
 
 
June 2020 
Figure 1. Recently thinned forest with log 
deck. Most material thinned in Arizona is 
small-diameter and has limited markets.  
Figure  2. Bole segmentation as a strategy to maximize value. Wood properties 
vary systematically within a tree stem, and this can be used to direct the wood 
toward the most appropriate product. This pattern is specific to southwestern 
ponderosa pine, and may not represent other species.  

 
How do tree and landscape-scale factors affect wood properties? 
Crown characteristics exerted strong controls on both wood density and stiffness; in general, the higher the 
canopy base height, the higher were both properties. Higher canopy base height also increases the length of 
the branch-free bole, which allows for production of lumber with fewer knots. Study results also indicated 
that trees with higher density wood were found on southerly aspects and on soils with a higher clay content. 
 
What effects can management actions have on wood properties? 
• 
Thinning stands after trees begin producing mature wood can improve wood quality. We conducted a 
replicated stand density experiment that showed stand basal area did not significantly affect the wood 
density of trees. This means that release due to thinning will not affect ring-level wood density. How-
ever, because wood quality generally increases with tree age, releasing stands of mature trees will re-
sult in a greater proportion of higher-density and higher-stiffness mature wood (Figure 3).  
• 
Prescribed fire can have a positive effect on wood quality. We found that crown base height was sig-
nificantly and positively related to both wood density and stiffness, so fire can improve wood quality 
through its action of increasing canopy base height. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions  
Higher density and higher stiffness wood does exist in northern Arizona ponderosa pine. It is restricted to 
the mature wood zone of trees in select stands, which are often characterized by high crown base height, 
growth on a southerly aspect, and on soils with a higher clay content. It is important to note that the value of 
“lower quality” wood can be increased by developing markets for value-added products, such as bioenergy, 
biochar, and oriented strand board. 
 
Further Reading 
Burdon, R.D., R.P. Kibblewhite, J.F.C. Walker, et al. 2004. Juvenile versus mature wood: A new concept, orthogonal to 
corewood versus outerwood, with special reference to Pinus radiata and P. taeda. Forest Science, 50:399–415. 
Jozsa, L.A., and G.R. Middleton. 1994. A discussion of wood quality attributes and their practical implications. Forintek 
Canada Corp, Vancouver, BC. Special Publication No. SP-34. 
Lachenbruch, B., J.R. Moore, and R. Evans. 2011. Radial variation in wood structure and function in woody plants, and 
hypotheses for its occurrence. In: Size- and age-related changes in tree structure and function. Tree Physiology, pp 
121–164. 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publications 
Vaughan, D., D. Auty, T.E. Kolb, et al. 2019. Climate has a larger effect than stand basal area on wood density in Pinus 
ponderosa var. scopulorum in the southwestern USA. Annals of Forest Science, 76(3): 85.  
Vaughan, D., D. Auty, J. Dahlen, et al. (In Press). Modeling variation in wood stiffness of Pinus ponderosa using static 
bending and acoustic measurements. Forestry. 
 
Contact: Damon Vaughan, Damon.Vaughan@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 3. Cross-sectional view of two example 
trees with different management histories. Five-
year increments of rings are shown, and the 
inner 50 years are highlighted, representing 
juvenile wood. Each tree is the same age (75) 
and approximately the same diameter. The tree 
that grew slowly and was thinned (right) has a 
substantially smaller proportion of low-density, 
low-stiffness juvenile wood. 
