FOREST ENGINEERING (R SPINELLI, SECTION EDITOR)
A Critical Review of Comminution Technology and Operational
Logistics of Wood Chips
Raffaele Spinelli1 & Lars Eliasson2 & Han-Sup Han3
# Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
Abstract
Purpose of the Review This review offers essential information on the factors affecting the efficiency of wood chip supply
chains, and of comminution in particular. The paper indicates the pros and cons of alternative set ups, as well as the impact of
specific technical choices, including machine setup and adjustments.
Recent Findings Chipping performance is closely related to chipper characteristics and setup, and to feedstock type. In general,
productivity is directly proportional to chipper power and piece size, as far as the latter is within the capacity of the machine in
question. Blade wear, cut length, and screen size also have a strong impact on productivity and work quality—and so do operator
experience, skill, and motivation. Daily production is affected by work organization and machine reliability: delay time may
represent between 25 and 50% of actual work site time—occasionally more, especially when the interface with the transport fleet
is not properly managed.
Summary Wood biomass supply chains are characterized by comminution as their central process, since all automatic wood
boilers require comminuted wood. Different supply chains are defined by what kind of feedstock is comminuted and where
comminution takes place. In principle, one can comminute whole trees, logs, or logging residues—and comminution can occur
on the cutover, at the landing or in a yard—be it a terminal or the factory wood yard. Comminution can be obtained by chipping,
grinding, crushing, or shredding. Chipping is by far the most common method and is applied in different ways depending on
work conditions.
Keywords Biomass . Bioenergy . Productivity . Harvesting . Residues
Introduction
Farmers, forest owners, and forest contractors play a crucial
role in the development of the new bioeconomy, since they are
the suppliers of the indispensible raw material [1]. Of course,
individual roles will develop in different ways, depending on
the propensities of each single actor—and especially on one’s
entrepreneurial capacity. Forest companies and contractors
can focus on processing and adding value to the raw
material—where farmers remain pure farmers and only
produce a different crop than the conventional ones—or
evolve into suppliers of an intermediate or end-product, thus
undertaking increasingly complex tasks while adding value to
their product [2].
Regardless of the scope of one’s business, the availability
and control of the raw material is key to success, especially in
a future where raw material availability can become the main
limit to industrial development [3]. For example, feedstock
cost may represent 25% or higher for production of electricity
using woody biomass in western USA. Therefore, even the
most ambitious entrepreneurs who opt for the supply of an
end-product will have interest in maintaining control over
the primary resource produced by their fields and forests [4].
The rural landscape offers many types of biomass, which can
be transformed into many different products, through a wide
range of processing operations [5]. It is beyond the scope of this
review to provide a complete list of various types of biomass that
can be obtained from agriculture and forestry. This review paper
focuses on woody biomass for energy production. Wood is an
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Forest Engineering
* Raffaele Spinelli
raffaele.spinelli@ibe.cnr.it
1
CNR IBE, Florence, Italy
2
Skogforsk, Uppsala, Sweden
3
North Arizona University, Flagstaff, AR, USA
Current Forestry Reports
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40725-020-00120-9

abundant and versatile raw material, which has been used for a
wide range of purposes since the most ancient times. Before
industries shifted to oil and coal, wood was the primary source
of energy in the world, a role that it still maintains in developing
countries and in many rural areas of the industrialized countries
[6]. For instance, the consumption of firewood is about 22 mil-
lion m3 per year in France [7] and 18 million tons per year in
Italy [8]. Overall, modern Europe still uses over 100 million solid
m3 of firewood per year, about twice as much as Canada and the
USA together [9]. Most of this firewood is commonly burned in
traditional stoves, which have a limited expansion potential be-
cause of their low handling efficiency, poor versatility, high
maintenance needs, and excessive particulate emissions. In
Sweden, households use 9.6 TWh of fuelwood and a further
16.2 TWh of primary forest fuels are used in heat and combined
heat and power plants [10].
Modern biomass boilers are fed with wood chips or pellets
as a feedstock material—the latter produced by refining wood
chips into powders and then re-aggregating this powder ma-
terial into small-size uniform-shaped energy products.
Comminution of wood fuels is therefore a key step to initiate
the product development process with the greatest potential
for growth [11]. Chips can be efficiently produced from low
value woody materials (e.g., logging slash and small-diameter
whole trees) by using a chipper or a grinder. Chippers use
knives to process whole trees, stem wood, or branches into
wood chips that are relatively uniform in size (Fig. 1). A
minimum level of contamination with soils and rocks is im-
portant to extend the life of knives. Grinders use hammers in
their comminution processes, which can effectively handle a
mix of waste materials including limbs and tree tops contam-
inated with soils. Ground materials display large particle size
variability and low bulk density and they are commonly used
only for production of energy in large biomass energy facili-
ties [12, 13]. In this paper, wood chips describe comminuted
wood materials produced using a chipper or a grinder.
The production of wood chips is not exclusive to the
bioenergy sector. Chipping is a central process in the pulp
and particle-board manufacturing industries [14]. All these
industries require that wood is reduced to small pieces, which
are pulped or re-aggregated into board products, after adding
suitable chemical mediums. Bioenergy industries use the
same chipping process as these other industries, adapting it
to their own needs. In fact, mobile wood chippers were first
developed in North America in the 1970s to supply pulp mills
with chips.
The rapid growth of the bioenergy sector requires that the
supply of wood chips is expanded—a task that would be im-
possible without new technical knowledge aimed at reducing
wood chip production cost, improving wood chip quality, and
facilitating wood chip storage. This is especially true with
energy chips supplied directly from the forest, which suffer
from an economical disadvantage compared with sawmill res-
idue supply chains. However, chipping is not a simple opera-
tion, and its successful deployment requires much technical
and operational knowledge and experience [15]. Operational
planning to produce wood chips requires careful selection of
machines and logistics that result in a well-balanced operation
between chipping and hauling operations [16]. Amounts
(tons, oven dry tons, cubic meters), material concentrations
(tons/ha etc), types (e.g., whole trees or logging slash), and
locations (e.g., scattered or piled) of raw materials directly
affect the development of a comminution operation plan.
The strategic importance of forest biomass derives from its
large potential for growth in supply, which is far greater than
for other sources of wood fuel. In fact, it is known that plants
pioneering the bioenergy sector in a given region make a
priority target of any available sawmill residues, which are
considered as waste by sawmills, but offer good fuel quality
and are already concentrated at sawmills near the main roads.
For that reason, early biomass processing technologies have
been heavily biased by such a relatively simple supply chain,
and an easy raw material. Sawmill residues have a lower water
content than forest chips produced from whole trees and log-
ging residues and contain a greater quantity of fiber, because
they are obtained from delimbed logs, frequently after
debarking [17]. However, the availability of sawmill residues
is subject to the fluctuations of sawn wood production, and it
changes with the demand for conventional timber products—
not bioenergy. That is why new plants using biomass need to
target the primary forest sector, which has a large potential for
expansion.
A Supply Chain for the Production of Wood
Chips
Mechanical competence alone cannot guarantee the success of
forest machine entrepreneurs: good planning skills are at least
Fig. 1 A classic chipper drum, showing the knives and the knife pockets
Curr Forestry Rep

as important. The successful production of wood chips re-
quires a clear understanding of the entire process and of the
supply chain, including selection of the right machine, the
right source feedstock, and the right organizational layout
[18]. It is understood that a company dedicated to the indus-
trial production of wood chips should have a fairly powerful
machine (> 200 kW). For in-woods chipping operations, a
chipper should be mounted on a carrier that is suitable for
the prevalent work conditions. For example, those who plan
to chip directly on the cutover should mount their chipper on a
self-propelled all-terrain carrier, while those who want to cov-
er scattered roadside landings should rather opt for a truck-
mounted unit for fast mobility [19].
The efficient production of wood chips requires a rethink-
ing of conventional wood harvesting techniques [20], to im-
prove efficiency when extracting the biomass to roadside.
There are various options for chipping or grinding operations,
depending on the wide variety of working conditions and
available machinery [21]. However, most cases can be
grouped under six general scenarios, depending on where
chipping occurs and on the types of biomass materials to be
chipped (Fig. 2). First of all, chipping can occur in the forest or
outside the forest, on some kind of yard or pad, i.e., a landing,
terminal, or fuel yard. Furthermore, a distinction can be made
based on the source of feedstock: whole trees that may not be
marketed as traditional assortments because they do not meet
the necessary specifications—e.g., they are undersized, poorly
formed, or belong to a non-commercial tree species [22]; logs
that cannot be turned into traditional assortments for the same
reasons as above; and finally, tops and branches, left on site
after the log assortments have been removed.
It is important to notice that a chipping yard or pad can be
located at the roadside—just at the forest edge, directly at the
user plant, or in an intermediate position, in which case one
will talk about a satellite yard or terminal. Each case offers
specific advantages, disadvantages, and logistic issues, but
they can all be lumped together when it comes to their impact
on technology choice, which boils down to whether one must
opt for an all-terrain chipper (for chipping in the forest) or for a
more conventional model without any special cross-country
capabilities. Depending on the number of stops and on where
chipping occurs, the biomass will be handled one or several
times, in different forms and with different machines.
When chipping on the cutover, the biomass is only moved
as chips, using an all-terrain vehicle and generally
transloading the chips onto a faster road vehicle once they
arrive at the roadside. However, due to the cost of the chipper
and its relatively low load capacity, chipping in the forest is no
longer an economically competitive option in Sweden and is
only used in special occasions [23]. When chipping at the
landing or a terminal, uncomminuted biomass must be moved
to the roadside landing with off-road vehicles such as tractors,
skidders, or forwarders. This operation is relatively efficient
and provides acceptable transport costs for logging residues
[24] or small-diameter trees from thinning [25] for average
distances up to 500 m.
Bulky or oversized materials such as tops and branches can
be packed into bales or bundles [26, 27]. Whole trees can also
be compacted into bundles, or simply crosscut into multiple
tree sections [28]. However, bundling and crosscutting repre-
sent an additional cost compared with chipping whole trees or
loose residues, and this cost is quite high for bundling in
particular, due to the low productivity and the high cost of
the bundling machine [29].
Chipping logging residues and whole trees poses specific
technical issues: both feedstock types contain a significant
proportion of branch material, which tends to produce long
splinters and fine particles. For this reason, chippers used on
branch material should be equipped with suitable devices that
allow control of chip size, such as screens or piece-breakers.
In contrast, chipping logs produces relatively uniform chip
sizes and, most chipping machines can achieve good results
with this material, if they are properly used [13, 30].
Chipping Residues at the Landing
Chipping residues at the landing is the simplest case in wood
chipping operations and one that generally proves to be prof-
itable [31]. It normally occurs when (1) whole trees are taken
at the landing and processed there, typically because the ter-
rain is not easily accessible to mechanized processing equip-
ment that is therefore confined at the roadside [32], or (2)
when small trees or logging residues have been forwarded to
the landing. In the first case, tops, and branches accumulate at
the roadside, and the chipper can be stationed there and dis-
charge directly into the transport vehicles [13] or into roll-on
roll-off containers [33]. In the second case, the material is
Chipping
In the 
forest
Logs
Whole 
trees
Residues
At a 
landing
Logs
Whole 
trees 
Residues
Fig. 2 The six main general scenarios for chipping operations
Curr Forestry Rep

taken to the landing, chipped, and delivered to the customer
when demand occurs [34••]. Best results are obtained with
powerful chippers or grinders, which are highly productive
and can normally access most landings [35]. Truck-mounted
chippers are ideal for covering small landing areas scattered
throughout the landscape [36] (Fig. 3). Depending on landing
conditions and available space, chippers with some off-road
capacity are usually needed. This, partly explains why only
37–40% of the chippers used on landings in Sweden in 2011–
2013 were mounted on trucks [378]. Trailer-mounted chippers
are less agile than vehicle mounted ones, but they are gener-
ally cheaper to purchase.
When the chipper discharges directly into the transports
[37] or into exchangeable containers [38, 39], the main prob-
lem is to ensure good coordination between the chipper and
the transports, so as to minimize waiting times on either side.
If there is enough space at the chipping site, it is possible to
discharge on the ground, forming a heap and reloading the
chips onto the transport vehicles when they show up, using a
normal loader equipped with a bucket. Forming a pile offers
the advantage of buffers—minimizing interaction delays [40].
On the other hand, all buffers require additional space that
may not be available at forest landings, and discharging on
the ground results in additional loading activities and a risk for
soil contamination or product losses - incurred when the bot-
tom layer of chips is left on site to avoid picking up dirt (i.e.,
contamination).
Chipping Residues Left in the Forest
This is the case when logs are processed at the stump site and
small trees or residues are accumulated in the forest. When
that occurs, operators have two options: chipping the biomass
where it lays and moving the chips to the landing, or moving
the residues to the landing and chip them there—the latter
taking us back to the case, described above (i.e., chipping
biomass at the landing).
In both cases, recovery is only possible when the terrain is
accessible to ground-based equipment and must be excluded
whenever terrain conditions prevent stand access.
Furthermore, effective recovery is only possible when the res-
idues have been concentrated in some way during tree felling
and processing. Scattered residue is difficult to collect, and
harvesting teams should be encouraged to concentrate resi-
dues through suitable incentives (often financial) when recov-
ery is planned. If necessary, residues can be piled before col-
lection using a loader. On the other hand, piling residues with
a bulldozer leads to contamination with soil and stones and
should be avoided.
In-woods residue chipping requires highly mobile chip-
pers: suitable machines are mounted on tracked carriers, for-
warders, or modified agricultural vehicles [41]. The vehicles
that move the chips to the roadside must also have good mo-
bility, and operators often use forwarders equipped with spa-
cious tipping bins. A cheaper alternative is offered by four-
wheel drive farm tractors equipped with double- or triple-axle
bin trailers. Mobility is greatly enhanced when the trailer axles
are powered through the tractor’s own power take-off. The
number of transports assisting the chipper will vary according
to chipper productivity, bin capacity, and extraction distance.
In most cases, two transports are enough to keep up with the
chipper. Ideally, the chipper should be equipped with an inte-
gral surge bin that will serve as a buffer and allow chipping for
that short time when no transport is available. In stand,
chipping in Sweden has been abandoned due to its high costs
but can still be justified on non-economic grounds [42].
Branches and tops have a low bulk density, which can
constrain extraction productivity. On the other hand, the ex-
traction of loose residue materials is the sole option on diffi-
cult sites that can only be accessed with specialized forest
equipment (e.g., forwarders). Furthermore, extracting loose
residues to a landing generally allows the use of a larger and
more productive chipper than could be driven to the stump
site, leading to higher chipping productivity. Therefore, the
additional cost incurred by resorting to a less efficient extrac-
tion technique (handling of loose residues) can be offset by the
savings accrued through better chipping efficiency.
Chipping Whole Trees at the Landing
Extracting whole trees and then chipping them at the landing
is the best option when working with relatively large trees that
can be extracted efficiently [43]. In that case, the biggest lim-
itation of tree extraction is that trees can get contaminated with
soil and dust, causing greater wear and tear to the chipper
knives. This drawback can be greatly mitigated when trees
are lifted off the ground (i.e., forwarded) rather than dragged
on it (i.e., skidded): forwarding is more efficient than skidding
Fig. 3 Truck-mounted chipper processing logging residues at a mountain
landing
Curr Forestry Rep

on distances longer than ca. 500 m, and is generally preferable
in thinning operations [25] and with the most productive chip-
pers that require a longer supply radius to reduce delays asso-
ciated with frequent relocation. Forwarding whole trees is an
easy task for small trees, but can easily be applied to large
trees after crosscutting them into tree section with a grapple
saw [44].
Moving whole trees to a landing offers the main advantage
of allowing the use of powerful industrial chippers, which can
achieve higher productivity levels compared with tractor-
mounted chippers [45, 46]. In addition, when the chipper is
stationed at the roadside, it can discharge directly into a con-
tainer or a chip van truck for transportation, thus removing the
need for a separate loader [38, 47].
Chipping Whole Trees in the Forest
As in the case of residues, chipping of whole trees directly on
the cutover requires chippers with high mobility and is highly
dependent on terrain trafficability. On the other hand, it makes
material handling easier, especially if the trees are relatively
small and extraction productivity is bound to be too low for
the operation to be profitable [48]. In-wood whole-tree
chipping is often applied to row-thinning operations in tree
plantations, using in-line machine configurations where the
chip shuttle is following the chipper [49].
Location of the Comminution Operation
and Transportation of Wood Chips
As we have seen just above, wood chipping can take place in
many different locations: on the cutover, at a landing, at a
roadside landing pad, at a terminal, or in the wood yard of
the user plant. In terms of pure chipping and supply econom-
ics, the simple strategy is to avoid in-woods chipping and
bring all the biomass to a stationary chipper on a yard, which
is generally more productive and less expensive than a mobile
chipper in the forest [50]. However, this is only possible if a
stationary chipper is available near one of the local wood
industries or terminals and if the transport distance is short
(< 50 km)—or if the feedstock to be chipped consists of logs
or tree section, which are relatively dense and can be
transported efficiently.
In most cases, it is best to use a mobile chipper, which can
get closer to the wood to be chipped and accrue all the benefits
of densification as early as possible along the whole supply
chain [51]. Trees, tree sections, and residues are quite bulky,
which makes it difficult to exploit the full payload potential of
road vehicles, and chip transportation cost is a major compo-
nent of total delivered cost [52].
In the forest, extraction of loose residues is improved by
expanding load spaces in a vehicle—which is generally
obtained by fitting conventional forwarders with hydraulically
powered movable load bay sides that can be enlarged during
loading. However, machines equipped with expanding load
spaces are rarely compatible with on-road transportation,
mainly due to their large size. Therefore, they can be used
effectively for off-road extraction only, and not for road
transportation.
The characteristics of the roadside landing represent a key
element in the selection of a suitable location of comminution:
this must be large enough to contain the operation and must be
easily accessible to the largest and fastest transports among those
that can be supported by the locally available road network [40].
On average, an industrial chipping operation requires at least
1000 m2 of landing area on flat ground which is the bare min-
imum to accommodate the chipper, the truck being loaded, and
the loose biomass pile [19]. However, not all of those areas need
to be accessible to trucks and there are examples of far smaller
areas being used for this purpose [53•].
More space is needed when using semitrailers, provided
road turns have a large enough radius to allow for their circu-
lation, and road gradient is moderate enough. Small landings
can only accommodate tractor-mounted chippers and light
transport vehicles (10-t trucks, tractors, and trailer units etc.).
As an extreme limit, a 3.5-m-wide road is enough to set up a
small in-line operation, so that the wood chips can be
unloaded directly into the truck, or an operation using inter-
changeable containers [37, 38] (Fig. 4). Of course, this solu-
tion implies that the wood to be chipped has been piled off the
road on one of the sides, within easy reach of the chipper
loader—which must be an integral loader, since this setup
does not allow enough space for a separate stand-alone loader.
While still technically feasible, such an operation remains
problematic in terms of truck logistics, since exchanging be-
tween the outgoing loaded truck and an incoming empty truck
Fig. 4 Roll-on roll-off containers offer great versatility, but their use is
limited to short distances due to their higher tare weight compared with
standard trucks
Curr Forestry Rep

often necessitates a move of the chipper and good communi-
cations between the drivers to allow for safe operations [54].
In any case, whenever possible, one should opt for the
largest possible landing among those available within a rea-
sonable distance from the forest, even at the cost of increasing
extraction distance.
Greatly simplifying, one may consider three main
situations:
1.
The landing is accessible to tractors and trailers, but not to
trucks;
2.
The landing is accessible to 3-axle trucks (10-–12-t capac-
ity), but not to full-sized trucks or semitrailers (25-–40-t
capacity)
3.
The landing is accessible to full-sized trucks or semi-
trailers (25-–40-t capacity).
The operation manager then has two main options: (1)
adapt the operation to the conditions offered by the nearest
available landing and accept some efficiency losses if the
landing reflects situation 1 or 2, or (2) move the biomass to
a larger landing, capable of accommodating a larger and more
effective operation, thus accepting the additional cost of mov-
ing uncomminuted biomass.
Such decisions are strongly affected by transportation dis-
tance, because efficiency gains obtained through a larger pay-
load are proportional to transportation distance [55]. When
transportation distance is 10 km or less, transportation by a
farm tractor and an 8-t trailer is relatively efficient, but it
becomes at least one third more expensive than transportation
using a truck when travel distance reaches 50 km or longer.
Therefore, decisions must account for the complex interaction
between extraction efficiency, chipping efficiency, and trans-
portation efficiency, which are affected by machine capacity
and biomass characteristics as well [56•]. In fact, if the main
biomass feedstock is logs, chipping can be easily performed at
any point along the supply chain because logs have much
better handling characteristics than whole trees or loose log-
ging residues.
Amounts and Types of Woody Materials to Be
Chipped
When planning a wood chipping operation, it is essential to
get a good estimate of the amount of woodchip that can be
obtained. Since the sector is still relatively new, managers
often lack the experience needed to accurately estimate the
amounts of wood chips that can be obtained from the various
silvicultural operations. The amount of wood chips yielded
from any given forest intervention depends on the type of
forest, the treatment applied, and the harvesting strategy
adopted by the operator—i.e. whole-tree chipping or integrat-
ed harvesting of conventional timber assortments and chips.
In boreal and temperate forests, whole-tree chipping in ear-
ly thinning operations yields between 40 and 60 t of fresh
wood chips per hectare [9, 57]. Subsequent thinning opera-
tions do not yield much more, because tree size is large
enough that part of the wood will be turned into conventional
timber assortments and integrated harvesting is applied to
mainly limbs and tree tops (not whole trees).
Clearcutting low-quality stands (e.g., stand conversion op-
erations) can generate large quantities of biomass, especially if
conversion into timber or pulp assortments is not considered
and one opts for whole-tree chipping. In this case, wood chip
yields can easily reach 130–160 tons per hectare, or even more
[26, 58]. This is often the case with road bank and stream
cleaning operations, and with salvage cuts in damaged or de-
graded stands, such as diseased chestnut groves or
Mediterranean scrub.
Finally, maturity or final harvest cuts in high-forests can
generate variable quantities of wood chips, depending on the
assortment strategy, and especially on the minimum small-end
diameter specified to produce conventional round wood as-
sortments [59]. When timber price declines—for instance due
to the overproduction resulting from catastrophic forest
damage—then one may find it profitable to chip low-quality
assortments. A simple way to account for the woodchip yield
of these operations is to link it to the timber yield, which can
be accurately estimated by local foresters. For instance, if the
minimum small-end diameter for timber assortments is set to
12 cm, then one may expect to recover ca. about 200 kg of
fresh wood chips for each cubic meter of roundwood. This
quantity expands to 300 kg when the minimum small-end
diameter is increased to 22 cm [60], and contracts substantial-
ly if minimum small-end diameter is reduced to 7 or 8 cm, as
is the case in many Nordic countries. These figures already
account for harvesting losses, since recovering all residues is
technically difficult and generally it does not pay: recovery
rates are variable but are generally vary between 40 and
70% [61, 62].
The type of material to be chipped affects the quality and
value of the product, and therefore the commercial strategy
that can be adopted. High-quality chips cannot be obtained
from the exclusive chipping of fine branches and small tree
tops, because this feedstock has a high bark and leaf content.
Such feedstock can only be directed to low-grade boiler fuel.
Therefore, it is not worth investing in artificial drying or using
narrow screens to minimize the proportion of oversize parti-
cles in fuels derived from this feedstock type: due to their
inherent low value of the origin feedstock, the sensible strat-
egy is to minimize the production cost.
The opposite is true if one can chip whole trees or logs. In
the first case, one may even consider producing two different
chip qualities: a high-grade chip obtained from the clean stem
Curr Forestry Rep

and a low-grade chip obtained from the tops. Such an opera-
tion can be achieved without crosscutting the trees, through
simply parking two containers under the chipper and turning
the discharge spout towards one or the other depending on the
tree portion being chipped at the time. While this strategy
might be somewhat tiresome for the operator, it is easily ap-
plied. Otherwise, the grapple on the chipper loader can be
equipped with a blade to shear off tops during feeding. Tops
accumulated by the chipper are then processed together when
the pile is large enough to fill a container [63].
Operational Planning and Production
Strategies
Planning chipping operations requires an accurate estimate of
the productivity one may achieve. To do this, one needs to
correctly estimate both chipping productivity and delay
time—i.e., the sum of all interruptions of productive work
due to maintenance, preparation, interference etc. Correcting
net productivity for the effect of delay time offers an estimate
that will reflect actual daily production. For all operations that
involve dependence on the availability of truck transports,
balancing chipping and trucking capacity is essential to avoid
operational delays [16, 39, 64].
The productivity of a chipper depends essentially on tech-
nical factors, and above all: the power of the chipper and the
size of the wood fed to it [63, 65, 66] (Fig. 5). Chipping
productivity increases with engine power and the size of the
pieces to be chipped (within the capacity limits of the ma-
chine). All these factors being equal, productivity is also in-
fluenced by cut length, knife wear, and screen size [67].
As far as cut length is concerned, one may consider three
reference levels based on the target wood chip size: small,
medium, and large. Small chips are used by small-scale
boilers and are produced at a cut length between 7 and
15 mm; Medium-sized chips are the most common and are
used by larger plants—often serving multiple buildings. These
chips are obtained at a cut length setting around 20–25 mm;
finally, large chips are used by industrial boilers or gasifiers
(the latter after removing all fines) and are produced after
adjusting cut length to about 40 mm. If one takes 20 mm as
a reference cut length (because it is the most commonly
adopted), then productivity will decrease by about a third if
one switches to short cut lengths, and will increase by about
15% if one switches to long cut lengths [68, 69].
Knife wear has an even stronger effect on chipping produc-
tivity. When the knives are worn out, productivity is halved
compared with the values achieved with new knives, just
sharpened. That also results in a dramatic increase of fuel
consumption [70–72]. For this reason, it is better to change
knives before they are completely worn out, as performance
declines very rapidly when blades start getting dull. The use of
disposable knives seems to offer some benefits, compared
with conventional re-usable knives [73, 74]. Knife wear also
has a major impact on chip quality in terms of particle size
distribution [75].
In fact, particle size distribution can be partly manipulated
by installing a screen, with the purpose of minimizing the
presence of oversize particles: however, the screen itself tends
to choke the outflow and causes a measurable drop in produc-
tivity, which is inversely proportional to the screen mesh size
[76]. Productivity losses are quite significant, and reach 25%
when switching from a wide mesh screen (e.g., 60 × 240 mm)
to a medium mesh screen (60 × 40 mm) [77]. In general, it is
advisable to use the use narrow-mesh screens sparingly, and
settle for the widest mesh capable of returning an acceptable
chip quality according to customer specifications.
Finally, performance varies considerably depending on the
personal capabilities (i.e., experience, skills and motivation)
of the machine operator. The best operators can exceed aver-
age reference levels by 30%, while the least capable operators
often remain below this average by the same margin (i.e., −
30%) [78].
In addition to the above-mentioned technical factors, orga-
nizational factors (i.e., operational planning) also play a cru-
cial role in determining production levels [79, 80]. Just going
back to operator effect, it should be noted that a recent study of
industrial chippers reported that the highest production was
not achieved by the most technically skilled operator, but by
operators who combined good technical skills with good plan-
ning [81••]. It does not really help being the fastest at running
a chipper, if the operation is not properly organized and avoid-
able delays end up curtailing productive work time. In fact, the
technical potential of any machine is fully exploited only if the
operation is well organized and downtime is kept to a mini-
mum. The most common causes of downtime are poor logis-
tics, maintenance, and starvation (i.e., lack of material to be
chipped) [82]. Poor logistics force the chipper into an idle state
waiting for suitable transports to receive the chips, and is a
major cause for chipper downtime [39, 53]. These factors
cause interruptions in the work process and reduce actual
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
100
200
300
400
500
Productivity (fresh t h-1)
Chipper power (kW)
Wholetrees (150 kg apiece)
Branches (15 kg apiece) 
Fig. 5 Chipper productivity as a function of chipper power and piece
size, estimated with Chipcost.xls
Curr Forestry Rep

productivity. A certain amount of downtime is inevitable, and
an operation manager’s ability is in avoiding predictable de-
lays through timely maintenance and rational site planning.
Depending on operation type, delays can represent an addi-
tional 30 to over 40% over productive work time, which can
reduce utilization (i.e., the ratio between productive work time
and total worksite time) to between 60 and 75% [83]. In some
cases, poor logistics can further reduce machine utilization,
which has been known to get as low as 50% or less [53•].
Under average working conditions, the following general
reference production figures can be expected for different ma-
chine types [84].
–
Chipper driven by the PTO of a 100-kW tractor, manually
fed by two people: 10–15 green t per day;
–
Chipper driven by the PTO of a 200-kW tractor, fed with
a loader: 40–50 green t per day;
–
Industrial chipper with a 350-kW engine, fed with a
loader: 100–200 green t per day;
–
Industrial chipper with a 1000-kW engine, fed with a
loader: 400–600 green t per day;
These are general reference values, and may vary with
feedstock type, tree species, moisture content, individual ma-
chine characteristics, specific operational setup (wood chip
size, screen type etc.), and the organization of the site.
Operators can more accurately calculate productivity and
costs specifically for their operational assumptions using the
ChipCost.xls model, which can be downloaded free of charge
from the website: www.biomassaforestale.org.
Conclusions
Comminution is the central process in wood biomass supply
chains, because all energy plants are fed with comminuted
wood. Comminution can be obtained by chipping, grinding,
crushing, or shredding. Only the largest industrial facilities are
equipped with their own comminuting machines, and even
these plants are often supplied with comminuted material be-
cause it does not pay to transport uncomminuted wood bio-
mass, unless this is over very short distances. Obviously, the
larger the plant, the larger the supply radius, and therefore a
substantial proportion of the wood biomass supply will be
received as chips—whether the plant is equipped with its
own chipper or not. That explains the overwhelming success
of in-woods chipping, performed with mobile chippers. These
machines can comminute whole trees, logs, or logging resi-
dues, and their performance depends on a number of factors,
including engine power, piece size, and machine set up. Cut
length, knife wear, and screen size must be managed in order
to maximize productivity and product quality.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
Raffaele Spinelli, Lars Eliasson, and Han-Sup Han
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does not
contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of
the authors.
References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
•• Of major importance
1.
Lindstad BH, Pistorius T, Ferranti F, Dominguez G, Gorriz-Mifsud
E, Kurttila M, et al. Forest-based bioenergy policies in five
European countries: an explorative study of interactions with na-
tional and EU policies. Biomass Bioenergy. 2015;80:102–13.
2.
Krausmann F, Erb K, Gingrich S, Lauk C, Haberl H, Global pat-
terns of socioeconomic biomass flows in the year. A comprehensive
assessment of supply, consumption and constraints. Ecol Econ.
2000;2008(65):471–87.
3.
Ericsson K, Nilsson L. Assessment of the potential biomass supply
in Europe using a resource-focused approach. Biomass Bioenergy.
2016;30:1–15.
4.
Ramos Pires Manso J, Bashiri Behmiri N. Renewable energy and
sustainable development. Estud Econ Apl. 2013;31(1):7–33.
5.
Asikainen A, Liiri H, Peltola S, Karjalainen T, Laitila J, Forest
Energy Potential in Europe (EU27). Working papers 69. Joensuu:
Finnish Forest Research Institute; 2008.
6.
FAO. 2016. FAOSTAT database (available at www.fao.org/
faostat/en/#home). Rome.
7.
Elyakime B, Cabanettes A. Financial evaluation of two models for
energy production in small French farm forests. Renew Energ.
2013;57:51–6.
8.
Caserini S, Fraccaroli A, Monguzzi A, Moretti M, Angelino E.
Stima dei consumi di legna da ardere ed uso domestico in Italia.,
Ricerca commissionata da APAT e ARPA Lombardia, Rapporto
finale. 2008. (accessed 11-12-2019) http://www.isprambiente.gov.
it/contentfiles/00004100/4156-stima-dei-consumi-di-legna-da-
ardere.pdf
9.
FAO. State of the world’s forests 2007 (accessed 14-11-2019)
http:// www.fao.org/docrep/009/a0773e/a0773e00.HTM; 2007.
10.
Anon. Production of unprocessed wood fuels 2016. Nr. ES 2017:
09, 2017. Swedish Energy Agency, Eskilstuna, Sweden.
11.
Eriksson G, Kjellström B. Assessment of combined heat and power
(CHP) integrated with wood-based ethanol production. Appl Energ.
2010;87:3632–41.
12.
Han SK, Han HS, Bisson J. Effects of grate size on grinding pro-
ductivity, fuel consumption, and particle size distribution. For Prod
J. 2015;65:209–16.
13.
Bisson J, Han HS. Quality of feedstock produced from sorted forest
residues. Am J Biomass Bioenerg. 2016;2:81–97.
14.
Stupak A, Asikainen A, Jonsel M, Karltun E, Lunnan A, et al.
Sustainable utilisation of forest biomass for energy—possibilities
and problems: policy, legislation, certification, and recommenda-
tions and guidelines in the Nordic, Baltic, and other European coun-
tries. Biomass Bioenergy. 2007;31:666–84.
Curr Forestry Rep

15.
Irdla M, Padari A, Kurvits V, Muiste P. The chipping cost of wood
raw material for fuel in Estonian conditions. Forestry Studies.
2017;66:65–74.
16.
Bisson J, Han SK, Han HS. Evaluating the system logistics of a
biomass recovery operation in northern California. For Prod J.
2016;66(1/2):88–96.
17.
Spinelli R, Nati C, Sozzi L, Magagnotti N, Picchi G. Physical char-
acterization of commercial woodchips on the Italian energy market.
Fuel. 2011;90:2198–202.
18.
Stampfer K, Kanzian C. Current state and development possibilities
of wood chip supply chains in Austria. Croat J For Eng. 2006;27:
135–45.
19.
Mihelič M, Spinelli R, Poje A. Production of wood chips from
logging residue under space-constrained conditions. Croat J For
Eng. 2018;39(2):223–32.
20.
Kärhä K. Industrial supply chains and production machinery of
forest chips in Finland. Biomass Bioenergy. 2011;35:3404–13.
21.
Díaz-Yáñez O, Mola-Yudego B, Anttila P, Röser D, Asikainen A.
Forest chips for energy in Europe: current procurement methods
and potentials. Ren Sust Energ Rev. 2013;21:562–71.
22.
Pottie M, Guimier D. Preparation of forest biomass for optimal
conversion. 1985. FERIC special report SR-32, Pointe Claire,
Canada. 112 p.
23.
Eliasson L. Procurement systems for logging residues. I: Thorsén,
Å., Björheden, R. and Eliasson, L. Efficient forest fuel supply sys-
tems. Composite report from a four year R&D programme 2007-
2010. 2011 Skogforsk, Uppsala. ISBN: 978-91-977649-4-0.
24.
Brunberg T, Eliasson, L. Underlag för produktionsnorm för
grotskotare. (productivity standards for forwarding of logging res-
idues) 2013, Skogforsk, ISBN 978-91-979694-2-0. In Swedish.
25.
Laitila J, Asikainen A, Nuutinen Y. Forwarding of whole trees after
manual and mechanized felling bunching in pre-commercial thin-
nings. Int J For Eng. 2007;18(2):29–39.
26.
Cuchet E, Roux P, Spinelli R. Performance of a logging residue
bundler in the temperate forests of France. Biomass Bioenergy.
2004;27:31–9.
27.
Kärhä K, Vartiamäki T. Productivity and costs of slash bundling in
Nordic conditions. Biomass Bioenergy. 2006;30:1043–52.
28.
Nuutinen Y, Björheden R. Productivity and work processes of
small-tree bundler Fixteri FX15a in energy wood harvesting from
early pine dominated thinnings. Int J For Eng. 2016;27(1):29–42.
29.
Spinelli R, Magagnotti N, Picchi G. A supply chain evaluation of
slash bundling under the conditions of mountain forestry. Biomass
Bioenergy. 2012;36:339–45.
30.
Spinelli R, Cavallo E, Eliasson L, Facello A, Magagnotti N. The
effect of drum design on chipper performance. Renew Energ.
2015;81:57–61.
31.
Jernigan P, Gallagher T, Aulakh J, Tufts R, McDonald T.
Implementing residue chippers on harvesting operations in the
southeastern US for biomass recovery. Int J For Eng. 2013;24:
129–36.
32.
Spinelli R, Nati C, Magagnotti N. Recovering logging residue:
experiences from the Italian eastern Alps. Croat J For Eng.
2007;28:1–9.
33.
Rawlings C, Rummer B, Seeley C, Thomas C, Morrison D, Han H,
et al. A study of how to decrease the costs of collecting, processing
and transporting slash. Missoula: Montana Community
Development Corporation; 2004. p. 21.
34.•• Eliasson L, Anerud E, Grönlund Ö, von Hofsten H. Managing
moisture content during storage of logging residues at landings –
effects of coverage strategies. Renew Energ. 2020;145:2510–5
This paper demonstrates several effective strategies for manag-
ing logging residues during storage, with the purpose of mini-
mizing dry matter losses and increasing net energy content.
35.
Marchi E, Magagnotti N, Berretti L, Neri F, Spinelli R. Comparing
terrain and roadside chipping in Mediterranean pine salvage cuts.
Croat J For Eng. 2011;32:587–98.
36.
Spinelli R, De Francesco F, Eliasson L, Jessup E, Magagnotti N. An
agile chipper truck for space-constrained operations. Biomass
Bioenergy. 2015;81:137–43.
37.
Asikainen A. Simulation of stump chrushing and truck transport of
chips. Scand J For Res. 2010;25(3):245–50.
38.
Picchi G, Eliasson L. Chip truck utilization for a container handling
chipper truck when chipping logging residues and the effect of two
grapple types on chipping efficiency. Int J For Eng. 2015;26(3):
203–11.
39.
Eliasson L, Eriksson A, Mohtashami S. Analysis of factors affect-
ing productivity and costs for a high-performance chip supply sys-
tem. Appl Energ. 2017;185:497–505.
40.
Spinelli R, Di Gironimo G, Esposito G, Magagnotti N. Alternative
supply chains for logging residues under access constraints. Scand J
For Res. 2014;29:266–74.
41.
Manzone M, Spinelli R. Wood chipping performance of a modified
forager. Biomass Bioenergy. 2013;55:101–6.
42.
Björheden R. Comminution and transport -keys for more efficient
forest fuel supply systems. I: Thorsén, Å., Björheden, R. and
Eliasson, L. Efficient forest fuel supply systems. Composite report
from a four year R&D programme 2007–2010. 2011. Skogforsk,
Uppsala. ISBN: 978–91–977649-4-.
43.
Baker S, Westbrook M, Greene W. Evaluation of integrated har-
vesting systems in pine stands of the Southern United States.
Biomass Bioenergy. 2010;34:720–7.
44.
Belbo H, Talbot B. Systems analysis of ten supply chains for whole
tree chips. Forests. 2014;5:2084–105.
45.
Hanzelka N, Bolding C, Sullivan J, Barrett S. Productivity and costs
of utilizing small-diameter stems in a biomass-only harvest. Int J
For Eng. 2016;27(1):43–52.
46.
Harrill H, Han HS. Productivity and cost of integrated harvesting of
wood chips and sawlogs in stand conversion operations. Int J For
Res. 2012:893079 (Open Journal), 10p.
47.
Mitchell D, Gallagher T. Chipping whole trees for fuel chips: a
production study. South J Appl For. 2007;31:176–80.
48.
Talbot B, Suadicani K. Analysis of two simulated in-field chipping
and extraction systems in spruce thinnings. Biosyst Eng. 2005;91:
283–92.
49.
Läspä O, Nurmi J. Geometrical thinning in energy wood harvesting.
Int J For Eng. 2016;29(3):171–8.
50.
Spinelli R, Magagnotti N. Comparison of two harvesting systems
for the production of forest biomass from the thinning of Picea abies
plantations. Scand J For Res. 2010;25(1):69–77.
51.
Björheden R. Optimal point of comminution in the biomass supply
chain. In: Talbot B, editor. Proceedings of the Nordic-Baltic
Conference on Forest Operations, 23–25 September 2008
Copenhagen. Copenhagen: Danish Forest and Landscape; 2008.
p. 28–30.
52.
Angus-Hankin C, Stokes B, Twaddle A. The transportation of fuel-
wood from forest to facility. Biomass Bioenergy. 1995;9(1–5):191–
203.
53.• Belbo H, Vivestadt H. Predicting delay factors when chipping
wood at forest roadside landings. Int J For Eng. 2018;29(2):128–
37 A good analysis of chipper utilization and downtime that
confirms previous findings by Spinelli and Visser 2009, and
develops them further.
54.
Zamora-Cristales R, Boston K, Sessions J, Murphy G. Stochastic
simulation and optimization of mobile chipping and transport of
forest biomass from harvest residues. Silva Fennica. 2013;47:Id
937 22 p.
55.
Zamora-Cristales R, Boston K, Sessions J, Murphy G. Economic
impact of truck-machine interference in forest biomass recovery
operations on steep terrain. For Prod J. 2013;63(5/6):162–73.
Curr Forestry Rep

56.• Aalto M, Korpinen O, Loukola J, Ranta T. Achieving a smooth
flow of fuel deliveries by truck to a urban biomass power plant in
Helsinki, Finland - an agent based simulation. Int J For Eng.
2018;29(1):21–30 Using simple simulation techniques, the study
exemplifies the importance of logistics and planning when
building a wood chip supply chain.
57.
Spinelli R, Magagnotti N, Aminti G, De Francesco F, Lombardini
C. The effect of harvesting method on biomass retention and oper-
ational efficiency in low-value mountain forests. Eur J For Res.
2016;135:755–64.
58.
Ghaffariyan MR, Spinelli R, Magagnotti N, Brown M. Integrated
harvesting for conventional log and energy wood assortments: a
case study in a pine plantation in Western Australia. South
Forests. 2015;77:249–54.
59.
Peltola S, Kilpeläinen H, Asikainen A. Recovery rates of logging
residue harvesting in Norway spruce (Picea abies (L.) Karsten)
dominated stands. Biomass Bioenergy. 2011;35:1545–51.
60.
Spinelli R, Nati C, Magagnotti N. Recupero di biomassa. Alcune
utilizzazioni in boschi alpini. Sherwood. 2006;119:21–7.
61.
Nilsson B, Nilsson D, Thörnqvist T. Distribution and losses of
logging residues at clear-felled areas during extraction for
bioenergy: comparing dried- and fresh-stacked method. For.
2015;2015(6):4212–27.
62.
Thiffault E, Béchard A, Paré D, Allen D. Recovery rate of harvest
residues for bioenergy in boreal and temperate forests: a review.
WIREs Energ Environ. 2014. https://doi.org/10.1002/wene.157.23p.
63.
Spinelli R, Hartsough B. A survey of Italian chipping operations.
Biomass Bioenergy. 2001;21(6):433–44.
64.
Asikainen A. Discrete-event simulation of mechanised wood-
harvesting systems. 1995. Research notesr. 38 University of
Joensuu, faculty of forestry, Joensuu sid ISBN 951-708-357-2.
65.
Assirelli A, Civitarese V, Fanigliulo R, Pari L, Pochi D, Santangelo
E, et al. Effect of piece size and tree part on chipper performance.
Biomass Bioenergy. 2013;54:77–82.
66.
Bergström D, Di Fulvio F. Review of efficiencies in comminuting
forest fuels. Int J For Eng. 2019;30(1):45–55.
67.
Kuptz D, Hartmann H. The effect of raw material and machine
setting on chipping performance and fuel quality – a German case
study. Int J For Eng. 2015;26(1):60–70.
68.
Facello A, Cavallo E, Magagnotti N, Paletto G, Spinelli R. The
effect of chipper cut length on wood fuel processing performance.
Fuel Proc Technol. 2013;116:228–33.
69.
Spinelli R, Magagnotti N. The effect of raw material, cut length,
and chip discharge on the performance of an industrial chipper. For
Prod J. 2013;62:1–6.
70.
Facello A, Cavallo E, Magagnotti N, Paletto G, Spinelli R. The
effect of knife wear on chip quality and processing cost of chestnut
and locust fuel wood. Biomass Bioenergy. 2013;59:468–76.
71.
Grönlund Ö, Eliasson L. Effects of knife wear on the performance
and fuel consumption for a drum chipper. Proceedings of the 2013
Formec conference, September 30 to October 2, 2013. Stralsund,
Germany.
72.
Nati C, Eliasson L, Spinelli R. Effect of chipper type, biomass type
and blade wear on productivity, fuel consumption and product qual-
ity. Croat J For Eng. 2014;35(1):1–7.
73.
Spinelli R, Magagnotti N. Using disposable chipper knives to de-
crease wood fuel processing cost. Fuel Proc Technol. 2014;126:
415–9.
74.
Spinelli R, Magagnotti N. Determining long-term chipper usage,
productivity and fuel consumption. Biomass Bioenergy. 2014;66:
442–9.
75.
Spinelli R, Glushkov S, Markov I. Managing chipper knife wear to
increase chip quality and reduce chipping cost. Biomass Bioenergy.
2014;62:117–22.
76.
Eliasson L, von Hofsten H, Johannesson T, Spinelli R, Thierfelder
T. Effects of sieve size on chipper productivity, fuel consumption
and chip size distribution for open drum chippers. Croat J For Eng.
2015;36(1):11–8.
77.
Nati C, Spinelli R, Fabbri PG. Wood chips size distribution in
relation to blade wear and screen use. Biomass Bioenergy.
2010;34(5):583–7.
78.
Mola-Yudego B, Picchi G, Röser D, Spinelli R. Assessing chipper
productivity and operator effects in forest biomass operations. Silva
Fennica. 2015: 49 (5): art. no. 1342: 14 p.
79.
Röser D, Mola-Yudego B, Prinz R, Emer B, Sikanen L. Chipping
operations and efficiency in different operational environments.
Silva Fennica. 2012;46:275–86.
80.
Windisch J, Väätäinen K, Anttila P, Nivala M, Laitila J, Asikainen
A, et al. Discrete-event simulation of an information-based raw
material allocation process for increasing the efficiency of an ener-
gy wood supply chain. Appl Energ. 2015;140:315–23.
81.•• Spinelli R, de Arruda Moura AC. Productivity and Utilization
Benchmarks for Chain Flail Delimber-Debarkers-Chippers Used
in Fast-Growing Plantations. Croat J For Eng. 2019;40(1):65–80
One of the few multi-team long-term studies offering (among
other things) a clear indication about the importance of opera-
tor effects when estimating chipper productivity.
82.
Marques A, Rasinmäki J, Soares R, Amorim P. Planning woody
biomass supply in hot systems under variable chips energy content.
Biomass Bioenergy. 2018;108:265–77.
83.
Spinelli R, Visser R. Analyzing and estimating delays in wood
chipping operations. Biomass Bioenergy. 2009;33(3):429–33.
84.
Spinelli R, Magagnotti N. A tool for productivity and cost forecast-
ing of decentralised wood chipping. For Pol Econ. 2010;12(3):194–
8.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Curr Forestry Rep
