2019 Wildfire Season: An Overview
Southwestern US
june 2020

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
Authors: Michael Lynch and Alexander Evans
Reviewers: Barb Satink Wolfson, Southwest Fire Science Consortium, and Heidi Schewel, Coronado National Forest
 
Cover photo: The Woodbury Fire ignited on June 8, 2019, in the Superstition Wilderness on the Tonto National Forest near 
the Woodbury Trailhead. The fire burned in rugged terrain for the next 28 days, eventually growing to a total of 123,875 acres. 
This was the largest fire in Arizona or New Mexico during the 2019 season and the sixth-largest wildfire in Arizona history.
Please use the following citation when referring to this report: 
Lynch, M., and A. Evans. 2020. 2019 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern US. Special Report. Ecological 
Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 20 p.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.	
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the 
basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.
Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by 
reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes.  
The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines ecological restoration  
as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem  
with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to  
return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration 
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally 
dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, 
and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing 
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on 
reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—
and reestablishing productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests 
of the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, 
to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, 
and policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available 
science used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions 
managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop 
scientific information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through  
an inclusive and open process.

Table of Contents
Introduction.....................................................1
Wildfire Management...................................1
The 2019 Fire Season....................................1
Regional Context............................................2
Data Sources...................................................2
Woodbury Fire, Arizona................................4
Sheridan Fire, Arizona...................................5
Castle Fire, Arizona........................................6
Coldwater Fire, Arizona................................7
Gap Fire, Arizona............................................8
Ikes Fire, Arizona............................................9
Pine Lodge Fire, New Mexico....................10
Huck Fire, Arizona........................................11
Bronco Gulch, Arizona................................12
Rawhide Fire, New Mexico........................13
Maroon Fire, Arizona...................................14
Triple Nickle Fire, New Mexico...................15
Conclusion.........................................................16
Appendix I. Fire Statistics............................19

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
1
Introduction
Wildfire is part of the landscape in the Southwest. It can be a 
threat to lives and property, but it is also crucial to maintaining 
healthy ecosystems. Forests in the Southwest are adapted 
to fire and many trees can easily survive low-intensity fires 
burning along the forest floor. For example, ponderosa pine 
forests need regular, low-severity fires to remain healthy. Over 
decades without fire on the landscape, fuel loads accumulated 
and facilitated more intense, high-severity fire. Each fire is 
different, and while some burn in ways that increase ecosystem 
resilience, others burn with greater severity than forests are 
adapted to, killing even the toughest trees and threatening lives 
and homes. Weather, climate, vegetation type, fuel conditions, 
and topography all influence how an individual wildfire burns 
on the landscape and whether it has beneficial effects. Some 
fires will leave many unburned patches, creating a mosaic burn 
pattern, whereas others will burn more contiguously.
This report is the seventh in a series of annual overviews 
available from the Southwest Fire Science Consortium and the 
Ecological Restoration Institute. The goal of this overview is 
to provide a concise summary of the fire season and to facilitate 
comparison with past fires. It follows the format of past years’ 
overviews1 and describes the impacts of the 12 largest fires by 
acreage in Arizona and New Mexico in 2019 (all fires greater 
than 8,000 acres in the Southwest region). As in previous 
overviews, this report covers when each fire burned, fire 
management costs, vegetation types, previous burn footprints, 
and burn severity, where available. The conclusion section 
summarizes these same measures for the large wildfires in the 
region and touches on how these fires burned in proximity to 
human communities. 
Wildfire Management
Managers can approach each wildfire with multiple objectives 
that range from managing the wildfire for public safety to 
managing the fire to benefit natural resources. Federal wildland 
fire management policy states:
“Response to wildland fires is based on ecological, social and 
legal consequences of the fire. The circumstances under which a 
fire occurs, and the likely consequences on firefighter and public 
safety and welfare, natural and cultural resources, and, values to 
be protected, dictate the appropriate response to the fire.”2
A full range of wildland fire response strategies may be 
employed to meet these objectives, including containing, 
confining, or suppressing the wildfire. The national Incident 
Management Situation Report identifies the percentage of each 
fire managed with a monitor, confine, point zone protection, 
or suppression strategy. This report compiles these figures to 
better explain how fires were managed in 2019.
Wildland fire management strategies are based on a thoughtful 
and systematic risk-based approach that considers firefighter 
and public safety, cause of the wildfire, location, existing land 
management plans, availability of resources, values at risk, and 
social and economic factors. Federal policy dictates that “initial 
action on human-caused wildfire will be to suppress the fire.”3 
The same federal policy allows naturally ignited wildfires (or 
parts of wildfires) to be managed for resource benefits, such as 
mitigating fuel loads to reduce the risk of high-severity fire, 
enhancing wildlife habitat, improving watershed health, and 
reducing risk to neighboring communities. Though multiple 
strategies are used to manage wildfires, it is important to 
note that federal agencies only recognize two types of fires: 
prescribed fire (planned) and wildfire (unplanned).
The 2019 Fire Season 
In 2019, wildfire burned 459,864 acres in the Southwest 
(Arizona and New Mexico), which is only 73 percent of the 
average number of acres burned in the two states over the 
previous ten years. Arizona had more wildfire (379,979 acres) 
than its ten-year average, while New Mexico had less (79,885 
acres) than its ten-year average. Unplanned human ignitions 
made up 47 percent and 29 percent of wildfire in Arizona and 
New Mexico respectively. Arizona conducted more than double 
the number of acres of prescribed fire (207,059 acres) than the 
previous ten-year average, while New Mexico had only 62,734 
acres or 85 percent of the ten-year average of prescribed fire 
acres (Figure 1). 
In 2019, wildfires over 100 acres represented 96 percent of the 
total acreage burned by wildfire in Arizona and New Mexico. 
The Southwest Coordination Center recorded the strategies 
managers employed for these fires. Of the 440,064 acres of 
wildfire for which a strategy is recorded in the Southwest 
2	 Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy 
www.nifc.gov/policies/policies_documents/GIFWFMP.pdf
3	  National Interagency Coordination Center Wildland Fire Annual 
Reports www.predictiveservices.nifc.gov/intelligence/intelligence.htm
Figure 1. Wildfires and prescribed fires acres burned in Arizona and New Mexico, 2002 to 2019.3
1	  2018, 2017, 2016, 2015, 2014, and 2013 Wildfire Season: An Overview, South-
western U.S.  
https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/search/searchterm/wildfire%20
season%20overview/field/type/mode/exact/conn/and/order/date/ad/asc

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
2
Coordination Center’s data, 51 percent were managed 
primarily with a fire suppression strategy, while a combination 
of monitor, confine, and point zone protection strategies were 
used on the other 49 percent (215,096 acres). 
This overview focuses on the 12 largest fires, which include 
nine Arizona fires: Woodbury, Sheridan, Castle, Coldwater, 
Gap, Ikes, Huck, Bronco Gulch, and Maroon; and three New 
Mexico fires: Pine Lodge, Rawhide, and, Triple Nickle. The 
12 largest fires in this report represent 61 percent of the acres 
burned by wildfire in 2019 (Figure 2). 
Regional Context
Most of the Southwest experienced above normal precipitation 
during the 2018 to 2019 winter. Weak El Niño conditions 
led to an ample snowpack. Drought conditions covered the 
Southwest at the end of 2018 with a large area of exceptional 
drought in the Four Corners region. By the end of March 
2019, much of the region had escaped from drought conditions 
and the Four Corners area had improved two levels, from 
extreme to severe drought. For the rest of the season, only small 
parts of the region were in drought conditions. 
Even with a relatively wet winter, warm and dry conditions 
in the spring allowed fine fuels to begin to dry out. The 
composite statewide Energy Release Component (ERC) was 
below average for the first half of the year and then increased 
to near or slightly above normal values which rose concerns 
about a potentially active fire season due to above normal fine 
fuel loading (especially in the lower elevations). The ERC is 
an index that estimates potential available energy released per 
unit area in the flaming front of a fire based on the fuel model 
and live and dead fuel moistures. The ERC is often used to 
track seasonal fire danger focused on fuel loading, woody fuel 
moistures, and larger fuel moistures. (Lighter fuels have less 
influence and wind speed has no influence on ERC.) A graph 
of ERC shows the 2019 fire season (blue line) in comparison 
to the ten-year average (gray line) and ten-year maximums (red 
4	 Graphs produced by Charles Maxwell and Jay Ellington, Predictive 
Services Meteorologist, Southwest Coordination Center. For more 
information see http://gacc.nifc.gov/swcc//predictive/fuels_fire-danger/
nfdrs_charts/Areawide.htm 
Figure 2. Map indicating the location of the 12 large fires in 2019 analyzed in this report.
line) (Figure 3).4 In much of the Southwest, ERCs were below 
ten-year average for much of the fire season.
The 2019 monsoon season was one of the hottest and 
driest on record because of waning influences of El Niño, a 
decrease in tropical storm activity, lack of northward moisture 
intrusions, and the likely influence of wetter and cooler 
periods extending well through May. Moreover, 2019 was the 
third-warmest monsoon season since 1895. The dry and hot 
monsoon season brought drought conditions back to much of 
the region by the fall.
Data Sources
Management, Objectives, and Cost
The InciWeb website (inciweb.nwcg.gov) provides background 
information on most large fires such as location and start date. 
InciWeb is an interagency information management system 
designed to provide the public with a single source of incident-
related information. Because InciWeb only sporadically 
reports costs, Incident Status Summary (ICS-209) reports 
were collected to document suppression or management 
costs. These costs do not reflect any post-fire costs such as 
rehabilitation or soil stabilization. The cost data from each fire 
is collected in a final table at the end of the document. Incident 
Status Summaries also provide “strategic objectives,” which 
briefly describe the desired outcome for the incident, high-
level objectives, and in some cases strategic benefits. Though 
strategic objectives often change during a fire, review of the 
most common or persistent strategic objectives for each fire 
provides some insight into the overarching management goals. 
Perimeters
Boundaries for each fire were taken from the Geospatial Multi-
Agency Coordination (GeoMAC) archive of fire perimeter 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
3
maps (rmgsc.cr.usgs.gov/outgoing/GeoMAC/). GeoMAC 
also provides perimeters of fires dating back to 2000, which 
provided a historic context for 2019 fires. 
Vegetation 
Basic information about vegetation and topography of burned 
areas was available from LANDFIRE (www.landfire.gov). 
LANDFIRE provides nationally consistent, scientifically based 
maps of existing vegetation as well as Vegetation Condition 
Class (VCC). Vegetation Condition Class was formerly referred 
to as Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC). Vegetation 
Condition Class displays how existing vegetation has departed 
from estimated natural or historic condition. In the Southwest, 
this departure is generally due to fire exclusion, past logging and 
grazing and results in greater density of trees and less healthy 
conditions. Vegetation Condition Class is a useful metric 
because it integrates information on existing vegetation, historic 
vegetation, and fire regimes into one variable and has been used 
to help determine where to focus restoration efforts. The most 
current VCC maps (2014) were used in this report.
Soil Burn Severity
Soil burn severity maps provide Burned Area Emergency 
Response (BAER) teams a tool to quantify soil impacts 
and assess potential for post-fire erosion (https://fsapps.
nwcg.gov/baer/baer-imagery-support-data-download). In 
the immediate aftermath of a fire, BAER teams perform an 
emergency assessment of post-fire soil conditions based on a 
combination of field observations and remote sensing change 
detection products derived from the differenced Normalized 
Burn Ratio (dNBR). The dNBR measures change in the ratio 
of near infrared reflected by healthy green vegetation to the 
shortwave infrared reflected by bare soil and rock. Most soil 
burn severity maps have four classes: high, moderate, low, and 
unburned; however, some maps combine the last two categories 
into a “low/unchanged” category. The distribution of soil burn 
severity is included in the individual fire discussions (where 
available) as well as in the final summary table.
Figure 3. Energy release component (ERC) 
index for the 2019 fire season in Arizona New 
Mexico. Note the elevated ERCs at the start 
of the Woodbury (black circle) and around 
the time of the Castle and Bronco Gulch Fires 
(black triangle).
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
(RAVG) maps estimate canopy mortality (https://fsapps.
nwcg.gov/ravg/). The USDA Forest Service Remote 
Sensing Applications Center provides RAVG analysis as a 
first approximation of areas that may require reforestation 
treatments because of canopy killed by high-severity fire. 
RAVG maps are created for wildfires that burn greater than 
1,000 acres of wooded Forest Service land or fires for which 
it is requested. The maps are produced by measuring the 
change between a satellite image before and immediately 
after a wildfire using an algorithm called relative differenced 
Normalized Burn Ratio (RdNBR), which is sensitive to 
vegetation mortality resulting from the wildfire event. The 
RdNBR is derived directly from the dNBR but is more 
sensitive to vegetation mortality than the dNBR. 
While soil burn severity maps and RAVG canopy mortality 
maps use similar satellite change detection methods, they 
measure fundamentally different forest attributes. In many 
areas, canopy mortality and soil burn severity patterns are 
similar. However, in some vegetation types, such as chaparral or 
grass, it is possible for a fire to cause complete canopy mortality 
with little effect on soils. 
Caveats
There are important caveats for all data used in this summary. 
First, the fire information presented here was taken from 
official sources between December 2019 and February 
2020 and may not include updates or revisions. Second, the 
geospatial data used to generate the maps and tables are also 
based on the best available information, however these data 
contain errors and uncertainties. For example, the remote 
sensing data used in all these datasets can include errors 
introduced during collection, processing, and interpretation. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
4
Woodbury Fire, Arizona
The Woodbury Fire ignited on June 8, 2019, in the 
Superstition Wilderness on the Tonto National Forest near 
the Woodbury Trailhead. The fire burned in rugged terrain 
for the next 28 days, eventually growing to a total of 123,875 
acres. This was the largest fire in Arizona or New Mexico 
during the 2019 season and the sixth-largest wildfire in 
Arizona history. The Woodbury Fire accounted for 33 percent 
of the wildfire acres in Arizona in 2019. Managers working 
on the fire opted to use a combination of suppression (70 
percent) and monitor/point zone protection (30 percent) 
strategies. This approach was chosen for firefighter and public 
safety while protecting values, including the Pinto Valley and 
Carlotta mining infrastructure, Roosevelt and Horse Mesa 
Hydropower Dams, Silver King Substation, 500kv and 115kv 
power lines that supply electricity to metropolitan Phoenix, 
the Top of the World subdivision, commercial structures, 
ranches, riparian waterways, and threatened and endangered 
species in the Sonoran Desert ecosystem. Other protection 
priorities included the Tonto National Monument. During 
the fire, National Park Service archeologists and firefighters 
were able to cover the Upper and Lower Cliff Dwellings 
with fire retardant wrapping, which successfully protected the 
700-year-old wood within. 
Twelve responders were treated for illness or injury while 
working on the Woodbury Fire. No structures were lost 
but 440 citizens were asked to evacuate their homes, and 
closures were issued at several locations including the Tonto 
National Forest and Tonto National Monument. Arizona State 
Highways 88 and 188 were closed during the fire in addition to 
several smaller roads. Wildfire management cost $25 million, 
or about $202 per acre. 
Figure 4. RAVG canopy mortality in the Woodbury Fire burn area.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The primary vegetation types included chaparral (44 percent), 
scrub (25 percent) and piñon-juniper (18 percent). Although 
LANDFIRE classified only three percent of the burned area as 
grass, the Incident Status Summary and several other resources 
cited that a primary factor which led to the immense size of this 
fire was abundant, fully-cured, invasive, and native grasses present 
at all elevations in nearly all habitat types. These resources also 
cited extreme temperatures over 100 degrees Fahrenheit and a 
delayed monsoon season as contributing factors to its size. 
The Woodbury Fire reburned all 1,150 acres of the 2017 
Davis Fire in addition to the 2013 Pinion Fire (174 acres) and 
the 2012 Woodbury Fire (300 acres). It shared a two-mile 
perimeter with the 650 Fire (2011). Arizona State Highway 
188 served as a 12.25-mile perimeter to the north while State 
Highway 88 served as an 8.5-mile edge to the west. 
All the vegetation within the Woodbury Fire had low (78 percent) 
or moderate (20 percent) departure from historic conditions 
according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis. The other two percent of the burn area were water or 
barren lands to which vegetation departure cannot be measured.
Fire Severity
The RAVG analysis indicates that roughly one-third of the 
area had less than 25 percent canopy mortality, roughly another 
third had 25 to 90 percent mortality, and nearly another third 
had more than 90 percent mortality (Figure 4). The soil burn 
severity analysis revealed a slightly different result. More 
than 75 percent of the area was classified as low-severity (53 
percent) or unburned/undetected (22 percent) and none of the 
area was classified as high soil burn severity. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
5
Sheridan Fire, Arizona
The 21,500-acre Sheridan Fire was reported on August 5 on 
the Prescott National Forest 20 miles northwest of Prescott, 
Arizona. Some point zone protection strategies were used early 
in the fire but management chose to use a monitor approach 
as the primary strategy on this naturally ignited fire to provide 
for firefighter and public safety and restore fire to its natural 
role in piñon-juniper, ponderosa pine, and chaparral vegetation 
types. This created areas of moderate- to high-severity fire on 
mesa tops and hillsides and low-severity fire within drainage 
bottoms. Success of this approach was defined as reducing 
future risk to the ecosystem. No injuries or structures were 
reportedly damaged as part of the Sheridan Fire; however, fire 
related area closures were in effect around the Chino Valley 
Ranger District. The fire burned for 73 days into mid-October 
and cost $4.2 million to manage, or about $195 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
Roughly 40 percent (8,200 acres) of the area burned in the 
Sheridan Fire had been burned in the preceding two fire 
seasons. Nearly 1,400 of these acres were burned in three 
consecutive years as parts of the 2017 Hyde Fire, 2018 Stubbs 
Fire, and the 2019 Sheridan Fire. Despite three consecutive 
years of fire, no other fires occurred in this area over the last 
ten years. The Sheridan Fire mainly burned through piñon-
juniper (56 percent), ponderosa pine (17 percent), chaparral (13 
percent), and conifer-oak (8 percent) but also affected small 
areas of riparian forest, grass, and scrub. The Incident Status 
Summary indicated areas that had not burned in recent fires 
were characterized by decadent brush, which likely enhanced 
the fire’s size and intensity. The majority (87 percent) of the 
Sheridan Fire was identified as low departure from historic 
conditions but almost 2,500 acres (11 percent) was identified 
as high departure, according to LANDFIRE Vegetation 
Condition Class analysis. 
Fire Severity
Nearly 50 percent (10,001 acres) of the Sheridan Fire 
experienced greater than 90 percent canopy mortality, 
according to the RAVG analysis (Figure 5). This included 
nearly all the southern and western spurs of the fire. Other 
areas had a mosaic of canopy mortality and 35 percent (7,500 
acres) exhibited no canopy mortality. The soil burn severity 
analysis showed a similar spatial distribution of severity areas 
(Figure 6). However, many of the areas that showed moderate 
soil burn severity had very high (greater than 90 percent) 
canopy mortality.
Figure 5. Canopy mortality map for the Sheridan Fire.
Figure 6. Soil Burn Severity map of the Sheridan Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
6
percent). Fifty-four percent of the Castle Fire was classified as 
high departure from historic vegetation conditions based on 
the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. The 
area affected by the Castle Fire had not burned in any of the 
previous ten fire seasons, nor did it share any perimeters with 
previous fires. Past fires near the Castle Fire include the 2015 
Burnt Complex Fire which burned approximately 4,000 acres a 
few miles to the west.
Fire Severity
Ninety-eight percent of the area was in low (68 percent) or 
unburned/undetected (30 percent) soil burn severity categories 
(Figure 7). None of the Castle Fire was classified as high soil 
burn severity. RAVG data were not available.
Castle Fire, Arizona
The Castle Fire burned for 62 days, from July 12 to September 
12, and covered 19,368 acres in Coconino County, Arizona. 
This fire was located 11 miles south of Jacob Lake and three 
miles west of Arizona State Highway 67 near Oquer Canyon 
on the Kaibab National Forest. Fire managers chose to use a 
combination of confine (80 percent), monitor (10 percent), 
and point zone protection (ten percent) strategies to allow this 
naturally ignited fire to burn across the landscape. The fire 
intensity was mostly low to moderate, with occasional flare-
ups in dense pockets of fuel. The Incident Status Summary 
indicated one injured responder with no further detail. There 
were no reported civilian injuries, evacuations, or damaged 
structures. The cost for managing the Castle Fire was $5.95 
million, or about $307 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Castle Fire burned primarily through ponderosa pine 
(38 percent), mixed conifer (33 percent), and conifer oak (18 
Figure 7. Soil burn severity map of the Castle Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
7
perimeters lie entirely within the Coldwater Fire. The 2018 
Deer Fire (765 acres) served as a 4.25-mile boundary in the 
southeastern part of the fire while the 2010 Ranger Fire (6,400 
acres) created a 1.4-mile edge farther north. Other area fires 
that did not overlap or share a boundary included the 2016 
Pivot Rock Fire (5,968 acres) and the 2011 Scout Fire (809 
acres). Thirty-four percent of the Coldwater Fire had a high 
departure from historic vegetation conditions based on the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. 
Fire Severity
Fire severity was generally low in the Coldwater Fire. RAVG 
maps identified nearly all the area as zero (71 percent) or less 
than 25 percent canopy mortality (26 percent). Less than 
one percent (142 acres) experienced greater than 90 percent 
mortality (Figure 8). These canopy mortality rates are far lower 
than many of the other fires in 2019 but nearly all of the area 
affected was ponderosa pine or mixed conifer, which tend to 
require a much more intense fire to induce canopy mortality 
than fires in grass, chaparral, and other vegetation types. This 
difference is highlighted in a comparison to the soil burn 
severity analysis. This analysis also showed most of the fire had 
low-severity; 76 percent low and 20 percent undetected. While 
some fires show a discrepancy between the canopy mortality 
and the soil burn severity it is worth noting that the majority of 
this fire had low soil severity and zero canopy mortality.  
Coldwater Fire, Arizona
Lighting started the Coldwater Fire on May 30 and it burned 
for the next 35 days, encompassing 16,790 acres south of 
Happy Jack, Arizona on the Coconino National Forest. Fire 
managers started with a monitor approach and transitioned 
to a 50/50 split of point zone protection and full suppression 
as the fire expanded toward Arizona State Highway 87. State 
Highway 87 eventually served as the western boundary for 
about 8.5 miles of the fire. Fire managers eventually chose 
to use a 100 percent suppression approach to protect the 
identified values and infrastructure from adverse fire effects 
while ensuring public and firefighter safety. The planned end 
state was to have fire along all control lines with mixed severity 
areas in the interior. They also sought to maintain low to 
moderate fire severity in any Mexican spotted owl habitat and 
to protect the City of Payson’s watershed. Fourteen structures 
were threatened but none were damaged or destroyed by 
the Coldwater Fire. Three minor injuries were reported for 
responders during the fire. Management of the wildfire cost 
$1.5 million, or $89 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The area affected by the Coldwater Fire was predominantly 
ponderosa pine (88 percent) with some mixed conifer (5 
percent) and riparian forest (4 percent). Several other fires 
have burned in this area over the last ten years. The 2011 Kehi 
Fire (187 acres) and the 2009 Independence Fire (1,372 acres) 
Figure 8. RAVG canopy mortality in the Coldwater Fire. Note that Arizona State Highway 87 served as the western boundary for the 
Coldwater Fire

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
8
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Gap Fire shared a 1.4-mile boundary with the 2012 
Hooker Fire (1,981 acres). Otherwise the area affected by the 
Gap Fire had not burned in the previous ten years, nor had 
any of the surrounding landscape. Most of the Gap Fire was 
scrub (72 percent) with lesser components of chaparral (11 
percent) and grass (9 percent). Eighty-six percent of the Gap 
Fire showed low departure from historic vegetation conditions 
according to LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis 
(Figure 9). 
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Gap Fire. 
Gap Fire, Arizona
The Gap Fire was reported on June 25 about ten miles 
northeast of Bylas, Arizona on the San Carlos Apache 
Reservation near Point of Pines and Hooker Gap. Fire 
managers chose to use a full suppression approach and go as 
directly as possible at the fire given the extreme fire weather 
conditions and the amount of arson fires, which posed a threat 
to the communities and surrounding values at risk in the area 
of Bylas and San Carlos/Peridot. Managers used Minimum 
Impact Suppression Tactics (MIST) in the Bureau of Land 
Management (BLM) Fishhooks Wilderness, which called for 
the minimum amount of forces necessary to effectively achieve 
the fire management protection objectives. Due to the extreme 
fire conditions and wind-driven runs, the fire grew to nearly 
13,000 acres in the first day and covered more than 16,000 
acres in the nine days it burned in late-June and early-July. No 
injuries or damaged structures were reported. The wildfire cost 
$1.25 million to manage, or about $75 per acre.
Figure 9. Vegetation Condition Class in the Gap Fire which is a LANDFIRE metric that gives a departure from historic vegetation 
conditions ranging from low to high. Most of the Gap Fire was low departure.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
9
high departure from historic vegetation conditions based on 
the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. The 
Ikes Fire reburned 1,770 acres of the 2018 Stina Fire (2,100 
acres) and shared three quarters of a mile perimeter with the 
2014 Quaking Fire. 
Fire Severity
Nearly 90 percent (14,500 acres) of the Ikes Fire displayed 
zero (68 percent) or less than 25 percent (21 percent) canopy 
mortality according to the RAVG analysis (Figure 10). The 
roughly 1,000 acres that experienced more than 90 percent 
canopy mortality were concentrated in the piñon-juniper and 
other short-stature vegetation types. Soil burn severity data 
were only available for a 6,989-acre section of the Ikes Fire. 
This was represented in the southeastern portion of the Ikes 
Fire primarily south of the 2018 Stina Fire. Soil burn severity 
data in this section indicated primarily low (45 percent) or 
undetected (45 percent) severity.  
Ikes Fire, Arizona
The Ikes Fire burned for 84 days, from July 25 to October 17, 
and covered 16,400 acres in Coconino County, Arizona. Fire 
managers chose to use a combination of confine (80 percent) 
and monitor (20 percent) strategies to allow this naturally 
ignited fire to burn across the planning area from where it 
started near Swamp Point in the Kaibab National Forest and 
into the northern part of Grand Canyon National Park. No 
structures were damaged or destroyed in this remote fire. Most 
services to the North Rim of the Grand Canyon remained 
open throughout this period with only local closures and 
occasional smoke issues on Arizona State Highway 67. The 
Ikes Fire cost $4.5 million to manage, or $274 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Ikes Fire burned through primarily ponderosa pine 
(56 percent), mixed conifer (21 percent), and piñon-
juniper (7 percent) with lesser components of several other 
vegetation types. Sixty-one percent of the Ikes Fire had a 
Figure 10. RAVG Canopy Mortality within the Ikes Fire perimeter. Grand Canyon National Park is shown in light green.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
10
Pine Lodge Fire, New Mexico
The Pine Lodge Fire started from an unknown cause on June 
19, 2019 in the Smokey Bear Ranger District of the Lincoln 
National Forest approximately five miles northwest of Arabella, 
New Mexico. The fire burned for 30 days across roughly 
15,000 acres. The Pine Lodge Fire burned in rugged terrain 
within the Capitan Mountains Wilderness Area, which created 
a series of operational challenges around access for firefighters 
and long travel times. Managers used a values-driven strategy 
that incorporated a mix of tactics (direct and indirect) when 
and where the probability of success was high and the risk 
was acceptable in relationship to the values. This meant that 
while the management strategy for this fire was designated as 
full suppression, it was implemented in different ways across 
the fire. Suppression efforts were more active outside the 
wilderness with a full suppression strategy using direct and 
indirect tactics while confine/contain and MIST were used 
inside the designated wilderness area. The Pine Lodge Fire 
destroyed three residences and four responders reported injuries 
or illness. The cost to manage the fire was $8 million, or about 
$532 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Pine Lodge Fire burned through a mix of piñon-juniper 
(39 percent), ponderosa pine (29 percent), mixed conifer (15 
percent), and riparian forest (10 percent). The area affected 
by the Pine Lodge Fire had not burned in the last ten years; 
however, the Incident Status Summary identified significant 
fire management challenges due to heavy dead-and-down fuels 
at all elevations and in all fuel types resulting from the 2004 
Peppin Fire. The Pine Lodge Fire did share a nearly two-
mile boundary with the 2017 Seven Cabins Fire. Ninety-four 
percent of the vegetation within the Pine Lodge Fire had high 
(58 percent) or moderate (36 percent) departure from historic 
conditions according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition 
Class analysis. 
Fire Severity
A quarter of the Pine Lodge Fire experienced no canopy 
mortality with an additional 24 percent analyzed as less than 
25 percent canopy mortality (Figure 11). There were also 
areas of very high canopy mortality with more than 3,100 
acres (21 percent) experiencing greater than 90 percent 
canopy mortality. Unlike some other fires in this report where 
the highest level of canopy mortality is concentrated in the 
lower statured vegetation, nearly 900 acres of the highest 
canopy mortality class was ponderosa pine in the Pine Lodge 
Fire. The soil burn severity data underscored the RAVG data 
showing more than 6,500 acres of the Pine Lodge Fire had 
a moderate soil burn severity. Although only 290 acres were 
designated as high-severity.  
Figure 11. RAVG canopy mortality in the Pine Lodge Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 11
Huck Fire, Arizona
The Huck Fire burned for sixteen days, from July 23 to August 
8, about five miles northeast of San Carlos on the San Carlos 
Apache Indian Reservation in Gila County, Arizona. This 
naturally ignited fire burned approximately 11,750 acres of scrub/
chaparral. Fire managers primarily chose a confine approach to 
keep the fire South of the San Carlos River Drainage and North 
of Huckberry Creek and Gila County Road 8 utilizing existing 
roads and natural features to allow the fire to achieve multiple 
resource benefits. No injuries, structural damage, or evacuations 
were reported for this fire. Management of the Huck Fire cost 
$500,000, or about $42 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The majority of the Huck Fire burned through scrub (55 
percent), chaparral (31 percent), and grass (12 percent). 
Nearly 60 percent of the vegetation within the Huck Fire 
was classified as low departure from historic conditions 
according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis (Figure 12). The area affected by the Huck Fire had 
not burned in the last ten years, but the area saw two large 
fires in 2019 with the Bronco Gulch Fire burning nearby. The 
final perimeters of the Bronco Gulch and Huck Fires were 
separated by less than a mile. 
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Huck Fire. 
Figure 12. Vegetation Condition Class in the Huck Fire which is a LANDFIRE metric that gives a departure from historic vegetation 
conditions ranging from low to high. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
12
Bronco Gulch, Arizona
The Bronco Gulch Fire burned 10,760 acres during a 13-day 
stretch (July 15–28), approximately sixteen miles northeast 
of San Carlos on the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation 
in Graham County, Arizona. Fire managers chose a point 
zone protection approach on this lightning-caused fire using 
naturally occurring features such as roads, and washes. In 
addition to firefighter and public safety, the fire managers 
hoped to restore natural fire regimes to the area to control 
cholla cactus and promote endemic grasses used for livestock 
grazing. No injuries, structural damage, or evacuations were 
reported for this fire. Management of the Bronco Gulch Fire 
cost $380,000, or $35 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Bronco Gulch Fire burned primarily through scrub 
(42 percent), chaparral (38 percent), and piñon-juniper (13 
percent), with small amounts of grass, riparian, and non-
vegetated areas. The area affected by the Bronco Gulch Fire 
had not been burned in the last ten years, although there were 
several other fires in the area including a 1.5-mile shared 
perimeter with the 2014 Skunk Fire (73,600 acres). Around the 
time the Bronco Gulch Fire was wrapping up, another large fire 
(Huck) was starting nearby. The final perimeters of the Bronco 
Gulch and Huck Fires were separated by less than a mile. 
Eighty percent of the vegetation within the Bronco Gulch Fire 
perimeter had low departure from historic conditions according 
to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis 
(Figure 13). None of the area was classified as high departure.
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Bronco Gulch Fire. 
Figure 13. Vegetation Condition Class in the Bronco Gulch Fire which is a LANDFIRE metric that gives a departure from historic 
vegetation conditions ranging from low to high. Most of the Bronco Gulch Fire was low departure.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 13
Rawhide Fire, New Mexico
The Rawhide Fire was reported on August 8 in the Guadalupe 
Ranger District of the Lincoln National Forest. The fire burned 
nearly 10,000 acres over the next 20 days around the Rawhide 
Canyon near the unincorporated community of Queen in 
Eddy County, New Mexico. Fire managers used a monitor and 
confine strategy to keep the fire within a designated area. No 
injuries, structural damage, or evacuations were reported for 
this fire. The Rawhide Fire cost $500,000 to manage, or about 
$50 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
Most of the area affected by the Rawhide Fire was grass (53 
percent), scrub (22 percent) or piñon-juniper (19 percent) 
with small amounts of chaparral and riparian vegetation. The 
Rawhide Fire reburned all the 2016 Lawyer Fire (587 acres) 
footprint. Several other large-scale fires burned in the vicinity 
of the Rawhide Fire including the 2011 Lookout Complex 
(18,820 acres) to the north and the 2011 Last Chance Fire 
(53,342 acres) to the south. The Kellar Fire burned 5,750 
acres 4.5 miles south of the Rawhide Fire in 2018. Seventy-
one percent of the vegetation within the Rawhide Fire was 
classified as medium departure from historic conditions in the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis.
Fire Severity
Nearly 60 percent (5,900 acres) of the Rawhide Fire displayed 
zero canopy mortality in the RAVG analysis (Figure 14). 
This is surprising given the amount of grass and other low-
stature vegetation types within the Rawhide perimeter. In fact, 
nearly 60 percent (3,080 acres) of the grass vegetation type 
was reported as no canopy mortality. Only 175 acres across 
all vegetation types were identified as having greater than 75 
percent canopy mortality. Soil burn severity data were not 
available for the Rawhide Fire.
Figure 14. RAVG canopy mortality in the Rawhide Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
14
Maroon Fire, Arizona
Lightning ignited the Maroon Fire in the Maroon Crater 
approximately 13 miles northeast of Flagstaff and seven miles 
east of US Highway 89. The fire started on May 16 and burned 
for the next 38 days in an area consisting of cinders, pine, 
juniper, grass, and brush. The Maroon Fire required a unique 
approach as the area surrounding the Maroon Crater included 
a World War II artillery training zone with the potential for 
unexploded ordnance, as well as public utilities infrastructure 
and homes several miles northeast of the fire. Management of 
the Maroon Fire was described as a full suppression strategy 
but was unique due to the unexploded ordnance and the fire 
was allowed to spread naturally through most of the planning 
area. Coconino National Forest officials kept heavy equipment 
and personnel out of the 565-acre area of Maroon Crater 
with unexploded ordnance, which prevented them from 
conducting ignitions by hand. Instead, managers dropped 
small detonation devices from a drone over the former range. 
It is thought to be the first-ever use of an unmanned aircraft 
over an active wildfire in Region 3. Fire managers did not 
find any unexploded ordnance, but live weapons could still 
be in the area and the US Army Corps of Engineers plans to 
remove unexploded ordnance from Maroon Crater in 2020. 
This operation is projected to be greatly aided by the burn, as 
ordnance that would have otherwise not been visible below the 
grass and forest fuels should now be exposed.
In addition to the unexploded ordnance issue, the nature of the 
cinder hills area is unique and far different from all other areas 
of the Coconino National Forest in relation to conditions and 
fire behavior. Due to the porous soil (small-diameter cinders) 
and extremely windy conditions, large amounts of combustible 
material were buried by wind-blown cinders. This created an 
environment that fire managers monitored for weeks before it 
finally consumed all the buried combustible material. 
No injuries, structural damage, or evacuations were reported for 
this fire. Management of the Maroon Fire cost $1.75 million, 
or $203 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Maroon Fire mainly burned through piñon-juniper (68 
percent) and ponderosa pine (18 percent) with scattered grass, 
scrub, and non-vegetated areas. Vegetated areas within the 
Maroon Fire were identified as moderate (59 percent) or low 
(38 percent) departure from historic conditions, according to the 
Vegetation Condition Class analysis. The other four percent of 
the burn area was classified as barren land on which vegetation 
departure cannot be measured. The area affected by the Maroon 
Fire had not burned in the preceding ten fire seasons. 
Fire Severity
Nearly 100 percent (8,530 acres) of the Maroon Fire showed 
no (6,400 acres) or limited (2,130 acres) canopy mortality 
according to the RAVG analysis (Figure 15). Soil burn severity 
data were not available for the Maroon Fire. 
Figure 15. RAVG canopy mortality in the Maroon Fire burn area.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 15
Triple Nickle Fire, New Mexico
The Triple Nickle Fire burned 8,063 acres northeast of Grants 
in the San Mateo Mountains near Mount Taylor in McKinley 
County, New Mexico. This naturally ignited fire started on 
August 8 and burned for the next 33 days on the Mt. Taylor 
Ranger District of the Cibola National Forest. Fire managers 
used a confine strategy on the fire, with goals of increasing 
wildlife benefits and reducing the threat of future catastrophic 
fires while continuing to protect the public, historical and 
cultural resource, threatened and endangered species, and range 
infrastructure. No injuries, structural damage, or evacuations 
were reported for this fire. The Triple Nickle Fire cost $2 
million to manage, or $248 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Triple Nickle Fire primarily burned in ponderosa pine (75 
percent) and piñon-juniper (16 percent) with small amounts 
of riparian and scrub vegetation. There were no documented 
fires in the area over the last ten years. One hundred 
percent of the vegetation within the Triple Nickle Fire had 
moderate departure from historic conditions according to the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis.
Fire Severity
The RAVG analysis showed relatively little canopy mortality 
across the Triple Nickle Fire, with 54 percent (4,350 acres) 
having no detectible canopy mortality and another 41 percent 
(3,300 acres) having less than 25 percent mortality. Only about 
100 acres of ponderosa pine experienced canopy mortality 
greater than 75 percent. The soil burn severity data supported 
the RAVG data that the Triple Nickle Fire was predominately 
a low-severity fire with 98 percent designated low (64 percent) 
or unburned/undetected (34 percent). Only six acres were 
designated high-severity (Figure 16).  
Figure 16. Soil Burn Severity data for the Triple Nickle Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
16
Conclusion
This report covers the 12 largest wildfires in Arizona and New 
Mexico. These 12 wildfires represented sixty percent of all acres 
burned in 2019. Chaparral was the most commonly burned 
vegetation type in the 12 fires covered in this report, however, 
more than 81 percent of the chaparral was in the Woodbury 
Fire (Figure 17). Far more acres of chaparral, scrub, and piñon-
juniper were burned in the largest wildfires of 2019 than 2018, 
while fewer acres of grassland, ponderosa pine, and mixed 
conifer burned. The large fires in the 2018 analysis burned 
41,000 more acres of ponderosa pine than the fires included in 
the 2019 analysis. 
Soil burn severity data were available for seven of the 12 large 
fires analzyed in this report, covering nearly 220,000 acres (84 
percent of acres in report). Seventy-eight percent of this area 
was classified as low or undetectable soil burn severity (Figure 
18). Only one percent of the acres for which soil burn severity 
data were available displayed high soil burn severity. Nearly all 
of these high-severity acres were in the Sheridan Fire.
Figure 17. Summary of acres burned in the largest fires by vegetation type. 
Figure 18. Summary of acres burned by soil burn severity class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 17
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
(RAVG) data were available for eight of the 12 large fires 
covered in this report (Figure 19). Of these 220,000 acres, 
nearly 35 percent (75,000 acres) showed no detectable 
canopy mortality while more than 50,000 acres (23 percent) 
showed greater than 90 percent mortality. The Woodbury 
and Sheridan fires account for more than 90 percent of the 
highest canopy mortality areas. In the Woodbury Fire, this 
highest canopy mortality class was primarily in chaparral 
and piñon-juniper with relatively low associated soil burn 
severity classifications. Much of the high canopy mortality 
in the Sheridan Fire was also found in piñon-juniper but 
included much more ponderosa pine and had a much higher 
soil burn severity classification. Canopy mortality in these 
ponderosa pine communities can be more ecologically 
significant than fires that mainly burn in vegetation such as 
grass, scrub, and chaparral. 
Only 14 percent of the area in this analysis was highly 
departed from historic conditions based on the LANDFIRE 
Vegetation Condition Class analysis (Figure 20). It is 
reasonable to assume that the high proportions of wildfire 
burning with low-severity and the high portion of the area 
Figure 19. Summary of acres burned by canopy mortality class.
burned close to the historic condition are related. Most of the 
39,500 high-departure acres were isolated to four fires: Castle 
(26 percent), Ikes (25 percent), Pine Lodge (22 percent) and 
Coldwater (16 percent). 
Human communities were not significantly affected by any 
of the largest fires of 2019. There certainly were localized 
impacts that should not be minimized, but only three structures 
were lost in these 12 fires and there were very few reported 
evacuations. In comparison, the 2018 Tinder Fire threatened 
more than 1,700 residences and required the evacuation of 300 
civilians. It eventually destroyed 33 residences and 63 minor 
structures. The 2018 Ute Park Fire led to the evacuation of 
nearly 3,500 civilians, consumed 14 buildings, and damaged 
critical power infrastructure. None of the 2019 fires listed in 
this report caused impacts of this scale. 
The cause of most fires in this report was lightning (naturally 
ignited) while three of the fires’ causes were undetermined at 
the time of this writing. 
The role of past fires was highly variable in the fires 
summarized in this report. Past fires played a role in most fires 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
18
 Figure 20. Summary of acres burned by vegetation condition class.
in this analysis and in many cases the edges of these ten-year-
old or less fire scars served as fire breaks with only limited 
overlap. Meanwhile the Sheridan Fire had areas that were 
burned in each of the preceding fire seasons. 
The 12 fires in this analysis cost nearly $56 million dollars to 
manage (with a range of strategies) for an average of $199 per 
acre. This was more than the average cost in our 2018 analysis 
but nearly half of the cost in the 2017 report. As noted above, 
managers identify the most appropriate strategy for each part of 
a wildfire to minimize threats and maximize positive outcomes. 
In 2019, managers used full suppression strategies on 49 
percent of the acres burned in the large fires summarized in this 
report. This matches well with the percentage for all wildfires 
over 100 acres for which strategy is recorded in the Southwest 
Coordination Center’s data: 51 percent were managed with a 
fire suppression strategy, while 49 percent were managed with 
other strategies. This suggests that managers were able to take 
advantage of relatively mild fire weather conditions throughout 
the 2019 fire season and naturally ignited wildfires in areas with 
low-to-moderate departure from historic conditions to benefit 
resources and increase community safety across the Southwest. 
While not every acre of wildfire managed with strategies other 
than full suppression burned at an ecologically appropriate 
severity, it is likely that a significant portion of the 215,096 
acres provided some benefit.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 19
General 
Vegetation Departure
Name
Acres
Cost
cost/ac
Low
Medium
High
Woodbury
 123,875 
 $25,000,000 
 $201.82 
78%
20%
0%
Sheridan
 21,510 
 $4,200,000 
 $195.26 
87%
2%
11%
Castle
 19,368 
 $5,950,000 
 $307.21 
21%
25%
54%
Coldwater
 16,790 
 $1,500,000 
 $89.34 
58%
4%
37%
Gap
 16,711 
 $1,250,000 
 $74.80 
86%
12%
2%
Ikes
 16,400 
 $4,500,000 
 $274.39 
21%
17%
61%
Pine Lodge
 15,044 
 $8,000,000 
 $531.77 
6%
36%
58%
Huck
 11,784 
 $500,000 
 $42.43 
59%
37%
3%
Bronco Gulch
 10,760 
 $380,000 
 $35.32 
80%
20%
0%
Rawhide
 9,951 
 $500,000 
 $50.25 
18%
71%
11%
Maroon
 8,602 
 $1,750,000 
 $203.44 
38%
59%
0%
Triple Nickle
 8,063 
 $2,000,000 
 $248.05 
0%
100%
0%
Appendix 1. Fire Statistics  
Soil Burn Severity
RAVG Canopy Mortality
Name
Unburned
Low
Moderate
High
0%
0-25%
26-50%
51-75%
76-90%
>90%
Woodbury
22%
53%
24%
0%
20%
14%
13%
15%
10%
29%
Sheridan
31%
20%
36%
13%
35%
8%
3%
4%
3%
47%
Castle
30%
68%
2%
0%
-
-
-
-
-
-
Coldwater
20%
76%
4%
0%
71%
26%
1%
1%
0%
1%
Gap
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Ikes
45%
54%
1%
0%
68%
21%
2%
2%
1%
6%
Pine Lodge
25%
28%
45%
2%
25%
24%
13%
11%
6%
21%
Huck
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Bronco Gulch
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Rawhide
-
-
-
-
59%
30%
6%
3%
1%
1%
Maroon
-
-
-
-
74%
25%
1%
0%
0%
0%
Triple Nickle
34%
64%
2%
0%
54%
41%
2%
1%
0%
1%

Ecological Restoration Institute
2019 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
20
Woodbury Fire, Arizona	
Woodbury Fire, Arizona	
Sheridan Fire, Arizona
Sheridan Fire, Arizona
Castle Fire, Arizona
Castle Fire, Arizona

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
