The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Managing for Resilience? 
 Implications of Resilience in Southwestern National Forests  
 
Introduction 
As unprecedented wildfires erupt across the western United States, a growing body of evidence 
shows that forest restoration can build resilience to disturbances in frequent-fire forests. Managing 
for resilience is a top priority in the US Forest Service’s 2012 Planning Rule. Despite the focus of 
resilience in the new rule and the term’s increasing appearance in planning, budgeting, and public 
relations documents, there is little direction on how to measure and manage for it. Resilience, and 
how to measure for it, is ambiguous in ecological literature and has a history of evolving definitions 
(Bone et al. 2016). To meet land management objectives, the use of resilience is dependent upon 
clear definitions, standards, and metrics.  
 
In this study, researchers conducted interviews with Forest Service managers and planners revising 
forest plans in the Southwestern Region (Region 3) to examine how resilience is interpreted and op-
erationalized as an agency strategy. Our findings revealed key considerations for using resilience as 
a management objective.   
 
Research Findings  
1)   Interviewees identified resilience as a management priority but had concerns over the 
term’s utility and context. Most definitions aligned with ecological resilience: the capacity of a 
system to retain key structures or functions following a disturbance. Engineering resilience 
(bouncing back to a prior state after a disturbance) and social-ecological resilience 
(incorporating feedback between human and non-human systems) were mentioned minimally.  
 
2)   Common barriers for translating resilience directives into action: 
• The scale of resilience: Inconsistent focus of resilience at the project or landscape level con-
strained its use. Over-emphasis on resilience to wildfire also caused issues. 
• Tensions with standards versus flexibility: Interviewees embraced latitude and adaptive 
management in the 2012 rule but found a lack of prescriptive standards makes resilience 
challenging to implement. 
• Future uncertainties: Interviewees found restoring ecosystem function to promote resilience 
while planning for future, changed landscapes conflicting.  
 
3)   Recommendations: 
• Interviewees favored the development of metrics to monitor resilience and having examples 
of its application in other forests. 
• Interviewees suggested interagency collaboration would be useful to coordinate the intent 
and use of resilience at a landscape scale.  
 
 
July 2020 

 
Management Implications 
• Resilience operates and must be considered at different scales of space and time.  
• In a broad sense, resilience can be a useful uniting concept between federal agency resource man-
agers and their stakeholders. However, to be operational in practice, prescriptive standards of re-
silience may be necessary. 
• Restoring lands to be resilient to climate change presents a difficult management paradox: Is re-
storing historic processes for resilience also meeting climate-change-resilience goals? Is a forest’s 
adaptive capacity to climate change considered 
resilience? 
• Resilience was most commonly defined as eco-
logical resilience, which may limit the concept’s 
full potential given managing forests in light of 
future climate requires consideration of interde-
pendencies in both natural and human systems.  
• It is unlikely to remove “resilience” from land 
management dialogue; thus, it is valuable to ex-
plore avenues to improve how the term is applied. 
We suggest that resource specialists and external 
partners collaborate to co-produce resilience 
knowledge and metrics to develop more effective 
approaches.  
 
 Research Needs 
• Future qualitative case studies in other ecosystems and/or with more staff specialty areas are 
needed to inform the role of resilience.  
• Future work examining metrics of resilience are needed for improving the use of resilience as a 
management objective.  
• Future questions include how to apply a co-produced strategy for resilience.  
 
Further Reading 
Bone, C., C. Moseley, K. Vinyeta, and R.P. Bixler. 2016. Employing resilience in the United States Forest Ser-
vice. Land Use Policy. 52: 430–438.  
Millar, C.I., N.L. Stephenson, and S.L. Stephens. 2007. Climate change and forests of the future: Managing in 
the face of uncertainty. Ecological Applications. 17(8): 2145–2151. 
Stephens, S.L., B.M. Collins, E. Biber, and P.Z. Fulé. 2016. U.S. federal fire and forest policy: emphasizing re-
silience in dry forests. Ecosphere. 7(11):1–19.  
Waltz, A.E.M., M.T. Stoddard, E.L. Kalies, J.D. Springer, D.W. Huffman, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2014. Ef-
fectiveness of fuel reduction treatments: Assessing metrics of forest resilience and wildfire severity after 
the Wallow Fire, AZ. Forest Ecology and Management. 334:43–52. 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Greiner, S.M., K.E. Grimm, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2020. Managing for resilience? Examining Management Impli-
cations of Resilience in Southwestern National Forests. Journal of Forestry, 118(4), 433–443. 
 
 
Contacts:  
Michelle Greiner, smg464@nau.edu 
Amy Waltz, Amy.Waltz@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded in part by NAU’s Henry Hooper Student Fund. 
Photo courtesy of USDA Forest Service 
