The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Regional Woody Biomass Supply Assessment for Northern Arizona 
 
By Patrick M. Rappold and Han-Sup Han 
Introduction 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University performed a woody biomass sup-
ply study for three locations across northern Arizona, which are being considered for an HM3, Inc. tor-
refaction processing facility. In this study, woody biomass refers to materials available for energy pro-
duction, including small-diameter (<5.9 in dbh) whole trees, residues left from sawlog tree processing, 
sawmill residues, and by-products from grassland restoration projects (Figures 1 and 2). Data sources 
used included timber cruise data provided by the USDA Forest Service, truck scaling data, and volume-
per-acre estimates published by TSS Consultants 
(2016).1 The bulk of the Forest Service data were 
associated with the request for proposals and com-
panion geospatial data for the Phase II contract of 
the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI). An 
HM3 manufacturing facility in Arizona was being 
considered in the following locations: 
1. Arizona Army National Guard Camp Navajo 
Ordinance Facility in Bellemont, AZ 
2. Garland Prairie Road in Williams, AZ 
3. Drake, AZ  
 
For each of the three locations listed above, a 
geospatial analysis using the ArcGIS Pro software 
(ver. 2.5.0) package from ESRI Inc. was conducted 
to determine Service Areas based upon driving time 
on various road types from each location. For the 
Garland Prairie and Drake locations, the one-way 
driving times were delineated into 30, 45, and 90-
minute intervals. Driving time delineations for the 
Camp Navajo location was done in 30, 45, and 60-
minute intervals. The differences in one-way driving 
time intervals was done in an attempt to meet the 
annual raw material supply needs of the HM3 torre-
faction processing facility, which was identified at 
320,000 green tons of woody biomass.  
 
     July 2020 
Figure 1. Forest residues left from a restoration thinning 
operation in northern Arizona, consisting of small-diameter 
trees, tree tops, branches, and wood chunks. 
Figure 2. Ponsse harvester felling juniper trees in a grass-
land restoration project, which can be a source of woody 
biomass for production of torrefaction energy products. 
1 Biomass Feedstock Supply Availability Assessment for Yavapai 
County. Sacramento, CA. 46 p.  

 
 
 
At the current time, timber harvest plans associated with the 4FRI project extend from 2019 to 
2023. When single or multiple contracts for the Phase II portion of the 4FRI project are awarded 
sometime in 2020, longer term projections for timber harvests on federal lands will possibly be easi-
er to identify. Overall, it is recommended that HM3 develop a raw material supply chain covering 
diverse woody biomass resources from Arizona State Trust Lands, Camp Navajo, other forest prod-
uct manufacturers such as sawmills, and privately-owned lands. This diversification will facilitate 
the greatest likelihood of a consistent supply of biomass. The recent injunction imposed against tim-
ber harvesting on federal forests in New Mexico and certain forests in Arizona illustrates the need 
for a diverse supply chain that is able to sustain policy changes. Figures 3, 4 and 5 show the Service 
Areas for three different biomass hauling times to each location.  
 
Figure 3. One-way Service Area Transportation Analysis from Camp Navajo 
Figure 4. One-way Service Area Transportation Analysis from Garland Prairie  

 
 
Juniper removed during grassland restoration and range improvement projects on privately owned 
lands can be a potential source of biomass for short periods when access to national forests is limited. The 
cost of harvesting and processing the juniper may potentially exceed the price point that HM3 is able to 
procure for the material and still operate profitably. In comparison to harvesting woody biomass from 
ponderosa pine forests, biomass recovery from juniper removal is often costly. The yield of juniper bio-
mass per acre is also lower than reported biomass yields generated during timber harvesting operations. It 
should also be noted that unlike ponderosa pine forests, juniper woodlands are typically not managed for 
the long-term sustainable production of wood fiber. Supplies of juniper biomass should be considered as 
part of a supply chain portfolio with the understanding of the inherent adverse factors outlined above.  
 
The three supply studies should be integrated into a higher-level supply chain analysis that in-
cludes on-the-ground validation of the figures presented. Numerous businesses that have expanded or are 
considering expanding their operations to Arizona have combined supply study reports and actual forest 
inventory processes as a due diligence to themselves and investors.  
 
The volume of available biomass presented in each report are also factored into how logging con-
tractors merchandise logs. Because of this, it is recommended that HM3 actively work with the businesses 
awarded Phase II 4FRI contracts to identify how to most cost-effectively secure the needed biomass vol-
umes to operate a HM3 facility at peak profitability. While the supply studies strive to present the best 
available information, long-term supplies of biomass increasingly depend upon unpredictable market con-
ditions and competition that may directly affect prices and supply.  
 
In terms of location, the Garland Prairie Road site currently has the greatest potential for HM3 to 
successfully develop infrastructure and have a long-term sustainable raw material supply. This is due in 
large part to the current mix of forest product companies established on Garland Prairie Road. By co-
locating with other forest product businesses, there is an opportunity to utilize by-products generated from 
manufacturing activities of nearby businesses. Operating within a business cluster also enables logging 
contractors to reduce transportation costs by delivering logs and biomass to a centralized location. The 
central wood terminal concept also has the potential to maximize the value of each log through on-site 
merchandising, which often is more efficient than in-woods merchandising. Currently, the Garland Prairie 
Road site lacks a key component—an established rail spur where material can be put directly on rail and 
shipped to international markets. Until an appropriately scaled rail spur becomes established, it is recom-
mended that HM3 diligently work to identify domestic markets for their product. The ever-increasing 
growth of Arizona’s population requires continued expansion of residential housing and multi-family 
housing development. A common denominator across all housing sectors is the need for concrete and ce-
ment. Marketing the HM3 coal substitute to cement manufacturers for their manufacturing process may 
enable a sustainable ramp up in HM3 operations until a rail spur is completed at the Garland Prairie site. 
Contact: Han-Sup Han, Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by USDA Forest Service Grant 2019-DG-11031600-048. 
Figure 5. One-way Service 
Area Transportation Analysis 
from Drake Cement 
