Developing and sustaining collaborative resilience 
in the face of change: 
A review of the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program projects
August, 2020
CFRI  - 2003

Colorado Forest Restoration Institute
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI) was established in 2005 as an application-oriented, science-based outreach 
and engagement organization hosted by the Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship and the Warner College 
of Natural Resources at Colorado State University. Along with centers at Northern Arizona University and New Mexico 
Highlands University, CFRI is one of three Institutes that make up the Southwest Ecological Restoration institutes, 
which were authorized by Congress through the Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act of 2004. We lead 
collaborations between researchers, managers, and stakeholders to develop, synthesize, and apply locally-relevant, actionable 
knowledge to inform forest management strategies and achieve wildfire hazard reduction goals in Colorado and the Interior 
West. Our work informs forest conditions assessments, management goals and objectives, monitoring plans, and adaptive 
management processes. We help reduce uncertainties and conflicts between managers and stakeholders, streamline planning 
processes, and enhance the effectiveness of forest management strategies to restore and enhance the resilience of forest 
ecosystems to wildfires. We complement and supplement the capacities of forest land managers to draw upon and apply 
locally-relevant scientific information to enhance the credibility of forest management plans. We are trusted to be rigorous 
and objective in integrating currently-available scientific information into forest management decision-making. We do this 
through collaborative partnerships involving researchers, forest land managers, interested and affected stakeholders, and 
communities. 
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute at Colorado State University receives financial support through the Cooperative 
and International Programs of the U.S. Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, under the Southwest Forest Health 
and Wildfire Prevention Act. In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution 
is prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. To file a complaint of 
discrimination, write: USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights Room 326-A, Whitten Building 1400 Independence Avenue, SW 
Washington, DC, 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice & TDD).
Colorado State University
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute
Department of Forest & Rangeland Stewardship
Mail Delivery 1472
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado 80523 
(970) 491-4685
cfri.colostate.edu
Publication date: August, 2020
Cover photo credit: Karina Puikkonen; Colorado Forest Restoration Institute
Other photo credits: Colorado Forest Restoration Institute
Authors: Beeton, Tyler A.1 , Cheng, Anthony S.1, Colavito, Melanie M.2
Contributors: Buchanan, Lindsay3 , Robertson, Jessica.3
1. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University, Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Fort Collins, CO
2. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ
3. USDA Forest Service, Forest Management, Range Management, and Vegetation Ecology staff, Washington Office
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Beeton, TA, Cheng, AS, and Colavito, MM (2020). Developing and sustaining collaborative resilience in the face of change: A 
review of the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program projects. CFRI-2003. https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/
uploads/sites/22/2020/08/CFLRP-Developing-and-sustaining-collaborative-resilience.pdf.
Colorado State University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.

Table of Contents
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 01
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 02
INTRODUCTION. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 04
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 05
FINDINGS. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 06
Spanning Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 06
Aligning Opportunities with Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Collaborative Formality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
External Changes can Disrupt Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
LESSONS LEARNED FOR COLLABORATIVE RESTORATION MOVING FORWARD. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16
Developing Adaptive Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Recommendation 1: Implement structures and/or practices to absorb inevitable changes in 
participants, confer institutional memory, and translate knowledge into practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Recommendation 2: Conduct vulnerability and adaptive capacity assessments of collaboratives  . . . . 20
Recommendation 3: Use scenario planning to explore future changes, tradeoffs in decision-making, 
and opportunities for adaptation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Recommendation 4: Congress should consider expanding the CFLRP funding mechanism to
 develop and sustain collaborative capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
CONCLUSION. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 24
REFERENCES. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25
APPENDICES. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25
Appendix 1: Roles of boundary spanning activities in supporting collaborative efforts . . . . . . 31
Appendix 2: Regional support and coordination for CFLRP work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Appendix 3: The multiple dimensions of trust and related activities to maintain or 
build trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Appendix 4: Positive and negative impacts of common stressors or changes experienced 
by collaboratives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Appendix 5: Responses to internal and external changes and barriers to response . . . . . . . . . . 39
Appendix 6: Example boundary objects from CFLRP projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Appendix 7: On the timing of involvement in the Environmental Analysis and 
Decision Making Phases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Appendix 8: Ecological disturbance can redistribute priorities, erode trust, 
and undermine collaborative effectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Appendix 9: Collaborative Resilience Worksheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        01
Preface and acknowledgements
The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) was an incubator for innovation and learning 
to improve forest management outcomes, advance applied research and multi-partner monitoring, and develop 
new collaborative governance structures.  The initial 10-year performance period for the CFLRP has come to an 
end, and the Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI) and other Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes 
are well-positioned to document lessons learned and transfer knowledge from the CFLRP to other collaborative 
forest restoration groups locally and across the nation. 
The white paper published herein was developed in response to a request from contributors from the USDA 
Forest Service Washington Office Jessica Robertson (Integrated Restoration Coordinator) and Lindsay Buchanan 
(CFLRP Program Coordinator) to document lessons learned and assess the applicability of CFLRP collaborative 
planning, implementation, monitoring, and adaptive management processes to improve CFLRP and non-CFLRP 
programs and projects.  In that vein, this white paper provides a synthesis of peer-review and gray literature on 
CFLRP projects and survey findings from two collaborative forest restoration cross-boundary workshops and a 
national CFLRP collaboration indicator survey to assess: 1) the factors that enabled and constrained collaboration; 
and 2) what factors contributed to the evolution, sustainability, and resilience of collaboratives through time. 
This white paper was made possible with a grant from the Forest Service, an agency of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, specifically an agreement (#19-DG-11031600-062) between the Southwestern Region and Colorado 
State University/CFRI. The white paper is published in partial fulfillment of deliverable #5 under Project 2 in 
CFRI’s fiscal year 2019 work plan. 
The authors would like to thank contributors for reviewing and providing valuable feedback on earlier drafts. The 
authors would also like to acknowledge Ben Irey from the National Forest Foundation. Ben provided assistance 
in adapting and including a sub-set of the survey questions in the 2020 CFLRP Collaboration Indicator Survey 
that were used herein to inform the assessment. The authors would also like to acknowledge Hannah Brown 
for her insightful feedback on an earlier draft and for designing the layout of this report. 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        02
Executive Summary
The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) was established to support collaborative, 
science-based restoration of priority forested landscapes. This report assesses the “C” in CFLRP. The author team 
synthesized peer-review and gray literature on CFLRP projects and findings from cross-boundary workshops 
and the National Forest Foundation’s Collaboration Indicator Survey to assess the following research questions:
1. What are the factors that enabled and constrained collaboration across CFLRP project contexts 
and cases?; and
2. What contributes to the evolution, sustainability, and resilience of collaboratives through time?
The report identifies four emergent themes, and for each theme documented key findings and recommendations 
for collaborative forest restoration, which are summarized below.
Collaboration entails spanning different types of boundaries so people can more easily work together
•. Policy makers should consider long-term investments in boundary spanning organizations and
individuals to promote inclusivity, transparency, accountability, and use of best available scientific
information.
•. Investing in boundary spanning activities (e.g., field trips, joint fact-finding) can promote relationship-
building, social learning, and knowledge exchange.
•. Unit line officers and regional leadership can enable or constrain collaboration - collaboratives should 
seek support for collaboration from multiple levels of authority.
•. The Forest Service, an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (Forest Service), can cultivate
collaboration by mandating collaboration training, including collaboration in performance metrics,
using guidebooks on collaboration best practices, and/or establishing opportunities for promotions
in place.
•. To absorb inevitable agency and non-agency personnel transitions, collaboratives could: 1) document
and periodically review operating principles, procedures, and agreement on restoration principles; 2)
develop on-boarding documents and activities; 3) engage in the Forest Service hiring process to ensure 
new personnel embrace collaborative efforts; 4) and/or incorporate redundancy in positions or roles.
Aligning collaborative engagement opportunities with participants’ expectations and capacity to engage requires 
constant attention and adaptive management
•. Incremental, intermediate steps (e.g., focusing on “small wins”, high-agreement issues, demonstration 
projects), and reporting minority opinions can help demonstrate progress, and build capacity for
establishing dialogue to tackle more contentious, larger-scale objectives.
•. Engaging participants early and often throughout decision-making processes can help collaboratives 
understand and inform the process, and identify actions that are plausible and desirable within Forest 
Service sideboards.
•. Constantly (re)consider who should participate and when (e.g., operations staff in direction- and
priority-setting) to better incorporate collaborative vision and recommendations into operations on
the ground.
•. Include Forest Service personnel in communication and dialogue, but not in collaborative decision-
making to reduce conflict (e.g., FACA concerns) and increase time spent working towards restoration
goals. Several public resources document how collaboratives can inform the NEPA process and
navigate FACA concerns.

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               03
The degree of collaborative formality is dynamic and dependent on local context and history
•. Collaborative formality is contingent upon the history of collaboration, internal capacities and 
expectations for engagement, and can change in response to internal or external factors. 
•. Some degree of formality may be required to define roles, procedures, and goals.
•. It is important to consider trade-offs between highly formal and informal structures in the context 
of stakeholder expectations, capacities, and needs.
•. Collaboratives and those who engage with, or support, collaboratives should consider and periodically 
re-evaluate collaborative structures and processes to: align personnel and funding capacities, 
expectations, and needs of existing and new members; consider the historical conditions that may 
inhibit what restoration options are feasible and desirable; and remain flexible and responsive to 
internal and external changes. 
Changes in ecological and economic, social, or political conditions can disrupt progress and force a group to adjust
•. External changes largely outside the control of collaboratives can provide windows of opportunity to 
garner support and reorganize, though they can also undermine collaborative progress and diminish 
adaptive capacity. 
•. Collaborative should: 1) document the major stressors they have been exposed to, or will likely 
experience in the future; 2) identify existing or future response and preparedness options to mitigate 
negative impacts and overcome barriers; and 3) determine ways to navigate opportunities when 
desirable changes occur.
The findings described herein highlight an overarching theme to consider for collaborative forest restoration: 
Change is a fundamental and recurring aspect of collaboration. Collaborative groups are continuously impacted, 
both positively and negatively, by changes within their group, external changes in social and ecological conditions, 
and a fluid institutional environment in terms of policy direction and resource availability. In this vein, the report 
identifies four recommendations to assist collaboratives in anticipating, navigating, and building collaborative 
resilience to change. First, turnover was the most commonly cited stressor that collaboratives experienced, and 
thus collaboratives should implement structures and/or practices to absorb inevitable changes in participants, 
confer institutional memory, and translate knowledge into practice. Second, collaboratives should assess and 
periodically evaluate their vulnerability and adaptive capacity to changes that have impacted their group using 
structured self-assessments grounded in vulnerability and adaptation science. Third, collaboratives should 
consider using scenario planning to explore the impacts of future biophysical and social changes, tradeoffs in 
decision-making, and opportunities for adaptation. Fourth, congress should consider expanding the CFLRP 
funding mechanism to develop and sustain collaborative capacity. 
Given the continued emphasis on utilizing collaboration to realize national-level policy goals associated with 
forest restoration and wildfire risk management across landownerships and jurisdictions as envisioned by the 
Forest Service Shared Stewardship Strategy, it is necessary to understand the ways in which collaboration can 
be sustained over many years and be adaptable and resilient to stressors. Here, the report outlines a number of 
practical solutions to adapt to internal and external changes, as well as a number of frameworks and approaches 
for collaboratively assessing social vulnerability and adaptive capacity to current and future change. The 
intention is that collaborative participants and agency-partners find this report useful as they continue to engage 
in and grapple with collaborative forest restoration. 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        04
Introduction
The Forest Landscape Restoration Act (FLRA), 
passed under title IV of the Omnibus Public Land 
Management Act of 2009 (PL 111-11), established the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
(CFLRP). The purpose of the title was to “encourage 
the collaborative, science-based ecosystem restoration 
of priority forest landscapes”1 through a competitive 
funding program administered by the Forest Service. 
In FY2010 and FY2012, an independent federal 
advisory committee selected 23 CFLRP projects 
based on the likelihood that proposed projects would 
meet the five primary objectives of the act: 1) support 
sustainable ecological, social, and economic systems; 
2) leverage local resources with private and state-level 
resources; 3) reduce the cost of wildfire management, 
reintegrate natural fire processes, and reduce risk
of uncharacteristic wildfire; 4) demonstrate how
ecological restoration can benefit ecological and
watershed health and reduce management costs; and 
5) demonstrate the utility of biomass utilization to
help reduce treatment cost, support local economies,
and enhance forest health. CFLRP projects were so
designated for a period of 10 years.
Having passed the CFLRP’s initial 10-year 
performance period, the timing is ripe to take stock 
of the progress and outcomes of the CFLRP. The 
following report is part of a multi-partner synthesis 
effort to distill lessons learned and findings from 
CFLRP projects. The goal is to identify ways to 
inform and improve the CFLRP, and translate 
lessons learned to the Forest Service and external 
partners to improve collaborative restoration 
more broadly. The synthesis effort consists of two 
assessment levels and is coordinated by the Forest 
Service. The Level I assessment consists of a report 
to Congress to demonstrate the extent to which 
the CFLRP is fulfilling the purposes of the title. 
The Level II assessment is a deeper dive to identify 
broader lessons learned from the CFLRP in relation 
to several themes, including: 1) reducing the risk of 
uncharacteristic wildfire; 2) ecological outcomes; 3) 
science-based approach and multi-party monitoring; 
4) collaborative approach; 5) leveraging resources;
and 6) social and economic benefits.
1        Pub. L. No. 111-11, tit. IV, 123 Stat. 991 (2009) 
The CFLRP developed mechanisms for evaluating 
project outcomes and accomplishments, and it 
attracted a host of social and natural science 
research activities. As such, a large, robust dataset 
exists for synthesis (e.g., spatial and non-spatial 
agency documentation, peer-reviewed literature, 
management and monitoring plans, annual project 
reporting). In the Level II assessment, the Forest 
Service leveraged these resources, coordinated 
“subject-expert” working groups for each theme, and 
hosted peer-learning activities to distill findings and 
lessons learned, as well as consider best practices 
for the next iteration of the CFLRP. The Southwest 
Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERIs) are 
working in concert with the Forest Service to support 
these efforts by assisting in peer learning activities 
and outreach, conducting syntheses on related 
topics of interest, and serving on working groups 
as subject-experts.  
The report herein is intended to support the Level II 
assessment on the collaborative approach theme. The 
CFLRP explicitly required projects to be developed and 
implemented collaboratively. However, ‘collaboration’ 
was not specifically defined in the FLRA or CFLRP 
requirements, nor did the CFLRP provide specific 
guidelines by which collaborative groups convened 
and engaged in collaborative restoration throughout 
the life of the CFLRP project. This has resulted in a 
multitude of collaborative structures, processes, and 
practices that were implemented in diverse social and 
ecological contexts across the country. Also, while 
a number of social science research projects have 
addressed collaboration in CFLRP projects, very few 
longitudinal assessments track collaboration in the 
CFLRP through time. Thus, the research questions 
that are addressed in this synthesis are:
1.
What are the factors that enabled and
constrained collaboration across CFLRP
project contexts and cases?; and
2. What contributes to the evolution,
sustainability, and resilience of collaboratives 
through time?
The intended audience for this report is place-
based collaborative groups, non-governmental 
organizations and their networks, Forest Service 
personnel, and non-federal partners.

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        05
Methodological Approach
The author team conducted a review of peer-reviewed 
and gray literature on CFLRP projects related to 
collaboration. This report defines collaboration as 
a process in which stakeholders work with each 
other and the Forest Service on restoration-related 
activities. Resources were compiled predominantly 
from the CFLRP Resource Library2, while several other 
dissertations and relevant materials not included in 
the CFLRP Resource Library were retrieved from a 
Google Scholar and Web of Science search. In all, the 
author team developed a database of peer-reviewed 
and gray literature (n=43) related to the collaboration 
theme. This was supplemented with two additional 
sources: 1) results from a worksheet completed by 
participants (n=35) and notes from breakout groups 
(n=10) at the 2020 SWERI Cross-Boundary Landscape 
Restoration Workshop (Figure 1)3 and the Idaho 
Forest Restoration Partners workshop (n=10)4; and 
2) a subset of questions from the National Forest
Foundation’s (NFF) 2020 CFLRP Collaboration
Indicator survey5 (henceforth collaboration survey),
which assessed the successes and challenges of each 
of the 23 CFLRP projects’ collaborative efforts (n=105). 
Both the worksheet and collaboration survey asked
participants to document the internal and external
changes that they were exposed to, positive and
2        https://www.fs.fed.us/restoration/CFLRP/resource-library.php
3  
     https://sweri.eri.nau.edu/cross-boundary-landscape-restoration-workshop/
4  
     http://idahoforestpartners.org/reference-library.html
5  
     https://www.nationalforests.org/collaboration-resources/learning-topics/collaborative-
forest-landscape-restoration-program-cflrp/cflrp-monitoring
negative impacts of these changes, responses, and 
barriers to response. The collaboration survey 
included other questions pertinent to this analysis, 
including: 1) the level of collaborative engagement 
in the environmental analysis and decision-making 
phases pursuant to the National Environmental 
Policy Act (NEPA); 2) whether the Regional Office 
supported and coordinated CFLRP project work; 
and 3) the name, duration, and role of third-party 
facilitators and organizations that provided technical 
analysis capacity. 
Each of these resources were uploaded to, coded, 
and analyzed in Atlas.ti, a qualitative data analysis 
software package following a grounded theory 
approach (Glaser and Strauss 1967; Bryant and 
Charmaz 2007; Corbin and Strauss 2008). Text-based 
resources were read in their entirety, wherein codes 
(i.e., a word or phrase that summarizes meaning 
in a text segment) were applied to text segments 
related to the collaboration topic. The codes were 
inductively generated, and were focused on the 
structures, processes, and practices of collaboration, 
the factors that enabled or constrained collaborative 
function and performance, and lessons learned for 
collaborative restoration. Videos and webinars from 
the CFLRP Resource Library (n=15) were analyzed 
separately and supplemented the findings. 
Figure 1: Participants from over 50 0rganizations discuss successful strategies for collaboration at the 2020 
SWERI Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop.

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        06
Findings
The findings are summarized into four emergent 
themes: 1) collaboration entails spanning different 
types of boundaries so people can more easily work 
together; 2) Aligning collaborative engagement 
opportunities with participants’ expectations and 
capacity to engage requires constant attention and 
adaptive management; 3) degree of collaborative 
formality is dynamic and dependent on local 
context and history; and 4) changes in ecological and 
economic, social, or political conditions can disrupt 
progress and force a group to adjust. 
This report describes each theme, in turn, below. Key 
findings and recommendations from each theme are 
summarized in boxes and using bold-face, italic font 
and bulleted lists for easy reference. The report also 
includes links to relevant tools, websites, and articles 
in footnotes throughout. 
Spanning Boundaries
Collaboration entails spanning different types of 
boundaries so people can more easily work together. 
Collaboration is a process by which individuals 
or organizations with different perspectives and 
resources come together to achieve outcomes they 
would not be able to attain by working alone. The 
CFLRP was unique in that it dedicated sustained 
funding and a requirement to collaborate from 
planning to implementation and monitoring. The 
10-year duration of projects meant that collaborators 
needed to create and sustain a space through which 
this ‘coming together’ could endure through time, 
and persist throughout changes in participants and 
personnel, policies, resources, and other unforeseen 
circumstances. A theme emerging from the 
synthesis is that creating and sustaining this space 
required participants to work across geographic, 
administrative, social, political, and cultural 
boundaries. 
Boundary spanning activities allow collaborative 
participants to work through differences and attain 
mutually-beneficial outcomes. These activities 
include and, in turn, support: 
Spanning Boundaries: 
Key Findings and Recommendations
• Policy makers should consider long-
term investments in boundary spanning
organizations and individuals (e.g., community 
champions, facilitators) to promote inclusivity, 
transparency, accountability, and use of best
available scientific information.
• Investing in boundary spanning activities
(e.g., field trips, joint fact-finding) can promote 
relationship-building, social learning, and
knowledge exchange.
• Unit line officers and regional leadership
can enable or constrain collaboration—
collaboratives should seek support for
collaboration from multiple levels of authority.
• The Forest Service can cultivate collaboration 
by mandating collaboration training, including 
collaboration in performance metrics, using
guidebooks on collaboration best practices,
and/or establishing opportunities for
promotions in place.
• To absorb inevitable agency and non-agency
personnel transitions, collaboratives could: 1)
document and periodically review operating
principles, procedures, and agreement on
restoration principles; 2) develop on-boarding
documents and activities; 3) engage in the
Forest Service hiring process to ensure new
personnel embrace collaborative efforts; 4)
and/or incorporate redundancy in positions
or roles.
• The development of boundary objects and
a robust transition strategy can articulate
shared visions among collaborative members 
and across entities to ensure practices and
procedures endure personnel change.

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               07
• 
collaboratively producing and applying 
shared knowledge; 
• 
pooling, sharing, and leveraging resources 
(e.g., human, social, financial, and political 
capital) to build collaborative capacity; 
• 
developing and sustaining relationships and 
trust among participants who may otherwise 
be at odds with one another; and 
• 
investing in the capacities needed for 
participants to self-organize and self-govern 
(i.e., where people voluntary organize 
around common rules and procedures, and a 
common function to solve shared problems)6 
(Cash et al. 2006; Berkes 2009; Robinson and 
Wallington 2012; Cheng et al. 2015; Edelenbos 
and van Meerkerk 2015; McAllister and 
Taylor 2015; Bergemann et al. 2019; Colavito 
2019; Ryan and Urgenson 2019; Jensen-Ryan 
and German 2019)
Based on the review of the CFLRP literature, the author 
team identified a number of factors that enabled 
and constrained boundary-spanning, including 
key individuals and organizations (e.g., community 
champions, facilitators, coordinators, research 
groups), activities, and objects (See Appendix 1 for a 
detailed list of the roles and examples of boundary 
spanning activities in supporting collaboration).  
Community champions: Community champions 
were opinion leaders and trust-brokers that made 
sure community interests and perspectives were 
represented, helped get community buy-in, and 
maintained collaborative momentum by maintaining 
all participants’ attention on, and accountability to, 
the CFLRP project (Cheng and Sturtevant 2012; Egan 
and Dubay 2013; Antuma et al. 2014). 
6        In contrast to centralized, hierarchical government, self-organization is not centralized. Self-organization and self-
governance occurs when individuals and organizations voluntarily organize to establish and agree on common rules 
and procedures; develop a common understanding of the problem at hand and serve a common function or goal; and 
integrate and learn from diverse knowledges, experiences, and information (i.e., learning by doing) to solve a shared, 
or common, problem (Ostrom et al. 1999; Folke et al. 2005; Folke 2006; Hahn and Nykvist 2017; Nederhand et al. 2019).
7        Joint fact finding is a set of procedures wherein multiple stakeholders come together to “to compile and 
pool relevant information and to “translate” it into a form that can be used by decision makers and others 
to create the foundation for broad-based consensus” (McCreary et al. 2001, p. 329). In short, the role of joint 
fact-finding missions is to bring together diverse perspectives and research for knowledge exchange.
8        Peer-learning activities facilitate sharing of ideas, successes and challenges, and exchange of knowledge across CFLRP 
projects. Each CFLRP project operated under a similar policy context, which supported this knowledge exchange.
9        Field trips, pub talks, and others provided a forum for building trust and relationships in informal settings and 
for facilitating knowledge exchange among collaborative groups, Forest Service, and the broader community.
Professional third-party facilitators and/or 
coordinators: According to the collaboration survey 
responses, the majority of CFLRP projects (60%) 
have used third-party facilitators over the life of the 
project. Some projects used facilitators throughout 
the project tenure, for part of it, and/or have cycled 
through several facilitators (National Forest 
Foundation 2020). Facilitators were instrumental 
in: 1) reducing conflict and establishing zones of 
agreement; 2) (re)defining goals, missions, and 
objectives; 3) ensuring diverse perspectives were 
heard; 4) ensuring tasks were completed as promised; 
5) supporting public engagement activities; and 6) 
conducting evaluations of the collaborative process 
(Bartlett 2012; Cheng and Sturtevant 2012; Moote 
2013; Antuma et al. 2014; DuPraw 2014; Bergemann 
2017; Schultz et al. 2017; Walpole et al. 2017; USFS 
2018). Meanwhile, coordinators held multiple roles, 
such as: 1) planning meetings; 2) coordinating field 
trips; 3) monitoring support; and 4) outreach and 
communication, among others (e.g., Knapp 2010; 
Antuma et al. 2014; Bergemann 2017; Schultz et al. 
2017; Urgenson et al. 2017; USFS 2018).
Invest in opportunities for relationship-building, 
knowledge exchange, and learning: Individuals and 
organizations supported cross-boundary work 
through relationship-building and knowledge 
exchange activities, such as: 1) joint fact-finding 
missions7; 2) peer-learning webinars, workshops, 
and site visits8; 3) field trips9; 4) pub talks; and 5) 
podcasts. The majority of collaboratives (~70% of 
survey respondents) reported the use of third-party 
organizations to augment science and technical 
analysis capacity (National Forest Foundation 
2020). These entities supported biophysical and 
socio-economic monitoring, adaptive management, 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        08
resource-specific specialization/expertise, landscape 
evaluations, and planning, to name a few (Bartlett 
2012; Antuma et al. 2014; DuPraw 2014; Cheng et al. 
2015, 2019; Butler et al. 2015; Blue Mountain Forest 
Partners 2017; Schultz et al. 2017; Walpole et al. 2017; 
Thompson III et al. 2018; USFS 2018; Bergemann et 
al. 2019; Butler and Esch 2019; Butler and Schultz 
2019; Christenson and Butler 2019; Colavito 2019; 
McIntyre 2019; National Forest Foundation 2020).
These activities supported social learning and 
knowledge exchange in several ways, for example:
•
field trips illustrated how restoration
principles translated to operations on the
ground and allowed the collaborative group to 
provide feedback on restoration treatments;
•
joint fact-finding missions tailored research
to local contexts and scales to support
decisions; and
•
peer learning workshops helped share
successes and challenges of collaborative
restoration across CFLRP projects and
promoted relationship-building.
In sum, policy-makers relying on collaboratives 
to advance on-the-ground forest restoration 
should consider investing in boundary spanning 
individuals, organizations, and activities. Investing 
in boundary spanning can: ensure local and 
diverse perspectives are included at the table; allow 
participants to collectively work through differences 
and develop mutually beneficial outcomes; develop 
accountability for completion of tasks and programs 
of work; facilitate use of the best available science for 
learning and adaptive management; and promote 
relationship-building and knowledge exchange. 
Role of local Forest Service unit line officer and Regional 
Office in shaping the collaborative space: Although 
national level policies, such as the FLRA, can provide 
the opportunity for collaborative spaces to emerge, 
actual collaborative functioning relied on the 
willingness and ability of local Forest Service unit 
line officers to steer intra-unit attitudes, values, team 
dynamics, and personnel and financial resources 
to support collaboration (Sabatier et al. 1995; Butler 
10      https://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/fseprd493263.pdf
2013; Moseley and Charnley 2014; Cheng et al. 
2015). Line officers, thus, can either legitimize the 
collaborative process or become a significant barrier 
to collaborative performance (Wondolleck and Yaffee 
2000;  Butler 2013; Bergemann et al. 2019; Butler and 
Schultz 2019). In a similar vein, Regional Office 
decisions can either support or inhibit collaborative 
work (See Appendix 2). For instance, prioritization of 
collaboration at the regional level can help steer unit- 
and district-level commitments to collaboration. The 
region can also provide resources to support trust-
building activities, flexible financing options, and 
offer technical expertise and specialization when 
needed. Alternatively, mis-alignment between 
regional-level priorities and CFLRP project principles, 
limited support for—or conflicting guidance on—
implementation and contracting, and diminished 
engagement with the CFLRP project through time 
reportedly inhibited collaborative performance 
(National Forest Foundation 2020). Collaboratives 
need to garner support for collaborative engagement 
and restoration from multiple levels of authority and 
influence. Also, the Forest Service should cultivate 
and incentivize collaboration at all levels, which 
could be achieved by:
•
including collaborative engagement as part
of managers’ performance metrics;
•
finding mechanisms to include collaborative 
participants in the interview process for new
candidates on the national forest;
•
mandating collaboration training for line
officers who engage with collaboratives; and/
or
•
developing guidebooks or tools that inform
line officers of effective ways to get involved
in collaborative restoration. (Bixler and Kittler 
2015; National Forest Foundation 2016; Butler 
and Schultz 2019; Christenson and Butler
2019; Ryan and Urgenson 2019).  An example of 
this is the Partnership Capacity Assessment10
Tool, which was developed to help Forest
Service personnel evaluate and enhance their 
capacity to engage with collaborative groups .

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        09
Turnover of Forest Service personnel and collaboration 
participants: Across CFLRP projects, an oft-cited 
factor negatively affecting collaboration is the 
turnover of participants (Wondolleck and Yaffee 
2000; Schultz et al. 2017; National Forest Foundation 
2020; McIntyre and Schultz 2020). This is neither 
unique to CFLRP projects nor to the Forest Service. 
Loss of participants can: 1) slow collaborative 
progress; 2) diminish trust and relationships; and 3) 
result in the loss of institutional memory, leadership, 
direction or focus, commitment, and local knowledge 
and understanding of social and ecological contexts 
(Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000; Antuma et al. 2014; 
Cheng et al. 2015; Schultz et al. 2017; Mottek Lucas 
et al. 2017; DiBari and Randall 2018; USFS 2018; 
Butler and Schultz 2019; McIntyre 2019; National 
Forest Foundation 2020). Turnover can also present 
opportunities to reorganize - new participants can 
reinvigorate and legitimize collaboration, facilitate 
boundary-spanning, encourage risk-taking, and 
consider new ways of doing things (National Forest 
Foundation 2016, 2020). 
Transition strategy: It is important to have a 
strategy to deal with personnel transitions so that 
collaborative performance and function is not 
impacted. Stern and Coleman (2019, 2014) have 
argued that developing agreed-upon rules and 
procedures that articulate shared values, goals, roles, 
expectations for engagement and negotiation, and 
commitments (i.e., procedural, or systems-based 
trust) can help absorb turnover and maintain and 
build other forms of trust (e.g., rational or affinitive) 
as new personnel come onboard (See Appendix 3 for 
examples of how collaboratives can build or repair 
trust). As new personnel come on board there is 
constant negotiation about how knowledge will 
be shared and used, who is responsible for what, 
and what capacities individuals and groups bring 
to bear (DuPraw 2014; Orth and Cheng 2019). Thus, 
periodically reviewing and evaluating operating 
principles and reviewing ground rules for negotiation 
at meetings is critical (National Forest Foundation 
2020). 
Additionally, some CFLRP projects adjusted to 
participant turnover by developing: 
11        https://www.fs.usda.gov/detailfull/prc/tools-techniques/collaboration/?cid=STELPRDB5155747&width=full
•
“hand-over memos”11;
•
onboarding workshops, meetings, or field
trips;
•
a buddy system where senior personnel
worked with new staff;
•
redundancy in positions or roles as new
personnel come on board; and
•
a process wherein collaborative participants
were involved in the interview process for
new Forest Service personnel to identify
candidates who embrace collaborative
restoration (Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000;
Antuma et al. 2014; DuPraw 2014; National
Forest Foundation 2016; Schultz et al. 2017;
USFS 2018; Butler and Schultz 2019; Cheng et 
al. 2019; Christenson and Butler 2019).
Still, a number of barriers remain to responding to 
turnover. For example, the Forest Service culture 
of “move out to move up,” detailing, and limited 
capacity to fill vacancies hinders collaboration. 
An organizational shift that offers incentives and 
promotional potential to stay on the forest could help 
maintain institutional knowledge, understanding 
of local social and ecological contexts, and foster 
collaboration (Gray et al. 2001; Schultz et al. 2017; 
National Forest Foundation 2020). Also, collaboration 
survey respondents reported that they did not have 
enough notification prior to agency departures, 
they lacked a ‘deep bench’ of participants from 
which to recruit, and it was difficult to recruit and 
retain participants who have their own jobs or 
other commitments and are not paid to collaborate 
(National Forest Foundation 2020). Appendix 4 
provides more detail on the positive and negative 
impacts of turnover, and Appendix 5 highlights a 
number of responses and barriers to responding to 
turnover.
“Boundary objects”: Boundary objects are objects or 
structures that exist within and between entities 
(e.g., the Forest Service and collaborative group) that 
facilitate knowledge sharing and understanding on 
practices and procedures. Example boundary objects 
employed in CFLRP projects included: 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               10
• 
guidelines for restoration treatments and/or 
agreements that document responsibilities 
and expectations (e.g., memoranda of 
understanding, general technical reports); 
• 
monitoring and adaptive management 
protocols; and 
• 
models, databases, or maps (Antuma et al. 
2014; Cheng et al. 2015; Clearwater Basin 
Collaborative 2015; Stern and Coleman 2015; 
Urgenson et al. 2017)
Appendix 6 includes example boundary objects with 
links to where they can be found. Boundary objects can 
provide institutional memory and translate knowledge 
into practice (Cheng et al. 2015). Boundary objects 
that are co-produced12, re-evaluated, and updated 
as conditions change, and that explicitly identify 
how the agency will implement recommendations 
are more likely to be relevant over time and with 
turnover (Cheng et al. 2015; Urgenson et al. 2017). 
In sum, developing boundary objects and a robust 
transition strategy can articulate shared visions 
and processes of the collaborative group, facilitate a 
common understanding between the collaborative 
group and Forest Service, and ensure that practices 
and procedures endure personnel change.
Aligning Opportunities with Capacity
Aligning collaborative engagement opportunities 
with participants’ expectations and capacity to 
engage requires constant attention and adaptive 
management. Within a collaborative space, an array 
of collaborative engagement types and decision-
making phases can occur. Because ‘collaboration’ 
is not specifically defined in the FLRA or CFLRP 
requirements, every participant (including Forest 
Service line officers and staff) has different 
expectations for what it entails relative to forest 
landscape restoration decision-making. Furthermore, 
expectations of some stakeholders about the types 
and timing of collaborative engagement may exceed 
the capacity of other stakeholders to deliver on those 
12   Co-production refers to an iterative and collaborative process where multiple perspectives, expertise, 
and actors come together to develop knowledge relevant to a particular context or issue. Some general 
principles of co-production are that it is situated within a context, issue, or place; involves multiple actors 
and perspectives; has a clearly define goal; and is iterative and interactive (Norström et al. 2020)
Aligning Opportunities with Capacity:
Key Findings and Recommendations
Collaboratives should consider the following 
to help work towards shared agreement, 
learn about and inform decision-making 
within regulatory and institutional 
guidelines, and move from one phase to the 
next:
• 
Incremental, intermediate steps 
(e.g., focusing on “small wins”, high-
agreement issues, demonstration 
projects), focusing on undesired 
outcomes, and reporting minority 
opinions can help demonstrate progress, 
and build capacity for establishing 
dialogue to tackle more contentious, 
larger-scale objectives.
• 
Engaging participants early and often 
throughout decision-making processes 
can help collaboratives understand and 
inform the process, and identify actions 
that are plausible and desirable within 
Forest Service sideboards.
• 
Constantly (re)consider who should 
participate and when (e.g., operations 
staff in direction- and priority-setting) 
to better incorporate collaborative vision 
and recommendations into operations 
on the ground.
• 
Include Forest Service personnel in 
communication and dialogue, but not 
in collaborative decision-making to 
reduce conflict (e.g., FACA concerns) 
and increase time spent working 
towards restoration goals. Several public 
resources document how collaboratives 
can inform the NEPA process and 
navigate FACA concerns.

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        11
expectations. The attention CFLRP projects have paid 
to tailoring and adapting collaborative engagement 
types and timing to participants’ expectations and 
capacities is often time-consuming, but also critical 
to long-term collaborative progress. 
Many CFLRP projects determined the need 
to develop consensus-based decision-making 
through open, transparent dialogue as an 
expected type of collaborative engagement. 
However, developing consensus is challenging 
and slow, particularly in complex natural resource  
management contexts (Urgenson et al. 2017). To 
mediate this challenge, several CFLRP projects: 
•
strove to attain, and celebrate, “small” wins or 
successes early in the collaborative process,
wherein groups focused first on areas of
general agreement;
•
implemented a pilot or demonstration project; 
•
developed “issue-based” recommendations
that identify shared visions on specific
management topics; or
•
focused on identifying undesired outcomes
instead of desired outcomes.
These incremental, intermediate steps can help build 
the capacity for dialogue and agreement on more 
contentious issues or setting restoration objectives 
at larger scales (Cheng and Sturtevant 2012; Antuma 
et al. 2014; DuPraw 2014; Schultz et al. 2017; Walpole 
et al. 2017; Urgenson et al. 2017; Christenson and 
Butler 2019; Toman et al. 2019). In instances where 
consensus could not be reached, some CFLRP projects 
developed majority and minority reports that were 
both delivered to the Forest Service, which helped 
ensure all voices were heard (Monroe 2015; Urgenson 
et al. 2017; Christenson and Butler 2019; Ryan and 
Urgenson 2019). 
With regards to the timing and level of collaborative 
engagement in decision-making processes, CFLRP 
projects and reviews pointed to the importance 
of interactions between stakeholders and the 
Forest Service early, often, and throughout the 
environmental analysis and decision-making 
(EADM) process pursuant to the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other planning 
requirements (Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000; Schultz 
et al. 2012, 2017; Butler 2013; Cheng et al. 2015; National 
Forest Foundation 2016; Mottek Lucas et al. 2017; USFS 
2018; Bergemann et al. 2019; Butler and Esch 2019; 
Christenson and Butler 2019; McIntyre 2019). This 
was also echoed in findings from regional partner 
roundtables on EADM (DiBari and Randall 2018). 
When treatments are based on “shelf-stock” NEPA 
with limited to no collaborative input, Forest Service 
managers have limited flexibility to accommodate 
requested changes to management actions (Cheng 
et al. 2015; Bergemann et al. 2019; Butler and Esch 
2019). Alternatively, when stakeholders participate 
in developing the evidence basis for why forest 
restoration is needed, it can often: 1) increase trust; 
2) potentially reduce conflict and litigation; and 3)
streamline the NEPA process (Schultz et al. 2012; Esch 
and Vosick 2016; Bergemann et al. 2019) (Appendix
7). CFLRP projects have provided opportunities for
collaborative involvement in many phases of the
NEPA process. Over 60% of respondents from the
collaboration survey reported that their collaborative 
was involved in assessing ecological conditions,
defining the purpose and need, scoping, defining
design criteria, defining alternatives, defining
monitoring and mitigation strategies, and reviewing 
and commenting on drafts. Fewer respondents noted 
that they were involved in the objections, litigation,
or analysis of environmental effects phases.
Legal requirements, mandates, and associated 
timelines of the Forest Service’s procedures are often 
not made explicit to collaboration participants, which 
can result in participants having limited or erroneous 
understanding of these processes (e.g., Antuma et 
al. 2014; Mottek Lucas 2015; Esch and Vosick 2016). 
Multiple, frequently used lines of communication 
among Forest Service personnel and collaborative 
groups in the EADM process can: 
•
clearly define the Forest Service’s available
decision space;
•
identify when and how the Forest Service is
accountable to the collaborative;
•
demonstrate to stakeholders why actions are 
taken (or why they are not);

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               12
• 
help stakeholders better understand how and 
when to inform the process; and 
• 
help cross-walk from planning to 
implementation. 
Thus, including collaborative participants in the 
EADM process can identify feasible and mutually-
desirable actions within Forest Service sideboards 
(Cheng and Sturtevant 2012; National Forest 
Foundation 2016; Monroe and Butler 2016; Bergemann 
2017; DiBari and Randall 2018; Christenson and 
Butler 2019).
There is a need to closely consider who should be 
included and when in the collaborative process to 
better integrate planning and implementation.  In the 
Forest Service, planning, research and assessment, 
and implementation of land management activities 
are separate functions that are often carried out by 
different individuals or teams. These various teams 
themselves are made up of multiple entities engaged 
in a lengthy process; navigating and understanding 
these processes can be cumbersome, especially for 
collaboratives that aren’t typically directly involved. 
A disconnect between planning and implementation 
can be a challenge for collaborative engagement and 
management as projects move from one phase to 
the next (Gray et al. 2001; Knapp 2010; Freeman 
and Goldman 2016). For example, Cheng et al. 
(2015) noted that when the Colorado Front Range 
Restoration Initiative failed to include field-level 
staff during the initial transition from direction-
setting to implementation, the collaborative provided 
little incentive for, or understanding among, these 
staff to carry out the collaborative’s goals.  When 
restoration principles are implemented by Forest 
Service staff who have not been involved in 
collaborative restoration direction– and priority– 
setting, consequences can include: 
• 
discontent with results on the ground 
when implemented actions don’t reflect the 
collaborative’s vision; 
• 
diminishment of social capital developed 
during the direction-setting phase ; and 
• 
tasks not being completed on time (National 
Forest Foundation 2016; Stern and Coleman 
2019).
NEPA Resources for Collaboratives
There are many available resources that collaboratives can use to understand the NEPA process and that 
provide guidelines for how to collaborate with federal agencies during the NEPA process. For example:
• 
NFF hosts a learning topics page dedicated to providing tools, webinars, and a roadmap for 
collaboration before, during, and after NEPA.
See: https://www.nationalforests.org/collaboration-resources/learning-topics/collaboration-the-national-
environmental-policy-act
• 
The Payette Forest Coalition developed a NEPA Business 
Process that outlines expectations and responsibilities of 
the Responsible Official, Interdisciplinary Team, and the 
collaborative (Schmidt and DiBari, 2013)
See: http://www.spatialinterest.info/administrativedocuments.html
• 
Brown (2015) provided information to collaboratives about 
the administrative and judicial review process of the Forest 
Service and opportunities, or insertion points, for engagement 
in these processes.
See: https://www.nationalforests.org/assets/files/Admin_Legal-
Review-Opportunities-for-Collabs_SJ-Brown-and-ERI-2015.pdf

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        13
Many collaboratives haven’t historically been 
directly involved in the implementation phase of a 
project. However, there are opportunities to facilitate 
collaborative learning about the process and steps 
involved in implementation. For example, in 2017 the 
Ecological Restoration Institute hosted face-to-face 
workshops with local- to national-level Forest Service 
personnel, representatives from industry, and Four 
Forests Restoration Initiative staff to: consider the 
issues and concerns with implementing landscape-
scale restoration projects in ecosystems with 
traditionally low-value wood, and identify pathways 
for innovation and modernization in implementation 
(Vosick and Colavito 2020)13.  
A tension often cited in case studies is that Forest 
Service employees must maintain authority over 
decisions that are made on public lands, while 
adhering to legally defined, yet somewhat opaque 
procedures for collaboration, vis-à-vis the Federal 
Advisory Committee Act (FACA) (Schultz et al. 
2012; Butler 2013). Butler (2013) found that in cases 
where Forest Service personnel had a strong role 
in attempting to structure decision-making in the 
collaborative for fear of FACA violations, social capital, 
trust, and dialogue among the group was diminished, 
and the time spent working on restoration goals was 
reduced. Alternatively, when Forest Service personnel 
were not included in collaborative decision-making, 
but were heavily involved in communication and 
dialogue, conflict was reduced and the agency 
personnel and stakeholders spent more time working 
together to identify appropriate and desirable 
ecological restoration goals (Butler 2013). 
Lack of clarity under FACA requirements for 
collaboration has resulted in different interpretations 
among line officers and other decision-makers 
regarding how and to what extent they should be 
involved in the collaborative process (Butler 2013; 
Christenson and Butler 2019). Collaboration has been 
practiced and touted by Forest Service leadership 
since the early 1990s, and guidance to clarify FACA 
standards vis-à-vis collaboration have been issued by 
13   2020 Modernizing 4FRI Implementation: Progress after two years workshop—https://sweri.eri.nau.edu/4fri-
modernization-workshop/; See also related conference proceedings—https://sweri.eri.nau.edu/accelerated-restoration/
14    See for example the National Forest Foundation’s Toolbox of Resources on FACA and collaboration, 
including a series of peer learning sessions related to the subject: https://www.nationalforests.
org/collaboration-resources/tools-search/results?q=FACA&type=&topic=      
the Forest Service, other federal agencies, and subject 
matter experts over the years14. Yet, FACA remains a 
source of confusion and conflict for all parties across 
CFLRP projects.  
Collaborative Formality
The degree of collaborative formality is dynamic, 
and dependent on local context and history. CFLRP 
projects varied in their degree of formality, from 
highly to loosely structured processes.  Highly 
structured processes included group charters, 
membership and decision rules, and memoranda 
of understanding. Other groups subscribed to very 
loose organizing principles, and eschewed formal 
documents and rules (Monroe and Butler 2016; Butler 
and Esch 2019). This range of collaborative formality 
appears to be associated with the history of conflict, 
cooperation, and trust between parties, and sets 
the stage for subsequent collaborative dynamics. 
For example, while some collaborative groups with 
historically high levels of agreement may not need to 
rely on formal processes for deliberation and decision-
making, others who do not have this foundation may 
need formal structures and processes (Antuma et al. 
2014; Monroe 2015; Monroe and Butler 2016; USFS 
2018; Bergemann et al. 2019; Butler and Esch 2019; 
Ryan and Urgenson 2019; Stern and Coleman 2019).
Donahue (2004) and others (Monroe 2015; Ryan 
and Urgenson 2019) point out that at least some 
degree of formality may be needed to initially 
identify participants, procedures, and goals of 
the collaborative, which should be reconsidered as 
the collaborative evolves. A consequence of a high 
degree of formalization is that formal collaboratives 
require a significant amount of resources (e.g., 
personnel, finances, time) to coordinate and facilitate 
the group, while informal groups have much less 
overhead. In collaborative groups with limited staff 
and organizational capacity, Bonnel and Koontz 
(2007) found that some collaborative groups ended 
up spending an inordinate amount of resources on 
organizing at the expense of addressing resource 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               14
management issues. Therefore, it is important to 
consider internal capacities as well as expectations 
for the timing and amount of collaborative 
engagement when structuring collaboratives 
(Bartlett 2012; National Forest Foundation 2016).
Additionally, structure and formality of 
collaboratives change over time as social, ecological, 
economic, and policy conditions change (Lauber and 
Decker 2011; Chaffin et al. 2014; Monroe and Butler 
2016; Cosens et al. 2018; USFS 2018). The specific 
ways in which collaboratives adapt to changes are 
reflective of local context, collaborative history, and 
current conditions. For example, CFLRP projects 
reorganized their existing collaborative structures 
and processes, or created entirely new collaborative 
organizations in response to the FLRA requirements 
for landscape-scale restoration and collaboration 
from planning through implementation and multi-
party monitoring. Furthermore, CFLRP projects 
were arguably subject to additional scrutiny and 
attention from collaborative participants and interest 
groups external to the collaborative due to the unique 
collaborative mandate of the pilot program. This 
led several collaboratives to reorganize throughout 
the life of the project to respond to concerns about 
inclusivity, participation in decision-making 
processes, and fiscal accountability and transparency 
(Monroe and Butler 2016). 
In sum, the degree of formality in collaboratives is 
dependent on the context and history of collaboration 
or conflict, internal capacities (e.g. personnel 
and funding), and collaborative expectations for 
engagement. Also, structures and processes can 
change in response to internal or external stressors 
affecting the group. These factors (i.e., local context 
and history, internal capacities, expectations, 
and external or internal stressors) are important 
to consider for both emerging and “mature” 
collaboratives, as well as funding agencies, parent 
organizations, and Forest Service personnel who 
support or engage with collaboratives. For example:
• 
emerging collaboratives should consider 
these factors as they initially develop their 
structure and decision-making processes; 
• 
collaboratives should periodically re-evaluate 
their collaborative structure and process to 
determine whether changes are needed as 
a consequence of changes in membership, 
capacities, goals, or external changes; 
Collaborative Formality:
Key Findings and Recommendations
Collaboratives should consider the following 
to help work towards shared agreement, 
learn about and inform decision-making 
within regulatory and institutional 
guidelines, and move from one phase to the 
next:
• 
Collaborative formality is contingent 
upon the history of collaboration, 
internal capacities and expectations 
for engagement, and can change in 
response to internal or external factors. 
• 
Some degree of formality may be 
required to define roles, procedures, and 
goals.
• 
It is important to consider trade-offs 
between highly formal and informal 
structures in the context of stakeholder 
expectations, capacities, and needs.
• 
Collaboratives and those who engage 
with, or support, collaboratives should 
consider and periodically re-evaluate 
collaborative structures and processes 
to: align personnel and funding 
capacities, expectations, and needs of 
existing and new members; consider the 
historical conditions that may inhibit 
what restoration options are feasible 
and desirable; and remain flexible and 
responsive to internal and external 
changes.

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        15
•
Participants, line officers, and funding and
parent organizations should take the time to
understand these factors in CLFRP projects,
which can help them: 1) understand how past 
events shape what options for restoration
are available and desirable; 2) provide more
meaningful expectations for collaborative
engagement based on personnel resources,
capacity, and needs; and 3) develop the
responsiveness and flexibility to adjust to
changes external to and largely outside the
control of the group.
External Changes can Disrupt Progress
Changes in ecological and economic, social, or 
political conditions can disrupt progress and force 
a group to adjust. Larger-scale or unanticipated 
changes in ecological, economic, social, or political 
circumstances can provide opportunities to garner 
collective action (Mottek Lucas 2015; Schultz et al. 
2017; Mottek Lucas et al. 2017; Toman et al. 2019). 
For example, biophysical disturbances are often 
catalysts for establishing a collaborative around 
a common purpose, as they provide justification 
for restoration efforts, and can result in additional 
funding and support to mitigate negative impacts 
from disturbance events (Appendix 4).
Yet, these same changes can undermine a 
collaborative group’s function and performance 
and decrease the adaptive capacity15 of collaborative 
groups to respond (Emerson and Gerlak 2014; Cheng 
et al. 2015; Schultz et al. 2017; Butler and Schultz 
2019). Conflicting priorities, legal challenges, or 
policy changes associated with contentious resource 
management issues (e.g., listing of an endangered 
species, or a lawsuit barring forest management 
activity like the Mexican-spotted owl injunction 
in the southwest that started in the fall of 201916) 
can challenge collaborative forest restoration. 
Changes in the timing and among of funding (e.g., 
congressional appropriations to individual forests or 
funding allocations from Regional Office), might also 
15   Adaptive capacity is defined as “the ability of a system to evolve in order to accommodate environmental 
hazards or policy change and to expand the range of variability with which it can cope” (Adger 2006, p. 270)
16   See https://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/gila/home/?cid=FSEPRD666433 for updates on court rulings related to the injunction
affect the pace and scale of collaborative restoration 
(Schultz et al. 2017; Mottek Lucas et al. 2017; USFS 
2018). Limited industry capacity and loss of long-
term stewardship contracts have also reduced 
the ability of collaborative groups to meet their 
restoration goals, which has increased conflict and 
frustration between the collaborative, surrounding 
community, and the Forest Service (Antuma et 
al. 2014; Esch and Vosick 2016; Schultz et al. 2017; 
McIntyre 2019). Fallout from the 2008 recession 
has contributed to the decline of timber industry 
operating and processing capacity, and affected 
collaborative membership and participation among 
industry organizations that have provided support 
for collaboration (Bergemann 2017; Mottek Lucas et 
al. 2017). Unanticipated ecological disturbance—such 
as a wildfire in or surrounding the project area—
can challenge agency capacity and slow momentum 
(Schultz et al. 2017; McIntyre and Schultz 2020), or a 
poorly managed fire or escaped broadcast burn can 
quickly erode social capital and community buy-in 
for prescribed burning (Antuma et al. 2014; National 
Forest Foundation 2020). Disturbance can also take 
External Changes can Disrupt Progress:
Key Findings and Recommendations
•
External changes largely outside the
control of collaboratives can provide
windows of opportunity to garner
support and reorganize, though they can
also undermine collaborative progress
and diminish adaptive capacity.
•
Collaborative should: 1) document the
major stressors they have been exposed
to, or will likely experience in the future;
2) identify existing or future response
and preparedness options to mitigate
negative impacts and overcome barriers;
and 3) determine ways to navigate
opportunities when desirable changes
occur.

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        16
resources away from collaborative groups and shift 
priorities, or even lead to conflicting priorities, 
which can delay implementation and undermine 
collaborative performance (Cheng et al. 2015; Schultz 
et al. 2017; Bergemann et al. 2019; National Forest 
Foundation 2020) (Appendix 8). 
Collaborative groups have demonstrated flexibility 
to respond to ecological disturbances. For example, 
in response to the 2012 Barry Point Fire in Oregon 
and California—which burned up approximately 
four years of identified restoration projects and a 
NEPA-ready green timber program—the Lakeview 
Stewardship Group agreed on a post-fire salvage 
logging project and successfully made amendments 
to the CFLRP project agreement related to funding 
allocation, planning/project areas, timelines, and 
outputs (Spaeth 2014). Strategic planning that 
identifies alternative options when unexpected 
disturbances occur may streamline this process 
and reduce impacts to wildfire and other biophysical 
disturbances (National Forest Foundation 2016, 2020). 
Other collaboratives drafted letters of support to 
ensure that collaborative priorities were aligned with 
actions identified in categorical exclusions following 
insect disturbance, or developed a joint fact-finding 
process to document impacts of salvage logging on 
wildlife to inform future management decisions. 
To respond to legal or policy changes, collaboratives 
submitted letters of support for projects, filed an 
amicus brief, and/or sought legal support from an 
outside agency (National Forest Foundation 2020). 
Still, a number of barriers constrain the ways in 
which collaboratives respond to changes in social 
and ecological conditions that are largely outside of 
their control. See Appendix 5 for examples of how 
collaborative groups have responded to turnover, 
biophysical disturbances, and legal or policy changes, 
and the remaining barriers that inhibited their 
response capacity. 
17   https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/shared-stewardship
As such, collaborative groups should invest time and 
resources to:
•
identify the types of changes they have been
exposed to;
•
develop preparedness and response actions to 
mitigate negative impacts of external change 
and overcome barriers to the extent possible; 
and
•
identify courses of action for navigating
desirable changes when they occur.
Lessons Learned for 
Collaborative Restoration 
Moving Forward
The CFLRP was a learning laboratory for landscape-
scale, collaborative forest restoration. Through 
analysis of CFLRP projects and the broader 
collaborative management literature, the author 
team identified several themes that enabled, 
constrained, and/or were important to consider 
for collaborative forest restoration. Together, these 
findings highlight an overarching theme to consider 
for collaborative restoration moving forward: 
change is a fundamental and recurring aspect of 
collaboration. Collaborative groups are continuously 
impacted, both positively and negatively, by changes 
within their group, external changes in social and 
ecological conditions, and a fluid institutional 
environment in terms of policy direction and 
resource availability (e.g., personnel and funding). 
These changes, in turn, have the potential to expose 
collaborative groups to a number of vulnerabilities, 
as well as opportunities that must be considered and 
navigated. In this section, the report distills findings 
and lessons learned from this synthesis, with an aim 
to provide a forward-looking diagnostic framework 
for identifying, anticipating, and navigating change, 
and for building collaborative resilience in the face 
of change. The report does this in the context of 
the Forest Service “Shared Stewardship Strategy”17 
(henceforth Shared Stewardship) and finish with 
policy recommendations for the CFLRP specifically 
and collaborative forest restoration more broadly.  

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        17
Developing Adaptive Capacity
Collaborative groups must develop the adaptive 
capacity to be resilient to prospective changes 
from different directions. Collaboration in forest 
landscape restoration, or any other natural 
resource problem area, is nested within, and 
impacted by internal (e.g., group membership; 
financial resources, social capital) and external 
(e.g., social, political, economic conditions; 
biophysical conditions; legal requirements and 
agency priorities) factors. These factors change 
over time and interact to affect the outcomes, 
outputs, and performance of local collaboratives 
(Ostrom 2009; Emerson et al. 2012; Moseley and 
Charnley 2014) (Figure 2). A lingering question 
from the many academic studies and agency 
reviews of the CFLRP is the extent to which CFLRP 
projects are resilient to internal and external 
changes.
Resilience is “the capacity of a social-ecological system 
to absorb a spectrum of shocks or perturbations and 
to sustain and develop its fundamental function, 
structure, identity, and feedbacks through either 
recovery or reorganization in a new context” (Chapin 
III et al. 2009, p. 24).  Adopting a collaborative resilience 
framework starts with the acknowledgement that 
change is a fundamental aspect of any system. In 
order to mitigate the vulnerability of collaboratives 
to unwanted change and identify opportunities to 
take advantage of desired changes, collaboratives 
must enhance their adaptive capacity to anticipate 
and strategically respond. 
Collaborative resilience is dependent upon the 
combination and interaction among biophysical and 
social components. From a biophysical standpoint, 
resilience depends on the type, severity, duration, 
and cumulative impacts of the disruption(s). With 
regards to the social component, collaborative 
resilience depends on a number of attributes of 
adaptive capacity, including:
•
anticipating potential disruptions and
preparedness planning
•
developing institutional flexibility, diversity,
and redundancy;
•
instituting structures and practices that
facilitate trust-building, social learning,
and knowledge exchange across actors and
organizations at multiple levels of authority
and influence;
•
access to and mobilization of human,
financial, political, and institutional
resources; and
•
the ability to take risks and innovate while
maintaining transparency and accountability 
(Holling and Gunderson 2002; Berkes et al.
2003; Folke et al. 2005; Nelson et al. 2007;
Kofinas 2009; Goldstein 2012; Cheng and
Sturtevant 2012; Cisneros 2019).
Adaptive capacity of collaboratives is especially 
pertinent in light of Shared Stewardship and its 
emphasis on expanding forest management roles, 
responsibilities, and accountabilities across land 
ownerships and jurisdictions. The durability and 
adaptability of these new or evolving collaborative 
arrangements is often a secondary consideration 
once formal political agreements are signed 
(e.g., Memoranda of Understanding). The report 
identifies several recommendations to help 
collaborative groups build resilience to internal 
and external changes based on findings from the 
synthesis and the collective applied research. These 
include: 1) implement structures and/or practices 
to absorb inevitable changes in participants, confer 
institutional memory, and translate knowledge 
into practice; 2) conduct and periodically revisit 
vulnerability and adaptive capacity assessments; 
3) use scenario planning to explore future changes,
tradeoffs in decision-making, and opportunities
for adaptation; and 4) expand the CFLRP funding
mechanism to develop and sustain collaborative
capacity (Table 1).

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               18
Top-down factors
• 
Legal requirements (e.g., FACA, NEPA)
• 
Policy mandates (e.g., FLRA)
• 
Agency priorities, strategies (e.g., shared 
stewardship, forest products modernization, 
environmental analysis and decision making)
• 
Funding priorities, amount, and timing
• 
Agency culture
Social, political, and 
economic conditions
 
— History and context of 
collaboration with Forest Service
 
— Community dynamics
 
— Industry capacity/presence
 
— Listing of threatened or 
endangered species
Biophysical conditions
 
— Forest type, structure and 
condition
 
— Biodiversity, presence of 
threatened and endangered 
species
 
— Ecological disturbance 
(frequency, extent, severity)
 
— Climate change
Outputs
Outcomes
Performance
Sharing knowledge, 
responsibility, capacity
Sharing knowledge, 
responsibility, capacity
Collaborative dynamics
• Boundary spanning organizations, 
activities, and objects
• Social learning and knowledge exchange
• Social capital and trust
• Financial, human, institutional 
resources
• Consensus building
• Pluralistic, transparent communication 
and negotiation
• Operating rules, procedures, formality
• Timing and level of engagement
• Institutional flexibility, diversity, 
redundancy
Collaborative
Non-
governmental 
organizations
Academic 
institutions
Sharing knowledge, 
responsibility, capacity
Figure 2: Social-ecological system framework highlighting external and internal processes that affect the function, outcomes, and performance of collaborative groups.
Collaborative space
Forest Service
 
— Forest Unit  
line officers
 
— Budgets
 
— Unit culture
 
— Support for 
collaboration

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               19
Recommendation
Practical solutions/Example approaches
Implement structures and 
practices to absorb change 
in participants, confer 
institutional memory, and 
translate knowledge into 
practice
• 
Co-develop and revisit rules and procedures to provide structure and 
accountability
• 
Co-develop and revisit boundary objects (e.g., written agreements that guide 
restoration treatments and monitoring), on-boarding material or activities (e.g., 
workshops, buddy system), and build redundancy in positions or roles
• 
Develop incentives for collaboration (e.g., include collaboration as part of 
performance evaluations, inter- and intra-organizational collaboration training) 
Conduct and periodically 
revisit vulnerability 
and adaptive capacity 
assessments 
(See Appendix 9)
• 
Place-based vulnerability assessments work with communities and practitioners 
to determine the underlying causes of vulnerability and rely on past events 
as analogs for future impacts and plausible, desirable response options. These 
assessments ask:
* What changes has the collaborative experienced?
* How have these changes impacted collaborative performance?
* What have collaboratives done to prepare for or respond to these changes?
* What remaining barriers need to be overcome that inhibit response? 
• 
Structured self-assessments could be carried out by the collaborative and with 
Forest Service personnel (See Appendix 9 for an example assessment worksheet).
• 
Vulnerability is time- and context-specific and should be periodically re-
evaluated perhaps through annual reporting mechanisms which could support 
inter- and intra-collaborative learning and strategic allocation of limited 
resources.
Use scenario planning to 
explore future changes, 
tradeoffs in decision-making, 
and opportunities for 
adaptation
• 
Scenario planning can help collaborative participants explore the impacts of 
potential future biophysical and social changes on collaborative function and 
performance.
• 
Scenario investment planning, a tool emphasized in the Forest Service Shared 
Stewardship Strategy, can help clarify the tradeoffs involved in various 
restoration strategies.
• 
Scenario planning provides a space to collaboratively test assumptions, explore 
response options, and identify desirable outcomes and measures of success and 
resilience.
• 
Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science and partners have led the 
development and deployment the Climate Change Response Framework and 
menus of adaptation options in forests and fire-adapted ecosystems, which 
are useful tools for identifying climate-smart management actions to adapt to 
climate change and variability
• 
Simulation modeling can supplement scenario planning to evaluate the impacts 
of management alternatives and climate change scenarios on desired outcomes.
Expand CFLRP funding 
mechanism to develop and 
sustain collaborative capacity
• 
Support activities related to planning, social learning, conflict management, and 
relationship-building
• 
Support for facilitators, coordinators, and technical/scientific experts can help 
develop and maintain accountability among collaborative members and support 
the suggested assessments recommended herein
• 
Extend funding’s focus on “mature” collaboratives to nascent collaboratives in 
marginalized areas where capacity is low
• 
Develop funding mechanisms to better support multi-jurisdictional restoration 
efforts
Table 1: Recommendations for collaboratives to build and sustain resilience

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        20
Recommendation 1: Implement structures and/
or practices to absorb inevitable changes in 
participants, confer institutional memory, and 
translate knowledge into practice
Creating and sustaining a space for collaboration 
required individuals to span boundaries to provide 
critical capacities, knowledge, and responsibilities 
(Figure 2). Yet, turnover in collaborative participants 
and agency personnel is inevitable. One strategy to 
promote stability through change is for collaborative 
groups to invest time and attention to co-develop 
systems-based, or procedural, trust by establishing 
and adapting rules and procedures to provide 
structure and accountability (Stern and Coleman 
2019).
Though the degree of formality may vary widely 
between collaboratives, establishing basic rules 
and procedures for decision-making processes 
can confer institutional memory as people come 
and go (Table 1). Yet, it is important that rules and 
procedures remain flexible to account for changes or 
disturbances. Periodically revisiting and reaffirming 
the relevance, effectiveness, and mutual agreement 
on such rules and procedures serves as a reminder 
for both long-standing and new participants of how 
interdependent collaborative members are, despite 
their different viewpoints (Zellner et al. 2012), 
and may help institutionalize collaboration under 
Shared Stewardship despite participant turnover and 
external change. 
Collaboratives should consider co-developing 
boundary objects and onboarding material, hosting 
onboarding activities, and ensuring redundancy or 
overlap in roles or positions to support new personnel. 
Boundary objects and onboarding material need to be 
periodically updated to remain relevant (Cheng et al. 
2015; Stern and Coleman 2015; USFS 2018; Butler and 
Schultz 2019; Christenson and Butler 2019) (Table 1). 
In this vein, when turnover occurs, it is important to 
take stock of which capacities or knowledges are lost, 
and what is needed to fill the gaps that they left, with 
the understanding that people and organizations 
required to meet current and future goals and 
needs may have different capacities, knowledges, 
and responsibilities as those that left. In other words, 
turnover can also present an opportunity for renewal 
and reorganization. 
One challenge to collaborative resilience under 
Shared Stewardship is that its implementation rests 
not only on Forest Service line officers, but various 
state and local governments, and non-governmental 
and community-based entities and individuals. 
Findings from this synthesis suggest that different 
entities will interpret how to implement Shared 
Stewardship differently based on their organizational 
and community cultures, budgetary and staffing 
constraints, and individual attitudes and perceptions 
(Sabatier et al. 1995; Butler 2013; Moseley and 
Charnley 2014; Cheng et al. 2015). This underscores 
the need to align incentives for collaboration across 
organizations, perhaps by including them as part 
of managers’ performance, offering collaboration 
training involving all organizations’ key participants, 
and joint program-of-work reviews as collaborative 
learning and accountability opportunities (Table 1). 
Recommendation 2: Conduct vulnerability and 
adaptive capacity assessments of collaboratives 
Increases in the frequency, size, and severity of forest 
disturbances can diminish the adaptive capacity 
of collaboratives. Large-scale wildfire or insect 
and disease outbreaks can affect planning units 
and reallocate priorities and resources. Further, 
changes in dynamic socio-economic conditions 
(e.g., demographic transitions, forest products 
markets and industry capacity dynamics, recreation 
use trends) and internal conditions can affect the 
vulnerability of collaborative groups and may 
diminish collaborative progress and performance 
(Figure 2). While this synthesis provided several 
examples of the ways in which collaboratives were 
impacted by, and responded to, internal and external 
changes, vulnerability is unique to local social and 
ecological contexts. Therefore, collaboratives should 
consider conducting vulnerability and adaptive 
capacity assessments to internal and external 
changes (Table 1) (See Appendix 9 for a worksheet to 
assess collaborative resilience and adaptive capacity). 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               21
Vulnerability is defined as the “state of susceptibility 
to harm from exposure to stresses associated with 
environmental and social change and from the 
absence of capacity to adapt” (Adger, 2007: 268). As 
the definition implies, vulnerability consists of three 
inter-dependent components: 1) exposure to a stressor 
(e.g., wildfire); 2) sensitivity to harm; and 3) adaptive 
capacity, or the ability to prepare for or respond to 
change. Socio-cultural, political, and institutional 
barriers can limit response capacity (Adger et al. 
2009; Jantarasami et al. 2010; Moser and Ekstrom 
2010; Bierbaum et al. 2013; Biesbroek et al. 2013). 
There are a number of frameworks and approaches 
to assess social vulnerability and adaptive capacity of 
collaboratives to multiple social and environmental 
stressors across scales (e.g., Turner et al. 2003; Smit 
and Wandel 2006), and some adapted specifically to 
public lands and collaborative management contexts 
(Gupta et al. 2010; Fischer et al. 2013; McNeeley et al. 
2017).18 One such approach is place-based, qualitative 
vulnerability assessments. These assessments 
acknowledge that vulnerability is place-, context-, 
and time-dependent (Smit and Wandel 2006; O’Brien 
et al. 2007), and thus rely on close consultation with 
collaboratives and/or resource managers to:
• 
document the underlying causes of 
vulnerability and adaptive capacity; and 
• 
identify past impacts, responses, and barriers 
that inhibited response as analogs for future 
impacts, feasible and desirable response 
options, and remaining needs (Smit and 
Wandel 2006; Ford et al. 2010).19 
Place-based vulnerability assessments are commonly 
conducted using participant observation, focus 
groups, or in-depth interviews, which can help 
document the context-specific factors that 
contribute to vulnerability that might be otherwise 
overlooked using quantitative approaches. Further, 
and particularly relevant to the CFLRP and CFLRP 
projects, conducting place-based vulnerability 
18   See Fischer et al. (2013) https://doi.org/10.5849/jof.12-091 and McNeeley et al. (2017) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
crm.2017.01.005 for different approaches to social vulnerability assessment in public lands management contexts.
19   See Ford et al. (2010) http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/wcc.48 for a review of case 
study and analog approaches in vulnerability research
20  Beeton and McNeeley (2020) – a technical assessment of social vulnerability to climate change 
and agency decision-making https://cnhp.colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/download/
documents/misc/COBLM-SLV-SVA_Technical-Assessment_Report-Final.pdf     
assessments with collaboratives and Forest Service 
resource managers may help articulate how Forest 
Service decision-making exacerbates or attenuates 
local vulnerabilities, while also providing a better 
understanding among collaboratives of the 
regulatory and institutional context in which the 
Forest Service operates (Beeton and McNeeley 2020)20. 
Vulnerability assessments present an opportunity 
to develop desirable and plausible actions that are 
within the regulatory and legal bounds of Forest 
Service management. 
Collaboratives can be impacted by external and 
internal changes at any time; changes have the 
potential to expose collaboratives to new and 
potentially compounding vulnerabilities. Thus, 
collaboratives should periodically monitor and 
evaluate their vulnerabilities and adaptive capacities 
over time (Table 1). CFLRP projects are required to 
submit annual reports describing outputs, outcomes, 
and performance, which may provide an opportunity 
to implement a standardized self-assessment protocol 
to evaluate the adaptive capacity of CFLRP projects 
annually (Appendix 9). This could: 
• 
provide yet another social learning 
opportunity for collaboratives to identify 
where capacities exist, where they don’t, and 
support adaptive management;
• 
provide a mechanism for peer learning across 
CFLRP projects; and
• 
help funding agencies and parent 
organizations more efficiently allocate 
limited resources where needed. 
Beyond the CFLRP context, regular periodic 
assessments of collaborative progress relative to 
Shared Stewardship agreements and programs of 
work may help institutionalize adaptive capacity for 
the long term across multiple levels of authority and 
agency. 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        22
Recommendation 3: Use scenario planning to 
explore future changes, tradeoffs in decision-
making, and opportunities for adaptation 
Identifying current changes to which collaboratives 
are exposed and using structured self-assessments to 
document impacts, response options, and remaining 
needs is critical (See recommendation 2). Yet, it is 
also important to explore the impacts of potential 
and uncertain future biophysical, social, political, 
and economic changes to collaborative function and 
performance (Table 1). In dealing with highly complex 
and uncertain spaces, such as the forest landscape 
restoration management arena, collaboratives can use 
scenario thinking and strategic scenario planning. 
Scenarios are simply descriptions or narratives of 
plausible, future states. They depict how internal or 
external forces and factors might interact and change 
in the future, and the ways in which these changes 
may provide both challenges and opportunities for 
organizations or communities. Strategic scenario 
planning can be used by collaboratives to:
•
identify future plausible, but divergent
biophysical, socio-political, and/or economic
scenarios
•
explore the impacts of those scenarios on
multiple and often conflicting management
objectives;
•
explore tradeoffs and outcomes in alternative 
restoration activities to strategically prioritize 
investments; and
•
assess whether current management actions, 
objectives, and desired conditions can be
achieved or need to be revised in light of
future conditions (Rose and Star 2013) (Table
1).21
Scenario planning has been used in CFLRP projects 
specifically, and in the Shared Stewardship Strategy 
and public lands management contexts more broadly. 
In 2018, as the initial 10-year performance period 
21   Rose and Star – Using Scenarios to explore climate change: A handbook for practitioners: http://
climate.calcommons.org/sites/default/files/CCScenarios-Handbook%20FINAL%20080113.pdf
22       L. Buchanan, Personal communication
23   Scenario Investment Planning Platform - https://sipp-usfs.opendata.arcgis.com/
mandated by CFLRP authorizing legislation ended, 
there was uncertainty about funding multi-party 
monitoring and maintenance treatments on CFLRP 
projects. Regional and national-level leadership 
developed a process to support scenario planning that 
would consider plausible future funding scenarios 
for monitoring and restoration work. A template 
was developed and CFLRP projects completed and 
submitted these scenario plans in their FY 2018 
Annual Report.22 Additionally, the Forest Service 
and its partners developed the Scenario Investment 
Planning Platform23 to clarify tradeoffs and set 
priorities for investment under Shared Stewardship. 
Case studies from the Scenario Investment Planning 
Platform offer lessons learned in clarifying and 
focusing priorities for collaborative restoration work 
(Table 1).
Scenario Planning for Climate Change
Climate projections indicate that warmer and drier 
conditions will increase the extent, severity, and 
duration of insect outbreaks and wildfires in the 
future (Vose et al. 2018), and the pace and scale of 
change in some areas will cause transformations to 
novel systems with no historical analog (Williams 
and Jackson 2007; Hobbs et al. 2009, 2014; Schoennagel 
et al. 2014, 2017). In many cases, the direction and 
magnitude of change is highly uncertain, as are 
the likely changes to, and interactions among, 
social and ecological systems. Climate change is a 
risk multiplier, i.e., changes in climate will further 
challenge resource management decision-making 
and may exacerbate existing vulnerabilities. As 
such, it is imperative to explore plausible future 
climate scenarios and the impacts to resources of 
management concern, management objectives, and 
actions.
In this vein, the Department of the Interior (DOI) 
and Forest Service have developed and deployed 
climate change scenario planning in public lands 
management contexts (e.g., Symstad et al. 2014; 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               23
Schuurman et al. 2019).24 The Northern Institute of 
Applied Climate Science (NIACS) Climate Change 
Response Framework project has also developed 
climate change tools and approaches25, including 
an adaptation workbook and menus of adaptation 
strategies and approaches for forests.26 Additionally, 
Southwest FireCLIME partnered with NIACS 
to develop a menu of adaptation options for fire-
adapted ecosystems.27 Both of these resources 
are intended to help natural resource managers 
explore future impacts and vulnerabilities, assess 
whether current desired conditions and actions are 
tenable under future change, and identify desirable 
and feasible adaptations from a menu of options 
(Table 1). Recently, scientists and managers from 
the DOI and Forest Service coordinated a two-day 
climate change and adaptation workshop for the 
Colorado Front Range national forests (Pike-San 
Isabel and Arapaho-Roosevelt), which developed 
a hybrid approach comprised of the NIACS Forest 
Adaptation Resources framework and a climate 
scenario planning framework spearheaded by the 
DOI North Central Climate Adaptation Science 
Center. The intent of this effort is to develop a 
general technical report to inform future project- 
and forest-level planning for climate change.28 In 
addition, the Climate Change Response Framework 
includes a number of demonstration projects where 
land managers integrate and monitor climate-
smart practices.29 Demonstration projects could 
serve as yet another social learning opportunity to 
develop mutual agreement and understanding on 
collaborative restoration efforts. 
Scenario planning can be supplemented with 
quantitative simulation modeling. For instance, 
simulation models could be used to assess the 
effects of various management alternatives (e.g., 
forest treatment strategies) and climate scenarios 
on fire risk reduction or desired ecosystem structure 
(Stoddard et al. 2015; Symstad et al. 2017; Halofsky 
24    Schuurman et al. (2019) https://irma.nps.gov/Datastore/DownloadFile/632857
25    Swanston et al. (2016), NRS-GTR-87-2: https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/52760      
26   Menus of adaptation strategies and approaches: https://forestadaptation.org/adapt/adaptation-strategies     
27   Adaptation Tools – Resources for managing fire and forests in the context of climate 
change: https://swfireclime.org/fire-climate-adaptation-tools/      
28   https://www.fs.usda.gov/inside-fs/delivering-mission/sustain/climate-change-vulnerability-and-adaptation-options-two
29   Climate change response framework adaptation demonstration projects: https://
forestadaptation.org/adapt/demonstration-projects      
30   Loehman et al. 2018 http://www.mdpi.com/1999-4907/9/4/192 ; see also Halofsky et al. (2017). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-017-1925-0 and Stoddard et al. (2015) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-1925-0      
et al. 2017; Loehman et al. 2018).30 The Scenario 
Investment Planning Platform uses simulation 
modeling to assess tradeoffs in management 
alternatives across jurisdictional boundaries. These 
tools are useful to explore whether collaborative 
restoration management actions will result in 
desirable outcomes, and prioritize restoration 
investments (Table 1).
Scenario Planning Processes
Scenario planning can take many forms, from 
responding to a set of structured questions during 
annual reporting, to participatory workshops. Thus, 
the individuals or organizations that need to be 
involved in the process can vary, depending on the 
scope, scale, and intent of the process. In the case 
of climate change scenario planning workshops, 
these are structured, highly collaborative and 
participatory workshops that typically last 1-3 days. 
These workshops are intended to provide a space for 
participants to test assumptions and critically and 
creatively explore options to anticipate and respond 
to future change. Thus, a broad range of diverse 
partners, including climate scientists, ecologists, 
agency program managers and specialists, and 
collaborative members should be brought together, 
and professional facilitation may be warranted. 
Regardless of the scenario planning process format, it 
is important to note that collaborative resilience can 
take many different forms depending on different 
group values, goals, and perspectives (Nelson et 
al. 2007; Crane 2010). As such, a scenario planning 
process should provide space for participants to 
collaboratively explore what outcomes are feasible 
and desirable, i.e., what does success mean to 
collaboratives, what are the measures of success, 
and to what and for whom is resilience considered 
(Table 1). 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        24
Recommendation 4: Congress should consider 
expanding the CFLRP funding mechanism to 
develop and sustain collaborative capacity
A programmatic evaluation of the 23 CFLRP projects 
found that in the majority of cases, the CFLRP’s 
sustained funding and mandate to collaborate: 1) 
brought together diverse partners who leveraged 
resources for restoration; 2) helped to provide a 
forum where multiple perspectives and interests 
were heard; and 3) helped work towards agreement 
for forest restoration (Schultz and McIntyre 2019; 
McIntyre and Schultz 2020). Yet, the CFLRP limited 
funding to implementation and monitoring, and as 
a result many CFLRP projects struggled or stalled 
due to inadequate resources to carry out the time-
consuming work associated with social learning, 
conflict management, relationship-building, and 
building agreement that provide the foundation for 
implementation (Cheng and Sturtevant 2012; Butler 
and Schultz 2019). Thus, there is a need for additional, 
sustained investment in collaboratives to support 
the multiple types and timing of collaborative 
engagement opportunities and planning for capacity 
building (Table 1). Financial support for community 
champions, facilitators, coordinators, and technical 
and scientific support staff is critical to sustain 
collaborative groups over the long-term. These 
organizations and individuals can help: develop 
and sustain attention to CFLRP projects; develop 
and maintain accountability to co-developed rules, 
procedures, and boundary objects in addition to 
other tasks required among the group; and bring 
the best available scientific information to the types 
of assessments recommended herein. 
The CFLRP competitive grant process focused its 
investments on funding mature collaboratives in 
high-priority landscapes with a higher likelihood 
of achieving landscape restoration goals. Yet, there 
is also a need for funding mechanisms to support 
collaborative restoration in landscapes where 
collaborative capacity is still forming or does not 
currently exist (Schultz and Moseley 2019). Otherwise, 
high-capacity organizations will continue to increase 
their capacity through competitive awards over 
time at the expense of lower-capacity organizations 
with fewer resources to engage in forest restoration 
activities (Cheng and Dale 2020). These issues of scale 
and “institutional fit” between top-down funding 
and capacity of collaborative groups to absorb the 
funding feature predominantly in the resilience and 
environmental management literature (Cash et al. 
2006; Wyborn and Bixler 2013; Schoon and Cox 2018). 
Furthermore, funding that only supports restoration 
projects on federal forest lands can create a mismatch 
in social and ecological scales, wherein the scale of 
the collaborative institution does not fit the scale 
of the ecological problem (Crowder et al. 2006). 
Funding models that support cross-boundary forest 
management as envisioned in Shared Stewardship, 
and exhibited by the Joint Chiefs Partnership, 
would certainly bring other, diverse partners and 
resources to bear to solve complex and large-scale 
forest management problems (Table 1). 
Conclusion
The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program is a national-scale policy experiment that 
provided an unprecedented opportunity to learn and 
infuse learning across federal land management. 
Collaboration has emerged as a favored policy tool, 
accompanied by rhetoric regarding its promise 
and benefits. While collaboration has produced 
observable and enduring benefits and outcomes, it 
is not without challenges. This synthesis of CFLRP 
projects finds that change is a fundamental aspect 
of collaboration. Collaborative groups are exposed to, 
and must navigate, internal organizational changes 
and external social, institutional, and ecological 
changes. Climate change will amplify the impacts 
of these changing conditions and may exacerbate 
vulnerabilities. Given the continued emphasis on 
utilizing collaboration to realize national-level policy 
goals regarding forest restoration and wildfire 
risk management across landownerships and 
jurisdictions as envisioned by the Forest Service 
Shared Stewardship Strategy, it is necessary to 
understand the ways in which collaboration can be 
sustained over many years and be adaptable and 
resilient to stressors. Here, the report outlined a 
number of practical solutions to adapt to internal and 
external changes, as well as a number of frameworks 
and approaches for collaboratively assessing social 
vulnerability and adaptive capacity to current and 
future change. 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        25
References
Adger WN (2006) Vulnerability. Global Environmental 
Change 16:268–281. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2006.02.006
Adger WN, Dessai S, Goulden M, et al (2009) Are there 
social limits to adaptation to climate change? 
Climatic Change 93:335–354. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-008-9520-z
Antuma J, Esch B, Hall B, et al (2014) Restoring Forests 
and Communities: Lessons from the Collabo-
rative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. 
University of Michigan
Bartlett G (2012) Chapter 7: Developing collaboration 
and cooperation. In: North M (ed) Managing 
Sierra Nevada Forests, GTR-PSW-GTR-237. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Pacific Southwest Research Station, Albany, CA, 
pp 81–88
Beeton TA, McNeeley SM (2020) San Luis Valley Field 
Office social vulnerability assessment to cli-
mate variability and change. Natural Resource 
Ecology Laboratory and Colorado Natural Heri-
tage Program, Colorado State University. Avail-
able at: https://cnhp.colostate.edu/wp-content/
uploads/download/documents/misc/COBLM-
SLV-SVA_Technical-Assessment_Report-Final.
pdf, Fort Collins, CO
Bergemann H (2017) The collaborative forest landscape 
restoration program: lessons from two Colora-
do-based forest restoration projects. Colorado 
State University
Bergemann H, Schultz CA, Cheng AS (2019) Chapter 11: 
Participating in Collaborative Implementation: 
The Role of Collaborative History and Context. 
In: Butler WH, Schultz CA (eds) A new era for 
collaborative forest management: Policy and 
practice insights from the collaborative forest 
landscape restoration program. Routledge, 
Oxon, UK and New York, USA, pp 178–194
Berkes F (2009) Evolution of co-management: role of 
knowledge generation, bridging organizations 
and social learning. Journal of environmental 
management 90:1692–1702
Berkes F, Colding J, Folke C (eds) (2003) Navigating so-
cial-ecological systems: building resilience for 
complexity and change. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, USA
Bierbaum R, Smith JB, Lee A, et al (2013) A comprehen-
sive review of climate adaptation in the United 
States: more than before, but less than needed. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global 
Change 18:361–406. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11027-012-9423-1
Biesbroek GR, Klostermann JEM, Termeer CJAM, Ka-
bat P (2013) On the nature of barriers to climate 
change adaptation. Regional Environmental 
Change 13:1119–1129. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10113-013-0421-y
Bixler RP, Kittler B (2015) Collaborative Forest Land-
scape Restoration: A Meta-analysis of Existing 
Research on the CFLR Program. Pinchot Insti-
tute for Conservation, Washington, D.C.
Blue Mountain Forest Partners (2017) Blue Mountains 
Forest Partners: Upland Forest Restoration 
Zones of Agreement - Version 2.0. Blue Moun-
tains Forest Partners
Bonnell JE, Koontz TM (2007) Stumbling Forward: The 
Organizational Challenges of Building and Sus-
taining Collaborative Watershed Management. 
Society & Natural Resources 20:153–167. https://
doi.org/10.1080/08941920601052412
Bryant A, Charmaz K (2007) The SAGE Handbook of 
Grounded Theory. Sage Publications, Thousand 
Oaks, CA
Butler WH (2013) Collaboration at Arm’s Length: Navi-
gating Agency Engagement in Landscape-Scale 
Ecological Restoration Collaboratives. Journal 
of Forestry 111:395–403. https://doi.org/10.5849/
jof.13-027
Butler WH, Esch B (2019) Chapter 1: Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration in Action: An 
overview of the CFLRP cases. In: Butler WH, 
Schultz CA (eds) A new era for collaborative for-
est management: Policy and practice insights 
from the collaborative forest landscape resto-
ration program. Routledge, Oxon, UK and New 
York, USA, pp 18–42
Butler WH, Monroe A, McCaffrey S (2015) Collabora-
tive Implementation for Ecological Restoration 
on US Public Lands: Implications for Legal 
Context, Accountability, and Adaptive Manage-
ment. Environmental Management 55:564–577. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-014-0430-8
Butler WH, Schultz CA (2019) Conclusion - The Future 
of Collaborative Forest Restoration: Scholar-
ship, Policy, and Practice. In: Butler WH, Schul-
tz CA (eds) A new era for collaborative forest 
management: Policy and practice insights from 
the collaborative forest landscape restoration 
program. Routledge, Oxon, UK and New York, 
USA, pp 217–235
Cash DW, Adger WN, Berkes F, et al (2006) Scale and 
Cross-Scale Dynamics: Governance and Infor-
mation in a Multilevel World. E&S 11:. https://
doi.org/10.5751/ES-01759-110208

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               26
Chaffin BC, Gosnell H, Cosens BA (2014) A decade of 
adaptive governance scholarship: synthesis 
and future directions. E&S 19:. https://doi.
org/10.5751/ES-06824-190356
Chapin III FS, Kofinas GP, Folke C (eds) (2009) Princi-
ples of ecosystem stewardship: resilience-based 
natural resource management in a changing 
world. Springer Science & Business Media, 
New York, NY
Cheng AS, Dale L (2020) Achieving Adaptive Gover-
nance of Forest Wildfire Risk Using Competi-
tive Grants: Insights From the Colorado Wild-
fire Risk Reduction Grant Program: Adaptive 
Wildfire Governance Using Competitive 
Grants. Rev Policy Res. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ropr.12379
Cheng AS, Gerlak AK, Dale L, Mattor K (2015) Examin-
ing the adaptability of collaborative governance 
associated with publicly managed ecosystems 
over time: insights from the Front Range 
Roundtable, Colorado, USA. E&S 20:art35. 
https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-07187-200135
Cheng AS, Sturtevant VE (2012) A Framework for 
Assessing Collaborative Capacity in Communi-
ty-Based Public Forest Management. Environ-
mental Management 49:675–689. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00267-011-9801-6
Cheng AS, Waltz AEM, Aplet GH (2019) Chapter 7: 
Challenges and opportunities for collaborative 
adaptive management in forest landscape res-
toration. In: Butler WH, Schultz CA (eds) A new 
era for collaborative forest management: Policy 
and practice insights from the collaborative for-
est landscape restoration program. Routledge, 
Oxon, UK and New York, USA, pp 119–136
Christenson RA, Butler WH (2019) Chapter 3: Navigat-
ing accountability tensions in collaborative 
ecological restoration of public lands. In: Butler 
WH, Schultz CA (eds) A new era for collabora-
tive forest management: Policy and practice 
insights from the collaborative forest landscape 
restoration program. Routledge, Oxon, UK and 
New York, USA, pp 59–77
Cisneros P (2019) What makes collaborative water 
governance partnerships resilient to policy 
change? A comparative study of two cases in 
Ecuador. E&S 24:. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-
10667-240129
Clearwater Basin Collaborative (2015) Selway-Middle 
Fork Collaborative Forest Landscape Resto-
ration Program: 5 Year Report 2010-2014
Colavito MM (2019) Chapter 8: Use of Scientific Infor-
mation to Inform Decision Making on CFLRP 
Projects. In: Butler WH, Schultz CA (eds) A new 
era for collaborative forest management: Policy 
and practice insights from the collaborative for-
est landscape restoration program. Routledge, 
Oxon, UK and New York, USA, pp 137–153
Corbin J, Strauss A (2008) Basics of qualitative research: 
Techniques and procedures for developing 
grounded theory. Sage Publications, Inc., Lon-
don, UK
Cosens BA, Gunderson L, Chaffin BC (2018) Introduc-
tion to the Special Feature Practicing Panarchy: 
Assessing legal flexibility, ecological resilience, 
and adaptive governance in regional water 
systems experiencing rapid environmental 
change. E&S 23:. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-
09524-230104
Crane TA (2010) Of models and meanings: cultural 
resilience in social-ecological systems. Ecology 
and Society 15:19
Crowder LB, Osherenko G, Young OR, et al (2006) Re-
solving mismatches in US ocean governance. 
Science 313:617–618. https://doi.org/doi: 10.1126/
science.1129706
DiBari K, Randall JA (2018) Environmental Analysis 
and Decision Making Regional Partner Round-
tables: National Findings and Leverage Points. 
National Forest Foundation
Donahue J (2004) On Collaborative Governance. Corpo-
rate Social Responsibility Initiative, Working 
Paper Number 2
DuPraw ME (2014) Illuminating Capacity-Building 
Strategies for Landscape-Scale Collaborative 
Forest Management Through Constructivist 
Grounded Theory. Doctoral Dissertation, Nova 
Southeastern University
Edelenbos J, van Meerkerk I (2015) Connective capacity 
in water governance practices: The meaning 
of trust and boundary spanning for integrated 
performance. Current Opinion in Environ-
mental Sustainability 12:25–29. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cosust.2014.08.009
Egan D, Dubay T (2013) Breaking Barriers Building 
Bridges: Collaborative Forest Landscape Resto-
ration Handbook. Northern Arizona University 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Flagstaff, 
Arizona
Emerson K, Gerlak AK (2014) Adaptation in Collab-
orative Governance Regimes. Environmen-
tal Management 54:768–781. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00267-014-0334-7

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               27
Emerson K, Nabatchi T, Balogh S (2012) An Integrative 
Framework for Collaborative Governance. 
Journal of Public Administration Research and 
Theory 22:1–29. https://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/
mur011
Esch B, Vosick D (2016) The Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in 
Achieving Outcomes. ERI White Paper—Issues 
in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University
Fischer AP, Paveglio T, Carroll M, et al (2013) Assess-
ing Social Vulnerability to Climate Change in 
Human Communities near Public Forests and 
Grasslands: A Framework for Resource Man-
agers and Planners. Journal of Forestry 111:357–
365. https://doi.org/10.5849/jof.12-091
Folke C (2006) Resilience: The emergence of a perspec-
tive for social–ecological systems analyses. 
Global Environmental Change 16:253–267. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.04.002
Folke C, Hahn T, Olsson P, Norberg J (2005) Adaptive 
governance of social-ecological systems. Annu 
Rev Environ Resour 30:441–473
Ford JD, Keskitalo ECH, Smith T, et al (2010) Case study 
and analogue methodologies in climate change 
vulnerability research. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews: Climate Change 1:374–392. https://doi.
org/10.1002/wcc.48
Freeman M, Goldman B (2016) Understanding and 
addressing critiques of collaboration. Harvard 
Negotiation and Mediation Clinical Program. 
https://www.nationalforests.org/assets/
pdfs/1-HNMCP-Presentation-Slides.pdf
Glaser B, Strauss A (1967) The Discovery of Grounded 
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. 
Aldine, Chicago
Goldstein BE (ed) (2012) Collaborative resilience: Mov-
ing through crisis to opportunity. The MIT 
Press, Cambridge, UK
Gray GJ, Enzer MJ, Kusel J (2001) Understanding Com-
munity-Based Forest Ecosystem Management: 
An Editorial Synthesis. Journal of Sustain-
able Forestry 12:1–23. https://doi.org/10.1300/
J091v12n03_01
Gupta J, Termeer C, Klostermann J, et al (2010) The 
adaptive capacity wheel: a method to assess 
the inherent characteristics of institutions to 
enable the adaptive capacity of society. Envi-
ronmental Science & Policy 13:459–471
Hahn T, Nykvist B (2017) Are adaptations self-orga-
nized, autonomous, and harmonious? Assess-
ing the social–ecological resilience literature. 
Ecology and Society 22:. https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-09026-220112
Halofsky JS, Halofsky JE, Hemstrom MA, et al (2017) 
Divergent trends in ecosystem services under 
different climate-management futures in a 
fire-prone forest landscape. Climatic Change 
142:83–95. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-
1925-0
Hobbs RJ, Higgs E, Hall CM, et al (2014) Managing 
the whole landscape: historical, hybrid, and 
novel ecosystems. Frontiers in Ecology and 
the Environment 12:557–564. https://doi.
org/10.1890/130300
Hobbs RJ, Higgs E, Harris JA (2009) Novel ecosystems: 
implications for conservation and restoration. 
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 24:599–605. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2009.05.012
Holling CS, Gunderson LH (2002) Resilience and adap-
tive cycles. In: Gunderson LH, Holling CS (eds) 
Panarchy: Understanding transformations 
in human and natural systems. Island Press, 
Washington, D.C., pp 25–62
Jantarasami LC, Lawler JJ, Thomas CW, others (2010) 
Institutional barriers to climate change adapta-
tion in US national parks and forests. Ecology 
and Society 15:33. http://www. ecologyandsoci-
ety.org/vol15/iss4/art33/
Jensen-Ryan DK, German LA (2019) Environmental sci-
ence and policy: A meta-synthesis of case stud-
ies on boundary organizations and spanning 
processes. Science and Public Policy 46:13–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scy032
Knapp C (2010) Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
Collaboration Case Study: Woodland Park 
Healthy Forest Initiative. Colorado Forest Res-
toration Initiative, Fort Collins, Colorado
Kofinas GP (2009) Adaptive co-management in so-
cial-ecological governance. In: Principles of 
Ecosystem Stewardship. Springer, pp 77–101
Lauber TB, Decker DJ (2011) Developing Adaptabili-
ty: The Promise and Pitfalls of Collaborative 
Conservation. Human Dimensions of Wildlife 
16:219–221. https://doi.org/10.1080/10871209.201
1.585437
Loehman R, Flatley W, Holsinger L, Thode A (2018) Can 
Land Management Buffer Impacts of Climate 
Changes and Altered Fire Regimes on Eco-
systems of the Southwestern United States? 
Forests 9:192. https://doi.org/10.3390/f9040192
McAllister RR, Taylor BM (2015) Partnerships for 
sustainability governance: a synthesis of 
key themes. Current Opinion in Environ-
mental Sustainability 12:86–90. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cosust.2015.01.001

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               28
McCreary ST, Gamman JK, Brooks B (2001) Refining 
and testing joint fact-finding for environmen-
tal dispute resolution: Ten years of success. 
Mediation Quarterly 18:329–348. https://doi.
org/10.1002/crq.3890180403
McIntyre KB (2019) Investigating Policy Tools and 
Variables to Support Collaborative Governance 
and Collective Learning: A Programmatic As-
sessment of the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program. Colorado State University
McIntyre KB, Schultz CA (2020) Facilitating collabora-
tion in forest management: Assessing the ben-
efits of collaborative policy innovations. Land 
Use Policy 96:104683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landusepol.2020.104683
McNeeley SM, Even TL, Gioia JB, et al (2017) Expanding 
Vulnerability Assessment for Public Lands: The 
Social Complement to Ecological Approaches. 
Climate Risk Management 16:106–119. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2017.01.005
Monroe A (2015) Structuring Collaborative Implemen-
tation on US National Forests: How Formality 
and Inclusivity Influence Effectiveness in the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program. Florida State University
Monroe AS, Butler WH (2016) Responding to a policy 
mandate to collaborate: structuring collab-
oration in the collaborative forest landscape 
restoration program. Journal of Environmen-
tal Planning and Management 59:1054–1072. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2015.1053562
Moote A (2013) Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation 
and adaptation in collaborative resource man-
agement. Mamut Consulting
Moseley C, Charnley S (2014) Understanding mi-
cro-processes of institutionalization: stew-
ardship contracting and national forest 
management. Policy Sci 47:69–98. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11077-013-9190-1
Moser SC, Ekstrom JA (2010) A framework to diagnose 
barriers to climate change adaptation. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Scienc-
es 107:22026–22031. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1007887107
Mottek Lucas A (2015) Flagstaff watershed protection 
project: Creating solutions through communi-
ty partnerships. Northern Arizona University 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Flagstaff, AZ
Mottek Lucas A, Kim Y-S, Greco B, et al (2017) Social 
and Economic Contributions of the White 
Mountain Stewardship Project: Final 10-Year 
Assessment—Lessons Learned and Implications 
for Future Forest Management Initiatives. 
Journal of Forestry 115:548–558. https://doi.
org/10.5849/JOF-2016-008R3
National Forest Foundation (2020) 2020 CFLRP Collabo-
ration Indicator Survey Results. National Forest 
Foundation. Available at: https://www.nation-
alforests.org/collaboration-resources/learn-
ing-topics/collaborative-forest-landscape-resto-
ration-program-cflrp/cflrp-monitoring
National Forest Foundation (2016) Collaborative Resto-
ration Workshop: Working Toward Resilient 
Landscapes and Communities. National Forest 
Foundation
Nederhand J, Klijn E-H, van der Steen M, van Twist 
M (2019) The governance of self-organization: 
Which governance strategy do policy officials 
and citizens prefer? Policy Sci 52:233–253. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-018-9342-4
Nelson DR, Adger WN, Brown K (2007) Adaptation 
to environmental change: contributions of a 
resilience framework. Annual review of Envi-
ronment and Resources 32:395
Norström AV, Cvitanovic C, Löf MF, et al (2020) Prin-
ciples for knowledge co-production in sus-
tainability research. Nat Sustain. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41893-019-0448-2
O’Brien K, Eriksen S, Nygaard LP, Schjolden A (2007) 
Why different interpretations of vulnerability 
matter in climate change discourses. Climate 
policy 7:73–88
Orth PB, Cheng AS (2019) Organizational Change in the 
US Forest Service: Negotiating Organizational 
Boundaries in the Collaborative Process. Envi-
ronmental Management 64:64–78. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00267-019-01145-y
Ostrom E (2009) A General Framework for Analyzing 
Sustainability of Social-Ecological Systems. 
Science 325:419–422. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1172133
Ostrom E, Burger J, Field CB, et al (1999) Revisiting the 
Commons: Local Lessons, Global Challenges. 
284:6
Robinson CJ, Wallington TJ (2012) Boundary Work: En-
gaging Knowledge Systems in Co-management 
of Feral Animals on Indigenous Lands. E&S 
17:art16. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-04836-170216

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               29
Rose M, Star J (2013) Using scenarios to explore climate 
change: a handbook for practitioners. National 
Park Service, U.S. Departement of the Interior, 
Washington, D.C., USA
Ryan CM, Urgenson LS (2019) Chapter 4: Creating and 
Sustaining Collaborative Capacity for Forest 
Landscape Restoration. In: Butler WH, Schul-
tz CA (eds) A new era for collaborative forest 
management: Policy and practice insights from 
the collaborative forest landscape restoration 
program. Routledge, Oxon, UK and New York, 
USA, pp 78–95
Sabatier PA, Loomis J, McCarthy C (1995) Hierarchical 
controls, professional norms, local constituen-
cies, and budget maximization: an analysis of 
US Forest Service planning decisions. Ameri-
can Journal of Political Science 204–242
Schoennagel T, Balch JK, Brenkert-Smith H, et al (2017) 
Adapt to more wildfire in western North Amer-
ican forests as climate changes. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 114:4582–4590. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1617464114
Schoon M, Cox M (2018) Collaboration, Adaptation, and 
Scaling: Perspectives on Environmental Gover-
nance for Sustainability. Sustainability 10:679. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su10030679
Schultz C, Mcintyre K, Cyphers L, et al (2017) Strategies 
for Success Under Forest Service Restoration 
Initiatives. University of Oregon
Schultz CA, Jedd T, Beam RD (2012) The Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program: A His-
tory and Overview of the First Projects. Journal 
of Forestry 110:381–391. https://doi.org/10.5849/
jof.11-082
Schultz CA, McIntyre K (2019) Chapter 12: Policy 
Design to Support Collaborative Landscape 
Restoration: Lessons from the CFLRP. In: Butler 
WH, Schultz CA (eds) A new era for collabora-
tive forest management: Policy and practice 
insights from the collaborative forest landscape 
restoration program. Routledge, Oxon, UK and 
New York, USA, pp 195–211
Schultz CA, Moseley C (2019) Collaborations and capac-
ities to transform fire management. Science 
366:38–40
Schuurman GW, Symstad A, Miller BW, et al (2019) Cli-
mate Change Scenario Planning for Resource 
Stewardship: Applying a Novel Approach in 
Devils Tower National Monument. 106
Smit B, Wandel J (2006) Adaptation, adaptive capac-
ity and vulnerability. Global Environmental 
Change 16:282–292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2006.03.008
Spaeth AD (2014) Resilience in Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration: The Lakeview Steward-
ship Group’s Response to the Barry Point Fire. 
Oregon State University
Stern MJ, Coleman KJ (2015) The Multidimensionality 
of Trust: Applications in Collaborative Natu-
ral Resource Management. Society & Natural 
Resources 28:117–132. https://doi.org/10.1080/08
941920.2014.945062
Stern MJ, Coleman KJ (2019) Chapter 2: Trust Ecology 
and Collaborative Natural Resource Manage-
ment. In: Butler WH, Schultz CA (eds) A new 
era for collaborative forest management: Policy 
and practice insights from the collaborative for-
est landscape restoration program. Routledge, 
Oxon, UK and New York, USA, pp 45–48
Stoddard MT, Sánchez Meador AJ, Fulé PZ, Korb JE 
(2015) Five-year post-restoration conditions 
and simulated climate-change trajectories in 
a warm/dry mixed-conifer forest, southwest-
ern Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Man-
agement 356:253–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2015.07.007
Symstad A, Long AJ, Stamm JF, et al (2014) Two Ap-
proaches for Incorporating Climate Change 
into Natural Resource Management Planning 
at Wind Cave National Park. National Park 
Service, Fort Collins, CO
Symstad AJ, Fisichelli NA, Miller BW, et al (2017) Mul-
tiple methods for multiple futures: Integrating 
qualitative scenario planning and quantitative 
simulation modeling for natural resource deci-
sion making. Climate Risk Management 17:78–
91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2017.07.002
Thompson III FR, Hanberry B, Shifley SR, Davidson 
BK (2018) Restoration of pine-oak woodlands in 
Missouri: Using science to inform land man-
agement debates and decisions. The Wildlife 
Professional July/August:56–60
Toman E, Walpole EH, Heeren A (2019) Chapter 6: From 
conflict to shared visions: Science, learning, 
and developing common ground. In: Butler 
WH, Schultz CA (eds) A new era for collabora-
tive forest management: Policy and practice 
insights from the collaborative forest landscape 
restoration program. Routledge, Oxon, UK and 
New York, USA, pp 103–118
Turner BL, Kasperson RE, Matson PA, et al (2003) A 
framework for vulnerability analysis in sus-
tainability science. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 100:8074–8079

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               30
Urgenson LS, Ryan CM, Halpern CB, et al (2017) Vi-
sions of Restoration in Fire-Adapted Forest 
Landscapes: Lessons from the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program. Envi-
ronmental Management 59:338–353. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00267-016-0791-2
USFS (2018) Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program: 2016-2018 U.S. Forest Service Proejct 
Site Visits. 22
Vose JM, Peterson DL, Domke GM, et al (2018) Forests. 
In: Reidmiller DR, Avery CW, Easterling DR, et 
al. (eds) Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the 
United States: The Fourth National Climate 
Assessment, Volume II. U.S. Global Change 
Research Program, Washington, D.C., USA
Vosick D, Colavito M (2020) Modernizing 4FRI Imple-
mentation: Progress After Two Years Workshop 
Final Report. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizo-
na
Walpole EH, Toman E, Wilson RS, Stidham M (2017) 
Shared visions, future challenges: a case study 
of three Collaborative Forest Landscape Resto-
ration Program locations. E&S 22:art35. https://
doi.org/10.5751/ES-09248-220235
Williams JW, Jackson ST (2007) Novel climates, no-an-
alog communities, and ecological surprises. 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 
5:475–482. https://doi.org/10.1890/070037
Wondolleck JM, Yaffee SL (2000) Making collabora-
tion work: Lessons from innovation in natural 
resource managment. Island Press
Wyborn C, Bixler RP (2013) Collaboration and nested 
environmental governance: Scale dependency, 
scale framing, and cross-scale interactions in 
collaborative conservation. Journal of Envi-
ronmental Management 123:58–67. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2013.03.014
Zellner M, Hoch C, Welch E (2012) Leaping forward: 
Building resilience by communicating vul-
nerability. In: Goldstein BE (ed) Collaborative 
resilience: Moving through crisis to opportuni-
ty. The MIT Press, Cambridge, UK

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        31
Appendix 1: Roles of boundary spanning activities in supporting 
collaborative efforts
The following summarizes a number of examples of boundary spanning activities, how they support collaboration, 
and case examples for each activity. Note that the majority of these are from CFLRP projects– Non-CFLRP 
collaborative project examples were retrieved from the CFLRP Resource Library and represent boundary 
spanning activities in collaborative groups more broadly.
Joint fact-ﬁnding missions
Role - Intended to bring together diverse perspectives and research for knowledge exchange
Examples: 
•
Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project: Questions of interest to the collaborative group were not
addressed in the scientific literature, and/or were not applicable to local ecological conditions. The group 
co-developed a research protocol that documented ecological and restoration needs, which was used to
inform the collaborative group and the agency (Christenson and Butler 2019).
•
Dinkey Landscape Restoration Project: Prior to being selected for CFLRP funding, stakeholders often cited 
conflicting scientific results to justify recommendations, which hindered the ability of Forest Service
managers to make decisions. A conflict mediation group recommended that parties involved in federal
collaborative forest restoration in the area conduct a joint fact-finding mission. The Forest Service and
researchers subsequently compiled relevant science and synthesized the state of the science in a General 
Technical Report (North 2009)31 on topics related to forest and fire ecology, ecosystem restoration and
wildlife species, including the Pacific fisher (Bartlett 2012). This document provided the cornerstone for
the Dinkey CFLRP project members and Forest Service to build scientific consensus, which subsequently 
led to them to co-develop guidelines to better consider Pacific Fisher and California Spotted Owl habitat
in ladder fuels management (Moote 2013; Christenson and Butler 2019). These guidelines were adopted
and integrated into the 2012 Soaproot Restoration Project Environmental Assessment (https://www.
fs.usda.gov/nfs/11558/www/nepa/74251_FSPLT2_286575.pdf). The CFLRP project also developed a field
guide to train field crews to identify Pacific Fisher habitat (Christenson and Butler 2019).
•
Colorado Front Range Landscape Restoration Initiative: Uncertainty and disagreement about historic
forest structure led to a pooling of resources among the Landscape Restoration Team and various partners 
to develop a Front Range-wide assessment of fire history and historic forest structure patterns, ultimately 
to determine locally-relevant reference conditions to inform prescriptions (Addington et al. 2018; https://
www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_series/rmrs/gtr/rmrs_gtr373.pdf). The GTR-373 document was developed with
the intention that the Forest Service would use it to inform project planning.
•
Southern Blues CFLRP: The Blue Mountains Forest Partners, part of the Southern Blues CFLRP project,
convened and facilitated several meetings and field trips with scientists, Forest Service managers,
community residents, representatives from the timber industry, and environmental conservation groups,
and collaborated with and funded scientists to conduct a number of projects to characterize historic
and current forest risks, structure and composition, and disturbance regimes in xeric ponderosa pine,
dry ponderosa pine, dry mixed conifer, and wet mixed conifer forests. This resulted in the collaborative
development of shared zones of agreement for each forest type that subsequently informed management 
decisions on the Malheur National Forest (http://www.bluemountainsforestpartners.org/work/zones-
of-agreement/).
31        https://www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/psw_gtr220/

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               32
• 
Lower Dolores Working Group: Disagreement about the condition of native fisheries and minimum 
flow needs for whitewater boating led to a joint fact-finding mission called the Way Forward (http://ocs.
fortlewis.edu/drd/way-forward.htm). Three fisheries experts were hired to summarize available data on 
native fish conditions independently. Subsequently, the experts came together to inform the collaborative 
of management options to sustain native fish populations. The collaborative group then assessed these 
management options in the context of social, economic, and legal feasibility to determine options that 
could be integrated in the near-term versus those that would be implemented in the long-term and would 
require additional funding or changes in policy (Moote 2013). 
Peer-learning networks and activities
Role - To facilitate sharing of ideas, exchange of knowledge across cases and contexts. Each CFLRP project operated 
under a similar policy context, which supported this knowledge exchange.
Examples: 
• 
Sustainable Northwest, Rural Voices for Conservation Coalition, and the National Forest Foundation, 
among others, hosted a number of regional- and national-level workshops and webinars, which 
allowed CFLRP project participants to share successes, barriers, and ways to overcome barriers to 
collaboration. Many peer learning workshops and webinars related to collaboration included: 1) 
dealing with transitions; 2) understanding and addressing critiques of collaboration; 3) measuring 
progress in collaboration; 4) elements of successful collaboration; 5) collaboration and the Federal 
Advisory Committee Act; and 6) NEPA and collaboration at the project-level. See the National Forest 
Foundation Toolbox of Resources for peer-learning sessions, workshops, and documents related 
to collaboration and other forest restoration topics (https://www.nationalforests.org/collaboration-
resources/tools-search/results?q=&type=peer-learning-sessions&topic=). See the Sustainable 
Northwest Forest Program website for links to presentations from collaborative forest workshops and 
webinars (http://www.sustainablenorthwest.org/what-we-do/programs/forest). See the Rural Voices 
for Conservation Coalition for information and summaries from peer learning activities (https://www.
ruralvoicescoalition.org/fostering-learning).
• 
National Forest Foundation hosts a practice of collaboration website where peer learning recordings 
are housed and where other tools and best management practices can be found (https://www.
nationalforests.org/collaboration-resources/learning-topics/collaboration).
• 
From 2016-2018, forest staff from CFLRP projects participated in site visits to adjacent CFLRP projects 
to facilitate knowledge exchange and networking opportunities. These site visits consisted of multiple 
staff and divisions from the Washington Office (e.g., Forest management; Ecosystem Management 
Coordination; Fire and Aviation Management) as well as regional- and local-level leadership, 
community members, and collaboratives to support cross-scale networking and learning (https://
www.fs.fed.us/restoration/documents/cflrp/SiteVisit/CFLRP-2016-2018-USFS-ProjectSiteVisits.pdf).
• 
The Allegheny Highlands Fire Learning Network (FLN), a non-CFLRP project, participated in 
regional- and national-level FLN meetings and field trips, which resulted in adjustment of prescribed 
fire treatments to better align with historical disturbances on mountain ridges based on what they 
learned from a group in Tennessee. They also adopted a monitoring protocol from a FLN group in 
Arkansas to enable comparison across cases (Moote, 2013).

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               33
Community ﬁeld trips, pub crawls, pub talks, podcasts, interpretive trails, monitoring 
jam sessions, etc.
Role - To provide a forum for building trust and relationships in informal settings and for facilitating knowledge 
exchange among collaborative groups, Forest Service, and the broader community.
Examples:
• 
Field trips – almost all cases involved field trips in some capacity, which were perceived as effective 
ways to: 1) promote shared understanding and identify zones of agreement; 2) better document how 
broad restoration principles can translate to operations on the ground; 3) facilitate two-way knowledge 
exchange (i.e., collaborative group and stakeholders could learn about rules, regulations, and policies 
that constrain Forest Service management actions, and the agency staff become more knowledgeable 
about restoration priorities across the collaborative groups); 4) offer the chance for collaborative groups 
to review and provide feedback on restoration treatments; 5) learn from and about impacts of wildfire 
and insect disturbance; and 6) onboard new participants following turnover ( Cheng et al. 2015; Antuma 
et al. 2014; Schultz et al. 2017; Mcyntyre 2019; DuPraw 2014; Christenson and Butler 2019; NFF 2016; 
Urgensson et al. 2017; Blue Mountain Forest Partners 2017; Monroe 2015; National Forest Foundation 
2020). For example, a sub-committee for the Dinkey Landscapes conducted field visits with silviculturists 
to identify location-specific project objectives, and developed targets and marking guidelines linked to 
project objectives. Follow-up surveys with the collaborative led to a facilitated discussion of how marking 
guidelines were determined and for what purpose, which helped contextualize how decisions are made 
on the ground and link project objectives to operational constraints (Bartlett 2012). 
• 
Monitoring jam sessions: The Uncompahgre Plateau and Colorado Front Range Landscape Restoration 
Initiative hosts annual monitoring jam sessions. These are hosted by the Colorado Forest Restoration 
Institute and provide a forum for community members to share and assess monitoring results and 
determine whether the monitoring results are consistent with desired conditions (USFS 2018; Cheng et 
al. 2017). A summary of a 2015 monitoring jam session in the Colorado Front Range CFLRP project can be 
found here: https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2017/12/2015_FR-CFLRP-Monitoring-
Jam-Session-2015-Summary-Final.pdf)
• 
Fire Learning Trail: The Grandfather Restoration Project CFLRP, in collaboration with the Southern Blue 
Ridge Fire Learning Network and Consortium of Appalachian Fire Managers and Scientists developed 
an interpretive fire learning trail that documents the value of fire on the landscape and the need for 
restoration. The Fire Learning Trail included interpretive signage along the way and had a podcast that 
was associated with the trail (McIntyre 2019; USFS 2018). More information about the Fire Learning Trail 
can be found here: http://www.appalachianfire.org/thefirelearningtrail 
Technical and scientiﬁc expertise
Role - Provided support in monitoring and evaluation, adaptive management, forest and watershed science, 
law, etc.
Examples:
• 
The Landscape Restoration Team (part of the Colorado Front Range Forest Restoration Initiative) 
partnered with the Colorado Forest Restoration Institute to develop a monitoring protocol to determine 
forest structure change across scales and treatment types, using a combination of the Common Stand 
Exam method and spatially-explicit analyses (Cheng et al. 2015). The monitoring plan with information 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change
        34
on the monitoring protocol can be found here: https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/
sites/22/2018/10/2017_FR_CFLRP_Monitoring_Plan_Typeset_2018.pdf 
•
The Southwestern Crown of the Continent CFLRP hired a monitoring coordinator to develop a monitoring 
plan (https://www.sciencebase.gov/catalog/item/5b8f1bfce4b0702d0e7ec9d1) and support project
implementation. A private firm, the Ecosystem Management Research Institute provided science and
monitoring support (Butler and Esch 2019).
•
On the Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project, The Nature Conservancy supported a monitoring and
research program to identify knowledge gaps and communicate the research process and outcomes to
partners (Butler and Esch, 2019).
•
A field tour of the Missouri Pine-Oak Woodlands Restoration project, where representatives from state
and federal agencies, NGOs, industry, and politicians voiced their reactions and concerns for current and 
future forest management led the collaborative to partner with other organizations to develop science-
based assessments related to concerns and uncertainties heard that day. These included assessments of:
1) woodlands and wildlife; 2) the effects of fire and harvesting; 3) economic impacts; and 4) restoration
during climate change (https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_journals/2018/rmrs_2018_thompson_f001.pdf).
•
The Lemhi County Forest Restoration Group, a non-CFLRP project, partnered with the Rural Voices
for Conservation Coalition for legal counsel to ensure that the Forest Service: 1) used the group’s best
practices criteria to evaluate contracting bids; 2) allowed a group member to sit on the bid review board;
and 3) held a public meeting during NEPA planning to discuss alternatives development (Moote 2013).
Facilitators and Coordinators
Role - Facilitators helped: establish zones of agreement; recharge waning participation; re-align direction; 
conduct evaluations of collaborative progress and project implementation; and ensure tasks were completed on 
time. Facilitators were particularly important in areas of highly contested management issues (e.g., threatened 
and endangered species)
Coordinators had diverse responsibilities, including meeting planning, coordinating field trips, grant/report 
writing, monitoring and science delivery, designing outreach and communication strategies, work with Forest 
Service, developing rules, identifying issues for discussion, etc.
Examples: 
•
Four Forest Restoration Initiative: Facilitators evaluated collaborative progress, success, and trust-building 
through annual self-reported assessments among the collaborative members using a combination of
notes from all-hands retreat and interviews (Esch and Vosick 2016).
•
Facilitators in a Pacific Northwest site mediated conflict and built relationships through development
of rules that mandated mutual respect and honesty, e.g., the group had to sign an oath that while they
don’t have to agree with each other, but will try to understand peoples’ perspectives (Walpole et al. 2017).
•
Colorado Front Range Landscape Restoration Initiative: Peak Facilitation helped to “re-energize” the
group through (re)defining goals; revisiting missions and objectives; developing clear decision-making
processes; and formalizing the process for determining membership (Bergmann, 2017).
•
Coordinators and facilitators in the Uncompahgre, Colorado Front Range, and Four Forest Restoration
Initiative helped convene meetings and field trips that brought together managers, collaborative
stakeholders, and scientists to review results and recommend changes to management actions (Cheng
et al. 2019).

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               35
• 
Dinkey Landscape Restoration Project: With support from Sierra National Forest and the Wilderness 
Society, a half-time monitoring coordinator was hired to oversee the multiparty monitoring program. 
Responsibilities included maintaining communication between parties, maintain databases, and making 
sure tasks were completed and consistent with the expectations of the collaborative group (Moote 2013; 
Schultz et al. 2014). A similar role for coordinator was established in the Selway-Middle Fork project 
(Clearwater Basin Collaborative 2015).
• 
Dinkey Landsape Restoration Project: The facilitator built trust by providing confidential consultation 
for collaborative members to discuss interests and negotiation principles, and air grievances. This helped 
the mediator build rapport with the collaborative members and helped frame perceived conflicts among 
members as collective problems. 
• 
Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project: Coordinator supported field trip planning and science engagement 
activities, and facilitated meetings with the Restoration Planning sub-committee to develop issue-based 
recommendations for restoration (Urgenson et al. 2017).

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               36
Appendix 2: Regional support and coordination for CFLRP work
In the 2020 NFF CFLRP Collaboration Indicator Survey, CFLRP project respondents were asked whether the Regional Office provided ample 
resources to support and coordinate CFLRP work using a rating scale (strongly agree; agree; don’t know; disagree; strongly disagree). Of those who 
had involvement with the Regional Office, roughly 40% agreed or strongly agreed that the Regional office supported CFLRP work, while about 15% 
reported that the Regional Office inhibited CFLRP work. The table below summarizes the Regional Office-level factors that supported or inhibited 
collaborative function and performance as well as few exemplar(s) from survey respondents.
Regional Office factors that support/inhibit 
collaborative function and performance
Exemplar(s)
Supporting
• RO prioritization of collaboration helped 
steer unit- and district-level commitment to 
collaboration
• Regional personnel joined collaborative meetings, 
field trips, collaborative workshops
• Provided resources for relationship- and trust-
building activities (e.g., field trips, camping trips)
• Provided timely response to needs
• Provided skilled personnel, specialists
• Provided flexible financing options
• Aligned project resources
• Provided feedback on CFLRP application
• Provided assistance in reporting accomplishments
• “The Regional office has attended collaborative field trips and statewide conferences in which 
collaboratives from across the state come together.”
• “[The] Regional Forester visited the CFLR area, met with the local coalition, and participated on 
a field trip.”
• “The RO has made it clear to the Forest Supervisors and the District Rangers what a priority 
they put on collaboration”
• “When issues were raised regarding collaborative process, the RO stepped up and reaffirmed the 
agency’s commitment to the process.”
• “RO support comes in the form of flexible financing, expert support, working for support from 
the WO.”
• “The Regional Office supported CFLRP function and performance through alignment of 
watershed restoration program resources and through relevant feedback on the second CFLRP 
application.”
• “Providing skilled personnel was very supporting.”
• “Supported function and performance by providing sufficient funding and manpower when 
needed.”
Inhibiting
• Lack of support, inconsistent, and/or conflicting 
guidance on navigating contracting issues, 
implementation
• Uncertainty in support for CFLRP 2.0
• Mis-alignment with CFLRP project principles and 
design criteria caused friction
• Mis-alignment between RO and Forest Units or 
districts
• Limited involvement from regional specialists 
• Diminished engagement throughout life of CFLRP 
due to agency turnover
• Elicited limited input from CFLRP project 
members on regional projects/initiatives 
• Limited funding, personnel to support and do the 
work 
• “The indecision of whether the region would support and submit new CFLRP proposals gave us 
a bit of whiplash.”
• “For first half of CFLRP, there was quite a bit of regional office engagement. During the second 
half, due to personnel turnover, the regional office has been totally invisible.”
• “The Regional office, in later years of the collaborative, cared little about input from the CFLRP 
and launched its own initiatives with little input.”
• “Regional office direction and guidance is sparse and often conflicting when it comes to proper 
implementation. [The] comfort and ability [at local scale] to expand policy interpretations to 
increase pace and scale objectives are inconsistent. Regional office goals for partnerships are not 
always implementable and the region often contributes to confusion when making agreements 
at the RO level without the proper consultation with implementation units like forest/districts.”
• “Lack of support or direction from regional office has been detrimental to implementation.”

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               37
Appendix 3: The multiple dimensions of trust and related activities to 
maintain or build trust
Stern introduced the concept of trust ecology and the multiple dimensions of trust (e.g., Stern and Coleman, 
2014, 2019). In short, these concepts argue that there are many forms of trust, including dispositional, affinitive, 
rational, and procedural (or systems-based) trust. The actionable forms of trust (i.e., affinitive, rational, and 
procedural) are necessary to support collaborative function and performance. Building and maintaining diverse 
forms of trust can contribute to the resiliency of the collaborative. Below, we describe each different form of 
trust, and some practices and activities collaboratives have engaged in to build and maintain trust:
• 
Dispositional trust is the “general tendency or predisposition of an individual to trust or distrust 
another entity in a particular context” (Stern and Coleman, 2014: 122).
 
○
Dispositional trust, unlike the other forms of trust, is difficult to change as it develops over 
the course of a person’s lifetime. 
• 
Procedural trust is having trust in a set of procedures, rules, or binding documents to as a way to 
guide actions. 
 
○
There are a number of ways to develop this form of trust, for example: 1) Develop clear, 
transparent collaborative structures that all participants are aware of; 2) co-develop 
a charter documenting rules for interaction; 3) establish criteria for decision-making 
and evaluation of decisions; and 4) establish a process whereby collaboratives can 
communicate about and negotiate dissenting opinions, and document the consequences 
for violating rules and procedures (Stern and Coleman 2019). Having a professionally-
trained facilitator or coordinator can help establish and maintain these practices and 
procedures. Co-developing strong procedural trust is the basis for all other forms of trust, 
thus it may be pertinent to build this type of trust first and ensure that it is maintained. 
Procedures ad practices are particularly useful for navigating personnel turnover (Stern 
and Coleman 2019). 
• 
Rational trust is developed over time as individuals demonstrate their expertise, performance, 
and follow-through on responsibilities. 
 
○
Facilitators or coordinators can help build rational trust by managing timelines and 
deliverables so that products and feedback are delivered when they are expected. Also, 
some groups have developed sub-committees, which not only reduces responsibilities and 
accountabilities of the larger collaborative group, but also enables specialists to convene 
and develop recommendations on more technical issues to the larger collaborative group. 
Together, these factors enable individuals to demonstrate to others their professional/
technical expertise, and as projects are completed on time members start to build trust that 
they can rely on others to get things done (Stern and Coleman 2019). 
• 
Affinitive trust is where affinity for a collaborative member is developed based on positive 
experiences with the person, similar values or backgrounds, and/or perceived connectedness to 
one another. 
 
○
Again, facilitators and facilitated discussions can help build affinitive trust by working 
together through contentious subjects. Additionally, field trips, pub talks, or other informal 
activities often lead to sharing information, shared learning, and relationship-building and 
help build affinitive trust (Stern and Coleman 2019). 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               38
Appendix 4: Positive and negative impacts of common stressors or changes experienced by 
collaboratives
The following lists both positive and negative impacts from common internal and external changes. Results are based on review of peer-review and gray 
literature, as well as results from the 2020 Collaboration Indicator Survey and worksheets completed at the SWERI Cross-boundary and Idaho Forest 
Restoration Partnership workshops in March and April 2020, respectively. These together indicated that turnover in participants, biophysical disturbance, 
and legal or policy changes were the most common stressors or changes collaboratives had experienced.
Changes
Positive Impacts
Negative Impacts
Turnover in 
participants
• Rejuvenate collaborative and provide 
excitement
• Different viewpoints, consider new 
ways of doing things, and promote 
risk-taking
• Turnover of disruptive or non-
supportive members provides new 
opportunities to build relationships, 
identify common goals, and increase 
transparency and communication
• Facilitate boundary spanning
• Backlogs, delays in progress, and uncertainty in implementation schedule
• Collaborative member fatigue
• Time lost to on-board, re-hash old arguments
• Increased workload on remaining participants
• Change in direction over long planning to implementation timeframes detrimental to progress
• New and non-supportive participants can derail progress and erode trust
• Loss of key voices diminishes balanced perspectives and equity in decision-making
• Loss of understanding of social-ecological context
• Loss of organizational vision, collaborative direction, and group norms
• Conversations become unfocused, while messaging, agreements, guidance is inconsistent
• Loss of understanding or commitment for collaborative engagement in different phases of work
Biophysical 
Disturbance
• Catalyst for establishing collaborative
• Agreement that collaborative 
recommendations were effective, 
appropriate, and needed
• Transitioned collaborative from 
recovery-oriented to resilience 
planning
• Increased funding and support for 
landscape-scale projects, strategic 
planning, and NEPA
• Wildfire helped meet ecological 
objectives
• Impacted planning units results in changes, delays, or uncertainty in implementation
• Less involvement of collaborative in categorical exclusions to respond to disturbance
• Loss of economic viability for timber sales and stewardship contracts
• Increased cost to treat units impacted by insects
• Diverted resources (personnel and funding) from projects or conflicting priorities regarding 
appropriate management actions
• Lack of restoration after disturbance led to frustration and loss of membership
• Poorly managed fire or escaped broadcast burn can erode social capital and trust 
• Shift in agency priorities to suppression, mitigation, and salvage
• Increase in scope and magnitude of resource needs
Legal or 
policy 
change
• Increased number of opportunities 
for restoration activities across 
boundaries (e.g., GNA)
• Increased funding for implementation 
and collaboration
• Litigation refocused Forest Service 
resources and brought positive 
attention to collaborative
• Mexican spotted owl injunction stopped implementation on Forest Service land, almost forced 
mills to close 
• Litigation led to collaborator fatigue due to slow progress and division among groups
• CFLRP/RMRI shifted focus away from existing collaboratives and created competition for 
resources (personnel and funding)

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               39
Appendix 5: Responses to internal and external changes and barriers to response
The following lists collaboratives’ responses and barriers to response to common internal and external changes. Results are based on review of peer-review and gray 
literature, as well as results from the 2020 Collaboration Indicator Survey and worksheets completed at the SWERI Cross-boundary and Idaho Forest Restoration 
Partnership workshops in March and April 2020, respectively. These together indicated that turnover in participants, biophysical disturbance, and legal or policy 
changes were the most common stressors or changes collaboratives had experienced.
Changes
Responses to Turnover
Barriers to Responding to Turnover
Turnover in 
participants
• Develop strategic plan to minimize disruption from turnover
• Develop and periodically review agreed-upon rules and procedures, MOUs with partners, 
etc.
• Reinforce ground rules at meetings 
• Develop hand-over memos, onboarding workshops or meetings
• Dedicate staff time to on-board new personnel, articulate responsibilities and 
accountabilities (e.g., buddy system, redundancy in positions or roles)
• Leadership requirements to help them “learn the ropes” before leading
• Hired a facilitator/coordinator to stay on topic, (re)define goals, vision, mission
• Introduced more structure to the collaborative and sub-committees
• Encouraged more time at meetings and more frequent work relationships 
• Pressure agency to remain accountable, fill vacancies/retain employees
• Develop understanding/agreements with agency leadership to prioritize collaboration 
among field unit line officers 
• Collaborative engagement in FS hiring process
• Increase partnerships and/or enhance partner coordination
• Agency culture - “move to promote” and detailing 
• Not enough “lead time” for departures
• Lacking a “deep bench” of participants to recruit
• Difficult to recruit/retain participants who have 
their own jobs, other commitments
Biophysical
Disturbance
• Field trips to observe effects and discuss benefits of disturbance
• Amended CFLRP project agreement:  changed priority management areas and adjusted 
targets and implementation schedule
• Identified alternative treatment areas or types (salvage, sanitation harvest)
• Acquired additional funding from the state to support wildfire mitigation work 
• Articulated collaborative priorities and collaborative support for CEs and restoration
• Re-established trust by providing a safe, open space for communication and negotiation
• Joint fact-finding mission addressed impacts of salvage logging on environment/wildlife 
to inform future management decisions
• Scale mismatches – e.g., lost value of insect-killed 
trees before NEPA compliance completed 
• Not enough emphasis on socioeconomic impacts to 
the local communities 
• Much of resources diverted to removing dead trees 
and creating fire breaks.
• Focus on administrative structure/procedures at 
expense of forest restoration and fuels reduction
Legal or 
policy 
change
• New Mexico State Forestry worked with industry to fund restoration work on private 
land
• Field visits to fine tune silvicultural prescriptions in the face of litigation
• Collaborative intervened in the lawsuit on behalf of the Forest Service
• Submitted letters of support for the project and participated in the objection review 
process
• Sought legal support from outside agency
• Filed an amicus brief
• Hired new staff to increase planning capacity and to solidify responsibilities for new 
collaborative restoration opportunities
• Mismatch in scales; project areas already specified 
and finding alternative treatments difficult
• Lack of state, regional, federal direction or guidance 
• Difficult for collaborative to provide timely 
responses during litigation process 
• Lack of sufficient resources to keep other projects 
moving forward during litigation
• Unsure of collaborative role in the litigation process
• Uncertainty with application, funding, uncertain 
placement

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               40
Appendix 6: Example boundary objects from CFLRP projects
Boundary objects—“material objects and structures that occupy the space between a CGR [collaborative 
governance regime] and the bureaucracy and that provide mechanisms through which CGR learning and ideas 
can be absorbed and acted upon by the bureaucracy” (Cheng et al. 2015)—may provide a robust mechanism to 
mitigate the impacts that result from turnover. 
Boundary objects can include: 
1) agreements co-developed by the collaborative and Forest Service that set guidelines for restoration 
treatments and/or expectations and accountabilities (e.g., memoranda of understanding); 
2) monitoring and adaptive management protocols; and/or 
3) models, databases, or maps (Antuma et al. 2014; Cheng et al. 2015; Urgenson et al. 2017). 
Below are a few examples of boundary objects found in the review of CFLRP projects that are currently being used or could 
be used as boundary objects:
• The Northeast Washington Forestry Coalition developed sideboards which provided 
recommendations for thinning, tree removal, and density thresholds in different areas (Antuma et 
al. 2014). It can be found here: https://www.nationalforests.org/assets/pdfs/Best-Practice-NEWFC-
Forest-Management-Guidelines.pdf 
• The Southern Blues Restoration Coalition is developing decision trees, which define zones of 
agreement among the collaborative from past projects so that future restoration treatments 
carried out by FS staff can be expedited so long as they are within shared goals of the collaborative. 
The decision trees also provide information regarding who to contact when questions or issues 
arise (Antuma et al. 2014).
• The Amador-Calaveras Consensus Group created a scorecard, which helped the collaborative 
group and Forest Service determine if a project fits within established recommendations (Antuma 
et al. 2014). 
• The Colorado Front Range Forest Landscape Restoration Initiative and related partnerships have 
developed a number of documents that serve as boundary objects:
 
○The Front Range Fuels Treatment Partnership Roundtable co-developed their Living 
with Fire document that the Forest Service uses as a guide for implementation (https://
mountainscholar.org/bitstream/handle/10217/80354/Living_With_Fire_May2006.
pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y). This was also a foundational document for the Colorado 
Front Range Forest Restoration Initiative CFLRP project proposal. 
 
○As part of the Upper Monument Creek Environmental Impact Statement, stakeholders 
associated with the Colorado Front Range Forest Restoration Initiative CFLRP and the Upper 
Monument Creek Collaborative developed treatment design criteria for operations staff, 
specifically to help translate broad ecological restoration goals into prescriptions on the 
ground. The treatment design criteria can be found here: https://www.conservationgateway.
org/ConservationByGeography/NorthAmerica/UnitedStates/Colorado/Documents/
Appendix%20D_Final%20Design%20Criteria%20Report_12-11-13.pdf. 
 
○A summary report and collaborative recommendations from the Upper Monument 
Creek Collaborative to the Forest Service Pike National Forest that articulated the 
collaborative’s desired conditions and management actions can be found here: https://www.

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               41
conservationgateway.org/ConservationByGeography/NorthAmerica/UnitedStates/Colorado/
Documents/UpperMonumentCreek_Web.pdf. 
 
○GTR-373: Principles and practices for the restoration of ponderosa pine and dry mixed-
conifer forests of the Colorado Front Range. Although several studies addressed the 
management of dry mixed-conifer forests (e.g., GTR-PSW-237; RMRS-GTR-310), these 
were not specific to the unique characteristics of the Colorado Front Range and therefore 
lacked the specificity to plan, implement, and monitor forest restoration activities within 
the Colorado Front Range CFLRP footprint. To define a common vision for restoration, 
the Front Range CFLRP worked with a range of scientists and managers from federal 
agencies, academia, and environmental NGOs who helped produce and review GTR-373. 
First, a team of scientists reconstructed historical forest conditions along the Colorado 
Front Rang using best available science to identify desired conditions. The document was 
developed to help managers and the broader collaborative forest restoration community 
understand desired conditions, identify restoration recommendations and the principles 
behind those, and provide a set of steps for implementing these principles. One respondent 
from the NFF CFLRP collaboration indicator survey noted that document has been useful 
to deal with turnover in collaborative participants and maintain institutional memory, 
“we have numerous publications including GTR-373 that outline much of the vision for 
the collaborative.”32 The document can be found here: https://cfri.colostate.edu/wpcontent/
uploads/sites/22/2019/03/RMRS_gtr373.pdf 
 
○The Landscape Restoration Team also developed an adaptive management framework--
which was approved by the Front Range Roundtable—that details the process of adaptive 
management (e.g., designing restoration goals, evaluating monitoring results, and changing 
actions): http://www.rmtrr.org/data/Aplet%20et%20al.%20FR-CFLRPAdaptiveManagement_
CFRI-TB-1403.pdf 
 
○The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute and Landscape Restoration Team also developed 
various monitoring protocols for ecological and socio-economic conditions (https://cfri.
colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2018/10/2017_FR_CFLRP_Monitoring_Plan_
Typeset_2018.pdf); and understory plants (https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/
sites/22/2017/12/FR-CFLRP-Understory-Monitoring-Protocol-2015.pdf)
• The Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project developed issue-based recommendations for 
the management of ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer forests, and for management of 
ponderosa pine impacted by dwarf mistletoe (Urgenson et al. 2017). These recommendations 
were incorporated into the Deschutes National Forest Melvin Butte Vegetation Management 
Project (Deschutes Collaborative Forest Project Annual Report - https://www.fs.fed.us/restoration/
documents/cflrp/2015AnnualReports/DeschutesFY2015AnnualReport.pdf). 
• Four Forest Restoration Initiative developed the Large Tree Retention Strategy, which provides 
issue-based recommendations to resolve conflicts over cutting large diameter trees to meet 
ecological and biodiversity goals and objectives (Urgenson et al. 2017)(https://4fri.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/old_growth_protection-revised080812.pdf). Key components of this strategy were 
implemented in the Large Tree Implementation Plan in the Record of Decision for the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative (https://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprd3836454.pdf).
32        Participant 22, NFF Collaboration Indicator Survey

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               42
• The Dinkey Landscape Restoration Project used GTR 220, An Ecosystem Management Strategy for 
Sierran mixed-conifer forests (https://www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/psw_gtr220/), 
which summarized the state of the science on: 1) forest and fire ecology; 2) principles of ecological 
restoration and sivicultural practices; and 3) wildlife, particularly the Pacific fisher. It was used 
as a framework and baseline to develop shared visions or zones of agreement on restoration 
priorities and options within the CFLRP project footprint (Bartlett 2012).
• The Clearwater Basin Collaborative signed a memorandum of understanding with the Forest 
Service that defines expectations of the CBC and the Forests included in the Selway-Middle Fork 
Clearwater CFLRP project

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               43
Appendix 7: On the timing of involvement in the Environmental 
Analysis and Decision Making Phases 
Cases pointed to the importance of interactions between stakeholders and the Forest Service early, often, 
and throughout the environmental analysis and decision-making (EADM) process pursuant to the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other requirements. We provide contrasting examples illustrating cases 
in which collaboratives were involved in the EADM process, as well as examples of how collaborative groups 
who were not included early and often in the EADM process subsequently mitigated this shortcoming.
• 
Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Restoration Project: Local participants were included early 
and often prior to and during the EADM phases. Involvement included collecting, analyzing, and 
interpreting information comparing historic vs. current forest conditions that, in turn, allowed 
participants to co-develop restoration principles to guide projects (Bergmann et al. 2019). When 
stakeholders participate in developing the evidence basis for why forest restoration is needed, 
it can often increase trust, potentially reduce conflict and litigation, and streamline the NEPA 
process. 
• 
Alternatively, Cheng et al. (2015) and Butler and Esch (2019) noted that in the Colorado Front Range 
Landscape Restoration Initiative and the Amador Calaveras Cornerstone Project collaborative 
groups were not involved in the NEPA process. Instead, most of the acres treated were based on 
“shelf-stock” NEPA, which limited the flexibility of forest service managers to accommodate 
requested changes from the collaborative group. 
• 
Compared to stakeholders involved in the Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Restoration project, 
stakeholders from the Colorado Front Range Landscape Restoration Initiative did not report an 
equal degree of trust in and satisfaction with the collaborative process (Bergmann, 2019). 
• 
The Colorado Front Range Landscape Restoration Initiative and Amador Calaveras Cornerstone 
Project both developed approaches to mitigate this shortcoming in part by completing 
environmental impact studies in new project areas (e.g., Upper Monument Creek) with more 
direct participation of stakeholders, and also developing a review and approval processes for NEPA 
documents that were in progress or had been completed (Butler and Esch 2019).

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               44
Appendix 8: Ecological disturbance can redistribute priorities, erode 
trust, and undermine collaborative effectiveness
Ecological disturbance can constrain collaborative progress. Disturbance can shift priorities and, in some 
cases, take resources (e.g., personnel and funding) away from the collaborative group in order to address new 
problems on the landscape, which in turn can deter collaborative progress and create conflict among the 
group. A poorly managed fire can also quickly erode trust and social capital. For example: 
• 
Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Restoration Project: The spruce beetle epidemic and 
subsequent development of the Spruce Beetle Epidemic and Aspen Decline Management 
Response (SBEADMR) led to reduced involvement among several key members of the 
Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Restoration Project, as their time and energy was shifted to 
SBEADMR (Bergmann, 2017). 
• 
Colorado Front Range Landscape Restoration Initiative: High mortality from the mountain pine 
beetle epidemic in Colorado led to the development of a new collaborative group, the Colorado 
Bark Beetle Cooperative. According to Cheng et al. (2015), this new collaborative attracted 
significant attention and competed with the Front Range Roundtable for financial resources. It 
also led to conflict among the Front Range Roundtable members; some members wanted to shift 
some resources to treating higher elevation zones to take advantage of new funding sources to 
mitigate mountain pine beetle impacts, while others argued that there was no scientific need 
to treat that zone. The conflict reduced the group’s focus on implementation and undermined 
collaborative effectiveness (Cheng et al. 2015). 
• 
Burney Hat Creek Basins: Antuma et al. (2014) reported that the Forest Service was coordinating 
fuels treatments with the adjacent Lassen Volcanic National Park. In 2012, a fire broke out on NPS-
managed lands. The fire eventually spread onto Forest Service-managed land and burned close to 
20% of the planning unit. This effectively deterred cross-boundary collaboration in the short-term 
and led to discontent among the local community (Antuma et al. 2014). 

Developing and Sustaining Collaborative Resilience in the Face of Change                                                                                                                               45
Appendix 9: Collaborative Resilience Worksheet
Below, we have developed a structured assessment that collaboratives can use to assess their vulnerability 
and adaptive capacity. It helps identify current structures or practices in place to respond to change, which 
provide an understanding of the plausible and potentially desirable response options available to the group, 
and also identifies remaining needs, or barriers, that need to be overcome in order to build capacity to respond 
in the future. It is grounded in findings from this synthesis. It has been piloted at two collaborative workshops, 
including the 2020 SWERI Cross-boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop (https://sweri.eri.nau.edu/
cross-boundary-landscape-restoration-workshop/) and the Idaho Forest Restoration Partnership (IFRP)’s 2020 
workshop Evolving Forest Collaboration: Expanding Shared Stewardship. At both workshops, we encouraged 
individuals to fill out the worksheet. We also administered breakout groups where the worksheet components 
were collectively discussed and reported back to the larger group. At the SWERI cross-boundary workshop, a 
key takeaway from the collaborative resilience breakout group was that worksheets such as the one appended 
provide a structured process for collaboratives to self-assess their adaptive capacity. The worksheets can be 
used as a social learning exercise and reviewed annually or periodically. At the IFRP workshop, we conducted 
an exit poll – the majority of participants reported that this worksheet was a useful approach to documenting 
and understanding collaborative resilience to internal and external changes and about half indicated that they 
would take this worksheet back to their collaborative to collectively populate.

How resilient is your collaborative? Assessing the vulnerability and adaptive capacity of collaborative groups to internal and external change 
In your breakout group, use this worksheet to: 
• discuss and learn about the internal and external changes collaboratives have experienced; 
• the associated impacts to collaborative function and performance; 
• the ways in which collaboratives have dealt with these changes across cases and contexts; 
• barriers that constrain response; and 
• best practices that have facilitated response. 
What internal or external change(s) 
has the collaborative group you are 
affiliated with experienced? 
These could include: 1) turnover in participants; 
2) the transition from direction-setting 
to implementation; 3) notable ecological 
disturbance; 4) sudden change in industry 
capacity; and/or 5) a legal or policy change, 
among others.
How have these changes impacted 
collaborative function or performance?
These may include both positive changes or 
negative impacts. For example, participant 
turnover may have resulted in new opportunities 
for collaborative progress. Conversely, turnover 
may have caused set-backs in getting to 
agreement or delays in implementation.
In what ways have you prepared for, 
responded to, or mitigated impacts from 
these changes? Please provide examples. 
These could include: 1) developing a transition 
strategy (e.g., written agreements guiding 
restoration treatments, onboarding material, 
a buddy system, or redundancy in roles); 2) 
enabling collaborative involvement early and 
often throughout planning and implementation 
phases; 3) augmenting prescriptions, planning 
areas, or priorities in the event they are affected 
by wildfire, among others.
What barriers or constraints inhibited 
your ability prepare for or respond to 
these changes? Please provide examples.
These could include: 1) lack of knowledge or 
experience about how to anticipate, plan for, or 
anticipate surprises; 2) lack of time – too many 
other issues to deal with; 3) lack of leadership 
within the collaborative; 4) lack of power, 
authority, or resources to affect change.

