The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Restoration Applications of Resource Objective  
Wildfires in Western US Forests 
By John Paul Roccaforte, Research Associate 
Introduction 
Frequent-fire forests of the western US have undergone remarkable changes in structure, composition, 
and function due to historical exclusion of naturally occurring fire. Land managers often use mechanized 
thinning followed by prescribed fire to reduce forest density and fuel loads and reestablish natural pat-
terns. However, thinning can be expensive and difficult to implement across all lands due to lack of mar-
kets, limited forest industry capacity, difficult terrain, lack of public acceptance, and management re-
strictions in wilderness areas and national parks. Accordingly, there is increasing interest in managing 
naturally ignited wildfires for meeting forest restoration objectives. To investigate the general effective-
ness of resource objective (RO) wildfires for restoring frequent-fire and associated forests of the western 
US, we conducted a review of the relevant peer-reviewed literature. 
  
Literature Demographics 
Formal analysis of ecological responses to RO fires was relatively recent — 21 of the 37 papers (57 per-
cent) we reviewed were published between the years 2010 and 2018, and only two peer-reviewed articles 
were published between 1970 and 2000. We found 17 studies that investigated RO fire outcomes in Sier-
ra Nevada forests, while other ecoregions represented in the literature included Arizona–New Mexico 
Mountains, Middle Rockies–Blue Mountains, and the Colorado Plateau. Most studies were conducted in 
parks and wilderness areas with long-standing fire use policies. For example, Yosemite National Park, 
one of the first parks to establish “let-burn zones,” was used in 14 of the 37 studies we reviewed. Few 
studies were conducted on multi-use, operational forest lands. We noted several ecoregions where fre-
quent-fire forests occur, but for which published studies on RO fires were lacking. Forest structure re-
sponses were the focus of 14 studies we reviewed, and fire characteristics — including effects of RO 
fires on severity, extent, and type of subsequent fires — were the focus of 12 studies. Studies of under-
story vegetation responses (six articles) and landscape-scale patterns or dynamics (six articles) were also 
common in the literature. Relatively few studies examined RO fire effects on hazardous fuels. Results on 
responses of important fine-scale structural attributes such as tree spatial patterns, snags, and “large” 
trees were not widely reported. 
 
Research Findings 
• Research indicated that RO fires were generally effective for reducing tree density and fire be-
havior; however, tree density often remained above known historical ranges of variation. 
• Restorative effects in terms of reducing tree density were particularly pronounced in areas where 
wildfires had burned repeatedly. Nearly all studies reporting on tree density changes indicated 
that effects aligned with ecological restoration objectives (Table 1, page 2). 
 
 
September 2020 

 
• 
Most studies examining changes to fire charac-
teristics showed desirable outcomes of RO fires, 
particularly with respect to decreases in subse-
quent burn severity and fire size (Table 1). 
• 
Studies reporting herbaceous understory re-
sponses were mixed with respect to effects on 
abundance and species richness; increases in 
invasive species abundance in areas of high burn 
severity were consistently reported (Table 1). 
• 
Research on landscape-scale patterns or dynam-
ics indicated that RO fires can increase hetero-
geneity with respect to vegetation distribution. 
A few studies suggested that landscapes experi-
encing decades of fire use appeared stable in 
terms of burn severity. Increases in heterogenei-
ty were thought to promote greater resiliency 
than fire-excluded landscapes (Table 1). Several 
authors suggested that RO landscapes could 
serve as references for restoration planning. 
 
Conclusions  
• 
Resource objective fires can be generally effec-
tive for restoration of frequent-fire forests, par-
ticularly on landscapes with long histories of 
fire use and in areas of moderate burn severity. 
• 
More research is needed to evaluate RO fire ef-
fects against explicit and well-articulated resto-
ration objectives, and additional studies are needed concerning important ecological processes and 
functions. 
• 
More research is needed to evaluate effectiveness of RO fires for meeting restoration goals in ecore-
gions such as the Southern Rocky Mountains, Utah–Wyoming Rocky Mountains, and the Black Hills. 
• 
More research is needed to evaluate effectiveness of RO fires on multi-use, operational forest lands.  
 
Literature Cited 
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D.G. DeLorenzo, and A.D. 
Graves. 2013. Restoring composition and structure in Southwestern frequent-fire forests: A science-based frame-
work for improving ecosystem resiliency. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-310. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 76 p.  
 
Further Reading 
North, M.P., S.L. Stephens, B.M. Collins, J.K. Agee, G. Aplet, J.F. Franklin, and P.Z. Fulé. 2015. Reform forest fire man-
agement – agency incentives undermine policy effectiveness. Science, 349 (6254): 1280–1281.  
Romme, W.H., G.D. Hayward, and C. Regan. 2012. A framework for applying the historical range of variation concept to 
ecosystem management. Chapter 17 in Historical environmental variation in conservation and natural resource 
management, ed. J.A. Wiens, G.D. Hayward, H.D. Safford, and C.M. Giffen. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell  
van Wagtendonk, J.W. 2007. The history and evolution of wildland fire use. Fire Ecology, 3: 3–17.  
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Huffman, D.W., J.P. Roccaforte, J.D. Springer, and J.E. Crouse. 2020. Restoration applications of resource objective wild-
fires in western US forests: a status of knowledge review. Fire Ecology, 16:18.  
 
Contact: John Paul Roccaforte, John.Roccaforte@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Table 1. Peer-reviewed studies published through 2018 were 
used to evaluate effectiveness of resource objective wildfires 
for restoring frequent-fire forests of the western US. Table 
shows the number of publications reporting decreases, neutral 
(no change), or increases in attributes commonly used to eval-
uate ecological restoration success. Shaded responses are 
typically considered desirable restoration outcomes (e.g., 
Reynolds et al. 2013). Note: Attributes were not mutually ex-
clusive to individual studies; some publications reported on 
responses of multiple attributes. 
