View this email in your browser
Working Paper: Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire
Landscapes of the Southwest
Soils are the foundation of forest ecosystems. As author Dan Binkley says in
the latest ERI working paper, “Forests and soils interact so strongly that any
major change in one of them leads to a reshaping of the other.” 
 
This strong connection between forests and soils is why ecologists and land
managers work to understand the impacts of ﬁres and restoration treatments
on soils. Research has shown that the impacts depend strongly on site-speciﬁc
details like soil type, moisture conditions at the time of the ﬁre, and spatial
variation across landscapes.  
 
The working paper “Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the
Southwest” explains why there is no one-size-ﬁts-all prescription for sustaining
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

soils as part of restoration treatments or ﬁre operations. But, managers can
improve localized prescriptions over time if each operational unit includes a
learning opportunity, with a pocket-science approach of varying treatment
intensities in small areas to ﬁnd out what happens when a treatment is omitted
(a control) or intensiﬁed (with extra fuel or burning under more extreme weather
conditions).
What land managers are saying:
“(This paper) is the most useful, insightful, distilled, and
practical manuscript of [the subject] I’ve read in a long time.
The graphics are great, the writing style is both informative
and fun, and the realistic and unbiased approach to the topic
matter is refreshing.”
– Forest Service research soil microbiologist
ERI Has Produced...
43 working papers over the past 18
years on a variety of subjects, from
smoke mitigation to bark beetles.
Click below to see all of the working
papers we have produced.
 
READ THE WORKING PAPER
VIEW ALL ERI WORKING PAPERS

What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2020 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
