 
 
 
An Evaluation of Spatial Structure in the Ft. Valley Restoration 
Blocks and the Pre-Treatment 4FRI Chimney Springs Project Area 
 
September 2020 
 
 
Prepared for 
USDA Forest Service 
Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) Team 
 
 
Prepared by 
Amy Waltz 
Jonathon Donager  
Caleb Stotts  
Andrew Sánchez Meador 
Bryce Esch 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. 
 

Table of Contents 
Executive Summary ...........................................................................................................1 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................1 
Methods ...............................................................................................................................4 
Study Site .....................................................................................................................4 
Classification of Imagery ............................................................................................5 
Spatial Metrics Assessment .........................................................................................5 
Results .................................................................................................................................7 
Spatial Metrics ............................................................................................................7 
Discussion..........................................................................................................................11 
Management and Collaborative Partnership Implications .........................................13 
Caveats and Limitations ..................................................................................................13 
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................14 
Literature Cited ...............................................................................................................14 

Executive Summary 
Forest restoration on western public lands have been increasing in scope and scale since the early 
2000s. These efforts restore attributes of forest structure to emulate historical reference 
conditions. Remote sensing applications can be used to quantify spatial structure for the purpose 
of informing silvicultural prescriptions and evaluating treatments. However, there are limited 
studies of reference conditions (and limited reference conditions at large scales) to develop the 
restoration spatial metrics ranges that could help define goals and appropriate monitoring 
metrics. There is also a lack of observations of how spatial structure metrics might change as a 
result of restoration treatments. This report develops metrics for a set of small, 20-year-old 
restoration treatments and develops baseline, pre-treatment conditions for the Chimney Springs 
task order, one of the first Four Forest Restoration Initiative task orders, in a high-visibility 
project area near Flagstaff, Arizona. We used resource-grade photography (RGP) that was 
contracted for about half of this 2-million-acre project. Important findings from this analysis 
include recognizing the need to determine the ecologically appropriate data resolution for spatial 
metric assessments. The RGP data set, at 0.3m resolution (pixel size), was too fine of scale to 
capture multi-tree clumps. The RGP is compared to more recently available imagery to display 
the changes in canopy cover and subsequent spatial metrics just due to resolution. More 
information is needed to vet the spatial metrics outcomes at different resolutions by comparing 
spatial analysis outcomes with the known variability found based on other monitoring metrics, 
such as forest structural attributes. 
 
 
Introduction 
Throughout western dry forest landscapes, dense and homogenous forest conditions have 
resulted in uncharacteristically large and severe wildfires and insect/disease outbreaks 
(Covington and Moore 1994, Hessburg et al. 2005, Addington et al. 2018). The Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative (4FRI) is a collaborative effort addressing these issues through restoration 
of forest ecosystems across 2.5 million acres on portions of the four national forests along the 
southern Colorado Plateau in northern Arizona. Forest restoration efforts seek to restore 
attributes of forest structure to emulate historical reference conditions, including tree density, 
age, and size distributions, and spatial arrangements of trees and openings (Reynolds et al. 2013, 
Sanchez Meador et al. 2011, 4FRI EIS or Monitoring Plan 2014). To achieve ecological and 
collaborative goals for restoring spatial patterns, silvicultural prescriptions often create a mosaic 
of fine-scale spatial structure, made up of individual trees and variably sized groups of trees 
within a matrix of variably sized openings (Sánchez Meador et al. 2011, Reynolds et al. 2013, 
Rodman et al. 2017). While a natural range of variability for spatial patterns in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests is not well defined at stand and landscape scales, restoring known patterns 
of fine-scale spatial heterogeneity is thought to be crucial for restoring forest conditions that are 
resistant and resilient to disturbances (Churchill et al. 2013, 2017, 2018, Egan 2008, Reynolds et 
al. 2013, Sánchez Meador et al. 2011). 
 
 
1

In 2010, the Four Forests Restoration Initiative (4FRI) project was selected for funding under the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP), which came with a mandate and 
funding for multi-party monitoring. The collaborative multi-party monitoring focused on 
effectiveness monitoring, which has been accomplished through a partnership of US Forest 
Service and collaborator funding and staff. The 4FRI is one of several landscape collaborative 
projects that has interest in using remote sensing methods to quantify spatial patterns and assess 
the efficacy of meeting ecologically based spatial structure and fuel treatment goals (Hamilton et 
al. 2013, 4FRI Adaptive Management and Monitoring Plan 2014, Zachman and Dickson 2017). 
Remote sensing applications can be used to quantify spatial structure for the purpose of 
informing silvicultural prescriptions and evaluating the efficacy of treatments for meeting 
restoration objectives (Cannon et al. 2017, 2018, Jeronimo et al. 2017, Wiggins et al. 2019). 
These analyses may provide relatively low-cost monitoring options while enabling larger-scale 
evaluations that can provide landscape context (Jeronimo et al. 2017). However, there are limited 
studies of reference conditions (and limited reference conditions at large scales) to develop the 
restoration spatial metrics ranges that could help define goals and appropriate metrics for 
practitioners and external stakeholders. There is also a lack of observations of how spatial 
structure metrics might change as a result of restoration treatments (Esch and Waltz 2019). This 
report develops metrics for a set of small, 20-year-old restoration treatments, and develops 
baseline, pre-treatment conditions for the Chimney Springs task order, one of the first 4FRI task 
orders, in a high-visibility project area near Flagstaff, Arizona (Figure 1).  
 
This report addresses the following questions, using and testing the resource-grade photography 
(RGP) and classification system, found in Zachman and Dickson (2017) for its applicability to 
assess these questions: 1) What are the range of values found in a set of eight spatial metrics in 
the pre-treatment Chimney Springs project area?; 2) What are spatial structure metric ranges in 
three, 20-year-old restored forest blocks?; 3) How does metric sensitivity to differences between 
restored and non-restored landscapes vary (i.e., what metrics are most appropriate to measure 
restoration-based forest structural change?); and 4) How does the RGP data resolution, grain and 
extent influence the classification methods and metrics of interest? Primary spatial structure 
metrics used in this analysis were based on the 4FRI Monitoring Plan and include canopy cover 
percentage, and a series of patch metrics that have the potential to be sensitive to the restoration 
treatments of thinning and burning. The set of metrics included area and edge metrics, shape 
metrics, and aggregation (and isolation) metrics (see Table 1). By using remote sensing methods, 
this report quantifies baseline spatial structure metrics that may be used to evaluate unit-level 
silvicultural treatments and the landscape effects of treatments.  
2

 
Figure 1. Resource Grade Photography of the Chimney Springs task order, north of Flagstaff, AZ. The 17 
treatment units, which are outlined in black, make up this 4FRI project and add up to 1,621 acres. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3

Methods 
Study Site 
This study was conducted within and adjacent to 
the Fort Valley Experimental Forest, an 
approximately 5,000-acre mixed-age ponderosa 
pine reserve located approximately 9 miles 
northwest of Flagstaff, AZ in the Coconino 
National Forest. The restored blocks were initiated 
in 1997 using restoration methods described in 
Fulé et al. 1997. Three experimental blocks were 
established; each containing three randomly 
assigned thinning levels and a control of 
approximately 35 acres per unit. While all tree 
thinning levels were based on historical 
reconstruction of site-specific overstory, for the 
purposes of this study, only the “full restoration” 
blocks were used. This thinning protocol retained 
all living pre-settlement trees and all trees with 
>16 inches diameter at breast height (Covington 
and Moore 1994; Fulé et al. 2001). In addition, 
remnant evidence of missing or dead pre-
settlement trees (e.g., snags, logs, stumps) were 
replaced with live post-1876 trees. Replacement 
trees were retained using 1.5–3 trees per remnant 
pre-settlement evidence. The 4FRI Chimney 
Springs project area surrounds this experiment 
consisting of 1,621 total acres, with 17 separate 
units varying in size from 32 acres to 341 acres. 
 
Thinning operations began in the Chimney Springs 
project area in the fall of 2017, with treatment 
implementation due for completion by 2020.The 
development of this project area through 4FRI 
includes innovative stewardship contracting 
through The Nature Conservancy, who has been 
working with Forest Service partners to promote 
restoration efficiencies and innovations. This pre-
treatment report will be complemented by a post-
treatment assessment following completion of the 
task order. The pre-treatment stands in Chimney 
Springs are not untouched, but have been an active 
part of timber management practices over the last 
Remote Sensing Terminology* 
Canopy cover – the percentage of an 
area occupied by patches that are 
classified as canopy. This is also known 
as the canopy intercept, or the proportion 
of stand area covered by vertical 
projections of tree crowns (Reynolds et 
al. 2013). 
Passive remote sensing – Remote 
sensing of energy naturally reflected or 
radiated from the terrain (e.g., aerial 
photography, satellite imagery). 
Active remote sensing – remote sensing 
methods that provide their own source of 
electromagnetic radiation to illuminate 
the terrain (e.g., LiDAR). 
Nadir – Point on the ground directly in 
line with the remote sensing system.  
Orthomosaic – Composite image or 
photograph made by piecing together 
individual images or photographs 
covering adjacent areas. 
Georeference – The association of 
something with locations in physical 
space. Imagery is typically 
georeferenced to spatially referenced 
basemaps. 
Orthorectify – The process of stretching 
the image to match the spatial accuracy 
of a map by considering location, 
elevation, and sensor information 
(ArcMap Help). 
Supervised classification – Digital-
information extraction technique in 
which the operator provides training-site 
information that the computer uses to 
assign pixels to categories. 
* Definition taken directly from 
https://quizlet.com/191681362/remote-sensing-
vocabulary-terms-flash-cards/aken unless 
otherwise specified. 
4

70 years. These stands are predominately trees aged less than 100 years old, and have been pre-
commercially thinned creating a more even-aged, evenly distributed stand with a mean diameter 
of around 17 inches. There are few pre-Euro-American settlement trees left in the unit. 
 
Classification of Imagery 
In 2014, the 4FRI Multi-Party Monitoring Board prioritized the acquisition of resource-grade 
photography (RGP) over the Coconino and Kaibab portion of the 4FRI landscape. The RGP 
imagery used in this analysis was collected in June of 2014. The 0.98-feet (0.3-meter) nominal 
resolution imagery consists of four bands (red, green, blue, and near infrared), and has been 
orthorectified and georeferenced. The imagery was collected with attention to maintaining nadir 
(Zachman and Dickson 2017).  
 
In this report, we use classification outputs created by Zachman and Dickson (2017). This 
classification was a simple three-category classification: canopy cover, shadow, and “other.” The 
classification was conducted in Google Earth Engine (Goerlick et al. 2017) using a suite of 
predictors in a random forest model. Predictors included spectral values and derivatives, 
including the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), as well as digital elevation and 
derivatives, such as slope and aspect. Inputs representing texture and edge detection were also 
calculated, including entropy and difference-of-Gaussians (see Zachmann and Dickson, 2017 for 
further details: https://lzachmann.github.io/4fri-lpa-report/).  
 
Spatial Metrics Assessment  
Zachmann and Dickson (2017) calculated a suite of landscape metrics and then created a second 
set of calibrated metrics, which took into account the effect of shadow within the the areal extent. 
We did not pursue the use of these calibrated metrics as they are not easily comparible to metrics 
from other data sets and times. Therefore, we calcuated a suite of landscape metrics from the 
classified canopy cover class only, separating that class from both shadow and other categories. 
It should be noted that while this classification captures canopy cover well, the elimination of 
shadow also precludes the detection of interlocking crowns in many cases. Zachmann and 
Dickson (2017) modeled correction factors for various landscape metrics based on solar zenith 
angle at the time of image acquisition, but this was beyond the scope of this study.  
 
Metrics were selected based on the 4FRI Multi-Party Monitoring Board’s initial review; they are 
listed and defined in Table 1. We calculated metric values using the landscape metrics package 
in R (Hesselbarth et al. 2019), which calcuates the same metrics as FRAGSTATS (McGarigal et 
al. 2012). Patches were identified as canopy positive pixel classifications connected using the 
eight-neighbor rule (queen’s case).  
 
 
 
 
5

Table 1. The metrics examined for this project, their associated metric type, how they are calculated, and 
some implications of their usefulness to assess ponderosa pine landscapes. Words in bold correspond to 
labels used in subsequent Tables. 
Metric Class 
Landscape 
metric 
Definition 
Implications 
Area and Edge 
Metrics 
Proportion of 
landscape 
(PLAND) 
(Canopy Cover) Total 
proportion of extent covered by 
individual patches 
The total canopy cover, varies 
with data grain and resolution 
Patch area (mean) 
(AREA) 
Summary of areas of individual 
patches within extent 
Tree density and basal area, 
habitat suitability 
Edge density (ED) 
Quantity of patch edge relative 
to total area 
Related to the density and 
complexity of patches 
Shape Metrics 
Perimeter-area 
ratio (PARA) 
(Edge - Area) The patch 
perimeter divided by the patch 
area 
Simplistic shape metric, but 
varies with patch size 
Patch density 
(PD) 
The number of patches relative 
to the total extent area. 
How many individual forest 
patches within a landscape, 
regardless of size. 
Aggregation 
Metrics 
Euclidean nearest 
neighbor distance 
(ENN) 
The shortest straight-line 
distance between the focal patch 
and nearest neighbor 
Simplest measure of 
aggregation/isolation 
Aggregation 
Index (AI) 
Measures aggregation by ratio 
of observed adjacent patches to 
maximum potential adjacencies. 
Measures aggregation at 
landscape scale, but clumpiness 
may be better for Class-scale. 
Landscape shape 
index (LSI) 
LSI is the total patch perimeter 
divided by the total patch area, 
for the landscape as a whole 
A landscape metric of perimeter 
and area, a measure of total 
geometric complexity. 
        
Some landscape metrics are sensitive to extent, in that the values within the same landscape will 
vary when larger extents are considered. For example, mean and standard deviation of patch size 
will change with extent in the same landscape, as the data are able to include larger patches with 
larger extents considered. To ensure a fair comparison among landscape metrics, we randomly 
sampled extents from within the pre-thinning boundaries that were consistent with the size of the 
restoration sites included in the study (~36 acres). Not wanting to duplicate spatial data and 
increase autocorrelation of metrics, a grid with a randomized origin was generated for each 
boundary and intersected with the treatment boundary. We then calculated landscape metrics 
within these resulting extents if their respective areas were at least 28 acres and less than 44 
acres (36 ± 8 acres). These sub-samples were averaged for each thinning unit (n=17) to provide 
metric values for each unit. 
 
6

Finally, the need to address the impact of resolution (grain) on the metrics resulted in the 
addition of question 4. To compare different resolutions, we examined canopy cover 
classifications at the three restoration sites from three independent imagery data sets: Zachmann 
and Dickson (2017) aerial imagery (0.3m grain), Planet Labs’ PlanetScope satellite imagery 
(3.0m grain), and European Space Agency’s Sentinel-2 satellite imagery (10m grain). 
 
Results 
Spatial Metrics 
 
Question 1: What are the range of values found in a set of eight spatial metrics in the pre-
treatment Chimney Springs project area? 
 
Canopy cover percent (PLAND) and the subsequent seven evaluated metrics showed high 
variability among the pre-treatment stands, suggesting that at the RGP resolution, starting 
conditions varied in total canopy cover and the distribution of that cover, even in a fairly 
homogenously aged stands. The area, edge, shape, and aggregation metrics are presented in 
Table 2 and Figure 2 “pre-thin” (n=17). Starting canopy cover using the 0.3m grain resource-
grade photography data was lower than other canopy measures in the same location (4FRI 
Working Group and M. Nigrelli, personal communication), ranging between 5 percent and 34 
percent.  
 
Question 2: What are spatial structure metric ranges in three, 20-year-old restored forest blocks? 
 
The three restored stands were small in acreage and number and serve as a starting data set to 
assess spatial metric variability from stands that are close emulations of historic forests. This 
small data set had a small range of canopy cover, from 20–28 percent, 20 years post-treatment 
(n=3, Table 2 and Figure 2, “restoration”). Not surprisingly, the additional metrics showed fairly 
consistent distributions. The aggregation index is based on contagion indices that measure the 
probabilities of patch cells being adjacent to patch cells of a different classification. In this 
example, it is an index based on how often canopy pixels are adjacent to non-canopy pixels 
versus other canopy pixels (like-adjacencies). There is high similarity among the three blocks, 
but all units, with small resolution, may have had a very similar probability of adjacency to a 
different patch, or canopy next to non-canopy. These blocks had highly variable starting 
conditions at the time of restoration in 1998. One block had a largely untouched stand of large, 
old trees, and restoration treatments resulted in a thinning of small-diameter in-growth trees. 
Another block had few large, old trees left, and restoration treatments replaced pre-settlement 
evidences with, at the time, 10–16-inch second-growth trees. The third block was intermediate 
between these two stand types.  
 
 
 
 
7

Question 3: How does metric sensitivity to differences between restored and non-restored 
landscapes vary (i.e., what metrics are most appropriate to measure restoration-based forest 
structural change)? 
 
There were little to no differences among the pre-treatment and the restoration units found in this 
comparison (Table 2 and Figure 2). The high variability in the pre-treatment stands in almost all 
cases encompassed the smaller ranges found in the three restoration units. Trends included a 
slightly larger patch area in the restored forests, and slightly fewer number of patches in the 
restored forests. The Euclidean nearest neighbor trended to slightly longer distances in the 
restored units. While patch density and area are highly dependent on spatial grain, these trends 
suggest a higher number of small patches in the pre-thin stands than in the restored forest 
thinning treatments. This is intuitive; the restoration treatment left trees aggregated based on 
historic trees and evidence, while the pre-thin forest historically has been managed with timber 
management practices of pre-commercial spacing. 
 
Table 2. Spatial structure metrics for pre-treatment Chimney Springs (n=17 units) and 
restoration blocks (n=3 units). Mean (standard deviation). 
METRIC (ABBREVIATION, UNIT) 
PRE-THIN 
RESTORATION 
SAMPLE SIZE 
n=17 
n=3 
CANOPY COVER (PLAND, %) 
21.4 (7.06) 
25.5 (4.07) 
PATCH AREA (AREA, SQ FT) 
20.2 (10.17) 
36.8 (2.98) 
EDGE DENSITY (ED, FT/AC) 
3921 (965.3) 
4334 (800.2) 
EDGE TO AREA RATIO (PARA, 
INDEX) 
5.9 (1.27) 
5.9 (0.51) 
PATCH DENSITY (PD, COUNT/~36 
AC) 
16,232 (5222.7) 
12,466 (2766.2) 
EUC. NEAREST NEIGHBOR (ENN, 
FT) 
4.0 (0.48) 
4.2 (0.53) 
AGGREGATION INDEX (AI, 
INDEX) 
87.0 (4.31) 
90 (0.29) 
LANDSCAPE SHAPE INDEX (LSI, 
INDEX) 
36.4 (30.7) 
61.9 (8.9) 
 
 
 
 
 
8

  
Figure 2. Box and whisker plots for eight metrics of spatial structure (mean denoted by the x). 
9

Question 4: How does the RGP data resolution, grain, and extent influence the classification 
methods and metrics of interest? 
 
Landscape metrics varied greatly with the input data set being used. The very fine image grain 
used in the classification of canopy cover (0.3m) clearly delineated individual projected tree 
crown area but tended to eliminate all interlocking crowns that would lead to larger patches on 
the landscape. Classification of canopy can be sensitive to image grain, which in turn leads to 
divergent landscape metric values (Wasserman et al. 2019). To illustrate this point, we included 
a simple comparison of three canopy cover classifications, including Zachmann and Dickson 
(2017), a classification using imagery collected by Planet Labs’ PlanetScope satellite (3m grain) 
and a classification using radar and optical imagery collected by the European Space Agency’s 
Sentinel-1 and -2 satellites (10m grain; Figure 3). Table 3 contains the canopy cover percentage 
as a proportion of the landscape for the three restoration sites at Chimney Springs. Going 
forward, more work is needed to capture the resolution that best describes the ecological range of 
landscape variability. 
 
Table 4. Comparison of canopy cover as a percentage of the 
landscape from within the three restoration sites at Chimney Springs 
stemming from three imagery data sets: Zachmann and Dickson 
(2017) aerial imagery (0.3m grain), Planet Labs’ PlanetScope 
satellite imagery (3.0m grain), and European Space Agency’s 
Sentinel-2 satellite imagery (10m grain).  
 
GRAIN 
RESTORATION PLOT 
 
10-1-2 
6-2-2 
1-3-2 
0.3M 
CLASSIFICATION 
27.8 
29.0 
19.8 
3.0M 
CLASSIFICATION 
45.2 
36.5 
16.5 
10M 
CLASSIFICATION 
85.8 
66.2 
33.2 
 
 
 
10

Figure 3. Comparison of canopy cover classifications at 
the three restoration sites at Chimney Springs stemming 
from three independent imagery data sets: Zachmann and 
Dickson (2017) aerial imagery (0.3m grain), Planet Labs’ 
PlanetScope satellite imagery (3.0m grain), and 
European Space Agency’s Sentinel-2 satellite imagery 
(10m grain). Coarser grain imagery fails to capture 
small, individual canopies, but succeeds in creating 
cohesive patches and interlocking canopy areas.  
Discussion 
In frequent-fire forests, there is strong scientific 
understanding of restoration desired conditions 
using plot-based forest structural outcomes to 
measure success; however, there is limited capacity 
to collect these data across large landscapes. The 
use of remote sensing data sets to evaluate different 
spatial metrics in forest restoration can provide 
implementation and monitoring benefits. Remote 
sensing data sets can rapidly increase data 
availability across the large public landscapes 
currently under restoration management.  
 
At landscape scales, however, we lack information 
on the desired conditions and the appropriate ranges 
of these spatial metrics in restored landscapes. 
Using existing restored forests, which emulate the 
historic structure and tree distributions based on pre-
settlement evidence, can inform the appropriate 
metrics to use and help describe the spatial metric 
ranges. Understanding the range of values in these 
restored forests is needed as treatments continue to 
scale in size. An important observation from this 
work is that the selection of imagery and grain 
needs to be appropriate to the ecological scale of the 
questions.   
 
For this report, we quantified spatial metrics on 
three small forest restoration areas to start 
examining the range of variability for these metrics. 
The adjacent and surrounding restoration project 
was analyzed for pre-treatment spatial metrics mean 
and variability.   
11

The restored blocks were limited in size and represented different forest starting conditions with 
differing levels of large, old trees. While small, we thought this would represent variability in 
spatial metrics based on canopy cover. Restoration targets in these units were based solely on 
tree density, not basal area or canopy cover. Restoration emulates the forest structure of a fire-
adapted system, considering the time allowed for trees to grow. Similarly, the pre-treatment 
stands were variable, but mostly represented the managed, second-growth forests with limited 
diameter and age variability. However, restoration treatment implementation goals were planned 
at larger scales, and included basal area forest structural goals and descriptions of opening size. 
Personal observations from the implementers acknowledge the perceived need to increase basal 
area in remaining groups to meet the stand-level basal area. Future studies will examine the 
spatial distribution in the post-treatment stands to assess for differences between evidence-based 
restoration and this larger landscape prescription methodology. 
 
Important findings from this analysis include recognizing the need to determine the ecologically 
appropriate data resolution for spatial metric assessments. More information is needed to vet the 
spatial metrics outcomes by comparing spatial analysis outcomes with the known variability 
found based on other monitoring metrics, such as forest structural attributes. Restoration 
treatments are planned to reduce tree densities to historic levels, and emulate fine-scale spatial 
heterogeneity found in historic forests. The appropriate spatial metrics will prove sensitive to 
changes in overall density, but more importantly, metrics should be sensitive to fine-scale 
heterogeneity. The Chimney Springs task order spatial metrics used canopy cover layers derived 
from RGP with no additional buffer. This study suggests that 0.3m resolution may be too fine a 
scale, as trees with close or touching canopies may not be included in a patch due to small gaps. 
Ecologically, these kind of tree groupings may serve as patches. The grain of this imagery is fine 
enough to recognize non-canopy within a single tree canopy, and will exclude these open patches 
in total percent of canopy cover (see caveats). As the grain size increases, canopy cover percent 
can increase (Wasserman et al. 2019). 
 
At this resolution, this study showed that the Chimney Springs pre-treatment forests had broader 
ranges of the metrics assessed than historic forests, but were not different than the 20-year 
restored forests. This was surprising, as plot-based data from the Chimney Springs task order 
reported an average of 130 trees per acre (TPA), and 126 feet2 per acre (BA) (Esch and Waltz 
2019). These levels exceed the historic ranges from the research plots located within the 
Chimney Springs task order (Hurteau et al. 2011 and Ecological Restoration Institute 
unpublished reports) of 23 to 48 TPA, and basal area 26–71 ft2/acre; and the restored ranges of 
38–74 TPA, with basal areas from 43–91 ft2/ac. In comparison, ground-based canopy cover 
using a densitometer showed almost twice the RGP range of restored canopy cover, from 20 
percent to 38 percent, with significant change from the 1996 pre-treatment stand canopy cover 
(ERI unpublished data, Table 5). 
 
 
 
12

YEAR 
RESTORATION PLOT 
 
10-1-2 
6-2-2 
1-3-2 
1998 PRE-
TREAT 
49.7 
56.7 
63.4 
2011 POST-
TREAT 
38.4 
33.1 
20.0 
% DIFFERENCE 
-22.7% 
-41.7% 
-68.4% 
 
Management and Collaborative Partnership Implications 
The methods described in this report can help land managers and stakeholders understand the 
variability in metrics and the impacts of remote sensing data resolution on the ability to assess 
spatial structure in restoration treatments.  
 
Pre-treatment analysis from remote sensing data, once calibrated to better known forest structural 
attributes, may help understand starting conditions and guide silvicultural prescriptions. When 
metric data resolution and metric sensitivity analysis is better understood, comparisons of pre- 
and post-treatment conditions may help to monitor treatment efficacy for meeting desired 
conditions. In the meantime, desired conditions for spatial structure should maintain flexibility 
for meeting other restoration goals and resource objectives (e.g., prioritizing the retention of all 
old-growth trees), and continued deliberation through the adaptive management process is 
recommended for relating spatial structure information into potential management applications. 
 
Caveats and Limitations 
Remote sensing deficiencies and errors. Resource-grade photography uses a passive sensor and 
is useful for evaluating the horizontal arrangement of openings and canopy, attributes that can be 
seen from above. This imagery is not suitable for determinations of tree species composition, tree 
size, precise number of trees per patch, and trees per acre. Small patches of regeneration, aspen, 
and possibly shrubs were likely joined into the canopy category. Overall, the possible grouping 
of regeneration and shrubs into the canopy layers likely resulted in slight inaccuracies of some 
canopy patch metrics. Due to possible differences in species composition, inaccuracies of canopy 
patch metrics may have occurred more frequently in the higher elevation units 1 and 2.  
 
Requirements for consistency. This report provides baseline spatial structure metrics that can be 
used in monitoring and adaptive management efforts. However, it is important to understand that 
metrics for spatial patterns are sensitive to the analysis scale, grain, thematic definitions, 
classification scheme and methods, extent of the analysis area, and minimum patch size filter 
(Hamilton et al. 2013, Wasserman et al. 2019). Comparing pre- and post-treatment spatial 
patterns with remote sensing techniques requires consistency in these characteristics (Hamilton 
et al. 2013), and making direct comparisons to other studies is not necessarily appropriate. 
Table 5. Plot-based canopy cover from 
densitometer, pre- and post-treatment 
across plots. Percent difference used as 
an example of magnitude of change. 
13

Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank the 4FRI Multi-Party Monitoring Board for selecting the metrics 
of interest, Mark Nigrelli with the Forest Service for sharing the resource-grade photography, 
and The Nature Conservancy for shared discussions on methods and metric refinement and 
review of report. A special thanks to co-author Caleb Stotts who initiated this project, wrote 
much of the introduction, and conducted several rounds of analyses. 
 
Literature Cited 
Addington, R.N., G.H. Aplet, M.A. Battaglia, J.S. Briggs, P.M. Brown, A.S. Cheng, Y. 
Dickinson, J.A. Feinstein, K.A. Pelz, C.M. Regan, J. Thinnes, R. Truex, J. Paula, B. 
Gannon, C.W. Julian, J.L. Underhill, B. Wolk. 2018. Principles and practices for the 
restoration of ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer forests of the Colorado Front Range. 
RMRS-GTR-373. Fort Collins, CO: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. 121 p.  
Cannon, J.B., K.J. Barrett, B.M. Gannon, R.N. Addington, M.A. Battaglia, P.J. Fornwalt, G.H. 
Aplet, A.S. Cheng, J.L. Underhill, J.S. Briggs, P.M. Brown. 2018. Collaborative restoration 
effects on forest structure in ponderosa pine-dominated forests of Colorado. Forest Ecology 
and Management, 424, 191–204.  
Cannon, J.B., M.E. Chambers, A.S. Cheng. 2017. Monitoring fine-scale spatial patterns of 
restoration treatments in the Uncompahgre Plateau, presentation. Colorado Forest 
Restoration Institute, Colorado State University. 
Churchill, D.J., A.J. Larson, M.C. Dahlgreen, J.F. Franklin, P.F. Hessburg, J.A. Lutz. 2013. 
Restoring forest resilience: From reference spatial patterns to silvicultural prescriptions and 
monitoring. Forest Ecology and Management, 291, 442–457 
Churchill, D.J., S.T. Seager, A.J. Larson, E.E. Schneider, K.B. Kemp, C. Bienz. 2018. Ecological 
functions of spatial pattern in dry forests: Implications for forest restoration. The Nature 
Conservancy newsletter. 
Churchill, D., G. Carnwath, A.J. Larson. 2017. Historical Forest Structure, Composition, and 
Spatial Pattern in Dry Conifer Forests of Western Blue Mountains, Oregon. Pnw-Gtr-965. 
Covington, W.W., M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: changes since 
Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry, 92, 39–47. 
Egan, D. 2008. Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Working 
Paper No. 22. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 11 p. 
Esch, B.E., and A.E.M. Waltz. 2019. Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) rapid plot pre-
treatment monitoring report 2019. Ecological Restoration Institute Report, prepared for 
4FRI Stakeholder Group. www.eri.nau.edu.  
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, M.M. Moore. 1997. Determining reference conditions for 
ecosystem management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological Applications, 7, 
895–908. 
14

Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI). 2014. Adaptive Management, Biophysical and 
Socioeconomic Monitoring Plan. https://www.fs.usda.gov/main/4fri/monitoring  
Hamilton, R., S. Cushman, K. McCallum, N. McCusker, T. Mellin, M. Nigrelli, M. Williamson. 
2013. Multiscale landscape pattern monitoring using remote sensing: The Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative. RSAC-10022-RPT1. Salt Lake City, UT: US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Remote Sensing Application Center. 24 p. 
Hessburg, P.F., J.K. Agee, J.F. Franklin. 2005. Dry forests and wildland fires of the inland 
Northwest USA: Contrasting the landscape ecology of the pre-settlement and modern eras. 
Forest Ecology and Management, 211, 117–139.  
Hurteau, M.D., M.T. Stoddard, P.Z. Fulé. 2011. The carbon costs of mitigating high-severity 
wildfire in southwestern ponderosa pine. Global Change Biology, 17, 1516–1521. 
Jeronimo, S.M.A., L.R. Dow, V.R. Kane, D.J. Churchill, J.F. Franklin. 2017. Using LiDAR to 
Guide Silvicultural Restoration in the Crater Lake Panhandle: Final Report to the National 
Park Service. 
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D.G. 
Delorenzo, A.D. Graves, T. Richard, S. Meador, J. Andrew, A. James, S. Megan, L. Patrick, 
G. Donald, D. Andrew. 2013. Restoring composition and structure in Southwestern 
frequent-fire forests: A science-based framework for improving ecosystem resiliency. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-310. Fort Collins, CO: US Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 76 p.  
Rodman, K.C., A.J. Sánchez Meador, M.M. Moore, and D.W. Huffman. 2017. Reference 
conditions are influenced by the physical template and vary by forest type: A synthesis of 
Pinus ponderosa-dominated sites in the southwestern United States. Forest Ecology and 
Management 404, 316–329.  
Sánchez Meador, A.J., P.F. Parysow, and M.M. Moore. 2011. A New Method for Delineating 
Tree Patches and Assessing Spatial Reference Conditions of Ponderosa Pine Forests in 
Northern Arizona. Restoration Ecology, 19, 490–499.  
Wasserman, T.N., J.S. Andrew, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2019. Grain and Extent Considerations are 
Integral for Monitoring Landscape-Scale Desired Conditions in Fire-Adapted Forests. 
Forests. 21 p.  
Wiggins, H.L., C.R. Nelson, A.J. Larson, and H.D. Safford. 2019. Using LiDAR to develop 
high-resolution reference models of forest structure and spatial pattern. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 434, 318–330.  
Zachmann, L.J., and B.G. Dickson. 2017. Four Forest Restoration Initiative – Landscape Pattern 
Analysis. Technical Report. Landscape Conservation Initiative. 
15
