An Assessment of Pinyon-Juniper Woodland Classification 
on the Kaibab National Forest 
September 2020 
Prepared for 
USDA Forest Service 
Kaibab National Forest 
Prepared by 
Bryce E. Esch, Bryce.Esch@nau.edu 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service 

Table of Contents 
Introduction ..............................................................................................................................1 
Purpose .....................................................................................................................................1 
Pinyon-Juniper Classification ...................................................................................................2 
Methods ....................................................................................................................................3 
Results ......................................................................................................................................4 
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................8 
Future Work .............................................................................................................................9 
Literature Cited .......................................................................................................................10 
Appendix A. Pinyon-Juniper Reference Conditions Report ..................................................12 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to the Kaibab National Forest, including Micah Kiesow, Ariel Leonard, Jessi Ouzts, 
and Alex Spannuth. And thanks to the Ecological Restoration Institute’s David Huffman, 
Michael Stoddard, and Amy Waltz for their review.  

Introduction 
Natural resource managers are under increasing pressure to improve stand-level resistance to 
wildfire and changing climate conditions while also managing for multiple-use objectives. 
Emphasized within these multiple-use land management objectives is the need to maintain 
ecosystem sustainability and integrity. To effectively prioritize management among competing 
land-use pressures, it is especially important for managers to stratify or identify unique 
ecological ecosystems in order to maximize resource potential and maintain ecosystem integrity. 
In conversations with Kaibab National Forest managers, it is clear that information on 
pinyon-juniper stand structure (i.e., subtypes), locations, and extent on the forest is needed, in 
order to better inform management options for both fuel reduction and ecosystem function. The 
Kaibab National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan states, “the pinyon-juniper 
vegetation communities (pinyon-juniper grassland, shrubland, or woodland) should be 
determined before developing project proposals to ensure the applicable desired conditions are 
applied” (USDA 2014). The current Kaibab National Forest plan and estimates of forest 
composition are based off of a 1991 Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey (TES; Brewer et al. 1991), 
and mid-scale vegetation inventory (USDA 2013). The TES uses soil classifications, vegetation 
community association, and site potential to evaluate terrestrial ecosystems, but does not 
incorporate information on processes or disturbance. Given that this information forms the 
foundation of Kaibab National Forest vegetation management planning, what can the TES data 
tell us about potential vegetation on the Kaibab National Forest, and what additional data are 
needed to make confident management decisions?  
Pinyon-juniper systems are particularly vulnerable to climate change, existing in a 
transition zone between wetter forests at higher elevations and drier non-forested systems at 
lower elevations (Triepke et al. 2019). These systems experience contraction and expansion over 
short and long-time scales depending on climactic fluctuations and disturbance regimes (Romme 
et al. 2009, Jacobs 2011, Floyd et al. 2015, Triepke et al. 2019). Using a number of publications 
assessing pinyon-juniper classifications, including a previous pinyon-juniper assessment on the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (Greco and Sensibaugh 2015), a technical guide to pinyon-
juniper reference conditions (Huffman et al. 2011), and Kaibab TES data (Brewer et al. 1991) on 
soil type, vegetation composition, and topography, we determined likely areas of each pinyon-
juniper vegetation type across the Kaibab National Forest. Combining these data with Ecological 
Restoration Institute (ERI) and Kaibab National Forest monitoring plot data, we were able to 
validate assumptions made based on the Kaibab TES, identify areas for field validation, and 
make suggestions for future classification approaches for improved landscape-level assessment. 
Purpose 
Discussions with Kaibab National Forest soil resource and fire ecology staff indicated a need to 
enhance vegetation classification data on pinyon-juniper forest types on the forest. A pinyon-
juniper typing key developed at ERI with the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (Roberson et 
al. 2016) has been helpful to Kaibab National Forest staff, but some conditions on the forest may 
be unique. This report summarizes work done in the spring and summer of 2020 to assess 
1

potential pinyon-juniper communities on the Kaibab National Forest based off of TES data 
(Brewer et al. 1991).  
Two major concerns in the southwestern region and throughout the West are ecosystem 
restoration and wildfire risk reduction. In some circumstances, ecological restoration and 
wildfire risk reduction goals and outcomes can look very similar, such as the objective of 
reduced tree densities in ponderosa pine (Fulé et al. 2012). However, in pinyon-juniper 
communities, which are not adapted to frequent fire, it is unclear what ecological restoration 
should look like and how wildfire risk reduction impacts the ecological viability of the pinyon-
juniper systems (Huffman et al. 2009). The pinyon-juniper type is identified by the Kaibab 
National Forest as departed from and not trending toward reference conditions, indicating the 
need for active management for ecosystem health (USDA 2009). Additionally, Kaibab National 
Forest planning documents identify reduction of wildfire risk, especially in the wildland-urban 
interface, as a high priority outcome of management actions. Given the extent of pinyon-juniper 
vegetation, the departure of that vegetation from the natural range of variability, and the 
immediacy of wildfire risk, pinyon-juniper could be a high priority for active management.  
Pinyon-Juniper Classification 
Pinyon-juniper systems occur on approximately 50 million acres across the US, 40 percent of 
which is found in Arizona and New Mexico. These systems are highly variable in species 
composition and structure and are broadly defined by the presence of one juniper (Juniperus 
spp.) tree species and/or one pinyon-pine (P. edulis, P. monophylla var. fallax, P. discolor, and 
P. cembroides) tree species. Several juniper species are found across the Southwest, with three
species occurring most commonly on the Kaibab National Forest: alligator juniper (J. deppeana),
one-seed juniper (J. monosperma), and Utah juniper (J. osterosperma). Alligator juniper is more
commonly found at higher elevations and is frequently associated with ponderosa pine (P.
ponderosa). For the purposes of this report, we will focus on one-seed and Utah juniper species.
The two-needle pinyon (P. edulis) is most common pinyon pine on the Kaibab National Forest,
with rare occurrences of single-leaf pinyon (P. monophyla). For more detail on the biogeography
of pinyon-juniper systems, see Appendix A.
The Kaibab National Forest in northern Arizona estimates 40 percent, or 630,000 acres, 
of the forest is pinyon-juniper vegetation across three forest districts (USDA 2014). Romme et 
al. (2009) described three major structural classifications of pinyon-juniper vegetation — 
persistent woodland, wooded shrubland, and pinyon-juniper savanna (Romme et al. 2009, 
Margolis 2014, Huffman et al. 2019).  
Moisture availability and disturbance, particularly fire (or lack thereof) are the major 
drivers of structure and composition in pinyon-juniper systems (Romme et al. 2009). Low-
intensity surface fire would not have played a role in structuring persistent pinyon-juniper 
woodlands historically, but infrequent, stand-replacing fires created patches of early seral 
vegetation and landscape mosaics of various structural stages (Romme et al. 2009, Huffman et 
al. 2019). Persistent pinyon-juniper woodlands are characterized by large long-lived trees, large 
snags, and large coarse woody debris (Huffman et al. 2011). As persistent woodland systems 
recover from stand-replacing fire, transitional stages may appear similar to wooded shrublands. 
2

Conversely, pinyon-juniper savannas were historically regulated by more frequent, low-severity 
fire, fueled by grass understories. These frequent fires reduced tree establishment and kept 
pinyon-juniper tree densities low (Margolis 2014). The Kaibab National Forest Land and 
Resource Management Plan refines the description of these types: pinyon-juniper grasslands 
(savannas), where forbs and grasses dominate the understory; pinyon-juniper shrublands 
(wooded shrublands), where shrubs (e.g., big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata), rubber 
rabbitbrush (Ericameria nauseosa), fourwing saltbush (Atriplex canescens), and winterfat 
(Krascheninnikovia lanata)) dominate the understory; and pinyon-juniper woodlands (persistent 
woodlands), where understory is sparse and overstory is well-developed (USDA 2014). 
Methods 
We used the Kaibab National Forest TES to characterize map units in three different pinyon-
juniper subtypes — savanna, wooded shrubland, and persistent woodland. The TES was 
developed in 1991 using aerial photography to delineate map units, supplemented with field 
verification (Brewer et al. 1991). For the purposes of this report, classification reflects the 
potential vegetation type in the map unit. First, potential pinyon-juniper map units were 
identified using the TES dominant vegetation type, either juniper or pinyon pine. Then, 
characteristics found in the TES were used to classify map units, including dominant species, 
topography, understory species, soil types, plant associations, and location.  
The Kaibab National Forest plan emphasizes thin and rocky soils and uplands sites as a 
key identifier of pinyon-juniper woodlands; this association is supported in the pinyon-juniper 
literature (Romme et al. 2009, USDA 2014). An initial assessment, in advance of the Kaibab 
Plateau Ecological Restoration Project (KPERP), of the Kaibab National Forest TES data had 
been done to identify potential areas of persistent woodland and wooded shrublands on the North 
Kaibab Ranger District (M. Kiesow, personal communication, March 31, 2020). The criteria 
used for that identification were: 
1. Topography — steep slopes
2. Lithic, shallow soils with rock outcrops
3. Low amounts of shrub and grass
An initial classification of the Tusayan and Williams districts using solely these criteria
appeared to be insufficient (M. Kiesow, personal communication, March 31, 2020). Based on 
ERI research that quantified remnant historical tree structures on the Tusayan Ranger District, 
pinyon-juniper shrubland was over-identified, and pinyon-juniper woodland was under-
identified. A second phase of classification added criteria in an effort to increase classification 
accuracy. Criteria added were: 
1. Geographic location (e.g., proximity to ponderosa pine or grasslands, location in relation
to known areas of savannah or persistent woodland)
2. Plant associations
3

The importance of soil type and topography were also reduced in the second 
classification, given that pinyon-juniper subtypes can be associated with a variety of soil types 
and topographies (Romme et al. 2009). The following descriptions include the core criteria 
assumed to be associated with each sub-type, based on literature review and field data.  
Pinyon-juniper savanna — high grass cover, higher presence of one-seed juniper (J. 
monosperma) (later establishing, more likely to be encroachment), topographically homogenous 
(flat plains), soils with high levels of organic matter (i.e., mollisols). 
Pinyon-juniper shrub — high shrub cover. 
Pinyon-juniper woodland — high cover of Colorado pinyon (P. edulis) and Utah juniper (J. 
osteosperma), lower grass and shrub cover, topographically heterogenous, adjacent to map units 
of PIPO, soils with lower levels of organic matter (e.g., alfisols, inceptisols, aridsols). 
Field data from ERI and Kaibab National Forest were used to verify map unit 
classification. Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey units were cross-checked with Kaibab National 
Forest monitoring plots to ensure that pinyon-juniper-dominant areas were left out of the 
classification or misclassified. Data summarized from ERI research plots in the Tusayan district 
were compared to TES map units to verify classifications.  
Results 
Figures 1, 2, and 3, show the estimated location of three pinyon-juniper subtypes across the 
North Kaibab, Tusayan, and Williams districts of the Kaibab National Forest, respectively. Table 
1 summarizes the estimated acres of each subtype. Review of the TES, including soil types, 
topography, geography, and plant associations, and subsequent classification indicated that the 
extent of persistent pinyon-juniper woodlands over the Kaibab National Forest is greater than 
expected. According to Huffman et al. (2019), persistent woodlands recovering from stand-
replacing fire may appear as pinyon-juniper shrub and may not be a separate pinyon-juniper 
subtype. Further description and verification of on-the-ground conditions are needed to 
determine the necessity of developing typing criteria specific to the pinyon-juniper shrub type. 
Table 1. Approximate acres of each pinyon-juniper subtype across the Kaibab National Forest 
districts 
District 
Persistent Woodland 
Pinyon-Juniper Shrub 
Savanna 
North 
Kaibab 
195375 
51885 
- 
Tusayan 
119565 
24838 
33269 
Williams 
34086 
14237 
124996 
4

Sources: Esri, HERE, Garmin, Intermap, increment P Corp., GEBCO, USGS,
FAO, NPS, NRCAN, GeoBase, IGN, Kadaster NL, Ordnance Survey, Esri Japan,
METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), (c) OpenStreetMap contributors, and the GIS
User Community
Figure 1. Kaibab National Forest North Kaibab District Pinyon-Juniper Subtypes
±
0
4
8
12
2
Miles
Legend
Savanna
Wooded Shrubland
Persistent Woodland
5

Sources: Esri, HERE, Garmin, Intermap, increment P Corp., GEBCO, USGS, FAO, NPS, NRCAN,
GeoBase, IGN, Kadaster NL, Ordnance Survey, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), (c)
OpenStreetMap contributors, and the GIS User Community
Legend
Savanna
Wooded Shrubland
Persistent Woodland
Figure 2. Kaibab National Forest Tusayan District Pinyon-Juniper Subtypes
±
0
4
8
12
2
Miles
6

Sources: Esri, HERE, Garmin, Intermap, increment P Corp., GEBCO, USGS,
FAO, NPS, NRCAN, GeoBase, IGN, Kadaster NL, Ordnance Survey, Esri Japan,
METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), (c) OpenStreetMap contributors, and the GIS
User Community
Legend
Savanna
Wooded Shrubland
Persistent Woodland
Figure 3. Kaibab National Forest Williams District Pinyon-Juniper Subtypes
0
4
8
12
2
Miles±
7

Conclusion 
The TES is intended to be used to determine where more information regarding on-the-ground 
conditions may be needed (Brewer et al. 1991). In this classification exercise, we found that the 
TES was helpful for estimating potential locations of pinyon-juniper subtypes, but ultimately 
more information is needed. We recommend that practitioners integrate the criteria in Box 1 into 
site visits to make local assessments of pinyon-juniper subtypes in order to identify appropriate 
management actions. Additionally, descriptions of pinyon-juniper subtypes used by the Kaibab 
National Forest may be out of date with current research and understanding of the large range of 
variability in soil, topography, and other site characteristics that can be associated with pinyon-
juniper subtypes, and particularly the range of conditions associated with persistent woodlands. 
Further integration of best available science in project plans would be helpful is addressing this 
gap. 
Guidance on pinyon-juniper system subtypes is necessary for helping managers to 
understand the differences in fire frequency and the appropriate densities of different pinyon-
juniper systems, and ultimately the appropriate management actions. In pinyon-juniper woodland 
management, Kaibab National Forest practitioners may face a conflict in two primary 
Box 1. Criteria for Identification of Persistent Woodlands and Savannas 
Identifying persistent woodlands: 
•
Large juniper — more than 12 inches in diameter (diameter at root collar)
•
Large pinyon indicate the persistence of a pinyon-juniper system
•
Large and old coarse woody debris (logs, snags, cut stumps)
•
Evidence of stand-replacing fire — charred coarse woody debris
•
Can be associated with a variety of soil types, but most common on shallow, rocky
soils that do not readily support herbaceous cover (e.g., alfisols, inceptisols,
aridsols)
•
Can be associated with a variety of landforms, but is common on steep slopes and
rocky outcrops.
Identifying historic savannas: 
•
Lack of large coarse woody debris
•
Sparse tree cover (less than 10 percent canopy cover)
•
Grass-dominated understory
•
Deeper soils that support the herbaceous understory (e.g., mollisols)
•
Encroachment more likely to be one-seed juniper (J. monosperma)
•
Often found on flat plains
8

management goals, ecosystem restoration and fuels management. A study by Huffman et al. 
(2019) showed that prescribed fire alone maintained persistent woodland conditions, while 
prescribed fire implemented with tree thinning led to the loss of large trees and the creation of a 
novel system. Monitoring and adaptive management of pinyon-juniper treatments would be 
helpful for identifying treatments that meet both fuel reduction and ecological restoration goals. 
Understanding the differences between pinyon-juniper system subtypes is also key for 
managers seeking to restore grassland areas encroached by pinyon and juniper and improve 
range and wildlife habitat values. Current and historical ecological conditions along with 
management context are keys to guide decisions and actions within pinyon-juniper subtypes 
across the Kaibab National Forest.  
Future Work 
This effort, developed with assistance from and review by Kaibab National Forest staff, is the 
first stage in an ongoing discussion with forest resource and fire staff regarding knowledge gaps 
and science information needs for pinyon-juniper management. Ongoing conversations may 
identify additional gaps, and field-based knowledge of these systems will inform any revisions. 
Our intent is to also capture from practitioners the potential management needs and 
options in each pinyon-juniper subtype, based on resource and fire management objectives. 
Feedback and information gathered will be incorporated into future products. 
9

References Cited 
Brewer, D.G., R.K. Jorensen, L.P. Munk, W.A. Robbie, and J.L. Travis. 1991. Terrestrial 
Ecosystem Survey of the Kaibab National Forest. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern 
Region. 380 p. 
Floyd, M.L., W.H. Romme, M.E. Rocca, D.P. Hanna, and D.D. Hanna. 2015. Structural and 
regenerative changes in old-growth piñon-juniper woodlands following drought-induced 
mortality. Forest Ecology and Management, 341, 18–29.  
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012. Do thinning and/or burning 
treatments in western USA ponderosa or Jeffrey pine-dominated forests help restore 
natural fire behavior? Forest Ecology and Management, 269, 68-81. 
Greco, B. and M. Sensibaugh. 2015. Rapid Assessment Report: Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest’s West Escudilla Restoration Project. Ecological  
Restoration Institute. 
Northern Arizona University. 44 pp. Submitted July, 2015. Project Record. 
Huffman, D.W., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, J.E. Crouse, A.J. Sánchez Meador, and S. Nepal. 
2019. Stand Dynamics of Pinyon-Juniper Woodlands After Hazardous Fuels Reduction 
Treatments in Arizona. Rangeland Ecology and Management, 72(5), 757–767.  
Huffman, D.W., M. Sensibaugh, J.E. Crouse, D.G. Brewer, and W.W. Chancellor. 2011. Pinyon-
Juniper Reference Conditions: A Manager’s Guide for Coarse-Filter Assessment of 
Historical Structure and Natural Disturbance Regimes. Ecological Restoration Institute. 
Northern Arizona University. 12 pp. Submitted May 2011. 
Huffman, D.W., P.Z. Fulé, J.E. Crouse, and K.M. Pearson. 2009. A comparison of fire hazard 
mitigation alternatives in pinyon-juniper woodlands of Arizona. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 257(2), 628–635.  
Jacobs, B.F., W.H. Romme, and C.D. Allen. 2008. Mapping “old” vs. “young” piñon-juniper 
stands with a predictive topo-climatic model. Ecological Applications, 18(7), 1627–1641. 
Margolis, E.Q. 2014. Fire regime shift linked to increased tree density in a pinon-juniper 
landscape. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 23(2), 234–245.  
Robertson, E.R., C.A. Nelson, B. Greco, and M. Sensibaugh. 2016. “Pinyon-Juniper Woodland, 
Savanna, and Great Basin Grassland Key.” Revised diagram excerpt for Appendix E of 
the Rapid Assessment Report by the Northern Arizona University’s Ecological 
Restoration Institute. Submitted for the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest West 
Escudilla Restoration Project in July 2015. Project Record. 
Romme, W.H., C.D. Allen, J.D. Bailey, W.L. Baker, B.T. Bestelmeyer, P.M. Brown, K.S. 
Eisenhart, M.L. Floyd, D.W. Huffman, B.F. Jacobs, R.F. Miller, E.H. Muldavin, T.W. 
Swetnam, R.J. Tausch, and P.J. Weisburg. 2009. Historical and modern disturbance 
regimes, stand structures, and landscape dynamics in piñon-juniper vegetation of the 
western United States. Rangeland Ecology and Management, 62(3), 203–222.  
Triepke, F.J., E.H. Muldavin, and M.M. Wahlberg. 2019. Using climate projections to assess 
ecosystem vulnerability at scales relevant to managers. Ecosphere, 10(9).  
USDA Forest Service. 2014. Land and Resource Management Plan for the Kaibab National 
Forest. Available online at: 
https://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/fseprd517406.pdf 
10

USDA Forest Service. 2013. Kaibab National Forest Vegetation and Fire Specialist Report. 
Available online at: 
https://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5367667.pdf 
USDA Forest Service. 2009. Kaibab National Forest Comprehensive Evaluation Report. 
Available online at: 
https://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/fsm91_050073.pdf 
11

Pinyon-Juniper Reference Conditions: A Manager’s Guide for Coarse-Filter 
Assessment of Historical Structure and Natural Disturbance Regimes 
David W Huffman 
Mark Sensibaugh 
Joe Crouse 
Dave Brewer 
Walker Chancellor 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017 
May 2, 2011 
APPENDIX A. Pinyon-Juniper Reference Conditions Report
12

Executive Summary 

Pinyon-juniper ecosystems of the Southwest are variable in terms of site conditions, species
composition, and historical conditions.   This variability requires that resource professionals
understand local systems and conditions in order to develop restoration management strategies.

Restoration approaches begin with the development of reference conditions, which describe
ranges of variability for key ecosystem attributes for periods of time occurring prior to onset of
intensive land use activities.

Reference conditions are developed using multiple lines of biological and cultural evidence.
General understanding of reference conditions for a management site may be gained without
conducting sophisticated analysis.

Land managers may be most interested in whether particularly sites were pinyon-juniper
“savannas”, “woodlands”, or other systems that historically lacked a pinyon and/or juniper tree
component.

In rapid assessments, general understanding of historical conditions can be gained by a focus on
existing old trees, large snags, logs, and stumps, charred live and dead trees, fires scars and “cat-
faces”, and soils characteristics.

Savanna conditions were probably most prevalent on productive sites with fine-textured soils,
where grasses and other herbaceous plants making up fine, surface fuel beds were supported by
summer-dominated precipitation regimes.  Evidence that would suggest historical savanna
conditions includes scattered occurrence of old (> 130 years) trees, or large snags, logs, or
stumps, fire scars indicating low-severity fire on old trees, and occurrence of Mollisols and
associated soil suborders.

On rocky, unproductive sites, where topographic influences break surface fuel continuity, or
where ignition sources are infrequent or ineffective, moderately dense to closed woodland
conditions may develop. Evidence suggesting woodland conditions includes frequent occurrence
of old trees, and large snags, logs, and stumps.  Woodlands that have experienced stand-
replacing fire show groups to large areas of charred snags, logs, and stumps.  Soils may have
rocky surface structure and/or fall within orders such as Alfisol, Inceptisol, or Aridisol.

Evidence for recent expansion of pinyon-juniper into grasslands, shrublands, and fire-excluded
forest types includes an absence of old trees and large coarse wood.  Soils may be similar to
those described for historic savannas or woodlands.

Caution must be taken when interpreting coarse filter evidence although interpretations of
changes gain robustness as various lines of evidence converge. Ecosystems are dynamic and
detection of recent changes may not necessarily trigger a restoration management response.
Comprehensive assessment of ecological conditions and factors leading to changes challenge
managers to develop greater understanding of historical reference conditions.
13

Introduction 
Recently, land managers have been increasingly interested in formulating sound, science-based 
strategies for pinyon-juniper ecosystems. Strategies include ecological restoration of communities 
degraded by past land uses and conservation of biological diversity. However, there is presently much 
uncertainty among land managers and restoration practitioners concerning reference conditions and 
viable treatment approaches. The following guide outlines coarse filter approaches for assessing 
historical patterns of pinyon-juniper ecosystem structure and disturbance regimes.   Although similarities 
may be found across the range of the pinyon-juniper type, the focus of this guide is on pinyon-juniper 
systems of the American Southwest.  
Biogeography 
Pinyon-juniper savannas, woodlands, and forests are common across the semi-arid landscapes of 
the western United States and northern Mexico.  In the U.S., pinyon-juniper ecosystems occur on 
approximately 20 million hectares and express high variability in species composition and structure.  In 
the U.S., the pinyon-juniper vegetation type occurs on approximately 20 million hectares; about 40% of 
this is found in the southwestern states of Arizona and New Mexico. The pinyon-juniper type is broadly 
defined as being comprised of at least one juniper tree species (section Sabina) and/or one pinyon pine 
(subsection cembroides) tree species. The most generally distributed pinyon species are single-leaf (Pinus 
monophylla) and Colorado pinyon (P. edulis). Single-leaf pinyon occurs throughout the Great Basin and 
northern Colorado Plateau; Colorado pinyon is found on the Colorado Plateau and in the Southwest. 
Mexican pinyon is restricted to southeastern Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas. Junipers mainly found 
west of the Rocky Mountains include western (Juniperus occidentalis), one-seed (J. monosperma), Utah 
(J. osteosperma), alligator (J. deppeana) and Rocky Mountain (J. scopulorum) juniper. Utah juniper is 
common throughout the Great Basin and Colorado Plateau; western juniper is typically found north of 
the Great Basin and west to the Pacific Coast; one-seed juniper is primarily found in the Southwest 
(Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado), Texas, and Oklahoma; alligator juniper is found exclusively in the 
Southwest and Texas but typically occurs at higher elevations than one-seed and Utah junipers; Rocky 
Mountain juniper is also common at higher elevations across the West and is often found associated with 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa). 
Complex stands can be found near the distributional limits of individual species and it is not 
uncommon on landscapes of the Southwest to find more than one juniper species co-occurring with 
pinyon pine. Additional complexity may be found at ecotonal boundaries and where topography creates 
14

sharp transitions among communities. Thus, across the range of the pinyon-juniper type, there is high 
variability in overstory species composition depending upon climate, soils, aspect, and other site 
characteristics. Further, understory complexity mirrors variability found in tree species among these 
ecosystems. This variability requires that resource professionals understand local systems and conditions 
in order to develop sound management strategies.  
Developing Reference Conditions 
Reference conditions provide land managers and restoration practitioners with a set of baseline 
conditions and characteristics that are used to assess ecological changes, guide restoration approaches, 
and evaluate responses to management actions.  Typically, reference conditions describe ranges of 
variability for key ecosystem attributes, and often these ranges are considered for periods of time 
occurring prior to onset of intensive land use activities. Hence, quantities, qualities, and dynamics of 
these attributes when used in developing reference conditions are referred to as “natural” ranges of 
variability (NRV), or historical ranges of variability (HRV).   For forest ecosystems, attributes of interest 
include ranges of tree density and size distribution, species composition, stand dynamics, natural 
disturbance type, disturbance frequency and severity, and landscape structure.  These characteristics are 
important since overstory trees often have substantial effects on numerous other ecosystem processes 
and functions.  Because trees can be long-lived and techniques of reconstruction can be relatively 
accurate, detailed information may be obtained for forest overstory attributes prevailing over temporal 
scales of a few centuries.  Of course, the farther back in time the estimate, the coarser and less detailed 
the information usually becomes.  Further, periods of time long past are typically less representative of 
present ecological constraints and less relevant to restoration objectives.   Additional attributes of 
interest in forest systems, but for which it is often more difficult to determine historical ranges, include 
understory plant community composition and diversity, and wildlife community and population 
characteristics. 
Reference conditions for any given ecological attribute are best developed using as many sources 
of information as possible.  This pulling together of multiple lines of evidence makes for more robust and 
detailed interpretation of past conditions.  Sources of historical information can be generally separated in 
to biological and cultural evidence.  In forest systems, biological evidence that can provide insight into 
conditions of the past decades to centuries may include tree and shrub increment cores or cross-sections, 
fire scars, old logs, stumps, and snags, and charcoal.  Other sources that can provide less detailed clues 
15

about conditions occurring over time scales of centuries to millennia include packrat middens, charcoal 
and pollen deposits, and plant macrofossils in soil.   Cultural evidence may include historical journal 
accounts, professional or public records, photographs, and oral descriptions provided by locals.   
A general understanding of reference conditions for a management site may be gained without 
conducting sophisticated analysis, particularly as lines of evidence converge.  For pinyon-juniper 
ecosystems of the Southwest, “rapid assessment” of reference conditions may be conducted with the 
expressed purpose of identifying historical structural characteristics and disturbance regimes.  More 
specifically, land managers may be most interested in whether particularly sites were historically open 
pinyon-juniper systems, regulated by frequent fire, soils conditions, and/or drought (i.e., pinyon-juniper 
“savannas”); denser, more stable systems that experienced few significant disturbances of long periods 
of time; (pinyon-juniper “woodlands”); or other systems that historically lacked a significant 
compositional pinyon and/or juniper tree component. In these rapid assessments, general understanding 
of historical structure and disturbance regimes can be gained by a focus on the following types of 
evidence: 1) existing old trees; 2) large snags, logs, and stumps; 3) live and dead trees showing charcoal 
(char); 4) fires scars and “cat-faces”; and 5) soils characteristics.  As previously explained, interpretation 
of these evidences is made stronger by convergence with other sources such as historical photographs, 
written documents, and oral descriptions of past site conditions.  
Historic Savannas 
Open savannas, where drought, frequent surface fire, and competition with other vegetation 
constrained establishment of juniper and pinyon seedlings, prevailed on some pinyon-juniper sites in the 
Southwest. Although canopy cover values were likely variable, savanna landscapes were characterized by 
scattered trees often comprising less than 30% cover. Savanna conditions were probably most prevalent 
on productive sites with fine-textured soils, where grasses and other herbaceous plants making up fine, 
surface fuel beds were supported by summer-dominated precipitation regimes. Such areas are found in 
the southeastern extent of the pinyon-juniper in the states of Arizona New Mexico, and Texas.  Savanna 
conditions have been disrupted on some sites by historical livestock grazing and fire exclusion associated 
with Euro-American settlement. Sheep, cattle, and horse grazing effectively removed fine, grassy fuels 
and thereby interrupted natural fire cycles. Selective grazing of herbaceous plants may have also 
encouraged dominance of woody species that in turn could serve as nurse structures facilitating tree 
seedling establishment.  
16

Evidence that would suggest historical savanna conditions on a site includes scattered occurrence 
of old (> 130 years) trees, and large snags, logs, and stumps.  Pre-Euro-American settlement origin of live 
trees can be assessed using diagnostic features such as thick, deeply furrowed bark, buttressed and 
scarred base, large branches, spreading crowns, dominant height, and large basal diameter.  Similarly, 
dead pinyon and juniper trees likely to represent pre-Euro-American establishment cohorts may be well-
decomposed and/or large in diameter.  For dead trees, genus (Pinus versus Juniperus)  can be identified 
from bark characteristics, wood color (yellowish pine versus red-brown juniper), wood smell (“piney” 
versus “cedar chest”) , and decay patterns (“blocky” pine versus juniper “ribs”).  In these diagnostics, it is 
important to utilize several characteristics in making a determination.   Other evidence for historical 
savanna conditions includes presence of fire scars indicating low-severity on old trees.  These scars 
should show both charring of dead wood within the scarred lesion and characteristic healing wood at the 
boundary of the lesion and tree bark.  Unfortunately, pinyon and juniper trees are fire sensitive and 
typically do not develop large “cat faces” with numerous fire scars before they die from direct or indirect 
causes.  However, multiple fire scars on a single tree can occur.  Additionally, other more fire-resistant 
species (e.g., ponderosa pine) may hold scars from historic low-severity fire on transitional sites. Large 
groups of charred dead structures indicating stand-replacing fire should be lacking.  Soils suggesting 
savanna conditions would show presence of mollic epipedons.  These upper soil layers are high in organic 
matter due to formation under long-term grass cover.  Occurrence of Mollisols and associated suborders 
can be identified by utilizing Terrestrial Ecosystem Surveys (TES) or other soils maps.   
Historic Woodlands 
On rocky, unproductive sites, where topographic influences break surface fuel continuity, or 
where ignition sources are infrequent or ineffective, moderately dense to closed woodland conditions 
may develop. Often growing for centuries without major disturbance, persistent woodlands show greater 
occurrence of old trees and large snags and logs.  Stands are typically all-age and trees may grow in 
groups surrounded by relatively open interspaces or gaps of various sizes.  Natural fire regimes in 
woodlands were stand-replacing and rotations for some sites have been calculated to be hundreds of 
years.  Historically, woodland fires were weather-driven, with significant fires likely occurring under hot, 
dry, windy conditions.  Fires varied in size from small “blowouts” at the scale of single trees to groups to 
large areas of high-severity fire hundreds of acres in extent.  This variability led to different landscape 
patterns and has implications for restoration prescriptions.  Evidence that would suggest undisturbed 
17

woodland conditions includes frequent occurrence of old trees, and large snags, logs, and stumps.  
Evidence for historical woodlands that have experienced stand-replacing fire includes charred snags, logs, 
and stumps (i.e., coarse wood).  Coarse wood left from past fire may be relatively large in diameter and 
may persist for more than a century. These structures may be difficult to detect if they are overtopped by 
vegetation such as bunch grasses, shrubs and sprouting tree species.  Further, the rate of tree 
reestablishment may be very slow in burned-over areas and recovering sites may take on savanna-
appearing characteristics with scattered occurrence of trees and some level of herbaceous cover in the 
interspaces.  However, evidence of prior woodlands can persist for many decades after fire occurs and 
may be detected in careful field observations.  Soils suggesting historical woodland conditions may have 
rocky surface structure or show typical characteristics of forest soils. Soils orders that may be associated 
with woodlands in the Southwest include Alfisols, Inceptisols, and Aridisols.  Soils information may be 
found in TES descriptions and other maps. 
Changes in Other Systems 
Recent expansion of pinyon-juniper communities into other systems such as grasslands, 
shrublands, and fire-excluded forest types has been widely observed across the western United States.  
Evidence for expansion into former grasslands or shrublands includes an absence of old trees and large 
coarse wood.  Soils may be similar to those described for historic savannas.  Similarly, where pinyon and 
juniper trees have expanded into other forest types, old trees and large coarse wood will likely be absent, 
although soils may be similar to those described for historic woodlands.   
Restoration Implications 
The above descriptions are intended to provide land managers with coarse filter tools with which 
to assess recent changes in pinyon-juniper ecosystem structure and disturbance patterns.  Although 
beyond the scope of this guide, greater accuracy and precision in estimates of historical conditions may 
be gained through controlled laboratory- or field-based measurements and specific analytical techniques. 
For example, composite fire scar analysis can provide precise estimates of mean fire return interval and 
seasonality for historical surface fire regimes when individual fire scar dates are determined through 
techniques of dendrochronology.  This suggests that caution must be taken when interpreting coarse 
filter evidence since data collection and analysis will likely not meet fine filter standards for higher 
18

degrees of confidence.  As mentioned previously, interpretations of changes in structure and natural 
disturbance, whether coarse or fine filter, gain robustness as various lines of evidence converge.   
  Ecosystems are dynamic and various attributes may change over time, particularly in transition 
zones between different community types.  This suggests that recent changes detected in ecosystem 
structure or disturbance regime may not necessarily trigger a restoration management response.  
Restoration-based alternatives are most appropriate when changes from historical conditions are linked 
to anthropogenic factors such as intensive or abusive land use. 
Other attributes and processes, in addition to structure and natural disturbance, have shown 
recent changes in pinyon-juniper ecosystems of the Southwest.  For example, spread of invasive plant 
species, overharvesting, and intensive livestock grazing have contributed to ecological degradation in 
ways that may not be apparent by solely assessing structure and disturbance.  This suggests that 
comprehensive assessment of ecological conditions may be required.  Such assessments challenge 
managers to develop multifaceted interpretations of historical reference conditions.     
Key References 
Arnold, J.F., D.A. Jameson, and E.H. Reid. 1964. The pinyon-juniper type of Arizona: effects of grazing, 
fire, and tree control. USDA Forest Service Production Research Report No. 84. 
Baker, W.L., and D.J. Shinneman. 2004. Fire and restoration of pinyon-juniper woodlands in the western 
United States: a review. Forest Ecology and Management 189:1-21. 
Bradshaw, K.E., and J.L. Reveal. 1943. Tree classification for Pinus monophylla and Juniperus utahensis. 
Journal of Forestry 41:100-104(5). 
Egan, D., and E.A. Howell. 2001. The historical ecology handbook: a restorationist’s guide to reference 
ecosystems. Island Press, Washington. 
Floyd, M.L., D.D. Hanna, and W.H. Romme. 2004. Historical and recent fire regimes in piñon-juniper 
woodlands on Mesa Verde, Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 198:269-289. 
Huffman, D.W., P.Z. Fulé, K.M. Pearson, and J.E. Crouse. 2008. Fire history of pinyon-juniper woodlands at 
upper ecotones with ponderosa pine forests in Arizona and New Mexico. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 38:2097-2108. 
Leopold, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and fire in southern Arizona. Journal of Forestry 12:1-10. 
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 1999. Reference conditions and ecological restoration: a 
southwestern ponderosa pine perspective.  Ecological Applications 9:1266-1277. 
Romme, W.H, C.D. Allen, J.D. Bailey, W.L. Baker, B.T. Bestelmeyer, P.M. Brown, K.S. Eisenhart, M. L. 
Floyd, D.W. Huffman, B.F. Jacobs, R.F. Miller, E.H. Muldavin, T.W. Swetnam, R.J. Tausch, and P.J. 
Weisberb. 2009. Historical and modern disturbance regimes, stand structures, and landscape 
dynamics on pinon-juniper vegetation of the Western United States. Rangeland Ecology and 
Management 62:203-222. 
Sink, S.E. 2003. Photographic guide to pinyon and juniper tree maturity classes. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 
19

PLATE 1 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
20

PLATE 2 
A 
B 
C 
D
E 
F 
G 
H 
21

PLATE 3 
A 
B
C 
D 
E 
F 
22

Plate Descriptions 
Plate 1.  
A.
Burned juniper stump overtopped by herbaceous vegetation.
B.
Charred, coarse wood indicating a fire-killed group of pinyon and/or juniper trees.
C.
Group of burned snags surrounded by pinyon and juniper trees that have grown back since the
original fire.
D. Burned snag with young pinyon growing next to it.
E.
“Cat face” showing several fire scars on ponderosa pine snag.  This snag occurred in a ponderosa
pine forest – pinyon-juniper woodland transition zone.
F.
Fire scar on Utah juniper.  These tree can hold fire scars but “cat faces” are rare.
Plate 2. 
A.
Presettlement-age Utah juniper.  This tree is likely to be several hundred years old.
B.
Presettlement-age pinyon pine tree.
C.
Presettlement-age Utah juniper tree.
D. Presettlement-age Utah juniper tree.
E.
Group of presettlement-age trees.
F.
Large downed log that is likely to be presettlement in origin.
G. Presettlement downed pinyon pine log.
H. Presettlement pinyon pine snag.
Plate 3. 
A.
Rocky site where frequent historical surface fires were unlikely.
B.
Rocky fire protected site.
C.
Woodland conditions with several old trees, coarse wood, and forest soils.
D. Woodland conditions.
E.
Savanna conditions with scattered old trees, infrequent coarse wood, and grassland soils.
F.
Expansion of pinyon and juniper trees into sagebrush habitat.
23
