FIRE SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT (M ALEXANDER, SECTION EDITOR)
The Use of Science in Wildland Fire Management: a Review of Barriers
and Facilitators
Molly E Hunter1 & Melanie M Colavito2 & Vita Wright3
# The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Purpose of Review Science plays a critical role in natural resource management, and the use of science in decision-making is
mandated by several policy initiatives. Other disciplines have documented the challenges associated with applying science to
management and possible solutions to overcoming challenges, but the evaluation of science use in wildland fire management is
relatively immature. In this paper, we reviewed the available literature that evaluates science use in wildland fire management and
common barriers and facilitators to science use in decision-making.
Recent Findings We developed a conceptual model that describes the possible uses of science in fire management (perception,
planning, forecasting, implementation, assessment, communication, and policy), common barriers to science use (lack of science,
uncertainty, funding/capacity, conflict), common facilitators to fire science use (collaboration, trust, boundary organizations, co-
production), and factors that can act as facilitators or barriers to science use depending on their presence or absence (awareness,
accessibility, relevance). In the context of our conceptual model, we reviewed 67 papers that examined fire science use between
1986 and 2019.
Summary Most studies were conducted in the USA in the last 10 years and demonstrated that science is commonly used in fire
management and that the maturation of organizations devoted to science translation and communication in the last 10 years has
likely facilitated the application of fire science. The evaluation of fire science use, however, is still relatively immature, with
studies needed on the use of fire science in countries outside the USA, the use of science in the management of wildfires, and in
the crafting of policy related to wildland fire management.
Keywords Science application . Co-production . Collaboration . Fire science
Introduction
Background and Purpose of Review
Science, or the systematic pursuit of knowledge and under-
standing of the natural and social world through experiment
and observation, has long played a critical role in the manage-
ment of natural resources. In the last century, the relative im-
portance of science in land management decision-making has
been paramount as evident in the broad acceptance of “scien-
tific management” [1] and the many policy mandates for use of
“best available science” (e.g., 1973 Endangered Species Act,
2012 Forest Planning Rule) [2••]. Over time, more emphasis
has been placed on the role of other forms of knowledge (e.g.,
local knowledge, traditional ecological knowledge), collabora-
tive governance, and other factors in informing land manage-
ment decisions [1]. Nonetheless, science continues to plays a
critical role in decision-making and is particularly critical for
reducing uncertainty and enhancing credibility.
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Fire Science and
Management
* Molly E Hunter
mhunter@blm.gov
Melanie M Colavito
Melanie.colavito@nau.edu
Vita Wright
Vita.wright@usda.gov
1
Joint Fire Science Program, School of Natural Resources & the
Environment, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
2
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ, USA
3
USDA FS Rocky Mountain Research Station, Missoula, MT, USA
Current Forestry Reports
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40725-020-00127-2

The presence of science alone does not guarantee its appli-
cation. Certain factors need to be in place for science to have
utility to end users. These include salience (e.g., relevant to
land management decisions), credibility (e.g., technically ro-
bust), and legitimacy (e.g., unbiased) [3], conditions which are
not always present in scientific studies. In addition, decision-
makers need to be aware of relevant science and understand
how to properly apply their findings, which can be a signifi-
cant challenge when the body of available science is large,
confusing, or has uncertain implications [4, 5]. Scientific find-
ings can also conflict with other values related to the manage-
ment of natural resources [6].
Certain entities and processes can help overcome bar-
riers to science applications. The presence of boundary
organizations, which are designed to translate science, fa-
cilitate the development of new science relevant to deci-
sion-making, and improve communication and collabora-
tion among scientists and users of science, can accelerate
the use of science in decision-making [3]. Boundary or-
ganizations and collaborative research processes that in-
volve scientists and managers can also lead to the produc-
tion of boundary objects, which are tools (e.g., decision
support tools, workshops) that can help professionals
from different groups negotiate knowledge transfer [7]
and represent different viewpoints of those involved in
their production [8]. Improved communication and collab-
oration among scientists and science users can ultimately
lead to co-production of knowledge, whereby scientists
and science users collaboratively engage in the scientific
process, including formulating research questions,
methods, analysis, and disseminating results [9]. Co-
production in science can take on many different forms
[10], but the general principles, including ongoing two-
way communication among scientists and science users,
have been demonstrated to increase the likelihood that
science will be used in decision-making [11].
Relative to other fields (e.g., climate change adaptation),
the evaluation of the use of science for the management of
wildland fire is immature. Only recently have investigators
begun to study the use of fire science and barriers and facili-
tators of its application [2, 12–14]. A surge in research into the
application of fire science has likely been spurred in part by
the establishment of the Fire Science Exchange Network
(FSEN) in 2009, a boundary organization in the USA funded
by the Joint Fire Science Program (JFSP) and devoted to ac-
celerating the adoption of fire science [15••], as well as policy
changes following destructive wildfires (i.e., bushfires) in
Australia that spurred efforts to better incorporate science into
fire management [16]. Since this emerging body of work has
not been synthesized, the purpose of this study was to review
the scientific literature on the use of science in wildland fire
management and to identify factors that act as barriers or fa-
cilitators to fire science application.
A Conceptual Framework for the Use of Fire Science
To frame our investigation of the literature, we first developed
a conceptual model for how science is used in wildland fire
management and factors that may act as barriers or facilitators
(or both) (see Fig. 1). This framework was developed a priori
based on our own knowledge and experience of wildland fire
science and management [2, 12–14] and the use of science in
other areas of natural resource management.
According to the US National Wildfire Coordinating
Group (NWCG), fire management includes “all activities for
the management of wildland fires to meet land management
objectives. Fire management includes the entire scope of ac-
tivities from planning, prevention, fuels or vegetation modifi-
cation, prescribed fire, hazard mitigation, fire response, reha-
bilitation, monitoring, and evaluation” [17]. Thus, fire man-
agement encompasses both fuels management and wildfire
management. For the purpose of this paper, we consider fuels
management as the manipulation of living and dead vegeta-
tion to promote desirable fire behavior and meet other re-
source management objectives. We consider wildfire manage-
ment as the use of firefighting resources in suppression or
containment of human- or naturally caused wildfires if they
threaten valued resources, or the monitoring or facilitation of
spread of naturally caused wildfires if they are beneficial to
valued resources. There is some degree of overlap in manage-
ment of fuels and wildfire. For example, managers who im-
plement prescribed fires for the purpose of fuels reduction
often work in wildfire management. Managers in fuels and
wildfire, however, are largely encompassed in separate groups
Fig. 1 Conceptual model of the potential uses of fire science (perception,
planning, forecasting, implementation, assessment, communication,
policy) and possible barriers and facilitators to science use (inner
circle). Factors in the right side of the inner circle are more likely to act
as barriers when present. Factors on the left side are more likely to act as
facilitators when present. Factors in the middle can act as facilitators or
barriers depending on their presence or absence. This conceptual model
can be applied to fuels or wildfire management. See text for descriptions
of specific barriers and facilitators to science use
Curr Forestry Rep

specializing in either fuels or operations and using different
temporal scales and processes for decision-making. Decision-
making in fuels management occurs over long time-frames
(often years) largely under the guise of national policies that
dictate reducing wildfire risk, restoring ecological processes,
promoting resilience, and preventing environmental degrada-
tion (e.g., National Environmental Policy Act, National Forest
Management Act, National Fire Plan, Endangered Species
Act) [18, 19]. Decision-making in wildfire management oc-
curs over short time frames (days to weeks) under the structure
of the Incident Command System [20] and with common ob-
jectives of promoting firefighter safety, minimizing damage
and losses to valued resources, and utilizing fire as a natural
ecological process where appropriate.
Both fuel and wildfire managers use science from multiple
disciplines in decision-making. For example, fuel managers
may consult science in wildlife biology, forestry, and ecology
when planning fuel treatments that reduce wildfire risk while
maintaining or enhancing wildlife habitat [18]. Wildfire man-
agers regularly consult meteorologists to forecast potential
wildfire behavior, spread patterns, and impacts to valued re-
sources [21•]. However, the full scope of science use in wild-
land fire management has not been described or evaluated.
Based on our own understanding and experience in wildland
fire science and management, our conceptual model details
broad potential uses of science (perception, planning, forecast-
ing, implementation, assessment, communication, and policy)
and a multitude of potential barriers or facilitators to the use of
science (Fig. 1). In this model, factors shaded in red are those
that are more likely to act as barriers to science use, factors
shaded in green are more likely to be facilitators of science
use, and unshaded factors could act as facilitators or barriers,
depending on their presence or absence.
In this model, science use can entail altering a user’s
perception of an emerging management issue. For example,
science related to climate change or the spread of invasive
species may cause an end user to think about how manage-
ment practices may need adjustment in the future. Science use
for planning could include consultations with scientists or the
scientific literature in the development of fuel treatment plans
or use of forecasting tools to determine seasonal firefighting
resource needs. Science may be used in forecasting, or the
prediction of future conditions to inform current or future
management practices. Decisions related to implementation
may be more tactical and short term in nature. Examples could
include using science-based decision support tools to develop
specific parameters (e.g., weather and fuel conditions) under
which to conduct a prescribed fire or burnout operation.
Assessment includes the evaluation of management actions
or monitoring existing conditions. Science frameworks are
likely needed to assure that assessment in wildland fire man-
agement is robust. Science may be consulted in the
communication of management goals, objectives, or decision
frameworks with multiple audiences (e.g., public, stake-
holders, administrators, policy-makers). Finally, science
might be used in the crafting of policy related to wildland fire
management at national, state, and local levels. Some exam-
ples of enacted policies related to wildland fire management
include the 1995 fire-policy revision and the National Fire
Plan in the USA [22], and the “5% policy” in Australia [23].
Common barriers to the application of fire science in the
conceptual model described above include institutional
factors within fire management organizations (e.g., existing
policy, bureaucratic hurdles) that can impede the application
of fire science. Application of science can be halted if there is
a lack of science relevant to fire management or uncertainty
associated with the science findings or how to apply them to
fire management. Agencies often lack funding or capacity
(e.g., resources, scientific expertise, time) to keep abreast of
scientific studies and devise strategies for applying science.
There also can be external factors (e.g., public acceptance,
litigation) that deter land management agencies from adopting
fire science when there is a perception that it conflicts with the
values of specific entities external to fire management organi-
zations. Finally, fire science findings can be in conflict with
internal agency policies, external values, or other scientific
studies, all of which can prevent the application of fire
science.
Some of the above factors can also act as facilitators to the
application of fire science under certain conditions.
Institutional factors can act as facilitators to fire science use,
for example, when changes in agency policy dictate the use of
fire science. Our conceptual model proposes that there are a
number of factors that tend to be equally identified in the
literature as barriers or facilitators to the use of fire science,
depending on their presence or absence (Fig. 1). The
relevance of fire science to management decisions (e.g., ap-
propriate spatial and temporal scale) acts as a facilitator to
science use when indeed fire science is relevant to manage-
ment but a barrier when it is not. Awareness of fire science on
the part of intended users of science is a facilitator when
decision-makers are aware of relevant science and a barrier
when they are not. Other factors tend to have the same dichot-
omy, including accessibility, or the availability of science to
intended users in useful formats, and receptivity, or the beliefs
of intended end users on the utility of science.
The left side of the conceptual model lists several factors
which can act as facilitators to the use of fire science (e.g., co-
production, boundary organizations) (Fig. 1). In a general
sense, strong relationships among scientists and users of sci-
ence can foster trust among managers and scientists.
Collaboration and co-production on research and manage-
ment projects can lead to further trust in the science findings
on the part of managers. These factors have proven to be
successful in accelerating the adoption of science in other
areas of natural resource management [9]. The role of
Curr Forestry Rep

boundary organizations in facilitating this cycle and dissem-
inating science has proved to be paramount [3].
Methods
To address our research question, we limited our review to
papers that address fire science application explicitly as a
driving study question or more implicitly as an emergent study
finding. For example, a number of publications from other
fields, such as forest management and climate science, were
included in our review because findings emerged from those
studies that were relevant to wildland fire management. This
review did not include papers that present fire science findings
or decision support tools for wildland fire management unless
the papers also included some discussion about the use of that
science and whether or not the findings or tools were being
used in fire management. We also asked secondary questions
as part of this systematic review, including what methods were
used to assess fire science application, what type of paper was
used to present the findings (e.g., gray literature, peer-
reviewed publication), where was the research conducted,
what wildland fire management topics were addressed, and
what elements of wildland fire management were being
assessed (Fig. 1).
We used the Google Scholar database to search for papers
published before May 2019 using the following keywords:
“wildfire and science use,” “use-inspired science and wild-
fire,” “co-production and science and wildfire,” “fire science
application,” and “barriers and fire science and application.”
We compiled those studies that addressed in some capacity
the application of fire science in management, including how
science is used and factors that act as barriers or facilitators to
the use of fire science. We also “chased” compiled articles
forward and backward in time by examining their references
cited and using the “cite by” feature in Google Scholar to find
references that cite the compiled articles [24]. A few addition-
al articles published in 2019 were also included due to their
relevance. See Appendix A for a complete list of citations by
their general topic categories and year of publication in our
review.
In order to compare citations, we developed a spreadsheet
to track the following aspects of each paper: (1) whether or not
papers directly addressed the use of fire science as a study
question or whether the use of fire science emerged as a find-
ing from another line of inquiry; (2) whether the paper used
quantitative or qualitative methods or both or whether the
paper was anecdotal (e.g., based on personal observation or
opinion); and (3) basic information about the type of article
(e.g., peer-reviewed or gray literature), topic(s) (e.g., fuels
management, climate change), and location. In addition, we
tracked the degree to which papers assessed aspects in our
conceptual model, including how science is being used (e.g.,
perception, planning, forecasting, communication, implemen-
tation, assessment, policy, or other uses) and factors that act as
barriers or facilitators (or both) to science use (e.g., external,
institutional, relevance, funding/capacity, relationships, co-
production or collaboration present in some capacity, bound-
ary organization presence, science accessibility). Each paper
was reviewed for all aspects listed in our conceptual model,
but not all of the papers addressed all of these aspects, and
some of the aspects were captured in a general “other” cate-
gory if they were not part of our original conceptual model. In
the results, some aspects are combined because of consider-
able overlap in context (e.g., collaboration and co-
production).
All of the papers were coded according to each aspect in the
conceptual model (e.g., how science is used and identified
barriers or facilitators to science use). In order to ensure reli-
able coding across two coders, the first five papers were coded
by one coder and the second five papers were coded by the
second coder. Statistically significant intercoder agreement
was not obtained [25]. Each coder then reviewed the other
coder’s work to ensure that they were interpreting each paper
according to the conceptual model in the same way. The two
coders then discussed their interpretations and adjusted the
coding in the spreadsheet accordingly. After agreement be-
tween the two coders was achieved, the rest of the papers were
coded only once by one of the two coders. After coding was
complete, the different aspects of the conceptual model were
compared by all three authors using descriptive statistics and
over the time span of the articles in order to identify themes
and patterns in the review.
Results/Discussion
Overarching Study Trends
We found 67 papers that address the application of fire science
in some capacity. The earliest papers we found on the use of
fire science were an anecdotal study published in 1986 [26]
and a Master’s thesis from 1987 [27]. Since then, both the
number of papers and the number of papers published in
peer-reviewed journals have increased over time, especially
after 2010 (Fig. 2). The quality of evidence has also increased
over time as more investigators have used quantitative and
qualitative methods to assess the use of fire science, as op-
posed to relying on anecdotal approaches (Fig. 3). The vast
majority of authors investigated the use of fire science in the
USA, with only seven studies conducted in Australia, five in
Canada, and three in Europe. Many of the reviewed papers
(32) focused specifically on the use of fire science, including
in assessing firefighter safety, reducing wildfire risk, and man-
aging post-fire landscapes. Other reviewed papers examined
the use of science in a broader context, such as land
Curr Forestry Rep

management more generally (15) and climate change (12), yet
presented results related to fire science within these contexts.
Fewer papers (8) specifically examined the application of fire
science in relation to the use of science-based decision support
tools. Most of the 67 papers addressed the use of fire science
in the context of fuels management (37) rather than wildfire
management (9). For the remaining papers (21), the manage-
ment context (fuels vs. wildfire management) was either not
readily apparent or both contexts were addressed.
Given the sharp increase in number and quality of studies
after 2009, we summarize and present results for two time
periods: 1986–2009 and 2010–2019. The increase in number
and quality of papers over time likely reflects a growing in-
terest in factors that influence science use and increased
investment on the part of land management agencies in pro-
grams that accelerate the adoption of science in natural re-
source management. Recognizing the need to advance the
use of science by natural resource managers, some agencies
have established boundary organizations [28] for this very
purpose. Most notably for fire, this includes the JFSP FSEN
[4]. Other relevant boundary organizations in the USA include
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s
Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments (RISA)
established in 1995 [29] and the Department of Interior
Landscape Conservation Cooperatives established in 2009
[30]. In British Columbia, the non-profit Forest Research
Extension Partnership (FORREX) provides access to science
to support sustainable natural resource management decisions
Fig. 2 Number of papers
published each year that address
the application of fire science in
some capacity. Gray literature
includes studies published in
technical or other reports,
conference proceedings, popular
publications, and book chapters.
Peer-review includes studies
published in peer-reviewed
scientific journals
Fig. 3 Number of papers
published in each year that utilize
anecdotal, qualitative,
quantitative, or both quantitative
and qualitative methods in
investigating the application of
fire science in management.
Anecdotal refers to methods that
rely on personal observation.
Qualitative refers to studies that
utilize interviews, focus groups,
or similar instruments to better
understand the nature of fire
science use. Quantitative refers to
methods that utilize surveys or
similar instruments to quantify
some aspect of fire science use
Curr Forestry Rep

to government, non-government, aboriginal, academic, and
industry partners [31]. In Australia, Bushfire and Natural
Hazards CRC (www.bnhrcrc.com/au; accessed 8/27/2020)
plays a similar role of provided relevant fire science to end
users. These organizations have provided opportunities to
evaluate factors that influence the application of fire science
by land managers and contributed to the growing body of
work in fire science application.
All of the papers we reviewed acknowledged and/or docu-
mented that fire science is used in land management in some
capacity. Authors most commonly identified land manage-
ment planning and implementation of management activities
as times in which fire science is used to inform manager de-
cisions (Fig. 4). This is consistent with findings from other
studies [12–14] and perhaps is not surprising, given that many
US policies dictate the use of science in planning [12, 14, 32,
33]. Other common uses of science include increasing percep-
tion of emerging fire science issues, forecasting, and develop-
ing communication strategies or assessment protocols. For
example, output from a relatively new wildfire decision sup-
port tool in Australia was used to communicate science to the
public, policy-makers, or managers [23, 34]. Very few studies
have documented the use of fire science to inform policy. This
could reflect a need for increased use of fire science to inform
policy-making or a need to explicitly study how fire science is
or is not utilized in policy settings.
Common Barriers to Fire Science Application
The most commonly identified factors identified as barriers to
fire science use are shown in Fig. 5. Factors external to fire
management agencies were most often cited as barriers to the
Fig. 4 Number of papers in two
time periods (1986–2009 and
2010–2019) that identify specific
points in the wildfire management
cycle where fire science is utilized
Fig. 5 Number of papers in two
time periods (1986–2009 and
2010–2019) that identify how
external factors, funding/capacity,
and institutional factors acts as
either a barrier, facilitator, or both
a barrier and facilitator to the
application of fire science
Curr Forestry Rep

application of fire science (Fig. 5). These include a lack of
public awareness of science and lack of public support of
specific fire management approaches [12, 35–42], a percep-
tion by managers that science conflicts with policy or political
agendas, a perception that science itself is politically motivat-
ed [43, 44], and concerns that new approaches will be litigated
[41]. Lack of funding/capacity and institutional factors was
also commonly listed as barriers to science use (Fig. 5).
Only four studies identified lack of science as a significant
barrier to science use [25, 45–47].
Lack of funding/capacity (including time) was commonly
reported as a barrier to fire science application in publications
across time periods and across geographic areas [4, 12–14, 40,
48–50]. Thirty-four papers mentioned resources or capacity as
either barriers (28), facilitators (5), or both (1) (Fig. 5). Resource
management specialists across five federal agencies identified
capacity problems as a barrier to using new research [36].
Similarly, two studies of fire managers in the USA found that
they were more likely to face capacity barriers, such as lack of
time, funding, and personnel, than problems with the quality or
availability of data [14, 51]. A recent case study of one of the
JFSP Fire Science Exchanges acknowledged the importance of
institutional support and funding as facilitators for fire science
delivery and the co-production of knowledge [2••]. During an-
other case study, managers recommended staffing solutions,
including the designation of staff whose responsibilities would
be to filter research information, the designation of a research
liaison, and/or a research assistant, who would be responsible
for seeking scientific information on specific topics [40].
In addition to time and resources, authors noted that, in
order to apply science, managers need an institutional struc-
ture that supports innovation. This includes processes for in-
tegrating new approaches into management and the flexibility
to experiment with new approaches. Discussing barriers to the
application of new wildfire risk management tools, Calkin
et al. [38] cited research [52] that found innovation and risk-
taking were among the least rewarded traits for decision-
makers. Others acknowledged that the management authority
inherent in bureaucracies can compromise adaptability, the
absence of mechanisms for linking learning to implementation
decisions, and lack of review processes that integrates science
and monitoring information [32, 46, 50]. Potential solutions
include developing incentives and rewards for applying fire
science and adopting adaptive management processes [32,
53]. Early papers that recognized institutional factors within
fire management agencies most often referred to them as bar-
riers to the application of science (6 of 8 papers). Later papers
also predominantly cited institutional factors as barriers (16 of
31 papers), but a growing number of papers acknowledged
that institutional factors can be facilitators (9 of 31 papers)
or they can act as both barriers and facilitators (6 of 31 papers)
(Fig. 5). This could reflect institutional investment in capacity
for applying science.
Organizational culture can be an overriding influence on
many of the institutional barriers and facilitators mentioned.
Organizational members often behave based on shared values,
beliefs, and assumptions more than rules [54]. Wright [55]
applied the Garvin et al. [56] survey of learning organization
characteristics to 495 fire managers and decision-makers in
three US federal fire organizations, measuring psychological
safety, openness to new ideas, appreciation of differences,
analysis, information transfer, and time for reflection.
Survey respondents indicated they felt psychologically safe
introducing new ideas in their work units; however, they were
less certain new ideas would be integrated into existing ap-
proaches. Compared with individual experiences and percep-
tions, work unit and agency culture were not significant deter-
minants of research use by fire managers [55]. Further study is
needed to assess whether and how organizational culture af-
fects the use of fire science.
Other factors identified as barriers to science use were sci-
ence uncertainty, conflict, and awareness. Sixteen papers cited
uncertainty or conflict around science findings as a barrier to
fire science use. This includes science that is incompatible
with management approaches or agency directives, or science
findings that are confusing or inconclusive. Of the twelve
papers that examined the use of fire science in the context of
climate change, a relatively high proportion (6 papers) identi-
fied scientific uncertainty or conflict as a barrier. This may
reflect the fact that climate change science often relies on
environmental modeling exercises that include downscaling
of climate projects, and many studies report that managers
are uncertain or skeptical of such methods [57, 58]. In the
realm of fire science, scientific uncertainty or conflict can arise
from a lack of synthesis of the scientific literature [59], lack of
science in a particular locality [46], or lack of trust in the
outcome of studies that rely heavily on modeling and assump-
tions [34]. Ten papers identified lack of awareness or under-
standing of science by managers as a significant factor in
determining the use of fire science in decision-making. For
example, a survey and interview with boundary spanners in
fire management indicated that some wildland fire managers
did not use science because they were not aware of relevant
fire science [13].
Common Factors Acting as Barriers and Facilitators to
Fire Science Application
Two of the most common factors identified for influencing the
use of science were the accessibility of science to managers
(46 papers) and relevance of science to management concerns
(41 papers). These factors were identified as both facilitators
and barriers to the application of fire science (Fig. 6).
Generally speaking, when fire science was highly relevant to
management needs and easily accessible to managers, these
were identified as facilitators to the application of fire science.
Curr Forestry Rep

They were identified as barriers when these conditions were
not in place. For example, Garfin et al. [60] documented how
seasonal weather forecasts are heavily relied upon in fire man-
agement, partly because the spatial and temporal scales of
forecasts are relevant to fire management decisions and the
forecasts are distributed in multiple formats. In contrast, other
authors suggested that decision support tools are not used
because managers are not interested in the topics they address
[42], or that fire managers believe many scientific studies are
not relevant to their locality, and that the sheer volume of
studies and lack of synthesized works makes the science ef-
fectively inaccessible [36, 44].
While we cannot determine statistically significant differ-
ences between time periods, it is interesting to note that only a
small proportion of papers published between 2001 and 2009
listed science relevance and accessibility as facilitators of sci-
ence, whereas much higher proportion of papers published
between 2010 and 2019 identified these factors as facilitators
of science use (Fig. 6). This trend could reflect increased in-
vestment in organizations that span boundaries between sci-
entists and managers or increased attention to evaluating the
use of fire science. Whether seen as barriers or facilitators, the
results show that fire science is often, but not always, seen as
relevant to manager needs and accessible to them [13].
Nonetheless, issues of science relevance and accessibility re-
main. For example, while there is great promise in application
of remote sensing tools in fire management, spatial and tem-
poral scales are not always consistent with fire management
needs, and managers have difficulty learning about newly
available tools [49].
Personal receptivity to science can also be a barrier or fa-
cilitator to science application. This includes individual inno-
vativeness, educational and professional backgrounds, beliefs
about research ease of use and usefulness, attitudes toward
science, and stress levels that can hinder creativity [14, 40,
42, 55]. Many papers in both periods recognized individual
differences in receptivity to scientific innovations suggested
receptivity was a barrier; however, some papers were more
optimistic, noting that differing receptivity also can be a facil-
itator of science application (Fig. 6). Wright [14] and Kaage
[27] suggested that understanding audiences, in particular
identifying innovativeness and early adopters within the fire
management organization, can be used to more effectively
deliver science to potential users.
Common Facilitators to Fire Science Application
Authors that referred to relationships, co-production (or col-
laboration), boundary organizations, and boundary objects
largely discussed these factors as facilitators to fire science
application. Multiple papers address the importance of rela-
tionships between scientists and managers or decision-makers
for facilitating the use of science [14, 51, 55, 61–63]. For
example, two studies noted that direct engagement and expe-
rience with scientists created more support for and use of
science by managers [55, 64]. Other studies illustrate the im-
portance of face-to-face and in-person interactions for foster-
ing relationships [12, 65, 66]. Only 2 of the 33 papers that
discussed relationships described it as a possible barrier. For
example, Neale and May [67••] discussed how relationships
can suffer due to communication breakdowns, and Kearns and
Wright [40] discussed issues that arise when relationships
with scientists are not present. Kemp et al. [41] also noted that
relationships are a facilitator to the use of science when they
are present, which implies that a lack of relationships is a
barrier. Relationships were also proposed as a way to address
other barriers in land management planning and collaboration
[58, 68]. Furthermore, relationships and trust are important
precursors to processes like the co-production of knowledge
or collaboration in research [69].
Fig. 6 Number of papers in two
time periods (1986–2009 and
2010–2019) that identify how the
accessibility of science to
managers, the relevance of fire
science to management needs,
and the receptivity of managers to
science acts as either a barrier,
facilitator, or both a barrier and
facilitator to the application of fire
science
Curr Forestry Rep

In 1987, Kaage [27] suggested involving practitioners in
the development of research would increase practitioner own-
ership of new ideas and improve research and manager opin-
ions of each other. The concept of co-production (also referred
to as collaboration in some of the publications) has received
increasing attention in the papers we reviewed over time, es-
pecially since 2010 (Fig. 7). The increased use of the concept
has created some confusion about what exactly co-production
entails [70] or when it is the most appropriate tool for facili-
tating the use of science [71]. Co-production is time intensive
and requires significant capacity that is not always available,
especially in fire management, so it can be a prohibitive ap-
proach unless it is facilitated through a boundary organization,
which can dedicate the necessary attention and effort to delib-
erately facilitating co-production to produce actionable sci-
ence [2••]. Nonetheless, in the papers that we reviewed, it is
largely discussed in a positive light. For example, Allen et al.
[57] note that co-production is now desired by some research
participants, Kemp et al. [41] emphasize that science that is
informed by the context in which the intended end users of
that science operate can be used more effectively, and Archie
[68] notes that it can be used to address other barriers to the
use of science in land management planning and collabora-
tion. Garfin et al. [60] describe how the principles of co-
production can be used to get managers and scientists working
together to increase the use of seasonal forecast science. Only
one of the studies that we reviewed discussed both barriers
and facilitators to collaborative or co-produced approaches
[36]. Only 3 of the 24 articles we reviewed that addressed
co-production used quantitative methods, 13 used either qual-
itative or mixed-method approach, and 8 of them used anec-
dotal approaches. This highlights the difficulty of measuring
the outcomes of co-production or collaboration, though there
is a growing effort to better evaluate co-production of knowl-
edge processes and outcomes [63, 72]. Furthermore, co-
production of knowledge is one of many approaches to
collaboration around the development and use of science for
decision-making, and more work is needed to really under-
stand its outcomes [10, 63].
Similar to the authors that discuss relationships and co-
production, the 23 papers that discussed boundary organiza-
tions largely presented them as facilitators to the use of fire
science. Notably, only one paper included a discussion of
boundary organizations in the literature we reviewed in the
1986–2009 time period (Fig. 7). In the last 10 plus years, the
term “boundary organization” has become more institutional-
ized in fire science and management, due in part, to the work
of the JFSP FSENs. These were not established until 2009,
and they are dedicated to facilitating the use of fire science by
managers. The first foundational paper assessing the FSENs
was not published until 2012 and noted that the FSENs are
important for consolidating information and improving the
connections between scientists and managers [4]. However,
the FSENs have received increasing attention as boundary
organizations in recent years, particularly with respect to their
evaluation of intended outcomes [15••], unique engagements
with managers [66], and deliberate use of co-production [2••].
The role of the NOAA RISAs in assisting with the use of fire
science for predictive services and fire-related meteorology
has also received more attention in recent years [60]. Some
papers suggest that boundary organizations and boundary
spanners, the individuals who work in boundary organizations
and play intermediary roles, often represent a trusted source of
scientific information [62] and can be helpful in facilitating
collaborative groups that are trying to use science to come to
consensus on complex landscape management concepts that
affect wildland fire [2, 47].
Some authors that discussed boundary objects tended to
have more reservations about their role in facilitating the use
of fire science. For example, 3 of the 20 papers that discussed
boundary objects discussed them as possible barriers [42, 43,
73] and another 3 discussed boundary objects as both potential
Fig. 7 Number of papers in two
time periods (1986–2009 and
2010–2019) that address
relationships (or trust), co-
production (or collaboration), and
boundary organizations
Curr Forestry Rep

barriers and facilitators of fire science use [44, 74, 75].
Boundary objects can be amorphous and range from work-
shops [76] to decision-support tools [22, 38, 59], so their use
and outcomes vary depending on the type of boundary object
under consideration. For example, with boundary objects like
wildfire risk maps [74, 75], the utility for management is
mixed depending on how managers were engaged in the
map development. Other authors noted that boundary objects
like risk models or decision-support tools can be complex and
difficult to use without support from experienced practitioners
or strong visual outputs [34, 42]; therefore, managers who
perceive innovations as difficult to use may not use them
without adequate training and support [14, 42, 45]. During a
series of fire-climate workshops, fire managers suggested that
fire-climate science and decision support tools could be taught
through training courses [45]. Additionally, when decision-
support tools and models are simplified and modified with
manager input, they can become easier to use in fire manage-
ment [66, 77].
Conclusion
The available body of work on the application of fire sci-
ence shows that fire science is indeed used in decision-
making in wildland fire management. For our conceptual
model of fire science use (Fig. 1), there is more evidence
for fire science use in certain aspects of wildland fire man-
agement (e.g., planning, forecasting) than others (e.g., as-
sessment, policy). There is also more evidence for the use
of fire science in fuels management as opposed to wildfire
management. This most likely reflects a lack of scientific
studies on the use of fire science in these areas rather than a
lack of science use. It is possible that the factors governing
the use of fire science in, for example, policy development
and wildfire management are different from those in plan-
ning or fuels management. Thus, we recognize a need for
additional studies on the use of fire science in understudied
aspects of our conceptual model, particularly the use of fire
science in policy, assessment, and all aspects of wildfire
management, particularly internationally. Additional stud-
ies on the cost-benefit ratio of research investments could
inform the allocation of research and operational invest-
ments [78].
Factors in the center of our conceptual model, such as
science relevancy and accessibility, are perhaps more easily
adaptable than others, as change typically occurs on an in-
dividual level, as opposed to a societal or institutional level.
Studies we reviewed showed that factors on the left side of
our conceptual model (e.g., collaboration, relationships) are
key to improving science accessibility, relevancy, and trust
on an individual level [12, 34, 39, 43, 61]. Boundary orga-
nizations are keys to fostering relationships and
collaboration on an institutional level, which ultimately in-
creases the facilitators and reduces the barriers to science
use in decision-making [3]. The available literature suggests
that boundary organizations in wildland fire management
have been successful in facilitating the use of fire science
[13, 15]. Given that fire-related boundary organizations are
relatively new, they should continue to be evaluated longi-
tudinally, to understand how they influence collaboration,
co-production, and fire science application as they mature
[2••]. As additional boundary organizations develop inter-
nationally, they too should be evaluated for effectiveness in
facilitating the use of fire science.
The most common barriers to the application of fire sci-
ence were external factors (e.g., public acceptance, litiga-
tion) and funding/capacity (e.g., lack of scientific expertise,
time to adopt science). The fact that these factors are com-
monly mentioned in both time periods suggests that they are
persistent and difficult to overcome. Changes in funding/
capacity do not happen often, but when they do occur, they
can have profound effects on the use of fire science in man-
agement. Examples include the development and growth of
predictive services in wildfire management [67••], the
National Fire Plan in the USA, and the development of
boundary organizations [2, 4, 56]. External factors are also
slow to change, but change can be precipitated by dramatic
events, such as destructive wildfires [64]. To that end, it is
critical that scientists and managers are ready to take advan-
tage of rare opportunities for change in capacity and exter-
nal factors to advance the use of science in decision-making.
They can be better prepared for such opportunities by con-
tinually fostering all the factors on the left side of our con-
ceptual model.
Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge their institutions for
supporting the published work, the Joint Fire Science Program, the
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station, and the
Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
Molly Hunter, Melanie Colavito and Vita Wright
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does not
contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of
the authors.
Appendix A—General Topic Areas
with Articles by Year
General Fire Science
&
1987 [27]
&
2001 [22, 45]
Curr Forestry Rep

&
2002 [40]
&
2007 [36, 50]
&
2008 [39]
&
2010 [14]
&
2011 [51]
&
2012 [62]
&
2013 [44, 59, 79]
&
2014 [80, 81]
&
2015 [32, 55, 82, 83]
&
2016 [13, 23, 34, 60]
&
2017 [12, 63, 84–86]
&
2018 [15••]
&
2019 [2, 73, 75]
General Land Management
&
2003 [87]
&
2004 [53]
&
2006 [88]
&
2007 [89, 90]
&
2008 [91]
&
2011 [48]
&
2012 [92]
&
2015 [42, 46]
&
2017 [43, 47]
&
2018 [93, 94]
&
2019 [64]
Climate Change
&
2010 [95]
&
2012 [35]
&
2013 [76]
&
2014 [58, 68, 96, 97]
&
2015 [37, 41]
&
2016 [65]
&
2017 [57]
&
2019 [66]
Decision Support Tools
&
1986 [26]
&
2010 [61]
&
2011 [38, 77]
&
2012 [98]
&
2017 [49]
&
2018 [67, 74]
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were
made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
•• Of major importance
1.
Brunner R, Steelman TA, Coe-Juell L, Cromley CM, Edwards CM,
Tucker DW. Adaptive governance: integrating science, policy, and
decision making. New York: Columbia University Press; 2005.
2.•• Colavito MM, Trainor ST, Kettle NP, York A. Making the transi-
tion from science delivery to knowledge coproduction in boundary
spanning: a case study of the Alaska Fire Science Consortium.
Weather Clim Soc. 2019. https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-19-
0009.1 This paper is useful for understanding how a
boundary organization focused on the development and
communication of fire science operates and how it has
changed over time.
3.
Cash DW, Clark WC, Alcock F, Dickson NM, Eckley N, Guston
DH, et al. Knowledge systems for sustainable development. Proc
Natl Academy Sciences. 2003;100:8086–91. https://doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.1231332100.
4.
Kocher SD, Toman E, Trainor SF, Wright V, Briggs JS, Goebel CP,
et al. How can we span the boundaries between wildland fire sci-
ence and management in the United States? J For. 2012;110:421–8.
https://doi.org/10.5849/jof.11-085.
5.
McNie EC. Reconciling the supply of scientific information with
user demands: an analysis of the problem and review of the litera-
ture. Environ Sci Pol. 2007;10:17–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2006.10.004.
6.
Sarewitz D, Pielke RA Jr. The neglected heart of science policy:
reconciling supply of and demand for science. Environ Sci Pol.
2007;10:5–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2006.10.001.
7.
White DD, Wutich A, Larson KL, Gober P, Lant T, Senneville C.
Credibility, salience, and legitimacy of boundary objects: water
managers’ assessment of a simulation model in an immersive deci-
sion theater. Sci Public Policy. 2010; https://academic.oup.com/jof/
article/109/1/43/4599449;37:219–32.
8.
Star SL, Griesemer JR. Institutional ecology, `translations’ and
boundary objects: amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39. Soc Stud Sci 1989;
https://doi.org/10.1177/030631289019003001, 19, 387, 420
9.
Lemos MC, Morehouse BJ. The co-production of science and pol-
icy in integrated climate assessments. Glob Environmental Change.
2005;15:57–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2004.09.004.
10.
Meadow AM, Ferguson DB, Guido Z, Horangic A, Owen G, Wall
T. Moving toward the deliberate coproduction of climate science
Curr Forestry Rep

knowledge. Weather Climate Soc. 2015;7:179–91. https://doi.org/
10.1175/WCAS-D-14-00050.1.
11.
Cash DW, Borck JC, Patt AG. Countering the loading-dock ap-
proach to linking science and decision making: comparative analy-
sis of El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) forecasting systems.
Sci Technol Human Values. 2006;31:465–94. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0162243906287547.
12.•• Colavito MM. The role of science in the Collaborative Forest
Landscape Restoration Program. J For. 2017. https://doi.org/10.
5849/jof.15-142 This paper examines how science is applied in
collaborative efforts to plan and implement forest restoration
under the umbrella of a policy mechanism that requires
science-based collaboration.
13.
Hunter ME. Outcomes of fire research: is science used? International J
Wildland Fire. 2016;25:495. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF15202.
14.
Wright V. Influences to the success of fire science delivery: perspec-
tives of potential fire/fuels science users. Joint Fire Science Program
2010. https://www.firescience.gov/projects/04-4-2-01/project/04-4-2-
01_vw_jfsp_final_report.pdf. Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
15.•• Maletsky LD, Evans WP, Singletary L, Sicafuse LL. Joint Fire
Science Program (JFSP) Fire Science Exchange Network: a nation-
al evaluation of initiative impacts. J For. 2018. https://doi.org/10.
1093/jofore/fvy009 This paper presents results from four year
longitudinal evaluation survey of the Joint Fire Science
Program Fire Science Exchange Network, a fire science
boundary organization in the United States. Managers who
answered the survey indicated that this boundary
organization was a trusted source and enhanced the
accessibility of fire science within their regions.
16.
Ruane S. Using a worldview lens to examine complex policy is-
sues: a historical review of bushfire management in the South West
of Australia. Local Environ. 2018;23:777–95. https://doi.org/10.
1080/13549839.2018.1467390.
17.
National Wildfire Coordinating Group. Glossary of wildland fire.
National Wildfire Coordinating Group https://www.nwcg.gov/
glossary/a-z. Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
18.
Peterson DL, Johnson MC. Science-basis for strategic planning for
hazardous fuel treatment. Fire Manag Today. 2007;67(3):13–8.
19.
Stephens SL, Ruth LW. Federal forest-fire policy in the United States.
Ecol Appl. 2005;15:532–42. https://doi.org/10.1890/04-0545.
20.
Dague D, Hirami P. The United States Forest Service’s incident
command system 40 years on: from domestic wildfires to interna-
tional disaster response. Unasylva. 2015;60:79–85.
21.• Heffernan R. Who does what: the roles of scientists in wildland fire
weather. Fire Manag today. 2017;75(1):6–9 In this popular man-
agement article, the author articulates the role of the National
Weather Service in disseminating weather and climate science
to fire managers. Weather and climate science is disseminated
in various projects and used in particular for short- and long-
term planning and forecasting.
22.
Conard SG, Hartzell T, Hilbruner MW, Zimmerman GT. Changing
fuel management strategies - the challenge of meeting new infor-
mation and analysis needs. International J Wildland Fire. 2001;10:
267. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF01027.
23.
Neale T, Weir JK, Dovers S. Science in motion: integrating scien-
tific knowledge into bushfire risk mitigation in Southwest Victoria.
Australian J Emergency Manag. 2016;31:13–7.
24.
Jahangirian M, Eldabi T, Garg L, Jun GT, Naseer A, Patel B, et al.
A rapid review method for extremely large corpora of literature:
applications to the domains of modelling, simulation, and manage-
ment. Int J Information Manag. 2011;31:234–43. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijinfomgt.2010.07.004.
25.
Saldana J. The coding manual for qualitative researchers. London:
Sage Publications; 2016.
26.
Kiil AD, Quintilio D, Alexander ME. 1986. Adaptation of a nation-
al system of fire danger rating in Alberta, Canada: a case study in
technology transfer. In: Proceedings of the 18th IUFRO World
Congress. 1986. https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pubwarehouse/pdfs/11517.
pdf Accessed 30 March 2020.
27.
Kaage W. Predicting prescribed fire managers’ perceptions of their
information sources’ worth. M.S. Thesis. 1987. University of
Montana.
28.
Guston DH. Boundary organizations in environmental policy and
science: an introduction. Sci Technol Human Values. 2001;26:399–
408. https://doi.org/10.1177/016224390102600401.
29.
Meadow A. An ethnohistory of the NOAA RISA program. Climate
Assessment for the Southwest, University of Arizona. 2017. https://
w w w . c l i m a s . a r i z o n a . e d u / s i t e s / d e f a u l t / f i l e s /
pdfmeadow2017risahistory.pdf. Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
30.
Jacobson C, Robertson AL. Landscape Conservation Cooperatives:
bridging entities to facilitate adaptive co-governance of social–
ecological systems. Hum Dimens Wildl. 2012;17:333–43. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10871209.2012.709310.
31.
Innes, T. Natural resources information management forum: putting
knowledge to work. FORREX . 2003. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.7.2353&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
32.
Meyer MD, Roberts SL, Wills R, Brooks M, Winford EM.
Principles of effective USA federal fire management plans. Fire
Ecology. 2015;11:59–83. https://doi.org/10.4996/fireecology.
1102059.
33.
Schultz C, Sisk TD, Noon BR, Nie MA. Wildlife conservation
planning under the United States Forest Service’s 2012 planning
rule. J Wildlife Manag. 2013;77:428–44. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jwmg.513.
34.
Neale T, Weir JK, McGee TK. Knowing wildfire risk: scientific
interactions with risk mitigation policy and practice in Victoria.
Australia Geoforum. 2016;72:16–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
geoforum.2016.03.008.
35.
Archie KM, Dilling L, Milford JB, Pampel FC. Climate change and
western public lands: a survey of U.S. federal land managers on the
status of adaptation efforts. Ecol Soc. 2012. https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-05187-170420.
36.
Barbour J. Accelerating adoption of fire science and related re-
search. Joint Fire Science Program. 2007. https://www.
firescience.gov/projects/05-S-07/project/05-S-07_final_report.pdf
Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
37.
Bosomworth K. Climate change adaptation in public policy:
frames, fire management, and frame reflection. Environment and
Planning C: Government and Policy. 2015;33:1450–66. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0263774X15614138.
38.
Calkin DC, Finney MA, Ager AA, Thompson MP, Gebert KM.
Progress towards and barriers to implementation of a risk frame-
work for US federal wildland fire policy and decision making. For
Policy Economics. 2011;13:378–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
forpol.2011.02.007.
39.
Kalabokidis K, Losifides T, Henderson M, Morehouse B. Wildfire
policy and use of science in the context of a socio-ecological system
on the Aegean Archipelago. Environmental Sci & Policy. 2008;11:
408–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2008.01.006.
40.
Kearns S, Wright V. Barriers to the use of science: USFS case study
on fire, weed, and recreation management in wilderness. Aldo
Leopold Wilderness Research Institute. 2002.
41.
Kemp KB, Blades JJ, Klos PZ, Hall TE, Force JE, Morgan P, et al.
Managing for climate change on federal lands of the western United
States. Ecol Soc. 2015;20. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-07522-
200217.
42.
Marcot BG, Fisher LA, Thompson MP, Tomosy M. Applying the
science of decision making: a survey of use and needs in the na-
tional forest system. USDA Forest Service. 2015. https://www.fs.
fed.us/emc/nepa/includes/FS_SurveyofDecisionScience2015.pdf
Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
Curr Forestry Rep

43.•• Colovito MM. Utilising scientific information to support resilient
forest and fire management. Int J Wildland Fire. 2017. https://doi.
org/10.1071/WF16158 This paper provides examples of how
science is used in forest and fire management and includes
recommendations for scientists and managers working to
improve the development, application, and communication of
science.
44.
Davis EJ, Moseley C, Olsen C, Abrams J, Creighton J. Diversity
and dynamism of fire science user needs. J For. 2013;111:101–7.
https://doi.org/10.5849/jof.12-037.
45.
Garfin GM, Morehouse BJ. Facilitating use of climate information
for wildfire decision-making in the U.S. Southwest. 2001. https://
www.climas.arizona.edu/sites/default/files/pdfgarfin2001.pdf.
Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
46.
Cheng A, Gerlak A, Dale L, Mattor K. Examining the adaptability
of collaborative governance associated with publicly managed eco-
systems over time: insights from the Front Range Roundtable,
Colorado. USA Ecology and Society. 2015;20. https://doi.org/10.
5751/ES-07187-200135.
47.•• Urgenson LS, Ryan CM, Halpern CB, Bakker JD, Belote RT,
Franklin JF, et al. Visions of restoration in fire-adapted forest land-
scapes: lessons from the Collaborative Forest Landscape
Restoration Program. Environ Manag. 2017. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00267-016-0791-2 This paper presents findings from 86
interviews with participants in collaborative forest restoration
projects on challenges and opportunities for adopting science-
based forest restoration. Engagement of science was identified
as one factor that facilitates the goals of collaborative forest
restoration groups.
48.
Jacobi WR, Crump A, Lundquist JE. Dissemination of Forest
Health Research Information in the Rocky Mountains. J For.
2011. https://doi.org/10.1093/jof/109.1.43.
49.
Milford JB, Knight D. Increasing the use of earth science data and
models in air quality management. J Air & Waste Manag Assn.
2017;67:431–44. https://doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2016.
1248303.
50.
Morford S, Hollstedt C. Revisiting a forest extension strategy for
British Columbia: a survey of natural resource practitioners and
information providers. Ministry of Forests and Range Forest
Science Program. 2007. https://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hfd/pubs/Docs/
Tr/Tr042.pdf Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
51.
Ryan CM, Cerveny LK. Wildland fire science for management:
federal fire manager information needs, sources, and uses.
Western J Applied For. 2011;26:126–32. https://doi.org/10.1093/
wjaf/26.3.126.
52.
Kennedy JJ, Haynes RH, Zhou X. Line officers’ views on stated
USDA Forest Service values and the agency reward system. USDA
Forest Service. 2005. https://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/pubs/pnw_gtr632.
pdf Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
53.
Wright V. Barriers to science-based management: what are they
and what can we do about them? In Proceedings of the 2003
George Wright Society / National Park Service Joint Conference.
2004 The George Wright Society http://wwwgeorgewrightorg/
0310wrightpdf Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
54.
Weick KE, KM Sutcliffe. Managing the unexpected: assuring high
performance in an age of complexity. 2011. San Francisco: John
Wiley and Sons.
55.
Wright V. Individual and organizational influences on fire research
use by federal fire managers and decision makers in the Bureau of
Land Management, National Park Service, and U.S. Forest Service.
Ph.D. Dissertation. 2015. University of Montana.
56.
Garvin DA. Edmonsdson A, Gino F. Is yours a learning organiza-
tion? Harvard Business Review. 2001; March:1–10.
57.
Allen E, Stephens J, Yorgey G, Kruger C, Ahamed S, Adam J.
Climate science information needs among natural resource
decision-makers in the Northwest US. Climate Services. 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cliser.2017.03.002.
58.
Archie KM, Dilling L, Milford JB, Pampel FC. Unpacking the
‘information barrier’: comparing perspectives on information as a
barrier to climate change adaptation in the Interior Mountain West.
J Environmental Manag. 2014;133:397–410. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jenvman.2013.12.015.
59.
Chen X, Emery N, Garcia ES, Hanan EJ, Hodges HE, Martin T,
et al. Perspectives on disconnects between scientific information
and management decisions on post-fire recovery in Western US.
Environ Manag. 2013;52:1415–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00267-013-0165-y.
60.
Garfin G, Brown TJ, Wordell T, Delgado E. The making of national
seasonal wildfire outlooks. In: Climate in Context. San Francisco:
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.; 2016. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118474785.ch7.
61.
Morehouse BJ, O’Brien S, Christopherson G, Johnson P.
Integrating values and risk perceptions into a decision support sys-
tem. Intl J Wildland Fire. 2010;19:123. https://doi.org/10.1071/
WF08064.
62.
Owen G, McLeod JD, Kolden CA, Ferguson DB, Brown TJ.
Wildfire management and forecasting fire potential: the roles of
climate information and social networks in the Southwest United
States. Weather Climate Society. 2012;4:90–102. https://doi.org/
10.1175/WCAS-D-11-00038.1.
63.•• Wall TU, Brown TJ, Nauslar NJ. Spot weather forecasts: improving
utilization, communication, and perceptions of accuracy in sophis-
ticated user groups. Weather Clim Soc. 2017. https://doi.org/10.
1175/WCAS-D-15-0055.1 Through interviews with fire
practitioners, this paper documents to use and interpretation
of spot weather forecasts in fire management. Trust in and
appropriate use of spot weather forecasts is improved when
there are strong professional relationships between fire
practitioners and meteorologists.
64.
White EM, Lindberg K, Davis EJ, Spies TA. Use of science and
modeling by practitioners in landscape-scale management deci-
sions. J For. 2019;117:267–79. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/
fvz007.
65.
Blades JJ, Klos PZ, Kemp KB, Hall TE, Force JE, Morgan P, et al.
Forest managers’ response to climate change science: evaluating
the constructs of boundary objects and organizations. Forest
Ecology and Manage. 2016;360:376–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2015.07.020.
66.
Rutherford T, Schultz C. Adapting wildland fire governance to
climate change in Alaska. Ecol Soc. 2019;24. https://doi.org/10.
5751/ES-10810-240127.
67.•• Neale T, May D. Bushfire simulators and analysis in Australia:
insights into an emerging sociotechnical practice. Environmental
Hazards. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1080/17477891.2017.1410462
This paper provides a history of bushfire simulators in
Australia and a review of studies on their use. The paper also
presents needs for future research on the adoption of bushfire
prediction systems.
68.
Archie KM. Mountain communities and climate change adaptation:
barriers to planning and hurdles to implementation in the Southern
Rocky Mountain region of North America. Mitig Adapt Strateg
Glob Chang. 2014;19:569–87. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-
013-9449-z.
69.
Djenontin INS, Meadow AM. The art of co-production of knowl-
edge in environmental sciences and management: lessons from in-
ternational practice. Environmental Manag. 2018;61:885–903.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-018-1028-3.
70.
Bremer S, Meisch S. Co-production in climate change research:
reviewing different perspectives. WIREs Clim Change. 2017;8.
https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.482.
Curr Forestry Rep

71.
Wall TU, Meadow AM, Horganic A. Developing evaluation indi-
cators to improve the process of coproducing usable climate sci-
ence. Weather Climate Society. 2017;9:95–107. https://doi.org/10.
1175/WCAS-D-16-0008.1.
72.
Kettle NP. Knowledge co-production in contested spaces: an eval-
uation of the North Slope Borough – shell baseline studies program.
ARCTIC. 2019. https://doi.org/10.14430/arctic67804.
73.
Schultz C, McCaffrey SM, Huber-Stearns HH. Policy barriers and
opportunities for prescribed fire application in the western United
States. Intl J Wildland Fire. 2019;28:874. https://doi.org/10.1071/
WF19040.
74.• Colavito MM, Wasserman TN, Vosick D. All-Lands Planning,
Coordination, and Wildfire Risk Reduction Project Report.
Northern Arizona University Ecological Restoration Institute.
2018 https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/
p17192coll1/id/913/rec/2/ Accessed 30 Dec 2019. This report
summarizes an effort to communicate a wildfire risk
assessment tool to potential end users and provides results
from an evaluation of the communication process.
75.•• Sherry J, Neale T, McGee TK, Sharpe M. Rethinking the maps: a
case study of knowledge incorporation in Canadian wildfire risk
management and planning. J Environmental Manag. 2019. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.12.116 This paper presents
findings from interviews with wildfire managers in Alberta,
Canada on their perceptions of science and the use of science
in decision-making. Perceptions of science among wildfire
managers have been shaped by individual and institutional
values and priorities.
76.
Cross MS, McCarthy PD, Garfin G, Gori D, Enquist CAF.
Accelerating adaptation of natural resource management to address
climate change. Conserv Biol. 2013;27:4–13. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1523-1739.2012.01954.x.
77.
Pence M, Zimmerman T. The wildland fire decision support sys-
tem: integrating science, technology, and fire management. Fire
Management Today. 2011;71(1):18–22.
78.
Gould JS, Patriquin MN, Wang S, McFarlane B, Wotton BM.
Economic evaluation of research to improve the Canadian Forest
Fire Danger Rating System. Forestry. 2012;86:317–29. https://doi.
org/10.1093/forestry/cps082.
79.
Smith R, Lee ME, Kim YS. Joint Fire Science Program publica-
tions survey - feedback from fire professionals. Joint Fire Science
Program. 2013. https://www.firescience.gov/projects/11-C-01-02/
project/11-C-01-02_final_report.pdf Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
80.
Clayton H, Mylek MR, Schirmer J, Cary GJ, Dovers SR. Exploring
the use of economic evaluation in Australian wildland fire manage-
ment decision-making. Intl J Wildland Fire. 2014;23:555. https://
doi.org/10.1071/WF13140.
81.
Robichaud PR, Rhee H, Lewis SA. A synthesis of post-fire burned
area reports from 1972 to 2009 for Western US Forest Service
lands: trends in wildfire characteristics and post-fire stabilisation
treatments and expenditures. Intl J Wildland Fire. 2014;23:929.
https://doi.org/10.1071/WF13192.
82.
Kulig JC, Westlund R, et al. Soc Nat Resour. 2015;28:908–17.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2015.1037876.
83.
Smith JK. Strengthening syntheses on fire: increasing their useful-
ness for managers. USDA Forest Service. 2015. https://doi.org/10.
2737/RMRS-GTR-337 Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
84.• Adams TT, Butler BW, Brown S, Wright V, Black A. Bridging the
divide between fire safety research and fighting fire safely: how do
we convey research innovation to contribute more effectively to
wildland firefighter safety? Int J Wildland Fire. 2017. https://doi.
org/10.1071/WF16147 In this commentary, authors discuss the
use of science to inform fire fighter safety, using the adoption of
the science of fire fighter safety zones as a case study.
85.
Otero L, Nielsen JO. Coexisting with wildfire? Achievements and
challenges for a radical social-ecological transformation in
Catalonia (Spain). Geoforum. 2017;85:234–46. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.geoforum.2017.07.020.
86.• Weir JK, Neale T, Clark L. Science is critical but it’s not every-
thing: our findings. In: proceedings from the Bushfire and Natural
Hazards CRC & AFAC conference. 2017. This paper presents
summary findings from projects investigating the role of sci-
ence in making fire risk reduction decisions in Australia. The
authors argue that while scientific information is critical in this
context, managers and policy makers must also acknowledge
the importance of other forms of knowledge.
87.
Joyce L. Improving the flow of scientific information across the
interface of forest science and policy. Forest Policy Econ. 2003;5:
339–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1389-9341(03)00033-9.
88.
Wright V. Overcoming barriers to the use of science in National
Parks. In: Proceedings of the 2005 George Wright Society
Conference on Parks, Protected Areas, and Cultural Sites. 2006.
The George Wright Society. http://www.georgewright.org/
0568wright.pdf Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
89.
Wright V. Communication barriers to applying federal research in
support of land management in the United States. In: Proceedings:
international conference on transfer of forest science knowledge
and technology. U.S. Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research
Station. 2007. https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_other/rmrs_2007_
wright_v001.pdf Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
90.
Yougblood A, Bigler-Cole H, Fettig CJ, Fiedler C, Knapp EE,
Lehmkuhl JF, et al. Making fire and fire surogate science available:
a summary of regional workshops with clients. USDA Forest
Service. 2007. https://doi.org/10.2737/PNW-GTR-727.
91.
Corringham TW, Westerling AL, Morehouse BJ. Exploring use of
climate information in wildland fire management. USDA Forest
Service. 2008. https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_p042/rmrs_
p042_603_613.pdf Accessed 30 Dec 2019.
92.
Driscoll CT, Lambert KF, III Chapin FS, Nowak DJ, Spies TA,
Swanson FJ, Kittredge DB, Hart CM. Science and society: the role
of long-term studies in environmental stewardship. BioScience.
2012;62:354–66. https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2012.62.4.7.
93.
Ryan CM, Cerveny LK, Robinson TL, Blahna DJ. Implementing
the 2012 Forest planning rule: best available scientific information
in forest planning assessments. For Sci. 2018;64:159–69. https://
doi.org/10.1093/forsci/fxx004.
94.
Esch BE, Waltz AEM, Wasserman TN, Kalies EL. Using best
available science information: determining best and available. J
For. 2018;116:473–80. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvy037.
95.
Kolden CA, Brown TJ. Beyond wildfire: perspectives of climate,
managed fire and policy in the USA. Intl J Wildland fire. 2010;19:
364. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF08111.
96.
Raftoyannis Y, Nocentini S, Marchi E, Sainz RC, Guemes CG,
Pilas I, et al. Perceptions of forest experts on climate change and
fire management in European Mediterranean forests. IForest -
Biogeosciences and Forestry. 2014;7:33–41. https://doi.org/10.
3832/ifor0817-006.
97.
Lackstrom K, Kettle NP, Haywood B, Dow K. Climate-sensitive
decisions and time frames: a cross-sectoral analysis of information
pathways in the Carolinas. Weather Climate Society. 2014;6:238–
52. https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-13-00030.1.
98.
Roncoli C, Breuer N, Zierden D, Fraisse C, Broad K, Hoogenboom
G. The art of the science: climate forecasts for wildfire management
in the southeastern United States. Clim Chang. 2012;113:1113–21.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0526-1.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Curr Forestry Rep
