2020 
Cross-Boundary 
Landscape Restoration 
Workshop Summary
Advancing all-lands restoration in 
New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, 
and surrounding states
March 2–4, 2020, Hotel Andaluz, Albuquerque, New Mexico

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
ii
Workshop attendees assembled at the Hotel Andaluz in Albuquerque, New Mexico for a three-day conference to discuss advancing all-lands restoration in 
the Southwest US.
Publication date: October 2020
Photo credits: Hannah Brown, Colorado Forest Restoration Institute
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI). 2020. 2020 Cross-Boundary Restoration Workshop Summary: Advancing all-lands restoration in 
New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, and surrounding states. ERI Workshop Report. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 34p.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.	
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, 
Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

Table of Contents
Introduction.........................................................1
Workshop Structure............................................1
Conference Themes and Key Takeaways..........2
Engaging Diverse Stakeholders.........................4
Adaptive NEPA and Science-Based Tools.........6
Climate Change Adaptation Strategies.............9
Climate Change Adaptation Tools...................11
Vision to Prescription........................................12
Utilization and Biomass....................................13
Burning without Borders..................................14
Adaptive Management.....................................16
Conclusion and Evaluation...............................19
Acknowledgements..........................................20
Appendices.........................................................21
Appendix A. Detailed Workshop  
Evaluation Results........................................21
Appendix B. Workshop Agenda...................26
Appendix C. Workshop Attendees..............28

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
1
Introduction
Over the last 20 years, the restoration of publicly owned, 
fire-adapted forests has occurred at increasingly larger scales, 
including current planning efforts of more than 1 million acres 
and across multiple ownerships. Collaborative partnerships 
of land managers and multiple stakeholders work to find 
common ground among disparate stakeholder groups, and 
contribute to advancing restoration though policy development 
and technical capacity additions. New policy initiatives and 
innovative funding sources encourage federal land managers to 
collaborate and leverage partner funds across all boundaries to 
better address climate change impacts, including increasing fire 
probabilities and drought disturbances. 
The 2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop 
gathered people who work collaboratively across jurisdictional 
boundaries to build successful forest restoration programs. The 
workshop provided a venue for participants to share innovations 
and best practices among large landscape restoration projects on 
public and private lands. Different land owners and agency land 
managers are working together to better manage and protect 
forested landscapes across thousands of acres in the West. Each 
program and project has its own challenges, unique approaches, 
and successes. During the workshop, US Department of 
Agriculture Forest Service Chief Vicki Christiansen and New 
Mexico State Forester Laura McCarthy provided keynote 
addresses that stressed how important landscape-level thinking 
and partnerships are to finding solutions that work to protect 
our large ecosystems and their dependent social systems. 
These landscapes are diverse, and each collaborative is 
uniquely suited to address their local ecosystem threats 
and community needs. Yet, when practitioners from across 
these landscapes are brought together to share their stories, 
common themes are evident, and make for powerful learning 
opportunities across different land ownerships, states, and 
partnerships. The outcomes from this workshop are designed 
to inform future opportunities: for example, policy changes 
may be needed to modernize federal contract design and 
implementation; in other areas, key technical tool training is 
needed across ownership boundaries and state lines to better 
inform national needs assessments.
Workshop Structure
This event was designed to put the “work” back in workshop. 
Over three days, attendees only saw two presentations. 
Instead, they listened to short “lightning panels” that 
highlighted key success stories, research findings, or innovative 
break-throughs. The bulk of the workshop was devoted to a 
series of smaller breakout groups focused on eight different 
themes. Workshop organizers identified the themes to 
address what collaborative, cross-boundary groups in the 
Southwest are working on today, based on academic research 
from Dr. Courtney Schultz — director of the Public Lands 
Policy Group and associate professor of forest and natural 
resource policy at Colorado State University — and Forest 
Service agency reviews of the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program. While a short time was spent 
recognizing each theme’s barriers and gaps to collaborative 
landscape restoration, the workshop focused on digging into 
recently developed solutions to these problems. 
The audience included federal, tribal, state, and local land 
managers, research partners, and multiple stakeholders from 
landscapes across the West. There were representatives 
from established collaborative efforts, as well as projects 
just initiating landscape-level work from Colorado, New 
Mexico, and Arizona. This enormous amount of experience, 
knowledge, and innovation was best suited toward a peer-
learning format that accelerates the diffusion and adoption of 
innovation — and our findings reflect that.
Left photo: Dr. Courtney Schultz (left) spoke with USDA Forest Service Chief Vicki Christiansen (right) 
during an “Interview with the Chief” segment for the workshop’s opening day. Right photo: New Mexico 
State Forester Laura McCarthy provided a keynote address to open day two of the workshop.

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
2
Common Issues/Challenges
Solutions/Tools
Turnover
• Within organizations 
involved in the collabo-
rative
• Industry partners
• Of parties/stakeholders/
organizations involved in 
the collaborative
• Create templates for internal documents that describe workings of the collaborative
• Shared leadership roles/redundancy/succession planning. More than one person should be 
able to take on roles in the collaborative
• Multiple people from each organization involved and empowered to speak for their 
organization — increases redundancy
• Regular contact with/tap into industry networks so you know who to call if the contractor 
goes out of business
• Avoid surprises: ask participants often about their perceptions of their roles
Funding
• Who gets it, how much, 
and for how long?
• Funding to do the work 
of collaboration, not just 
the “work in the woods”
• Joint work between collaboratives to designate who in an area applies for a given pot of 
money, to reduce competition
• Be prepared for “surprise funding” with planned projects already in place
• Diversify funding sources and stack funding from multiple sources across multiple projects: 
spreading the funding source around makes it more likely that projects can manage to 
continue if one source of funding dries up. 
• Grants and Agreements reorganization on an agency scale
Collaborative structure
• Creating clear expectations 
for members
• Time/capacity of individ-
uals
• Continuity/momentum
• Draw up chartering documents, memorandums of understanding, write down the 
structure of the collaborative. These could be part of a “welcome packet” for new members
• Professional outside facilitation expertise was cited over and over as a helpful tool for 
keeping a collaborative on track. 
• Maintain a single clearinghouse where information about collaborative structure can be 
stored. Share success stories here. 
• Regularly address these in meetings, reassess priorities/goals
• Organizational redundancy: more than one person from each contributing organization 
participating in the collaborative.
Community engagement/
creating inclusive 
collaboratives
• Putting real time and effort into identifying stakeholders 
• Education in communities, especially with field trips
• Make meetings fun and social wherever possible
• Change meeting times/locations to get diverse range of attendees (income, education level, 
age, etc.)
• Trying to engage citizen groups with broad membership who have leadership that may be 
paid to show up (e.g., Sierra Club)
• Adapting technology [with COVID-19, everyone is learning that not all connections need 
to be made in person. This is an opportunity to improve the way business is done.]
This workshop summary report highlights some of the key 
findings and case studies from each of the eight themes 
addressed during the workshop. Solution-based breakouts 
are summarized in text boxes that include immediate next 
action items. Relevant case studies and examples shared by 
workshop participants are highlighted. Finally, the workshop 
attendees were surveyed on the last day, and survey results 
are included here. 
Conference Themes and Key Takeaways
Collaborative Resilience
The long-term resilience of collaboratives is a persistent issue 
in cross-boundary restoration work. A resilient collaborative 
has the capacity to continue even when the original staff 
members of the organizations participating retire or move 
into different job duties that prevent them from continuing 
to engage. Moreover, resilient collaboratives are able to pivot 
to respond to new challenges and focuses for the landscapes 
they work on, rather than disbanding when the initial influx 

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
3
of funding for dealing with a specific problem dries up. Issues 
of turnover, funding, and collaborative structure were 
repeatedly referenced by workshop participants as barriers to 
collaborative resilience.
Key Stakeholders
A resilient place-based collaborative represents a diversity 
of stakeholders across organizational scales. Diversity in 
perspectives and experiences, along with access to leverageable 
resources, can facilitate multiple, innovative, and flexible 
response options needed to absorb shocks and disturbances.1 
Additionally, including diverse partners early and often in 
a transparent process can reduce conflict, build trust, and 
promote shared understanding and agreement.2 Identifying 
key stakeholders is crucial to building a collaborative. There 
is no need to wait until an acute problem presents itself to 
start reaching out to stakeholders and holding informal, 
social meetings. Collaboratives that build relationships, trust, 
and social support early have systems in place to deal with 
challenges or seize funding opportunities when they arise. 
These established collaborative groups can be extremely 
helpful and powerful in addressing contentious issues 
when they arise. Engaging with citizen groups with broad 
membership (e.g., the Sierra Club) can be a good place to 
start—they may even have leadership whose job descriptions 
include participating in collaborative meetings. 
Getting Everyone to the Table
It can be challenging to get non-traditional participants to the 
table. Educational field trips focused on local natural resource 
issues may be a way to connect with communities that have 
not traditionally been involved with collaborative work. In 
addition, for a broader range of perspectives, change meeting 
times and locations to attract a diverse range of attendees, 
or adapt with technology like video conferencing to allow 
rural populations to attend meetings. As COVID-19 poses 
new challenges, everyone is reevaluating the traditional ways 
of working together. We can use these skills in the future to 
engage more fully with potential participants who are unable 
to travel to meetings. Young people are another group often 
not present in these conversations. Engaging with youth 
programs (e.g., Future Farmers of America), or offering 
mentorship opportunities to high school and college students 
may foster a broader sense of community.
Designing Collaboratives to Ease Turnover
Collaborative structure should be deliberately developed with 
longevity and resilience in mind. Internal documents that 
describe the workings of the collaborative can get new members 
up to speed efficiently and ensure that the collaborative group 
itself has a clear understanding of its own goals and functions. 
These documents and structures can include:
• 
Chartering documents, Memorandums of Understanding 
(MOUs), and other formal process documents that are 
regularly revisited and updated by collaborative members 
as objectives shift.
• 
Retaining professional, external facilitation services to 
assist participants in conversations about structuring the 
collaborative, and ensure that that structure is carried 
through despite participant turnover.
• 
Redundancy (there are opportunities to further 
investigate barriers to redundancy within the structure of 
federal agencies).
o	
Sharing leadership roles between multiple 
individuals/organizations and planning in advance 
for succession when a participant leaves the 
collaborative.
o	
Multiple people from each organization should 
ideally be involved and empowered to speak on 
behalf of their organization.
Funding Collaborative Work
Collaborative funding is an ever-present concern. As one 
workshop participant noted, “who gets it, how much, and 
for how long?” There are two components of funding in 
collaborative restoration: funding work on the ground 
and funding the work of collaboration itself. To reduce 
competition for funding that supports work on the ground, 
participants suggested that when funding becomes available in 
an area where multiple collaboratives work, they should reduce 
competition for that funding by deciding between themselves 
who should apply for a given pot of money. In addition, 
collaboratives should plan proactively for the arrival of 
“surprise funding” by having shelf-stock projects ready when 
money becomes available. Having diverse and stacked funding 
sources can also mitigate funding decreases. For funding the 
work of collaboration, a more aggressive restructuring of 
agency grants and agreements programs to increase efficiency 
and remove barriers may also be warranted. Suggestions for 
solving problems concerning where money is stored and how 
it is disbursed included a role for partner organizations as 
trustees and advocates, or designating 501(c)(3) status for the 
collaborative groups themselves. 
Leadership Getting Behind Collaboratives
Land management agency leadership has an important role 
to play in ensuring that the voices of collaboratives are heard 
at the decision-making level. When leadership is willing to 
step outside the status quo and take responsibility for creating 
1	
 Nelson, D.R., W.N. Adger, and K. Brown. 2007. Adaptation to Envi-
ronmental Change: Contributions of a Resilience Framework. Annual 
Review of Environment and Resources, 32.: 395–419; Olsson, P., C. Folke, 
and F. Berkes. 2004. Adaptive Co-management for Building Resilience in 
Social-Ecological Systems. Environmental Management, 34.
2	
 Wondolleck, J.M., and S.L. Yaffee. 2000. Making collaboration work: 
Lessons from innovation in natural resource management. Island Press.; 
Goldstein, B.E., ed. 2012. Collaborative resilience: Moving through crisis 
to opportunity. The MIT Press: Cambridge, U.K.

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
4
a culture that shares risk, encourages innovation, and looks 
at failures as a shared learning opportunity, collaboratives are 
much stronger. 
Case Study: Resilient Collaboratives Provide Nimble Solutions
An injunction that halted “timber management” activities 
impacted five national forests in New Mexico and one in 
Arizona. As a result, Youth Corps crews with the Forest 
Stewards Guild had to halt their prescribed fire work on these 
US Forest Service lands. However, because of their long-
standing membership in multiple collaborative efforts, their 
diversity of multi-jurisdictional partners and projects, and due 
to their strong working relationships with partners, the Forest 
Stewards Guild was able to tap into a deep network of state 
and other land managers to get clearance for the youth crew 
to burn on other lands. Moreover, this situation emphasized 
the need to work across boundaries and have established 
agreements. A strategy now exists to overcome this challenge 
in the future.
Engaging Diverse Stakeholders
Identifying and Reaching out to Diverse Stakeholders
Identifying and engaging diverse stakeholders is a key 
component in building effective, resilient collaboratives. 
Stakeholders can include adjacent land ownerships (federal, 
state, and local land management agencies, tribes, and private 
land owners) as well as business owners, local and tribal 
governments, and private citizens. Participants identified 
several solutions for incorporating stakeholders into 
collaborative decision-making. First, it is crucial to identify 
Common Issues/Challenges
Solutions/Tools
Identifying key stakeholders
• Identify forest users as broadly as possible (e.g., nearby home and business owners, 
hiking groups, ATV users, mountain bikers, environmental groups, researchers work-
ing in the area, etc.)
• Contact tools
    Use parcel data from county website to identify landowners
    Tax bill mailings
    Outreach events/presentations
    Direct mail (cited as more successful than email)
    Nextdoor website
    Signage on projects with contact information
    Headwaters Economics has tools for finding and engaging new audiences 
• Important to identify your “glue people” who can get others on board
Sharing ownership/building trust
• Demonstration sites
• Be available
• Take the time at the beginning to work toward consolidated desired condition state-
ments: stakeholders agree about what restoration is
• Creating metrics of intended impact and constantly monitoring and updating group, 
adapting collaborative to respond
NEPA
• Has traditionally been the last 
and only opportunity for the 
public to engage
• Community education/outreach processes that are ongoing and not connected to a 
specific NEPA process can build a more informed public over time
• Coordinating NEPA processes across boundaries
Funding
• Need for funding to do outreach 
and education throughout the 
process

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
5
appropriate stakeholders. This might involve thinking outside 
the box to identify land users, such as recreation groups 
(e.g., hiking groups, ATV users, or mountain bikers), or 
resource industries (timber or mining groups or businesses, 
or ranchers). Landowners can be identified using tools like 
parcel data from county websites, tax bill mailings, and 
outreach events/presentations. Participants suggested that they 
found direct mail to be more effective than email, and also 
mentioned that the Nextdoor website has been an effective 
place to contact landowners. 
In the forest, signage around work sites with contact 
information for relevant managers can provide an opening 
for conversations with those stakeholders who may be most 
concerned, or simply curious. For example, the American 
Forest Foundation (AFF) has yard signs stating that the 
landowner has signed onto the project, explains objectives 
(e.g., fire mitigation), with a flier box that contains contact 
information and success stories. Signs are sequential, 
from project planning, to project ongoing, to “This is a 
healthy forest, treatment conducted on x date.” This builds 
education around treatment. The AFF places these signs 
strategically where the most appropriate eyes will see them, 
which depends on communication objectives (i.e., targeting 
nearby landowners by placing them on local streets, versus 
targeting larger audiences by placing them near highways). 
Demonstration sites in visible locations with explanatory 
signage give stakeholders the opportunity to see the results of 
restoration treatments through time, at a very local level. 
Building trust and sharing ownership in the community 
is crucial. Working with established organizations and 
departments that people already trust, like local fire 
departments, can ease communication and build credibility 
with community members. It is important to identify 
members of the community who act as “glue people” — 
those who help bring others together — who have the 
respect of the community and the capacity to bring others 
on board. In addition, making land management staff 
available and approachable for community questions and 
conversations increases mutual understanding. In some cases, 
it may be necessary to hire a consultant with the capacity 
to do community outreach to better understand and engage 
with the community. Participants mentioned Headwaters 
Economics as an organization that has tools for finding and 
engaging new audiences.
Collaboratively Identifying Desired Conditions
Engagement doesn’t end once the stakeholders are at the 
table. Instead, it is important to work together to create 
consolidated desired condition statements. Stakeholders have 
to agree about what restoration looks like on their landscape 
before moving forward collectively. After desired conditions 
are identified, the stakeholders should create metrics to 
monitor the results of their intended impact. The group 
should receive regular updates on results so the collaborative 
can respond adaptively.  
A New Outlook on the National Environmental Policy Act
Public comment periods during the National Environmental 
Policy Act (NEPA) process have traditionally provided 
the last (and only) opportunity for the public to engage in 
decision-making. Instead, engaging with and educating 
communities before a NEPA process begins may be 
more productive. Allowing stakeholders to come up with 
alternatives in a NEPA document may be another option — 
one participant reported being “surprised by their similarity 
to USFS intention.” 
Case Study: Developing the Next Generation of Leaders 
through a Programmatic Outreach Strategy
As more tribal resource managers reach retirement age, work 
funded through the Intertribal Timber Council engages with 
and develops the next generation of managers. This long-
term and strategic program acknowledges a change in how 
new generations of land practitioners want to engage in land 
management (i.e., they do not want to cut line anymore, they 
want to engage with data) and develops strategies for growing 
a new professional workforce. This effort also works to 
build understanding of current issues as well expected future 
challenges. This model is relevant as workforces across land 
management agencies turn over, and strategies for retaining 
institutional knowledge and expertise become more relevant 
than ever.
Identifying and 
engaging diverse 
stakeholders is a 
key component 
in building 
effective, resilient 
collaboratives.

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
6
Adaptive NEPA and Science-Based Tools
Where and How Does Adaptive NEPA Work Best?
Many managers and their partners are already using adaptive, 
flexible NEPA without realizing it. The consensus in workshop 
discussion groups was that adaptive NEPA works better on 
larger, less complex landscapes, and in circumstances where 
there is limited data available for rapidly changing landscapes. 
With forests operating on old management plans based on 
inventory data from as far back as the 1980s, managers may 
be trying to implement restoration treatments without a 
sufficient understanding of on-the-ground conditions. This 
is especially true in areas where massive disturbances such as 
wildfire or pest outbreaks have occurred since the last inventory 
was taken. Conditions-based NEPA documents address these 
knowledge gaps and increase flexibility for implementers by 
offering a range of responses, i.e., “if you’re in these conditions, 
here’s the suite of tools available to you.” Developing the 
range of possible site conditions within which implementers 
will operate requires completing a hefty amount of up-front 
analysis to include base layers that might include soil type, 
erosion risk, heritage clearance, proximity to water resources, 
and other applicable information. 
Developing Desired Conditions for Adaptive NEPA
In addition to addressing a wide range of possible current 
conditions at a site, conditions-based NEPA relies on the 
development of desired conditions for these sites. Engaging 
stakeholders up front to develop this menu of desired 
conditions can give more ownership over the NEPA process, 
and provide opportunities for everyone to get on board with 
a complex plan. Engaging everyone can also reduce what one 
participant called, “reactive creation of plans.” Participants 
suggested that in a “reactive” process, “timber staff comes up 
with a plan and the wildlife biologist is then taking a position 
of trying to mitigate that plan, and specialists are being 
forced to react to one another’s plans rather than being truly 
collaborative.” Engaging specialists to create sideboards can 
give voice to all conditions, and give everyone the opportunity 
to plan for them. 
Building successful adaptive NEPA relies on engaging all 
stakeholders in a meaningful way. This means that NEPA 
would need to evolve beyond “the public’s last opportunity 
to engage.” Instead, expectations for change and evolution 
as the project continues needs to be transparent up front, 
Common Issues/Challenges
Solutions/Tools
Using adaptive NEPA
• Many people are already using an adaptive, 
flexible NEPA without realizing it
• Complexity of using adaptive NEPA 
overlapping with more traditional NEPA—
how to keep track?
• Adaptive NEPA works best on: large landscapes, more simplistic 
landscapes, rapidly changing landscapes where data on current 
conditions is limited
• Plan for potential changes in your area that could occur in the 2–3 
years it takes to get to implementation (i.e., potential wildfire, beetle 
outbreak, etc.)
• Targeted pilot program with new kind of staffing for adaptive NEPA
Data
• Operative with old forest plans based on even 
older data (i.e., 1980s)
• Lack of good inventory data
• Data scale mismatches (project vs. landscape 
scale)
• Incorporate real-time monitoring as part of the project
• Stand data works for gaps as we move to new technologies like LiDAR
• Survey data collection crews to get key pieces of information quickly
• Document work and collect monitoring data in a way that can be used 
cross-boundary
Conditions-based NEPA
• Developing both menu of potential 
conditions on the ground and desired 
conditions
• Complete upfront analysis to include base layers like soil conditions, 
erosion risks, heritage clearance, etc.
• Engage stakeholders up front to develop a menu of desired conditions
• Move past reactive planning to develop sidebars that incorporate 
information from all resource specialists
Communication
• Getting buy-in and support for adaptive 
NEPA
• Communicating data
• Engage stakeholders up front to develop a menu of desired conditions, 
roll out possibilities for changes and sidebars from the beginning
• NEPA no longer the public’s last opportunity to engage
• Transparency in data: build monitoring into NEPA as it is being 
developed, and build data sets with partners

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
7
hand in hand with monitoring plans to provide information 
— including triggers — about when a course change is 
necessary. While this process takes significantly longer in 
the planning stages, “when we have patience to ‘delay now,’ 
we may not have as many delays later.” This can become 
condition-based management; for example, when beetle kill 
is above 70 percent of the overstory, these are the treatments 
available. The collaborative process aids in the development 
and understanding of these triggers for different treatments. 
Establishing specific partnerships to develop a range of 
scenarios can distribute the work among parties, and also 
increase stakeholder buy-in for changing treatments on the 
ground. Collaboratives can prepare for this process by having 
clearly established goals and objectives, including desired 
conditions for the landscapes where they work.
Incorporating Data into Adaptive NEPA 
Participants agreed that transparency in NEPA processes is 
crucial, and “transparency in thought also means transparency 
in data.” This means sharing data and being transparent about 
data collection and analysis methods. During data collection 
and analysis, increased willingness to incorporate partner 
data may improve not only federal planning data quality, it 
can improve stakeholder buy-in. For example, during the first 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) of the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative (4FRI) collaborative, partner data and 
analyses were used to quantify available small-diameter wood 
for industry. The Forest Service planning document, however, 
relied on older forest stand data that were modeled forward to 
adjust for current conditions, which then were interpolated to 
the rest of the landscape (plot-based data were only available 
for about 30 percent of the landscape). As a result, some 
stakeholder group members felt their efforts had been wasted. 
This led to a subsequent loss of technically skilled partners — 
which are needed to address real gaps in agency skills and 
methods to analyze landscapes — in the 4FRI collaborative 
efforts. Partnerships that participate in co-developed, usable 
data for federal projects can result in more efficiencies and 
buy-in from stakeholders and agency personnel. Building 
ground-based data sets with partners is also a good example 
of this. Surveying data collection crews may be a means to 
quickly collect and report key pieces of fine-scale information 
that are observable in the field, but may not be captured 
by monitoring metrics. These data also document project 
boundaries, implementation methods, and monitoring results 
in a way that can be used consistently across boundaries to 
reduce redundancy.  
Communicating Data
Transparency in communicating about data is also crucial. 
Sharing everything, even putting Excel sheets online, can 
increase understanding and trust among collaborators. 
Providing locally based information that has been collected 
in the forest may also require making stand exam data and 
other data more available and consumable to the public. 
Participants, especially scientists, expressed desire for 
increased literacy about modeling among the end-users of 
their analysis, particularly communicating uncertainties 
and complexities in data. This could include incorporating 
information in end products about which models are relevant 
in different systems, incorporating error measurements, 
and explaining assumptions made by the models and 
acknowledging their limitations.
Innovative Staffing Solutions
The complexity of using adaptive NEPA documents that 
overlap with existing, more traditional planning documents 
cannot be overstated. The workload of developing and 
applying these more adaptive and conditions-based NEPA 
documents might be addressed with a targeted pilot program 
that experiments with new kinds of staffing structures. 
Case Study: Using Triggers as Intervention Signals
The Maroon Bells-Snowmass Wilderness in Colorado 
has seen skyrocketing recreational use in recent years, and 
concurrent natural resource degradation. The White River 
National Forest and Gunnison Ranger District needed 
a plan to address the biophysical impacts resulting from 
overnight use, while continuing to provide opportunities 
for recreation. The resulting wilderness area management 
plan addresses the immediate need to reduce the number of 
recreationists and provides possibilities and options to trigger 
certain management responses when recreation use reaches 
certain levels. A conditions-based Overnight Visitor Use 
Management Plan gives management options over the next 
20 years. It includes possibilities for reducing management 
responses when biophysical impacts are successfully reduced, 
or increasing management responses if resources continue 
to be degraded. In addition to implementing a permitting 
process, planners also had the foresight to plan for multiple 
actions at the point of multiple triggers. 
ERI Director of Science Delivery Amy Waltz captures participant input 
during a breakout session on adaptive NEPA

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
8
Science-Based Tools for Adaptive NEPA and  
Forest Planning	
Workshop participants shared successes in how to increase 
efficiencies and collaborate at larger scales. Large-scale NEPA 
may need increased flexibility to adapt. Workshop attendees 
shared tools that included improved modeling; optimization 
and prioritization exercises following signed NEPA to inform 
strategic implementation; and condition-based management 
“bins” that offer broader application of appropriate treatments, 
when found on the ground. These tools have been used 
to address knowledge gaps, and as frameworks to support 
collaborative decision-making, and include:
• 
AirNow NOAA Maps
• 
Ecological Response Units
• 
Rapid Ecological Assessment
• 
Satellite and remote-sensing imagery
• 
Forest and Inventory Analysis data
• 
Quantitative Wildfire Risk Assessment
What are PODs?
Potential Operational Delineations (PODs), are a science-based strategic planning tool 
already being used to make decisions around planning for and engaging with wildfires on 
over 20 National Forests across the country. Using a combination of local, on-the-ground 
expertise and advanced spatial analysis, PODs identify the safest and most effective control 
lines that could be used to contain a wildfire, regardless of ownership. Once these bound-
aries have been defined, a larger group of stakeholders can engage to identify values (e.g., 
homes, infrastructure, water resources, wildlife habitat) within them, and pre-plan potential 
responses to ignition within any given POD. PODs maps are useful tools for communicat-
ing land and fire management objectives with the public, within agencies, and have even 
been used across agencies during fire incidents.
When combined with other risk assessment tools, PODs provide a framework that 
empowers science-informed decision making, improves communication and collaboration, 
and facilitates the integration of land and fire management objectives. There is value in 
having common language about fire and risk that transcends boundaries, and PODs are 
an effective mechanism for Shared Stewardship; the framework integrates the local Forest 
Service, region, and affected stakeholders and community and provides opportunities to 
have conversations about fire planning before the fire season begins.
Barriers and Information Needs
Participants had questions about developing and using PODs, including:
• 
What is the appropriate scale for PODs?
• 
How is this framework being integrated with the rest of the Forest Service’s planning?
• 
How will changing conditions be iteratively incorporated into the framework?
• 
How do PODs integrate with the Wildland Fire Decision Support System?
There was also a need for engagement and buy-in regarding PODs at all levels of decision 
making, including local fire protection districts. 
One potential area in which PODs could be improved would be to characterize the effec-
tiveness of various control features that make up the PODs themselves (e.g., highly effec-
tive control features like wide roads vs. minimally effective control features like small trails), 
or the effectiveness of such control features under certain conditions (e.g., extreme vs. mod-
erate fire conditions).
One session on 
science-based 
tools focused on 
the co-developed 
Potential 
Operational 
Delineations 
(PODs) 
framework. 

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
9
Climate Change Adaptation Strategies
Knowledge Gaps
Adapting in the face of climate change presents many 
challenging issues and needs for participants in the 
workshop. Knowledge gaps include the effects of climate 
change on specific species and ecosystems, including spruce/
fir ecosystems, lodgepole patchcuts, and ponderosa pine over 
longer time scales. Other gaps include the concurrence of 
climate change with pest and disease outbreaks as disturbance 
interactions, the economic impacts of climate change, the 
longevity of treatments in the face of climate change, and 
the limitations of local vulnerability assessments — most 
vulnerability assessments are regional and lack fine-scale 
detail. Building monitoring into forest planning is a way to 
detect changes and collect data about some of these questions, 
with high-value areas sampled more intensively. Downscaling 
climate outputs with finer scale precipitation information 
would be helpful. 
Using Existing Data to Validate Models
Existing data can be used in new ways to address some 
knowledge gaps. For example, the Forest Service has many 
long-term experimental studies, as well as stand data from 
forests treated in the 1950s or earlier. This data may be very 
useful in validating existing tools and models both for general 
accuracy and for local use. Place-based model validation might 
involve using data with a starting point in the 1950s or earlier, 
seeing how well climate models have predicted the current 
forest structure, and using that information to understand the 
limitations and strengths of the model for a particular area 
in the future. Matching models with on-the-ground research 
opportunities for validation might involve operationally scaled 
sites that would be monitored through time, and used to 
validate models like the Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) or 
bioclimate information. 
The “Changing Politics of Climate Change”
The political nature of climate change conversations can 
inhibit planning for it, especially when managers feel they 
cannot specifically mention the phrase “climate change” in 
planning documents. Workshop participants suggested that 
the government perception that climate change adaptations 
and/or considerations are at odds with forest product 
industries may not be accurate. Instead, one participant noted 
Common Issues/Challenges
Solutions/Tools
Knowledge gaps
• Effects of climate change on specific species and ecosys-
tems (ponderosa, spruce/fir, lodgepole patchcuts, etc.)
• Disease/pests/climate change as interacting factors
• Local vulnerability assessments, not just regional
• Long-term economic impacts of treatments
• Validating tools/models
• ASCC (Adaptive Silviculture for Climate Change) sites
• Monitoring built into forest planning gives opportunity to 
detect changes. Sample high-value areas more intensely/often
• Use existing data in new ways
Political
• Need buy-in from leadership
• Need for consistent policy across federal agencies 
regarding climate adaptation
• Build understanding in political leadership about what 
industry partners actually think about adapting to climate 
change
Community collaboratives
• Getting collaboratives involved in incorporating science 
through participating in monitoring/field trips/workshops
• Advocates in the environmental sector can help 
collaboratives with climate change messaging
Planning
• Forest plans may be cookie-cutter, lack of cross-
jurisdictional planning, plans do not keep pace with 
change
• Forest plan revisions are a good opportunity to incorporate 
climate change planning
• Need to specifically mention climate change in planning 
documents
Capacity to develop and use labor-intensive tools
• Ideally the tools are able to be used by the people who 
need the information to make decisions
• Outside support/funding to bring in experts/technicians 
familiar with the tools
• Including scientists/experts in collaborative efforts

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
10
that, “industry is not really fighting it, it’s really the politicians 
who act like they are acting on behalf of the industry and 
knew what they wanted, but that’s not really true.” For 
example, one participant had experience with an emissions 
modeling tool (e.g., https://www.epa.gov/air-emissions-
modeling/emissions-modeling-tools) that was well received by 
industry partners. However, without buy-in from leadership 
and a consistent policy across federal agencies regarding 
climate change adaptation, progress is hampered. 
Climate Change Messaging
Community-based collaboratives, environmental groups, and 
nonprofits can help with messaging and education around 
climate change. For example, in the case of a small but vocal 
group concerned about the amount of carbon released by 
prescribed fire contributing to climate change, the Forest 
Stewards Guild held a “common ground workshop.” A 
facilitator helped articulate opinions and concerns on both 
sides to get the group involved and allow them to feel heard. 
Other kinds of workshops for the management and science 
communities could also help collaboratives incorporate 
climate change science. 
Case Study: Forest Action Plans as an Opportunity to 
Incorporate Climate Change Planning
In June 2019, Colorado State University’s Department 
of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship and the Northern 
Institute of Applied Climate Science (NIACS) facilitated a 
workshop for the Colorado State Forest Service to incorporate 
climate change drivers into the 2020 Forest Action Plan 
(FAP) Update. The workshop process drew from the NIACS 
Climate Change Response Framework and Adaptation 
Workbook process, as well as a previous workshop developed 
by NIACS staff for the Pennsylvania Department of 
Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR).
 
Partners from the Colorado State Forest Service, Colorado 
State University, NIACS, as well as Colorado Parks and 
Wildlife (CPW) and CSU’s Natural Resource Ecology Lab 
(NREL), came together for two full days to think about how 
to incorporate climate change adaptation into Colorado’s FAP 
update. Day one of the workshop focused on thinking about 
climate change vulnerabilities to the Colorado FAP working-
themes, and day two focused on developing climate-adaptive 
management strategies and approaches. This workshop was 
the first time the NIACS framework had been used for a 
statewide FAP update. This workshop was showcased as an 
example for using the NIACS framework to incorporate 
climate change adaptation into additional State Action Plans 
in the Midwest and Northeast.
Using Tools to Plan for Climate Change
Below are tools participants have used to address planning 
for climate change. Ideally, these tools should be used by 
those who need to incorporate the information into planning. 
However, barriers for using these tools remain, as the capacity 
to develop and use labor-intensive tools may be limited. These 
barriers could be overcome with funding to develop facility 
with the tools, and in some cases support for outside experts 
and technicians who are familiar with using the tools. 
Participants put the “work” back in workshop, filling out short worksheets during a breakout session.

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
11
Climate Change Adaptation Tools
Tool
Workshop Participant Uses and Reactions
FVS extension with climate add-on
White pine, San Juan National Forest
ASCC (Adaptive Silviculture 
for Climate Change) Bioclimate 
modelites
•  Network of sites experimentally testing climate adaptation strategies.
•  Information is applicable and available. Website is useful and up to date
•  Each ASCC site has a contact who can provide guidance/resources,  
   lead workshops
Bioclimate model
For tree species under multiple climate scenarios
Emissions modeling
Tool can model emissions and climate change impact; “we had been losing court 
cases on emissions issues”; didn’t have the data to understand emissions impacts at 
local/smaller scales
National Climate Assessment
•  This tool laid out predicted impacts in a more localized area in a way that is easy  
   to understand for a lay person
•  Helpful for NEPA planning without a background in climate science
Northern Institute of Applied 
Climate Science (NIACS) climate 
prescription menus
Menus of adaptation strategies, pick and choose from as a tool to deal with themes. 
Starting with the goals and objectives for each resource theme, and then bring in 
climate impacts and vulnerabilities to decide on adaptation strategies
NIACS western seed mapper
Identifying vulnerabilities and actions, which tree communities are expected to do 
well in coming years, thinking about what we are going to re-plant
High resolution spatial data
Can look at thresholds for climate data
NorWest tool
Useful as fisheries biologist, looking at stream temperatures to help identify projects, 
spatially distinct, useful for translating climate projection at stream reach scale
EISI tool
•  “Not easy at all”
•  Excel spreadsheet tool to look at vulnerability of management priorities like  
   cultural or other resources. High resolution, looks at what projections might hold  
   for the future (temperature, precipitation)
•  For NM/TX/LA/OK region
FireClime
•  Looking at climate and desired future conditions, used to prioritize where we go  
   and what we do for treatments and fire management strategies
•  Made for SW forest ecosystems, now being integrated in other locations — must  
   be adapted as localized outputs are a need

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
12
Vision to Prescription
From Desired Conditions into Work on the Ground
Collaborative implementation hinges on whether the 
planning process effectively engaged stakeholders in 
collaboratively defining restoration and restoration 
goals, and the development of desired conditions before 
moving into conversations about targets and prescriptions. 
Some collaboratives have found success by first agreeing 
on “undesired conditions” and reverse engineering the 
conversation to develop prescriptions that address a long-
term desired trajectory for a forest. One crucial component 
of developing desired or “undesired” conditions is identifying 
which available science is relevant for understanding the 
ecology of the system (nuances like local fire frequency, 
precipitation, geology, soils, and historical forest structure).
Collaborative conversations about desired conditions and 
prescriptions might involve trips to demonstration sites on 
different landscapes, on different ownerships, during different 
seasons, and to a variety of different treatment approaches 
to communicate what past prescriptions look like on the 
ground and visualize future ones. Field trips like this are 
also an opportunity to identify knowledge gaps or potential 
monitoring questions that the collaboratives want addressed. 
Common Issues/Challenges
Solutions/Tools
Communication
• With public/landowners
• Within collaboratives
• Within agencies
• With restoration professionals
• Trips to diverse demonstration sites (ownerships, landscapes, treatment 
types)
• LiDAR can show 3D structure of project site so people can see the 
vision
• Creating maps with citizens/citizen groups
• Involving local communities/schools in monitoring
• Regularly marking stands with partners
• Modeling alternatives and presenting all information to landowners
• Highlight and present positive feedback to leadership, especially when 
foresters take risks/demonstrate creativity
Creating Prescriptions
• Identifying desired conditions
• Prescriptions for a long-term trajectory
• Using locally relevant science
• Focus on collaborative development of desired conditions, defining 
restoration/goals rather than moving straight to targets and prescriptions
• May be easiest to begin with agreeing on “undesired conditions”
• Collect the best science. Identify how your area is ecologically similar to 
or different from the areas the science was done
Translating ideas to on-the-ground projects
• Communication with contractors
• Using LiDAR and aerial imagery to draw out groups for prescriptions
• Using GTRs (310, 373) to inform prescriptions
• Develop shared understanding of vision so contractors can share creative 
solutions based on their knowledge, improve project outcomes
• Designation by prescription and flagging can be used to designate 
certain management zones (i.e., streams)
Involving Stakeholders in Designing Prescriptions
Developing desired conditions and management plans that 
articulate collaboratively defined desired conditions is only 
a first step. The collaborative vision needs to be translated 
into a prescription for work on the ground. Translating these 
ideas to on-the-ground projects can be the most challenging 
piece of collaborative restoration. Participants referenced 
using General Technical Reports (e.g., GTR-310 and GTR-
373) to inform writing prescriptions. LiDAR can also be 
a powerful tool to show 3D structure of a project site so 
people can visualize the site and potential treatment impacts. 
Workshop participants discuss adaptive management in a breakout group.

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
13
One participant also mentioned using LiDAR to draw out 
groups for prescriptions to address the challenge of executing 
randomness on the ground.
More in-depth communication might involve creating maps 
with stakeholders, or engaging them in monitoring efforts. 
Participants provided the following examples:
• 
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute facilitates Avenza 
mapping; points and tracks mapped by community 
members are an important part of the general 
conversations between concerned citizens and the Forest 
Service. The information is also incorporated into the 
design and layout of treatments. 
• 
Communicating desired future conditions with a 
landowner might involve modeling several alternatives 
and presenting all the information, including trade-offs 
and potential consequences. 
• 
One way to effectively sustain communication among 
restoration professionals and within agencies could 
be regular field trips for partners to collaboratively 
participate in marking stands.  
Communication with contractors can also be an essential piece of 
the implementation puzzle. Developing a shared understanding 
of vision gives contractors the opportunity to share creative 
solutions based on their institutional knowledge to improve 
project outcomes. A one-page summary of the prescription for 
the contractor, rather than a 25-page document can be a useful 
communication tool. A contract template for each forest type 
that translates complex prescriptions depending on conditions 
may also be useful. Designation by prescription (the contractor 
is provided with a description of the desired end result of a 
treatment, and is expected to implement to achieve those results) 
and flagging can be used to designate certain management zones 
(i.e., streams). 
Rewarding Progress
When land managers take risks and are being creative, 
collaboratives have a powerful capacity to bring positive 
feedback to leadership. Highlighting positive feedback gives 
land management agencies more incentives to be involved in 
collaboratives, because they can see the payoff. 
Case Study: Coordinating Project Boundaries to Work at a 
Landscape Scale in Summit County, Colorado
The Colorado State Forest Service coordinates projects in 
Summit County with Forest Service projects, trying to place 
treatment areas near Forest Service boundaries so projects 
neighbor one another and prescriptions are similar. Summit 
County funds these projects, so they have to meet county 
needs as well as Forest Service needs. However, this has 
provided opportunities for open communication, meetings, 
and field tours where partners can give and receive input to 
improve prescriptions. Sustaining this open communication 
helps projects move forward to achieve impacts across 
boundaries and build trust. 
Utilization and Biomass
The Persistent Barrier: The Cost of Restoration
One persistent question is: what should be done with all the 
material coming out of the woods? The cost of removing low-
value, small-diameter trees and biomass is a major barrier to 
cross-boundary landscape restoration. Partners are working 
together to find many creative solutions — the biomass 
challenge may be an opportunity to create a more cohesive 
strategy across agencies and collaboratives. Using stewardship 
contracts rather than timber contracts is one solution. 
Operational solutions include reducing operator’s haul costs 
with load counts and drying biomass to reduce weight.
Transportation and Financing Solutions
Several participants recommended solutions to address 
the cost of transportation, including expanding markets 
via railroad to send material to the right place at the right 
price, either to domestic or international markets. In 
California, climate investment grants have been used to create 
transportation subsidies to get wood from private land to a 
biomass utilization plant. The 4FRI project has used Farm Bill 
authority and a subsidy from the Biomass Crop Assistance 
Program to address biomass. New Mexico uses CFRP to 
help with biomass utilization. The Rio Grande Water Fund 
successfully spearheaded the use of conservation finance to 
address biomass, and the Colorado State Forest Service gives 
loans to industry. 
Creative Solutions for Wood Utilization
Competition with cheaper energy industries makes biomass 
use challenging. Wood Innovation Grants may help researchers 
find better uses for biomass by providing funding to problem-
Attendees spent most of the workshop in discussion on common land 
stewardship challenges and possible solutions.

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
14
solve wood utilization issues. In the meantime, biomass can be 
used by the public for personal fuel, or managers can take the 
opportunity to view the contractor as a partner and get them 
involved in finding a solution for slash. For example, in the 
San Juan National Forest, the Forest Service made an informal 
commitment to offer a consistent output of ponderosa pine 
thinning/selection harvest acres and volume annually over 
the next 10 years. This commitment led to industry milling 
investment in Montrose, CO and Dolores, CO. Foresters on 
the San Juan NF led this effort to scale the footprint of forest 
restoration and management efforts locally. Most of the activity 
fuels/biomass are being piled and burned as part of these efforts. 
Changing the Culture Around Biomass Use
Many participants suggested the need for more creativity 
when it comes to biomass utilization, particularly more 
innovative ways of marketing and messaging. Broadening 
the conversation by bringing in new voices, like students, 
engineers, investors, and other future leaders, can allow 
for new ideas about how to successfully design and market 
new products, and can result in creative solutions. There are 
opportunities to develop and market local sustainable wood 
products with Forest Stewardship Council certification. There 
is also a sense of national pride and security tied to energy 
independence that can be developed from using domestic 
biomass products such as wood chips from forest restoration 
projects. As one participant summarized, “it’s about moving 
beyond volume targets, looking at value in the acres treated 
rather than the timber they produce, and selling restoration 
and ecosystem services.”
Case Study: Chip and Ship to International Markets
Recently, the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) 
successfully shipped biomass in the form of wood chips 
from Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) projects to 
South Korea at $80/ton. The western portion of the 4FRI 
landscape in northern Arizona has struggled with wood 
utilization due to long hauling distances from restoration sites 
to mill infrastructure and markets. During the Chip-and-
Ship pilot project, ERI tested the process for shipping wood 
chips overseas to South Korean markets and investigated 
the railroad infrastructure and business requirements to 
implement such an operation at a larger scale. There is high 
demand for wood products and biomass in South Korea, and 
this solution may open doors to others.  
Burning Without Borders
A major piece of the restoration puzzle moving forward is 
cross-boundary prescribed burning and managed wildfire. 
The three major components of this challenge that workshop 
participants focused on were funding and agreements, 
planning, and communicating about fire. 
Funding Cross-Boundary Burning 
Cross-boundary burning requires cross-boundary funding. 
While one participant noted that “you can sometimes get 
away with calling it a training day,” cross-boundary work 
ultimately means large-scale agreements specifically designed 
to manage reimbursements for other participating agencies. 
Agencies and organizations are finding creative solutions to 
Common Issues/Challenges
Solutions/Tools
Cost of removing and transporting biomass
• Using stewardship contracts rather than traditional timber contracts
• Reduce cost of haul with operator by drying biomass to reduce weight
• Creative financing
Biomass use
• Competition with other energy industries 
(coal, natural gas) makes biomass use 
challenging — it is currently less cost effective
• Get contractor involved in finding market for slash
• Public use/personal fuel
• Wood innovation grants
• International markets
Messaging
• Engaging investors, engineers, and marketing folks, not just foresters
• Market sustainability of local wood products — Forest Stewardship 
Council certification
• Energy independence (national pride and security tied into energy 
independence)
• Moving beyond volume targets, looking at values from acres treated 
beyond timber targets

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
15
funding challenges. Annual operating agreements do account 
for cost-sharing, and sometimes the transmitting agency 
will accept responsibility even when it is intended to be split 
as a measure of good will. For instance, in Colorado local 
agreements through the District of Fire Prevention  
and Control allow agencies to transfer money and pay  
for resources. 
In New Mexico, the Forest Stewards Guild implements the 
All-Hands All-Lands Burn Team in the Rio Grande Water 
Fund landscape in close coordination with The Nature 
Conservancy of New Mexico, and maintains a no-cost 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Valles 
Caldera National Monument, part of the National Park 
Service. Since being signed in 2018, this MOU has allowed 
the non-profit guild, the guild’s Youth Corps, diverse members 
of the All-Hands All-Lands Burn Team, and the Valles 
Caldera to burn together on multiple occasions. This became 
particularly critical to the Youth Corps in 2019 when the 
injunction halting “timber management” on Forest Service 
lands indefinitely postponed burning for the Youth Corps. The 
MOU allowed the Youth Corps to gain valuable prescribed 
fire experience and training with the National Park Service-
managed Valles Caldera that they otherwise would not have 
been able to receive during their 12-week program. It is clear 
from the various ways these challenges have been addressed, 
that having innovative grants and agreements staff is a crucial 
piece of funding cross-boundary burning. 
Planning a Cross-Boundary Burn
Beyond the challenges of funding prescribed fire, planning 
for cross-boundary burns is also complicated. Burn plans 
Common Issues/Challenges
Solutions/Tools
Funding/Agreements
• Cross-boundary burning requires 
cross-boundary funding
• Large-scale agreements specifically designed to manage reimbursements for 
other agencies coming to help
• Local agreements allow agencies to transfer money to pay for resources
• Annual operating agreements do account for cost-sharing. Sometimes 
transmitting agency accepts responsibility even when it is supposed to be split as 
a measure of good will
• Having a good grants and agreements person goes a long way according to  
Forest Service staff
• Water providers/utilities who own land can provide private restoration funds to 
organizations, including Forest Service
Planning and permissions
• Forest plans
• Risk management
• Forest management plans that allow you to manage natural fire starts
• Burn plans can be part of larger management plans
• Importance of shared risk component cannot be overstated
• Someone needs to assume liability
Capacity issues
• Multi-Agency Teams: “right people with right qualifications at the right time”
Communication
• Inter- and intra-agency communi-
cation
• Communication with public
• Regular pre-fire planning meetings to look at local data (e.g., county scale).
• Landscape-scale geo-spatial planning where all federal agencies can put resources 
together and treatments can be connected between agencies
• Daily cooperating meetings as the fire progresses
• Youth education
• Outreach to media/on social media to celebrate prescribed fire accomplishments
• PSA on local TV, movie theaters, radio
• Personal outreach: handwritten letter, inviting people to watch fire, conversations, 
hosting events/speakers
• Keep smoke/fire webpages updated — they can drive huge increase in traffic

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
16
can be part of larger management plans—in fact, in New 
Mexico, they will allow you to manage natural fire starts if a 
forest management plan supports it. On BLM lands, the state 
historic preservation officer is moving toward programmatic 
agreements instead of agency-specific and site-specific 
requirements for getting appropriate cultural clearances.
Risk management and liability coverage is an important 
component of burn planning, especially for small groups. The 
power of shared risk cannot be overstated, and organizational 
leadership must support fire management staff, and reward 
those who go above and beyond. Beyond a culture of shared 
risk, there needs to be some genuine liability coverage. In 
Arizona, the state assumes liability given the private land burn 
plan is peer-reviewed and meets state requirements. 
Multi-agency teams help with capacity issues by sending “the 
right people with the right qualifications at the right time” 
for fires. Trainings like Prescribed Fire Training Exchanges 
(TREX) give people experience. The All-Hands All-Lands 
Burn Team described above is a model for increasing capacity 
through cross-agency cooperation. The Forest Stewards 
Guild assumes the team’s liability, and the team benefits 
from agreement structures, flexible funding, and firefighters 
and leaders who are working to support and develop a larger 
culture of fire. 
Communicating about Fire
Agency communication begins with planning. Regular pre-
fire planning meetings facilitated by a professional — in 
which participants consider local data — help to develop 
a fire management plan. On a larger scale, geo-spatial data 
repositories where all federal agencies can report available 
resources and record treatments could help agencies connect 
and plan landscape-scale treatments. Once a fire begins, it is 
crucial to present a unified front with partners. Having daily 
cooperating meetings and creating an MOU may help ensure 
everyone is on the same page. 
Emily Hohman with The Nature Conservancy gives a lightning talk on cross-
boundary burning.
Public-facing communication presents other opportunities. 
Communication tools can include youth education on fire 
ecology, public talks and learning series, hand-written letters 
to homeowners adjacent to a prescribed burn, and personal 
conversations while witnessing prescribed fire. Reaching out to 
hunting and fishing groups and contacting utility customers are 
other ways to involve stakeholders. Non-profits can take some 
risk and communicate with the public about the benefits of fire 
under the right conditions. All agencies need a liaison for social 
media and web outreach, including the smoke page on a fire site 
— announcements about prescribed fire or wildfire can increase 
web traffic up to 600 percent. Media outreach to celebrate 
prescribed fire accomplishments and PSAs on local TV, radio, 
and at movie theaters can help change the conversation around 
fire and garner public support. One participant reported, “In 
Florida, people would yell at me if I wasn’t burning on a good 
day.” Public perception of fire is not an insurmountable obstacle.
Case Study: US Fish and Wildlife Burns on Private Land
Just days before the cross-boundary workshop began, the US 
Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) completed a 2,000-acre 
burn that crossed private property in New Mexico. This burn 
resulted from three years of conversations between New Mexico 
Game and Fish, state land managers, and private landowners. 
The burn was managed, and paid for up-front by the USFWS, 
but Game and Fish will reimburse for the work done on the 
other properties. The USFWS also assumed liability for the 
burn, but part of the agreement had landowners sign off not to 
hold USFWS responsible for any damages. 
In the future, the next fire will be on private, state, and 
federal National Wildlife Refuge land. In January, USFWS 
changed their policy on prescribed fire, and can now burn on 
any jurisdiction without the National Wildfire Coordinating 
Group (NWCG) as long as the liability is covered. They are 
planning to burn on private lands, including tribal, where 
tribal members are the private landowners. These landowners 
are interested and in touch with the USFWS, which is also 
working with the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The Navajo 
Nation has a checkerboard of ownership, and tribes have to be 
creative with partnering and funding. 
Adaptive Management
Defining Adaptive Management is Challenging
One intent of the adaptive management session was to get 
participants to define what adaptive management means to 
their collaborative. While participants shared many stories 
about changing course in response to failures or new challenges, 
few clear definitions of adaptive management were provided. 
This suggests there is more work needed to clarify what 
adaptive management is, what the mechanisms for adaptive 
management are, and what the metrics are for success. 

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
17
Structuring Collaboratives for Adaptive Management
Many participants noted that they struggled to “close the 
adaptive management loop,” and collaboration is at the heart 
of nearly every solution discussed. As one participant stated, 
“if you’re not in a long-term collaborative … it’s just  
 
not really going to happen, it’s the last thing on the district’s 
or forest’s mind at that point.” Adaptive management 
can be built into the mission, vision, and structure of the 
collaboratives. Formal processes for adaptive management 
can be written into a collaborative’s chartering documents, 
especially when programs like the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) provide for long-
term planning on big landscapes. 
Bringing Monitoring Data into Adaptive Management 
Discussions
To improve efficiency, small subgroups can be assigned 
monitoring tasks, tackle technical monitoring problems, and 
bring the results back to the collaborative. Outside expertise 
may be needed to design comprehensive and effective 
monitoring plans. A monitoring “tzar” or coordinator 
position might have the responsibility to keep monitoring 
data organized and ensure the collaborative is focused 
Common Issues/Challenges
Solutions/Tools
Monitoring
• Data collection
• Capacity
• Funding
• Using established/collaboratively developed monitoring protocols so the 
data is useful for multiple parties
• The FACTS database will add a new Key Performance Indicator to 
overlay with FACTS data in 2021
• Use partners in collaboratives to complete monitoring
• Train timber crews to do some monitoring so fewer visits are needed
Incorporating data
• Building data-based adaptive management 
into collaborative structure
• Time it takes to collect and incorporate data
• Incorporating uncertainty (e.g., climate 
change)
• Changing scope of work when data indicate 
that it is necessary
• Writing adaptive management structure into the mission and vision, and 
developing a formal process, especially surrounding long-term funding
• Creating monitoring “tzar”/coordinator positions
• Outside expertise is often needed
• Hope for LiDAR, drones, and other remote technologies to make 
monitoring data more widespread more rapidly
• Agreements without volume attached are conducive to changing the 
scope of work when needed, as they are more flexible and less restrictive
• Lots of communication/good relationship with contractor allows for 
more flexibility
Communication
• Photo time series
• Bringing people out into the woods builds trust. Provides opportunities 
for different agencies/expertise to get together
• Demonstration sites
• Field trips to demonstrate monitoring methods
Scale
• How do we monitor and adaptively man-
age at the landscape scale in addition to the 
treatment scale?
• Aligning collaboratives around common adaptive management frame-
work, define adaptive management
• Sharing monitoring and adaptive management plans/processes across 
collaboratives
• Standardize data collection methods so they can be compared across 
boundaries
Policy
• More support for monitoring from leadership and accountability for 
incorporating results 
• Adaptive NEPA/conditions-based management may be better suited to 
adaptive management than traditional NEPA 
• More effective governance structure: separate funding for monitoring

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
18
on the right indicators. Regularly scheduled sessions to 
review monitoring data and/or annual science workshops 
bring related groups together to share monitoring results. 
Sessions like this give collaboratives the opportunity to 
incorporate data and ask themselves questions about whether 
management objectives and treatment methods still make 
sense when new information is considered. 
The time it takes to design monitoring, collect and analyze 
data, and bring it back to the group—i.e., the time it takes to 
incorporate data—is a challenge to true adaptive management. 
Workshop participants expressed an interest in increased 
opportunities to share monitoring approaches, results, and 
lessons learned through networks or workshops. Increased 
technology accessibility and efficiency, for example with 
LiDAR and UAV (unmanned aerial vehicle, i.e., drone), may 
make monitoring data more widespread and quickly available.
Monitoring completed restoration work is necessary 
for adaptive management. Monitoring requires funding 
that goes beyond the lifespan of project implementation, 
representing continuous investment in data collection and 
analysis. Incorporating resource specialist surveys, using 
partners in a collaborative to complete monitoring, and 
training timber crews in monitoring data collection could 
be cost effective ways to collect more data. Established 
protocols should be used for data collection to ensure the 
data are useful to multiple parties, that data collection 
is consistent, and that multiple monitoring groups are 
collecting the same type of data. 
Additional Data Needs 
Some monitoring indicators are still lacking, including 
aspects of human dimensions and social science research. 
Involving social scientists can increase capacity and could 
address this issue. Outside consultants can also help 
with this monitoring research; for example, Headwaters 
Economics has done socioeconomic monitoring in Idaho 
and Montana. It will be crucial to develop meaningful 
metrics for collecting and analyzing social data, and 
reporting results. Participants also reported that fire effects 
monitoring is often missing from monitoring programs, and 
suggested writing monitoring into burn plans, or developing 
jobs for fire effects monitoring crews either within fire crews 
or within fire-focused or monitoring organizations. 
Communication with Public and Partners
Communication is crucial to getting the public and 
partnering agencies on board with adaptive processes. 
Photo time series, demonstration sites, and field trips to 
demonstrate treatment and monitoring methods build trust 
and provide opportunities for different agencies and experts 
to share perspectives. Researchers have an opportunity to 
explore which outreach methods are the most effective 
to engage people in the adaptive management process. 
Committing and following through with monitoring allows 
managers to take risks, and communication with the public 
during implementation is crucial. 
Communicating with Implementers
There is a need to translate decisions made by the 
collaborative down to the implementation level. Having 
the flexibility to change the scope of work within existing 
agreements is key to managing adaptively on the ground. 
Cost share and participating agreements and agreements 
without volume attached are more flexible and less restrictive, 
which often allows for changes in the scope of work. Active 
communication and a good contractor relationship also allow 
for more trust and flexibility. 
Adaptively Managing at the Landscape Scale
Many participants had questions about how to adaptively 
manage at a landscape scale, especially since monitoring 
has been mostly at the treatment scale. Landscape-level 
monitoring is still in its infancy, and CFLRP projects and 
other large landscape restoration projects are still developing 
ways to measure and monitor progress of restoration 
across projects that span across hundreds of thousands, if 
Breakout groups discussed a range of management challenges and 
brainstormed potential solutions and tools.
CFRI Director Tony Cheng facilitates a breakout group on collaborative 
resilience.

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
19
not millions, of acres. Several projects in the western US 
are piloting monitoring projects to assess landscape-level 
restoration progress, and these could potentially serve as 
models for other landscape restoration initiatives.3 Cross-
boundary monitoring and collaboration are necessary, but 
current mechanisms to make connections between groups are 
inadequate. Solutions include aligning collaboratives around 
common adaptive management frameworks and working 
to clearly define adaptive management. This might involve 
taking the time to develop and define desired conditions 
and what to monitor, and also explicitly stating objectives 
at different scales. To get to scale, collaboratives may work 
to share monitoring and adaptive management plans and 
processes, and standardize data collection methods so they can 
be compared across boundaries.  
Policy Changes
Policy solutions for improving adaptive management include 
incentivizing monitoring and adaptive management at the 
leadership level and creating accountability structures for 
incorporating monitoring results. Incentivizing adaptive and 
conditions-based NEPA may also lead to planning that is better 
suited to adaptive management in the future. There is a need 
for a better governance structure in the Washington office of 
the Forest Service in order to make adaptive management more 
effective. One participant suggested, “It’s a balance between 
providing flexibility and not getting in the way, but also looking 
at where more guidance and resources are needed.” This might 
include the establishment of a department or separate fund 
for monitoring, or legislation renewing the funding for certain 
programs every year. On an agency level, organizing national 
meetings helps provide clarity on what individual regions need, 
which can help with efficiency. 
Case Study: Incorporating Monitoring Data  
into Adaptive Management
The Front Range Roundtable, a collaborative group that 
works on Colorado’s Front Range, has built in reviewing 
monitoring results to their collaborative structure with 
scheduled “Front Range Jam Sessions.” Every year the 
participants round up all monitoring data and maps, talk 
about what is working, and what does not work. The whole 
collaborative attends these meetings, including researchers, 
land managers, and other key players. These events are 
opportunities for unengaged collaborators to catch up 
and report back to their respective organizations. This 
allows partners to leverage each other’s work and apply 
lessons learned to their own projects. Staff at CFRI are 
currently working on a project that demonstrates how, over 
time, treatments on the Front Range CFLRP landscape 
incorporated monitoring results from other projects, 
and more recent projects more closely matched desired 
conditions. 
Conclusion and Evaluation
The workshop exceeded expectations. Key patterns emerged 
from the keynote speakers: Chief Christiansen challenged 
our group to address the existing mismatch between the 
scale of change and the scale of work, and then encouraged 
us to think bigger about Shared Stewardship opportunities. 
That was echoed by New Mexico State Forester McCarthy, 
who also stated that cross-boundary work remains the 
hardest work we do, but that it is working in efforts like the 
Rio Grande Water Fund. Dr. Schultz confirmed through 
research findings that national policy tools that seed 
collaborative, cross-boundary restoration are successful, but 
require evaluation and adaptation to changing ecological, 
societal, and political issues. The results and action items 
created in these three days will set the stage for those shared 
lessons and today’s opportunities.
Workshop Feedback
Participants were asked to complete an evaluation at the 
conclusion of the workshop. Of the 157 participants, 57 
evaluations were completed. The majority of respondents 
indicated they attended the workshop to learn and share 
ideas, as well as network. After attending the workshop, most 
respondents said the workshop met their expectations. For 
example, one respondent noted, “There was actually a lot of 
work and deep thinking. Good networking opportunities.” 
Most workshop participants agreed or strongly agreed that the 
workshop objectives were met, and the agenda organization 
was effective. Most respondents also agreed or strongly agreed 
with the statement, “I learned something new about scientific 
knowledge and analytical tools that I can use in my cross-
boundary landscape restoration efforts.”
The workshop agenda relied heavily on breakout sessions; 
not surprisingly, there was positive feedback about the 
breakout session, as well as notable areas for improvement. 
One respondent noted, “Breakout sessions (w/ choices of 
topics — excellent!) were long enough to allow good, in-
depth discussions and info sharing. Also, long and frequent 
breaks allowed people to follow up on discussions with 
others.” On the other hand, one respondent said, “The 
breakout groups were just a little too big and did not allow 
for everyone to contribute or share their perspectives.” 
Although some areas for improvement were noted, the 
overall response to the emphasis on breakout groups was 
positive. The majority of respondents noted that the 
breakout sessions were the most useful part of the workshop 
and indicated they had a lasting impact on participants. For 
example, one respondent noted, “The breakout groups were 
3	
 Esch, B.E., and A.E.M. Waltz. 2019. Assessing Metrics of Landscape 
Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program Projects. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 12p. 

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
20
extremely informative, well-managed, and resulted in a lot of 
food for thought in my work.”
Workshop evaluations also included suggestions for future 
workshops, audiences to capture, ways to improve, and 
topics to address. Among the suggestions for improvement 
were more time overall and more time for case studies and 
sharing experiences. Respondents also noted they would like 
to see future workshops address the issue of climate change 
on cross-boundary restoration more explicitly, as well as 
innovative mechanisms for accomplishing restoration from 
implementation approaches to financing options. Overall, the 
response to the workshop was very positive, from the food 
and venue to the conversation. Respondents even noted that 
they liked the evaluation form, as illustrated in this quote, 
“Excellent work — it was all great — the venue, food, agenda, 
facilitators, and notetakers. Thank you! And I normally hate 
filling out evals, but even your eval form was good and made it 
a pleasure!”
Acknowledgements
Workshop outcomes were compiled and summarized by 
Hannah Brown, Bryce Esch, Amy Waltz, and Melanie 
Colavito. This workshop was made possible by the workshop 
planning team: Alan Barton, Tony Cheng, Melanie Colavito, 
Bryce Esch, Ben Irey, Eytan Krasilovsky, Kent Reid, Amy 
Waltz, and Brett Wolk. The workshop organizers would 
like to thank the staff at CFRI, NMFWRI, NM Highlands 
University, RMRS, and RVCC for their assistance in 
facilitating and staffing the workshop, as well as all the 
speakers and participants who put the “work” back in 
“workshop.”  

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
21
Appendix A. Detailed Workshop Evaluation Results
Workshop Evaluation Results
Total number of respondents: 57
1.      What did you hope to gain from this workshop?
• 
Learning and sharing ideas (31) (56%) 
o	
“To learn from other collaboratives, their successes and failures.”
o	
“Foundational understanding of collaborative forest management and how it works.”
o	
“A better understanding of what cross-boundary collaboration looks like on-the-ground in the intermountain West.”
• 
Networking (13) (23%)
o	
“Connecting with others who have faced/are facing similar challenges to gain ideas and build networks for future idea 
sharing.”
o	
“Connections with other folks working across state, federal, tribal boundaries on landscape/ecosystem restoration.”
o	
“The ability to network with folks that are doing similar work in different regions.”
• 
Updates (5) (9%)
o	
“Updates: examples from other regional efforts; explore partnerships with Arizona/NM colleagues.”
• 
Other
o	
“I wanted to 1) meet colleagues 2) identify climate science needs 3) identify processes, practices, structures to enable 
collaborative resilience.”
a.      In what ways did the workshop meet your expectations?
• 
Networking and relationship building with diverse audience (25) (44%)
o	
“There were great conversations in the groups! I also took away pieces of knowledge from the lightning talks and guest 
speaker talks. I also had great conversations during meals about different perspectives.”
o	
“There were ample opportunities for networking. The format provided many opportunities so we could get to know 
each other.”
• 
Peer learning and information sharing (15) (26%)
o	
“I did learn a lot more about adaptive management. Also the importance of understanding knowledge of desired 
conditions ahead of time.”
o	
“There was actually a lot of work and deep thinking. Good networking opportunities.”
o	
“I was able to learn about different experiences and opportunities and challenges and gain some good ideas.”
• 
Breakout groups provided learning opportunities (14) (25%)
o	
“Breakout sessions (w/ choices of topics – excellent!) were long enough to allow good, in-depth discussions and info 
sharing. Also, long and frequent breaks allowed people to follow-up on discussions with others.”
o	
“I was really pleased with the discussions within our breakout groups.”
• 
Speakers (4) (7)
o	
“Lots of varied, high-quality speakers; good format – no death by PowerPoint.”
• 
Workshop outputs (2) (4%)
o	
“I look forward to reviewing the summary that I hope will provide identified barriers and potential solutions.”
• 
Other
o	
“Putting the work into workshop helped identify/achieve.”
b.      In what ways did the workshop fall short of your expectations?
• 
Breakout group challenges (12) (21%)
o	
“The breakout groups were just a little too big and did not allow for everyone to contribute or share their perspectives.”
o	
“Not enough sharing time in breakouts – felt like a data collection activity to support SWERI research objectives. Not 
enough time to learn more on tools.”
• 
Discussion focus (10) (18%)
o	
“Sometimes conversations felt circular. Sometimes I feel like two dominant voices won the conversation.”
o	
“More case studies and current examples of efforts would have been helpful, especially from projects/efforts that have 
experienced significant successes and failures.”

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
22
o	
“Not seeing the take-homes as well as I expected.”
o	
“Hoping to focus more on other’s successes and creative solutions, a little less on barriers.”
• 
Participants missing (5) (9%)
o	
“I would have appreciated more private land voices at the table.”
o	
“Seemed pretty heavy on the federal land managing agencies issues and policies.”
o	
“Elephant in the room is lack of diversity, which may speak to equity and opportunity challenges in this industry.”
• 
Plenary sessions and lightning talks (5) (9%)
o	
“I would have liked to have a Q&A after the lightning talks. Some additional success stories or lessons learned 
presented in greater detail. 5-minute lightning talks were not enough.”
• 
Not enough time (2) (4%)
o	
“We could go longer!”
• 
Missing topics (1) (2%)
o	
“Didn’t learn much about new forest products.”
 
2.      Please indicate your level of agreement with the following by marking the appropriate boxes below:
 
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
The objectives of the workshop were clear.
20 (35%)
31 (54%)
4 (7%)
1 (2%)
 
The stated objectives of the workshop were 
met.
20 (35%)
29 (51%)
7 (12%)
 
 
The organization of the workshop agenda 
was effective.
36 (63%)
17 (30%)
4 (7%)
 
 
The workshop materials provided useful 
information.
21 (37%)
29 (51%)
4 (7%)
2 (4%)
 
I learned something new about scientific 
knowledge and analytical tools that I 
can use in my cross-boundary landscape 
restoration efforts.
21 (37%)
23 (40%)
9 (16%)
3 (5%)
 
The workshop facilities were appropriate.
28 (49%)
17 (30%)
6 (11%)
5 (9%)
1 (2%)
The workshop was effectively facilitated.
38 (66%)
15 (27%)
3 (5%)
1 (2%)
 
3.      How did you learn about the workshop? 
Original Invitation 
from SWERI 
Partner
Email from 
Supervisor
Email from 
Colleague
Email Newsletter (e.g., 
RVCC Monthly News, FLN 
Networker, etc.)
Other:
31 (54%)
10 (18%)
13 (23%)
4 (7%)
-Forest Stewards 
Guild
-I am on 
CFRI research staff
4.      Which part of the workshop was most useful to you (e.g., plenaries, poster session, breakout groups) and why?
• 
Breakout groups (41) (72%)
o	
“Breakout groups – showed that we all have similar problems and helped to come up with potential solutions.”
o	
“Breakout sessions – able to hear peoples’ experiences, make connections, share challenges, and more towards potential 
strategies.”

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
23
• 
Plenaries/ lightning talks (10) (18%)
o	
“Plenaries and breakouts! Direct learning and able to discuss.”
• 
Networking (4) (7%)
o	
“The most useful part of the workshop to me was actually the breaks. Aside from just networking, I also had many 
conversations about the work people did and lessons learned from people with more experience. Just getting a variety of 
people together in a room was helpful.”
• 
Poster session (2) (4%)
o	
“Poster session/breakout groups/plenaries, etc. All of it – can’t imagine one part without the other.”
5.      Which part of the workshop needed the most improvement and why?
• 
Breakout Groups (21) (37%)
o	
“Larger rooms for breakouts, multiple groups in the same room didn’t work too well. Ways to minimize background 
noise, hard to hear in some of the breakouts.”
o	
“Breakout sessions – too big groups, not enough time on some topics, not adequate space; lack of focus/knowledge by 
facilitators to keep conversations on topic; questions for breakouts didn’t appear to be from implementor/collaborator 
perspective or needs.”
o	
“The breakout group reconvene report back method felt redundant. Many people seemed to check out during this time. 
Maybe a summary of breakout conversations could be provided as a document after the conference instead of the report 
back method.”
o	
“Double workshops – recap and transition for newcomers in the 2nd hour. Sometimes conversations moved on in 2nd 
hour without really revisiting questions for topics and didn’t have opportunity weigh in on original questions.”
o	
“Breakout groups: had difficulty hearing when next to other groups. Thought to breakout organization by your group 
number identified on folder resulted in the best conversations. During the sessions where you could choose which topic 
to go to it resulted in self-selecting discussions where a few dictated the conversation (occurred in most of these).”
• 
Lack of diversity (4) (7%)
o	
“Private land voices because these stakeholders are critically important to effectively working across boundaries.”
o	
“Broadscale monitoring partners not present – can help make collaborative connections. Potentially a leaders are 
conveners segment – we are all leaders and can make collaboration happen half-day maybe. Gilberg leadership will do 
this and they discuss “power sharing”.”
• 
Plenary Sessions (4) (7%)
o	
“Plenary sessions – could have used some maps to illustrate points.”
o	
“I actually would have liked more PowerPoints and case studies of successful initiatives/projects.”
o	
“I think some Q&A or discussion time for lightning talk panels would be useful. Lightning talks à connected to 
breakouts more explicitly.”
• 
Other
• 
“Posters – we just didn’t connect them to the workshop very well.”
• 
“Conference space – this hotel doesn’t accommodate breakout sessions well – not enough separate meeting rooms. 
Doesn’t work to have multiple groups in same big room – too loud. Also, outdoor spot was too loud with street noise. 
Wouldn’t want breakout groups to be any larger.”
6.      Please indicate your level of agreement about how applicable each breakout topic is to your job:
 
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Collaborative resilience
29 (51%)
18 (32%)
6 (11%)
1 (2%)
 
Planning across boundaries and at 
landscape scales
28 (49%)
23 (40%)
2 (4%)
 
1 (2%)
Moving from planning to 
implementation
22 (39%)
24 (42%)
7 (12%)
1 (2%)
 
Structuring adaptive management for 
the long-term
30 (53%)
19 (33%)
3 (5%)
1 (2%)
1 (2%)

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
24
 
Additional Illustrative Comments:
• 
“It would have been useful to have a list of acronyms and their definitions for things I don’t know like PODs and ASCC, 
etc. I had to wander around asking random people what they meant.”
• 
“Success stories – building markets, collaborative resilience, prescribed fire. Who is doing what and who is having great 
success?”
• 
“As a contractor working within a CFLRP, it is good to know how we can be more involved.”
7.      Is there something you wanted to add that you did not get a chance to say in a workshop breakout group? Please note 
the group topic from the list in the question above (Q6).
 
• 
Moving from Planning to Implementation
o	
“I would like to hear lessons learned/advice from CFLRP implementers.”
• 
Adaptive Management
• 
“I hoped to understand how to produce useful data from citizen science on invasive species (plants, mostly) using APPs like 
Wildspotters before and after thin and burn projects, etc.”
• 
Climate Change
o	
“I think there is a lot of climate change impacts and indicators that large-scale collaboratives are not monitoring.”
o	
“Climate change – we discussed in the group a variety of tools and the usefulness of those, barriers to integrating 
climate change information and needs. These were framed in the context of tools for ecological response and 
assessments. It is important to note that climate change is ONE stressor, and it is a risk multiplier. There are also many 
social, political, and economic factors that managers deal with and need to be considered/integrated à social-ecological 
assessments!”
• 
General
• 
“I said it, but I’ll say it again: restoration and forest management is a practice. We learn by doing. The goal shouldn’t be to 
do things perfectly – it should be to get better over time.”
• 
“I still think there are some disconnects between stakeholders/partners and USFS in terms of long-term management goals. 
That is ecological/process needs based maintenance vs. re-entry from mechanical prescription.”
• 
“Fire adapted communities learning network can serve as a bridge between agencies, private owners, and tribes.”
• 
“CFLRP heavy – some of us may never have a CFLRP in our area. What other tools can we use to treat cross-boundary.”
8.      What is the most effective way for you to learn about cross-boundary landscape restoration? Please circle no more than 
three. 
Workshops
Webinars
Online 
training 
videos
Online 
courses/ 
other 
online 
resources
Face-
to-face 
workshops
Face-
to-face 
training
Written 
material
Word of 
mouth/ 
peer-to-
peer
25 (44%)
15 (26%)
2 (4%)
5  (9%)
35 (61%)
25 
(44%)
5 (9%)
15 
(26%)
 
Other items listed included: field trips (5) (9%), digital/ online materials (2) (4%), blogs (1) (2%), one-on-one contact (1) (2%), 
continued dialogue (1) (2%), concrete examples (1) (2%). 
9.      Was there anyone you felt was missing from the workshop?
 
• 
State government representatives (8) (14%)
• 
Tribal members/ tribal forestry/ BIA (8) (14%)
• 
Industry representatives (7) (12%)
• 
Private land managers (4) (7%)
• 
Department of Interior agency representatives (3) (5%)

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
25
• 
Local government (2) (4%)
• 
County government (2) (4%)
• 
Fire managers (2) (4%)
• 
Wild Earth Guardians/ litigants (2) (4%)
• 
Corporations/ recreation industry with investment interest (2)
• 
Soil conservation districts (1) (2%)
• 
Natural Resource Conservation Service (1) (2%)
• 
Forest Service Regional Office (1) (2%)
• 
Forest Service leadership participation in breakouts (1) (2%)
• 
Forest Service District Rangers and Forest Supervisors (1) (2%)
• 
Small/ local non-profits (1) (2%)
• 
Academics (1) (2%)
• 
Social scientists (1) (2%)
 
10.   Please let us know if you have suggested future workshop topics related to landscape restoration.
Illustrative Comments:
• 
“Conservation finance and restoration economics.”
• 
“More on condition-based management, monitoring, and adaptive management.”
• 
“Monitoring workshop: planning to operations level, time sensitivity w/ project length, how to get the more for your money, 
for sake of what, why and for who?”
• 
“How to understand the generation of data and science and how different groups interface with that science. What happens 
when the science disagrees? How can we consider a less narrow view of what science IS and how (unreadable) that can be 
useful.”
• 
“Incorporating science into…management, collaboration, etc.”
• 
“Cost and profit centers for forest management contractors; retrospective on the first 10 years of CFLRP; how to develop 
collaboration skills and promote collaborative relationships and behaviors.”
• 
“Examples of mechanisms of successful collaboration, such as: types of agreements, forums, and follow-up actions.”
• 
“Agreements, MOUs, contracts; discuss forestry contract administration and the positive impacts that flexibility in contracts 
can allow.”
• 
“All the tools for each stage and to what scale they are appropriate for use.”
• 
“Biomass utilization is a common problem, and to solve it will require collaboration because industry usually needs large 
volumes to be reliable – i.e., all lands contributing volume.”
 
11.   Please provide any additional feedback or comments.
Illustrative Comments:
• 
“Excellent work – it was all great – the venue, food, agenda, facilitators, and notetakers. Thank you! And I normally hate 
filling out evals, but even your eval form was good and made it a pleasure!”
• 
“You should have acronym police in breakout groups – writing down acronym definitions as they are relevant on a poster for 
reference to facilitate understanding between agencies and disciplines.”
• 
“Great work on this, it exceeded my expectations and really inspired me to keep doing this work in my corner of the 
Southwest.”
• 
“Need to continue holding these to keep the momentum up and moving forward.”
• 
“Learning topics and resource library sites were shared at the end. It would have been nice to highlight one or more during 
the workshop. We get bombarded with information that is “self-serve,” but face-to-face delivery shouldn’t be forgotten 
about.”

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
26
Appendix B. Workshop Agenda
Theme: Collaborative Landscape Restoration – Strategies to get to shared stewardship and cross-boundary forest and fire 
restoration.
Objectives:
• 
Share successes and lessons-learned on cross-boundary, collaborative efforts to restore fire-adapted forest landscapes
• 
Develop actionable strategies for emerging cross-boundary, collaborative landscape-scale restoration programs and projects
Planning Committee:
Amy Waltz, ERI	
Brett Wolk, CFRI
Bryce Esch, ERI	
Tony Cheng, CFRI
Melanie Colavito, ERI	
Eytan Krasilovsky, Forest Stewards Guild
Kent Reid, NMFWRI	
Ben Irey, NFF
Alan Barton, NMFWRI
Monday, March 2 
1:00 – 1:10pm	
Welcome and Workshop Goals
	
Tony Cheng, Director, Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University
1:10 – 1:20pm	
Welcoming Statement from Region 3, U.S. Forest Service
	
Elaine Kohrman, Acting Regional Forester
	
U.S. Forest Service Region 3
1:20 – 1:45pm	
National Policy Perspective on Cross-Boundary Restoration
	
Vicki Christiansen, Chief, US Forest Service
1:45 – 2:05pm	
Research Perspective:
	
Courtney Schultz, Associate Professor, Dept. of Forest & Rangeland Stewardship, 
	
Colorado State University
2:05 – 2:30pm	
An Interview with the Chief by Courtney Schultz 
3:00 – 3:20pm	
Lightning Talks: Collaborative Resilience
	
Melanie Colavito, Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU
 
•    Clay Speas, USFS, Grand Mesa, Gunnison, and Uncompahgre Forest
 
•    Cynthia Naha, Santo Domingo Tribe
 
•    Anne Bradley, The Nature Conservancy
3:20 – 4:40pm	
Convene into breakout groups to discuss collaborative resilience 
4:40 – 5:00pm	
Reconvene and share
5:00pm	
Adjourn
5:30-7:30pm	
Poster Social and Cocktail Hour
Tuesday, March 3 
8:30 – 8:35am	
Opening and Agenda Review
	
Kent Reid, Director, NM Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute, 
	
New Mexico Highlands University
8:35 – 9:05am	
Laura McCarthy, State Forester, New Mexico

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
27
9:05 – 9:35am	
Lightning Talks: Planning across boundaries and at landscape scales.
	
Brett Wolk, Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University
 
•   Tom Fry, American Forest Foundation
 
•   Patrick Moore, USFS, Four Forest Restoration Initiative
 
•   Jessica Haas, USFS, Rocky Mountain Research Station
 
•   Megan Friggens, USFS, Rocky Mountain Research Station
10:00 – 11:00am	
Convene into six breakout groups - subset of three themes, 2 breakouts each
 
•   Groups 1 & 2: Actionable strategies to engage diverse stakeholders in setting mutual goals and 	 	
	
    shared direction for cross-boundary shared stewardship
 
•   Groups 3 & 4: Adaptive NEPA and science-based analytical tools for effective development of 
	
    landscape-scale strategies and action plans
 
•   Groups 5 & 6: Scientific knowledge and science-based analytical tools for effective climate 
	
    adaptation strategies
11:00 – 11:50am	
Rotate Breakout Groups (people can stay in the same or move to another) 
11:50am – 12:15pm	
Reconvene and share.
1:30 – 2:00pm	
Lightning Talks: “Lost in Translation”: Moving from Planning to Implementation. 
 
Amy Waltz, Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU
 
•   Richard Reynolds, USFS, Rocky Mountain Research Station
 
•   Travis Woolley, The Nature Conservancy
 
•   Dick Fleishman, USFS, Four Forest Restoration Initiative
 
•   Emily Hohman, The Nature Conservancy Fire Learning Network
2:00 – 3:00pm	
Convene into breakout groups - subset of three themes, 2 breakouts each
 
•   Groups 1 & 2: Moving from vision to prescription.
 
•   Groups 3 & 4: Utilization of wood products and biomass
 
•   Groups 5 & 6: Burning without borders - The good, the bad, and the ugly
3:30 – 4:30pm	
Rotate breakout groups
4:30 – 5:00pm	
Reconvene and share
Wednesday, March 4 
8:30 – 8:35am	
Opening welcome and Agenda Review
8:35 – 8:55am	
Lightning Talks: Structuring Adaptive Management for the Long-term.
 
Melanie Colavito, ERI
 
•   Bryce Esch, Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU
 
•   Eytan Krasilovsky, Forest Stewards Guild
 
•   Greg Aplet, The Wilderness Society
9:00 – 10:15am	
Convene into breakout groups to discuss adaptive management 
10:45 – 11:00am	
Reconvene and share
11:00 – 11:15am	
Applying workshop outcomes to the CFLRP reauthorization
	
Jessica Robertson and Lindsay Buchanan, USFS Washington Office
11:15 – 11:30am	
CFLRP collaboration survey and Shared Stewardship Peer-Learning sessions
	
Ben Irey, National Forest Foundation
11:30am – 12:00pm	
Moving forward – Next Steps and Action Items 

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
28
 
Appendix C. Workshop Attendees
 
Matthew
Abernathy
Fort Collins
CO
Fort Collins Conservation District
A Hart
Allex
Peñasco
NM
Ojito de Caballo Ranch
Steven
Alton
Woodland Park
CO
USDA Forest Service 
Victoria 
Amato 
Broomfield
CO
SWCA Environmental Consultants 
Nate
Anderson
Missoula
MT
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station
Greg
Aplet
Denver
CO
The Wilderness Society
Kevin
Barrett
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Alan
Barton
Las Vegas
NM
New Mexico Forest & Watershed Restoration 
Institute, New Mexico Highlands University
Mike
Battaglia
Fort Collins
CO
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station
Costley
Beaver
Ramah
NM
Ramah Navajo Chapter Office of Grants & 
Contracts-Natural Resource Mgt, Agriculture 
& Forestry
Tyler
Beeton
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Hannah
Bergemann
Santa Fe
NM
Santa Fe National Forest
Teagen
Blakey
Nederland
CO
Magnolia Forest Group
Angela
Boag
Denver
CO
Colorado Department of Natural Resources
Clarissa
Boberg-Greene
Carlsbad
NM
BLM
Chris 
Bockey
Phoenix
AZ
SWCA Environmental Consultants 
Tabi
Bolton
Flagstaff
AZ
Campbell Global
Anne
Bradley
Santa Fe
NM
The Nature Conservancy
Jessica
Brewen
Fort Collins
CO
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station
Hannah
Brown
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Lindsey
Buchanan
Portland
OR
USDA Forest Service
Karl
Buermeyer
Jemez Springs
NM
USDA Forest Service
Jimbo
Buickerood
Durango
CO
San Juan Citizens Alliance
Page
Buono
Durango
CO
2-3-2 Cohesive Strategy Partnership 
Esmé
Cadiente
Santa Fe
NM
Forest Stewards Guild
Mike
Caggiano
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Marin
Chambers
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
29
Tony
Cheng
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Vicki
Christiansen
Washington
DC
USDA Forest Service
Melanie
Colavito
Flagstaff 
AZ 
Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU
Martha
Cooper
Gila
NM
The Nature Conservancy
Ray
Corral
Peñasco
NM
USDA Forest Service
Maurice
Cruz
Albuquerque
NM
South Central Climate Adaptation Science 
Center
Anthony 
Culpepper
Durango
CO
Mountain Studies Institute 
Patti
Dappen
Las Vegas
NM
New Mexico Forest and Watershed 
Restoration Institute
Jacob
Davidson
Santa Fe
NM
New Mexico Department of Game and Fish
Carrie
Dennett
Phoenix
AZ
BLM
Beth
Dodson
Missoula
MT
University of Montana
Laura 
Doth
Ruidoso
NM
South Central Mountain RC&D Council, 
Inc.
Jarod
Dunn
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Bryce
Esch
Flagstaff
AZ
Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU
Frank 
Falzone
Lakewood
CO
Jefferson Conservation District
Jonas
Feinstein
Denver
CO
USDA - Natural Resources Conservation 
Service
James
Fischer
Fort Garland
CO
Trinchera Property Management
Dick
Fleishman
Flagstaff
AZ
USDA Forest Service-Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative
Sabrina
Flores
Alamogordo
NM
 
Paula
Fornwalt
Fort Collins
CO
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station
Ian 
Fox
Albuquerque
NM
USDA Forest Service 
Megan
Friggens
Albuquerque 
NM
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station
Tom
Fry
Washington
DC
American Forest Foundation
Allen
Gallamore
Golden
CO
Colorado State Forest Service
Ben
Gannon
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Ashley
Garrison
Breckenridge
CO
Colorado State Forest Service
Jim
Gerleman
Pueblo
CO
 
Jonathan
Glass
Santa Fe
NM
The Forest Times
Zach
Goodwin
Missoula
MT
National Forest Foundation
Jessica
Haas
Bozeman
MT
Rocky Mountain Research Station
Collin
Haffey
Santa Fe
NM
The Nature Conservancy

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
30
Sid
Hall
Del Norte
CO
USDA Forest Service
Han-Sup
Han
Flagstaff 
AZ
Northern Arizona University
Karen
Hardigg
Enterprise
OR
Rural Voices for Conservation Coalition
Dana
Hayward
Durango
CO
Mountain Studies Institute
Katie 
Heard
Idaho Springs
CO
USDA Forest Service
Michael
Henio
ramah
NM
Ramah Navajo Chapter Office of Grants & 
Contracts-Natural Resource Mgt, Agriculture 
& Forestry
Emily
Hohman
Pagosa Springs
CO
The Nature Conservancy
Benjamin
Irey
Missoula
MT
National Forest Foundation
Randy
Johnson
Denver
CO
Colorado State Forest Service
Aaron 
Johnson
Albuquerque
NM
Cibola National Forest
Liz
Johnson-Gebhardt
Priest River
ID
Priest Community Forest Connection
Andrea
Jones
La Jara
CO
USDA Forest Service
Joel
Jurgens
Flagstaff
AZ
The Nature Conservancy
Aaron
Kimple
Silverton
CO
Mountain Studies Institute
Gabe
Kohler
Santa Fe
NM
Forest Stewards Guild
Elaine
Kohrman
Albuquerque
NM
USDA Forest Service-Southwest Region
Gwen
Kolb
Albuquerque
NM
US Fish and Wildlife Service-Partners for 
Fish & Wildlife
Eytan
Krasilovsky
Santa Fe
NM
Forest Stewards Guild
Jeremy
Kruger
Flagstaff
AZ
USDA Forest Service-Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative
Korey
Largo
Albuquerque
NM
USDA Forest Service
Tim 
Leishman
Pagosa Springs
CO
USDA Forest Service - San Juan NF
Mike 
Lewelling
Estes Park
CO
National Park Service
Megan
Lowell
Lakewood
CO
USDA Forest Service
Maya
MacHamer
Boulder
CO
Fourmile Watershed Coalition
Leah
Manak
Missoula
MT
National Forest Foundation
Danny
Margoles
Mancos
CO
Dolores Watershed Resilient Forest 
Collaborative
Christopher
Marks
Flagstaff
AZ
National Park Service
Matt 
Marshall
Fort Collins
CO
Big Thompson Conservation District/ NRCS
Shawn
Martin
Albuquerque
NM
Cibola NF
Jonathan
Martin
Flagstaff
AZ
Northern Arizona University
Laura
McCarthy
Santa Fe
NM
State of New Mexico Forestry Division
Michael
McHugh
Aurora
CO
Aurora Water
Kevin
McLaughlin
Fort Collins
CO
USDA Forest Service
Matt
McLemore
Lakewood
CO
Jefferson Conservation District

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
31
Rick
Merrick
Ruidoso
NM
South Central Mountain RC&D Council, 
Inc.
Dorian
Miranda
Las Vegas
NM
New Mexico Forest and Watershed 
Restoration Institute
Patrick
Moore
Flagstaff
AZ
4-FRI Four Forest Restoration Initiative
Kat
Morici
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
W. Keith
Moser
Flagstaff
AZ
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station
Anne
Mottek
Flagstaff
AZ
Mottek Consulting/Greater Flagstaff Forests 
Partnership
Stephanie
Mueller
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Cynthia
Naha
Santo Domingo Pueblo
NM
Santo Domingo Tribe
Megan
Nasto
Logan
UT
Utah Forest Institute, Department of 
Wildland Resources, Utah State University
Natalie
Omundson
Washington
DC
American Forest Foundation
Paul
Orbuch
Boulder
CO
METI/USFS
Susan
Ostlie
Albuquerque
NM
Rio Grande Valley Broadband of the Great 
Old Broads for Wilderness
Katherine
Ottmers
Las Vegas
NM
New Mexico Forest and Watershed 
Restoration Institute
Dennis
Page
Canon City
CO
USDA Forest Service-San Isabel NF
Kristen
Pelz
Santa Fe
NM
Forest Inventory and Analysis, USDA Forest 
Service
Courtney
Peterson
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado State University 
Brienne
Pettit
Flagstaff
AZ
USDA Forest Service-Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative
Matt 
Piccarello
Santa Fe
NM
Forest Stewards Guild
Henry 
Provencio
Flagstaff
AZ
USDA Forest Service-Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative
Tim
Reader
Durango
CO
Colorado State Forest Service
Aaron
Rector
Colorado Springs
CO
Markit! Forestry Management
Kent
Reid
Las Vegas
NM
New Mexico Forest & Watershed Restoration 
Institute, New Mexico Highlands University
Michael
Remke
Durango
CO
Mountain Studies Institute
Jason
Remshardt
Monte Vista
CO
USDA Forest Service-Rio Grande National 
Forest
Gretchen
Reuning
Laporte
CO
Fort Collins Conservation District
Richard
Reynolds
Fort Collins
CO
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
32
Pete
Rivera
Albuquerque
NM
BLM-Albuquerque District
Jessica
Robertson
Alexandria
VA
USDA Forest Service
Louis 
Rymalowicz
Las vegas
NM
New Mexico Forest and Watershed 
Restoration Institute 
Buck
Sanchez
Albuquerque
NM
USDA Forest Service-Southwestern Region
Justin
Schofer
Flagstaff
AZ
USDA Forest Service-Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative
Courtney
Schultz
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado State University
Robert
Scram
Taos Ski Valley 
NM
Taos Ski Valley Inc. 
Brenda
Sharp
Montrose
CO
Brenda Sharp Native Ecotypes, LLC
Emily
Sinkular 
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado State University, Public Lands 
Policy Group
Andrew
Slack
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Mike
Smith
Denver
CO
RenewWest
Derek
Sokoloski
La Veta
CO
 
John
Souther
Flagstaff
AZ
USDA Forest Service-Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative
Clay
Speas
 
 
USDA Forest Service
Garrett
Stephens
Lakewood
CO
Jefferson Conservation District
Jens
Stevens
Santa Fe
NM
US Geological Survey, New Mexico 
Landscapes Field Station
Cody 
Stropki
Albuquerque 
NM
SWCA Environmental Consultants 
Emily
Swindell
Durango 
CO
Mountain Studies Institute
Thomas
Timberlake
Lakewood
CO
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station
Weston
Toll
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado State Forest Service
Michael
Tooley
Monte Vista
CO
USDA Forest Service
Jay
Turner
Albuquerque
NM
Cibola NF
Matthew
Tuten
Pagosa Springs
CO
USDA Forest Service-San Juan National 
Forest
Jeff
Vail
Lakewood
CO
 
Don 
Vandendriesche
Albuquerque
NM
USDA Forest Service
Amy
Waltz
Flagstaff
AZ
Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU
Katarina
Warnick
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Zachary
Wehr
Granby
CO
Colorado State Forest Service
Aaron 
Wilkerson
Phoenix
AZ
 
Dennis
Will
Colorado Springs
CO
City of Colorado Springs Parks and 
Recreation
Katie
Withnall
Las Vegas
NM
New Mexico Forest and Watershed 
Restoration Institute

2020 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop Summary
33
Brett
Wolk
Fort Collins
CO
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CSU
Lochen
Wood
Fort Collins
CO
USDA Forest Service 
Rachel
Wood
Santa Fe
NM 
Forestry Consultant / GoodWood
Tyrel
Woodward
Florissant
CO
Bird Conservancy of the Rockies, NRCS, 
CPW
Travis
Woolley
Flagstaff
AZ
The Nature Conservancy
Joseph
Zebrowski
Las Vegas
NM
New Mexico Highlands University
Bryan
Zebrowski
Flagstaff
AZ
Markit! Forestry Management
Kevin
Zimlinghaus
Boulder
CO
USDA Forest Service

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
