Local Experiences with the  
2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: 
A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
November 2020

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been significantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: View of a portion of the Museum Fire burn area. The fire burned 1,961 acres in the Dry Lake 
Hills north of Flagstaff in summer 2019. It burned in an area with steep slopes that feed into the Rio de Flag 
watershed. Photo by Catrin Edgeley
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: November 2020
Authors: Catrin M. Edgeley and Melanie M. Colavito
Reviewers: Sara Dechter, Comprehensive Planning Manager, City of Flagstaff; Anne Mottek, 
Mottek Consulting and Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership; Brady Smith, Public Affairs 
Officer, Coconino National Forest, USDA Forest Service; Jay Smith, Forest Restoration 
Director, Coconino County
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Edgeley, C.M., and M.M. Colavito. 2020. Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and 
Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest 
Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 40 p.
 
Northern Arizona University is an equal opportunity provider.
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from 
discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten 
Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-5964 
(TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
This publication made possible through a grant from the USDA Forest Service.

Table of Contents
Executive Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2
Introduction . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2
Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flood Events in Flagstaff, Arizona. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3
Survey Approach. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5
Resident Experiences with the Museum Fire. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7
Management and Policy Implications . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  22
References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 23
Appendix: Museum Fire survey booklet. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  25

2	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary 
Communities across the western United States are growing increasingly familiar with the impacts of uncharacteristic 
wildfires and subsequent post-wildfire flooding. Recent notable fire and flood risk events in the Flagstaff, Arizona area offer 
a unique opportunity to understand how residents in affected communities experience these interconnected hazards and how 
it might influence future support for forest management. This white paper summarizes the results of a survey that collected 
data on resident experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire in Flagstaff, Arizona, to better understand the social impacts of 
wildfire and post-fire flooding, including experiences during the fire, communication about the fire and post-fire flood risks, 
experience with and understanding of the Ready, Set, Go (RSG) evacuation system, and perceptions of forest management 
in the Flagstaff area, FWPP, and the Museum Fire cause. Recent fire events and risk mitigation efforts in northern Arizona 
demonstrate that there is a critical need for social data that can influence emergency management, risk communication, and 
policy design and implementation. We found that respondents largely agreed that communication about the Museum Fire 
and subsequent fire risk was clear. However, many respondents indicated that the RSG evacuation system was confusing, 
and many respondents said that they expected to be notified to evacuate by a professional in-person. Overall, survey 
respondents demonstrated a high level of understanding regarding fire ecology, acceptance of forest management activities, 
and willingness to pay for future forest restoration and flood risk reduction projects. We developed a set of management and 
policy implications based on these results on the following topics: 1) communication during fire; 2) Ready, Set, Go; 3) post-
fire flood risk; and 4) forest and fire management. These results and associated management and policy implications provide 
evidence-based, actionable information for wildfire incident management teams, emergency managers, and city and county 
officials related to fire and post-fire flooding risk in communities-at-risk for wildfire.
Introduction 
Communities across the western United States are growing increasingly familiar with the impacts of uncharacteristic 
wildfires. The increase in severe wildfire events is largely due to past land management practices of fire suppression and 
exclusion coupled with insect and disease outbreaks, drought, and climate change. A long-lasting effect of severe wildfire, 
particularly in the Southwest where seasonal monsoons overlap with fire season, is subsequent post-wildfire flooding. These 
post-fire flooding events are expected to occur more frequently in the future due to increased wildfire and more extreme 
precipitation events due to climate change (Brunkal 2015). Recent notable fire and flood risk events in the Flagstaff area 
offer a unique opportunity to understand how residents in affected communities experience these interconnected hazards and 
how it might influence future support for forest management.
Post-fire flooding can have significant impacts, both ecologically and socially, extending many miles from the fire footprints 
where the floods originate. Steep slopes that burn at high severity during wildfire are especially susceptible to flooding after 
heavy rain events and can generate destructive flooding events (Neary and Leonard 2019). Resultant ecological impacts are 
spatially variable but can include soil erosion (DeBano et al. 2005), debris flows generated by water runoff (Carroll 2011, 
Rengers et al. 2016), soils that become altered and repel water and increase runoff (Koestner et al. 2011), and changes in 
stream chemistry (Murphy et al. 2018). 
Several studies have documented the costs of post-fire flooding (Combrink et al. 2013) and estimated the potential costs of 
post-fire flooding (Arizona Rural Policy Institute 2014). Less is known about the social impacts of post-fire flooding, including 
how communities and local jurisdictions respond and adapt to post-fire flood risk (Mockrin et al. 2018). Predicting and 
planning for infrequent but high-impact events like extreme post-fire flooding, especially in places like the Southwest where 
monsoon rains are highly variable (Koestner et al. 2011), can be difficult to justify to stakeholders without a clear picture of 
both ecological and social impacts. There is a growing consensus that zoning regulations and adequate infrastructure developed 
through appropriate pre-fire planning can reduce potential damages and costs from post-fire flooding (Neary and Leonard 
2019). However, communication around related mitigation actions is complex; some studies indicate that post-fire flood 
mitigation implemented in response to perceived flood risks may not always be effective (Chin et al. 2016). 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         3
This white paper summarizes the results of a survey that collected data on resident experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire 
in Flagstaff, Arizona, to better understand the social impacts of wildfire and post-fire flooding. Recent fire events and risk 
mitigation efforts in northern Arizona demonstrate a critical need for social data that can influence emergency management, 
risk communication, and policy design and implementation.
Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flood Events in Flagstaff, Arizona 
The Schultz Fire and the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project
Flagstaff, located in Coconino County in northern Arizona, provides a unique opportunity to better understand the social 
impacts of both wildfire response and post-fire flood risk. The Schultz Fire burned over 15,000 acres of the Coconino 
National Forest north of Flagstaff in June 2010. Of those 15,000 acres, approximately 70% were classified as high to 
moderate burn severity (Koestner et al. 2011). When the monsoon rains arrived a few weeks later, heavy floods originating 
from the burned slopes flowed into downstream neighborhoods, resulting in significant infrastructure and housing damage, 
changes to the watershed, and one death. Flooding continues to be a significant issue for downslope neighborhoods in the 
years following the Schultz Fire, demonstrating the potentially long-lasting and widespread effects of fire and flooding to 
Flagstaff (Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project 2012). In 2013, the total economic impact of the fire and post-fire flooding 
was conservatively estimated to be between $133 million and $147 million, with projected future mitigation costs also in the 
millions (Combrink et al. 2013). Economic costs associated with post-fire flooding and mitigation were 10 times greater than 
the costs of fire suppression (Neary and Jackson 2019). 
Following the Schultz Fire, the community of Flagstaff galvanized in recognition of the urgent need to: 1) reduce the risk 
of uncharacteristic wildfire and post-fire flooding; and 2) restore forest structure and function in areas that serve as critical 
foundations for the city’s watershed. Existing efforts to restore ecosystem structure and function to the forested landscapes 
around Flagstaff by land management agencies like the Forest Service, stakeholder groups like the Greater Flagstaff Forests 
Partnership (GFFP), and landscape-scale collaborative groups like the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) largely 
avoid areas with steeper slopes that are difficult to access and thus more expensive to treat. However, growing recognition 
that moderate to severe wildfire events that occur on steep slopes such as the Schultz Fire could have significant watershed 
impacts presented a shared motive for action in more challenging topography. Members of local land management agencies 
and the local community came together to coordinate efforts and provide funding for forest restoration work, with a focus 
on reducing the dense fuel loads in two key areas: the Dry Lake Hills north of Flagstaff, which feed into the Rio de Flag 
watershed, and Mormon Mountain south of Flagstaff, which feeds into Lake Mary — the main reservoir for the city. 
Public support was paramount to sustain momentum for reducing severe wildfire risk to forests and watersheds. In November 
2012, 73.6% of voters in Flagstaff approved a ballot measure known as the “Forest Health and Water Supply Protection Project,” 
which approved a $10 million bond to fund the necessary fuel reduction work on these key watersheds (Flagstaff Watershed 
Protection Project 2012). This effort became known as the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project (FWPP), the objective of 
which was to “reduce the risk of unnatural, high-severity wildfire on roughly 11,000 acres and the associated risk of post-fire 
flooding by utilizing a variety of treatment options on steep slopes, potentially including cable and helicopter logging methods” 
(Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project 2012). Strong partnerships with a range of organizations would be necessary to 
implement the FWPP, and a number of collaborators and funding partners were brought into the collaborative effort (Mottek-
Lucas 2015). Local government also responded in creative ways. For example, Coconino County hired a forest restoration 
director in 2018 and invested taxpayer dollars through the Flood Control District to fund annual restoration work. 
The Arizona Rural Policy Institute conducted a cost-avoidance study for the City of Flagstaff ’s FWPP Monitoring Team 
in response to the economic impacts associated with the Schultz Fire to better understand the potential costs that could be 
avoided by implementing the FWPP (Arizona Rural Policy Institute 2014). The estimated potential damage associated with 

4	
Ecological Restoration Institute
wildfire and flooding ranged between $489 and $986 million for the Dry Lake Hills and between $84 and $215 million for 
Mormon Mountain in 2014 dollars (Arizona Rural Policy Institute 2014). Meanwhile, a report titled, “Coconino County 
Post-Wildfire Debris Flow and Flooding Assessment” (Loverich et al. 2017) provided an evaluation of all the areas at risk 
for flooding and debris flow following wildfire in Coconino County. The report authors estimated that there is an increased 
risk to buildings and critical facilities throughout the county from wildfire and post-fire flooding, but that forest restoration 
and fuels reduction treatments could mitigate up to 58% of the risk when conducted within entire watersheds, including 
wilderness areas (Loverich et al. 2017). These studies further justified the importance of mitigating post-fire flooding risks in 
the Flagstaff area and throughout Coconino County. 
Implementation of the FWPP first focused on the Dry Lake Hills area north of Flagstaff. The first phase of the FWPP 
included mechanical and hand thinning at the base of Mt. Elden in the Dry Lake Hills, concluding in 2018. The second 
phase of the FWPP included a combination of hand thinning, helicopter logging, and steep slope cutting, which were in 
various phases of completion in July 2019.  
The Museum Fire
The Museum Fire started on July 21, 2019, in the Dry Lake Hills area that was currently undergoing fuels reduction as part 
of the FWPP. Approximately 1,961 acres were burned in the Dry Lake Hills, adjacent to the Schultz Fire burn scar. The 
fire significantly impacted ongoing FWPP implementation work, burning two log decks that were being offered for sale 
by the Forest Service and awaiting removal. However, because the focus of FWPP was the removal of small trees, these log 
decks were of little to no monetary value (Summerfelt 2019). The Museum Fire burned through a popular recreation area 
that recently had been opened up to the public following extended closures to assure safety during FWPP helicopter logging 
work. The fire and ensuing suppression efforts occurred in popular local recreation areas and abutted neighborhoods close to 
Flagstaff city limits, garnering great concern from the public (Figure 1). The fire was not contained until August 12, 2019 
and resulted in a mixture of burn severities from low to high intensity (Coconino National Forest 2019). 
Several neighborhoods near the Dry Lake 
Hills received evacuation orders, including 
an area impacted by the Schultz Fire and 
post-fire flooding events. Coconino County 
and other officials used the Ready, Set, Go 
(RSG) system to notify Flagstaff residents 
about evacuation orders during the Museum 
Fire. RSG is a system meant to educate 
property and homeowners of their wildfire 
risk and provide information about the 
actions that residents need to take in event 
of a wildfire. In addition to using the RSG 
system, officials also used a number of other 
outreach methods to communicate with 
the public, including in-person community 
meetings that were simultaneously live-
streamed on social media. 
The Museum Fire started during a period that is typically the height of the monsoon season in northern Arizona. However, 
at the time, 2019 turned out to be the lowest monsoon season on record in Flagstaff in terms of precipitation totals, though it 
later became the second lowest after 2020 (NWS 2020). Concerns about post-fire flooding from the Museum Fire burn scar 
The Museum Fire started on July 21, 2019 in the Dry Lake Hills area 
north of Flagstaff. The fire burned approximately 1,961 acres and was 
contained on August 12, 2019. Photo by Melanie Colavito

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         5
were high, and while the fire was still actively 
burning, a thunderstorm dropped nearly two 
inches of rain in the Dry Lake Hills. City and 
county officials mapped out the areas of highest 
post-flood risk and communicated these risks to 
the public via numerous community meetings. 
Immediate efforts were made to provide jersey 
barriers and sandbags for the areas of highest 
risk, and many residents came together to 
fill and place sandbags for their neighbors. 
Neighborhoods in the projected flood zone 
were also placed on pre-evacuation notice. 
When additional rain and post-fire flooding 
never materialized, the community was left 
with mitigation measures in place that had not 
yet been fully utilized (Buffon 2019a). 
The Museum Fire was classified as a human-caused fire, but the source of the ignition was under investigation for some time 
following full containment of the fire in early August 2019. Following the investigation, officials determined that the fire “was 
likely caused by an excavator striking a rock during operations” (Coconino National Forest 2019). The excavator was reported 
to have created a spark that hibernated overnight until temperatures and wind allowed it to grow into a fire the next day, 
which was July 21. However, no negligence on the part of the excavator operator was reported, as the operator had waited the 
customary amount of time to watch for a fire following the use of the equipment. The ongoing fuel reduction work as part of 
the FWPP was still emphasized as important for protecting the watershed following the fire (Buffon 2019b). 
There is still much to be learned, both ecologically and socially, about the impacts and outcomes of the Museum Fire. This 
event provides a unique opportunity to better understand community perceptions of wildfire and post-wildfire flooding 
risk, especially in a community like Flagstaff that is accustomed to wildfire and post-fire flooding and generally supportive 
of efforts to reduce wildfire risk and restore forest health, as documented through initiatives like FWPP. At the same time, 
some of the details of the fire investigation have not been made public, and the timing of the fire during the middle of 
FWPP implementation was described by some as a “worst-case scenario.” Therefore, we conducted a survey with Flagstaff 
residents to better understand their experiences with the Museum Fire, including experiences during the fire, communication 
about fire and post-fire flood risks, experience with and understanding of the RSG evacuation system, perceptions of forest 
management in the Flagstaff area, FWPP, and the Museum Fire cause. 
Survey Approach
Surveys are a useful tool for rapid data collection at the household level in order to understand resident experiences and social 
impacts. We administered a mixed-mode survey during November and December 2019. Survey packets were mailed to 2,758 
homes, which included a paper copy of the survey booklet, an introductory letter with information on how to take the survey online 
if preferred, and a postage-paid reply envelope. A reminder postcard was sent two weeks later. Survey materials were made available 
in both English and Spanish (although we received no responses via the Spanish format). Households selected to receive the survey 
included: (1) all homes placed under some form of wildfire evacuation warning during the Museum Fire; (2) all homes that had 
a projected risk of flooding up to three inches in depth after the Museum Fire based on modeling used by Coconino County; 
and (3) a random sample of households within the Flagstaff city limits that did not fall under the first two categories (Figure 1). 
We received 617 completed surveys from households identified through the mail survey sample for a response rate of 22.37%, 
which is in line with response rates for similar surveys and study populations. An online version of the survey was also shared via 
A view of a steep slope burned by the Museum Fire. Photo by 
Melanie Colavito

6	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Figure 1. Map of areas affected by the Museum Fire. Data sources: USDA Forest Service (Museum Fire evacuation 
area); Coconino County (3-inch flood depth area)

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         7
the Flagstaff Community Forum (FCF) website and social media, and associated email requests were sent to members of their 
listserv. This forum is available for any member of the public, meaning that responses were collected via convenience sampling. 
An additional 169 questionnaires were completed through this site that bared no statistically significant differences to responses 
received via the mail survey sample. We received a total of 786 surveys (see Table 1 for an overview of responses by location).
Table 1. Survey responses by area and administration method
* “Unknown” indicates surveys where respondents declined to answer questions about their location or removed survey tracking 
numbers from their booklet.
The questionnaire collected information across five broad topics: (1) the respondent’s experience with the Museum Fire; 
(2) communication of emergency information during the Museum Fire; (3) evacuation experiences and the Ready, Set, Go 
evacuation system; (4) opinions regarding forest management in the Flagstaff area, including the FWPP; and (5) basic 
demographic information. Space was provided for additional comments on the last page. Survey materials are included in 
Appendix 1.
Resident Experiences with the Museum Fire
Fire and Flood Risk
One of the defining characteristics of post-fire flood risk is its prolonged presence, often remaining a threat for years after the 
original fire event. Flood risk became a growing concern as the Museum Fire burned, driven in part by local experience with 
post-fire flooding from the 2010 Schultz Fire. Understanding risk perceptions associated with fire and subsequent flooding 
can support the development of more streamlined communication and outreach efforts over the coming months to years.
 
Survey participants were asked to estimate the likelihood of wildfires and post-fire flooding occurring on a range of spatial 
scales in the next ten years. Table 2 shows responses stratified across sampling areas. Respondents within the broader city 
limits indicated a higher likelihood of fire occurring on private property in Coconino County and Flagstaff, while those who 
were in the evacuation area during the Museum Fire perceived the highest likelihood of their own property being damaged. 
Those in the flood risk area generally anticipated a higher likelihood of post-fire flooding.
Given that respondents anticipated a higher likelihood of post-fire flood risk at a range of scales in the next 10 years (Table 
2), identifying their willingness to support continued mitigation efforts such as sand bags and Jersey barriers can help 
streamline risk reduction outreach. Flagstaff-area residents participating in this survey broadly agreed with each of the 
statements shown in Table 3; however, those in the flood risk zone consistently exhibit lower agreement than the other two 
zones. Broader trends across these data indicate that 41.3% of respondents in the flood risk zone strongly agreed with the 
statement “flood risk reduction efforts should stay in place until flood risk has subsided” in comparison to 45.9% in the city 
limits and 51.4% in the fire evacuation area. Respondents within the city limits and fire evacuation areas are less likely to 
interact with flood mitigation efforts on a daily basis. 
	
	
Mail survey	
	
FCF
	
Delivered	
Responses	
Response rate 	
Responses 	
Total 
	
	
	
	
	
responses
Fire evacuation area	
1,144	
267	
23.34%	
24	
291
Flood risk area	
359	
84	
23.40%	
10	
94
City limits	
1,255	
266	
21.20%	
132	
398
Unknown*	
N/A	
N/A	
N/A	
3	
3
	
	
	
	
	
786

8	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Table 2. Perceived likelihood of future hazard event impacts. Survey participants were prompted to answer the 
following question: “Please indicate the likelihood that the following events will occur during the next 10 years.” 
Percentages shown are average scores, with the highest survey zone average indicated in bold (for example, 
respondents in the flood risk area anticipate that there is a 98.7% chance that a wildfire will occur in Coconino 
County between 2020 and 2030).
 
Table 3. Respondent perceptions of flood risk reduction efforts after the Museum Fire.
Survey participants were prompted to answer the following question: “Please indicate the extent to which you 
agree or disagree with the following statements about flood risk reduction efforts (e.g., sandbags, road closures).” 
The Likert scale response with the highest percentage of respondents is shown in bold.
 
	
Fire evacuation	
Flood risk 	
City limits
	
area	
area
A wildfire occurs anywhere in Coconino County 	
98.4% 	
98.7% 	
98.0%
A wildfire occurs on private property in Coconino County 	
85.8% 	
78.4% 	
87.9%
A wildfire occurs within Flagstaff City limits 	
68.6% 	
68.2% 	
74.6%
A wildfire damages a neighborhood in the City of Flagstaff 	
51.7% 	
49.8% 	
56.0%
A wildfire damages your Coconino County home 	
30.1% 	
24.0% 	
25.3%
A post-fire flood occurs anywhere in Coconino County 	
88.9% 	
89.4% 	
88.7%
A post-fire flood occurs on private property in Coconino County 	
80.9% 	
79.6% 	
81.7%
A post-fire flood occurs within Flagstaff City limits 	
71.1% 	
70.7% 	
73.5%
A post-fire flood damages a neighborhood in the City of Flagstaff 	
63.5% 	
65.7% 	
65.3%
A post-fire flood damages your Coconino County home 	
23.7% 	
38.9%	
8.8%
	
Strongly 	
Moderately 	
Neither 	
Moderately 	
Strongly
	
disagree 	
disagree 	
agree nor 	
agree 	
agree
Flood risk reduction efforts  	
	
	
disagree
Should stay in place until flood 	
5.8% 	
5.1% 	
9.1% 	
32.8% 	
47.3%
risk has subsided
Have made some areas of Flagstaff 	
4.5% 	
6.4% 	
21.8%	
9.6% 	
27.8%
unattractive
Are inconvenient 	
10.7% 	
12.8% 	
31.7%	
1.3% 	
13.6%
Are appropriate given the current 	
3.7% 	
5.4% 	
7.3% 	
34.5% 	
49.1%
risk
May need to stay in place for years 	
8.4% 	
11.6% 	
20.1% 	
35.8% 	
24%

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         9
Communication During the Museum Fire
Transparent and clear communication about developments during and after fire events is critical for public safety and 
relationship building between communities and agencies. A variety of organizations and agencies shared information about 
fire risk, evacuation, suppression progress and resource availability with the public via various communication platforms 
during the Museum Fire. These included public meetings, social media postings, and online updates via official agency 
websites. Coconino County has its own alert system for rapid communication during emergencies that residents can opt-
in to receive via text or email — 84.4% of survey respondents stated they were signed up for emergency alerts during the 
Museum Fire.
 
Three hundred and twelve (39.7%) survey respondents attended meetings focused on information dissemination about the 
Museum Fire, while 203 (25.8%) attended meetings about post-fire flood risk. Notably, more respondents attended both 
meetings “virtually” (n = 296, 37.6%) via Facebook live or the City of Flagstaff website than did in person (n = 221, 28.1%). 
Figure 2 shows meeting attendance divided by surveyed area.
 
Survey participants were most trusting of organizations and agencies that operated at the local level (Table 4). Importantly, 
29.1% of respondents did not use Inciweb, a centralized national website for vetted fire incident information. Respondents 
expressed the highest level of trust in the US Forest Service, which may be because the Museum Fire burned predominantly 
on National Forest System land.
 
Survey respondents were also asked to indicate their response to the following question: “How do you expect to be notified 
about a wildfire or flood event that threatens your Flagstaff home?” (Table 5). Participants most frequently indicated that 
they expect to receive notifications via the Coconino County emergency alert system, aligning with the high number of 
respondents who stated that they had signed up for this system as reported earlier. Some respondents provided comments 
describing that while they themselves were not signed up, someone else in their household was. This may explain the 
marginal difference in these statistics.
Figure 2. Attendance at meetings associated with the Museum Fire and associated post-fire flood risk. Data are 
presented by mode of attendance across each of the three sample zones.

10	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Table 4. Trustworthiness of information sources during the Museum Fire. 
Survey participants were prompted to answer the following question: “How trustworthy or untrustworthy were the 
following sources of information for making decisions about risk posed to your household related to the Museum 
“Fire?” The response with the highest percentage of respondents is shown in bold.
Table 5. Anticipated mode of communication during wildfire and flood risk
Survey participants were prompted to answer the following question: “How do you expect to be notified about a 
wildfire or flood event that threatens your Flagstaff home?” Participants could select multiple responses. 
 
	
Very 	
Somewhat 	
Neutral 	
Somewhat 	
Very 	
I didn’t
	
trustworthy 	
trustworthy 	
	
untrustworthy 	 untrustworthy 	
use this
	
	
	
	
	
	
source
US Forest Service 	
61.2% 	
17.6% 	
6.6% 	
3.2% 	
3.4% 	
7.9%
My local fire department 	
55.7% 	
10.8% 	
10.6% 	
0.9% 	
1.3% 	
20.6%
Law enforcement (e.g. 	
49.9% 	
18.5% 	
11.8% 	
2% 	
1.7% 	
16%
Sheriff ’s Office)
Coconino County 	
48.3% 	
25.2% 	
11% 	
3.4% 	
1.9% 	
10.2%
The City of Flagstaff 	
40.9% 	
24.2% 	
15% 	
5.4% 	
2.9% 	
11.5%
Inciweb 	
36.6% 	
14.8% 	
16.2% 	
1.8% 	
1.5% 	
29.1%
Media (e.g., newspapers, TV 	
20.2% 	
43.7% 	
18.7% 	
9.4% 	
3% 	
5%
news, radio)
My family and friends 	
19.4% 	
27.6% 	
32.3% 	
5% 	
1.2% 	
14.4%
My neighbors 	
12.8% 	
29.2% 	
32.4% 	
9.3% 	
2.2% 	
14.1%
Internet searches 	
8.3% 	
40.9% 	
25.7% 	
11.2% 	
1.9% 	
12.1%
Neighborhood groups (e.g., 	
8.2% 	
16% 	
31.2% 	
6% 	
2.2% 	
36.4%
Homeowners Association)
Social groups (e.g., recreation 	
3.5% 	
11.2% 	
32.6% 	
9.2% 	
2.8% 	
40.7%
clubs)
Communication outlet 	
Percentage of respondents
The Coconino County emergency alert system 	
88.8%
Local news outlet (e.g., Newspaper or TV) 	
51.4%
My neighbors or family members 	
48.4%
City of Flagstaff government 	
43.5%
An in-person visit from a local official 	
41.0%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) 	
31.8%

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         11
Subsequent questions asked specifically about social media use to locate local emergency information; 59.3% of respondents 
stated that they use at least one social media platform for this purpose. Facebook was the most common platform (44.3% of 
respondents), followed by online community forums like Nextdoor (18.2%) and Twitter (13.3%). 
Overall, respondents agreed that communication about the Museum Fire and subsequent fire risk was clear (strongly agree 
= 34.8%; moderately agree = 39.2%). A majority of respondents agreed with the statement: “Enough information was 
available for me to make decisions about the safety of my home” (strongly agree = 35.2%; moderately agree = 42.5%). Those 
surveyed within the city limits sample area were most likely to agree with that statement, while those in the flood risk area 
were most likely to disagree.
Evacuation
A vast number of homes in the Flagstaff area were placed under evacuation through the Ready, Set, Go notification system 
(RSG) during the Museum Fire. The system advises that residents in fire prone areas should always be “Ready” for fire by 
maintaining defensible space around their properties and having essentials accessible in case a fire does threaten their home. 
The “Set” stage is initiated to notify residents of the possibility that they might need to evacuate. The “Go” stage is initiated 
to notify residents that it is time to evacuate. Just over half (54.5%) of respondents stated that their residence was placed 
under evacuation warning through the RSG system. When asked which level(s) their property was placed under, responses 
were distributed as follows:
●• 
21.4% of respondents said their home was at the “Ready” stage
●• 
33% of respondents said their home was at the “Set” stage
●• 
5.2% of respondents said their home was at the “Go” stage
A subset of respondents reported that their home was placed under more than one warning stage (e.g., shifting from “Set” 
to “Go”). A small number (7.8%) of respondents reported that they evacuated their household due to wildfire risk, with an 
additional 0.3% evacuating due to flood risk. These evacuees were not necessarily placed in the “Go” stage of RSG, meaning 
that they may have proactively decided to evacuate or that other factors beyond this survey influenced decision making 
(e.g., smoke impacts). Approximately 14.5% of survey respondents had evacuated due to a wildfire prior to the Museum 
Fire, whether it was at their Flagstaff residence or at another property they had once lived in during their lifetime. 
Public interpretation of the RSG tiered evacuation system remains under-researched in the emergency management 
literature. Questions asked survey recipients to indicate the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with a range of 
statements related to interpretation of RSG. Table 6 provides an overview of these data. Respondents who were in the fire 
evacuation area indicated a slightly higher understanding of the RSG system, likely given their recent experience navigating 
it. Responses indicate residents’ uncertainty about two key areas of RSG: (1) Whether all three levels of the RSG system 
would occur during a fire; and (2) how they will be contacted regarding their home’s evacuation stage.
A variety of organizations and agencies shared information with the public about fire risk, evacuation, suppression 
progress, and resource availability during the Museum Fire, including public meetings, social media postings, and 
online updates via official agency websites. Photo by Catrin Edgeley

12	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Table 6. Respondent understandings of the Ready, Set, Go evacuation system. 
Survey participants were prompted to answer the following question: “Please mark to the extent to which you 
agree or disagree with the following statements about the Ready, Set, Go evacuation system.” The Likert scale 
response with the highest percentage of respondents is shown in bold.
Existing studies suggest that residents living in fire-prone areas often have high expectations regarding in-person contact 
to initiate evacuation. In areas with larger populations like Flagstaff, or in a scenario where a fire is fast-moving, this is 
often unattainable. Table 7 shows resident assessments of broad community expectations for in-person notification across 
survey sampling zones. Overall, respondents showed high agreement with the statement “People expect to be notified by 
professionals about when to evacuate.” When asked whether the respondent personally expected to be notified in-person 
about evacuation, 40.1% said yes.
 
Table 7. Resident expectations of in-person evacuation notifications. Survey participants were prompted to answer 
the following question: “Please mark to the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statement: 
“People expect to be notified by professionals about when to evacuate.” The Likert scale response with the highest 
percentage of respondents is shown in bold.
 
	
Strongly 	
Moderately 	
Neither agree nor 	
Moderately 	
Strongly
	
disagree 	
disagree 	
disagree 	
agree	
agree
City limits 	
1.0% 	
0.5% 	
5.4% 	
18.8% 	
74.2%
Evacuation area 	
0.0% 	
1.7% 	
5.2%	
0.8% 	
72.2%
Flood risk area 	
2.2% 	
0.0% 	
6.5% 	
16.1% 	
75.3%
The Ready, Set, Go warning system for 
evacuation is clear
The Ready, Set, Go warning system is the 
best way to ensure the safety of residents in 
my community
The Ready, Set, Go warning system will not 
affect my plans during a wildfire
Residents only need to evacuate if they 
are contacted as part of the Ready, Set, Go 
warning system
All three levels of the Ready, Set, Go warning 
system will occur during wildfires
I know how I would be contacted about 
evacuation using the Ready, Set, Go system
Strongly 
disagree
2.5%
1.6%
44.2%
20.2%
21.6%
9.8%
Moderately  
disagree
4.3%
3.4%
29.3%
29.2%
17.4%
15.3%
Neither 
agree nor
disagree 
6.7%
19.9%
15.1%
19.8%
23.7%
13.9%
Moderately 
agree
35.9%
37.5%
6.4%
18.5%
16.5%
33.2%
Strongly 
agree
50.6%
37.7%
5.1%
12.4%
20.7%
27.7%

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         13
Fire and Forest Management
One section of the survey was dedicated to understanding resident perceptions of fire and forest management, both during 
the Museum Fire and in the future. Responses related to the Museum Fire and management were positive overall; select 
examples include:
•● 
66.5% agreed Flagstaff was well prepared for an event like the Museum Fire (18% strongly agreed, 48.5% 
moderately agreed).
•● 
90% agreed that firefighting response to the Museum Fire was adequate (71.5% strongly agreed, 18.5% 
moderately agreed).
Survey respondents demonstrated a high level of understanding regarding fire ecology in their responses associated 
with the role of landscape health and fire (see Mottek Lucas 2015 for background on community outreach efforts). An 
overwhelming majority of respondents recognized that “fire is a natural part of the landscape around Flagstaff (53.3% 
strongly agree; 33.2% moderately agree), indicating a higher social acceptability of fire activity in the area. Additionally, 
there was strong agreement that the landscape would recover from impacts introduced by the Museum Fire (34.5% 
strongly agree; 39.6% moderately agree). 
The Museum Fire significantly impacted ongoing FWPP implementation work, burning two log decks 
being offered for sale by the Forest Service and awaiting removal. This photo series shows one of the 
log decks awaiting sale before the Museum Fire (above), and the same area after the fire burned the 
logs (below). Photo by Melanie Colavito

14	
Ecological Restoration Institute
This survey was delivered to residences shortly after the conclusion of an investigation to identify the source of the fire’s 
ignition; a US Forest Service press release shared widely by the media reported the outcome as likely caused by an isolated spark 
from contractor equipment affiliated with FWPP fuel treatment. The identification of a human-caused source might explain 
why 57.6% of respondents strongly or moderately agreed that “the Museum Fire was preventable.” Additionally, 30.7% of 
respondents strongly or moderately agreed with the statement, “the Museum Fire was not a typical fire for this area.”
Many respondents indicated that they felt recreation had been negatively impacted by the Museum Fire (37% moderately 
agreed, 26.9% strongly agreed). 
Public acceptance of forest management outcomes is often a key indicator of their support for future risk mitigation 
efforts. Figure 3 shows how acceptable or unacceptable survey respondents found various management outcomes to be 
in the Flagstaff area. Acceptance remained relatively high across all outcomes (>60% of respondents found approaches 
moderately or very acceptable) with the exception of smoke or reduced air quality (31.8% moderately acceptable; 8.8% 
very acceptable). However, prescribed fire was one of the most accepted outcomes (35.6% moderately acceptable; 42.8% 
very acceptable); this contradiction highlights the challenges of management tactics that have consequences beyond public 
land such as reduced air quality. 
Figure 3. Acceptability of different forest management outcomes. Survey participants were prompted to answer 
the following question: “Please indicate how acceptable or unacceptable you find the following forest management 
outcomes.”

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         15
Willingness to Pay for Forest Management
Respondents were asked how they would like to see future forest management funded in the Flagstaff area. Outcomes 
are shown in Table 8. Increased utility fees were the most unacceptable approach for survey respondents, with moderate 
acceptance of increased city and property taxes. Respondents were also invited to provide other options they might support; 
these ranged from additional taxes on tourism (e.g., BBB [Bed, Board, and Booze] tax), shifts in federal funding of public 
land management budgets, and increased fees for recreation through trailhead parking.
Table 8. Acceptability of future forest management funding avenues. Survey participants were prompted to answer 
the following question: “Please indicate how acceptable or unacceptable you find the following strategies for 
financing forest management to reduce wildfire risk in the Flagstaff area.” The Likert scale response with the highest 
percentage of respondents is shown in bold.
Existing support for publicly funded forest management, such as FWPP, offers the opportunity for similar efforts in the 
future. At least 24.2% of survey respondents were not willing to pay any amount, indicating $0 per month. A further 18.3% 
opted not to answer this question. However, 57.5% of respondents were willing to pay some amount; Table 9 shows the 
outcomes of this effort, stratified by annual household income. The amount that households are willing to pay toward forest 
management is directly connected to household income; households earning above $150,000 per year show a marked increase 
in the amount they are willing to contribute. A 2012 survey conducted by Mueller (2014) found that Flagstaff residents were 
willing to pay $4.89 a month to contribute to forest restoration. Our survey sought to replicate this open-ended question 
format that allowed respondents to write in any dollar amount. Our survey showed a significant increase in willingness to 
pay since Mueller’s study, with a mean response of $18.58. This difference may be driven by different question framing; our 
survey asked about willingness to pay for wildfire risk reduction rather than forest restoration.
	
Very 	
Moderately 	
Neutral 	
Moderately 	
Very
	
unacceptable 	
unacceptable 	
	
acceptable 	
acceptable
Increased city taxes 	
21.6% 	
14.6% 	
17.5% 	
36.5% 	
9.8%
Increased property tax 	
24.4% 	
17.4% 	
15.5% 	
32.6% 	
10.2%
Increased fees for household 	
34.2% 	
24.7% 	
17.5% 	
17.5% 	
4.9%
utilities
No additional fees for forest 	
18.1% 	
20.6% 	
34.4% 	
13.5% 	
13.4%
management

16	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Table 9. Variations in willingness to pay across survey sample groups, stratified by reported annual household 
income. For reference, the average household income per fire area is: Fire evacuation area: $80,000–99,000, Flood 
risk area: $60,000–79,000, City limits: $60,000–79,000.
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project
The initial success of the FWPP has driven much discussion and public interest around how it might be sustained or 
replicated in the future (Mottek Lucas 2015). Among our survey respondents, 39.2% voted in support of proposition 405 
in 2012; 2.2% voted in opposition; 25% couldn’t remember how they voted; 3.5% didn’t vote; 29.6% didn’t live within the 
Flagstaff city limits in 2012; and 0.5% were not yet old enough to vote.
Respondents overwhelmingly agreed that collaborative management efforts across agencies, governments, and organizations 
were the best way to address fire risk to Flagstaff (Figure 4). Many also expressed that more money should be invested 
in the FWPP (24.7% strongly agreed, 31.7% moderately agreed). This support was confirmed by high agreement among 
participants that they would support future initiatives like FWPP to reduce wildfire and flood risk in Flagstaff (34.7% 
strongly agreed, 38.6% moderately agreed). This support for collaborative approaches, combined with findings presented 
above, indicate that Flagstaff residents selectively support management mechanisms that operate at the local level and focus 
on public lands.
Annual household 
income before taxes
Less than $20,000 per 
year
$20,000 to 39,999 per 
year
$40,000 to $59,999 
per year
$60,000 to $79,999 
per year
$80,000 to $99,999 
per year
$100,000 to $149,999 
per year
$150,000 to $199,999 
per year
$200,000 to $249,999 
per year
$250,000 or more per 
year
Total
Mean
$5.70
$13.26
$14.46
$15.28
$14.28
$21.10
$23.67
$29.54
$33.55
$18.58
N
23
27
82
80
69
141
63
26
33
566
Mean
$8.64
$15.27
$13.77
$16.98
$17.11
$18.27
$18.62
$22.22
$22.69
$16.85
N
14
26
42
46
35
66
29
9
13
280
Mean
$2.50
$11.00
$10.42
$13.54
$15.63
$23.40
$7.29
$28.33
$56.67
$16.22
N
4
11
12
6
8
15
7
3
3
69
Mean
$0.00
$10.50
$15.90
$12.86
$10.04
$23.63
$33.33
$34.50
$37.76
$21.44
N
5
10
29
28
26
60
27
14
17
216
Evacuation area
Flood risk area
City limits
Total

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         17
Figure 4. Support for partnerships to address Flagstaff’s wildfire risk. Survey participants were prompted to answer 
the following question: “Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statement: 
Partnerships between the City, U.S. Forest Service, and other organizations are the best way to address fire risk to 
Flagstaff.”
More than half of survey respondents disagreed with the statement “efforts like the FWPP mean that less action is needed to 
address fire risk on my private property” (24% strongly disagreed, 31.8% moderately disagreed). Survey data suggest there is 
a significant subset of residents in the Flagstaff area who recognize their responsibility to reduce risk on their own land; this 
perspective aligns with a large body of existing literature on responsibility for risk mitigation on private property (e.g., Martin 
et al. 2009, McFarlane et al. 2012, Edgeley and Paveglio 2019).
Additional Respondent Comments
Space was provided at the end of the survey for respondents to share any additional thoughts or comments related to the 
Museum Fire. This resulted in 219 comments. Comments typically fell under three broad themes:
 
1.  Support for Higher Regulation of Forest Use
Numerous comments detailed concerns related to campfire restrictions on Coconino National Forest and other public lands 
in the Flagstaff area. Many indicated that they felt the highest risk of human-caused wildfire came from tourists visiting from 
outside the area who may not be as familiar with local forest etiquette. Although the reported cause of the Museum Fire was 
not a campfire, this likely emerged from longstanding concerns related to the 2010 Schultz Fire, which was caused by an 
escaped campfire, and broader conflicts surrounding forest use between locals and visitors. Typical comments addressing this 
issue explicitly asked for tighter restrictions during periods of high fire risk:
“So long as tourism is promoted, Flagstaff will have increased wildfire risk. Visitors have no comprehension of the risk. People 
who come from the deserts to “cool off ” should not be lighting fires! Start a “Bring a sweater” campaign.” 
“Camping and fire bans should be considered and implemented way sooner than they generally are. We should NOT be 
thinking about tourism dollars when making these decisions. We should be thinking ONLY of preventing catastrophic fire, 
which is mostly/often caused by humans.”
“I strongly believe that when fire risk is high, we need more regulations, such as closing areas to vehicle traffic, banning 
campfires, banning commercial operations that pose a risk, etc.”

18	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Coconino National Forest has expanded their existing year-round campfire ban by 25,000 acres surrounding Flagstaff since 
this survey was conducted (Buffon 2020). The FWPP Environmental Impact Statement also included a campfire ban in the 
Dry Lake Hills project area that was enforced at the time the Museum Fire occurred in response to public comments during 
the public involvement process.
 
2.  Clarification over Emergency Communication
Many respondents expressed confusion or uncertainty around emergency notifications related to the Museum Fire. Most 
frequently, these comments were related to the RSG system. Their predominant concern was a lack of “all clear” alerts 
informing residents that they were either downgraded or no longer placed under any stage of the RSG system, requiring 
them to rely on other less reliable sources or word of mouth to determine when to return to their residence. Comments about 
RSG were diverse:
 
“My only issue with the notification process was the decision to stop notifying by text when evacuation levels were reduced. 
Initially, we were notified when areas went from ‘go’ to ‘set’ or ‘set’ to ‘ready.’ Later, the County decided not to make this 
text notification so it was difficult to figure out if my neighborhood was downgraded from ‘set’ to ‘ready’ when containment 
increased; this felt particularly important because containment lines around a hot spot near my neighborhood had not been 
established when less reliable social media sources were reporting the status change.”
“The implementation of ‘Ready, Set, Go’ was not ideal. There was a lot of confusion out there as to what it meant, how 
people would find out, etc. I don’t think our neighborhood was ever officially told when we were out of ‘Set.’ I even tried 
calling the official information number and a) the published open times were incorrect and b) once I finally talked to 
someone, they weren’t very nice and I don’t think that particular individual was well informed as to the situation.”
“My neighborhood was put on ‘set’ evacuation status the day after the fire started. We were told we would be notified by 
the Coconino County alert system when our neighborhood was taken off ‘set’ and back to ‘ready.’ This NEVER happened 
and the only notification we received was by watching the Phoenix news station. This severely compromised my trust in 
Coconino County and their ability to communicate with 90% of the people who were put on the ‘set’ evacuation notice.”
 
Other comments expressed uncertainty caused by the misnaming of neighborhoods placed under evacuation; for example, 
some respondents reported that Lockett Estates was listed as Locket Meadows, leaving some households unclear about 
whether evacuation notifications applied to them. Concerns regarding RSG may not be unique to Flagstaff, and communities 
across the West may be experiencing similar challenges and complications. 
 
3.  Reported Cause of the Museum Fire
In an earlier section of the survey, 82.8% of respondents indicated that they were aware of the reported cause of the Museum 
Fire. Many comments questioned the reported cause or requested that the full Forest Service report be released. Many 
respondents provided comments that highlighted change or lack of change in support for continued forest management. Two 
examples of opposing arguments are shown below:
 
“Horribly sad that the Museum Fire was caused by FWPP worker. But this sad accident should not reduce our commitment 
to FWPP and similar projects. Instead we should plan and implement them faster (but more carefully).”
 
“The cause of the fire was tragic and in fact squandered the resources already extracted from local citizens. I don’t think 
citizens should be asked or required to provide further resources until a full accountability of the cause is made, remediation 
of procedures and oversight achieved, and avenues of reinsurance (sic) explored to protect citizens from further squandering 
of their resources in the future.”
 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         19
Themes within these kinds of comments 
highlighted that a subset of residents expect 
changes to how FWPP is funded or greater 
transparency around the role of fuel treatments 
in relation to the Museum Fire before they 
would consider supporting a similar approach 
again. These comments typically requested 
financial information on the status of FWPP, 
and for specific strategies or approaches that 
would be implemented to prevent a similar 
ignition from contractor equipment occurring 
again. However, as noted earlier, 73.3% of 
respondents strongly or moderately agreed that 
they would support future initiatives like FWPP, 
so it is possible that these comments were provided by a non-representative minority within the Flagstaff community. This 
percentage of respondents in support is strikingly similar to the percentage of residents who voted in support of the city bond 
that supported FWPP in 2012 (Nielsen and Solop 2013).
 
Management and Policy Implications
Survey findings indicate that Flagstaff-area residents retained positive attitudes toward forest, fire, and flood risk 
management in the months following the Museum Fire. We provide evidence-based suggestions for decision-makers below 
that can maintain and advance successful efforts to support community adaptation and safety during wildfire and post-fire 
flood risk. 
Communication During the Museum Fire
• 
The virtual public meeting format used to communicate with residents during the fire was well attended. Officials should 
continue to stream in-person meetings on multiple platforms to reach a wider audience. 
• 
Residents are most trusting of organizations and entities from the local community, such as the local Forest Service units 
and local fire departments. These entities should be used to communicate with the public during fires. 
• 
Inciweb, a centralized website for fire incident information, is not highly utilized by residents, and could be better shared 
as a resource.
• 
Overall, fewer residents found communication of information about flooding clear, perhaps because it was not relevant 
to them. Nonetheless, local entities responsible for communicating about flood risk may need to provide more detailed 
information for residents to make decisions about the safety of their homes regarding flood risk. 
• 
Some residents share the expectation that they will be notified in-person by professionals about when to evacuate 
during a wildfire or flood event. In most cases, this is likely to be unfeasible as there is not enough time or capacity 
for professionals to visit all affected households. This finding suggests that residents need to be better equipped with 
the knowledge to make decisions about when to evacuate without supervision. This may necessitate more effective 
communication of the Ready, Set, Go system (see section below) or other thresholds that might encourage self-
evacuation. Officials should also clearly state in public meetings and other communication forums that in-person contact 
about evacuation will likely not occur. 
• 
Many residents have signed up for the Coconino County alert system and received alerts via the system during the 
Museum Fire. The county should continue to use the system to communicate to residents during an emergency, and 
maintain efforts to encourage residents to sign up for alerts wherever possible. 
I strongly believe that when fire risk is 
high, we need more regulations, such 
as closing areas to vehicle traffic, ban-
ning campfires, banning commercial 
operations that pose a risk, etc.
— Survey respondent in support  
of higher regulation of forest use

20	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Ready, Set, Go Evacuation Notification System
Data collected in this survey indicate that while RSG is clear to residents in theory, there is confusion regarding the 
implementation of this system in practice — regardless of whether they had evacuated using the RSG system or not 
during the Museum Fire. Clarification around RSG and communication to improve evacuation safety more broadly can 
take several forms:
• 
High dependence on official evacuation notices among survey respondents indicates a clear need to provide residents 
with knowledge that can help them make evacuation decisions autonomously. Creating and sharing resources and 
information to residents about fire behavior, possible thresholds for evacuation, and evacuation decision making can 
encourage a reduced reliance on in-person communication and increase public safety. 
• 
Many residents understand the RSG system in theory but not in practice; notably, there is confusion regarding whether 
all three levels will occur, and whether they will be announced incrementally from “ready,” to “set,” to “go.” Wider 
communication about the RSG system in advance of fire season, with more details about how it may be implemented 
under different scenarios, will help clarify this uncertainty. 
• 
Advanced public listing of outlets where RSG evacuation warnings will be communicated and updated can streamline 
public information receipt during fires. Survey findings indicate that many Flagstaff residents are signed up for the 
Coconino County emergency alert system, but are not aware that they will receive evacuation notices through that 
platform. Providing resources that help residents connect communication systems with their uses could alleviate stress 
and encourage the use of trustworthy information sources during wildfires.
• 
Many residents were confused by incorrect place names in evacuation notices during the Museum Fire (e.g., Lockett 
Ranches referred to as “Locket Meadows”). Confirmation that neighborhood or subdivision names are accurate in 
emergency messaging before they are publicly shared will reduce confusion and improve public response time to 
notifications. Use of maps can eliminate further uncertainty associated with diverse names used by different populations 
for the same location.
• 
While communicating about evacuation as the fire approaches is critical, numerous survey respondents were uncertain 
about when it would be safe to return to their homes once the threat had subsided. Many expected to be notified that 
RSG for their neighborhoods had been lifted or relaxed through the Coconino County emergency alert system, but did 
not receive any information through this channel. Clear communication about (1) when and where RSG evacuation 
notices have been lifted or reduced a level, and (2) where residents will be able to access the most up-to-date information 
about their neighborhood will be beneficial for evacuees during future fires.
Many challenges associated with the implementation of RSG are not unique to Flagstaff; however, Flagstaff ’s local and 
county government have consistently demonstrated a high capacity for implementing and improving wildfire adaptation 
efforts. Lessons learned from resident experiences with RSG offer another opportunity for Flagstaff to further improve the 
safety of its residents. 
Post-Fire Flood Risk
Local experiences with the Schultz Fire in 2010 influenced public perceptions and expectations for flooding and flood risk 
management following the Museum Fire (McMannis 2019). As flood risk is likely to remain in areas downslope of the 
burned area, addressing resident concerns and misconceptions remains extremely important. Findings from this survey 
support the following management implications:
• 
Flagstaff residents have a strong understanding of the connectivity between wildfires and post-fire flooding; however, 
those who are evacuated in fire risk areas often have different experiences and perceptions to those in flood risk areas that 
should be considered during communication and outreach.

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         21
• 
Maintaining communication about post-fire flood risk between local agencies and residents is critical to encourage 
continued awareness downslope of the Museum Fire burn scar. Lower risk awareness and support for long-term 
mitigation to address post-fire flooding by residents in the flood risk area suggests that these efforts should span multiple 
years, and can also benefit from communication more broadly across the population to maintain support both city-wide 
and in the greater Flagstaff area.
• 
Rapid public communication, such as public meetings held in-person and virtually, about flood risk while the Museum 
Fire was still burning was well received and well attended by residents throughout the Flagstaff area. Officials should 
continue to introduce flood risk information early and through a range of communication channels. 
• 
Residents indicated willingness to see flood mitigation efforts, such as sand bags and Jersey barriers, maintained in 
order to reduce future flood risk. However, residents in the flood risk zone were less likely to state that flood mitigation 
measures should be maintained, suggesting they may be experiencing some fatigue in living with the mitigation measures 
during an unusually dry monsoon season. This might warrant additional communication with these areas about the 
reasons for keeping the measures in place. 
• 
Those within the city limits and fire evacuation areas are less likely to interact with flood mitigation efforts on a daily 
basis and may not need the same level of targeted outreach as those within the flood risk area.
The lessons learned from the survey illustrate that addressing post-fire flood risk should largely focus on providing residents 
with information about why flood mitigation measures should remain in place, where they can access resources to supplement 
their flood mitigation measures, and how flood risk reduction efforts might be funded in the future. Providing residents with 
information about flood risk and mitigation will continue to be important, as the potential for flooding is still present despite 
recent dry monsoon seasons. 
Flood risk is likely to remain in areas downslope of the burned area despite recent dry monsoon 
seasons. It is recommended that flood mitigation measures, like concrete barriers and sand bags 
around homes and property, remain in place. Photo by Catrin Edgeley

22	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Forest and Fire Management
Fire events can be highly influential on community support for future land management efforts (McCool et al. 2004, 
Paveglio and Edgeley 2017). Survey findings indicate that although the conditions surrounding the Museum Fire concerned 
many residents, it did not substantially reduce their support for future forest management efforts. Findings from this survey 
support the following management implications:
•● 
High public support for active forest management through proactive and collaborative approaches seems likely to 
continue following the Museum Fire. 
●• 
Survey respondents indicated a preference for collaborative forest management across agencies, governments, and 
organizations as a path forward to address wildfire risk and forest management. A significant portion of survey 
respondents stated their interest in FWPP continuation or the introduction of a similar bond format to reduce fire and 
flood risk in the future. 
●• 
Any effort to implement additional taxation for Flagstaff-area residents to support forest management may benefit from 
a prorated approach that takes annual household income into consideration.
●• 
Residents recognize that they are responsible for reducing fire risk on their own properties. High awareness that FWPP 
does not reduce this need indicates that many Flagstaff residents are receptive to resident-focused outreach efforts and 
resources that they can use to manage vegetation and structure risk on their property. Practices that are shared and 
promoted among Flagstaff residents should highlight the benefits of shared responsibility for wildfire risk reduction.
Under these collaborative conditions, local government and land management agencies have a relative amount of flexibility given 
widespread public support for and recognition of the need for forest restoration and wildfire and post-fire flood risk reduction.
Conclusion
This white paper summarizes results of a survey about resident experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire in Flagstaff, Arizona 
to better understand the social impacts of wildfire and post-fire flooding. These results and associated management and 
policy implications provide evidence-based, actionable information for wildfire incident management teams, emergency 
managers, and city and county officials related to fire and post-fire flooding risk in communities-at-risk for wildfire. 
Specifically, these results include social data about resident experiences during the fire, communication about fire and post-
fire flood risks, experience with and understanding of the RSG evacuation system, perceptions of forest management in 
the Flagstaff area and FWPP, and the Museum Fire cause. Findings highlight areas where future efforts can be focused to 
facilitate positive change. The results and recommendations provided here can also supplement community planning efforts 
to reduce wildfire risk and help to inform the development of actionable Community Wildfire Protection Plans (Colavito 
2020). 
The 2019 Museum Fire caused widespread impacts to Flagstaff-area residents that varied based on the risks posed to 
each household. Looking forward, Flagstaff officials can explore several paths forward for increasing public understanding 
of evacuation during fires and how associated decision making about evacuation works. Officials must also continue to 
communicate about prolonged post-fire flood risk and flood risk mitigation measures. 
While public support for forest management to address fire risk and watershed health in Flagstaff remains high overall, these 
results illustrate that there are nuances about how much residents are willing to pay for restoration and flood risk reduction 
and show varied support for management outcomes. These nuances indicate that future public participation in forest 
management must incorporate greater flexibility to accommodate the diversity of resident backgrounds and perceptions. 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         23
References
Arizona Rural Policy Institute. 2014. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project Cost Avoidance Study. Prepared for the 
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project Monitoring Committee. 23p. Available online: https://in.nau.edu/wp-content/
uploads/sites/212/Flagstaff-Watershed-Protection-Project-2014.pdf.
Buffon, S. August 28, 2019 (a). Residents adapt as sandbag stacks remain around flood threatened areas. Arizona Daily Sun. 
Available online: https://azdailysun.com/news/residents-adapt-as-sandbag-stacks-remain-around-flood-threatened-
areas/article_fac76c51-3d92-5684-b1f1-ce2ad134b7f9.html. 
Buffon, S. September 11, 2019 (b). Museum Fire caused by forest thinning operations, fire investigators say. Arizona 
Daily Sun. Available online: https://azdailysun.com/news/museum-fire-caused-by-forest-thinning-operations-fire-
investigators-say/article_a1d0c83e-6115-50f6-8bbd-5d4b6183b7c3.html. 
Buffon, S. January 18, 2020. Forest Service spreads camping and campfire ban to communities around Flagstaff. Arizona 
Daily Sun. Available online: https://azdailysun.com/news/forest-service-spreads-camping-and-campfire-ban-to-
communities-around-flagstaff/article_beb998f8-7e2a-56ee-b1fd-26b9a88304f0.html
Brunkal, H.A. 2015. Analysis of Post-Wildfire Debris Flows: Climate Change, the Rational Equation, and Design of a 
Dewatering Brake. Dissertation. Colorado School of Mines. 141p. 
Carroll, M.D. 2011. Movement of Channel-Borne Sediments in the 2010 Schultz Fire Burn Area. Master’s Thesis. Northern 
Arizona University. 161p. 
Chin. A., L. An, J.L. Florsheim, L.R. Laurencio, R.A. Marston, A.P. Solverson, G.L. Simon, E. Stinson, and E. Wolh. 
Investigating feedbacks in human-landscape systems: Lessons following a wildfire in Colorado, USA. Geomorphology 
252 (2016): 40-50. 
Coconino National Forest. 2019. Forest Service announces cause of Museum Fire. Press release. Available online: https://
www.fs.usda.gov/detail/coconino/news-events/?cid=FSEPRD662372 [Last accessed June 2, 2020]. 
Coconino National Forest. 2019. Museum Fire 2019 – Soil Burn Severity Map. Available online: https://inciweb.nwcg.gov/
incident/map/6482/0/93632 [Last accessed September 23, 2020]. 
Colavito, M. 2020. Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West. 
ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 14 p. 
Available online: https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/1034/rec/14
Combrink, T., C. Cothran, W. Fox, J. Peterson, and G. Snider. 2013. A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire. 
Ecological Restoration Institute - Issues in Forest Restoration. 48p. 
DeBano L.F., Neary D.G., Ffolliott P.F. 2005. Soil physical properties. In ‘Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Effects of Fire on 
Soil and Water’. Eds. D.G., Neary, K.C. Ryan, F.L. DeBano) USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 4, Ch. 2, pp. 29–51. (Ogden, UT).
Edgeley, C.M. and Paveglio, T.B., 2019. Exploring influences on intended evacuation behaviors during wildfire: what roles 
for pre-fire actions and event-based cues?. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 37, pp. e101182.
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project. 2012. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project Executive Summary and 
Implementation Plan. The City of Flagstaff and the Flagstaff Ranger District, Coconino National Forest. 16p. Available 
online: https://www.flagstaff.az.gov/DocumentCenter/View/41236/Ex-Summ-Impl-Plan_Dec12?bidId=
Koestner, K.A., P.E. Koestner, and D.G. Neary. 2011. Estimating Post-Fire Peak Flows Following the Schultz Fire, 
Coconino National Forest, Arizona. Hydrology and Water Resources in Arizona and the Southwest. Available online: 
https://repository.arizona.edu/handle/10150/296989. 
Loverich, J.B., A.M. Youberg, M.J. Kellogg, J.E. Fuller. 2017. Post-Wildfire Debris-Flow and Flooding Assessment: 
Coconino County, Arizona. Report prepared for Coconino County by JE Fuller. 70p.  

24	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Martin, W. E., Martin, I. M., & Kent, B. 2009. The role of risk perceptions in the risk mitigation process: the case of wildfire 
in high risk communities. Journal of Environmental Management, 91(2), pp489-498.
McCool, S. F., Burchfield, J. A., Williams, D. R., & Carroll, M. S. (2006). An event-based approach for examining the effects 
of wildland fire decisions on communities. Environmental management, 37(4), 437-450.
McMannis, S. July 22, 2019. Museum Fire: Flagstaff residents remain hopeful, prepared for the worst. Arizona Daily Sun. 
Available here: https://azdailysun.com/news/museum-fire-flagstaff-residents-remain-hopeful-prepare-for-the-worst/
article_fe8a4e85-bab1-57c7-8c2d-1f377d56f94f.html
McFarlane, B.L., McGee, T.K. and Faulkner, H., 2012. Complexity of homeowner wildfire risk mitigation: an integration of 
hazard theories. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 20(8), pp.921-931.
Mockrin, M.H., Fishler, H.K. and Stewart, S.I., 2018. Does wildfire open a policy window? Local government and 
community adaptation after fire in the United States. Environmental Management, 62(2), pp.210-228.
Mottek Lucas, A. 2015. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships. 
ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University. 28 p.
Mueller, J. M. 2014. Estimating willingness to pay for watershed restoration in Flagstaff, Arizona using dichotomous-choice 
contingent valuation. Forestry, 87(2), pp327-333.
Murphy, S.F., R.B. McCleskey, D.A. Martin, J.H. Writer, and B.A. Ebel. 2018. Fire, Flood, and Drought: Extreme 
Climate Events Alter Flow Paths and Stream Chemistry. Journal of Geophysical Research 123 (8): 2513-2526. 
10.1029/2017JG004349
National Weather Service (NWS). 2020. Yearly Monsoon Statistics for Flagstaff. NOAA. Available online: https://www.wrh.
noaa.gov/twc/monsoon/monsoon_flg.php
Neary, D.G. and J.M. Leonard. 2019. Physical Vulnerabilities from Wildfires: Flames, Floods, and Debris Flows. In ‘Human 
Impact on the Environment’ (H. Naser, ed.). 17p. 
Nielsen, E., & Solop, F. (2013). Fact sheet: Forest health and water supply protection project ballot measure: Exit poll 
results. Ecological Restoration Institute Fact Sheet.
Paveglio, T. and Edgeley, C., 2017. Community diversity and hazard events: understanding the evolution of local approaches 
to wildfire. Natural Hazards, 87(2), pp.1083-1108.
Rengers, F.K., L. McGuire, J.W. Kean, D.M. Staley, D.E.J. Hobley. 2016. Model simulations of flood and debris flow timing 
in steep catchments after wildfire. Water Resources Research 52 (8): 21p. 10.1002/2015WR018176

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         25
Appendix. Museum Fire Survey Booklet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resident  experiences wit h t he  
2 0 1 9  Museum Fire 
 
To be completed by the adult in the residence (age 18 or older) who has had the most recent 
birthday and has the ability to make decisions about the property this survey was sent to. 
 
The Museum Fire was a wildfire that began on July 21st 2019 and burned 1,961 acres of land 
near the City of Flagstaff. This survey asks about your household’s experience with the 
Museum Fire and post-fire flood risk to inform future management efforts. 
 
Survey ID: 
 
 
 
 

26	
Ecological Restoration Institute
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 1: Your experience with the Museum Fire 
This section of the survey will ask you about your experience with the Museum Fire to help us 
better understand the impact of this event on Flagstaff-area residents. Please answer these 
questions about the property this survey was delivered to. 
Q1.   Please mark which of the following statements apply to your Flagstaff home. Please 
mark all that apply. 
My home was in an evacuation zone during the Museum Fire 
My home was in the flood risk area during and after the Museum Fire 
My home was not threatened by fire or flooding related to the Museum Fire 
Q2.   Did you evacuate from your home because of the Museum Fire? Mark all that apply. 
Yes, due to wildfire risk 
Yes, due to flood risk 
No, I did not evacuate 
I was not at my Flagstaff residence during the Museum Fire 
Q4.  Did you attend any public meetings about the Museum Fire and/or subsequent flood 
risk? Please mark all that apply. 
 
 
I attended in 
person 
I attended 
virtually (e.g. 
Facebook stream) 
I did not 
attend 
Public meeting(s) about the Museum Fire 
 
 
 
Public meeting(s) about post-fire flood risk
 
 
 
Q3.  Mark the statement(s) that best describe the level of insurance you have for the 
property this survey was sent to. Please mark all that apply. 
 
 
Yes, homeowners or 
renters insurance 
Yes, flood 
insurance 
No, this home 
was not insured  
N/A 
I purchased insurance before 
the Museum Fire 
 
 
 
I purchased insurance during 
or after the Museum Fire 
 
 
 
2 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         27
   
 
Q6.   Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following 
statements about your experience with the Museum Fire and/or post fire flood risk. 
Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
I lost sleep as a result of the 
Museum Fire or flood risk 
 
 
 
 
 
I was worried about the safety 
of my property because of the 
Museum Fire or flood risk 
 
 
 
 
 
I could not attend work 
because of the Museum Fire or 
subsequent flood risk 
 
 
 
 
 
My health suffered as a result of 
the Museum Fire or flood risk 
 
 
 
 
 
I often worry about the impacts 
that future fires or floods in this 
area could cause  
 
 
 
 
 
Q5.   Please indicate the extent to which the Museum Fire has improved or impaired your 
ability to undertake the following recreation activities in the Flagstaff area. Please 
mark one answer for each statement. If you do not participate in a given recreation 
activity, mark N/A. 
 
Significantly 
impaired 
Moderately 
impaired 
No 
change 
Moderately 
improved 
Significantly 
improved 
N/A 
Hiking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mountain biking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Running or trail 
running 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bird watching or 
other wildlife 
observation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other (please 
explain) ________
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

28	
Ecological Restoration Institute
 
 
 
 
Q8.   Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements 
about flood risk reduction efforts (e.g. sandbags, road closures). Please mark one answer 
for each statement. 
Flood risk reduction 
efforts … 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither agree 
nor disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
…should stay in place 
until flood risk has 
subsided 
 
 
 
 
 
…have made some 
areas of Flagstaff 
unattractive 
 
 
 
 
 
…are inconvenient 
 
 
 
 
 
…are appropriate 
given the current risk 
 
 
 
 
 
…may need to stay in 
place for years 
 
 
 
 
 
Q7.   Please indicate the likelihood that the following events will occur during the next 10 
years. For each option, fill in the chance that the event occurs; where 0 indicates a 0% 
chance and 100 indicates that you are 100% certain that event will occur.  
 
A wildfire occurs anywhere in Coconino County 
 
A wildfire occurs on private property in Coconino County 
 
A wildfire occurs within Flagstaff City limits 
 
A wildfire damages a neighborhood in the City of Flagstaff 
 
A wildfire damages your Coconino County home 
 
 
A post-fire flood occurs anywhere in Coconino County 
 
A post-fire flood occurs on private property in Coconino County 
 
A post-fire flood occurs within Flagstaff City limits 
 
A post-fire flood damages a neighborhood in the City of Flagstaff 
 
A post-fire flood damages your Coconino County home 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
Post- fire flood risk
Wildfire risk
4 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         29
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 2: Communicating about your safety in Flagstaff 
This section of the survey will ask you about how information relating to the Museum Fire and 
post-fire flood risk was communicated to you. 
Q1.   How trustworthy or untrustworthy were the following sources of information for 
making decisions about risk posed to your household related to the Museum Fire? 
Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Very 
trust-
worthy 
Somewhat  
trust-
worthy 
Neutral 
Somewhat 
untrust-
worthy 
Very 
untrust-
worthy 
I didn’t 
use this 
source 
My local fire department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Forest Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet searches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inciweb 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My neighbors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Media (e.g. newspapers, 
TV news, radio) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The City of Flagstaff  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Law enforcement (e.g. 
Sheriff’s Office) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coconino County 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My family and friends 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neighborhood groups 
(e.g. Homeowners 
Association) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social groups (e.g. 
recreation clubs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other: 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q2.   Are you signed up for the Coconino County emergency alert system? Mark one answer. 
Yes 
No 
I don’t know 
5 

30	
Ecological Restoration Institute
 
 
Q3.   How do you expect to be notified about a wildfire or flood event that threatens your 
Flagstaff home? Please mark all that apply.  
By my neighbors or family members 
Local news outlet (e.g. newspaper or TV)  
An in-person visit from a local official  
The Coconino County emergency alert system  
City of Flagstaff government 
Social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter) 
Other (please explain) ____________________________ 
Q5.   Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following 
statements about communication during the Museum Fire and subsequent post-fire 
flood risk. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither agree 
nor disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Communication about the 
Museum Fire and post-fire 
flood risk was clear 
 
 
 
 
 
Enough information was 
available for me to make 
decisions about the 
safety of my household  
 
 
 
 
 
It was easy to find 
answers to questions I 
had about the Museum 
Fire and/or post-fire 
flooding 
 
 
 
 
 
Q4.   Which social media platform(s) do you use to find local emergency information? 
Please mark all that apply.  
Facebook 
Twitter 
Online community forum (e.g. Nextdoor) 
Other (please list) ____________________________ 
None/I do not use social media 
6 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         31
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4: Forest management in the Flagstaff area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 3: Evacuation in Coconino County 
Coconino County uses a three-level system called “Ready, Set, Go!” to communicate with 
residents about wildfire evacuation recommendations. Warnings during each of these three 
stages reflect the following: 
 
 
Ready:  Those at risk are made aware of the risk, but do not have to leave. 
 
Set:  
Those at risk should be prepared to leave immediately. 
Go:  
Immediate evacuation from the area is highly recommended. Roads will be 
closed to high risk areas, and residents deciding to stay may not receive 
assistance from emergency services. 
 
  
The following questions ask you about the Ready, Set, Go! evacuation system.  
Q1.   Please mark to the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following 
statements about the Ready, Set, Go! evacuation system. Please mark one answer for 
each statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
People expect to be notified  
by professionals about when 
to evacuate 
 
 
 
 
 
The Ready, Set, Go! warning 
system for evacuation is clear 
 
 
 
 
 
The Ready, Set, Go! warning 
system is the best way to 
ensure the safety of residents 
in my community 
 
 
 
 
 
The Ready, Set, Go! warning 
system will not affect my 
plans during a wildfire 
 
 
 
 
 
Residents only need to 
evacuate if they are contacted 
as part of the Ready, Set, Go!  
warning system 
 
 
 
 
 
All three levels of the Ready, 
Set, Go! warning system will 
occur during wildfires 
 
 
 
 
 
I know how I would be 
contacted about evacuation 
using the Ready, Set, Go! system 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

32	
Ecological Restoration Institute
 
 
Section 4: Forest management in the Flagstaff area 
The following questions ask for your opinions about forest management in and around the City 
of Flagstaff. 
Q1.   Please indicate how important or unimportant it is to protect the following values 
from potential wildfire impacts in the Flagstaff area. Please mark one answer for each 
statement. 
 
Very 
unimportant 
Moderately 
unimportant 
Neither 
important nor 
unimportant 
Moderately 
important 
Very 
important 
Watershed health 
and water quality 
 
 
 
 
 
Forest health 
 
 
 
 
 
Recreation 
opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
Local wildlife 
 
 
 
 
 
Air quality 
 
 
 
 
 
Scenic views 
 
 
 
 
 
Commercial timber 
 
 
 
 
 
Tourism revenue 
 
 
 
 
 
Local businesses 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety of life and 
property 
 
 
 
 
 
Q3.   Have you ever been evacuated from your home during a wildfire prior to the Museum 
Fire? This could be any home you have lived in in the past. Please mark one answer.  
Yes 
No 
I’m not sure 
Q2.   Was your Flagstaff home placed under evacuation using the Ready, Set, Go! system 
during the Museum Fire? Please mark all that apply. 
No 
Yes 
 
My home was at the “Ready” level 
My home was at the “Set” level 
My home was at the “Go” level 
8 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         33
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q2.   Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following 
statements about forest management around Flagstaff. Please mark one answer for 
each statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Forest management has 
decreased the likelihood of a 
wildfire impacting my home  
 
 
 
 
 
Forest management has 
decreased the likelihood of a 
flood impacting my home  
 
 
 
 
 
I would like to see forest 
management accelerated 
around Flagstaff  
 
 
 
 
 
Forest management should be 
a priority for Flagstaff officials 
 
 
 
 
 
Wildfire risk to Flagstaff is 
mostly from public lands (e.g. 
National Forests, City or State 
lands) 
 
 
 
 
 
Wildfire risk to Flagstaff is 
mostly from private lands 
 
 
 
 
 
Forest management has 
negatively impacted recreation 
in the Flagstaff area 
 
 
 
 
 
Please continue to the next page 
9 

34	
Ecological Restoration Institute
 
 
Q3.   Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following 
statements about wildfire risk in the Flagstaff area. Please mark one answer for each 
statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Enough is being done to address fire 
risk on public lands around Flagstaff 
 
 
 
 
 
Enough is being done to address fire 
risk on private lands around 
Flagstaff 
 
 
 
 
 
I could do more to reduce wildfire 
risk to my Flagstaff home 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility for protecting homes 
from wildfire lies primarily with the 
homeowner 
 
 
 
 
 
Property owners should be  
required by law to manage fire- 
prone vegetation around their home
 
 
 
 
 
Q4.   Please indicate how acceptable or unacceptable you find the following strategies for 
financing forest management to reduce wildfire risk in the Flagstaff area. Please mark 
one answer for each statement. 
 
Very 
unacceptable 
Moderately 
unacceptable 
Neutral 
Moderately 
acceptable 
Very 
acceptable 
Increased city taxes  
 
 
 
 
 
Increased property tax 
 
 
 
 
 
Increased fees for 
household utilities 
 
 
 
 
 
No additional fees for 
forest management 
 
 
 
 
 
Other________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
Q5.  Please indicate below how much you would be willing to pay a month to support 
wildfire risk reduction in and around Flagstaff. Please write a dollar amount in the box.  
 
 
$ 
a month 
10 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         35
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q7.   Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following 
statements about the Museum Fire. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Fire is a natural part of the 
landscape around Flagstaff 
 
 
 
 
 
The landscape will recover 
from the impacts of the 
Museum Fire 
 
 
 
 
 
The Museum Fire had a 
beneficial impact on the 
health of this landscape 
 
 
 
 
 
The Museum Fire negatively 
impacted recreation 
opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
Q6.   Please indicate how acceptable or unacceptable you find the following forest 
management outcomes. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Very 
unacceptable 
Moderately 
unacceptable 
Neutral 
Moderately 
acceptable 
Very 
acceptable 
Smoke or reduced air 
quality 
 
 
 
 
 
More open forests  
 
 
 
 
 
Temporarily reduced 
recreation access to 
manage forests 
 
 
 
 
 
Prescribed fire 
 
 
 
 
 
Presence of residual 
materials removed during 
forest management  
 
 
 
 
 
Temporary roads 
 
 
 
 
 
Burned areas 
 
 
 
 
 
11 

36	
Ecological Restoration Institute
 
 
 
 
Q8.   Please mark the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements 
about the Museum Fire. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neutral 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Firefighting response to the 
Museum Fire was adequate 
 
 
 
 
 
Flood risk after the Museum 
Fire was preventable 
 
 
 
 
 
Efforts to address flood risk 
after the Museum Fire were 
adequate 
 
 
 
 
 
The Museum Fire was not a 
typical fire for this area 
 
 
 
 
 
The Museum Fire was preventable 
 
 
 
 
 
Flagstaff was well prepared for an 
event like the Museum Fire 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 5: Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project (FWPP)  
City of Flagstaff residents had the opportunity to support the funding for the “Forest Health 
and Water Supply Protection Project” (Question 405) on the 2012 vote ballot. This municipal 
bond project would finance up to $10 million to support planning and implementation of forest 
health and water supply protection on U.S. Forest Service, State and City lands in the Flagstaff 
area. This effort later became known as the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project (FWPP) 
after it was passed.  
The following questions ask for your thoughts on the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project. 
Q1.   Do you remember how you voted for Question 405, “Forest Health and Water Supply 
Protection Project” in 2012? Please mark one answer. 
 
I voted in support 
I voted in opposition 
I don’t remember 
I did not vote 
I did not live in the City of Flagstaff during the 2012 vote 
I was not old enough to vote in 2012 
12 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         37
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q1.   Are you aware of the reported cause of the Museum Fire? Please mark one answer. 
 
Yes 
No 
Q2.   Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following 
statements. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neutral 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Partnerships between the City, 
U.S. Forest Service, and other 
organizations are the best way 
to address fire risk to Flagstaff 
 
 
 
 
 
More money should be 
invested in FWPP 
 
 
 
 
 
Efforts like FWPP mean that 
less action is needed to address 
fire risk on my private property 
 
 
 
 
 
Forest management under 
FWPP has reduced the risk of 
wildfires in Flagstaff 
 
 
 
 
 
Forest management under FWPP 
has reduced the risk of flooding  
in Flagstaff  
 
 
 
 
 
I would support future initiatives 
like FWPP to reduce wildfire and 
flood risk in Flagstaff  
 
 
 
 
 
All recent forest management 
around Flagstaff is tied to FWPP 
 
 
 
 
 
Please continue to the next page 
13 
Section 6: Museum Fire cause 

38	
Ecological Restoration Institute
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 7: Background information 
The following questions ask for some basic information about your household. All information 
provided in this survey will remain private and is not tied to you in any way. 
Q1.   Please mark whether you own or rent the property that this survey was sent to. Please 
mark one answer. 
 
Own 
Rent 
Q2.   Please mark which gender you identify as. Please select one answer. 
Male 
Female 
Other 
Q3.  In what year were you born?   
 
YYYY (e.g. 1978) 
Q5.   Are you or have you ever been employed by an industry or organization associated 
with the following? Mark all that apply.  
Forestry or wood products 
Firefighting or fire management 
Public safety, law enforcement or emergency management 
Insurance or real estate 
Recreation and tourism 
Water or water management 
I have never been employed in any of these industries 
Q4.  Are you currently a student in higher education? (e.g. at NAU, Coconino College). 
Please mark one answer. 
 
Yes 
No 
14 

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         39
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q6.  Approximately how many years have you lived in Flagstaff?   
 
(e.g. 15) 
Q8.   Please indicate your race/ethnicity below. Select all that apply. 
American Indian or Alaskan Native 
Asian 
Black or African-American 
Hispanic or Latino 
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander 
White/Caucasian 
Other 
Q7.   Please indicate the highest level of education that you have completed. Please 
choose one.   
Elementary school 
High school diploma or GED 
Associate’s degree 
Technical or trade school 
Bachelor’s degree or other four-year degree 
Master’s degree 
Professional degree (e.g. MD, DSS, DVM, JD) 
Doctorate degree (e.g. Ph.D., EdD) 
Q9.   Which of the following best describes the total annual income of this household 
before taxes? If you are retired, please indicate the amount of money you receive 
from your annual retirement benefits. Please mark one answer. 
Less than $20,000 per year 
$20,000 to 39,999 per year 
$40,000 to $59,999 per year 
$60,000 to $79,999 per year 
$80,000 to $99,999 per year 
$100,000 to $149,999 per year 
$150,000 to $199,999 per year 
$200,000 to $249,999 per year 
$250,000 or more per year 
15 

40	
Ecological Restoration Institute

Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents         41

42	
Ecological Restoration Institute
About the ERI White Paper Series: Issues in Forest Restoration 
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines 
ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with 
respect to its health, integrity and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic 
trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once-diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to 
damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers 
on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural 
processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every 
forest restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers 
elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does 
not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1. 	 Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. 	 Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. 	 Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected  
Literature and Surveys
4. 	 Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from  
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
5. 	 Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona:  
A Case Study of Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. 	 Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations  
in Northern Arizona
7. 	 Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. 	 Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. 	 Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. 	What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research  
Synthesis for Practitioners
11. 	Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. 	Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. 	Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. 	Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on  
Navajo Tribal Forest Lands
15. 	Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16. 	Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. 	A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. 	Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. 	The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. 	Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. 	Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. 	The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
23. 	Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West
24. 	Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape  
Restoration Projects
25. 	Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West
26. 	Wildfire Trends Across the Western US: Forest Fires Have Increased in Size, Severity, and Frequency 
Across Western Forests

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
