The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and 
economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based 
research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk 
 
By Melanie Colavito and Catrin Edgeley  
Introduction 
Communities across the western United States are increasingly affected by uncharacteristic wildfires and 
post-wildfire flooding. Over the past 10 years, the community of Flagstaff, Arizona, has experienced im-
pactful wildfires and post-fire flooding. In 2019, the Museum Fire burned 1,961 acres in the Dry Lake Hills 
north of Flagstaff where forest thinning had been underway as part of the Flagstaff Watershed Protection 
Project (FWPP). The FWPP was funded through a $10 million voter-approved bond in 2012 to support fuels 
reduction work on key watersheds that support the community of Flagstaff. The FWPP effort was catalyzed 
by the 2010 Schultz Fire, which caused between $133–147 million dollars in damage from fire and severe 
post-fire flooding. Although the Museum Fire has not yet resulted in the predicted post-fire flooding, it still 
galvanized significant community response to prevent flood damage.  
Resident Survey 
We conducted a survey of Flagstaff residents to understand their experiences with the fire and post-fire 
flood risk. The survey addressed five broad topics: 1) the respondent’s experience with the Museum Fire; 2) 
communication of emergency information during the Museum Fire; 3) evacuation experiences and the 
Ready, Set, Go! (RSG) evacuation system; 4) opinions regarding forest management in the Flagstaff area, 
including the FWPP; and 5) basic demographic information. We received a total of 786 completed question-
naires using mail and online survey administration techniques—from those living within the evacuation 
zone for the fire and from those within the flood risk zone for the fire.  
Findings and Recommendations 
Based on our findings, we developed a set of evidence-based recommendations for decision-makers to facil-
itate and support community adaptation and safety during wildfire and post-fire flooding events. 
 
Communication During the Museum Fire 
• 
Virtual public meetings to communicate with residents during the fire were well attended. We recom-
mend officials continue to stream in-person meetings on multiple platforms to reach a wider audience. 
• 
Respondents were most trusting of local organizations and entities, such as local Forest Service units 
and local fire departments. We recommend using these entities to communicate with the public during 
fires. 
• 
Many respondents found communication of information about flooding unclear, predominantly because 
they were uncertain about whether it was relevant to them. Local entities responsible for communicating 
about flood risk may need to provide more detailed information for residents to make decisions about 
the safety of their homes regarding flood risk. 
• 
Many respondents had signed up for the Coconino County alert system and received alerts during the 
Museum Fire. We recommend the county continue to use the system to communicate to residents during 
an emergency and maintain efforts to encourage residents to sign up for alerts. 
 
     November 2020 

Ready, Set, Go Evacuation Notification System  
The results indicate that while RSG is clear to residents in theory, there is confusion about the implemen-
tation of this system. Clarification around RSG to improve evacuation can take several forms: 
 
• 
High dependence on official evacuation notices 
among survey respondents indicates a clear need to 
provide residents with knowledge that can help 
them make evacuation decisions autonomously. 
Creating and sharing resources and information 
with residents about fire behavior, possible thresh-
olds for evacuation, and evacuation decision-
making can encourage a reduced reliance on in-
person communication and increase public safety. 
• 
Many respondents expressed confusion regarding 
whether all three RSG levels will occur, and wheth-
er they will be announced incrementally from 
“ready,” to “set,” to “go.” Wider communication 
about the RSG system, with more detail about how 
it may be implemented under different scenarios, 
can help clarify this uncertainty. 
• 
Advanced public listing of outlets where RSG 
evacuation warnings will be communicated and 
updated can streamline public information receipt 
during fires. Survey findings indicate that many 
Flagstaff residents are signed up for the Coconino County emergency alert system, but are not aware 
that they will receive evacuation notices through that platform. Providing resources that help residents 
connect communication systems with their uses could alleviate stress and encourage the use of trust-
worthy information sources during wildfires. 
• 
Many respondents were confused by incorrect place names in evacuation notices during the Museum 
Fire. Confirmation that neighborhood or subdivision names are accurate in emergency messaging be-
fore they are publicly shared can reduce confusion and improve public response time to notifications. 
Use of maps to present evacuation information can eliminate further uncertainty associated with di-
verse names used by different populations for the same location. 
• 
Many evacuated residents expected to be notified that RSG for their neighborhoods had been lifted or 
relaxed through the Coconino County emergency alert system so they could return home, but did not 
receive any information through this channel. Clear communication about 1) when and where RSG 
evacuation notices have been lifted or reduced, and 2) where residents will be able to access the most 
up-to-date information about their neighborhood will be beneficial for evacuees during future fires. 
 
Many challenges associated with the implementation of RSG are not unique to Flagstaff. Lessons learned 
from respondent experiences with RSG offer opportunities to further improve the safety of its residents. 
 
Post-Fire Flood Risk  
Local experiences with the 2010 Schultz Fire influenced public perceptions and expectations for flooding 
and flood risk management following the Museum Fire. As flood risk is likely to remain in areas 
downslope of the burned area long after a fire event, addressing resident concerns and misconceptions re-
mains important. Findings from this survey support the following management implications: 
 
• 
Survey respondents demonstrated a strong understanding of the connectivity between wildfires and 
post-fire flooding; however, those evacuated in fire risk areas often have different experiences and 
perceptions to those in flood risk areas that should be considered during communication and outreach. 
• 
Maintaining communication about post-fire flood risk between local agencies and residents is critical 
to encourage continued awareness downslope of the Museum Fire burn scar. Support for long-term 
mitigation to address post-fire flooding by respondents in the flood risk area suggests these efforts 
should span multiple years, and can benefit from communication across the greater Flagstaff area to 
maintain support. 
 
A variety of organizations and agencies shared infor-
mation with the public about fire risk, evacuation, sup-
pression progress, and resource availability during the 
Museum Fire. Photo by Catrin Edgeley 

• 
Rapid public communication, such as in-person and virtual public meetings, about flood risk while the 
Museum Fire was still burning was well received and attended by respondents. We recommend that 
officials continue to introduce flood risk information early and through a range of communication 
channels, taking care to highlight which neighborhoods or areas that information is pertinent to. 
• 
Respondents indicated willingness to see flood mitigation efforts, such as sand bags and Jersey barri-
ers, maintained in order to reduce future flood risk. Residents in the flood risk zone were less likely to 
state that flood mitigation measures should be maintained, suggesting they may be experiencing some 
fatigue in living with the mitigation measures. This might warrant additional communication with 
these areas about the reasons for keeping the measures in place. 
 
The results illustrate that addressing post-fire flood risk should largely focus on providing residents with 
information about why flood mitigation measures should remain in place, where they can access resources 
to supplement their flood mitigation measures, and how flood risk reduction efforts might be funded in the 
future. Providing residents with information about flood risk and mitigation will continue to be important, 
as the potential for flooding is still present despite recent dry monsoon seasons. 
 
Forest and Fire Management  
Survey findings indicate that although the conditions surrounding the Museum Fire concerned many resi-
dents, they did not substantially reduce public support for future forest management efforts.  
 
• 
High public support for active forest management through 
proactive and collaborative approaches seems likely to con-
tinue following the Museum Fire. 
• 
Survey respondents indicated a preference for collaborative 
forest management across agencies, governments, and or-
ganizations to address wildfire risk and forest management. 
A significant portion of respondents stated an interest in the 
continuation of FWPP or the introduction of a similar bond 
format to reduce fire and flood risk in the future. 
• 
Efforts to implement additional taxation for Flagstaff resi-
dents to support forest management may benefit from a pro-
rated approach that accounts for annual household income. 
• 
Respondents largely recognize they are responsible for re-
ducing fire risk on their properties. High awareness that 
FWPP does not reduce this need indicates that many Flag-
staff residents may be receptive to resident-focused outreach efforts and resources that they can use to 
manage vegetation and structure risk on their property. Practices that are shared and promoted among 
residents should highlight the benefits of shared responsibility for wildfire risk reduction. 
 
Under these collaborative conditions, local government and land management agencies have a relative 
amount of flexibility given widespread public support for and recognition of the need for forest restoration 
and wildfire and post-fire flood risk reduction. 
 
Conclusion 
Looking forward, Flagstaff officials can explore several paths to enhance communication and public un-
derstanding of evacuation during fires and decisions regarding flood risk mitigation measures. Public sup-
port for forest management in the Flagstaff area remains high, but there are opportunities for increased 
public participation in forest management in the future.  
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following white paper: 
Edgeley, C.M., and M.M. Colavito. 2020. Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: 
A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 40 p. 
 
Contact: Melanie Colavito, Melanie.Colavito@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. 
View of a slope burned by the Museum Fire. 
Photo by Catrin Edgeley 
