ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Working Paper 44
Mitigating Postfire 
Runoff and Erosion in the 
Southwest using Hillslope 
and Channel Treatments
January 2021
SOUTHWEST 
FIRE     SCIENCE 
CONSORTIUM

Author: Henry Grover
Reviewers: Anna Jaramillo-Scarborough, US Forest Service, Southwestern Region; Rich Schwab, 
National Park Service, National Wildfire Coordinating Group; Carolyn Sieg, US Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station; Pete Robichaud, US Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station; 
Barb Satink Wolfson, Southwest Fire Science Consortium; Andi Thode, Professor of Fire Ecology and 
Fire Science, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University; Amy Waltz, Director of Science Delivery, 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Cover photo: An incised channel created by the erosion of a drainage after the Cerro Grande Fire in 2000 near Los Alamos, 
NM. The view is upstream and the blue backpack is about 3 feet tall. The incision seen in this photo was after the wildfire and 
subsequent rain storm; this drainage had no definite banks prior to the storm. Photo by John A. Moody, US Geological Survey
Please use the following citation when referencing this working paper:
Grover, H. 2021. Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments. ERI Working 
Paper No. 44. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 11 pp.
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The international Society for Ecological Restoration 
defines ecological restoration as “the process of assisting the recovery of an ecosystem that has been 
degraded, damaged, or destroyed,” and that “the goal of ecological restoration is to return a degraded 
ecosystem to its historic trajectory.” 1
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last 150 
years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and lack 
their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible 
to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests 
centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of the Intermountain West. 
By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to 
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and policy makers 
to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science used to make management 
decisions and scientists working on the questions managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring 
together localized efforts to develop scientific information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the 
ground through an inclusive and open process.	
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and practitioners 
in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide guidance on management decisions 
surrounding ecological restoration topics. This publication would not have been possible without funding 
from the USDA Forest Service and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products 
does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
1	 Society for Ecological Restoration. “What is Ecological Restoration?” https://www.ser-rrc.org/what-is-ecological-restoration/

Table of Contents
Introduction......................................................................................... 1
Hillslope and Channel Erosion............................................................ 1
Postfire Assessments Inform Treatment Recommendations................ 2
The Runoff/Erosion Response and Soil Burn Severity..........................2
Determining Values at Risk and Justifying Treatments.........................2
Hillslope Erosion Treatments............................................................... 3
Erosion Barriers .................................................................................3
Mulch.................................................................................................3
Postfire Seeding...................................................................................6
Channel Erosion Treatments................................................................ 7
Alluvial Fan Repair and Protection.....................................................7
Road Treatments.................................................................................. 8
Conclusions and Management Recommendations.............................. 9
Literature Cited.................................................................................. 10

Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44
1
Introduction 
Wildfires in the southwestern US are getting larger, more frequent, 
and more severe due to changing climatic conditions like rising 
temperatures and prolonged drought (Singleton et al. 2018, 
Mueller et al. 2020). Catastrophic wildfire events directly impact 
communities, ecosystems, and cultural resources—and can pose 
continuing hazards long after the fire is extinguished. Flooding 
and erosion from heavy rainstorms are postfire emergencies 
caused by the severe loss of vegetation cover and the alteration 
of soil conditions. Because these postfire impacts can pose safety 
concerns and threaten property and infrastructure, there is a need 
to understand postfire treatments and their effectiveness toward 
ecosystem resilience and community protection. 
The Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER) program 
is the primary response used by all federal land management 
agencies to address emergency postfire soil and slope stabilization 
issues. This federally funded program coordinates its postfire 
assessment and implementation efforts with state and tribal 
governments, local agencies, and emergency management 
departments (National Interagency Fire Center 2020). Both the 
US Department of Agriculture and US Department of Interior 
provide a guidebook to identify post-wildfire threats to values 
at risk on federal lands and steps to take immediate actions to 
manage those risks before the first damaging storm (Rowley 
2020). Selecting the right treatment is a complex decision, but 
understanding the treatment costs, implementation methods, and 
ecological impacts can help inform that decision. The purpose of 
this working paper is to compare the effectiveness of treatments 
to mitigate the two most common forms of erosion, hillslope and 
channel erosion. With a focus on severely burned ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa) and mixed-conifer forest soils of the Southwest, 
this paper includes land management recommendations and 
treatment implications as well as examples of lessons learned and 
trade-offs among methods. 
Hillslope and Channel Erosion 
Hillslope and channel erosion are the two main types of 
erosion that land managers and BAER teams work to 
prevent. Hillslope erosion (Fig. 1A) is often broken down 
into three categories of increasing magnitude 1) rain splash, 
2) sheet, and 3) concentrated flow or rill and gully erosion. 
Rain splash erosion occurs when raindrops hit bare soil 
and detach particles. Water flowing over weakened soils 
and entraining soil particles within it drives sheet erosion. 
Natural recovery of rain splash and sheet erosion usually 
occurs within three years of a fire when soil surface cover 
and water infiltration increase. Rills form when sheet flow 
becomes concentrated into small incisions on hillslopes. 
Rills can develop into larger more efficient flow paths 
known as gullies which can continue to grow until they 
reach bedrock or larger substrate materials that can no 
longer be eroded (Neary et al. 2012). Channel erosion (Fig. 
1B) occurs when preexisting channels become overwhelmed 
by high peak flows and enlarge rapidly. Rills, gullies, and 
channels create much higher rates of runoff and erosion 
and can continue long after rain splash and sheet erosion 
subside (Neary et al. 2012). Because of this, treatments are 
often focused on preventing these types of erosion from 
beginning. Water-saturated debris flows are single large 
erosion events often triggered by longer duration, high 
intensity storms on steep hillslopes or in channels (Cannon 
et al. 2001, Neary et al. 2012). Although rare, these events 
are the largest and most destructive, making them both 
difficult to predict and prevent.
Figure 1. Postfire sheet and rill erosion on the 1994 Buffalo Creek Fire (A) and channel erosion on the 2000 Cerro Grande Fire (B). Courtesy of the USDA 
“After Fire: Toolkit for the Southwest” website photo library.

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44    Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments
2
Postfire Assessments Inform Treatment 
Recommendations
A wildfire that triggers a BAER assessment varies among 
agencies but is largely driven by fire size. Burn severity, 
topography, and proximity to values at risk are also factors. 
USDA Forest Service BAER guidelines recommend 
assessments on fires greater than 500 acres, but there is no 
minimum size on DOI lands. Teams consist of a leader who 
requests specialists depending on anticipated values at risk that 
need protection, the complexity of the fire and potential for 
postfire damage. BAER teams arrive at roughly 40–60 percent 
fire containment and submit their assessment report to line 
officers within seven days of 100 percent containment of the 
wildfire on USDA lands and no more than 21 days from fire 
discovery on DOI lands. 
The Runoff/Erosion Response and Soil Burn Severity
In the Southwest, a monsoon season typically brings an end 
to fire season. When these high rainfall intensity storms occur 
after wildfires, the likelihood of large runoff and erosion events 
increases with rates up to three orders of magnitude higher 
than pre-fire conditions (Adams and Comrie 1997, Moody and 
Martin 2009, Wagenbrenner and Robichaud 2014). Moderate 
and especially high soil burn severity can dramatically reduce 
water infiltration and soil resistance to erosion. Therefore, an 
important step in assessing postfire risks is creating a soil burn 
severity (SBS) map. SBS maps are a combination of satellite-
derived Burned Area Reflectance Classification (BARC) maps 
(Key and Benson 2006) and field-based data including postfire 
ground cover, soil structure, soil water repellency, ash color and 
depth, and fine root scorch (Parsons et al. 2010). 
Determining Values at Risk and Justifying 
Treatments
BAER teams must also determine the values at risk, such as 
human life and safety, property, and critical natural or cultural 
resources, from potential erosion and flooding. Wildfire 
incident management teams often have a list of values 
generated by the Wildfire Decision Support System (WFDSS) 
and agency administrators, which provide the BAER team 
a good starting point. Wildfire values at risk are usually not 
consistent with watershed response values because flooding 
and erosion can be transported outside burned areas. Local 
knowledge is essential in this process, especially when BAER 
teams are not familiar with resources; thus, an up-to-date GIS 
database of potential values at risk for each management unit 
can be a large asset. 
To justify treatments for mitigating risks to values, the 
DOI and USDA mandate that teams complete a cost-risk 
analysis. The cost-risk analysis consists of weighing the 
potential damage to values when no treatments have been 
applied compared to the costs of applying treatments. To 
provide a better understanding of how BAER funding 
is justified, we examined values at risk from the 30 
southwestern fires with the most expensive BAER treatment 
requests. Life and safety was the highest-ranking value 
on 26 fires, and public property was the second highest 
(Robichaud et al. 2014, Fig. 2). Federal land management 
agencies do not have the legislative authority to spend 
money outside of their jurisdictions. Because of this, 
agencies usually can only justify treatments based on values 
on federal property, but protecting private property is 
sometimes cited in funding requests (Fig. 2). When teams 
identify values at risk that are not on federal property, they 
collaborate with the Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(NRCS), and state, county, and local land management 
agencies to ensure that partner needs are met. 
While it is relatively straightforward to assign a value to 
roads, campgrounds, and buildings, it is more difficult to assign 
dollar amounts to non-market values. As a rule, BAER teams 
do not assign dollar values to human life and safety. Other non-
market values include water quality, endangered species, soil 
productivity, and other ecosystem services. Efforts are currently 
underway to better estimate non-market resource values in 
the Southwest; however, currently many BAER teams rely on 
experience to make these judgments. Tools and spreadsheets, 
such as the values at risk or VAR lite tool, have been 
developed to make these comparisons more consistent, but 
standardization is difficult from fire to fire as treatment cost, 
effectiveness, and values can vary widely (Calkin et al. 2007). 
Models are used to quantify the cost risks by quantifying the 
likelihood and extent of damage. For example, using the Forest 
Service Erosion Risk Management Tool (ERMiT) assessment, 
teams can predict soil loss from hillslopes that are untreated, 
seeded, or straw mulched at different rates (Robichaud 2008). 
Teams can then compare these estimates with the value of 
the soil and the cost of mulching to justify a treatment. On 
many wildfires in the Southwest, moderate and high soil burn 
severity is patchy, on low slopes, or does not pose great risks 
to values. In this scenario, natural recovery of the burned areas 
is usually the best course of action and BAER teams often 
recommend closing the fire perimeter to facilitate recovery and 
reduce risks to life and safety. 
Understanding Erosion Mitigation Results:  
Context is Key
One must consider many factors when trying to interpret 
results from postfire erosion and runoff mitigation 
monitoring studies. For example, soils derived from a 
rhyolitic parent material are more susceptible to erosion 
than ones derived from limestone (Moosdorf et al. 2018). 
Coarse textured soils are more likely to be water repellent 
than fine soils (DeBano et al. 1970). Topographic features 
such as slope, slope length, concavity, and hillslope to 
channel connectivity are major drivers of downslope 
impacts (Moody et al. 2013). Aspect and biotic community 
can have large effects on vegetative recovery postfire 
(Robichaud et al. 2013b). These factors make it difficult 
to find comparable experimental units for study in postfire 
research, especially at relevant scales such as watersheds 
(Moody et al. 2013). Thus, extrapolating research results 
from one fire or one geographic region to another requires 
careful consideration of the context of those studies, which 
this working paper tries to accomplish.

Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44
3
Hillslope Erosion Treatments
Hillslope erosion treatments are designed to reduce postfire 
hillslope erosion and runoff from fire-affected hillslopes and 
to protect downstream resources by reducing flooding and 
sediment deposition (Robichaud et al. 2010). Hillslope erosion 
treatments include three major categories: 1) erosion barriers, 
2) mulching, and 3) seeding (Napper 2006). The majority of 
recent hillslope treatments include straw mulch, wood shred 
mulch, and less often seeding (Fig. 3). 
Erosion Barriers
Erosion barriers are linear treatments installed on the hillslope 
contour with the intent of restricting sheet flow and trapping 
soil behind them. Straw wattles and contour felled logs were 
once widely used hillslope treatments, but their use declined 
from 2000–2010 as more effective mulching treatments were 
developed (Robichaud et al. 2010; Fig. 3). Erosion barriers are 
expensive and especially likely to fail during the short duration 
high intensity rainfall events common in the Southwest as 
they do not provide ground cover and tend to channelize flow 
(Robichaud et al. 2010). 
Mulch
The use of postfire mulching has increased dramatically 
in recent years, as it has proven to be effective at reducing 
hillslope erosion (Robichaud et al. 2010; Fig. 3). Robichaud et 
al. (2010) reviewed studies on the effectiveness of three types of 
commonly used materials: 1) hydromulch, 2) agricultural straw 
mulch, and 3) wood shred mulch. Additionally, soil tackifiers 
such as polysaccharides or polyacrylamides have been applied 
as hillslope treatments either on their own or in conjunction 
with mulches (Robichaud et al. 2010). 
Trends in Southwestern BAER Funding
To compare trends in BAER hillslope and channel 
erosion treatment funding allocation over time, we 
compiled treatment requests for the 30 most expensive 
wildfires in the Southwest region using the BAER 
burned area reports database (Robichaud et al. (2014); 
Figs. 3 and 5). Selecting the most expensive fires created 
a focus on the treatment used when risks to important 
values were high and large expenditures justified. Usually, 
only a fraction of each original request is funded but data 
on final costs were not available. The first major takeaway 
is that BAER expenditures can be many millions of 
dollars, making it important to use the most cost-effective 
treatments when possible. Throughout this publication, 
we connect changes in expenditures with effectiveness 
results to show how management strategies and scientific 
results have interacted in the last 20 years.  
Hydromulch and Soil Tackifiers
Hydromulching can be applied via aircraft or adjacent to 
roads using vehicles. It consists of water, fiber mulch, and a 
tackifier mixed into a slurry and sprayed onto the soil surface. 
Hydromulch is expensive at $1,684 to $4,348 per acre, 
breaks down quickly after application, and can concentrate 
flows on longer slope lengths (Napper 2006). Two studies 
at catchment scales in Colorado and California showed 
that hydromulch cover was less than 10 percent, 2.5 and 5 
months after application, following a series of high intensity 
rainfall events from initial cover values of 64 percent and 21 
percent, respectively (Robichaud et al. 2013c). Furthermore, 
hydromulching did not reduce erosion or runoff during that 
Figure 2. Values at risk (VAR) 
for the 30 largest BAER 
funding requests in the Forest 
Service Southwestern Region, 
2000–2019. VAR rank refers 
to the order in which each 
value appeared. Adapted from 
Robichaud et al. (2014).

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44    Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments
4
time (Robichaud et al. 2013c). Polyacrylamide was tested on 
two sets of paired watersheds in southern California but also 
did not reduce erosion rates (Wohlgemuth and Robichaud 
2007). Hydromulch and soil tackifiers are not recommended 
or widely used due to their high cost and low effectiveness 
compared to straw and wood shred mulches.
Straw Mulch
Agricultural straw mulching has become a widely used postfire 
erosion mitigation tool due to its effectiveness at reducing 
erosion and runoff, relatively low cost, and speed of installation 
(Napper 2006, Fig. 3). These attributes make straw mulching 
an effective tool at mitigating risks to even the most important 
values, such as human life and safety and public property, 
by reducing runoff peak flows and erosion that can damage 
infrastructure. Its relatively low cost per acre compared to wood 
shred mulching also make it useful when less critical values are 
at risk, such as municipal water sources (Table 1). Finally, straw 
mulch can be bought and shipped economically, and because of 
its low density is quickly installed, an important consideration 
in the Southwest where damaging storms can arrive days to 
weeks after fires burn. Potential risks of straw mulching are the 
Figure 3. Total funding 
requests for hillslope 
treatments and percentages 
by treatment for the 30 largest 
BAER funding requests in the 
Forest Service Southwestern 
Region, 2000–2019. Dollar 
values are in millions and are 
adjusted for inflation to 2019 
values.
Hillslope treatment attribute
Wood Shred Mulch
Straw Mulch
Seeding
Effectiveness high intensity rainfall
High
Moderate
Low
Effectiveness low intensity rainfall
High
High
Moderate-Low
Effectiveness on slopes (40–65%)
High
Moderate
Low
Function 0-1 year
High
High-Moderate
Low-Very Low
Function 1-3 year
High
Moderate
Depends on establishment
Function 3+ years
High
Low
Depends on establishment
Resistance to wind displacement
High
Low
Moderate
Resistance to water displacement
High
Moderate
Very Low pre-germination
Implementation speed
Slow
Fast-Moderate
Fast
Risk of invasive species
Very low
High-Moderate
Moderate
Impact on native species
Positive-Neutral
Positive-Neutral
Negative/Unknown
Cost per acre: Avg (Range)
Acre: $1,486 ($357–2,100)
Acre: $930 ($206–1,868)
Acre: $103 ($12–833)
Table 1.  Postfire erosion and runoff hillslope treatment comparison adapted from Napper (2006) and Robichaud et al. (2010). Treatments shown are currently 
the most widely implemented. Costs are from the 30 highest BAER funding requests in the southwestern US. Highlighted cells indicate an attribute’s positive, 
desired effect for that treatment.

Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44
5
introduction of non-native species onto burned areas (Beyers 
2004), as well as its potential for wind to transport it off 
hillslopes, greatly reducing its effectiveness in some situations 
(Copeland et al. 2009, Robichaud et al. 2013a).
Robichaud et al. (2013b, 2013c) studied straw mulching 
treatment effectiveness on four fires throughout the western 
US at hillslope scales and on one fire at small watershed 
scales. On the 2002 Hayman Fire in Colorado and the 
2003 Hot Creek Fire in southern Idaho, straw mulch did 
not reduce hillslope erosion on slopes of 41 and 55 percent, 
respectively, during high intensity storms the first year postfire 
(Wagenbrenner et al. 2006, Robichaud et al. 2013b). Straw 
mulch decreased hillslope erosion on two fires in southeastern 
Washington and northern Idaho with slopes of 50 and 65 
percent, respectively. Researchers attributed this difference in 
effectiveness to greater vegetation recovery on the mulched 
plots in the successful fires, which held mulch in place and 
reduced bare soil cover. On the Hayman Fire, straw mulch 
was effective at reducing both erosion and runoff peak flows 
at larger catchment scales (Robichaud et al. 2013c). Straw 
mulching also decreased soil surface temperature by 12°F 
compared to unmulched locations on the 2000 Cerro Grande 
Fire in New Mexico, reducing evaporation and increasing 
plant growth (Robichaud et al. 2010). This highlights straw 
mulching’s ability to expedite postfire vegetation recovery and 
the importance of post-treatment monitoring (Robichaud et 
al. 2013b). 
One consideration of straw mulching is providing enough 
cover to effectively reduce erosion without suppressing 
native vegetation. In a review of straw mulching studies, a 
ground cover of 60 percent, or roughly 1 ton per acre, was the 
minimum application rate to reduce erosion (Prosdocimi et al. 
2016). In Washington state, mulching depths less than 3 cm 
had positive effects on plant recovery; however, when depths 
exceeded 5 cm recovery was strongly inhibited (Dodson and 
Peterson 2010). On the 2012 High Park Fire in Colorado, 
researchers found a slight positive effect of straw mulching on 
serotinous lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) regeneration three 
years after the fire (Wright and Rocca 2017). 
The introduction of non-native species via straw mulching 
is a common concern in burned areas of the western US. 
Due to its origin in agricultural fields, straw mulch can 
contain many non-native species, which take advantage of 
open ecological niches postfire. On the 1999 Megram Fire in 
northern California, Kruse et al. (2004) found that mulching 
significantly increased the number of non-native species 
present and impeded native species recovery. Practitioners now 
take care to buy certified weed-free straw mulch with mixed 
results. On the 2013 Rim Fire in California, weed-free rice 
straw mulch increased non-native forb and grass cover and 
non-native species richness (Shive et al. 2017). In two years 
of monitoring following the 2013 Silver Fire in New Mexico, 
there was no indication that mulching had introduced non-
native species (Natharius 2015). Straw mulching effects on 
vegetative recovery at six wildfires in the interior Northwest 
and Rocky Mountains 9 to 13 years postfire were generally 
neutral or positive (Bontrager et al. 2019). Mulch had no 
significant effect on understory plant diversity, species richness, 
or cover and non-native cover was low across the study. 
Mulching did increase Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) 
over ponderosa pine establishment but did not change overall 
seedling density (Bontrager et al. 2019). 
Wood Shred Mulch
Wood shred mulch, also known as wood strand or wood straw, 
consists of linear wood fragments usually generated on site 
from burned low-value timber (Fig. 4). Wood shred mulch is a 
new treatment but has gained popularity due to its effectiveness 
at reducing erosion, longevity on hillslopes, resistance to wind 
erosion, and local availability of materials, thus decreasing the 
possibility of invasive species encroachment (Table 1, Fig. 3). This 
comes at a high average cost of implementation of $1,486 per 
acre and a relatively slow implementation time of ≈35 acres/
helicopter/day, due to its high density (Robichaud et al. 2013a). 
Figure 4. Wood shred mulch 
grinding and spreading via 
helicopter, Stickpin Fire, WA. 
Photo credit: Jason Jimenez, 
Colville NF. 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44    Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments
6
Because studies widely recognize it as the most effective 
hillslope treatment, practitioners use wood shred mulch when 
risks are high to important values, such as human life and 
safety and property.
On indoor rainfall and concentrated flow simulations, 
wood shred mixes with greater than 98 percent of fragments 
longer than 2 inches and less than 1 inch wide were the most 
effective at reducing both runoff and erosion on 40 percent 
slopes (Foltz and Wagenbrenner 2010). Favorable results 
were found for both 50 percent and 70 percent cover, leading 
researchers to recommend lower cover values (Foltz and 
Wagenbrenner 2010). Two Southwest fires confirmed the 
importance of long and narrow fragments when, on the 2002 
Indian Fire in Arizona, small wood chips were transported 
off 30–40 percent hillslopes but longer fragments on the 2010 
Schultz Fire remained on hillslopes of 30–65 percent. This 
difference was attributed to the ability for longer fragments 
to interlock, thus reducing their redistribution via runoff 
(Riechers et al. 2008, Robichaud et al. 2013a). On the Hayman 
Fire, wood shred mulch at 51 percent cover on 23 percent 
slopes effectively reduced hillslope erosion from 8.5 to 1.2 
tons/acre during a high-intensity storm the first year postfire 
(Robichaud et al. 2013b). The higher density of wood shred 
has an added benefit of resisting wind transport (Copeland et 
al. 2009), making it more effective than wheat straw on steeper, 
more exposed hillslopes, and hillslopes where plant recovery 
may be slow. Wood shred had more than twice the residence 
time as wheat straw on three fires where both were applied to 
adjacent hillslopes (Robichaud et al. 2013b). The effectiveness 
of wood shred mulching for reducing runoff has not been 
tested at catchment scales, but one study found a 50-percent 
reduction on small (2.7 ft2) and large hillslope (1,076.4 ft2) 
scale plots during the first postfire year at mulching rates of 
77–87 percent cover (Prats et al. 2016). 
Few studies have examined the longer-term ecological 
impacts of wood shred mulching, but short-term studies have 
shown generally positive outcomes. In Portugal, researchers 
found that wood shreds reduced organic matter loss by 88 
percent; however, these gains were not statistically significant 
due to low replication (Prats et al. 2016). On the 2012 High 
Park Fire, wood shred mulching did not change understory 
recovery or plant available nitrogen but increased lodgepole 
pine regeneration four years after fire (Jonas et al. 2019).
Postfire Seeding 
Postfire seeding is a widely used hillslope treatment due 
to its relatively low cost per acre, ease of rapid installation, 
and perceived effectiveness (Table 1). Seeding treatments 
in many parts of the western US have declined; however, 
it was still relatively common within the Southwest region 
from 2000–2009, accounting for 32 percent of total Forest 
Service seeding costs (Peppin et al. 2011). Our more recent 
examination of seeding versus mulching cost requests in the 
Southwest points to an increased use of mulch over time, while 
seeding expenditures have remained relatively flat (Fig. 3). 
Because seeding has a lower chance of success than mulching 
treatments, teams only recommend it in situations where 
risks to values are low or values are less critical, such as soil 
productivity. Often in these cases, natural regeneration is a 
viable and more cost-effective option.
Reviews of postfire seeding effectiveness in the western 
US show that seeding is unlikely to reduce postfire erosion 
and runoff (Robichaud et al. 2000, Beyers 2004, Peppin et al. 
2010). Peppin et al. (2010) found that when using more robust 
effectiveness monitoring methodologies (replicated randomized 
experiments), 0 out of 16 seeding treatments reduced erosion. 
Unpublished BAER monitoring reports found that seeding 
efforts in the Southwest region on the 2013 Silver and 2014 
Signal fires on the Gila National Forest were successful at 
establishing seeded species in mixed-conifer and ponderosa 
pine forest types with elevations from 7,200 to 9,600 ft. Seed 
mixes for both fires consisted of a majority of barley (Hordeum 
vulgare) and native graminoid species. On the 2013 Silver 
Fire, seeding increased canopy cover more than 50 percent and 
significantly decreased percent bare soil when compared to 
unseeded sites (Natharius 2015). Seeding on the 2014 Signal 
Fire increased graminoid cover by 40 percent and total species 
richness the first year postfire but suppressed native forb cover 
the second year postfire (Koehler and Keisow 2016). Bare soil 
cover was similar on seeded (63 percent) and untreated sites 
(68 percent) the first fall postfire but had diverged to 28 and 
63 percent, respectively, by year three. These changes correlate 
with changes in erosion rates on paired seeded and untreated 
north-facing hillslopes with 50 percent slopes (Koehler and 
Keisow 2016). Erosion rates averaged 15.5 and 29 tons/acre 
in 2014 and 0.6 and 6 tons/acre by 2016 on treated hillslope 
and untreated hillslopes, respectively. These successes were 
likely driven by low intensity rainfall directly after seeding, 
which allowed seedlings to establish and not get washed 
away by subsequent higher intensity rainfall (Natharius 2015, 
Koehler and Keisow 2016). Observational BAER effectiveness 
monitoring has also shown seeding establishment on the 2012 
Little Bear and 2015 Slide fires, but no effects on hillslope 
erosion were measured (Anna Jaramillo, Southwest Region 
BAER Coordinator, personal communication).
These results contrast with those of many fires where 
seeding efforts have failed. On the 2010 Schultz Fire, seeding 
was not recommended by the BAER team due to concerns 
about the lack of effectiveness and potential negative effects on 
native recovery, but was ultimately implemented as a treatment 
(Coconino National Forest 2010). High rainfall intensity of 
0.95 inches in 10 min directly after seeding caused seeds to be 
washed off of hillslopes (Neary et al. 2012). Conversely, when 
low precipitation rates occurred after the 2000 Bobcat Fire in 
Colorado, seeded species did not germinate, resulting in no 
change in ground cover or erosion (Wagenbrenner et al. 2006). 
One study examined seeding on randomized plots on three 
fires in ponderosa pine ecosystem types in northern Arizona 
across a range of slopes (5–25 percent) and aspects (Stella et 
al. 2010). Non-native cereal grains, common wheat (Triticum 
aestivum) and annual ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum), along with 
a native seed mix of graminoids and forbs were tested against 
controls (Stella et al. 2010). Although postfire precipitation 
was at or above yearly average, cereal gains only established 
on one fire which had the highest elevation (7,874 ft) and 
annual precipitation (25.4 in) resulting in 13 percent and 10 
percent higher canopy cover on ryegrass and wheat seeded plots 

Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44
7
respectively compared to unseeded controls. This suggests that 
if the main goal for postfire rehabilitation is erosion reduction, 
seeding can provide cover and potentially reduce erosion 
when low rainfall intensity storms predominate on hillslopes 
favorable to recovery. Seeding is a less reliable hillslope treatment 
than wheat straw or wood shred mulching and thus teams 
recommend it only when those options are not practical (Table 
1). Furthermore, current drought conditions combined with 
climate projections for the southwestern US point to weakening 
of the North American monsoon, increasing the likelihood of 
seeding failure (Pascale et al. 2017, Williams et al. 2020).
Additional management considerations of postfire 
seeding are the potential of seeded species outcompeting and 
suppressing native plant recovery, increasing non-native plant 
establishment, or introducing genetically different non-local 
seeds into mixes (Beyers 2004, Peppin et al. 2010, 2014). 
Cereal grains or sterile hybrids that are intended to have short 
(<3 year) residence times have been used recently to decrease 
effects on native recovery (Peppin et al. 2011). Monitoring on 
the 1996 Dome Fire indicated that when using short-lived 
cereal grains, detrimental impacts on native forbs and overstory 
plant recovery can persist after grasses decline (Barclay et al. 
2004). Conversely, seeding successfully reduced non-native 
species cover in moderate to high burn severities both one- 
and two-years postfire. In six out of 11 studies on forested 
regions in the western US, seeding reduced non-native species 
establishment (Peppin et al. 2010).  Research and monitoring 
of the effects of postfire seeding on native and non-native plant 
establishment most often occurs between one- and three-years 
postfire, making it difficult to determine longer-term ecological 
impacts. A better understanding of the legacy impacts of 
postfire seeding at relevant timescales requires long-term 
replicated studies.
Channel Erosion Treatments
Channel treatments range from removing debris and culverts 
to installing check dams, large debris basins, and trash racks 
(Napper 2006). Removal of debris such as logs is a widely 
used and effective channel treatment (Fig. 5, Table 2). Debris 
removal reduces log and sediment entrainment in runoff, which 
can increase channel peak flows and erosion through plugging 
and subsequent failure of downstream infrastructure. Removal 
allows for the passage of runoff through the built environment 
and is useful in reducing threats to life and safety on roadways 
as well as threats to the infrastructure itself. Installation of 
channel treatments was popular until the early 2000s but is 
not common now due to its low effectiveness compared to 
mulching treatments and potential for negative downstream 
impacts (Fig. 5).
Check dams consist of channel-width low dams placed 
at consistent intervals perpendicular to the channel. Straw 
bale check dams are commonly installed in steeper headwater 
channels; however, effectiveness is limited by storage capacity 
and failure. On the 2010 Twitchell Canyon Fire in southern 
Utah, the effectiveness of straw bale dams was evaluated on a 
series of paired treated and untreated catchments (Robichaud 
et al. 2019). Directly after installation of dams at a rate of 
1.6 per acre of watershed, high rainfall intensity combined 
with slow plant recovery and erodible soils created erosion 
rates of 8.7 to 11.5 tons/acre. Check dams were filled quickly 
and trapped only 10–50 percent of sediment per catchment, 
resulting in no significant treatment differences (Robichaud et 
al. 2019). If the potential for debris flows and channel plugging 
still exists after channel clearing, trash racks, deflectors, and 
debris basins are other options on low slope alluvial fans. These 
treatments are usually expensive, require clearing of debris after 
runoff events, and are difficult to install quickly, making them 
a last resort for postfire erosion and runoff mitigation to be 
used when risks to values are high and other options are not 
available (Napper 2006).
Alluvial Fan Repair and Protection
In some extreme examples of postfire runoff and erosion, 
such as the 2010 Schultz Fire in Arizona and the 2012 
Waldo Canyon Fire in Colorado, channel erosion extended 
onto relatively low slope (<10 percent) alluvial fans where 
deposition of sediment from steeper hillslopes would normally 
Channel treatment
Check dam
Channel clear
Deflector
Debris basin
Trash rack
Effectiveness high runoff
Low
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Effectiveness low runoff
Moderate
High
High
High
High
Function 0-1 year
Moderate
High
High
Need maintenance
Need maintenance 
Function 1-3 year
Low
High
High
Need maintenance
Need maintenance 
Function 3+ years
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Need maintenance
Need maintenance 
Implementation speed
Moderate
Fast
Slow
Slow
Slow
Potential for failure
High
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Cost per unit: 
Avg. (Range)
Each: $745 
($112-1,364)
Mile: $16,350 
($1,020-83,333)
Each: $10,456
($227-22,681)
Each: $4,992 
($1,137-8,889)
Each: $9,840
($595-34,091)
Table 2. Comparison of postfire channel erosion treatments. Treatments shown are currently the most widely implemented. Costs are obtained from the 30 
highest BAER funding requests in the Southwest. Highlighted cells indicate an attribute’s positive, desired effect for that treatment. 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44    Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments
8
occur. This caused runoff and sediment to be transported into 
neighborhoods well downstream of the burned area (Neary et 
al. 2012). Although no controlled comparisons of treatment 
effectiveness were made, alluvial fans were restored on both 
fires to mitigate flows and sediment deposition that were 
impacting downstream resources (Rosgen and Rosgen 2013). 
By removing incisions and armoring alluvial fans, runoff can 
spread over a wider area, reducing flow speeds and stream 
power and allowing for increased infiltration and sediment 
settling (Allen Hayden, Natural Channel Design, personal 
communication). These circumstances are beyond the scope 
of the BAER program and are often funded using NRCS 
emergency watershed protection program resources. 
On the 2019 Museum Fire in Arizona, postfire mitigation 
consisted of proactively reducing channel incision and 
increasing infiltration and sediment deposition on low slope 
alluvial fans (Allen Hayden, Natural Channel Design, personal 
communication). This involved armoring steeper (≈10 percent) 
channel sections with cross vane rock weirs, also known 
as grade stabilizers, a technique most often used in stream 
restoration (Napper 2006, Yochum 2014). Robichaud et al. 
(2000) reviewed these features previously and rated them good 
to fair by three survey respondents. Currently, monitoring of 
this technique is ongoing; however, its relatively low cost and 
rapid installation could make it a valuable tool for postfire 
restoration when risks to values are high. 
Road Treatments
Where roads meet channel crossings, teams often anticipate 
damage to culverts and roads. One common road treatment in 
the Southwest is to temporarily remove culverts and close roads 
to allow unhindered passage of flows until postfire hydrology 
has recovered (Foltz et al. 2009). Ditch clearing and armoring 
is another common postfire treatment and involves upgrading 
roadside drainage ditches by removing debris and adding 
protective rocks to prevent culvert plugging (Napper 2006). 
Other techniques for protecting roads at channel crossings 
include increasing culvert size, armored rolling dips, end walls, 
or outsloping (see Napper 2006 for a comprehensive list). Their 
effectiveness has not been tested systematically during high 
runoff events and is beyond the scope of this publication (Foltz 
and Robichaud 2013).
Figure 5. Total funding requests 
for channel treatments and 
percentages by types for 
the 30 largest BAER funding 
requests in the Forest Service 
Southwestern Region between 
2000 and 2018. Dollar values 
are in millions and are adjusted 
for inflation to 2019 values.

Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44
9
Conclusions and Management Recommendations
Erosion and runoff can increase dramatically postfire in the Southwest when high burn 
severity, high rainfall intensity, and steep slopes converge. When treatments are needed, 
encouragingly, postfire funding over the last 20 years has shifted toward the increased 
use of more effective mitigation techniques. While these tools can reduce the risk of 
flooding and erosion, they do not eliminate risk and can become overwhelmed under 
adverse conditions. 
•	
In many instances, BAER program management goals, to protect values at risk 
before the first damaging storm, are achieved by closing burned areas and allowing 
for natural recovery. This action is often preferable due to its low cost and relative 
ease of implementation. 
•	
When important values are at high risk, wood shred mulching or straw mulching 
are most effective at reducing hillslope erosion but costs, speed of implementation, 
wind redistribution, and natural recovery should be considered. 
•	
The most effective methods for reducing risks using channel treatments involve 
removing debris. This can prevent debris from becoming entrained in runoff, thus 
reducing the likelihood of downstream infrastructure plugging and failure. 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44    Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments
10
Adams, D.K., and A.C. Comrie. 1997. The North American 
monsoon. Bulletin of the American Meteorological 
Society, 78: 2197–2213.
Barclay, A.D., J.L. Betancourt, and C.D. Allen. 2004. Effects 
of seeding ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum) on vegetation 
recovery following fire in a ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) forest. International Journal of Wildland 
Fire, 13: 183–194.
Beyers, J. L. 2004. Postfire seeding for erosion control: 
Effectiveness and impacts on native plant 
communities. Conservation Biology, 18: 947–956.
Bontrager, J.D., P. Morgan, A.T. Hudak, and P.R. Robichaud. 
2019. Long-term vegetation response following post-
fire straw mulching. Fire Ecology, 15: 22.
Calkin, D.E., K.D. Hyde, P.R. Robichaud, J.G. Jones, L.E. 
Ashmun, and D. Loeffler. 2007. Assessing post-fire 
values-at-risk with a new calculation tool. USDA 
Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-
GTR-205. Fort Collins, CO.
Cannon, S.H., E.R. Bigio, and E. Mine. 2001. A process for 
fire-related debris flow initiation, Cerro Grande fire, 
New Mexico. Hydrological Processes, 15: 3011–3023.
Coconino National Forest. 2010. Schultz Fire, burned area 
emergency response report.
Copeland, N.S., B.S. Sharratt, J.Q. Wu, R.B. Foltz, and J.H. 
Dooley. 2009. A wood-strand material for wind 
erosion control: effects on total sediment loss, PM10 
vertical flux, and PM10 loss. Journal of Environmental 
Quality, 38: 139–148.
DeBano, L.F., L.D. Mann, and D.A. Hamilton. 1970. 
Translocation of hydrophobic substances into soil by 
burning organic litter. Soil Science Society of America 
Journal, 34: 130–133.
Dodson, E.K., and D.W. Peterson. 2010. Mulching effects on 
vegetation recovery following high severity wildfire in 
north-central Washington State, USA. Forest Ecology 
and Management, 260: 1816–1823.
Foltz, R.B., P.R. Robichaud, and H. Rhee. 2009. A synthesis of 
post-fire road treatments for BAER teams: methods, 
treatment effectiveness, and decision-making tools for 
rehabilitation. USDA Forest Service General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-228. Fort Collins, CO.
Foltz, R. B., and N. S. Wagenbrenner. 2010. An evaluation of 
three wood shred blends for post-fire erosion control 
using indoor simulated rain events on small plots. 
Catena 80:86–94.
Foltz, R. B., and P. R. Robichaud. 2013. Effectiveness of post-
fire Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER) 
road treatments: Results from three wildfires. USDA 
Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-
GTR-313. Fort Collins, CO.
Jonas, J. L., E. Berryman, B. Wolk, P. Morgan, and P. R. 
Robichaud. 2019. Post-fire wood mulch for reducing 
erosion potential increases tree seedlings with few 
impacts on understory plants and soil nitrogen. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 453: 117567.
Kampf, S.K., B.M. Gannon, C. Wilson, F. Saavedra, M.E. 
Miller, A. Heldmyer, B. Livneh, P. Nelson, and L. 
MacDonald. 2020. PEMIP: Post-fire erosion model 
inter-comparison project. Journal of Environmental 
Management, 268: 110704.
Key, C.H., and N.C. Benson. 2006. Landscape assessment: 
Remote sensing of severity, the Normalized Burn 
Ratio. FIREMON: Fire Effects Monitoring and 
Inventory System. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report, RMRS-GTR-164-CD. Fort 
Collins, CO.
Kinoshita, A. M., T. S. Hogue, and C. Napper. 2014. 
Evaluating pre- and post-fire peak discharge 
predictions across western U.S. watersheds. Journal 
of the American Water Resources Association, 50: 1540–
1557.
Koehler, N., and M. Keisow. 2016. Signal fire treatment 
effectiveness monitoring. Silver City, NM.
Larsen, I.J., L.H. MacDonald, E. Brown, D. Rough, M.J. 
Welsh, J.H. Pietraszek, Z. Libohova, J. de Dios 
Benavides-Solorio, and K. Schaffrath. 2009. Causes 
of post-fire runoff and erosion: water repellency, cover, 
or soil sealing? Soil Science Society of America Journal, 
73: 1393.
Moody, J. A., and D. A. Martin. 2001. Post-fire, rainfall 
intensity-peak discharge relations for three 
mountainous watersheds in the western USA. 
Hydrological Processes, 15: 2981–2993.
Moody, J. A., and D. A. Martin. 2009. Synthesis of sediment 
yields after wildland fire in different rainfall regimes 
in the western United States. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire, 18: 96–115.
Moody, J. A., R. A. Shakesby, P. R. Robichaud, S. H. Cannon, 
and D. A. Martin. 2013. Current research issues 
related to post-wildfire runoff and erosion processes. 
Earth-Science Reviews, 122: 10–37.
Moosdorf, N., S. Cohen, and C. von Hagke. 2018. A global 
erodibility index to represent sediment production 
potential of different rock types. Applied Geography, 
101: 36–44.
Mueller, S.E., A.E. Thode, E.Q. Margolis, L.L. Yocom, J.D. 
Young, and J.M. Iniguez. 2020. Climate relationships 
with increasing wildfire in the southwestern US from 
1984 to 2015. Forest Ecology and Management, 460: 
117861.
Napper, C. 2006. Burned area emergency response treatments 
catalog. USDA Forest Service, National Technology 
and Development Program. Watershed, Soil, Air 
Management 0625 1801-STTDC, San Dimas, 
California.
Natharius, M. 2015. BAER level II monitoring report year two 
Silver Fire Gila National Forest.
National Interagency Fire Center. 2020. “Burned Area 
Emergency Response (BAER).” NIFC.gov. https://
www.nifc.gov/BAER/ (accessed December 11, 2020).
Literature Cited

Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 44
11
Neary, D.G., K. A. Koestner, A. Youberg, and P.E. Koestner. 
2012. Post-fire rill and gully formation, Schultz Fire 
2010, Arizona, USA. Geoderma, 191: 97–104.
Parsons, A., P.R. Robichaud, S.A. Lewis, C. Napper, and 
J.T. Clark. 2010. Field guide for mapping post-fire 
soil burn severity. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report RMRS-GTR-243. Fort Collins, 
CO.
Pascale, S., W.R. Boos, S. Bordoni, T.L. Delworth, S.B. 
Kapnick, H. Murakami, G.A. Vecchi, and W. Zhang. 
2017. Weakening of the North American monsoon 
with global warming. Nature Climate Change, 7: 
806–812.
Peppin, D.L., P.Z. Fulé, C.H. Sieg, J.L. Beyers, and M.E. 
Hunter. 2010. Post-wildfire seeding in forests of the 
western United States: An evidence-based review. 
Forest Ecology and Management, 260: 573–586.
Peppin, D.L., P.Z. Fulé, C.H. Sieg, J.L. Beyers, M.E. Hunter, 
and P.R. Robichaud. 2011. Recent trends in post-
wildfire seeding in western US forests: costs and 
seed mixes. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 20: 
702–708.
Peppin, D.L., A.L. Mottek-Lucas, and P.Z. Fulé. 2014. Post-
Fire Seeding in Western United States Forests: 
Perspectives of Resource Managers. Fire Ecology, 10: 
31–42.
Prats, S.A., J.W. Wagenbrenner, M.A.S. Martins, M.C. Malvar, 
and J.J. Keizer. 2016. Mid-term and scaling effects 
of forest residue mulching on post-fire runoff and 
soil erosion. Science of the Total Environment, 573: 
1242–1254.
Prosdocimi, M., P. Tarolli, and A. Cerdà. 2016. Mulching 
practices for reducing soil water erosion: A review. 
Earth-Science Reviews, 161: 191–203.
Riechers, G.H., J.L. Beyers, P.R. Robichaud, K. Jennings, E. 
Kreutz, and J. Moll. 2008. Effects of three mulch 
treatments on initial postfire erosion in north-central 
Arizona. USDA Forest Service General Technical 
Report PSW-GTR-189. Riverside, CA.
Robichaud, P.R., J.L. Beyers, and D.G. Neary. 2000. 
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Postfire Rehabilitation 
Treatments. USDA Forest Service General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-63. Fort Collins, CO.
Robichaud, P.R. 2008. Erosion Risk Management Tool 
(ERMiT). Stream Systems Technology Center.
Robichaud, P.R., L.E. Ashmun, and B.D. Sims. 2010. Post-
fire treatment effectiveness for hillslope stabilization. 
USDA Forest Service General Technical Report 
RMRS-GTR-240. Fort Collins, CO.
Robichaud, P.R., L.E. Ashmun, R.B. Foltz, C.G. Showers, 
and J.S. Groenier. 2013a. Production and aerial 
application of wood shreds as a post-fire hillslope 
erosion mitigation treatment. USDA Forest Service 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-307. Fort 
Collins, CO.
Robichaud, P.R., S.A. Lewis, J.W. Wagenbrenner, L.E. 
Ashmun, and R.E. Brown. 2013b. Post-fire mulching 
for runoff and erosion mitigation. Part I: Effectiveness 
at reducing hillslope erosion rates. Catena, 105: 75–92.
Robichaud, P.R., J.W. Wagenbrenner, S.A. Lewis, L.E. 
Ashmun, R.E. Brown, and P.M. Wohlgemuth. 2013c. 
Post-fire mulching for runoff and erosion mitigation 
Part II: Effectiveness in reducing runoff and sediment 
yields from small catchments. Catena, 105:93–111.
Robichaud, P.R., H. Rhee, and S.A. Lewis. 2014. A synthesis 
of post-fire burned area reports from 1972 to 2009 for 
western US Forest Service lands: Trends in wildfire 
characteristics and post-fire stabilization treatments 
and expenditures. International Journal of Wildland 
Fire, 23: 929–944.
Robichaud, P. R., K. A. Storrar, and J. W. Wagenbrenner. 2019. 
Effectiveness of straw bale check dams at reducing 
post-fire sediment yields from steep ephemeral 
channels. Science of the Total Environment, 676: 
721–731.
Rosgen, D., and B. Rosgen. 2013. Restoring alluvial fan 
connectivity for post-fire flood alleviation and 
sediment reduction. Fort Collins, CO.
Rowley, A. 2020. Emergency Stabilization - Burned Area 
Emergency Response (BAER). Forest Service 
Manual. Directive: 2500-2020-1
Shive, K.L., B.L. Estes, A.M. White, H.D. Safford, K.L. 
O’Hara, and S.L. Stephens. 2017. Rice straw mulch 
for post-fire erosion control: Assessing non-target 
effects on vegetation communities. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire, 26: 538–550.
Singleton, M.P., A.E. Thode, A. Sanchez Meador, and J.M. 
Iniguez. 2018. Increasing trends in high-severity fire 
in the southwestern USA from 1984–2015. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 433: 709–719.
Stella, K.A., C.H. Sieg, and P.Z. Fuĺe. 2010. Minimal 
effectiveness of native and non-native seeding 
following three high-severity wildfires. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire, 19: 746–758.
Wagenbrenner, J.W., L.H. MacDonald, and D. Rough. 
2006. Effectiveness of three post-fire rehabilitation 
treatments in the Colorado Front Range. Hydrological 
Processes, 20: 2989–3006.
Wagenbrenner, J.W., and P.R. Robichaud. 2014. Post-fire 
bedload sediment delivery across spatial scales in 
the interior western United States. Earth Surface 
Processes and Landforms 39: 865–876.
Williams, A.P., E.R. Cook, J.E. Smerdon, B.I. Cook, J.T. 
Abatzoglou, K. Bolles, S.H. Baek, A.M. Badger, 
and B. Livneh. 2020. Large contribution from 
anthropogenic warming to an emerging North 
American megadrought. Science, 368: 314–318.
Wohlgemuth, P.M., and P.R. Robichaud. 2007. The effects of 
selected postfire emergency rehabilitation techniques 
on small watershed sediment yields in southern 
California. USDA Forest Service General Technical 
Report PNW-GTR-689. Portland, OR.
Wright, M., and M. Rocca. 2017. Do post-fire mulching 
treatments affect regeneration in serotinous lodgepole 
pine? Fire Ecology 13: 139–145.
Yochum, S.E. 2014. Guidance for Stream Restoration. USDA 
Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical 
Notes, Engineering No 27

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1. Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2. Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4. Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5. Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6. Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7. Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8. Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9. Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10. The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11. Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12. Restoring Forest Roads
13. Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14. Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15. Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16. Snags and Forest Restoration
17. Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18. Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter?
19. Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20. Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
21. Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-Fire Southwestern Forests
22. Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23. Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
25. Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and 
Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26. Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27. Fuel Treatment Longevity
28. Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration 
Treatments
29. Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/
Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
30. Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
31. Climate Change Impact on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
32. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods
33. The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
34. Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest
35. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management
36. Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildfire Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in Southwestern Coniferous 
Forests
37. The Influence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
38. Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
39. Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
40. Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
41. Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
42. A Summary of the Natural Range of Variability for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Forests
43. Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service and by the Southwest Fire Science Consortium.
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182 or nau.edu/eri.

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
