View this email in your browser
Two-Day Seminar Brings Together Hundreds of Forest
Industry Experts
A critical barrier to achieving forest restoration goals in the Southwest is a lack
of capacity in the forest products industry. Expanding opportunities in the
industry sector allows for an increase in acres restored, which improves forest
health and reduces the risk of catastrophic wildﬁre.
On March 2 and 3, the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI)
Wood Utilization Team hosted a virtual seminar on the theme of expanding the
forest industry in the southwestern US. More than 300 people from across the
US and internationally registered for the event. The participants included
federal and state agency employees, academics, forestry contractors, and
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

forest products business employees. The webinar was an open forum for the
audience to share innovative ideas, operations strategies, and best
management practices to expand forest industry capacities.
The keynote sessions included discussions on the past, present, and future of
the forest products industry in the western US, especially economic
development opportunities for forest businesses in the Southwest. Four
different panels, each consisting of three speakers, touched on topics including
steep slope logging, innovative ideas in forest products, business assistance
and ﬁnancing to forest enterprises, and success stories of forest business
operations. One unique aspect to the webinar were virtual ﬁeld trips, where pre-
recorded videos allowed the audience to view several active harvesting
operations, wood products processing facilities and biomass energy conversion
technologies. 
In addition to successful business-to-business connections, some of the
tangible outcomes from the event are video recordings and presentation
documents, which are now posted on the event’s website. This was the ﬁrst in
a series of events by the SWERI Wood Utilization Team. The next seminar or
workshop will be hosted in fall 2021. 
Small-diameter logs are piled next to a recently thinned, restored forest.
Keep Me Posted on Upcoming Webinars

March 21 – An international day of celebration for
forest restoration and forest products!
International Day of Forests: Forest
Restoration, A Path to Recovery and
Well-Being 
World Wood Day Virtual Symposium and
the 3rd IUFRO Forest Products Culture
Colloquium
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
