View this email in your browser
An Assessment of Pinyon-Juniper Woodland
Classiﬁcation on the Kaibab National Forest
Researchers and ecologists at the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI)
conduct rapid ecological assessments, also referred to as RAPs, to quickly
gather relevant scientiﬁc information on an ecosystem, forest type, or stand to
aid land managers in decision making. Standard ﬁeld research can take years
to complete, but RAPs are a method for ecologists to collect and analyze ﬁeld
data when time is limited and a quick response to a scientiﬁc inquiry is
warranted.
 
Over the past 20 years, ERI ecologists have conducted numerous RAPs in the
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

southwestern region. In 2020, researchers assisted the Kaibab National Forest
by conducting a RAP to help them learn more about their pinyon-juniper
woodland community in order to effectively prioritize management among
competing land-use pressure.
 
The resulting RAP, An Assessment of Pinyon-Juniper Woodland Classiﬁcation
on the Kaibab National Forest, enhances vegetation classiﬁcation data on
pinyon-juniper forest types on the Kaibab National Forest. The report ﬁnds that
given the extent of pinyon-juniper vegetation, the departure of that vegetation
from the natural range of variability, and the immediacy of wildﬁre risk, pinyon-
juniper could be a high priority for active management.
 
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
LEARN MORE

Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
