View this email in your browser
White Paper: Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum
Fire and Associated Flood Risk 
A new white paper by researchers Catrin Edgeley and Melanie Colavito
titled, Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood
Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents, details results from a survey
administered to better understand how residents experienced the 2019
Museum Fire in Flagstaff, Ariz. 
 
The survey aimed to capture resident experiences during the ﬁre,
communication about ﬁre and post-ﬁre ﬂood risks, understanding of the Ready,
Set, Go! evacuation system, and perceptions of forest management.
 
Overall, respondents in the Flagstaff area demonstrated a high level of
understanding of ﬁre ecology, acceptance of forest management activities, and
willingness to pay for future forest restoration and ﬂood risk reduction projects.
 
The authors also developed a set of management recommendations for
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

incident management teams, emergency managers, and local ofﬁcials focused
on: 1) communication during ﬁre; 2) using the Ready, Set, Go! evacuation
system; 3) addressing post-ﬁre ﬂood risk; and 4) future forest and ﬁre
management.
What planners and land managers are saying:
“I read the (Museum Fire white paper) and it is excellent work,
and the recommendations are well crafted.”
— city planning manager 
 
“What I saw (in the Museum Fire survey white paper) was
impressive!”
—Forest Service public affairs ofﬁcer
ERI has produced ...
27 white papers over the past 19
years on a variety of subjects. Click
below to view our entire white paper
library. 
 
READ THE WHITE PAPER
VIEW ALL ERI WHITE PAPERS

What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2020 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
