View this email in your browser
Using Drones, Airplanes and State-of-the-Art Technology
to Assess Forest Health
Researchers at Northern Arizona University and the Ecological Restoration
Institute are using drones, airplanes and state-of-the-art laser scanning
technology to conduct forest assessments around C.C. Cragin Reservoir in
northern Arizona.
 
The researchers are partnering with analysts and project managers at Salt
River Project (SRP) to learn more about the forests around the reservoir to help
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

inform future forest restoration projects that aim to improve forest health
conditions, mitigate the potential for catastrophic ﬁre in the area and protect
one of the state’s critical watersheds.
 
The study uses airplanes, drones and on-the-ground handheld laser scanners,
also known as LiDAR scanners, to map the forests by accurately measuring the
forests’ complex structure using millions of 3D images produced by tiny lasers.
 
 “This collaboration is an exciting opportunity to further our understanding of
important watershed and wildlife habitat attributes and explore the use of
innovative technologies, such as hand-held mobile laser scanners and
unpiloted aircraft, to better understand existing forest conditions and guide
future restoration efforts,” said project lead, Andrew Sánchez Meador,
executive director of the Ecological Restoration Institute.
 
While drones and handheld devices can provide highly detailed information at
ﬁne scales (i.e., from an individual tree to all trees on hundreds of acres),
scanners mounted on piloted aircraft can cover huge landscapes and all three
platforms combined provide a more comprehensive evaluation. Evaluating the
three different LiDAR collection methods will provide an in-depth understanding
of trade-offs in selecting a single method, as well as which method is best
suited for collecting data on forest ﬂoor conditions in northern Arizona’s forests.
 
“This project is a great example of the pioneering ways researchers are
working together to solve Arizona’s wildﬁre and forest health problems,”
Sánchez Meador said.
 
This article is adapted from an SRP press release. For the full release and to
learn more about this project, click here.
 
LEARN MORE

What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2020 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
