View this email in your browser
New Working Paper: Mitigating Postﬁre Runoff and
Erosion in the Southwest
Catastrophic wildﬁre events impact communities, ecosystems, and cultural
resources—and can pose ongoing hazards years after the ﬁre is extinguished.
Flash ﬂooding and erosion from heavy rainstorms are postﬁre emergencies
caused by the severe loss of vegetation cover and alteration of soil conditions. 
 
Because these impacts pose health and safety concerns and threaten property
and infrastructure, emergency response teams mobilize to assess postﬁre
conditions and evaluate and implement the appropriate erosion mitigation
treatments. Selecting the right treatment is a complex decision, but
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

understanding the treatment costs, implementation methods, and ecological
impacts can help inform the process. 
 
A new working paper by the Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire
Science Consortium compares the effectiveness of treatments designed to
mitigate the two most common forms of postﬁre erosion: hillslope and channel
erosion. The paper focuses on severely burned ponderosa pine and mixed-
conifer forest soils of the Southwest. It includes examples of lessons learned
and trade-offs among erosion treatment methods and provides management
recommendations and treatment implications.
 
Have ﬁve minutes?
Don’t have time to read the full
working paper? Check out the fact
sheet! It provides a ﬁve-minute
takeaway of the paper’s key ﬁndings.
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
READ THE FULL PAPER

NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
