Article
The Human Dimensions of Spatial, Pre-Wildﬁre Planning
Decision Support Systems: A Review of Barriers, Facilitators,
and Recommendations
Melanie Colavito


Citation: Colavito, M. The Human
Dimensions of Spatial, Pre-Wildﬁre
Planning Decision Support Systems:
A Review of Barriers, Facilitators, and
Recommendations. Forests 2021, 12,
483. https://doi.org/10.3390/
f12040483
Academic Editors: David E. Calkin
and Matthew P. Thompson
Received: 5 March 2021
Accepted: 9 April 2021
Published: 14 April 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA;
melanie.colavito@nau.edu; Tel.: +1-928-523-6651
Abstract: Decision support systems (DSSs) are increasingly common in forest and wildﬁre planning
and management in the United States. Recent policy direction and frameworks call for collaborative
assessment of wildﬁre risk to inform fuels treatment prioritization using the best available science.
There are numerous DSSs applicable to forest and wildﬁre planning, which can support timely and
relevant information for decision making, but the use and adoption of these systems is inconsistent.
There is a need to elucidate the use of DSSs, speciﬁcally those that support pre-wildﬁre, spatial
planning, such as wildﬁre risk assessment and forest fuels treatment prioritization. It is important
to understand what DSSs are in use, barriers and facilitators to their use, and recommendations
for improving their use. Semi-structured interviews with key informants were used to assess these
questions. Respondents identiﬁed numerous barriers, as well as recommendations for improving DSS
development and integration, speciﬁcally with respect to capacity, communication, implementation,
question identiﬁcation, testing, education and training, and policy, guidance, and authorities. These
recommendations can inform DSS use for wildﬁre risk assessment and treatment prioritization to
meet the goals of national policies and frameworks. Lastly, a framework for organizing spatial,
pre-wildﬁre planning DSSs to support end-user understanding and use is provided.
Keywords: decision support system; decision support tool; wildﬁre risk assessment; spatial ﬁre
planning; treatment prioritization; science application
1. Introduction
Wildﬁre management is growing increasingly challenging as longer, more complex
ﬁre seasons demand additional resources and highlight the need for new strategies that
acknowledge the role of ﬁre and importance of adapting to wildﬁre [1]. Fire managers are
working with partners and stakeholders to collaboratively and spatially assess wildﬁre risk
using the best available science and technology, as well as facilitate decisions about where
to prioritize fuels treatments to reduce the risk of ﬁres before they start [2–5]. A growing
number of policies, frameworks, and guidance documents in the United States (U.S.)
articulate a need for collaborative, spatial, pre-ﬁre planning in varying ways, including
the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy (Cohesive Strategy), Forest
Service Manual Chapter 5140, Forest Service Shared Stewardship Initiative, and the 2018
Omnibus Spending Bill (PL115-141) to name a few [6–9]. At the same time, there are
numerous analysis methods, tools, and geographic and temporal scales for modeling
wildﬁre behavior, assessing ﬁre risk, and prioritizing areas for treatment [10,11]. This
can lead to confusion and other challenges in using decision support systems (DSSs) and
decision support tools (DST) to assess wildﬁre risk and inform treatment prioritization,
as well as in tactical settings on ﬁres [12,13]. Thus, there is a need to elucidate the use of
spatial, pre-ﬁre planning DSSs and DSTs for assessing wildﬁre risk and determining areas
for fuels treatment prioritization to facilitate collaborative, science-based pre-ﬁre planning
in the U.S. and elsewhere.
Forests 2021, 12, 483. https://doi.org/10.3390/f12040483
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/forests

Forests 2021, 12, 483
2 of 18
It is important to deﬁne key terms and develop a common language to talk about risk
in wildland ﬁre planning and management [14] (Table 1). The term used most prominently
in this paper is “decision support system”, which broadly refers to the different frameworks,
models, analysis methods, and products or decision support tools (i.e., software) that pro-
vide information about wildﬁre risk assessment and treatment prioritization to support
strategic, risk-informed pre-ﬁre planning (Table 1). In general, DSSs are computer-based
systems that provide informational outputs like spatial data layers that characterize areas
according to wildﬁre risk or highlight potential areas for prioritized forest restoration or
fuels reduction work. The term DSS may not adequately capture the complexity of different
spatial, pre-ﬁre planning frameworks, methods, and tools, and new terminology may be
warranted to describe the full realm of approaches [13]. Deﬁnitions are also discussed in
the Results. Other key terms used in this paper include “wildﬁre risk assessment” and
“treatment prioritization.” The distinction between wildﬁre risk assessment and treatment
prioritization can be indeterminant depending on the underlying risk science paradigm, as
they are related concepts. However, for the purposes of this paper, wildﬁre risk assessment
refers to approaches that explicitly model ﬁre and its behavior, while treatment prioritiza-
tion refers to approaches that are more focused on fuel (i.e., vegetation) and the hazards it
can create when ﬁre is present.
Table 1. Key concepts and their associated deﬁnitions as used in this paper.
Key Concept
Deﬁnition
Decision Support System
Different frameworks, models, analysis methods, products, and tools (i.e., software) that provide
information about wildﬁre risk assessment and treatment prioritization to support pre-ﬁre
planning. DSS refers to speciﬁc tools, such as the Wildﬁre Decision Support System (WFDSS), as
well as analysis methods and frameworks, such as Quantitative Wildﬁre Risk Assessments
(QWRA) or Potential Operational Delineations (PODs).
Wildﬁre Risk Assessment
Approaches for assigning values to risks or beneﬁts from ﬁre to support decision making. The
Thompson et al. [13] deﬁnition is used, “A product or process that collects information and
assigns values (relative, qualitative, quantitative) to risks for the purpose of informing priorities,
developing or comparing courses of action, and informing decision making.”
Treatment Prioritization
Approaches for determining where to treat hazardous fuels to reduce wildﬁre risk as determined
by a wildﬁre risk assessment or other ranking process.
Land management agencies like the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service
(hereafter: Forest Service) are required by numerous laws, policies, and guidance to use the
best available scientiﬁc information (BASI) in decision making about the planning for and
implementation of forest management treatments to restore forest health and reduce the
risk of catastrophic wildﬁre [15]. BASI also includes technologies like DSSs that can inform
forest and ﬁre management decision making. However, the use of BASI is complicated
by other decision-making considerations, such as resource availability, funding, end user
perceptions of science, uncertainty, limited understanding of how to apply BASI, and BASI
that is poorly conceived for end users, among other factors [16–20]. Furthermore, it is
challenging to develop policies and guidance that effectively support the development and
use of BASI in large, decentralized agencies like the Forest Service [21].
In recent years, the Forest Service and other agencies tasked with forest restoration
and ﬁre management have placed more emphasis on incorporating BASI and using DSSs
to enhance decision making about wildﬁre risk and fuels treatment planning and prior-
itization. One example of this is the 2018 Forest Service Shared Stewardship Initiative,
which encourages partnerships to focus restoration treatments and wildﬁre risk reduction
on high priority, strategic areas of the landscape [8]. It is a recognition that addressing
the challenge of the landscape-scale restoration and ﬁre problem necessitates coordination
among land management agencies and partners. Central to this initiative and others like it
is working with partners to use DSSs to collaboratively identify wildﬁre risk and priority
areas for treatment [4]. Collaboration has been shown to facilitate institutional changes in
organizations like the Forest Service when trying to reconcile new priorities with traditional

Forests 2021, 12, 483
3 of 18
decision-making processes [22]. Shared Stewardship and similar frameworks illustrate a
shifting paradigm in the Forest Service and other land management agencies toward risk-
informed, strategic ﬁre management and response, as well as acknowledge the inevitability
of ﬁre and its important ecological role [5,11,23].
Although there is broad direction and guidance to use DSSs for risk-informed, landscape-
scale hazardous fuels reduction treatments and ﬁre response, there are limited speciﬁcs for
doing so, such as explicit recommendations or requirements for what risk assessment and
prioritization DSSs to use. For example, Forest Service Manual (FSM) 5140—Hazardous
Fuels Management and Prescribed Fire—includes two objectives: (1) “understand the
role of ﬁre on the landscape . . . ”, and (2) “In cooperation with partners, strategically
plan and implement on a landscape scale, risk-informed, and cost-effective hazardous
fuel modiﬁcation and vegetation management treatments . . . ” [7]. FSM 5140 further
directs Regional Foresters to “establish direction that supports the risk-based, strategically
planned, prioritized, and cost-effective application of hazardous fuels management and
prescribed ﬁre practices . . . ” It does not state how strategic planning should be conducted
nor does it call out speciﬁc methods or DSSs, rather those speciﬁcs are left to the discretion
and interpretation of each Forest Service Region, which is a common approach in Forest
Service guidance. Indeed, a determination of what constitutes BASI is often left to the
discretion of end users [15].
The paradigm shift toward a strategic, risk-informed approach to wildﬁre manage-
ment that embraces the role of ﬁre, acknowledges our changing relationship to ﬁre, espe-
cially in the context of climate change, and moves away from ﬁre exclusion that can increase
long-term ﬁre risk is a result, in part, of efforts by the ﬁre science research community to
facilitate a more comprehensive understanding of ﬁre [1,5,24]. This shifting paradigm has
helped to advance science and technology, such as the development of DSSs designed for
ﬁre managers to facilitate risk-informed, strategic decision making by ﬁre managers both in
pre-ﬁre planning and ﬁre response [13,25]. These DSSs can provide important information
to ﬁre managers who are working to balance multiple objectives, such as reducing the
risk of catastrophic wildﬁre while working to restore the ecological role of ﬁre. They can
also provide an added level of support for complex decisions at different temporal and
spatial scales to facilitate treatments and the safe and effective use of ﬁre [3,26,27]. Some
DSSs incorporate expert knowledge from ﬁre managers and other partners into their associ-
ated outputs, as leveraging on-the-ground knowledge can provide a more comprehensive
picture for decision-makers that can facilitate longer-term adaptation to ﬁre [2].
At the same time, there are numerous scientific and technical approaches, many of which
have associated DSSs and DSTs, for accomplishing spatial pre-fire planning [10,11,13,28]. DSSs
evolve over time as they are tested and applied, so the suite of tools available to ﬁre
managers and decision makers is frequently changing. There are also different approaches
to classifying and cataloging this suite of tools depending on their underlying assumptions,
data, and methods of analysis [10,11]. This combination of a diverse and increasing pool
of information and DSSs coupled with their ongoing evolution can result in confusion
and other barriers to effectively using DSSs [12,18,23]. A lack of effective knowledge
management and landscape-scale monitoring of completed restoration or fuels reduction
treatments and limited or incomplete data sets can also limit the development of effective
risk assessment and treatment prioritization DSSs, as well as the evaluation of outcomes of
using DSSs to inform treatments and ﬁre response [21,29]. Another limitation is a lack of
end user participation in the development of the DSSs themselves [11,18]. In short, there
is uneven adoption and use of DSSs by their intended end users in land management
agencies [12,30]. Ultimately, it is unclear how DSSs impact decisions. The difﬁculty of
using and evaluating the use of DSSs contributes to broader challenges in changing the ﬁre-
suppression focused paradigm that dominates Forest Service policies and guidance [31].
Although DSSs can provide robust, scientiﬁc information to inform pre-ﬁre planning,
there are many social barriers to realizing the effective use of DSS outputs in decision
making in pre-ﬁre planning in the U.S. Thus, research is needed to identify the speciﬁc

Forests 2021, 12, 483
4 of 18
barriers and facilitators to the effective development and use of DSSs for wildﬁre risk
assessment and treatment prioritization and to generate actionable recommendations for
DSS developers, users, and policymakers to improve the use of DSSs in U.S. forest and ﬁre
management. This is especially pertinent in the western U.S. where ﬁre-adapted forests
have departed from their historic ﬁre regimes and are experiencing increases in wildﬁre
activity driven by past management practices, climate change, and drought [1]. The western
U.S. is also characterized by large areas of federally managed lands, much of which is
under stewardship of the Forest Service—one of the largest ﬁre management organizations
in the world—which has become increasingly focused on improving its ﬁre management
practices to incorporate risk-informed management principles to meet both short and
long-term ﬁre management objectives [5]. At the same time, Forest Service lands in the
western U.S. are interspersed with a wide array of other municipal, county, state, federal,
and tribal lands that necessitate managing ﬁre across jurisdictional boundaries [6,8].
This paper provides an analysis of barriers and facilitators to the use of DSSs for
wildﬁre risk assessment and fuels treatment prioritization by federal land managers,
especially in the context of the Forest Service, as well as identiﬁes speciﬁc recommendations
for improving the use of DSSs. This paper addresses the following key questions:
1.
What spatial pre-ﬁre planning DSSs are in common use for wildﬁre risk assessment
and treatment prioritization planning?
2.
What are common barriers and facilitators to the use of these DSSs?
3.
What recommendations and strategies can facilitate the effective use of these DSS
outputs in decision making?
This paper does not provide a comprehensive or technical summary of wildﬁre
decision support tools, nor does it evaluate speciﬁc DSS uses and successes [32]. Rather
it is an effort to explore the social dimensions of using DSSs for pre-ﬁre planning and to
develop recommendations to enhance the use of scientiﬁc and technical tools in decision
making. The results can be used to better understand the role of DSSs and support their
effective use.
2. Materials and Methods
This paper reports ﬁndings from semi-structured interviews in which respondents
were asked similar open-ended questions, though the order and exact questions varied
according to respondent answers [33]. Prior to the semi-structured interviews, preliminary,
scoping interviews with key contacts were conducted by the primary investigator/author
to inform the study purpose and need, design, and questions. To identify semi-structured
interview participants, a purposive sampling approach was used [34]. The primary in-
vestigator started by asking contacts from the scoping conversations for interviewee rec-
ommendations. The requirement for the purposive sample frame was that respondents
be familiar with the development or use of DSSs relevant to wildﬁre risk assessment and
treatment prioritization planning. The primary investigator also asked interviewees to
provide suggestions for additional interviewees. This sampling approach can lead to bias if
there is pre-existing alignment in perspectives among respondents in the same professional
networks, so interviewees in multiple geographic locations and roles were contacted to
capture a range of perspectives (Tables 2 and 3).
A total of 27 interviews were completed between February and April 2020 (n = 27); 22
of those respondents or 81% were Forest Service employees and 5 (19%) were stakeholders
or partners who work with the Forest Service. Interview participants were located in
Forest Service Regions 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 9, which also included the following states: New
Mexico (n = 6), Colorado (n = 5), Montana (n = 5), Oregon (n = 4), Arizona (n = 4), Idaho
(n = 1), California (n = 1), Minnesota (n = 1). Two possible limitations of the sample
include the heavy emphasis on Forest Service employees and the lack of resource specialist
participation (Table 2). This study focused intentionally on the use of DSSs in the context of
the Forest Service because of its directives and goals for using pre-ﬁre planning DSSs and
analytics [5,7,8]. However, the ﬁndings and recommendations may be applicable to other

Forests 2021, 12, 483
5 of 18
land management agencies using DSSs in pre-ﬁre planning. Interviews were conducted
until information saturation was reached or no new themes were being articulated.
Table 2. Interviewee general classiﬁcations (as assigned or self-identiﬁed during interview). Scien-
tist/developer refers to interviewees who primarily conduct research and may work in the Forest
Service or external organization. Boundary spanner refers to interviewees who work to facilitate
connections between scientists/developers and managers; they worked in both the Forest Service
and partner institutions such as universities. Boundary spanners in the context of pre-ﬁre planning in
the U.S. are individuals who provide communication and translation functions that help to facilitate
the exchange of knowledge to co-develop DSSs and bridge the spheres of science and management.
Manager refers to interviewees who make ﬁre or forest management decisions and work for the
Forest Service.
Interviewee Classiﬁcation
Number of Interviewees
Percent of Interviewees
Scientist/Developer
6
22%
Boundary Spanner
8
30%
Manager
13
48%
Table 3. Interviewee demographics by job role.
Job Role
Number of Interviewees
Percent of Interviewees
Collaborative Partner
2
7.3%
Agency Researcher
2
7.3%
Line Ofﬁcer
2
7.3%
External Researcher
3
11%
Fuels Management
5
19%
Fire Management
6
22%
Agency Analysis/Technical Transfer
7
26%
Interviews, which ranged from approximately 30 min to one hour in length, were
conducted over the phone. Interviews were recorded and the transcription service Rev
(Rev.com 2020, accessed 13 April 2021) was used to develop draft transcripts, which were
reviewed and edited for accuracy, as well as used to conduct a preliminary round of code
development. Once the ﬁnal transcripts were ready, the qualitative data analysis software
NVivo 11 for Windows (QSR International 2020) was used to organize and code completed
transcripts for key themes. A systematic, grounded theory approach was used to iteratively
generate themes both from prior knowledge and literature, as well as from the data itself,
during the coding process [35]. Codes were derived in two primary ways. First, a set of
codes was developed that corresponded to the interview questions, which allowed the
transcripts to be split into their broad, component parts. Then, within each of the broad
codes (i.e., facilitators, barriers, recommendations), descriptive codes were inductively
identiﬁed in the data and then iteratively revised. Each transcript was coded twice using
this process, detailed analytical notes were developed, and interview participants were
consulted when necessary to ensure single-coder reliability [36]. The ﬁndings presented
here represent broad themes identiﬁed during analysis. Interviewees are not identiﬁed to
ensure their anonymity according to the requirements of the Northern Arizona University
Institutional Review Board that oversees human subjects’ research.
3. Results
Findings are organized according to the primary research questions. Illustrative quotes
are used to highlight speciﬁc ﬁndings and are identiﬁed with interviewee classiﬁcations
(Table 2) and respondent codes.

Forests 2021, 12, 483
6 of 18
3.1. DSSs Referenced by Interviewees
Interviewees were asked to provide examples of DSSs they have used for wildﬁre
risk assessment and treatment prioritization. The DSSs referred to by interviewees are
organized in Table 4 according to the different kinds of information they provide and
roles they play in spatial, pre-ﬁre planning. Table 4 is not an exhaustive list of DSSs,
rather it provides context for the results that follow. Some interviewees referred to project-
speciﬁc DSSs developed for partners or collaborative groups, as well as groups like Risk
Management Assistance (i.e., teams that travel to ﬁres, provide analytics, and facilitate
discussion [37]), which are not included in Table 4.
Table 4 is classiﬁed into four sections: data sources; wildﬁre risk probability simula-
tors/models; methods or products that use wildﬁre risk simulations; and wildﬁre hazard
assessment approaches, models, and tools. Data sources refer to data that are used as
DSS inputs. With respect to wildﬁre risk, there are many challenges in modeling wild-
ﬁre, depending on weather conditions, patterns of ﬁre ignition across landscapes, and
historical ﬁre distribution [38]. Wildﬁre risk, as deﬁned here, is the likelihood of a ﬁre
occurring, the intensity of behavior when a ﬁre does occur, and effects of ﬁre on highly
valued resources and assets [25,39]. Wildﬁre risk probability simulators/models refer to
ﬁrst-order products that generate wildﬁre simulations. Each of the simulators/models
have different parameters and use different ﬁre behavior models to compute predictions,
but all use the same surface ﬁre spread equation developed by Rothermel [40]. Methods or
products that use wildﬁre risk simulations refer to second-order products that use outputs
from wildﬁre risk probability simulators/models to create additional decision support
information. Wildﬁre hazard assessment approaches, models, and tools are more focused
on fuels than ﬁre and refer to DSSs that characterize fuels and other aspects of the ﬁre
environment, provide simulations of forest growth and landscape processes, and analyze
how fuels management might impact ﬁre behavior. These DSSs inform treatment planning
and prioritization decisions, though as with wildﬁre risk, there are many challenges to
simulating fuel changes [38].
Table 4. DSS types and DSSs referenced by interviewees; not a comprehensive list of DSSs for wildﬁre risk assessment and
treatment prioritization planning. Websites where these DSSs can be accessed are provided where available.
DSS Type
DSSs Referenced by Interviewees
Website (All Sites
Accessed 8 April 2021)
Data Sources/DSS Inputs
LANDFIRE: a database of more than 20 geospatial layers such as vegetation,
ﬁre regimes, and fuels for the United States.
landﬁre.gov
Field Sampled Vegetation (FSVeg): stores data about trees, fuels, down
woody material, surface cover, and understory vegetation.
https://www.fs.fed.us/
nrm/fsveg/
Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA): a nationally coordinated
inventory of U.S. forest data.
https://www.ﬁa.fs.fed.us/
Wildﬁre Risk Probability
Simulators/Models
FlamMap: a ﬁre analysis system that calculates pixel-based measures of ﬁre
behavior; smaller scale but similar to LFSim.
https://www.ﬁrelab.org/
project/ﬂammap
FARSITE: a computational approach to estimating wildﬁre growth and
behavior integrated in FlamMap.
https://www.ﬁrelab.org/
project/farsite
Large Fire Modeling Simulation System (FSim or LFSim): a method for
simulating ﬁre across larger scales and across seasons than FlamMap or
FARSITE but using similar parameters.
https://www.ﬁrelab.org/
project/fsim-wildﬁre-risk-
simulation-software
Fire Spread Probability (FSPro): a probabilistic model that estimates where
ﬁre may go. Only available within the
Wildland Fire Decision Support System.
https://wfdss.usgs.gov/
wfdss_help/3290.htm
BEHAVE: a ﬁre modeling system that simulates surface and crown ﬁre rate
of spread and intensity, ignition probability, ﬁre size, spotting, and mortality.
https://www.ﬁrelab.org/
project/behaveplus

Forests 2021, 12, 483
7 of 18
Table 4. Cont.
DSS Type
DSSs Referenced by Interviewees
Website (All Sites
Accessed 8 April 2021)
Methods or Products that Use
Wildﬁre Risk Simulations
Wildﬁre Hazard Potential: a national map that combines ﬂame-length and
burn probability estimates across large landscapes.
https://www.ﬁrelab.org/
project/wildﬁre-hazard-
potential
https://wildﬁrerisk.org/
https:
//wfdss.usgs.gov/wfdss/
WFDSS_Home.shtml
Wildﬁre Risk to Communities: an interactive website that provides a
national scale assessment of wildﬁre risk among communities, created in
response to a 2018 law (PL115-141) [9] requiring the Forest Service to map
hazards by community.
Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS): system that supports ﬁre
managers, agency administrators, and analysts in making decisions on ﬁres;
includes ﬁre modeling capability and decision documentation processes.
Quantitative Wildﬁre Risk Assessment (QWRA): a ﬁre modeling process
that assesses how highly valued resources and assets respond to modeled
ﬁre behavior and determines associated beneﬁts and threats [25,39].
Potential Operational Delineation (POD): Boundaries or polygons that
provide different ﬁre response options across a landscape and an overview
of ﬁre risk according to potential control features and values at risk [3,26,41].
Wildﬁre Hazard Assessment
Approaches, Models, and Tools
Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS): forest vegetation modeling tool that
simulates forest growth in response to natural
processes and management actions.
https:
//www.fs.fed.us/fvs/
LSim: a forest landscape simulation model integrating FSim into a modiﬁed
FVS Parallel Processing Extension [38].
Scenario Investment Planning Platform (SIPP): spatial scenario planning
model (FORSYS), formerly Landscape Treatment Designer (LTD), scenario
planning approach for resource allocation and budgeting [42].
https://sipp-usfs.
opendata.arcgis.com/
ArcFuels: ArcGIS extension that uses FVS and ﬁre behavior models to
inform fuel treatment planning, ﬁre behavior modeling,
and wildﬁre risk assessment.
https:
//www.fs.fed.us/wwetac/
tools/arcfuels/index.php
Interagency Fuel Treatment Decision Support System (IFTDSS): online
system for fuels treatment planning, including ﬁre behavior modeling for
testing fuels treatment impacts on ﬁre behavior to
determine priority treatment areas.
https://iftdss.ﬁrenet.gov/
3.2. DSS Deﬁnitions
Interviewees were asked to deﬁne the term “decision support tool (DST),” though
this term has been expanded to “decision support system (DSS)” for this paper. The
results in this section are presented using the term DST as was asked of interviewees,
rather than DSS as is adopted elsewhere. The term DST means different things to different
people, and there is no established deﬁnition that has been universally adopted by the ﬁre
science and management communities. Many interviewees described DSTs in broad terms,
which is why it has been expanded to DSS. For example, one manager described a DST
as, “Anything that helps inform a decision better than what you would have otherwise
had available” (DST24). One scientist/developer noted that the term DST is misleading
and suggested that another term might be more appropriate. “They shouldn’t be called
decision support tools; they probably should be called something else. Thought analytics,
you know? Or, I call it conversational analytics. It’s a way of starting a conversation that
takes advantage of all the tools” (DST4).
Nonetheless, many respondents spoke of a clear distinction between the data that
go into a DST (e.g., geospatial data layers), a DST that provides a higher-level analytical
function (e.g., software), and DST outputs that inform decision making (e.g., maps or tables).
One boundary spanner said, “An important distinction for me is that a decision support
tool provides some capability to either evaluate scenarios or prioritize something. So, it
has some higher-level function that evaluates or analyzes the data in a unique way to help
someone make a decision” (DSS11). Respondents also distinguished between informational
resources, such as a website, and a DST with speciﬁc functions, such as software. For
example, one scientist/developer said, “A decision support tool . . . is something like
WFDSS or IFTDSS that are actual computer programs, software programs that provide
people actionable tools to ask questions and run analyses” (DSS16). Some interviewees also
emphasized that DSTs do not make decisions, rather they support decisions by providing
speciﬁc types of information for different management scenarios that are then balanced
with other sources of information. One manager stated, “It doesn’t make a decision, but it

Forests 2021, 12, 483
8 of 18
helps us take a quick look at what we might expect and consider that when we need to
move forward with a decision” (DSS21).
3.3. DSS Barriers
Respondents identiﬁed numerous barriers to DSS use, which fell into seven key
themes (Table 5). The ﬁrst theme identiﬁed by most interviewees, was that persistent
tensions and cultural issues impact DSS use. Respondents described two persistent tensions.
The ﬁrst tension was that some respondents articulated a desire for top-down directives
on what DSSs to use, while other respondents articulated a desire for organic, bottom-up
development and integration of DSSs. As one manager put it, “Everybody wants to be the
tip of the spear, be the most advanced or whatever, but you got to organically build that
within your ﬁre program” (DSS24). Meanwhile, another manager said, “It really needs to
be a top-down thing where, from the Forest Service perspective, it forces you to say, ‘Hey,
this is what we’re doing, and I want you to make sure that all of your staff is coming along’”
(DSS23). Interviewees also articulated a tension between a desire for scientist/developers
to co-develop tools in concert with intended end users, and conversely, a desire to not take
limited time away from end users in experimenting with a DSS that may not be adopted.
Interviewees also described persistent cultural issues, including the challenge of changing
existing paradigms about the role of science and ﬁre. As one scientist/developer noted,
“It’s a bigger challenge to create decision support concepts and get those propagated and
understood than it is to create a model” (DSS4).
Table 5. Key themes from results on DSS barriers, facilitators, and recommendations.
Results
Themes
DSS Barriers
(1) Persistent tensions, disconnects, and cultural issues impact the use of DSSs;
(2) Capacity issues inhibit both the development and use of DSSs;
(3) An ineffective process to integrate a new DSS into a program of work can limit its outcomes;
(4) Technical challenges in the use of DSSs can impact perceptions of their accuracy and usability;
(5) Complex information in DSSs can be difﬁcult to understand and can lead to confusion and
information overload;
(6) Institutional issues and governance barriers can inhibit the use of DSS; and
(7) Strategies for integrating DSS outputs into decision making processes are often lacking.
DSS Facilitators
(1) DSSs spur new conversations and facilitate communication;
(2) The process of developing and using DSSs impacts their perceived effectiveness; and
(3) DSSs can enhance the legitimacy of decisions.
DSS Recommendations
(1) Analytical capacity and funding to develop, integrate, and use DSSs needs to be increased;
(2) Communication about DSSs must be done in a common language and sustained through time to
build relationships;
(3) Implementation planning can ensure that DSS outputs are used;
(4) Determine the question that a DSS is meant to inform and develop and/or apply it accordingly;
(5) DSSs should be validated and tested with end users;
(6) DSS end users need both education and training in the concepts and tools; and
(7) Leadership intent for integrating and using DSSs should be clearly articulated through policies,
guidance, and authorities.
The second theme highlighted by all respondents was that capacity issues inhibit both
the development and use of DSSs. The most cited capacity issue was a lack of time for learning
new DSSs and integrating them into a program of work. Turnover in personnel, vacant
positions, and slow hiring create a persistent need to reeducate new staff. Interviewees
noted that there is a lack of personnel capacity, speciﬁcally personnel with the scientiﬁc
and analytical skills to learn and use DSSs. Existing agency personnel with analytical skills
are often oversubscribed. As one scientist/developer noted, “What we ﬁnd is that the GIS
professionals within the agencies, they’re so swamped with just their regular GIS path”
(DSS16). The same respondent noted that this also impacts agency researchers, “We’re a
fairly small community of people doing the analytical work” (DSS16). The lack of personnel

Forests 2021, 12, 483
9 of 18
capacity also impacts boundary spanners. As one noted, “I don’t think there’s enough
people who act in that tech transfer role” (DSS14). Lastly, funding creates capacity issues.
When funding is limited, it can impact processes to integrate DSS outputs in programs of
work or shift attention to other funding priorities.
The third theme identiﬁed in the interviews was that an ineffective process to integrate
a new DSS into a program of work can limit its outcomes. Many respondents noted that
there are diverse perspectives across ﬁre, fuels, and resource areas within agencies. When
perspectives are unevenly represented in DSS integration, procedural barriers can arise
when those missing perspectives are consulted. Several respondents expressed concern
that resource specialists are often missing from DSS conversations. Respondents also noted
that poor communication about the need for a DSS or a lack of champion in leadership
positions during integration can impact perceptions. As one manager explained, “There
wasn’t a lot of communication about the need for this type of tool, or how this type of
information would impact the ultimate users on the districts coming up with their ﬁve-year
plan” (DSS22). Lastly, some respondents emphasized that learning and integrating a DSS
takes time, and that it takes even longer to shift paradigms. As such, some respondents
expressed concern about “DSS experimentation fatigue” because managers have been
frequently asked to try new DSSs that may not have resulted in meaningful outcomes or
changes in practice.
The fourth theme was that technical challenges in the use of DSSs can impact perceptions of
their accuracy and usability. One frequently cited technical challenge was limitations with the
underlying data or models that serve as input to DSSs, because as one boundary spanner
noted, “The outlook that we’re going to get for these DSSs is heavily inﬂuenced by the
data that is available. And if you don’t understand that limitation, you might just run
with the results without factoring in those considerations that are a little more difﬁcult
to map” (DSS14). There can also be differences in data characteristics across geographic
and temporal scales and overlapping scales of information, which create tradeoffs that can
be difﬁcult to communicate. Many respondents also noted that technology malfunctions
inhibit DSS use and may drive end users back to tools with which they are familiar. As one
manager noted, “When you’re running a ﬁre, if you have to monkey with your iPad, and
now this isn’t working and whatever’s going on, you’re just going to go back to your steno
pad” (DSS17).
A ﬁfth theme across interviewees was that complex information in DSSs can be difﬁcult
to understand leading to confusion and information overload. Respondents across categories
highlighted that the number of different DSSs available and the different kinds of infor-
mation they provide can be overwhelming. For example, one scientist/developer said,
“It’s really easy, even for somebody like me who now works in this stuff day in, day out,
to get confused” (DSS16). Furthermore, it can be difﬁcult to select an appropriate DSS
without technical expertise or assistance. Respondents also noted that even when a DSS is
selected, there may still be a lack of understanding of how to use the DSS and interpret
its outputs. There is a learning curve associated with new concepts that takes time to
overcome. One scientist/developer explained, “There’s a lack of understanding of the
information fundamentally, and then a lack of its intended use” (DSS27).
The sixth theme was that institutional issues and governance barriers can inhibit DSS
use. Responses among interviewees highlight that different types of organizations face
different types of institutional barriers. In management agencies, interviewees noted that
a major institutional barrier is a lack of direction, alignment, and leadership intent about
DSS use and integration. This can result in confusion across organizational units, as one
scientist/developer described, “There just hasn’t been a lot of help out there to direct forests
on, okay, so now how do we take that next step of, we have all this great information,
how do we integrate it into our program of work?” (DSS9). Restrictions in agencies on
the use of technology, as well as limited IT capacity can also impede DSS use. In scientiﬁc
organizations, interviewees noted that the reward system does not incentivize scientists
to work on operationally relevant DSSs. As one boundary spanner noted, “If a scientist

Forests 2021, 12, 483
10 of 18
makes something really useful that the ﬁeld needs, there’s not a lot of incentives on their
end to keep it going” (DSS1).
The seventh theme across interviews was that strategies for integrating DSS outputs into
decision making processes are often lacking. Many interviewees noted that a major challenge
is a lack of implementation plans for integrating DSSs into existing planning processes
and programs of work. As one scientist/developer noted, DSS efforts often end with the
production of outputs and less attention is paid on integrating those outputs. “A big issue
is, then, the forest and regions, they get the data, and they say, ‘We have our QWRA, now
what?’ . . . ‘We have our PODs, now what?’ And people don’t know how to interpret it, so
they need a little bit of assistance or a little bit of additional training on how to interpret it”
(DSS9). Similarly, training is often limited or focused on using a speciﬁc DSS rather than
interpreting its outputs and integrating them into a decision. Data management issues can
also impact implementation. If data and outputs are not stored in an accessible location or
format, it can be difﬁcult for new users to ﬁnd the appropriate information, and this issue
tends to increase within large landscapes or jurisdictional entities.
3.4. DSS Facilitators and Beneﬁts
Respondents identiﬁed numerous facilitators to and beneﬁts from DSSs, which fell
into three themes (Table 5). First, respondents illustrated, in various ways, that DSSs can
spur new conversations and facilitate communication. This can include cross-boundary com-
munication across disciplines within agencies, across jurisdictional boundaries, and from
agencies to stakeholders or the public. For example, new conversations across disciplines
within agencies might include discussions among staff that were not common in the past.
As one scientist/developer explained, “One of the biggest and most beneﬁcial outcomes
is conversations between the ﬁre folks and line ofﬁcers and their resource specialist staff.
Conversations that have rarely happened in the past” (DSS27). A DSS and its outputs can
serve as a common space from which to share varying perspectives. DSSs can also facilitate
creative thinking, such as thinking at landscape scales. DSS outputs, like visuals and maps,
are communication objects that encourage discussions and joint decision-making. As one
manager described, “We had a bunch of pre-made maps out. And the good part of it was
we had the ﬁre management ofﬁcers, line ofﬁcers drawing maps together, putting lines on
the maps and thinking about things, from all the various history that was in their heads
in addition to all the data” (DSS13). Maps and visuals are also helpful in communicating
with the public and can help managers make effective arguments for fuels treatment and
restoration work.
The second theme was that the process of developing and using DSSs impacts their perceived
effectiveness. Interviewees referenced the concepts of co-development and boundary span-
ning as facilitators to creating and integrating operationally relevant DSSs. Co-development
is a collaborative, iterative process in which multiple perspectives are brought into DSS
development that can facilitate building relationships, trust, and respect. Boundary span-
ning or bridging organizations that span the spheres of science, decision making, and
policy, have unique functions that allow them to facilitate the co-development of DSSs. For
example, one scientist/developer noted, “This iterative process of working with the ﬁre
managers so that they’re owning it, it is their information. We’re just helping support the
development of it and learning where our model’s working well and where our model’s
not working well became really powerful” (DSS3). Co-development can also create and
sustain relationships and generate support and buy-in for a DSS, including with leadership
who can help articulate and communicate the rationale for adopting a DSS. As one manager
noted, “The fact that leadership was involved and pushing to get it done, and to come up
with a new way of looking at the problem was very useful” (DSS22). Interviewees also
noted that working with boundary spanning organizations can add capacity and credibility,
as well as increase access to scientiﬁc and technical expertise and even to a different DSSs
and their outputs. As one boundary spanner noted, “Most of the work that I’ve done in
this space is just making things more accessible” (DSS11). Lastly, interviewees highlighted

Forests 2021, 12, 483
11 of 18
that limited turnover or the presence of local champions who can articulate the need for a
DSS can facilitate development and integration. For example, one boundary spanner said,
“In order for these efforts to be successful on each landscape, there has to be one or two
people who really act as a champion, who want to use it, who know how to use it, who
understand how it was constructed . . . That’s the magic sauce” (DSS14).
The third facilitator was that DSSs can enhance the legitimacy of decisions. Respondents
articulated that, at a broad scale, DSSs outputs can provide rationale for decisions about
where to allocate funding and investments. DSSs can also illustrate the impact of invest-
ments in treatments by demonstrating successes, such as where risk has decreased. For
example, one boundary spanner said, “It really allows people to look, take a step back, and
say, ‘Wow, this work does show up, at least on the map, as being signiﬁcantly reduced’”
(DSS15). DSSs can also support longer-term planning and decision making by serving as a
central repository for information and quantifying existing or local knowledge that may
otherwise be difﬁcult to institutionalize due to turnover or retirement. As one manager
explained, “That institutional knowledge, I feel it lies in a few hands on the forest. Some
folks have that. But if those folks retire . . . that information is lost. But if you capture it . . .
then it’s more institutional. It’s more corporate knowledge, it will be retained” (DSS20).
Lastly, respondents noted that DSS outputs can provide an added level of credibility in
communication with the public about treatment decisions. One manager explained, “Hav-
ing more of that scientiﬁc or analysis background and being able to show that to some of
the concerned people about your project, it really helps clear the air and make it clear to
them that you’re not just willy-nilly picking things” (DSS25).
3.5. DSS Recommendations
Respondents were asked to provide recommendations for improving the development
and integration of DSSs in wildﬁre risk assessment and treatment prioritization planning,
which are organized into seven major themes (Table 5). The ﬁrst theme was that analytical
capacity and funding to develop, integrate, and use DSSs needs to be increased. One of the most
common recommendations across interviewees is that there is a need for more people
with analytical expertise, which is consistent with other research [3,12,13,37]. As one
manager explained, “If we want people to be using these tools, all the forests need to
invest in people that can use the tools” (DSS25). Respondents generally agreed that it
is important to prioritize and ensure funding for analytical work, especially for analyst
positions. Many respondents articulated that there should be analysts within national
forest or regional ofﬁces tasked with learning and integrating DSSs. It is important to locate
analytical capacity as close to the end users of that capacity as possible to develop trust
and buy-in. Respondents also noted that it would be helpful to have consistent analytical
positions across forests and regions, because as the same manager noted, “Some forests
have people that are good at this stuff, some forests don’t” (DSS25). Interviewees also
talked about the need for additional assistance from boundary spanners and boundary
spanning organizations to help co-develop and explain the need for DSSs, interpret and
communicate outputs, and facilitate conversations.
The second theme was that communication about DSSs must be done in a common language
and sustained through time to build relationships and trust. Communication can be a barrier
or facilitator depending on the context. Many respondents emphasized that a common
language is needed for DSSs and their associated concepts, which has also been articulated
by Thompson et al. [14]. Interviewees noted that it is important to set expectations about
language up front, as well as encourage participation from the intended end users of a
DSS early in a process to learn or develop that common language in a collaborative space.
As one manager explained, “the best way to communicate is right there on the front end”
(DSS20). In addition to engaging end users from the outset, respondents highlighted the
importance of sustaining engagement throughout DSS development and integration. End
user engagement can also help scientists/developers learn what elements of a DSS are
most useful or viable in each context. Effective communication can help forge relationships,

Forests 2021, 12, 483
12 of 18
which, as one manager noted, can also ensure progress. “Where the rubber meets the road,
is where you have and you forge these individual relationships, either which way the road’s
going. Whether it’s the scientist approaching the manager or the manager approaching the
scientist” (DSS12). Interviewees also talked about the importance of in-person engagement
to facilitate communication and sustain momentum. Lastly, some interviewees highlighted
the importance of sharing success stories and case studies to illustrate and communicate
best practices.
The third theme in the interviews was that implementation planning can ensure that DSS
outputs are used. Once DSS outputs are developed, interviewees emphasized there should
be a discussion about how those outputs are going to be integrated and used, as well as
a plan to ensure that those outputs are updated. One manager emphasized the need for
an implementation schedule, “The biggest recommendation I have is once you start and
you pick the tool you want to use . . . get your folks on a schedule and stick to it” (DSS23).
Respondents also noted that it is important to update data and outputs on some regular
schedule to keep the information up-to-date and relevant. One manager said, “They’re all
not static tools. They need to be updated to have relevance” (DSS24).
A fourth major recommendation was that it is critical to ﬁrst determine the question
that a DSS is meant to inform and then develop and integrate it accordingly. Respondents
emphasized the concept of reverse engineering DSSs by ﬁrst determining the management
question(s) that needed decision support and then developing the technical aspects of a
DSS so that it produced outputs to inform that management question(s). As one boundary
spanner explained, “Early on in a process, deﬁne what a management question actually
is that needs decision support” (DSS11). On the other hand, because there are numerous
DSSs already available, in cases where one needs to be selected rather than developed, it
can be challenging for end users to select the appropriate DSS. One scientist/developer
emphasized that it is then incumbent on the scientists/developers to explain what kinds
of questions a given DSS can answer. “This is what you can do with the information I’m
giving you and these are the types of questions that this information can answer. But if you
want answers to these questions, which are different, you maybe need to turn to different
tools” (DSS16). Some respondents emphasized that this should also include explanations
of the geographic and temporal scales, as well as data resolutions for which a given DSS is
relevant. In short, respondents articulated that there are tradeoffs among DSSs that should
be communicated to end users.
The ﬁfth theme articulated by respondents was that DSSs should be validated and tested
with end users. The importance of model validation for decision support has been identiﬁed
in other research [12]. One boundary spanner noted, “After you’ve drawn stuff on a map,
you need to get out in the woods” (DSS10). Respondents also emphasized that validating
DSS outputs is an essential way to improve them over time. One manager said, “Verify
it on the ground with the folks that are closest to it, because . . . applying all of the pieces
that we might know in a geospatial lab sense out on the ground always is improved by
ground-truthing” (DSS7). Respondents also illustrated ways in which validation can make
DSSs more user-friendly. One manager noted, “Just make sure that things are tested with
folks that are out there doing it . . . make sure that it is operationally relevant” (DSS17).
Effective ground-truthing requires a thorough system of documentation of DSS uses and
outcomes. Thus, respondents highlighted that end users can assist in validation and
iterative improvement of DSSs through forums that allow for user feedback, such as user
advisory groups.
The sixth theme is that DSS end users need both education and training in DSS concepts
and tools. Education refers to the development of a comprehensive understanding of risk
and risk-informed decision making. Training refers to the necessary steps to develop and
apply DSS outputs in programs of work and decision-making. As one boundary spanner
said, “Our line ofﬁcers and ﬁre managers need to be educated in risk, not trained but
educated. Training tells you how to go through step A to step B, and C or D, or whatever.
Education gives you the ability to work on a problem and apply concepts to the problem.

Forests 2021, 12, 483
13 of 18
Right now, most of our folks are not well educated in risk or educated at all in risk” (DSS2).
Education is also a way to change existing paradigms and cultures in ﬁre management that
were identiﬁed as barriers by some respondents. Changing paradigms and cultures takes
time, so some interviewees recommended continuing education programs and revised
or new qualiﬁcations that could facilitate both education and training relevant to DSS
development and integration. With respect to training, the “train-the-trainer” approach
was mentioned by several respondents as an efﬁcient strategy to deliver DSS concepts
to geographically dispersed management units. Train-the-trainer is a model whereby a
local user is trained to use a DSS and then returns to his or her local unit to train his or
her colleagues. Respondents also noted that user workshops are helpful for DSS training.
Some respondents highlighted that workshops also need to focus on interpreting and using
DSS outputs, not just processing data and models to produce DSS outputs. One manager
noted, “We’re working on . . . more of a user type of workshop, how do you use this data
in ArcGIS, how can you put it in a NEPA (National Environmental Policy Act) analysis,
how could you use it in a burn plan” (DSS25).
The seventh recommendation was that leadership intent for integrating and using DSSs
should be clearly articulated through policies, guidance, and authorities. Interviewees recom-
mended several ways in which policies, guidance, and authorities could be revised to
illustrate a coherent and explicit leadership vision and intent for using DSSs. Some re-
spondents felt that explicit, national guidance was needed. Other respondents noted that
developing guidance for DSSs is challenging, in part, because the science and technology
are constantly evolving. Thus, one recommendation for clarity in leadership intent is to
start by articulating a compelling “why” for using a speciﬁc approach and associated tools
to garner buy-in and support. This is especially important in a dispersed agency, such
as the Forest Service, which could beneﬁt from clear, consistent communication across
all levels of the agency. Some respondents argued that multi-directional communication
across agency levels is important to ensure that leadership understand the perspective of
DSS users at different management levels. This can be accomplished, in part, by supporting
and empowering thought leaders and change agents, including providing support for
reasonable risk-taking. To that end, it is important to strike a balance between articulating
leadership intent from the top, while also communicating local and public perspectives
with leadership to inform setting directives. Interviewees also noted that it is important
to develop incentives and accountability for using DSSs, which requires some degree of
evaluation and documentation. In short, many respondents argued for a more structured
approach to decision-making, which has also been articulated by other researchers [13,23].
As one manager explained, “I have a dream. We need an integrated approach and commit-
ment to structured, risk-informed decision making . . . And one of the next steps is some
assessment of the analytic capability in the agency and how we want to leverage it . . . And
if we use a structured decision-making approach, I actually might come up with a fairly
reasonable set of next steps” (DSS7).
4. Discussion
This paper has provided an overview of the human dimensions of using DSSs for
wildﬁre risk assessment and fuels treatment planning and prioritization by forest and ﬁre
managers, especially in the context of the Forest Service in the U.S. The purpose of the
paper was to elucidate the use of spatial, pre-ﬁre planning DSSs and develop recommen-
dations for improving their use. Although many barriers to the effective development,
integration, and use of DSSs in spatial, pre-ﬁre planning were identiﬁed, some of which
have been noted in previous studies [3,11–13,18,19,30], this study sought to also identify
respondent-informed, actionable recommendations for overcoming those barriers. Respon-
dents provided numerous recommendations, which are intended to inform the perspectives
of science, management, and decision-making audiences working to improve the use of
DSSs for wildﬁre risk assessment and treatment prioritization. A limitation of this study is
that it does not provide an evaluation of speciﬁc DSSs and their uses, rather, it is a broad

Forests 2021, 12, 483
14 of 18
assessment of the human dimensions of DSS use in both wildﬁre risk assessment and fuels
treatment prioritization planning contexts. Future research should include evaluations
of DSSs to understand their use in speciﬁc contexts (e.g., [32]), as well as communicate
lessons learned and successes in DSS use.
Barriers to the use of DSSs are summarized in Table 5. These results highlight that
one of the primary challenges is uneven use, lack of use, and confusion about the use of
DSSs [12]. Respondents, including scientist/developers, noted that confusion is under-
standable due to the numerous DSSs in existence [11,13]. Additionally, respondents noted
that there are cultural and institutional barriers to the use of DSSs that are illustrative of a
changing paradigm in ﬁre science and management, as well as necessitate new approaches
to education and training [2,5,24,31]. Barriers also arise due to a lack of consistent and clear
communication across agencies tasked with forest and ﬁre management [4]. Nonetheless,
there is a growing awareness and recognition of these types of barriers both in research and
in practice. Many of these barriers stem from what has been characterized as a disconnect
between science and management that is not exclusive to the topic of pre-ﬁre planning,
but pervades many complex natural resource management issues that seek to integrate
scientiﬁc information into decision-making [43–45]. The barriers identiﬁed in this study
are, therefore, not insurmountable, and many of the facilitators and recommendations
provided by respondents align with a growing body of research that articulates ways in
which to better develop actionable scientiﬁc information, including DSSs, to inform natural
resource management decision-making [46,47].
Facilitators to the use of DSSs in spatial, pre-ﬁre planning identiﬁed by respondents
are summarized in Table 5. These facilitators demonstrate the importance of processes to
develop and integrate DSSs that are focused on developing buy-in and trust in the concepts
and outputs through iterative, sustained communication and engagement between DSS
users, boundary spanners, and scientists/developers. This process is often referred to as
the co-production of knowledge, which can refer to a wide range of science development
and application practices [43] that are focused on creating scientiﬁc information that
is credible, salient, and legitimate [44], as well as actionable by the intended users of
that information [45]. The co-production of knowledge is a time-intensive process, but
developing actionable, user-oriented scientiﬁc information can be facilitated through a
range of engagements that are speciﬁcally designed to produce usable information [46].
These engagements often occur through boundary spanning activities, which intentionally
bridge the spheres of science and decision making and are often facilitated by boundary
organizations through two-way, sustained interactions between scientists/developers and
DSS end users [44,47]. Many respondents alluded to the concepts of co-production and
boundary spanning without explicitly using the terms, which suggests both the value of the
concepts and their growing prevalence in science-management interactions. Respondents
also noted that, when DSSs are developed in this way, that the use of their outputs enhances
decisions, further emphasizing that these forms of engagement and DSS development can
make outputs more actionable for decision making.
Most importantly, respondents identiﬁed seven key recommendations to improve the
use of DSSs in spatial, pre-ﬁre planning (Table 5). These recommendations range in terms of
the level of potential complexity, cost, and feasibility their implementation would represent.
Furthermore, some of these recommendations align with efforts that are underway to
varying degrees. It should also be acknowledged that the reality of implementing these
recommendations may vary depending on the context of the ﬁre or forest management
agency in which they are being implemented. While these recommendations are largely
tailored for the Forest Service, if only one land management agency were to implement
these types of changes, they would likely be less impactful due to the cross-boundary
nature of wildland ﬁre management challenge. These recommendations also have varying
relevance to different audiences. For example, the recommendation that communication
about DSSs must be done in a common language and sustained through time to build relationships
and trust, applies to all audiences, and is something that has been addressed in previous

Forests 2021, 12, 483
15 of 18
work [14]. As respondents highlighted, this recommendation can be accomplished by
establishing a common language early in a collaborative, pre-ﬁre planning process and
being consistent in the use of that language.
Other recommendations are more relevant to scientist/developer and boundary span-
ner audiences. For example, the recommendation that it is critical to ﬁrst determine the
question that a DSS is meant to inform and then develop and integrate it accordingly aligns
with the concepts of co-production and boundary spanning [43,45] and is increasingly
a common practice in the development of science that is meant to inform management
decisions. There are multiple spatial, pre-ﬁre planning DSSs that employ this approach
to varying degrees, such as PODs (Table 4), which are developed through collaborative
processes that incorporate local knowledge [26,27,41]. The recommendation that DSSs
should be validated and tested with end users is also more relevant to scientist/developer and
boundary spanner audiences and is another example of a recommendation that is being
used more frequently in the development of many of the DSSs referred to be interviewees
(Table 4). Validation and testing can include both ground-truthing of DSS outputs, as well
as documentation and evaluation of decisions in which DSS outputs were incorporated.
This can lead to iterative improvement in DSSs over time.
The recommendation that implementation planning can ensure that DSS outputs are
used is more relevant to manager audiences. This recommendation would not require
signiﬁcant additional capacity to implement, since it focuses on ensuring that new DSSs
are incorporated into existing programs of work. However, it would require clear and
consistent communication within the management community—including among fuels,
ﬁre, and resource staff and line ofﬁcers in the context of the Forest Service—to ensure that
there is awareness of the DSSs, a consistent articulation of how they will be, implementation
plans and schedules, and regular updates to DSS data and outputs. Additionally, managers
could work with scientists/developers and boundary spanners to identify appropriate
implementation plans and validation processes to ensure that DSSs are being used as
intended and evaluated for relevance [12].
The last three recommendations are most relevant to leadership and policy audiences
and are the most complex and challenging to implement. The recommendation that
leadership intent for integrating and using DSSs should be clearly articulated through policies,
guidance, and authorities could begin with steps such as articulating a compelling “why” for
using a particular DSSs, which can then be reﬁned and communicated multi-directionally
across the levels of the Forest Service. Clear, consistent communication does not require
additional resources to implement, but it does require commitment to the process. Leaders
can also help to develop incentives for using DSSs and empower innovative thought leaders
working to expand the use of DSSs. Leadership intent can also be articulated through
explicit, national level guidance, which is already in existence in frameworks like the
National Cohesive Strategy [6] or Shared Stewardship [8], though there could be additional
work to better articulate the expectations and goals of pre-ﬁre planning DSS use in many of
these broader policies and frameworks. The recommendations that analytical capacity and
funding to develop, integrate, and use DSSs needs to be increased and that DSS end users need
both education and training in DSS concepts and tools are more complex and challenging to
implement. Nonetheless, ensuring the use of DSSs in spatial, pre-ﬁre planning requires a
sufﬁcient number of analysts who are located strategically to provide support to decision
makers, and analysts are developed through appropriate education and training programs.
Leadership and policymakers could begin to explore how to support the need for increased
analytical capacity within agencies to support the use of DSSs, as well as integrate the
necessary training, continuing education, and certiﬁcation processes within forest and ﬁre
management agencies [5,31]. For example, revised qualiﬁcations for using DSSs could be
developed to support the ongoing use of these tools and the need for continued education.
Lastly, many respondents deﬁned DSSs in broad terms. Respondents made distinc-
tions among data, software, and outputs when asked to deﬁne DSSs or DSTs. As has
been noted, there are many DSSs in use, and those referenced in this paper (Table 4) are

Forests 2021, 12, 483
16 of 18
not a comprehensive summary (e.g., [11,13]). Nonetheless, due to the confusion about
differences in DSSs expressed by respondents, as well as the other barriers identiﬁed by
respondents, a clear organization of DSSs in a user-oriented framework that could be
coupled with the other recommendations may be warranted. Such a framework could
be updated as new tools emerge or existing tools evolve, but it is imperative that it be
organized in such a way as to facilitate end-user understanding of the different DSSs and
where they can be applied in different decision spaces or decision contexts (e.g., long-term,
strategic planning; short-term, tactical planning; and scene-of-action decision-making). A
framework for organizing DSSs according to the themes from this research is provided in
Figure 1. The framework distinguishes between data or DSS inputs, which are processed
to create ﬁrst-order products such as ﬁre probability surfaces that can provide decision
support without any further processing. However, the framework also acknowledges that
ﬁrst-order products can be further processed with different models, systems, or analysis
methods to produce second-order products that provide an added level of information for
decision making (e.g., QWRA or PODs, see Table 4). Both ﬁrst- and second-order products
can be generated at different geographic and temporal scales, as well as resolutions. Each of
these different types of outputs has potential use for decision making, but there is a need to
better organize them according to the different decision spaces in which they are relevant.
Figure 1. A framework for organizing spatial, pre-ﬁre planning DSSs to support end-user under-
standing and use of tools. Decision space (white boxes) refers to different decision contexts such as
long-term, strategic planning; short-term, tactical planning; and scene-of-action decision-making.
This framework is a proposed path forward for better organizing existing and future
DSSs according to the types of decisions their outputs can inform and to better contex-
tualize them for end users. An organization of DSSs could be coupled with the other
recommendations from this study to work toward a more efﬁcient use of DSSs to support
science-based, collaborative, strategic pre-ﬁre planning that acknowledges a changing
paradigm around forest and ﬁre risk management.
Funding: This research was funded by a grant from the United States Department of Agriculture
Forest Service.
Data Availability Statement: The interview recordings for this study were deleted after transcription
in accordance with the Institutional Review Board (IRB) requirements for this study. The transcripts

Forests 2021, 12, 483
17 of 18
have been de-identiﬁed and are kept in a secure location managed by the author. Data requests will
be considered on an as needed basis in accordance with IRB rules. Transcripts for this study will be
deleted in 2025 in accordance with IRB rules.
Acknowledgments: I am grateful for the contributions and time of the interview participants whose
knowledge and perspectives informed this report. I am also grateful for the time and perspectives
of my colleagues in the ﬁeld who helped in the conceptualization of this study. Northern Arizona
University is an equal opportunity provider.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1.
Schoennagel, T.; Balch, J.K.; Brenkert-Smith, H.; Dennison, P.E.; Harvey, B.J.; Krawchuk, M.A.; Mietkiewicz, N.; Morgan, P.;
Moritz, M.A.; Rasker, R.; et al. Adapt to more wildﬁre in western North American forests as climate changes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 2017, 18, 4582–4590. [CrossRef]
2.
Dunn, C.J.; O’Connor, C.D.; Abrams, J.; Thompson, M.P.; Calkin, D.E.; Johnston, J.D.; Stratton, R.; Gilbertson-Day, J. Wildﬁre risk
science facilitates adaptation of ﬁre-prone social-ecological systems to the new ﬁre reality. Environ. Res. Lett. 2019, 15. [CrossRef]
3.
Greiner, S.M.; Schultz, C.A.; Kooistra, C. Pre-season ﬁre management planning: The use of Potential Operational Delineations to
prepare for wildland ﬁre events. Int. J. Wildland Fire 2020. [CrossRef]
4.
Stratton, R. The path to strategic wildland ﬁre management planning. Wildﬁre 2020, 29, 24–31.
5.
Thompson, M.P.; MacGregor, D.G.; Dunn, C.J.; Calkin, D.E.; Phipps, J. Rethinking the wildland ﬁre management system. J. For.
2018, 116, 382–390. [CrossRef]
6.
Wildland Fire Leadership Council. The National Strategy: The Final Phase in the Development of National Cohesive Wildland
Fire Management Strategy. 2014; 101p. Available online: https://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/strategy/thestrategy.shtml
(accessed on 13 April 2021).
7.
USDA Forest Service. Forest Service Manual 5100–Wildland Fire Management, Chapter 5140–Hazardous Fuels Management and
Prescribed Fire; USDA Forest Service National Headquarters (WO): Washington, DC, USA, 2020; 17p.
8.
USDA Forest Service. Toward Shared Stewardship Across Landscapes: An Outcome-Based Investment Strategy; USDA Forest Service
National Headquarters (WO): Washington, DC, USA, 2018; 28p. Available online: https://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/
toward-shared-stewardship.pdf (accessed on 11 February 2021).
9.
United States Congress. H.R. 1625 Consolidated Appropriations Act (PL115-141). 2018. Available online: https://www.congress.
gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/1625/text (accessed on 11 February 2021).
10.
O’Connor, C.D.; Thompson, M.P.; Rodríguez y Silva, F. Getting ahead of the wildﬁre problem: Quantifying and mapping
management challenges and opportunities. Geosciences 2016, 6, 35. [CrossRef]
11.
Pacheco, A.P.; Claro, J.; Fernandes, P.M.; de Neufville, R.; Oliveira, T.M.; Borges, J.G.; Coelho Rodrigues, J. Cohesive ﬁre
management within an uncertain environment: A review of risk handling and decision support systems. For. Ecol. Manag. 2015,
347, 1–17. [CrossRef]
12.
Rapp, C.; Rabung, E.; Wilson, R.; Toman, E. Wildﬁre decision support tools: An exploratory study of use in the United States. Int.
J. Wildland Fire 2020, 29, 581–594. [CrossRef]
13.
Thompson, M.P.; Wei, Y.; Calkin, D.E.; O’Connor, C.D.; Dunn, C.J.; Anderson, N.M.; Hogland, J.S. Risk management and analytics
in wildﬁre response. Curr. For. Rep. 2019, 5, 226–239. [CrossRef]
14.
Thompson, M.P.; Zimmerman, T.; Mindar, D.; Taber, M. Risk Terminology Primer: Basic Principles and a Glossary for the Wildland Fire
Management Community; General Technical Report 349; USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: Ft. Collins, CO,
USA, 2016; 19p.
15.
Esch, B.E.; Waltz, A.E.M.; Wasserman, T.N.; Kalies, E.L. Using best available science information: Determining best and available.
J. For. 2018, 116, 473–480. [CrossRef]
16.
Colavito, M.M. Utilising scientiﬁc information to support resilient forest and ﬁre management. Int. J. Wildland Fire 2017, 26,
375–383. [CrossRef]
17.
Hunter, M.E. Outcomes of ﬁre research: Is science used? Int. J. Wildland Fire 2016, 25, 495–504. [CrossRef]
18.
Hunter, M.E.; Colavito, M.M.; Wright, V. The use of science in wildland ﬁre management: A review of barriers and facilitators.
Curr. For. Rep. 2020, 6, 354–367. [CrossRef]
19.
White, E.M.; Lindberg, K.; Davis, E.J.; Spies, T.A. Use of science and modeling by practitioners in landscape-scale management
decisions. J. For. 2019, 117, 267–279. [CrossRef]
20.
Wright, V. Inﬂuences to the Success of Fire Science Delivery: Perspectives of Potential Fire/Fuels Science Users; JFSP #04-4-2-01.
2010. Available online: https://www.ﬁrescience.gov/projects/04-4-2-01/project/04-4-2-01_vw_jfsp_ﬁnal_report.pdf (accessed
on 13 April 2021).
21.
Wurtzebach, Z.; Schultz, C.A.; Waltz, A.E.M.; Esch, B.E.; Wasserman, T.N. Adaptive governance and the administrative state:
Knowledge management for forest planning in the Western United States. Reg. Environ. Chang. 2019, 19, 2651–2666. [CrossRef]

Forests 2021, 12, 483
18 of 18
22.
Timberlake, T.J.; Schultz, C.A.; Evans, A.; Abrams, J.B. Working on institutions while planning for forest resilience: A case study
of public land management in the United States. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 2020, 1–21. [CrossRef]
23.
Calkin, D.C.; Finney, M.A.; Ager, A.A.; Thompson, M.P.; Gebert, K.M. Progress towards and barriers to implementation of a risk
framework for US federal wildland ﬁre policy and decision making. For. Policy Econ. 2011, 13, 378–389. [CrossRef]
24.
Calkin, D.E.; Thompson, M.P.; Finney, M.A. Negative consequences of positive feedbacks in US wildﬁre management. For. Ecosyst.
2015, 2, 1–10. [CrossRef]
25.
Calkin, D.E.; Ager, A.A.; Gilbertson-Day, J. Wildﬁre Risk and Hazard: Procedures for the First Approximation; General Technical
Report RMRS-GTR-235; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: Fort Collins, CO,
USA, 2010; 62p.
26.
Caggiano, M.D. Potential Operational Delineations and Northern New Mexico’s 2019 Fire Season; CFRI-2002; Colorado Forest
Restoration Institute: Ft. Collins, CO, USA, 2020; 8p. Available online: https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22
/2020/02/Caggiano_PODs-New-Mexico-Case-Study-2.14.20.pdf (accessed on 11 February 2021).
27.
O’Connor, C.D.; Calkin, D.E. Engaging the ﬁre before it starts: A case study from the 2017 Pinal Fire (Arizona). Wildﬁre 2019,
28, 14–18.
28.
Rodríguez y Silva, F.; O’Connor, C.D.; Thompson, M.P.; Molina Martínez, J.R.; Calkin, D.E. Modelling suppression difﬁculty:
Current and future applications. Int. J. Wildland Fire 2020, 29, 739–751. [CrossRef]
29.
Esch, B.; Waltz, A.E.M. Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Projects; ERI
White Paper–Issues in Forest Restoration; Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University: Flagstaff, AZ, USA,
2019; 12p. Available online: https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/1015/rec/36 (accessed on
11 February 2021).
30.
Colavito, M.M.; Wasserman, T.N.; Vosick, D. All-Lands Planning, Coordination, and Wildﬁre Risk Reduction Project Report; Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University: Flagstaff, AZ, USA, 2018; 54p. Available online: https://cdm17192.contentdm.
oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/913/rec/2/ (accessed on 11 February 2021).
31.
Schultz, C.A.; Thompson, M.P.; McCaffrey, S.M. Forest Service ﬁre management and the elusiveness of change. Fire Ecol. 2019, 15,
13. [CrossRef]
32.
Noble, P.; Paveglio, T.B. Exploring adoption of the Wildland Fire Decision Support System: End user perspectives. J. For. 2020,
118, 154–171. [CrossRef]
33.
Dunn, K. Interviewing. In Qualitative Research Methods in Human Geography, 2nd ed.; Hay, I., Ed.; Oxford University Press:
Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2008; pp. 79–105.
34.
Bernard, H.R.; Ryan, G. Analyzing Qualitative Data: Systematic Approaches; Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2010; 480p.
35.
Strauss, A.L.; Corbin, J.M. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques; Sage Publications: Newbury
Park, CA, USA, 1990; 270p.
36.
Saldaña, J. The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers; Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2016; 339p.
37.
Schultz, C.A.; Kooistra, C.; Miller, L.; Ferguson, M. Findings from a Third-Party Assessment of the U.S. Forest Service’s Risk Management
Assistance Teams; Public Lands Policy Group, Colorado State University: Ft. Collins, CO, USA, 2020; 40p.
38.
Ager, A.A.; Houtman, R.M.; Seli, R.; Day, M.A.; Bailey, J. Integrating large wildﬁre simulation and forest growth modeling
for restoration planning. In Proceedings of the 2017 Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) e-Conference; Tech. Rep. SRS-224.
Keyser, C.E., Keyser, T.L., Eds.; U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service, Southern Research Station: Asheville, NC, USA,
2017; pp. 129–137.
39.
Scott, J.; Thompson, M.P.; Calkin, D.E. A Wildﬁre Risk Assessment Framework for Land and Resource Management; Gen. Tech. Rep.
RMRS-GTR-315; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: Fort Collins, CO, USA,
2013; 83p.
40.
Rothermel, R.C. A Mathematical Model for Predicting Fire Spread in Wildland Fuels; USDA Forest Service Research Paper INT-115;
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: Ogden, UT, USA, 1972; 40p.
41.
Caggiano, M.D. Collaboratively Engaging Stakeholders to Develop Potential Operational Delineations; CFRI-1908; Colorado Forest
Restoration Institute: Ft. Collins, CO, USA, 2019; 10p. Available online: https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22
/2019/08/PODs-Collaborative-Engagement-Final-Report.pdf (accessed on 11 February 2021).
42.
Ager, A.A.; Houtman, R.M.; Day, M.A.; Ringo, C.; Palaiologou, P. Tradeoffs between US National Forest harvest targets and fuel
management to reduce wildﬁre transmission to the wildland urban interface. For. Ecol. Manag. 2019, 434, 99–109. [CrossRef]
43.
Bremer, S.; Meisch, S. Co-production in climate change research: Reviewing different perspectives. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Clim.
Chang. 2017, 8, e482. [CrossRef]
44.
Cash, D.W.; Clark, W.C.; Alcock, F.; Dickson, N.M.; Eckley, N.; Guston, D.H.; Jager, J.; Mitchell, R.B. Knowledge systems for
sustainable development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2003, 100, 8086–8091. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
McNie, E.C. Delivering climate services: Organizational strategies and approaches for producing useful climate-science informa-
tion. Weather Soc. 2013, 5, 14–26. [CrossRef]
46.
Meadow, A.M.; Ferguson, D.C.; Guido, Z.; Horangic, A.; Owen, G.; Wall, T. Moving toward the deliberate coproduction of climate
science knowledge. Weather Soc. 2015, 7, 179–191. [CrossRef]
47.
Colavito, M.M.; Trainor, S.F.; Kettle, N.P.; York, A. Making the transition from science delivery to knowledge coproduction in
boundary spanning: A case study of the Alaska Fire Science Consortium. Weather Soc. 2019, 11, 917–934. [CrossRef]
