View this email in your browser
Climate Change and Forest Adaptation: Building a
Strategy for Science-Based Action
Climate change represents one of the most complex and unique challenges for
natural resource management and poses an existential threat to sustaining the
nation’s forests and grasslands. It is well documented that wildﬁres across the
western US have increased in size, frequency, and severity since the 1950s.
These changes are closely linked with increases in temperature and an
increased frequency and intensity of drought.
Land management agencies recognize there is a growing need to incorporate
climate science into natural resource decision-making. To help land managers
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

as they work to better understand science-based adaptation strategies, the ERI
is partnering with the US Forest Service Southwestern Region (R3) to help
build a regional climate adaptation strategy. Our effort builds on the existing
climate change science in the Southwest and will integrate with forest plans,
the R3 analysis framework for landscape-scale projects, and other conventions
of the Southwestern Region. 
A body of research at ERI and elsewhere supports the urgent need for active
management and restoration work to protect and enhance at-risk ecosystems
that provide life-sustaining services, as well as communities at risk from
wildﬁre. The ERI works to translate and transfer this science to inform decision
making and policy that seeks to avoid catastrophic wildﬁre and mitigate the
effects of climate change. To view the latest ERI climate change research and
science syntheses as they relate to forest restoration and wildﬁres, click here.
 
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
View ERI Climate Effects Research

NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
