View this email in your browser
Map showing the four
study sites in northern
Arizona. The sites span a
precipitation gradient from
the drier sites at Mt.
Trumbull (MT) and
Grandview (GV) in
northwestern Arizona to
the wetter sites at Fort
Valley (FV) and Mineral
Creek (MC) in the north
and east-central areas of
the state, respectively.
Restoration Increases Resilience to Climate Change in
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
An Analysis of 20 Years of Forest Restoration Treatments 
A recent study led by Mike Stoddard and a team of ERI-NAU ecologists
examined two decades of ecological responses to forest restoration treatments
at a set of sites in ERI’s Long-term Ecological Assessment and Restoration
Network (LEARN). The analysis showed that restoration treatments increase
resilience to climate change in southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
 
Despite the widespread use of restoration treatments across the western US
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

for the past few decades, questions remain regarding long-term effectiveness
and potential for treatments to increase ecological resilience to changing
climatic conditions and severe wildﬁre. 
The team’s objectives were to compare long-term forest responses in paired
treated and untreated control units across a range of ponderosa pine sites to
assess indicators of forest resilience to climatic stressors and potential crown
ﬁre. They also used a climate-sensitive simulation model to predict future
outcomes for not only treatment pairs but historical reference conditions. 
 
The study demonstrated that evidence-based restoration treatments — those
that approximate site-speciﬁc patterns of tree density, spatial locations, and
surface ﬁre — have lasting effects on canopy fuels and forest structure, which
also confers a degree of drought resistance. However, results from this study
also showed a concerning loss of ponderosa pine basal area toward the end of
the climate change simulation period (2090) under a moderate emissions
scenario. 
 
Results from the study also suggested that management of ﬁre regimes even at
longer-than-historical intervals may be needed to maintain basal area within the
historical range of variability, and could allow sufﬁcient opportunities for pine
seedlings to establish under a moderate level of climate change. 
 
MORE ABOUT LEARN
In the Southwest, the ERI’s Long-term Ecological Assessment and Restoration
Network (LEARN) provides a scientiﬁcally rigorous approach to understanding
ecological effects of restoration treatments. For more than 20 years, LEARN
has had the continued support and cooperation from land management
agencies due to its potential to provide a gold standard of best available
science for ecosystem management.
 
READ FULL JOURNAL ARTICLE
Ecological restoration guided by historical reference conditions can increase
resilience to climate change of southwestern U.S. Ponderosa pine forests
 
MORE ABOUT LEARN

What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
