Wood for Life 
A Tribal Firewood Partnership in Northern Arizona 
Introduction 
Wood for Life (WFL) is a collaborative program comprised of a network of organizations in northern 
Arizona working to achieve common goals. The primary goals are to provide resources and a 
sustainable source of firewood to local tribes through forest restoration efforts; to reduce forest-wide 
fuels; and to foster and strengthen partner relationships.  
Much of northern Arizona’s forests are in degraded health. They are overly dense and prone to 
disturbances like catastrophic fire, drought, and disease and insect outbreaks. Forest restoration 
activities that involve the removal of hazardous fuels through mechanical thinning operations reduces 
the risk of severe fire and post-fire flooding. However, the small-diameter trees and biomass thinned 
from the forests have little to no market value, and there is limited forest products industry capacity in 
the region. Leaving piled wood on a project site for more than a few months increases the risk of fire 
and insect infestation. The lack of industry and forest product markets in the region has delayed large-
scale forest restoration efforts, but a diverse set of stakeholders have come together to create 
innovative solutions that spur forest restoration and improve community health and well-being.  
Many homes on the Navajo Nation and Hopi 
Reservation in northern Arizona are not connected to 
the power grid and rely on coal and wood for home 
heating. The closure of the Navajo Generating Station 
(NGS) and the coal mine in Kayenta in 2019 left many 
tribal members vulnerable to energy uncertainty.  
Transitioning homes from coal to firewood for heating 
and cooking is feasible as a transitional or long-term 
fuel source, and forest restoration on National Forest 
System (NFS) lands can generate an abundant fuelwood 
supply. However, transportation of wood is a long-term 
challenge, and the COVID-19 pandemic and stay-at-
home orders increases challenges for securing and 
transporting firewood.  
To address these challenges, WFL’s vision is to facilitate the delivery of a sustainable and substantial 
amount of firewood to tribal partners from forest restoration projects on NFS lands. The WFL program 
connects wood from forest restoration projects with local tribal communities in need of firewood for 
heating, cooking, and traditional uses. The project seeks to address two very different—but both 
critically important—needs. It facilitates the removal of small trees and biomass from NFS lands while 
simultaneously providing tribal neighbors with firewood.  
This document provides an overview of the WFL partnership, summarizes approaches and lessons 
learned, and highlights future opportunities.  
May 2021 
Photo courtesy of Ancestral Lands Hopi 
1

Project History 
In 2018, the Kaibab and Coconino national forests in northern Arizona began working with tribal 
governments on the Navajo Nation and Hopi Tribe to provide free firewood tags to be used for at-risk 
tribal members. The forests also began selling and providing free firewood permits at tribal 
community events. The programs were later expanded to support local village and chapter crews 
accessing the forest to cut wood for distribution to community members. The program was effective, 
but small in scale. 
The closure of NGS and the Black Mesa coal mine in 2019 greatly affected local tribal communities 
and resulted in a large reduction of revenue for tribal governments, a devastated economy, and the loss 
of free or reduced-price coal to tribal members. Nearby national forests subsequently began to see an 
uptick from tribal communities and support groups asking for considerable amounts of wood through 
Free Use Permits. While a truckload of coal might last one family a month, a truckload of firewood 
might only last 1–2 weeks, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic when people were quarantined 
and needed to warm their homes day and night. In some cases, the increased demand for firewood led 
to illegal harvesting of limited wood supply on tribal lands. The lack of fuel was very much a life or 
death issue for some. Additionally, transporting wood from the national forests to tribal communities, 
some of which are more than a half-day’s drive apart, emerged as another key barrier for tribal 
members in need of fuel and/or a vehicle capable of hauling wood. 
In response to the need for firewood on tribal lands, the need for removing forest restoration 
byproducts on NFS lands, and the challenge of transporting wood to tribal communities, numerous 
partners came together and formed Wood for Life. The national forests began hosting field trips to 
support tribal wood collection efforts, and in early 2020, the National Forest Foundation (NFF) began 
working with partners to raise funds and pilot efforts to transport wood, with an eye toward partnership 
building, overcoming challenges, and managing costs associated with transportation. Whole logs were 
delivered to several tribal communities where they were cut by local volunteers and distributed to 
community members.  
Since these initial pilots, interest and momentum in WFL has steadily grown. WFL now consists of a 
network of more than 20 partners and organizations1 that collectively have supplied, delivered, and 
processed more than 1,500 cords of wood in one year. This network is supported by a core team, 
including the Kaibab and Coconino national forests, National Forest Foundation, Navajo Chapters, 
Hopi Foundation, Conservation Legacy Ancestral Lands Conservation Corps, City of Flagstaff, and 
Northern Arizona University’s Ecological Restoration Institute, that works to coordinate opportunities 
between restoration projects and tribal partners.  
Approach and Lessons Learned 
The WFL network has three primary focus areas, each of which have associated challenges, successes, 
and lessons learned. These include: 1) wood supply coming from NFS lands; 2) transportation of 
firewood from NFS lands to processing centers and/or tribal communities; 3) firewood processing 
and distribution on tribal lands.  
Wood Supply 
Wood supply has been provided by restoration projects administered by the national forests and 
agreements with implementation partners (e.g., NFF, The Nature Conservancy, and City of Flagstaff). 
The national forests identified the wood supplies and provided them to tribal partners through a variety 
of scales, agreement types, and authorities.  
1 Partners as of Spring 2021: Coconino and Kaibab national forests, National Forest Foundation, Conservation Legacy Ancestral Lands Conservation Corps, Four 
Forest Restoration Initiative, Navajo Nation Dept. of Forestry, Cameron, Tuba City, Birdsprings, and Leupp Chapters, Ames Family, Honanie Family, Hopi Tribe, 
Hopi Villages, Hopi Foundation, Conservation Legacy, Red Feather Development Group, Joe Dirt Excavating, University of Arizona Tribal Cooperative Extension, 
Northern Arizona University’s Ecological Restoration Institute, W.L. Gore, church groups, Chizh for Cheii, Alamo Navajo Fuels Crew, The Nature Conservancy, 
and the City of Flagstaff  
2

Free Tag Program: The national forests provided free firewood tags for local tribes through 
administrative free use (36 CFR 223.2 Disposal of Timber for Administrative Use (eCFR)). 
Free Use: Since the COVID-19 pandemic, the national forests have used the following authorities to 
provide wood to tribal communities: 223.5 (scope of free use granted to individuals) and 2462.2 
(applicants granted free use: 3. emergency situations).  
Stewardship Agreements: These are agreement mechanisms that provide for the transfer of forest 
products from national forests to partners that perform services on NFS lands. WFL implementation 
partners have various stewardship agreements in place with the national forests that have generated 
firewood supply. The ownership and responsibility for removal of biomass off-site falls to the partner 
under the Stewardship Agreement. In this capacity, the partner has the authority to work directly with 
tribal governments or non-profits to arrange for transfer of materials. 
Section 323 Public Law 108-7, 2003 — National forests may enter into stewardship projects via 
agreement or contract with individuals, public, or private entities, to perform services to achieve land 
management goals to meet community needs.  
Key Lessons/Challenges: During the COVID-19 pandemic, the national forests provided free firewood 
tags through existing authorities. However, the Forest Service could benefit from examining existing 
authorities to find the most appropriate and efficient approach to supporting the program’s longer-term 
needs. The Forest Service is developing new authorities specific to tribal free use, and forests will 
need to determine appropriate limits. Stewardship agreements helped expand the scale of WFL. 
However, they require a partner with the necessary capacity, funding, and objectives in place to 
implement restoration work and facilitate distribution to tribal partners.  
Transportation 
The costs and logistics of transporting small-diameter trees from national forests to the Navajo Nation 
and Hopi Reservation emerged as key barriers. Numerous transportation methods (e.g., dump trucks, 
truck trailers, log trucks with loaders) can be used, each with varying costs and efficiencies.  
WFL has used two primary transportation approaches. The first involves small truck-trailer 
combinations. These can only transport limited amounts of wood but work well for projects that use 
volunteers to transport wood or projects that have relatively small amounts of wood available. For this 
approach to work, the wood is split on site, not decked, or the removal time frame needs to be flexible. 
The second is transportation by log truck. Log trucks can transport substantially more wood in a single 
trip; however, many tribal communities do not have equipment to unload log trucks. A self-loading 
truck can travel with standard log trucks to aid in unloading the vehicles. Self-loading log trucks offer 
efficiencies in cost and scale but require partners to secure storage space for logs and can be limited by 
availability.  
The five key steps of Wood for Life: 1) Wood harvested from forest restoration projects is 2) staged on site, 3) loaded onto 
log trucks or individual trucks and trailers, and 4) delivered to tribal community members for processing and  
5) heating, cooking, or ceremonial purposes.
3

Key Lessons/Challenges: Sustained transportation support is a key challenge to facilitating WFL. 
Transportation needs include equipment, volunteers, government or non-profit support, funding, and 
business models that support tribal community economy and investment. Firewood transportation and 
loading equipment are also needed. For example, a self-loader has been essential to scaling up WFL 
this year; however, the project cannot rely on this piece of equipment, as the owner may sell it due to 
a lack of local licensed drivers. Unloading equipment could allow standard log trucks to be unloaded 
on tribal lands. Additionally, drop-off sites that maximize transportation efficiencies, both in terms of 
distance and number of processing sites, need to be identified. Partner organizations have helped 
meet funding needs for transportation, and the Forest Service has subsidized treatment costs to help 
pay for transportation through Stewardship Agreement funding, but longer-term solutions are needed. 
Processing and Distribution 
Once wood is harvested and transported to tribal lands, it needs to be processed and distributed 
among tribal communities. Partners determine where the wood is unloaded. Once unloaded, it is cut 
into smaller lengths and split by volunteers or paid crews, like crews from the Ancestral Lands 
Conservation Corps. To efficiently process the wood and scale up efforts, equipment, such as log 
splitters, is needed. 
Wood distribution has been guided by tribal government and non-profit partners that develop the 
most appropriate model for each community. Approaches have ranged from broad to targeted efforts. 
In some cases, Facebook posts announce pick-up days at a central location, like the Cameron and 
Tuba City chapters on the Navajo Nation. Other efforts have been more intensive, like on Hopi, 
where partners identify recipients in Hopi villages and Ancestral Lands crews deliver wood directly 
to homes. These different approaches required varying levels of coordination and partnerships, but 
both took a significant amount of time and effort. Even with coordinated efforts, individuals still were 
unable to acquire their needed wood supply.  
Key Lessons/Challenges: Since firewood is an extremely valuable resource on tribal lands, there can 
be political challenges when processing and distributing it. Partnership and leadership from tribal 
communities is essential to navigate and develop equitable processes on the ground and to 
communicate strategies within the WFL partnership. Agreements like Memorandums of 
Understanding between villages and non-profit partners have helped facilitate the process. Increasing 
capacity for processing and distribution, including unloading equipment, will help sustain and scale 
up the WFL effort.  
Photo courtesy of  
Ancestral Lands Hopi 
4

Wood for Life: Looking Forward 
Currently, the national forests use existing authorities and stewardship agreements to supply wood. 
Non-profit organizations and grants support transportation costs. And, tribal governments and 
community non-profits like Ancestral Lands Hopi Conservation Corps coordinate local processing and 
distribution with volunteer efforts and grants. WFL participants see relationship building and 
community-based partnership as key. The partnership is capacity limited and able to operate by 
individuals contributing their time in addition to their existing duties. To build capacity and scale up 
efforts, the partnership is exploring longer-term, innovative solutions, including sustained funding 
support and various business models, and there are several potential opportunities to use existing 
policy, funding, and incentive mechanisms to sustain and expand WFL.  
The Indian Self-Determination and Education 
Assistance Act (PL 93-638) is a legislative act that 
transfers authorities to tribes and recognized tribal 
entities to assume management of specific federal 
programs using a contracting process, often 
referred to as a 638 agreement or contract, unique 
to tribes. The Forest Service works with tribes to 
initiate and implement a 638 agreement to 
accomplish shared stewardship goals under the 
Tribal Forest Protection Act, which allows tribes 
to protect tribal trust lands from risks such as 
wildfire or insects and disease. Tribes can conduct 
restoration work, as well as supply firewood for 
their communities, provide job opportunities, and 
promote movement toward bioenergy self-
sustainability. Additionally, as part of the Tribal Energy Development and Self-Determination Act 
Amendments of 2017 (PL 115-325), the Tribal Biomass Demonstration Project could allow WFL to 
help tribes produce and manage a long-term supply of biomass as a bioenergy resource.  
Potential funding opportunities may come from USDA Rural Development programs and services. 
These programs and services offer various loan and grant opportunities for which federally recognized 
tribes and non-profits could apply. Potential opportunities for funding include but are not limited to: 
transportation, machinery, facilities, energy audits, and business and operational costs.  
Another possible option is to include participation in WFL through the proposed Civilian Climate 
Corps program, which could employ young people from tribes in restoration work. Community 
Project Funding—congressionally directed spending formerly referred to as earmarks—could also be 
used to support WFL via participating partners (the partnership is not a formal entity and cannot 
receive congressionally directed funding at this time).   
Incentives could also be applied to support WFL. Matching payments provided by a program like the 
Biomass Crop Assistance Program could assist with transportation and operational overhead. Another 
incentive could be to offer tax credits for purchasing efficient woodstoves. Inefficient woodstoves can 
have negative health impacts. Upgrading tribal homes to efficient woodstoves is necessary to mitigate 
long-term health impacts. Lastly, investments in tribal programs and businesses would benefit 
economic development and promote financial opportunities. Tribal Economic Development Bonds 
may be an option to secure money from private investors by issuing tax-favored bonds. 
Photo courtesy of Ancestral Lands Hopi 
5

Conclusion 
The Wood for Life program has generated substantial interest in northern Arizona and across the 
western United States. While local context matters and community-based approaches are key to the 
partnership’s success, enabling factors in northern Arizona may be replicated and tailored to other 
geographies, especially with the appropriate coordination and resources. Many restoration projects on 
NFS lands are challenged by a lack of markets for small-diameter trees and biomass. Many 
communities rely on firewood for home heating.   
The success of the program is due to a shared, common purpose across partners, similar levels of 
engagement and commitment, sufficient institutional support from involved organizations, effective 
communication, community-based relationships and coordination with chapters, villages, and tribal 
governments, support from a wide variety of funding sources, and opportunities to learn from 
partnerships in other areas. For example, the NFF also partners with Indigenous communities in Idaho 
to deliver firewood from NFF restoration projects, and is convening a peer learning session to share 
information across regions. 
WFL has faced challenges along the 
way, as well. It has been difficult to 
produce communication products or clear 
marketing or branding materials due to 
limited capacity. The process of 
“learning by doing” has built momentum 
but has been brought setbacks, too. It is 
clear there is a need to build and codify a 
governance system for the network, 
which includes developing an official 
process to bring in new partners and 
enhancing the overall logistical 
efficiency of the program. Additionally, 
quantifying the available wood supply 
for tribal use and the corresponding tribal 
demand for firewood would help 
streamline the program.  
Despite the challenges that emerged from the first phase of WFL, the program has aided in 
accomplishing restoration work on NFS lands and has distributed a significant amount of needed 
firewood to tribal communities. The WFL partners have built relationships through a vast network 
across northern Arizona and new connections are being forged every week.  
Currently, the WFL core team meets once a month and continues to learn by doing. The core team is 
working to develop a charter, a “Frequently Asked Questions” handout, and other foundational and 
operating documents. The team continues to track program efforts, match restoration projects and 
partners with non-profits on tribal lands, facilitate agreement-based work, and stay coordinated.  
The team’s next steps are to establish commitments for wood supply and wood processing, to expand 
training and capacity for firewood project development, to conduct strategic planning with the Hopi 
Tribe through the Hopi Firewood Partnership, and to explore policy connections and funding 
opportunities.  
Photo courtesy of Ancestral Lands Hopi 
6

Media Coverage 
Slate: A Home Heating Crisis. A Devastating Forest Fire Waiting to Happen. One 
Innovative Solution: Wood for Life aims to bring wood harvested from forests at 
risk of megafires to Indigenous elders who are in danger of freezing to death 
National Forest Foundation: COVID-19 Response Effort Provides Crucial 
Firewood Supply to Hopi and Navajo Homes 
University of Arizona Arid Lands Program/Tribal Extension Program: COVID-19 
Response Effort Provides Crucial Firewood Supply to Hopi and Navajo Homes  
Navajo-Hopi Observer: Cameron gets wood delivery: Cameron Chapter House 
partners with U.S. Forest Service, through the National Forest Foundation, to bring 
firewood to Cameron Chapter 
Hopi Tutuveni: Wood deliveries to Polacca  
The Journal: 100 Cords of Firewood Provided to Navajos and Hopi  
Wells Fargo Community Foundation: ‘Wood for Life’ project provides work, 
warmth, and well-being 
More Information 
Wood for Life Tribal Fuelwood Initiative: 
https://www.nationalforests.org/who-we-are/regional-offices/southernrockies/wood-for-
life-tribal-fuelwood-initiative  
Contact Information 
Sasha Stortz 
Arizona Program Manager, National Forest Foundation 
sstortz@nationalforests.org •  (928) 961-0318  
Melanie Colavito 
Director of Policy and Communications, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University 
melanie.colavito@nau.edu • (928) 523-6651 
