View this email in your browser
Sample showing multiple ﬁre scars recorded in the wood of a tree, datable to the year and
sometimes the season of a ﬁre. 
Lines of Evidence: How Reconstructing Historical Fire
Regimes Informs Current and Future Forest Management
The 2020 wildﬁre season set records across the western US. Scientists expect
climate change to exacerbate severe wildﬁres with increasing temperatures
and drought conditions. Add to the mix dense forests full of excess trees and
fuels from more than a century of ﬁre exclusion, and the need for action is
strikingly clear. 
 
A large body of scientiﬁc evidence indicates that modern-day wildﬁres, which
are uncharacteristically large and severe, are not consistent with historical ﬁre
regimes and pose one of the greatest threats to native dry western forest
ecosystems. To better understand the role ﬁ​re can play in forests today,
researchers and managers have found it useful to reconstruct attributes of
historical ​ﬁre regimes before the onset of ﬁ​re exclusion.
 
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

In 2014, ERI published a working paper by Larissa Y. Kent that evaluated
methods for reconstructing ﬁre regimes to help land managers meet their
particular research or resource goals. The working paper discussed several
methods for reconstructing historical ﬁ​re regimes and evaluated their
advantages, disadvantages, inherent uncertainties, assumptions, and temporal
and spatial precision: 
Historical documents and photos
Dendrochronology: ​ﬁre scar data
Dendrochronology: tree age, death and growth data
Forest structure data
Plant traits
Charcoal
Information about past ﬁ​re regimes can be a helpful reference to guide and
inform land managers about current and future ﬁre regime characteristics,
patterns, and forest structure characteristics. Management activities that beneﬁt
from understanding past ​ﬁre regimes include prescribed ﬁ​re, managed wild​ﬁres
for resource beneﬁ​t, and mechanical treatments to reduce ﬁre risk. 
 
Left: Evidence of large, severe ﬁre in spruce and aspen forests, San Francisco
Peaks, near Flagstaff, AZ, 1910. Right: Grasslands and scattered juniper trees,
Reserve Valley, Apache National Forest, 1923. Source: fs.usda.gov
READ THE WORKING PAPER

What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
