The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of com-
munities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues 
related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Mid-Scale Drivers of Variability in Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests  
of the Mogollon Rim, Arizona 
Introduction 
Dry mixed-conifer forests of the American Southwest provide critical ecosystem services such as wildlife 
habitat, watershed protection, carbon sequestration, and nutrient cycling. However, 20th century land use 
practices, such as logging, grazing, and fire exclusion, have disrupted natural fire regimes. The disruption 
of frequent, low-severity fires has altered the structure and composition of these forests and decreased 
their resilience to disturbances such as severe wildfire, insects, disease, and climate change. Restoring 
forest structure and composition can increase ecological 
resilience and allow these ecosystems to resist type conversion 
due to wildfire and climate warming. 
 
Although many restoration prescriptions are guided by historical 
reference conditions, managers still lack a full understanding of 
how environmental factors—such as topography, climate, and 
soil properties—influenced historical forest structure (Figure 1). 
For managers to design appropriate restoration projects, a more 
complete understanding of spatial heterogeneity of these 
environmental factors in dry mixed-conifer forests is needed.  
 
In this Salt River Project-funded study, we addressed these 
knowledge gaps by modeling drivers of historical variability in 
dry mixed-conifer forests on the Mogollon Rim in northern 
Arizona. This research was designed to better understand: 1) the 
historical structural conditions in these ecosystems; 2) whether 
spatial variation changed since fire exclusion; and 3) the relative 
importance of drivers of structural variability both historically 
(prior to widespread fire exclusion) and contemporarily.  
  
Methods 
In this study we used existing pre-treatment data collected from the ERI’s long-term ecological 
assessment and restoration network (LEARN) in 2014 to quantify contemporary conditions. To determine 
the historical variability at our site in the dry mixed-conifer forests of the Mogollon Rim, we 
reconstructed forest structure and composition using field plot data and dendroecological reconstruction 
techniques for the year 1879, the date of widespread fire exclusion. Historical and contemporary spatial 
variability across the study area was evaluated for spatial autocorrelation, which is the tendency for areas 
or sites close together to have similar values. We also used an analytical framework known as structural 
equation modeling (SEM) to assess the relationships between environmental factors, forest structure and 
species composition (Figure 1).  
 
June 2021 
Figure 1. Conceptual model 
representing our initial hypothesis that 
topography, climate, and soil directly 
drive variation in structure and 
composition, and indirectly drive 
variation in structure through 
composition. 

Results 
Historical forest conditions differed significantly from contemporary conditions (Figure 2). Model results 
showed that climate and topography were the main drivers of historical variation in forest structure and 
composition. In the contemporary model, topography and climate had the greatest influence on forest 
composition. Soil was a relatively unimportant driver of variability in both historical and contemporary 
models. Interestingly, environmental factors exhibited a stronger influence on contemporary forest 
conditions than on historical structure and composition, possibly due to anthropogenic exclusion of 
frequent fire. Composition is now a significant driver of forest density, and intermediate conifers and 
sprouting species that would have previously been kept to low densities by frequent fire having increased 
across the study area. 
 
 
Conclusions and Management Implications 
• Overall, our results confirmed that dry mixed-conifer forests on the Mogollon Rim were 
historically heterogeneous at the fine-scale and homogeneous at the mid-scale, and generally open 
prior to anthropogenic fire exclusion.  
• Model results suggested that fire dampened the importance of environmental factors in 
determining structural characteristics historically, and in the contemporary absence of fire, 
environmental factors assumed greater control of structural variation. 
• Study results demonstrate the need for extensive restoration efforts to reduce forest density and 
increase diversity of structural conditions.  
• Topographic characteristics may serve as useful guides for restoring historical forest composition. 
For example, forest managers could consider favoring pine-dominated conditions on ridgetops 
and upper slopes and allow for some mixed composition of conifers and shade-tolerant hardwoods 
in valley bottoms and lower slopes.  
• Managers seeking to increase ecological resilience to climate change are advised to use adaptive 
silvicultural approaches, such as implementing a wide variety of treatments and making use of 
microsite variation to inform prescriptions.  
 
Further Reading 
Huffman, D.W., T.J. Zegler, P.Z. Fulé. 2015. Fire history of a mixed conifer forest on the Mogollon Rim, northern 
Arizona, USA. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 24: 680–689. 
Rodman, K.C., A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, K.M. Waring. 2016. Reference conditions and historical fine-
scale spatial dynamics in a southwestern mixed-conifer forest, Arizona, USA. Forest Science, 62: 268–280.  
Strahan, R., A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, D. Laughlin. 2016. Shifts in community-level traits and functional 
diversity in a mixed conifer forest: a legacy of land-use change. Journal of Applied Ecology, 53: 1755–1765. 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Jaquette, M., A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, and M.A. Bowker. 2021. Mid-Scale Drivers of Variability in 
Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests of the Mogollon Rim, Arizona. Forests, (12) 622.  
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, Tayloe.Dubay@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2. Box plots depicting average 
tree diameter, stand basal area, and 
tree density for historical (1879) and 
contemporary (2014) forest conditions 
for dry mixed-conifer forests of the 
Mogollon Rim, AZ. 
