Article
Mid-Scale Drivers of Variability in Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
of the Mogollon Rim, Arizona
Matthew Jaquette 1, Andrew J. Sánchez Meador 1,*
, David W. Huffman 2 and Matthew A. Bowker 3


Citation: Jaquette, M.; Sánchez
Meador, A.J.; Huffman, D.W.; Bowker,
M.A. Mid-Scale Drivers of Variability
in Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests of the
Mogollon Rim, Arizona. Forests 2021,
12, 622. https://doi.org/10.3390/
f12050622
Academic Editors: Rosemary Sherriff
and Francisco B. Navarro
Received: 6 April 2021
Accepted: 12 May 2021
Published: 14 May 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1
School of Forestry and Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA; Matthew.Jaquette@nau.edu
2
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA;
David.Huffman@nau.edu
3
School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA; Matthew.Bowker@nau.edu
*
Correspondence: Andrew.SanchezMeador@nau.edu; Tel.: +1-928-523-3448
Abstract: The structure and composition of southwestern dry mixed-conifer forests have changed sig-
niﬁcantly, decreasing forest resiliency to uncharacteristic disturbances which also threaten ecosystem
services. Restoration of these forests can be informed by historical conditions; however, managers and
researchers still lack a full understanding of how environmental factors inﬂuence forest conditions.
We investigated historical and contemporary variability in dry mixed-conifer forests in northern
Arizona and identiﬁed important environmental drivers. We utilized forest sample plots and den-
drochronological reconstruction modelling to describe forest conditions in 1879 and 2014, respectively.
We used correlogram analysis to compare spatial autocorrelation of average diameter, basal area
and tree density, and structural equation modeling to partition the causal pathways between forest
structure, forest composition, and a suite of environmental factors reﬂecting climate, topography,
and soil. Historical (1879) reconstructed forests had signiﬁcantly fewer trees, lower basal area, and
higher average diameter than contemporarily (2014). Composition has shifted from ponderosa
pine dominance towards a more mixed-species composition. Historically, forest structure did not
exhibit strong spatial autocorrelation, but contemporary tree density and diameter were strongly
autocorrelated. Environmental factors described little variation in historical forest conditions but are
more important for contemporary conditions. Managers can utilize this increased understanding of
variation to tailor silvicultural prescriptions to environmental templates.
Keywords: forest restoration; historical structural conditions; structural equation modelling; correlo-
gram analysis; ﬁre exclusion
1. Introduction
Mixed-conifer forests cover approximately 1 M hectares in the southwestern United
States [1] and provide critical ecosystem services such as wildlife habitat [2], watershed
protection [3], carbon sequestration, and nutrient cycling [4,5]. However, 20th-century land-
use practices, speciﬁcally unregulated logging, grazing, and active ﬁre suppression, have
disrupted natural ﬁre regimes [6–8]. This has decreased these forests’ resilience [9,10]—the
“ability of an ecosystem to regain structural and functional attributes that have suffered
harm from stress or disturbance” [11]. Disrupting the historical disturbance regimes of
frequent, low-severity ﬁres has altered the structure and composition of these forests
[12–14] and has decreased their resilience to disturbances such as severe wildﬁre, insects,
disease, and climate change [9,10]. Restoring forest structure and composition can increase
ecological resilience, and many restoration prescriptions are guided by historical reference
conditions [11].
Reliance on historical reference conditions assumes that these characteristics can
provide context for managing contemporary ecosystems, and species conservation can be
accomplished by approximating the range of environmental conditions present prior to
Forests 2021, 12, 622. https://doi.org/10.3390/f12050622
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/forests

Forests 2021, 12, 622
2 of 29
ecological degradation [15]. While there has been criticism that historical conditions will
become irrelevant under future climatic conditions [16], restoring a more characteristic
composition and structure would increase ecosystem resiliency [3,9] and allow these
ecosystems to resist type conversion due to wildﬁre and climate warming [9,10,17].
In mixed-conifer forests of the American southwest, species composition varies along
a temperature–moisture gradient. At one end of the spectrum, ‘warm-dry’ mixed-conifer is
dominated by ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and can include other ﬁre-tolerant/shade-
intolerant species such as Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii), Douglas-ﬁr (Pseudotsuga menziesii)
and southwestern white pine (Pinus strobiformis). ‘Cool-moist’ mixed-conifer generally lacks
ponderosa pine and has a greater composition of ﬁre-intolerant/shade-tolerant species such
as quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides), Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii), and white ﬁr
(Abies concolor) [18]. In the warm-dry type, species composition has shifted towards more
shade-tolerant species over the last 100+ years since ﬁre exclusion; ponderosa pine has
decreased in dominance and the proportion of southwestern white pine and white ﬁr have
increased [12–14,19].
Forest density in warm-dry forests has also changed from pre-ﬁre exclusion conditions.
Historically, these forests had densities ranging from 51.6 to 245.6 trees ha−1 and basal areas
of 7.9 to 28.5 m2 ha−1 [9]; however, contemporary forest conditions across the southwest
are much denser [12,14,19–23]. These overly dense forests are at an increased risk of
burning at high severity in an increasing number of large, uncharacteristic ﬁres across
the southwest [24,25]. This contemporary ﬁre regime differs from the natural historical
ﬁre regime of frequent, low- to mixed-severity ﬁres [9]. Mean ﬁre return intervals ranged
from 2 to 8.5 years on the Mogollon Rim in northern Arizona [13] and to 31.6 years in New
Mexico [26] and 32 years in southwestern Colorado [12].
While previous studies have described the natural range of variability, managers still
lack full understanding of the relationships that drove historical forest structure. Topogra-
phy, climate, and soil factors are known to influence forest condition. Topographic models
and measures of solar radiation have been used to understand variation in forest structure
and composition [27,28]. Climate has strong interactions with fire frequency [12,26,29], and
precipitation and climatic water availability drive variation in tree establishment [30–32] and
density [23,33]. Soil properties, especially parent material, also influence forest structure and
composition [23,34–36].
Additionally, a more complete understanding of spatial heterogeneity in dry mixed-
conifer forests is needed. Variability in forests is spatially structured and hierarchically
organized [9,23,37]. Fine-scale (<4 ha) spatial patterns typically describe the arrangement
of individual trees within a stand and are nested within mid-scale (4–400 ha) patterns,
which describe the variation among stands within a landscape. Mid-scale patterns are
further nested within landscape-scale (400+ ha) structure. A review of spatial analyses
in ﬁre-frequent forests found that most spatial analyses of reference conditions have
focused on ﬁne-scale tree patterns of clusters of trees, single trees, and openings that
manifest at scales from 0.4 to 4 ha [9]. However, such patterns might be difﬁcult for forest
managers to implement in stand-level treatments [37]. Landscape restoration projects
that solely focus on ﬁne-scale patterns risk creating landscapes that are heterogeneous at
ﬁne scales, but homogeneous over mid- to landscape scales [38]. The lack of mid-scale
heterogeneity analyses in southwestern dry mixed-conifer forest limits managers from
designing appropriate restoration projects.
Our study addressed these knowledge gaps by investigating drivers of historical vari-
ability in dry mixed-conifer forests on the Mogollon Rim in northern Arizona. Speciﬁcally,
we focused on answering the following research questions: (1) What were the historical
structural conditions in these ecosystems? (2) How did structural conditions vary spatially,
and has spatial variation changed since ﬁre exclusion? and (3) What were the drivers of
variability in these forests, and how have drivers changed in relative importance since
ﬁre exclusion? Answers to these questions can help silviculturists design restoration treat-
ments that have appropriate levels of spatial and structural variability and better reﬂect

Forests 2021, 12, 622
3 of 29
environmental templates. By analyzing forest variability of historical and contemporary
time periods, we can further explore how ﬁre exclusion has impacted these forests.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Study Design
The Mogollon Rim is an escarpment stretching approximately 320 km from northern
Arizona to eastern Arizona and forms the boundary between the Colorado Plateau to the
north and the Southern Basin and Range Province to the south [39]. Our study area on the
Mogollon Rim ranges from 2223 to 2399 m in elevation, has a mean annual temperature
of 9.3 ◦C and a mean annual precipitation of 89 cm (Table A1). The forests fall into the
warm/dry classiﬁcation of mixed-conifer forest [18], with a major component of ponderosa
pine, and a mixture of southwestern white pine, Douglas-ﬁr, white ﬁr, Gambel oak, and
quaking aspen. Additional tree species found on the Mogollon Rim include New Mexico
locust (Robinia neomexicana) and bigtooth maple (Acer grandidentatum) [19]. Low-severity
ﬁres burned frequently on the Mogollon Rim with a mean ﬁre interval of 2 to 8.5 years until
1879 [13]. The forests on the Mogollon Rim are currently the target of restoration efforts to
increase ecological resilience [40] and protect important municipal water supplies [41].
This study utilized existing pre-treatment data collected from the long-term ecological
assessment and restoration network (LEARN) which was established in 2014 by the Eco-
logical Restoration Institute, in coordination with the U.S. Forest Service Mogollon Rim
Ranger District of the Coconino National Forest (see Figure 1). The surveyed area covers
approximately 250 ha, broken into six blocks where each block consisted of three ~16 ha
treatment units with 15 0.04-ha circular, ﬁxed-radius plots arranged on a 60-m grid within
each unit for a total of 270 plots across the study area. Crews completed data collection
in 2014, following methods described in detail in Roccaforte et al. [42]. Surveys recorded
species, diameter at breast height (DBH: 1.37 m above the ground), diameter at stump
height (DSH: 40 cm above the ground), total height, height to the base of the live crown,
two crown radii measurements (long and short side) and condition (live tree, snag, log, cut
stump, etc.) of all trees taller than breast height and all dead trees that may have predated
Euro–American settlement (ca. 1879). Crews collected tree cores on all pre-settlement trees,
trees larger than 40 cm DBH, and 10% of all trees smaller than 40 cm DBH.
 
Figure 1. Map of study area. Points represent the location of selected major cities, and colors ranging
from brown to blue represent low to high elevations. The Mogollon Rim is located southeast of
Flagstaff. The study area on the Mogollon Rim (inset) is arranged into six blocks.

Forests 2021, 12, 622
4 of 29
2.2. Determining Historical Variability
To determine the historical variability at our site in the dry mixed-conifer forests of
the Mogollon Rim, we reconstructed historical forest structure and composition using
ﬁeld plot data and dendroecological reconstruction techniques. These techniques were
developed and discussed in detail most recently by Rodman et al. [19] to incorporate
additional species. This reconstruction model estimated the diameter of each tree during a
set reconstruction year. We used 1879 for the reconstruction year, as a nearby by study [13]
reported this to be the date of ﬁre regime disruption. Historical tree diameters were based
on dendrochronological data (i.e., cross-dated increment cores collected from trees on ﬁeld
plots—see above) when available, and species-speciﬁc “back-growth” regression equa-
tions when dendrochronological data was not available. These “back-growth” equations
estimated the historical diameter using species-speciﬁc growth and bark thickness [43]
equations. Historical diameters for dead trees were estimated by using current diameter
and decomposition equations based on snag/log condition classes to determine death
date [44], and then input into the “back-growth” equations to estimate the diameter during
the reconstruction year. Cut stumps were assigned death dates of either 1965 or 1981,
corresponding with observed releases in tree growth [45] and harvesting operations on
the Mogollon Rim [19]. While this method of reconstructing forest structure may fail to
detect some small trees that died and decomposed prior to the contemporary surveys,
comparisons to historical surveys indicate that 91 to 94% of pre-settlement trees can be
identiﬁed by contemporary surveys in areas lacking recent disturbance [46,47].
We used the results of the reconstruction model to summarize average diameter (DBH;
cm), tree density (trees ha−1), and basal area (m2 ha−1) for each ﬁeld plot. We quantiﬁed
composition by calculating the ecological importance value (EIV; Equation (1)) of each
species in each plot, as described by Curtis and McIntosh [48]. EIV describes the importance
of a given species by accounting for its relative density (abundance) as well as relative
basal area (dominance), of the species. This index ranges from 0 to 2 and is calculated using
the following equation:
EIVspp = nspp
ntotal
+ BAspp
BAtotal
(1)
where EIVspp is the species-speciﬁc ecological importance value; nspp and BAspp are the
species-speciﬁc tree density and basal area, respectively; and ntotal and BAtotal are the total
tree density and basal area, respectively. We summarized these measures of forest structure
and composition across all study plots to determine the historical variability, as well as the
contemporary conditions at our Mogollon Rim site.
2.3. Measuring Spatial Variability
We evaluated spatial variability across the study area by quantifying spatial autocor-
relation. We used the ‘spdep’ package in R [49,50] to calculate Moran’s I [51,52]. We chose
to use Moran’s I to evaluate spatial variability because this metric is useful for describ-
ing patterns of continuous phenomena, estimating the size of patches, and is commonly
used in research (e.g., [14]). Signiﬁcant values of Moran’s I indicate positive and nega-
tive correlations between the attributes of interest for geographically compared plots [53].
We calculated Moran’s I for average diameter, tree density, and basal area and then com-
pared the empirical values at speciﬁed distances (lags) to simulations of expected values
given no signiﬁcant autocorrelation to evaluate signiﬁcance.
When calculated globally (i.e., across the entire study area) Moran’s I describes the
spatial autocorrelation of a variable—that is, whether the variable is distributed indepen-
dently across a landscape or is dependent upon the value of its neighbors. When calculated
locally, Moran’s I can also be plotted over increasing lag distances to create a correlogram,
describing the lag distance at which observations are highly correlated or exhibit spatial
autocorrelation. We calculated a local Moran’s I over 17 lags, where each lag generally
represents the 60 m distance between survey plots. Comparing the correlograms of the

Forests 2021, 12, 622
5 of 29
historical and contemporary data, we visually evaluated whether spatial variability had
changed since the exclusion of natural frequent ﬁre regimes.
The arrangement of the experimental blocks at the study site posed a challenge to
using Moran’s I in our analysis. Ideally, we could evaluate a complete range of distances
up to the maximum distance between any two points in the study area. However, there
are signiﬁcant gaps between some blocks. Blocks 2 through 5 are contiguous but Blocks
1 and 6 are disjunct from the others (see Figure 1). In Blocks 1 and 6, Moran’s I cannot
be calculated across distances larger than the maximum distance within the block, so we
limited our analysis to 1000 m, approximately the distance across one block. While this
hinders our ability to make inferences about landscape spatial patterns, we were still able
to evaluate variability across mid-scales.
2.4. Identifying Drivers of Variability
We used structural equation modeling (SEM) techniques in Amos software [54] to
identify the important relationships between environmental factors and forest structure
and composition that drove variation at the study site. SEM is an analytical framework
useful for investigating complex ecological systems because it can model multivariate rela-
tionships, explicitly partition direct and indirect causal relationships, include unmeasured
concepts as latent or composite variables, and provide a test of causal inferences [55,56].
SEM has been successfully used in southwestern forests to understand ponderosa pine
regeneration [32] relationships between environmental conditions, ﬁre history, and un-
derstory species richness and abundance [57,58] and to explore the drivers of plat-animal
interactions [59]. We chose to use SEM in our analysis to evaluate the relative importance
of abstract environmental factors, and to explicitly incorporate the relationship between
structure and composition as an indirect causal relationship.
To evaluate the relationships between environmental factors, forest composition, and
forest structure, prior to and following ﬁre regime disruption, we built two independent
models using reconstructed and contemporary ﬁeld plot conditions. These two models
followed the same model building techniques, and started from the same a priori model,
but used separate historical and contemporary datasets. While we could have tried multi-
group modeling, which would focus on determining which pathways differ most between
time periods [60], we were more interested in precise estimates of the effects of the drivers
of variability, optimized for each time period.
Our conceptual model describes our hypothesis that environmental factors directly
inﬂuence forest structure and composition, and indirectly inﬂuence forest structure through
composition (see Figure 2). Measured variables were grouped into three broad environmen-
tal factors: topography, climate, and soils. The measured variables of each environmental
factor were all correlated to each other (not shown in Figure 2 for simplicity). Each factor
could have been represented by many measures, so we compiled a large pool of poten-
tial explanatory variables to select from (see Table A1 for a complete, detailed list of
explanatory variables).

Forests 2021, 12, 622
6 of 29
 
Figure 2. Conceptual model used at the beginning of structural equation modeling. This model
represents our initial hypothesis that topography, climate, and soil directly drive variation in structure
and composition, and indirectly drive variation in structure through composition. Dashed boxes
represent conceptual groupings of variables, solid boxes represent measured variables, hexagons
represent composites of multiple measured variables, and arrows indicate causal relationships in
the data. Variables are described in Methods: Identifying drivers of variability and details for all
variables are provided in Table A1. Correlation between all environmental variables was included in
the model, but for simplicity were not shown in the diagram.
We used composite variables extensively as predictors of forest properties. Compos-
ites are an interpretational tool that can be used to compile the inﬂuences of multiple
conceptually-linked variables into one composite effect. Topographic variables were based
on a high-resolution (1 m × 1 m), LiDAR-derived digital elevation model (DEM), and were
calculated at 10 m resolution in ArcMap 10 software [61] and in R (version 3.6.1) statistical
software using the ‘raster’ [62] and ‘SpatialEco’ [63] packages. In the conceptual model
we selected from Beer’s aspect (or northeastness) [64], the heat load index (HLI) [65], and
the solar radiation index (SRI; calculated for the years 1879 and 2014) [66] to represent
‘aspect’ as a composite variable; we selected from elevation, topographic slope position
(TPI), and hierarchical slope position (HSP) to represent ‘position’ as a composite variable;
and we selected from slope, roughness, and the topographic ruggedness index (TRI) [67]
to represent ‘texture’ as a composite variable (Figure 2).
Climate factors included seven different climate variables: precipitation, mean temper-
ature, minimum and maximum temperatures, mean dewpoint temperature, and maximum
and minimum vapor pressure deﬁcits. These data were acquired from the Parameter-
elevation Regressions on Independent Slopes Model (PRISM) [68] for each month in 30
year periods from 1895 to 1924 (historical climate) and 1981 to 2010 (contemporary climate).
PRISM data were used in ecological analyses where weather data have not been collected

Forests 2021, 12, 622
7 of 29
on site. We spatially downscaled climate variables from their native 800 m × 800 m resolu-
tion to the plot level resolution (60 m × 60 m) using gradient and inverse distance-squared
weighting methods as described by Rodman et al. [23]. The downscaled climate variables
were summarized as annual averages and seasonal (e.g., summer = 1 June–31 August)
averages for the 30-year periods and assigned to each corresponding plot. In the conceptual
model we selected from precipitation, dewpoint temperature, minimum and maximum
vapor pressure deﬁcit variables into a ‘water availability’ composite variable; and selected
from mean, minimum and maximum temperature variables into a ‘temperature’ composite
variable (Figure 2).
Soil parent material is known to inﬂuence forest conditions [23,35]; however, parent
material does not vary substantially across the study area. Data from the Natural Resources
Conservation Service’s Soil Survey Geographic database (SSURGO) indicated that the
entire study area was Kaibab Limestone residuum [69]. In lieu of parent material, we used
soil characteristics that do vary across the study area and are still important drivers of forest
conditions [32,59]. Soil variables were calculated from the SoilGrids 100 m dataset [70].
Soil variables included six soil properties—percent organic C, total N, bulk density, pH,
percent sand, and percent clay—at seven standard soil depths—0, 5, 15, 30, 60, 100, and 200
cm. We selected from all these variables to represent a ‘soil’ composite variable (Figure 2).
We used average diameter and tree density from the historical reconstruction and
the contemporary survey as indicators of forest structure in the SEMs. To represent forest
composition in the SEMs, we used distance-based ordination techniques to reduce the
complexity of the community data so that they would be easier to use in variable selection
and structural equation modeling. We used the ‘vegan’ package [71] in R for this anal-
ysis. We transformed and standardized plot-level species count data before calculating
Bray–Curtis distance to describe the differences between plot overstory communities. We
then used nonmetric multi-dimensional scaling (NMDS) to calculate an independent three-
axis solution for both the historical and contemporary community data and to calculate
species scores within ordination space. Each three-axis solution was rotated to place the
maximum variation along the ﬁrst axis, which we then used to summarize the commu-
nity composition of each plot (see Appendix B for a more complete description of this
approach). Transformed average diameter, transformed density and the ﬁrst axis scores
from the community NMDS, make up the response variables for both our historical and
contemporary models.
With more than 100 potential explanatory variables to include in each model, but
desiring to keep the models parsimonious, we selected explanatory variables from each
category to build each composite variable based on correlation with the response variables.
We selected variables with the strongest correlations (i.e., greater than 0.1 or less than −0.1),
making sure not to select redundant variables (e.g., the same soil characteristic at multiple
depths, or the same climate variable at multiple seasons).
Using these criteria, we identiﬁed eleven measures of topography, climate, and soil
to include in both the historical and contemporary models. For the topography factor,
we selected hierarchical slope position to represent position, the solar radiation index to
represent aspect, and the topographic ruggedness index to represent texture. We selected
percent organic C at 30 cm, pH at 0 cm, and percent clay at 30 cm to represent the composite
soil factor. For the composite climate factor, we selected winter minimum vapor pressure
deﬁcit and spring precipitation to represent water, and fall mean temperature, and winter
maximum and minimum temperatures to represent temperature. For the contemporary
model, we identiﬁed nine measures of topography, climate, and soil to include in the model.
For topography, the same factors (HSP, SRI, and TRI) were selected. We selected pH at 0
cm, and percent clay at 30 cm to represent the soil factor. For climate, we selected spring
precipitation and summer mean dewpoint temperature to represent water, and winter
minimum and maximum temperatures to represent temperature.
After variables were selected, we veriﬁed the linearity of relationships before making
necessary modiﬁcations to the model. To simplify the model where possible, we replaced

Forests 2021, 12, 622
8 of 29
all of the topography composite variables (aspect, position, and texture), which had only
one explanatory variable, with direct effects. We found multicollinearity between the
explanatory variables of ‘temperature’ and ‘water’ which may have caused path coefﬁcient
inﬂation in the model. This issue was resolved by combining these two factors into a single
‘climate’ composite. While our approach of correlating all environmental variables was
conservative, this saturated the model, and model ﬁt statistics could not be calculated
with any spare degrees of freedom. To evaluate model ﬁt we removed the least signiﬁcant
correlation from the model, and calculated three model ﬁt statistics (chi-squared goodness-
of-ﬁt, Chi2; an adjusted goodness-of-ﬁt index (AGFI); and root mean square error of
approximation, RMSEA) over one degree of freedom. Because there were no signiﬁcant
correlations in the paths removed, the ﬁnal models behaved essentially the same as a
saturated model. While saturated models are traditionally not used as the ﬁnal SEM,
this was appropriate in our analysis because our objective was to evaluate the relative
importance of the environmental factors rather than test a novel theory of hypothesized
relationships in the ecosystem.
3. Results
3.1. Historical and Contemporary Conditions
Historical forest conditions prior to ﬁre regime disruption (1879) differed signiﬁcantly
from contemporary conditions in 2014 (Figure 3). Mean tree diameter across the study sites
averaged 27.5 (95% CI: 13.3–57.0) cm historically and varied widely across sample plots.
Contemporary average tree diameter was signiﬁcantly lower (p < 0.0001) than historical
conditions and averaged 20.1 (7.4–39.0) cm.
In 1879, basal area averaged 12.6 (2.0–79.4) m2 ha−1 (see Figures 3 and 4). Historical basal
area was highly variable but significantly lower than contemporary basal area (p < 0.0001).
Contemporary basal area averaged 30.8 (12.0–58.3) m2 ha−1 (see Figures 3 and 4). Historical
forests had an average density of 165 (48–352) trees ha−1. Comparisons with contemporary
forest were found to be significantly denser (p < 0.0001), with an average density of 657 (188–
2302) trees ha−1.
Figure 3. Historical and contemporary forest structure. Box plots depicting average tree diameter,
stand basal area, and tree density historical (1879) and contemporary (2014) forest conditions. Com-
parisons between the two time periods indicate a decrease in average tree diameter, an increase in
basal area, and a drastic increase in density from historical to contemporary periods.
Historically, forest overstory composition was typical of dry mixed-conifer in the
southwest (Figure 5). Ponderosa pine accounted for approximately half of total EIV
(0.934/2.0; see Equation (1)), with minor components of white ﬁr (EIV: 0.368), Douglas-ﬁr
(EIV: 0.302), and Gambel oak (EIV: 0.214). Contemporary composition is also characteristic
of dry mixed conifer, though ponderosa pine was found to have decreased in importance
(EIV: 0.622) and there has been a shift towards more mesic species. For example, white ﬁr
now accounts for approximately one-third of total EIV (0.620/2.0), Douglas-ﬁr increased to
0.370 EIV, and southwestern white pine increased from 0.018 in 1979 to 0.102 EIV in 2014.
There were also changes in the relative dominance of sprouting deciduous trees: Gambel

Forests 2021, 12, 622
9 of 29
oak (0.214 to 0.106) and aspen (0.118 to 0.008) decreased; bigtooth maple and New Mexico
locust increased (0.042 to 0.146; and 0.004 to 0.024, respectively).
Figure 4. Maps of historical (left) and contemporary (right) basal area. Comparison between the two
panels shows an increase in plot–level basal area and spatial homogeneity from 1879 to 2014.
Figure 5. Historical and contemporary forest community composition. Squares are color coded by
species, and each square represents 1 percent of total ecological importance values for the given
time period across all plots combined. Species are identiﬁed by four letter codes: ABCO (white ﬁr;
Abies concolor), ACGR (bigtooth maple; Acer grandidentatum), PIPO (ponderosa pine; Pinus ponderosa),
PIST (southwestern white pine; Pinus strobiformis), POTR (quaking aspen; Populus tremuloides), PSME
(Douglas-ﬁr; Pseudotsuga menziesii), QUGA (Gambel oak; Quercus gambelii), and RONE (New Mexico
locust; Robinia neomexicana). Comparison between the two panels shows a decrease in ﬁre adapted
species from 1879 to 2014.

Forests 2021, 12, 622
10 of 29
3.2. Spatial Variability
Overall, we found little indication of spatial autocorrelation in historical forest structure,
suggesting homogeneity of conditions. This homogeneity can be seen in the maps of historical
forest structure (e.g., Figure 4). Historically, average diameter had low Moran’s I and fell
within the envelope of no significant spatial autocorrelation at all distances (Figure 6a). Basal
area was significantly autocorrelated at distances of 90 and 210 m but at all other distances
was within the envelope of no significant spatial autocorrelation (Figure 6b). Interestingly,
density was significantly negatively autocorrelated at 810 m, but was otherwise not significantly
autocorrelated at all other lags. (Figure 6c).
Figure 6. Correlograms of historical and contemporary forest structure. Each panel displays the
spatial autocorrelation (as measured by Moran’s I) for historical and contemporary conditions (differ-
entiated by color). Points connected by solid lines indicate the Moran’s I at a given lag distance, and
the dotted lines indicate the upper and lower limits of no signiﬁcant spatial autocorrelation using 95%
conﬁdence envelopes. Points that are above the threshold are signiﬁcantly spatially autocorrelated,
points that are below the threshold are signiﬁcantly negatively autocorrelated. Historically, measures
of forest structure were generally not autocorrelated. Contemporarily, average diameter and density
are both signiﬁcantly autocorrelated.
Unlike historical conditions, some contemporary conditions exhibited signiﬁcant
spatial autocorrelation. Average diameter was highly autocorrelated over distances of
0 to 360 m and signiﬁcantly autocorrelated at distances up to 1000 m (Figure 6a). Tree
density was signiﬁcantly autocorrelated in contemporary forests at distances up to 360 m
and showed slight autocorrelation again at approximately 600 m, but was otherwise
insigniﬁcant (Figure 6c). Unlike average diameter and density, contemporary basal area
remained largely uncorrelated, only showing slight autocorrelation at distances of 210 and
570 m (Figure 6b).
3.3. Drivers of Variability
In both the historical and contemporary datasets, environmental variables exhibited
stronger correlations with composition as compared to structure or composition and historical
correlation coefficients were generally lower than contemporary values (Figure 7). Additionally,
the relationships between average diameter and most environmental variables switched signs,
changing from weakly positive to moderately negative, or weakly negative to moderately
positive between historical and contemporary time periods (Figure 7).

Forests 2021, 12, 622
11 of 29
Figure 7. Pearson correlation coefﬁcients between selected predictors and forest structure responses
for the subset of environmental variables, and measures of forest structure and composition included
in the historical and contemporary models. Strength and direction of the correlation are indicated by
color and reported by the correlation coefﬁcient.
The Chi2, RMSEA, and AGFI evaluations of model ﬁt suggest that the historical SEM
adequately ﬁt our data (see Table 1). In these tests the p-value indicates the probability
of good ﬁt; commonly, p > 0.05 is considered adequate, though this is only convention.
The AGFI has no p-value; commonly, an AGFI > 0.95 is interpreted to represent a good-
ﬁtting model, but again, this is only convention. The historical model has good descriptive
power for composition (r2 = 0.483) but has low descriptive power for average diameter (r2
= 0.088) and basal area (r2 = 0.101).
Table 1. Summary of structural equation model (SEM) performance. Measures of model ﬁt (Chi2) p-value, root mean
square error of approximation (RMSEA), and an adjusted goodness-of-ﬁt index (AGFI) are reported, as are measures of the
predictive power of the models (r2 for average diameter, density, and composition). Model ﬁt statistics are calculated over
one degree of freedom for both historical and contemporary models.
Model Fit
Response Variable r2
Model
Chi2 (p-Value)
RMSEA
(p-Value)
AGFI
Density
Average
Diameter
Composition
Historical
0.58 (0.447)
<0.001 (0.581)
0.968
0.088
0.101
0.483
Contemporary
0.42 (0.515)
<0.001 (0.638)
0.980
0.296
0.317
0.632
Topography and climate factors had relatively high importance in driving historical
forest structure and composition, while soil factors had a lower impact on forest conditions
(see Figure 8). The climate–composition relationship had the highest single path coefﬁcient

Forests 2021, 12, 622
12 of 29
in the historical model (total absolute value of the path coefﬁcient: 0.66), while topography
has a higher overall impact on historical composition than climate, from the cumulative
effect of aspect, position, and texture (0.73). Climate was a signiﬁcant driver of historical
density (0.28) and diameter (0.37) but was of approximately equal importance with topog-
raphy for these structural variables (0.24 and 0.32, respectively). Aspect and texture were
not signiﬁcant drivers of tree density or diameter. Soil had an impact on historical density
(0.35) and diameter (0.38) that was similar to that of climate and topography. Soil had a
relatively small, though still signiﬁcant, impact in driving historical forest composition
(0.39). Composition did not signiﬁcantly drive variation in historical tree density but did
have an impact on average tree diameter. While statistically signiﬁcant, this path coefﬁcient
(−0.23) was the smallest driver of historical average diameter. See Appendix A Table A3
for full details of the resulting model path components.
 
Figure 8. Historical structural equation model. The relative importance of each environmental
factor (topography, climate, and soil) can be interpreted by the width of the pathways leading to
structure and composition, which have been scaled to indicate the magnitude of the path coefﬁcient.
Paths with negative coefﬁcients are marked with diagonal hatch marks. Only paths with coefﬁcients
signiﬁcantly different from 0 are included in the diagram. Coefﬁcients are also reported on the paths,
and letters on the path correspond to entries in Table A3: Historic and contemporary model pathway
details. Topography and climate have the greatest inﬂuence on forest composition, and climate and
soil have the greatest inﬂuence on forest structure.
For our contemporary model, Chi2, RMSEA, and AGFI results also suggest that the
contemporary model converged at a solution with good ﬁt (Table 1). The model had
good descriptive power for density (r2 = 0.296) and diameter (r2 = 0.317), and even better
description of forest composition (r2 = 0.632). In the contemporary model (Figure 9),
climate factors had the strongest relative importance for composition, while topography
had the highest relative importance for forest structure. The pathway from climate to
composition had the strongest total absolute value of a path coefﬁcient in the model (0.79)
while pathways that lead from climate to density (0.21) and average diameter (0.21) had
relatively low importance. Topography had the strongest inﬂuence on contemporary forest
density (−0.36) and average diameter (0.32). Like the historical model, neither aspect
nor texture were signiﬁcant drivers of contemporary forest structure. The cumulative
effects of position and aspect on composition (−0.59) was a relatively important pathway.
However, texture was not an important driver of contemporary composition. Soil had
a relatively weak importance to both contemporary forest density (0.20) and diameter

Forests 2021, 12, 622
13 of 29
(0.26); this differs from the historical model, where soil was a relatively equal driver of
forest structure. The pathway from soil to composition (0.35) was the weakest driver of
contemporary composition. The relationship between contemporary forest composition
and structure differed from the one suggested by the historical model. Contemporarily,
composition was a signiﬁcant driver of forest density (0.26), but not forest diameter. See
Appendix A Table A3 for full details of the resulting model path components.
 
Figure 9. Contemporary structural equation model. The relative importance of each environmental
factor (topography, climate, and soil) can be interpreted by the width of the pathways leading to
structure and composition, which have been scaled to indicate the magnitude of the path coefﬁcient.
Paths with negative coefﬁcients are marked with diagonal stripes. Only paths with coefﬁcients
signiﬁcantly different from 0 are included in the diagram. Coefﬁcients are also reported on the paths,
and letters on the path correspond to entries in Table A3: Historic and contemporary model pathway
details. Topography and climate have the greatest inﬂuence on forest composition, and climate and
soil had the greatest inﬂuence on forest structure.
4. Discussion
4.1. Historical Range of Variability
Our results suggest that the abrupt disruption to the historical frequent ﬁre regime
drastically altered the forests on the Mogollon Rim, as has been reported in dry mixed-
conifer forests across the southwest (e.g., [12,19–23]). Reconstructed plots showed low
density, with large and variable tree sizes and low, yet variable, basal area. The historical
variability we found was similar to the ranges reported by both Reynolds et al. [9] and
Wassermann et al. [72] for dry mixed-conifer forests in the southwest. Additionally, the
average basal area and tree density we found were slightly higher than those reconstructed
elsewhere on the Mogollon Rim [14,19] and in the San Juan mountains of southwestern
Colorado [12]. Historical dry mixed-conifer forest at the Grand Canyon were reported to
be denser than those we found in our study [20,39] and those reported by Williams and
Baker [73] for the Mogollon Rim. When compared to mixed-conifer reference conditions
outside the southwest, our results are similar to those found on the Front Range of northern
Colorado and southern Wyoming [74,75], and considerably less dense than the results
reported from some parts of the Sierra Nevada in California [76]. Historical conditions
from other parts of the Sierra Nevada [33,77,78] and mountains in Oregon [79–81] had
higher basal area and lower tree density than in our study area, suggesting that those
forests had fewer and larger trees than those found on the Mogollon Rim.

Forests 2021, 12, 622
14 of 29
Contemporary forest conditions diverged signiﬁcantly from historical in all three
measures of forest structure. Average diameter was signiﬁcantly lower in contemporary
conditions, reﬂecting the legacy of harvesting larger trees for timber and the inﬂux of
many small trees due to ﬁre exclusion originating in the mid-1900s [14]. Basal area and
tree density increased signiﬁcantly. These changes are consistent with other studies in dry
mixed-conifer forests across the southwest; Fulé et al. [20], Heinlein et al. [22], Rodman
et al. [19,23], and Strahan et al. [14] all recorded large increases in tree density and basal
area in dry mixed-conifer forests over a similar time frame.
We found a shift in forest composition away from dry mixed-conifer, towards a more
wet mixed-conifer composition. For example, ponderosa pine has decreased in importance
(EIV), while white ﬁr has increased greatly. Southwestern white pine and Douglas-ﬁr have
also showed modest increases in EIV. This trend has been previously reported for forests of
the Mogollon Rim [13,19] and in other mixed-conifer forests in the Southwest [14,20,22,26].
Our results parallel those of other studies concluding that frequent ﬁres kept mesic, ﬁre-
intolerant species in check, but when released from ﬁre they established and survived in
areas where they were previously excluded [9,13].
4.2. Changes to Spatial Patterns
Changes to forest structure and composition were accompanied by changes to the
spatial pattern to forest conditions, as indicated by our correlogram analysis. Prior to
ﬁre regime disruption, the forests on the Mogollon Rim exhibited little signiﬁcant spatial
autocorrelation across scales up to 1000 m (~314 ha). Similarly, Strahan et al. [14] found
no signiﬁcant autocorrelation at similar resolutions, and at distances up to 2500 m in
mixed-conifer forests near our site. Both random and aggregated ﬁne-scale patterns
have been found on the Mogollon Rim [19,23], as well as outside the southwest [76,82].
Random arrangement of forest structural conditions suggests multi-scalar-level structural
heterogeneity that has been theorized [9,37], but not well documented.
In our study, contemporary average diameter and tree density were strongly auto-
correlated at distances up to 360 m, suggesting that these forests were composed of large
homogeneous patches, approximately 40 ha in size. This distance likely reﬂects the scale
of variation for environmental patterns related to geomorphic features (e.g., ridges and
valleys) on the study landscape. Autocorrelation at distances up to 1000 m indicated low
variation between patches. Interestingly, basal area showed no autocorrelation despite
both average diameter and tree density being autocorrelated. Disruption to the natural
frequent ﬁre regime, which maintained historical forest patterns, is the likely explanation
for this change. Strahan et al. [14] described a similar shift in the mid-scale variability of
community traits, and reported signiﬁcant spatial autocorrelation up to 250 m. Managers
seeking to restore historical spatial patterns should break up large and homogeneous
stands into smaller, variable patches, and restoration prescriptions should aim to generate
random structural variation within landscape patches. Silvicultural treatments such as
group selection or variable density thinning may achieve these goals.
4.3. Drivers of Variability
Our model of historical drivers of variability had poor explanatory power for de-
scribing variation in forest structure, and moderate power for composition. This weak
relationship between environment and forest structure was also seen in low bivariate
correlations between average diameter, density and almost all environmental predictors.
Low variation in historical density may have been due to the natural ﬁre regime of fre-
quent, surface ﬁres. Indeed, ﬁre may have been the main driver of historical variability
and diminished importance of environmental factors in determining tree size and stand
basal area. However, we were unable to include site-speciﬁc measures of ﬁre in our model,
and the relative importance of ﬁre versus environmental factors in determining historical
structure and composition needs further research.

Forests 2021, 12, 622
15 of 29
In our model, climate and topography were the main drivers of historical variation in
forest structure and composition. Path coefﬁcients indicated that warm and dry winters,
high spring precipitation, and warm fall temperatures correlated with low ponderosa pine
dominance. Microsites with higher water availability had higher tree densities, and sites
with cold, dry winters were associated with larger trees. Winter temperatures inﬂuence
snowpack duration into the spring and may in turn determine forest density [33]. Spring
precipitation is important for ponderosa pine seedling establishment in some forests [31],
while fall temperatures may inﬂuence fuel moisture and wildﬁre behavior. Over longer
periods, climate can affect fuel availability and timing of widespread ﬁre years in mixed-
conifer forests [12,26,29].
Topography was an important driver in our model of historical variation. Slope
position was consistently important, reﬂecting the effects of microsite variability on forest
conditions [27,83]. Aspect also drove variation. Sites with more solar radiation dry faster,
and drought-tolerant species such as ponderosa pine and Gambel oak are better able to
occupy these sites. Drying could also affect the availability of fuels for combustion and
in turn affect ﬁre frequency. Interestingly, Rodman et al. [23] did not ﬁnd topographic
factors to be important in determining historical forest structure at sites near ours, nor did
Abella and Covington [34] at other sites in northern Arizona. The systematic sample grid
in our study area may have captured a wider range of topographic conditions and greater
variation in structure and composition than these previous studies.
To evaluate how the relative importance of drivers of variability may have changed, we
compared historical and contemporary models. A major difference between the two models
was that they describe forests with and without ﬁre. In addition, other disturbances were
present during the contemporary period including livestock grazing and selective logging.
We were not able to include these processes in our contemporary model. In addition,
we did not have measures of natural disturbances such as insect or disease outbreaks,
droughts, or wildﬁres in either model. Such mortality factors would contribute to variation
in forest density and composition. Without plot-level measures of these disturbances, we
assumed they affected all plots equally, and were confounded with other changes that
occurred between 1879 and 2014, such as ﬁre regime disruption and climate change.
Soil was a relatively unimportant driver of variability in both historical and contem-
porary models. However, Rodman et al. [23], Abella and Denton [35], Kimsey et al. [36],
and Laughlin et al. [58] demonstrated that soil parent material drove signiﬁcant variation
in forest structure and composition at northern Arizona sites. The limited variation in soil
parent material across our study site likely explains our ﬁndings.
Interestingly, environmental factors exhibited a stronger inﬂuence on contemporary
forest conditions than on historical structure and composition, possibly due to anthro-
pogenic exclusion of frequent ﬁre. The contemporary model had stronger explanatory
power than the historical model, which reﬂected stronger correlations between contem-
porary environmental variables and forest measures. Climate was distinctly the most
important driver of forest composition on the contemporary landscape, and indicated that
sites with high spring precipitation, cold winter low temperatures, and dry summers were
associated with low ponderosa pine dominance. Forest composition may have histori-
cally been constrained by species adaptedness to ﬁre, but in the absence of ﬁre climate
asserted greater control of forest composition. Similar responses to ﬁre exclusion have
been described in other studies [9,13,14,19,20]. We found that climate increased in relative
importance contemporarily, and different components of climate became important. Simi-
larly, Mueller et al. [84] described a strengthening ﬁre-climate relationship, and others have
reported changes in the timing of widespread ﬁre years relative to periods of drought or
above average precipitation since ﬁre regime disruption [85,86].
Topography was less important to contemporary forest composition than in the
historical period, perhaps because microsite–fuel relationships [83] were less important.
Topography was the strongest driver of both tree density and diameter, but this relationship
changed dramatically since ﬁre exclusion. While lower slopes and valleys historically had

Forests 2021, 12, 622
16 of 29
lower density and larger trees, contemporarily they were dominated by high densities of
smaller trees. Historical logging targeted large, commercially valuable trees, which may
have been concentrated on lower, more productive microsites. While density has increased
signiﬁcantly across the entire study area, Rodman et al. [23] and Stephens et al. [33] both
found that density increases were greatest on mesic sites such as valleys and lower slopes.
The increase in density on the Mogollon Rim sites was also related to compositional changes.
Composition is now a signiﬁcant driver of forest density, and intermediate conifers and
sprouting species that would have previously been kept in low densities by frequent ﬁre
have increased on lower sites.
5. Conclusions
Overall, our study showed historically variable, heterogeneous, and open dry mixed-
conifer forests on the Mogollon Rim prior to anthropogenic ﬁre exclusion, with ponderosa
pine dominating stands on ridgetops, and more mixed composition persisting in drainages.
These changes parallel those seen in dry mixed-conifer forests across the southwest and
demonstrate the need for extensive restoration efforts to reduce forest density and increase
diversity of structural conditions. Overly dense forests are at a heightened risk of large,
severe wildﬁre, which could cause type change and reduce provision of ecosystem services.
Managers restoring dry mixed-conifer forests on the Mogollon Rim can use historical
conditions as guides for silvicultural prescriptions, while restoration of dry mixed-conifer
elsewhere in the southwest may be better served by the more general HRV described in
reviews (e.g., [9]).
Based on our ﬁndings, we hypothesize that ﬁre was a major driver of historical
forest variation, and in the absence of ﬁre, environmental factors assumed greater control
of variation. This supposition points to the reintroduction of ﬁre as a restoration tool.
Reintroduction of ﬁre would help reduce the density of small diameter, ﬁre-intolerant trees
and restore historical forest composition. Small-diameter trees have higher ﬁre-related
mortality than large trees, and persistence of ﬁre-intolerant species would have been
limited [87]. Low severity ﬁre, even multiple burns at low severity, do not always result in
forest density that approximates historical conditions, and it may be desirable to allow some
ﬁre to burn at moderate severity on the Mogollon Rim [88,89]. However, recent research
suggests that this can also lead to mortality of larger trees [90]. Some loss of large trees
may be acceptable in dry mixed-conifer forests when these species are undesirable from a
restoration perspective; however, further research and applied management experiments
are needed to better understand how mixed-severity ﬁre can be used to achieve multiple
restoration objectives.
Contemporary forest conditions are driven by environmental factors, especially those
related to climate, but these relationships are stronger and different from those of the past.
Historical climate relationships may not serve as an effective guide under novel climate
situations, so managers seeking to increase ecological resilience to climate change are
advised to use adaptive silvicultural approaches, such as implementing a wide variety of
treatments and opportunistically making use of microsite variation. Topographic position
may serve as a useful guide for restoring historical forest composition, indicating that forest
managers should encourage pine-dominated stands on ridgetops and upper slopes, while
allowing a more mixed composition of conifers and shade-tolerant hardwoods in valley
bottoms and lower slopes. The topographically complex Mogollon Rim has a diversity of
microsites that could serve as refugia for mesic mixed-conifer species as climate change
intensiﬁes over the coming decades. The increased understanding of historical ranges,
patterns, and environmental drivers of variability presented in our study will be useful for
maintaining dry mixed-conifer forests across the Southwest.

Forests 2021, 12, 622
17 of 29
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.J.S.M. and D.W.H.; methodology, A.J.S.M., D.W.H.,
M.A.B. and M.J.; software, A.J.S.M.; validation, A.J.S.M. and D.W.H.; formal analysis, M.J.; investiga-
tion, M.J.; resources, A.J.S.M. and D.W.H.; data curation, A.J.S.M. and M.J.; writing—original draft
preparation, M.J.; writing—review and editing, A.J.S.M., D.W.H., M.A.B. and M.J.; visualization, M.J.;
supervision, A.J.S.M. and D.W.H.; project administration, A.J.S.M. and D.W.H.; funding acquisition,
A.J.S.M. and D.W.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Salt River Project; SRP-NAU Cooperative Agreement; award
number 8200007407.
Data Availability Statement: The vegetation data presented in this study are available on request
from the corresponding author and the 100 m SoilGrids data are available at https://soilgrids.org/
(accessed on 12 May 2021). The PRISM 30-year climate normals are not publicly available due to
licensing conditions and are available for purchase at https://prism.oregonstate.edu/ (accessed on
12 May 2021).
Acknowledgments: Thank you to C. Ester and the SRP team for making this project possible. Thank
you to the staff and ﬁeld crews at the Ecological Restoration Institute for funding this research,
collecting ﬁeld data, and providing the dataset that is at heart of this research, as well as administra-
tive support.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.

Forests 2021, 12, 622
18 of 29
Appendix A
Table A1. Summary of all environmental variables considered for inclusion in models. Variables are organized by environmental factor, and subgroup if applicable. Summary statistics
(mean, minimum, maximum, and standard deviation, brief description, units, and data source) are provided for each variable. Historical and contemporary climate variables are
listed separately.
Factor
Variable
Mean
Min
Max
SD
Description
Units
Source
Climate:
Temperature
Annual tmax
15.18
14.58
15.92
0.32
Annual average of daily maximum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Annual tmax
15.55
14.95
16.31
0.33
Annual average of daily maximum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Spring tmax
13.91
13.28
14.65
0.33
Spring average of daily maximum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Spring tmax
14.44
13.80
15.22
0.34
Spring average of daily maximum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Summer tmax
24.67
23.98
25.48
0.36
Summer average of daily maximum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Summer tmax
25.44
24.75
26.27
0.36
Summer average of daily maximum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Fall tmax
15.97
15.43
16.69
0.31
Fall average of daily maximum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Fall tmax
16.27
15.72
17.01
0.31
Fall average of daily maximum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Winter tmax
6.17
5.63
6.86
0.31
Winter average of daily maximum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Winter tmax
6.07
5.54
6.76
0.30
Winter average of daily maximum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Annual tmean
8.96
8.85
9.05
0.03
Annual average of daily average temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Annual tmean
9.31
9.20
9.40
0.04
Annual average of daily average temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Spring tmean
7.35
7.23
7.50
0.05
Spring average of daily average temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Spring tmean
7.84
7.73
8.00
0.05
Spring average of daily average temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Summer tmean
18.06
17.94
18.14
0.04
Summer average of daily average temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Summer tmean
18.53
18.40
18.63
0.05
Summer average of daily average temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM

Forests 2021, 12, 622
19 of 29
Table A1. Cont.
Factor
Variable
Mean
Min
Max
SD
Description
Units
Source
Climate:
Temperature
Fall tmean
9.82
9.68
9.91
0.06
Fall average of daily average temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Fall tmean
10.16
9.99
10.29
0.08
Fall average of daily average temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Winter tmean
0.60
0.45
0.76
0.05
Winter average of daily average temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Winter tmean
0.71
0.63
0.84
0.04
Winter average of daily average temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Annual tmin
2.77
1.96
3.25
0.32
Annual average of daily minimum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Annual tmin
3.07
2.25
3.61
0.33
Annual average of daily minimum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Spring tmin
0.79
0.11
1.21
0.26
Spring average of daily minimum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Spring tmin
1.24
0.57
1.68
0.26
Spring average of daily minimum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Summer tmin
11.45
10.61
12.05
0.35
Summer average of daily minimum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Summer tmin
11.62
10.79
12.26
0.36
Summer average of daily minimum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Fall tmin
3.67
2.67
4.29
0.40
Fall average of daily minimum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Fall tmin
4.04
3.00
4.76
0.44
Fall average of daily minimum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Winter tmin
−4.98
−5.70
−4.69
0.26
Winter average of daily minimum temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate:
Temperature
Winter tmin
−4.64
−5.34
−4.25
0.27
Winter average of daily minimum temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Annual ppt
921
760
975
71
Annual total precipitation (1895 to 1924)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Annual ppt
887
752
932
59
Annual total precipitation (1981 to 2010)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Spring ppt
169
131
187
17
Spring total precipitation (1895 to 1924)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Spring ppt
169
136
184
15
Spring total precipitation (1981 to 2010)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Summer ppt
267
203
286
29
Summer total precipitation (1895 to 1924)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Summer ppt
242
182
259
27
Summer total precipitation (1981 to 2010)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Fall ppt
195
179
200
7
Fall total precipitation (1895 to 1924)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Fall ppt
190
177
194
5
Fall total precipitation (1981 to 2010)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Winter ppt
289
246
316
19
Winter total precipitation (1895 to 1924)
millimeters
PRISM
Climate: Water
Winter ppt
286
255
306
14
Winter total precipitation (1981 to 2010)
millimeters
PRISM

Forests 2021, 12, 622
20 of 29
Table A1. Cont.
Factor
Variable
Mean
Min
Max
SD
Description
Units
Source
Climate: Water
Annual tdmean
−3.95
−4.02
−3.88
0.03
Annual average of daily dewpoint temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Annual tdmean
−2.29
−2.38
−2.21
0.04
Annual average of daily dewpoint temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Spring tdmean
−7.40
−7.48
−7.32
0.04
Spring average of daily dewpoint temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Spring tdmean
−5.45
−5.54
−5.30
0.06
Spring average of daily dewpoint temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Summer tdmean
3.02
2.86
3.16
0.07
Summer average of daily dewpoint temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Summer tdmean
4.41
4.28
4.53
0.07
Summer average of daily dewpoint temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Fall tdmean
−2.59
−2.67
−2.50
0.04
Fall average of daily dewpoint temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Fall tdmean
−0.78
−0.89
−0.65
0.05
Fall average of daily dewpoint temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Winter tdmean
−8.82
−8.89
−8.75
0.02
Winter average of daily dewpoint temperature (1895 to 1924)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Winter tdmean
−7.36
−7.41
−7.26
0.03
Winter average of daily dewpoint temperature (1981 to 2010)
degrees Celsius
PRISM
Climate: Water
Annual vpdmax
14.65
13.94
15.51
0.37
Annual average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895
to 1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Annual vpdmax
14.94
14.19
15.75
0.35
Annual average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981
to 2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Spring vpdmax
13.51
12.87
14.24
0.32
Spring average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895 to
1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Spring vpdmax
13.73
13.11
14.40
0.29
Spring average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981 to
2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Summer vpdmax
24.22
23.03
25.61
0.61
Summer average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895
to 1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Summer vpdmax
25.03
23.56
26.49
0.66
Summer average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981
to 2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Fall vpdmax
14.35
13.72
15.21
0.35
Fall average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895 to
1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Fall vpdmax
14.38
13.73
15.16
0.32
Fall average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981 to
2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Winter vpdmax
6.53
6.15
6.99
0.20
Winter average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895 to
1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Winter vpdmax
6.61
6.36
6.93
0.13
Winter average of daily maximum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981 to
2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Annual vpdmin
3.26
2.84
3.56
0.18
Annual average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895
to 1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Annual vpdmin
3.09
2.92
3.27
0.09
Annual average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981
to 2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Spring vpdmin
3.10
2.78
3.32
0.13
Spring average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895 to
1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Spring vpdmin
3.15
2.97
3.30
0.07
Spring average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981 to
2010)
hectopascals
PRISM

Forests 2021, 12, 622
21 of 29
Table A1. Cont.
Factor
Variable
Mean
Min
Max
SD
Description
Units
Source
Climate: Water
Summer vpdmin
5.30
4.61
5.84
0.31
Summer average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895
to 1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Summer vpdmin
5.13
4.88
5.46
0.15
Summer average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981
to 2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Fall vpdmin
3.16
2.66
3.53
0.22
Fall average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895 to
1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Fall vpdmin
2.86
2.64
3.11
0.12
Fall average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981 to
2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Winter vpdmin
1.48
1.30
1.55
0.06
Winter average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1895 to
1924)
hectopascals
PRISM
Climate: Water
Winter vpdmin
1.20
1.15
1.23
0.02
Winter average of daily minimum vapor pressure deﬁcit (1981 to
2010)
hectopascals
PRISM
Soil
BD 0 cm
666
527
948
67
Bulk density of the ﬁne earth fraction (<2 mm) at 0 cm soil depth
grams per cubic
centimeter
Soil
Grids
Soil
BD 5 cm
891
766
1002
51
Bulk density of the ﬁne earth fraction (<2 mm) at 5 cm soil depth
grams per cubic
centimeter
Soil
Grids
Soil
BD 15 cm
1131
1023
1212
36
Bulk density of the ﬁne earth fraction (<2 mm) at 15 cm soil depth
grams per cubic
centimeter
Soil
Grids
Soil
BD 30 cm
1228
1162
1287
25
Bulk density of the ﬁne earth fraction (<2 mm) at 30 cm soil depth
grams per cubic
centimeter
Soil
Grids
Soil
BD 60 cm
1336
1219
1418
44
Bulk density of the ﬁne earth fraction (<2 mm) at 60 cm soil depth
grams per cubic
centimeter
Soil
Grids
Soil
BD 100 cm
1447
1364
1504
25
Bulk density of the ﬁne earth fraction (<2 mm) at 100 cm soil
depth
grams per cubic
centimeter
Soil
Grids
Soil
BD 200 cm
1439
1362
1507
30
Bulk density of the ﬁne earth fraction (<2 mm) at 200 cm soil
depth
grams per cubic
centimeter
Soil
Grids
Soil
Clay 0 cm
16
11
21
2
Percent clay at 0 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Clay 5 cm
16
11
21
2
Percent clay at 5 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Clay 15 cm
17
13
21
2
Percent clay at 15 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Clay 30 cm
24
16
37
5
Percent clay at 30 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Clay 60 cm
36
24
50
6
Percent clay at 60 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Clay 100 cm
37
25
49
6
Percent clay at 100 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids

Forests 2021, 12, 622
22 of 29
Table A1. Cont.
Factor
Variable
Mean
Min
Max
SD
Description
Units
Source
Soil
Clay 200 cm
36
24
50
6
Percent clay at 200 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
N Total 0 cm
70
48
81
5
Total Nitrogen at 0 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
N Total 5 cm
37
29
43
3
Total Nitrogen at 5 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
N Total 15 cm
21
16
25
2
Total Nitrogen at 15 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
N Total 30 cm
13
8
18
2
Total Nitrogen at 30 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
N Total 60 cm
10
6
15
2
Total Nitrogen at 60 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
N Total 100 cm
9
4
14
2
Total Nitrogen at 100 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
N Total 200 cm
11
5
15
2
Total Nitrogen at 200 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
pH 0 cm
58.3
55.1
62.7
1.7
pH in 1:1 soil–water solution at 0 cm soil depth
pH
Soil
Grids
Soil
pH 5 cm
56.8
53.7
61.0
1.6
pH in 1:1 soil–water solution at 5 cm soil depth
pH
Soil
Grids
Soil
pH 15 cm
57.0
54.5
61.0
1.5
pH in 1:1 soil–water solution at 15 cm soil depth
pH
Soil
Grids
Soil
pH 30 cm
57.0
55.0
60.3
1.3
pH in 1:1 soil–water solution at 30 cm soil depth
pH
Soil
Grids
Soil
pH 60 cm
57.1
55.2
60.6
1.3
pH in 1:1 soil–water solution at 60 cm soil depth
pH
Soil
Grids
Soil
pH 100 cm
57.2
55.1
61.6
1.5
pH in 1:1 soil–water solution at 100 cm soil depth
pH
Soil
Grids
Soil
pH 200 cm
57.4
55.1
61.9
1.6
pH in 1:1 soil–water solution at 200 cm soil depth
pH
Soil
Grids
Soil
Sand 0 cm
27
18
36
4
Percent sand at 0 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Sand 5 cm
28
19
36
4
Percent sand at 5 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Sand 15 cm
27
18
36
4
Percent sand at 15 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Sand 30 cm
27
20
35
4
Percent sand at 30 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids

Forests 2021, 12, 622
23 of 29
Table A1. Cont.
Factor
Variable
Mean
Min
Max
SD
Description
Units
Source
Soil
Sand 60 cm
28
20
37
4
Percent sand at 60 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Sand 100 cm
31
22
40
4
Percent sand at 100 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
Sand 200 cm
32
23
40
4
Percent sand at 200 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
SOC 0 cm
294
186
338
23
Soil organic Carbon at 0 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
SOC 5 cm
72
44
96
14
Soil organic Carbon at 5 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
SOC 15 cm
28
18
37
6
Soil organic Carbon at 15 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
SOC 30 cm
17
8
25
4
Soil organic Carbon at 30 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
SOC 60 cm
10
5
14
2
Soil organic Carbon at 60 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
SOC 100 cm
8
4
13
2
Soil organic Carbon at 100 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Soil
SOC 200 cm
9
3
16
3
Soil organic Carbon at 200 cm soil depth
percent by weight
Soil
Grids
Topography:
Aspect
Beer’s Aspect
1.44
0.00
2.00
0.56
Cosine transformed aspect
NA
DEM
Topography:
Aspect
Heat Load Index
(HLI)
0.83
0.71
0.97
0.05
Slope-aspect transformation
NA
DEM
Topography:
Aspect
Solar Radiation
Index (SRI)
1,715,499
1,593,948
1,810,763
41,603
Amount of incoming solar insolation
Watt hours per
square meter
DEM
Topography:
Position
Elevation
2332
2223
2399
41
Elevation above sea level
meters
DEM
Topography:
Position
Hierarchical Slope
Position (HSP)
3295
−10,371
14,386
5249
Multi-scalar measure of topographic exposure
NA
DEM
Topography:
Position
Topographic
Position Index
(TPI)
0.55
−11.53
9.75
3.61
Local measure of topographic exposure
NA
DEM
Topography:
Texture
Roughness
17.1
1.4
31.2
5.8
Maximum elevational difference
meters
DEM
Topography:
Texture
Slope
5.5
0.0
10.5
2.3
Steepness of terrain
degrees
DEM
Topography:
Texture
Terrain
Ruggedness Index
(TRI)
19.3
2.0
42.0
7.2
Average of elevational differences
meters
DEM

Forests 2021, 12, 622
24 of 29
Table A2. Summary of pathways in historic and contemporary models. Letters in the Diagram Key column correspond to
the letters on pathways in Figures 8 and 9. Values of NA indicate that this pathway is not included in these model diagrams.
Pathway: From and Pathway: To describe the directional relationship between model components that each pathway
represents. The Model column indicates whether the following values correspond to the pathway in the historical model or
the Contemporary model. The Coefﬁcient column contains the path coefﬁcient, which describes the relative magnitude
and direction of each pathway’s relationship. Values with * are statistically signiﬁcant from 0 (p < 0.05). The Components
column contains the predictors used to calculate each pathway; if more than one predictor was used, the path coefﬁcients
used to calculate the composite are given in parentheses.
Diagram Key
Pathway
Model
Coefﬁcient
Components
From
To
a
Position
Density
Historical
0.245 *
HSP
Contemporary
−0.358 *
HSP
b
Position
Diameter
Historical
−0.324 *
HSP
Contemporary
0.321 *
HSP
c
Position
Composition
Historical
−0.371 *
HSP
Contemporary
−0.405 *
HSP
NA
Texture
Density
Historical
−0.065
TRI
NA
Contemporary
−0.095
TRI
NA
Texture
Diameter
Historical
0.053
TRI
NA
Contemporary
−0.020
TRI
c
Texture
Composition
Historical
0.126 *
TRI
NA
Contemporary
0.068
TRI
NA
Aspect
Density
Historical
0.008
SRI
NA
Contemporary
0.010
SRI
NA
Aspect
Diameter
Historical
−0.124
SRI
NA
Contemporary
0.072
SRI
c
Aspect
Composition
Historical
−0.233 *
SRI
Contemporary
−0.184 *
SRI
d
Climate
Density
Historical
0.276 *
Winter Tmin (−0.491); Winter
Tmax (0.657); Fall Tmean (0.473);
Spring Precip (3.546); Winter
VPDmin (−3.462)
Contemporary
0.212 *
Winter Tmin (−2.566); Winter
Tmax (−3.615); Spring Precip
(−1.742); Summer Tdmean
(−0.035)
e
Climate
Diameter
Historical
0.370 *
Winter Tmin (−2.052); Winter
Tmax (−0.228); Fall Tmean (0.27);
Spring Precip (0.773); Winter
VPDmin (1.821)
Contemporary
0.212 *
Winter Tmin (2.423); Winter Tmax
(3.568); Spring Precip (2.202);
Summer Tdmean (1.224)
f
Climate
Composition
Historical
0.657 *
Winter Tmin (6.969); Winter Tmax
(1.124); Fall Tmean (−0.769);
Spring Precip (2.375); Winter
VPDmin (−6.687)
Contemporary
0.792 *
Winter Tmin (−0.855); Winter
Tmax (0.185); Spring Precip
(1.512); Summer Tdmean (−0.486)

Forests 2021, 12, 622
25 of 29
Table A2. Cont.
Diagram Key
Pathway
Model
Coefﬁcient
Components
From
To
g
Soil
Density
Historical
0.352 *
Clay.30 cm (0.207); ph.0 cm
(−0.726); SOC.30 cm (0.437)
Contemporary
0.203 *
ph.0 cm (−0.793); SOC.30 cm
(0.233)
h
Soil
Diameter
Historical
0.383 *
Clay.30 cm (−0.482); pH.0 cm
(0.441); SOC.30 cm (−0.863)
Contemporary
0.259 *
pH.0 cm (0.723); SOC.30 cm
(−0.309)
i
Soil
Composition
Historical
0.389 *
Clay.30 cm (0.26); pH.0 cm (0.924);
SOC.30 cm (0.116)
Contemporary
0.345 *
pH.0 cm (0.661); SOC.30 cm
(−0.373)
j
Composition
Diameter
Historical
−0.228 *
Axis 1
NA
Contemporary
−0.058
Axis 1
NA
Composition
Density
Historical
0.104
Axis 1
k
Contemporary
0.255 *
Axis 1
Appendix B
To represent forest composition in our models, we used distance-based ordination
techniques to reduce the complexity of the community data so that they would be easier to
use in variable selection and structural equation modeling. As noted in our methods, we
transformed plot-level species count data using Wisconsin double standardization before
calculating Bray–Curtis distance to describe the differences between plot overstory com-
munities. We then used nonmetric multi-dimensional scaling to calculate an independent
three-axis solution for both the historical and contemporary community data thus resulting
in a single species score within our ordination space. Finally, each three-axis solution was
rotated to place the maximum variation along the ﬁrst axis, which was used to summarize
the community composition of each plot (Figure A1).
For our ordinations of historical and contemporary forest community data, our ap-
proach successfully described species composition in three axes, with ﬁnal stresses of 0.11
and 0.12 (respectively). Each ordination was rotated to orient the most variation along the
ﬁrst axis (Axis 1). Axis 1 explained approximately half of variation in overstory composi-
tion (r2 of 0.425 and 0.511 for historic and contemporary, respectively). In both ordinations,
Axis 1 was used to describe a continuum ranging from ponderosa pine dominated sites at
the far negative end, to sites dominated by relatively rare sprouting species (bigtooth maple
and New Mexico locust) at the positive end, and intermediate values capturing sites with
Douglas-ﬁr, white ﬁr, southwestern white pine, Gambel Oak, and aspen (Figure A1a,b).
In the historical ordination, Gambel oak and aspen were grouped at one end of Axis 2,
and Douglas-ﬁr, white ﬁr and southwestern white pine were grouped at the other end.
Gambel oak and Douglas-ﬁr were grouped at one end of Axis 3, and southwestern white
pine, white ﬁr, and aspen were grouped at the other end (Figure A1c). In the contemporary
ordination, there was less differentiation of species along Axis 2 or Axis 3. Gambel oak is
differentiated on Axis 2 (Figure A1b), and southwestern white pine is differentiated on
Axis 3 (Figure A1d), with all other species clustered together.

Forests 2021, 12, 622
26 of 29
Figure A1. Ordinations of historical and contemporary forest community data. Points represent
the composition of each site; the distance between points represents the similarity between the
composition of each site; points that are close together are similar; points that are far apart are
dissimilar. The three-axis ordination space is displayed as Axis 1 by Axis 2 (a,b), and Axis 1 by
Axis 3 (c,d). Four letter species codes indicate the species scores within the ordination space: ABCO
(white ﬁr; Abies concolor), ACGR (bigtooth maple; Acer grandidentatum), PIPO (ponderosa pine;
Pinus ponderosa), PIST (southwestern white pine; Pinus strobiformis), POTR (quaking aspen; Populus
tremuloides), PSME (Douglas-ﬁr; Pseudotsuga menziesii), QUGA (Gambel oak; Quercus gambelii), and
RONE (New Mexico locust; Robinia neomexicana).
References
1.
Dieterich, J.H. Fire History of Southwestern Mixed Conifer: A Case Study. For. Ecol. Manag. 1983, 6, 13–31. [CrossRef]
2.
Wan, H.Y.; McGarigal, K.; Ganey, J.L.; Lauret, V.; Timm, B.C.; Cushman, S.A. Meta-replication Reveals Nonstationarity in
Multi-scale Habitat Selection of Mexican Spotted Owl. Condor 2017, 119, 641–658. [CrossRef]
3.
O’Donnell, F.C.; Flatley, W.T.; Springer, A.E.; Fulé, P.Z. Forest Restoration as a Strategy to Mitigate Climate Impacts on Wildﬁre,
Vegetation, and Water in Semiarid Forests. Ecol. Appl. 2018, 28, 1459–1472. [CrossRef]
4.
Kalies, E.L.; Yocom Kent, L.L. Tamm Review: Are Fuel Treatments Effective at Achieving Ecological and Social Objectives?
A Systematic Review. For. Ecol. Manag. 2016, 376, 84–95. [CrossRef]
5.
Sánchez Meador, A.; Springer, J.D.; Huffman, D.W.; Bowker, M.A.; Crouse, J.E. Soil Functional Responses to Ecological Restoration
Treatments in Frequent-ﬁre Forests of the Western United States: A Systematic Review. Restor. Ecol. 2017, 25, 497–508. [CrossRef]
6.
Bahre, C.J. Late 19th Century Human Impacts on the Woodlands and Forests of Southeastern Arizona’s Sky Islands. Desert Plants
1998, 14, 8–21.
7.
Cooper, C.F. Changes in Vegetation, Structure, and Growth of South-western Pine Forests since White Settlement. Ecol. Monogr.
1960, 30, 129–164. [CrossRef]
8.
Savage, M.; Swetnam, T.W. Early 19th-Century Fire Decline Following Sheep Pasturing in a Navajo Ponderosa Pine Forest.
Ecology 1990, 71, 2374–2378. [CrossRef]
9.
Reynolds, R.T.; Sánchez Meador, A.J.; Youtz, J.A.; Nicolet, T.; Matonis, M.S.; Jackson, P.L.; DeLorenzo, D.G.; Graves, A.D. Restoring
Composition and Structure in Southwestern Frequent-Fire Forests: A Science-Based Framework for Improving Ecosystem Resiliency;
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: Fort Collins, CO, USA, 2013; p. 76.
10.
Bryant, T.; Waring, K.; Sánchez Meador, A.; Bradford, J.B. A Framework for Quantifying Resilience to Forest Disturbance.
Front. For. Glob. Chang. 2019, 2, 56. [CrossRef]
11.
Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group. The SER International Primer on Ecological
Restoration; Society for Ecological Restoration International: Tucson, AZ, USA, 2004; p. 15.

Forests 2021, 12, 622
27 of 29
12.
Fulé, P.Z.; Korb, J.E.; Wu, R. Changes in Forest Structure of a Mixed Conifer Forest, Southwestern Colorado, USA. For. Ecol. Manag.
2009, 258, 1200–1210. [CrossRef]
13.
Huffman, D.W.; Zegler, T.J.; Fulé, P.Z. Fire History of a Mixed Conifer Forest on the Mogollon Rim, Northern Arizona, USA. Int. J.
Wildland Fire 2015, 24, 680–689. [CrossRef]
14.
Strahan, R.T.; Sánchez Meador, A.J.; Huffman, D.W.; Laughlin, D.C. Shifts in Community-level Traits and Functional Diversity in
a Mixed Conifer Forest: A Legacy of Land-use Change. J. Appl. Ecol. 2016, 53, 1755–1765. [CrossRef]
15.
Landres, P.B.; Morgan, P.; Swanson, F.J. Overview of the Use of Natural Variability Concepts in Managing Ecological Systems.
Ecol. Appl. 1999, 9, 1179. [CrossRef]
16.
Millar, C.I.; Stephenson, N.L.; Stephens, S.L. Climate Change and Forests of the Future: Managing in the Face of Uncertainty.
Ecol. Appl. 2007, 17, 2145–2151. [CrossRef]
17.
Walker, R.B.; Coop, J.D.; Parks, S.A.; Trader, L. Fire Regimes Approaching Historic Norms Reduce Wildﬁre-facilitated Conversion
from Forest to Non-forest. Ecosphere 2018, 9. [CrossRef]
18.
Romme, W.; Floyd, M.; Hanna, D.; Bartlett, E.; Crist, M.; Green, D.; Grissino-Mayer, H.; Lindsey, J.; Mcgarigal, K.; Redders, J.
Historical Range of Variability and Current Landscape Condition Analysis: South Central Highlands Section, Southwestern Colorado &
Northwestern New Mexico; Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University: Fort Collins, CO, USA, 2009.
19.
Rodman, K.C.; Sánchez Meador, A.J.; Huffman, D.W.; Waring, K.M. Reference Conditions and Historical Fine-Scale Spatial
Dynamics in a Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest, Arizona, USA. For. Sci. 2016, 62, 268–280. [CrossRef]
20.
Fulé, P.Z.; Crouse, J.E.; Heinlein, T.A.; Moore, M.M.; Covington, W.W.; Verkamp, G. Mixed-severity Fire Regime in a High-
elevation Forest of Grand Canyon, Arizona, USA. Landsc. Ecol. 2003, 18, 465–486. [CrossRef]
21.
Cocke, A.E.; Fulé, P.Z.; Crouse, J.E. Forest Change on a Steep Mountain Gradient after Extended Fire Exclusion: San Francisco
Peaks, Arizona, USA. J. Appl. Ecol. 2005, 42, 814–823. [CrossRef]
22.
Heinlein, T.A.; Moore, M.M.; Fulé, P.Z.; Covington, W.W. Fire History and Stand Structure of Two Ponderosa Pine-mixed Conifer
Sites: San Francisco Peaks, Arizona, USA. Int. J. Wildland Fire 2005, 14, 307. [CrossRef]
23.
Rodman, K.C.; Sánchez Meador, A.J.; Moore, M.M.; Huffman, D.W. Reference Conditions are Inﬂuenced by the Physical Template
and Vary by Forest Type: A Synthesis of Pinus ponderosa-Dominated Sites in the Southwestern United States. For. Ecol. Manag.
2017, 404, 316–329. [CrossRef]
24.
Westerling, A.L.; Hidalgo, H.G.; Cayan, D.R.; Swetnam, T.W. Warming and Earlier Spring Increase Western U.S. Forest Wildﬁre
Activity. Science 2006, 313, 940–943. [CrossRef]
25.
Westerling, A.L.R. Increasing Western US Forest Wildﬁre Activity: Sensitivity to Changes in the Timing of Spring. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2016, 371. [CrossRef]
26.
Margolis, E.Q.; Balmat, J. Fire History and Fire–climate Relationships along a Fire Regime Gradient in the Santa Fe Municipal
Watershed, NM, USA. For. Ecol. Manag. 2009, 258, 2416–2430. [CrossRef]
27.
Urban, D.L.; Miller, C.; Halpin, P.N.; Stephenson, N.L. Forest Gradient Response in Sierran Landscapes: The Physical Template.
Landscape Ecol. 2000, 15, 603–620. [CrossRef]
28.
Laughlin, D.C.; Fulé, P.Z.; Huffman, D.W.; Crouse, J.; Laliberté, E. Climatic Constraints on Trait-based Forest Assembly. J. Ecol.
2011, 99, 1489–1499. [CrossRef]
29.
Swetnam, T.; Baisan, C. Historical Fire Regime Patterns in the Southwestern United States Since AD 1700. In Fire Effects in
Southwestern Forests. In Proceedings of the Second La Mesa Fire Symposium, Los Alamos, NM, USA, 29–31 March 1994;
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: Fort Collins, CO, USA, 1996; pp. 11–32.
30.
Brown, P.M.; Wu, R. Climate and Disturbance Forcing of Episodic Tree Recruitment in a Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Landscape.
Ecology 2005, 86, 3030–3038. [CrossRef]
31.
League, K.; Veblen, T. Climatic Variability and Episodic Pinus ponderosa Establishment along the Forest-grassland Ecotones of
Colorado. For. Ecol. Manag. 2006, 228, 98–107. [CrossRef]
32.
Puhlick, J.J.; Laughlin, D.C.; Moore, M.M. Factors Inﬂuencing Ponderosa Pine Regeneration in the Southwestern USA.
For. Ecol. Manag. 2012, 264, 10–19. [CrossRef]
33.
Stephens, S.L.; Stevens, J.T.; Collins, B.M.; York, R.A.; Lydersen, J.M. Historical and Modern Landscape Forest Structure in Fir
(Abies)-dominated Mixed Conifer Forests in the Northern Sierra Nevada, USA. Fire Ecol. 2018, 14, 7. [CrossRef]
34.
Abella, S.R.; Covington, W.W. Vegetation–environment Relationships and Ecological Species Groups of an Arizona Pinus
Ponderosa Landscape, USA. Plant Ecol. 2006, 185, 255–268. [CrossRef]
35.
Abella, S.R.; Denton, C.W. Spatial Variation in Reference Conditions: Historical Tree Density and Pattern on a Pinus ponderosa
Landscape. Can. J. For. Res. 2009, 39, 2391–2403. [CrossRef]
36.
Kimsey, M.J.; Shaw, T.M.; Coleman, M.D. Site Sensitive Maximum Stand Density Index Models for Mixed Conifer Stands Across
the Inland Northwest, USA. For. Ecol. Manag. 2019, 433, 396–404. [CrossRef]
37.
Larson, A.J.; Churchill, D. Tree Spatial Patterns in Fire-frequent Forests of Western North America, Including Mechanisms of
Pattern Formation and Implications for Designing Fuel Reduction and Restoration Treatments. For. Ecol. Manag. 2012, 267, 74–92.
[CrossRef]
38.
Larson, A.J.; Stover, K.C.; Keyes, C.R. Effects of Restoration Thinning on Spatial Heterogeneity in Mixed-conifer Forest. Can. J.
For. Res. 2012. [CrossRef]

Forests 2021, 12, 622
28 of 29
39.
Hendricks, J.D.; Plescia, J.B. A Review of the Regional Geophysics of the Arizona Transition Zone.
J. Geophys.
Res.
1991, 96, 12351–12373. [CrossRef]
40.
Four Forest Restoration Initiative. Available online: https://www.fs.usda.gov/4fri (accessed on 20 April 2020).
41.
Cragin Watershed Protection Project.
Available online:
www.fs.usda.gov/detail/coconino/home/?cid=stelprd3850490
(accessed on 20 April 2020).
42.
Roccaforte, J.P.; Huffman, D.W.; Fulé, P.Z.; Covington, W.W.; Chancellor, W.W.; Stoddard, M.T.; Crouse, J.E. Forest Structure
and Fuels Dynamics Following Ponderosa Pine Restoration Treatments, White Mountains, Arizona, USA. For. Ecol. Manag.
2015, 337, 174–185. [CrossRef]
43.
Myers, C.A. Estimating Past Diameters of Ponderosa Pines in Arizona and New Mexico; Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station, Forest Service: Fort Collins, CO, USA; U.S. Department of Agriculture: Washington, DC, USA, 1963.
44.
Parker, J.L.; Thomas, J.W. Wildlife Habitats in Managed Forests: The Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington; US Department of
Agriculture: Washington, DC, USA, 1979.
45.
Sánchez Meador, A.J.; (Northern Arizona University School of Forestry, Flagstaff, AZ, USA). Personal communication, 2020.
46.
Bakker, J.D.; Sanchez Meador, A.J.; Fulé, P.Z.; Huffman, D.W.; Moore, M.M. “Growing Trees Backwards”: Description of a Stand
Reconstruction Model; USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: Fort Collins, CO, USA, 2008; pp. 136–147.
47.
Moore, M.M.; Huffman, D.W.; Fulé, P.Z.; Covington, W.W.; Crouse, J.E. Comparison of Historical and Contemporary Forest
Structure and Composition on Permanent Plots in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. For. Sci. 2004, 50, 162–176. [CrossRef]
48.
Curtis, J.T.; McIntosh, R.P. An Upland Forest Continuum in the Prairie-Forest Border Region of Wisconsin.
Ecology
1951, 32, 476–496. [CrossRef]
49.
Bivand, R.S.; Pebesma, E.; Gómez-Rubio, V. Applied Spatial Data Analysis with R, 2nd ed.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2013;
ISBN 978-1-4614-7618-4.
50.
Bivand, R.S.; Wong, D.W.S. Comparing Implementations of Global and Local Indicators of Spatial Association.
TEST
2018, 27, 716–748. [CrossRef]
51.
Moran, P.A.P. Notes on Continuous Stochastic Phenomena. Biometrika 1950, 37, 17. [CrossRef]
52.
Cliff, A.D.; Ord, J.K. Spatial Autocorrelation; Pion: London, UK, 1973.
53.
Mast, J.N.; Wolf, J.J. Spatial Patch Patterns and Altered Forest Structure in Middle Elevation versus upper Ecotonal Mixed-conifer
Forests, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, USA. For. Ecol. Manag. 2006. [CrossRef]
54.
Arbuckle, J.L. Amos; IBM SPSS: Chicago, IL, USA, 2014.
55.
Grace, J.B. Structural Equation Modeling and Natural Systems; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2006.
56.
Grace, J.B.; Bollen, K.A. Representing General Theoretical Concepts in Structural Equation Models: The Role of Composite
Variables. Environ. Ecol. Stat. 2008, 15, 191–213. [CrossRef]
57.
Laughlin, D.C.; Grace, J.B. A Multivariate Model of Plant Species Richness in Forested Systems: Old-growth Montane Forests
with a Long History of Fire. Oikos 2006, 114, 60–70. [CrossRef]
58.
Laughlin, D.C.; Abella, S.R.; Covington, W.W.; Grace, J.B. Species Richness and Soil Properties in Pinus ponderosa Forests: A
Structural Equation Modeling Analysis. J. Veg. Sci. 2007, 18, 231–242. [CrossRef]
59.
Huffman, D.W.; Laughlin, D.C.; Pearson, K.W.; Pandey, S. Effects of Vertebrate Herbivores and Shrub Characteristics on Arthropod
Assemblages in a Northern Arizona Forest Ecosystem. For. Ecol. Manag. 2009, 258, 616–625. [CrossRef]
60.
Eisenhauer, N.; Bowker, M.A.; Grace, J.B.; Powell, J.R. From Patterns to Causal Understanding: Structural Equation Modeling
(SEM) in Soil Ecology. Pedobiologia 2015, 58, 65–72. [CrossRef]
61.
ArcGIS Desktop: Release 10; Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI): Redlands, CA, USA, 2011.
62.
Hijmans, R.J. Raster: Geographic Data Analysis and Modeling; R Package, University of California: Davis, CA, USA, 2019.
63.
Evans, J.S. Spatialeco; R Package, University of Wyoming: Laramie, WY, USA, 2019.
64.
Beers, T.W.; Dress, P.E.; Wensel, L.C. Notes and Observations: Aspect Transformation in Site Productivity Research. J. For.
1966, 64, 691–692. [CrossRef]
65.
McCune, B.; Keon, D. Equations for Potential Annual Direct Incident Radiation and Heat Load. J. Veg. Sci. 2002, 13, 603–606.
[CrossRef]
66.
Rich, P.M.; Dubayah, R.; Hetrick, W.A.; Saving, S.C. Using Viewshed Models to Calculate Intercepted Solar Radiation: Applications in
Ecology; American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing: Bethesda, MD, USA, 1994; pp. 524–529.
67.
Riley, S.J.; DeGloria, S.D.; Elliot, R. Index That Quantiﬁes Topographic Heterogeneity. Intermt. J. Sci. 1999, 5, 23–27.
68.
PRISM Climate Group. Climate Data; Oregon State University: Corvallis, OR, USA, 2019.
69.
Web Soil Survey. Available online: Websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/ (accessed on 20 April 2020).
70.
Ramcharan, A.; Hengl, T.; Nauman, T.; Brungard, C.; Waltman, S.; Wills, S.; Thompson, J. Soil Property and Class Maps of the
Conterminous United States at 100-Meter Spatial Resolution. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 2018, 82, 186–201. [CrossRef]
71.
Oksanen, J.; Blanchet, F.G.; Friendly, M.; Kindt, R.; Legendre, P.; McGlinn, D.; Minchin, P.R.; O’Hara, R.B.; Simpson, G.L.;
Solymos, P.; et al. Vegan: Community Ecology Package; R Package, University of Helsinki: Helsinki, Norway, 2019.
72.
Wassermann, T.; Stoddard, M.T.; Waltz, A.E.M. Working Paper 42: A Summary of the Natural Range of Variability for Southwestern
Frequent-Fire Forests; Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University: Flagstaff, AZ, USA, 2019; p. 11.
73.
Williams, M.A.; Baker, W.L. Spatially Extensive Reconstructions Show Variable-severity Fire and Heterogeneous Structure in
Historical Western United States Dry Forests. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 2012, 21, 1042–1052. [CrossRef]

Forests 2021, 12, 622
29 of 29
74.
Brown, P.M.; Battaglia, M.A.; Fornwalt, P.J.; Gannon, B.; Huckaby, L.S.; Julian, C.; Cheng, A.S. Historical (1860) Forest Structure in
Ponderosa pine Forests of the Northern Front Range, Colorado. Can. J. For. Res. 2015, 45, 1462–1473. [CrossRef]
75.
Battaglia, M.A.; Gannon, B.; Brown, P.M.; Fornwalt, P.J.; Cheng, A.S.; Huckaby, L.S. Changes in Forest Structure since 1860 in
Ponderosa Pine Dominated Forests in the Colorado and Wyoming Front Range, USA. For. Ecol. Manag. 2018, 422, 147–160.
[CrossRef]
76.
Lydersen, J.M.; North, M.P.; Knapp, E.E.; Collins, B.M. Quantifying Spatial Patterns of Tree Groups and Gaps in Mixed-
conifer Forests: Reference Conditions and Long-term Changes Following Fire Suppression and Logging. For. Ecol. Manag.
2013, 304, 370–382. [CrossRef]
77.
Collins, B.M.; Lydersen, J.M.; Everett, R.G.; Fry, D.L.; Stephens, S.L. Novel Characterization of Landscape-level Variability in
Historical Vegetation Structure. Ecol. Appl. 2015, 25, 1167–1174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Stephens, S.L.; Lydersen, J.M.; Collins, B.M.; Fry, D.L.; Meyer, M.D. Historical and Current Landscape-scale Ponderosa Pine and
Mixed Conifer Forest Structure in the Southern Sierra Nevada. Ecosphere 2015, 6. [CrossRef]
79.
Hagmann, R.K.; Franklin, J.F.; Johnson, K.N. Historical Structure and Composition of Ponderosa Pine and Mixed-conifer Forests
in South-central Oregon. For. Ecol. Manag. 2013, 304, 492–504. [CrossRef]
80.
Hagmann, R.K.; Franklin, J.F.; Johnson, K.N. Historical Conditions in Mixed-conifer Forests on the Eastern Slopes of the Northern
Oregon Cascade Range, USA. For. Ecol. Manag. 2014, 330, 158–170. [CrossRef]
81.
Hagmann, R.K.; Johnson, D.L.; Johnson, K.N. Historical and Current Forest Conditions in the Range of the Northern Spotted Owl
in South Central Oregon, USA. For. Ecol. Manag. 2017, 389, 374–385. [CrossRef]
82.
Binkley, D.; Romme, B.; Cheng, T. Historical Forest Structure on the Uncompahgre Plateau: Informing Restoration Prescriptions for
Mountainside Stewardship; Colorado Forest Restoration Initiative, Colorado State University: Fort Collins, CO, USA, 2008; p. 26.
83.
Korb, J.E.; Fulé, P.Z.; Wu, R. Variability of Warm/Dry Mixed Conifer Forests in Southwestern Colorado, USA: Implications for
Ecological Restoration. For. Ecol. Manag. 2013, 304, 182–191. [CrossRef]
84.
Mueller, S.E.; Thode, A.E.; Margolis, E.Q.; Yocom, L.L.; Young, J.D.; Iniguez, J.M. Climate Relationships with Increasing Wildﬁre
in the Southwestern US from 1984 to 2015. For. Ecol. Manag. 2020, 460. [CrossRef]
85.
Meunier, J.; Romme, W.H.; Brown, P.M. Climate and Land-use Effects on Wildﬁre in Northern Mexico, 1650–2010. For. Ecol. Manag.
2014, 325, 49–59. [CrossRef]
86.
Swetnam, T.W.; Farella, J.; Roos, C.I.; Liebmann, M.J.; Falk, D.A.; Allen, C.D. Multiscale Perspectives of Fire, Climate and Humans
in Western North America and the Jemez Mountains, USA. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2016, 371, 20150168. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
87.
Fulé, P.Z.; Laughlin, D.C. Wildland Fire Effects on Forest Structure over an Altitudinal Gradient, Grand Canyon National Park,
USA. J. Appl. Ecol. 2006, 44, 136–146. [CrossRef]
88.
Huffman, D.W.; Sánchez Meador, A.J.; Stoddard, M.T.; Crouse, J.E.; Roccaforte, J.P. Efﬁcacy of Resource Objective Wildﬁres for
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine (Pinus ponderosa) Forests in Northern Arizona. For. Ecol. Manag. 2017, 389. [CrossRef]
89.
Huffman, D.W.; Crouse, J.E.; Sánchez Meador, A.J.; Springer, J.D.; Stoddard, M.T. Restoration Beneﬁts of Re-entry with Resource
Objective Wildﬁre on a Ponderosa Pine Landscape in Northern Arizona, USA. For. Ecol. Manag. 2018, 408. [CrossRef]
90.
Stoddard, M.T.; Fulé, P.Z.; Huffman, D.W.; Sánchez Meador, A.J.; Roccaforte, J.P. Ecosystem Management Applications of
Resource Objective Wildﬁres in Forests of the Grand Canyon National Park, USA. Int. J. Wildland Fire 2020, 29, 190. [CrossRef]
