The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of com-
munities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues 
related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Long-Term Functional Responses and Ecological Resilience Across a  
Network of Ponderosa Pine Restoration Treatments 
By Mike Stoddard, Research Associate 
Introduction 
Record-breaking temperatures and aridity have 
impacted the southwestern US in recent decades. 
Recent regional climate change, coupled with 
uncharacteristic high tree densities and fuel loads due to 
fire exclusion, has resulted in widespread tree mortality 
events due to factors such as wildfire, insect outbreaks, 
and drought stress. To restore the health and resilience 
of seasonally dry, frequent-fire-adapted ecosystems, 
land managers are implementing broad-scale, 
collaborative restoration projects across the western US 
with the intention of enhancing resistance to crown fire 
and climatic stressors. Despite the widespread use of 
restoration treatments, questions remain regarding long-
term treatment effectiveness and durability to shifting 
climate and changing disturbance regimes (e.g., severe 
wildfire). In this study, we examined ponderosa pine 
forest responses 10 and 20 years after restoration 
treatment implementation across a network of 
experimental study sites in northern Arizona and used 
climate simulation models to predict future outcomes 
under various management scenarios. We focused our 
analysis on differences in tree mortality, tree growth, 
canopy fuel loads, and potential fire behavior between 
restored (i.e., treated) and untreated areas. 
  
Research Findings 
• Restoration treatment areas had significantly lower tree mortality and greater diameter growth 
compared to controls over the 20-year study. 
• Treated areas remained lower in canopy fuels and crowning index (crown fire potential) without 
the need for additional tree thinning. 
• Forest structural characteristics, such as tree density, basal area, and diameter distributions, 
generally remained similar to historical reference conditions in treated areas with the exception of 
increases in ingrowth of sprouting species at the drier sites. 
 
June 2021 
Figure 1. Map of the four study sites in northern 
Arizona within the Long-term Ecological Assess-
ment and Restoration Network (LEARN). The sites 
span a precipitation gradient from the drier sites 
at Mt. Trumbull (MT) and Grandview (GV) in 
northwestern Arizona to the wetter sites at Fort 
Valley (FV) and Mineral Creek (MC) in the north- 
and east-central areas of the state, respectively. 

 
• Modeling basal area, crowning index, and the proportion of basal area in large trees under a 
future warming scenario suggested that the treated units underwent less changes than untreated 
areas; however, decline in basal area in both treated and untreated areas by the end of the 
century is concerning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions  
Evidence-based restoration treatments maintained their effectiveness over a 20-year period and 
showed several attributes that indicate resilience to drought, warming temperatures, and increasing fire 
occurrence. Our results indicated that ponderosa pine forests restored to near-reference conditions 
were better able to withstand future climate changes without undergoing abrupt transition compared 
with untreated areas. Furthermore, both our empirical results and simulations suggest that the 
frequency of prescribed fire can be longer than historical fire regimes and still promote resilience. 
Although restored (i.e., treated) areas performed better than untreated areas in terms of tree growth and 
mortality, modeled future basal area loss was a concern. Our study demonstrated the importance of 
monitoring key indicators and utilizing regional study networks as well as model simulations, all of 
which are instrumental in informing adaptive approaches to future environmental conditions. 
 
Further Reading 
Azpeleta Tarancón, A., P.Z. Fulé, K.L. Shive, C.H. Sieg, A.J. Sánchez Meador, B. Strom. 2014. Simulating post-
wildfire forest trajectories under alternative climate and management scenarios. Ecological Applications, 
24 (7), 1626–1637.  
Flatley, W.T., and P.Z. Fulé. 2016. Are historical fire regimes compatible with future climate? Implications for 
forest restoration. Ecosphere, 7: 1–21.  
Stephens, S.L., A.L. Westerling, M.D. Hurteau, M.Z. Peery, C.A. Schultz, S. Thompson. 2020. Fire and climate 
change: Conserving seasonally dry forests is still possible. Front. Ecol. Environ., 18 (6): 354–360.  
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Stoddard, M.T., J.P. Roccaforte, A.J. Sánchez Meador, D.W. Huffman, A.E.M. Waltz, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. 
Covington. 2021. Ecological restoration guided by historical reference conditions can increase resilience to 
climate change of southwestern U.S. ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology and Management, 493, 
119256. 
 
 
Contact: Mike Stoddard, Mike.Stoddard@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2. Tree mortality and basal 
area growth 10- and 20-years post-
treatment in treated (restored) and 
control (untreated) areas. Mortality 
and growth are the differences 
between year 5 and year 10, and year 
10 and year 20 following treatments. 
Different letters denote significant 
differences (p ≤ 0.05) between 
treatments within each time period. 
Also shown (inset) is ponderosa pine 
(PIPO) mortality from year 5 to year 
10, and year 10 to year 20. 
