The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of 
communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic 
issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Clearing Obstacles to Restoration 
 
 
 
Introduction 
There is agreement among forestry professionals and ecologists that restoration treatments are effective at 
restoring forest structure and function, preventing severe wildfire, and potentially mitigating the effects of 
climate change. However, significant hurdles remain to treating landscapes at large scales, and they range 
from policy to economic and planning barriers. The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) works with 
scientists, policy makers, land managers, and the forest products industry to identify clear solutions to 
overcome these barriers and increase the pace and scale of restoration treatments. Some of the primary 
barriers, along with recommended solutions, are listed below.  
 
Funding. Public land management agencies do not have the capacity or funds to solve the 
landscape-scale restoration and fire problem alone. The current degraded conditions of our forests 
and woodlands present a massive public health and safety problem in the form of catastrophic 
wildfires. They also present a risk to the delivery of important ecosystem services, like clean 
water and air, improved wildlife habitat and biodiversity, increased recreational opportunities and 
economies, cultural enrichment, climate change mitigation through carbon sequestration, and 
avoidance of catastrophic fire and flooding. Restoring forest health across large landscapes 
requires investment in solutions equal to the task. However, funding for federal, state, and local 
jurisdictions is often limited to address the scale of the problem.  
 
Solution: Public land management budgets must be augmented by billions of dollars a year for the 
next decade to invest in science-based restoration, wildfire, and climate resilience solutions. New 
funding sources must be identified, with an eye toward innovative federal and state funding, 
partnerships with private utility companies and municipalities, and leverage investor and other 
financing approaches to support the delivery of ecosystem services. 
 
Describing forest conditions and prioritizing treatments. Forest managers and decision makers 
lack sufficient data on existing forest conditions, fuel treatments, and fire histories within their 
jurisdictions and across multi-jurisdictional landscapes. Furthermore, there is often insufficient 
analytical capacity within agencies to use existing data sources, to plan and prioritize using 
commonly accepted science-based approaches, and to implement and adaptively manage 
restoration treatments at a pace and scale aligned with current and anticipated disturbances, such 
as wildfire, drought, or insect outbreaks. 
 
Solution: Science support and use of the best available science information is critical to ramping 
up the pace and scale of restoration treatments. Entities that span the boundaries of science, 
management, and policy, like the ERI, can provide science support for land managers by 
collecting, analyzing, and delivering information on existing forest conditions as well as adding 
technical capacity to accurately describe forest conditions and support treatment planning and 
decision-making on the ground. This best available science helps strengthen environmental 
planning documents and helps land managers make informed decisions when planning for and 
prioritizing treatments.  

Working across boundaries. In some cases, governance over forested lands is not aligned, 
leading to cultural and ownership differences, policy paralysis, and even conflict. Forest 
governance is often influenced by multiple agencies and affected entities that operate at different 
levels, leading to fragmentation of interests, priorities, and actions along horizontal (e.g., 
industrial vs. environmental values) and vertical (e.g., national vs. local government) lines.  
 
Solution: Since severe wildfires do not stop at jurisdictional boundaries, and preventing them 
depends on inclusive collaboration with communities on the front lines of these threats, there is a 
need to work across levels of government, to develop diverse partnerships, and to work with 
sovereign tribes. In order to increase restoration, it is imperative that disparate groups work 
together to find solutions and that the necessary support for these collaborative efforts is ensured.  
 
Better valuing resources. Most wood from restoration treatments in the Southwest (and much of 
the Interior West) is not merchantable (suitable for purchase or sale) and removing this material 
creates a biomass waste disposal problem. Furthermore, assessing the success of restoration 
based on traditional, forest-market valuation ignores the important (and often non- market) value 
of ecosystem services. 
 
Solution: There is a need to improve the overall economics of restoration treatments through the 
development of a restoration economy. This necessitates a better articulation of the potential 
economic value of a restored acre, rather than the current focus on valuing the materials (e.g., 
small diameter wood and biomass) generated through thinning and restoration treatments. We 
must also begin to better understand the true costs of wildfire, including suppression, prevention, 
i.e., the cost of restoration treatments, and mitigation efforts post-fire. This type of research will 
help to better quantify the value of a restored acre, the potential costs of inaction, and the 
potential return on investment of restoration.  
 
Inadequate business sector capacity. A major barrier to accelerating restoration and fire risk 
reduction throughout the West is the need for additional forest products industry capacity and 
markets to utilize small-diameter wood and biomass generated from restoration treatments. Many 
areas in the Southwest (and the interior West) lack forest products industry capacity, 
infrastructure, and workforce, as well as markets for the materials produced from restoration 
treatments. Hauling costs are often prohibitive, which prevents materials from getting to existing 
markets, and within the forest products industry, there is a need to increase operational efficiency 
and the use of small-diameter wood and biomass. 
 
Solution: The ERI is working with partners in industry to develop a forest operations business 
cluster in northern Arizona. A business cluster would provide local and regional solutions to 
hauling, processing, and marketing low-value wood products. It would house a Forest Operations 
Training Center, which will build workforce capacity and create local jobs. Similar types of 
business clusters are needed throughout the West. In addition to adding capacity to the wood 
products industry, there is a need for area wood supply analyses and other cutting-edge wood 
utilization research to assist in attracting and sustaining the forest products industry in Arizona.  
 
Conclusion 
Many of the barriers to ramping up the pace and scale of forest restoration treatments can be addressed 
through federal and state policies that strengthen and increase the rationale and funding for 
implementation, treatment prioritization, scientific research, business sector capacity, and improving our 
ability to value ecosystem services. New policy solutions must seek to get to the core of the issues that 
present obstacles to forest restoration, i.e., the difficulty of valuing the restored acre rather than the 
materials it provides, and the other barriers presented here.  
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, tayloe.dubay@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
