Appendix B. Economic Valuation of Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Impacts from Uncharacteristic Wildfire: Additional Background, Literature Review, and Methods       1
Full-Cost Accounting Remeasurement of the  
2010 Schultz Fire: Understanding the Long-term 
Socio-Economic Implications of High-Severity 
Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flooding
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
Appendix B. Economic Valuation of Mexican 
Spotted Owl Habitat Impacts from Uncharacteristic 
Wildfire: Additional Background, Literature Review, 
and Methods
August 2021

2	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Appendix B. Economic Valuation of Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Impacts from 
Uncharacteristic Wildfire: Additional Background, Literature Review, and Methods
Background
Economists have been refining cost-benefit analysis (CBA) for decades as environmental regulations have 
consistently included CBA in both mandates and best practices. CBA traditionally mirrored costs and revenue 
balancing as done by corporations, inclusive of market values only. However, CBA was improved when nonmarket 
values, including passive uses, were included in the accounting (e.g., Kopp 1992). Krutilla (1967) delineated 
categories of nonmarket values highlighted by “existence value,” or the value one places on knowing that a landscape 
or species exist even if that person may never visit the place. Additionally, there are option values (Weisbrod 1964), 
similar to having insurance to ensure future use, and bequest nonmarket values that society holds for potentially 
being able to utilize a resource in the future and for bequeathing intact ecosystems to future generations.  
Existence, bequest, and option values became known as passive use values (also known as non-use values) as they 
were fundamentally different from the use values generated by directly recreating or using resources from the 
landscape. Measuring passive use values was done using a nonmarket stated preference method called contingent 
valuation. The contingent valuation method (CVM) employs surveys of the affected community to simulate 
market choices and to elicit willingness to pay (WTP) for nonmarket ecosystem services (Mitchell and Carson 
1989). Because these nonmarket values are for public goods and services, they represent benefits with non-rivalry 
and non-excludability characteristics which means that one person’s enjoyment of passive uses does not interfere 
with others’ enjoyment and that these values can be simultaneously help by numerous individuals.  
Based on the hypothetical nature, or contingent nature, of stated preference methods used to determine passive use 
values, CVM took a while to become an accepted economic valuation method. CVM came under great scrutiny 
following the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989 when these methods were beginning to be used to estimate payments 
for civil suits in cases of major natural resource damage. The prospect of holding private companies financially 
liable for environmental degradation, including liabilities for passive use and non-consumptive values, led the Bush 
Administration and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to create a Blue-Ribbon panel 
of expert social scientists to advise on CVM in 1992. The resulting recommendations and guidelines (Arrow et al. 
1993) led to a set of best practices and ultimately led to greater acceptance amongst economists.  
The ensuing decades saw numerous experiments and reliability tests in CVM which all spurred advances in 
the valuation of passive use values and nonmarket ecosystem services. New, but similar methods to CVM, such 
as conjoint ranking and choice experiments have led to even greater refinements in valuing passive uses. CVM 
studies conducted with recommended best practices have been shown to provide estimates that are consistent with 
other methods and are increasingly according with economic theory and predictors (Freeman 2003). For properly 
conducted CVM studies, the reliability of results is increasingly becoming less of a concern (Boyle 2003).   
Literature Review
The Loomis and González-Cabán studies on valuing the public’s WTP for fire reduction policies that would 
protect spotted owls provided several answers to methodological questions relevant for transferring estimates or 
functions to the accounting of Schultz Fire damage. They conducted tests that illustrated the reliability of the 
WTP estimates, such as the MSO valuation (Loomis and González-Cabán 1997) illustrating scope effects where 
respondents valued multiple endangered Southwest species at greater values than the WTP for only protecting 
MSOs. Loomis and González-Cabán (1998) also detailed a benefit function transfer of their sample data, 
allowing for greater sensitivity analysis for benefits transfer of their spotted owl valuations.  

Appendix B. Economic Valuation of Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Impacts from Uncharacteristic Wildfire: Additional Background, Literature Review, and Methods       3
Perhaps the greatest contribution from the Loomis and González-Cabán studies is the research on the 
extrapolation of sample WTP to the appropriate accounting stance, or spatial extent. That is, CVM studies 
typically include surveys of residents closest to the ecosystem service being valued. For public lands and federally 
listed “threatened” species however, the value of conservation management and preservation of species accrues 
to all US residents and to some degree internationally (Haefele et al. 2018), though the WTP value is likely to 
decrease (or decay) for residents farther away from the service being valued. To determine national willingness 
to pay for fire protection policies that would reduce the annual amount of spotted owl critical habitat burned, 
Loomis and González-Cabán (1996) surveyed both Pacific Northwest residents and New England residents and 
found decreasing, yet still substantial willingness to pay across the country. Specifically, they found that California 
households had an annual mean WTP of $79 for fire management that would decrease the amount of California 
spotted owl (Strix occidentalis occidentalis) habitat that burned, whereas New England residents had an annual 
mean WTP of $45 per household for the California fire management program. This resulted in a total annual 
WTP of $4.7 billion for the entire US, illustrating that California residents’ WTP for protecting the spotted owl 
constituted only 17 percent of the total societal value.    
Methods
We started with locating all potential source studies to use for benefit transfer (see Table 5 (first table in MSO 
section) in main white paper). Based on guidelines from Rolfe et al. (2015) and Rosenberger and Loomis (2003), 
we consider which source studies may be suitable for direct unit value transfer based on similarities (or differences) 
in scope, measurement, framing, scale, and population. In this sense, scope similarity relates to the physical 
characteristics of source studies compared to our proposed valuation of MSOs as related to the Schultz Fire. 
All seven studies shown in Table 5 were focused on valuation of spotted owls and their associated old growth/
later seral forest habitats, suggesting scope similarity with our analysis. All seven identified studies also exhibit 
measurement and framing similarity, as the previous studies all based the valuations on policies that would 
help protect spotted owls to insure their existence. The final two assessment categories for determining transfer 
suitability, scale and population similarity, exhibit some differences based on type of spotted owl being valued (e.g., 
northern, California, or Mexican) and their correlating geographic ranges. Based on our identified potential source 
studies, we apply three types of benefits transfer.  
Discussion 
The spotted owl became a symbol of environmental concern (Rubin et al. 1991), valued by the public not only 
for itself but also for the late successional forest habitat it requires. Public values for the spotted owl tend to 
be more inclusive of values held for overall ecological health and ecosystem services provided by more pristine 
forests. For example, the northern spotted owl had the greatest average WTP values among numerous individual 
species in a meta-analysis synthesizing values for rare and endangered species, even greater than grizzly bears 
(Ursus arctos horribilis) and salmon (Loomis and White 1996). While “charismatic megafauna” and birds tend 
to generate the greatest WTP for protection, the spotted owl’s large valuation may hint at another source of 
value—symbolic value representing environmental good will (referred to as “stewardship value” by Carson 2012). 
The majority of spotted owl valuations were conducted around the design and implementation of the Northwest 
Forest Plan, a time when the spotted owl and environmental concerns came into the media spotlight. The spotted 
owl became the symbolic totem that embodied the environmental conflict represented by the Northwest Forest 
Plan— commodification of nature versus the conservation of nature. Thus, a portion of the societal value held 
for preserving spotted owls is likely symbolic value that represents greater environmental concerns than just the 
survival of one species.  

4	
Ecological Restoration Institute
Literature Cited
Carson, R.T. 2012. Contingent valuation: A practical alternative when prices aren’t available. Journal of economic 
perspectives, 26(4), 27–42.
Freeman III, A.M. 2003. The measurement of environmental and resource values: theory and methods. Resources 
for the Future, Washington, D.C., USA.
Kopp, R. 1992. Why Existence Values Should Be Used in Cost-Benefit Analysis. J. Policy Anal. and Manage., 11: 
123–30.
Krutilla, J.V. 1967. Conservation reconsidered. The American Economic Review, 57(4): 77–786.
Loomis, J.B., and D.S. White. 1996. Economic benefits of rare and endangered species: summary and meta-
analysis. Ecological Economics, 18(3), 197–206.
Mitchell, R.C., and R.T. Carson. Using surveys to value public goods: the contingent valuation method. Resources 
for the Future.
Rolfe, J., J. Windle, and R.J. Johnston. 2015. “Applying benefit transfer with limited data: unit value transfers in 
practice.” In Benefit Transfer of Environmental and Resource Values. Springer, Dordrecht. 141–162 pp.
Weisbrod, B.A. 1964. Collective-consumption services of individual-consumption goods. The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 78(3): 471–477.
