2020 Wildfire Season: An Overview
Southwestern US
JULY 2021

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
Authors: Michael Lynch and Alexander Evans
Reviewers: Barb Satink Wolfson, Southwest Fire Science Consortium/Northern Arizona University; Richard Naden, 
National Park Service; and Margaret Hangan Kaibab National Forest, USDA Forest Service  
Cover photo: The Mangum Fire burned for 46 days and covered 71,450 acres on the Kaibab Plateau near the North Rim of 
Grand Canyon National Park. Fire managers used a full suppression approach, which allowed for some point protection of 
infrastructure like the historic Jacob Lake Ranger Station featured in this photo. Photo courtesy of the Kaibab National Forest, 
USDA Forest Service
Please use the following citation when referring to this report: 
Lynch, M., and A. Evans. 2021. 2020 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern US. Special Report. Ecological 
Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 18 p.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.	
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the 
basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.
Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by 
reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes.  
The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines ecological restoration  
as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem  
with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to  
return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration 
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally 
dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, 
and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing 
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on 
reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—
and reestablishing productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests 
of the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, 
to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, 
and policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available 
science used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions 
managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop 
scientific information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through  
an inclusive and open process.

Table of Contents
Introduction................................................ 1
Wildfire Management................................ 1
The 2020 Fire Season................................. 1
Regional Context ....................................... 2
Data Sources............................................... 3
Bush Fire, Arizona...................................... 5
Bighorn Fire, Arizona................................. 6
Mangum Fire, Arizona................................ 7
Griffin Fire, Arizona.................................... 8
Cow Canyon Fire, Arizona......................... 9
Blue River Fire, Arizona............................ 10
Valley Fire, Arizona................................... 11
Blue River 2 Fire, Arizona......................... 11
Cub Fire, New Mexico.............................. 12
Luna Fire, New Mexico............................ 13
Medio Fire, New Mexico.......................... 14
Conclusion................................................. 15
Appendix I. Fire Statistics........................ 18

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
1
Introduction
Wildfire is part of the landscape in the Southwest. It can 
be a threat to lives and property, but it is also crucial to 
maintaining healthy ecosystems. Plant communities in the 
Southwest are adapted to fire. For example, ponderosa pine 
forests need regular, low-severity fires to remain healthy. Over 
decades without fire on the landscape, fuel loads accumulated 
and facilitated more intense, high-severity fire. Each fire is 
different, and while some burn in ways that increase ecosystem 
resilience, others burn with greater severity than forests are 
adapted to, killing even the toughest trees and threatening lives 
and homes. Weather, climate, vegetation type, fuel conditions, 
and topography all influence how an individual wildfire burns 
on the landscape and whether it has beneficial effects. Some 
fires will leave many unburned patches, creating a mosaic burn 
pattern, whereas others will burn more contiguously.
This report is the eighth in a series of annual overviews 
available from the Southwest Fire Science Consortium and 
the Ecological Restoration Institute. The goal of this overview 
is to provide a concise summary of the fire season and to 
facilitate comparison with past fires and fire seasons. It follows 
the format of past years’ overviews1 and describes the impacts 
of the nine wildfires over 25,000 acres in Arizona and New 
Mexico in 2020. Also included are two wildfires in New 
Mexico worthy of note. As described in the main report, the 
Medio Fire provides a useful example of fuel reduction efficacy 
in a high-value watershed. The Luna Fire is notable because 
of its late start date, October 17. As in previous overviews, this 
report covers when each fire burned, fire management costs, 
vegetation types, previous burn footprints, and burn severity, 
where available. The conclusion section summarizes these same 
measures for the large wildfires in the region and touches on 
how these fires burned in proximity to human communities. 
Wildfire Management
Managers can approach each wildfire with multiple objectives 
that range from managing the wildfire for public safety to 
managing the fire to benefit natural resources. Federal wildland 
fire management policy states:
“Response to wildland fires is based on 
ecological, social and legal consequences of the 
fire. The circumstances under which a fire occurs, 
and the likely consequences on firefighter and 
public safety and welfare, natural and cultural 
resources, and, values to be protected, dictate the 
appropriate response to the fire.”2
A full range of wildland fire response strategies may be 
employed to meet these objectives, including containing, 
confining, or suppressing the wildfire. The national Incident 
Management Situation Report identifies the percentage of each 
fire managed with a monitor, confine, point zone protection, 
or suppression strategy. This report compiles these figures to 
better explain how fires were managed in 2020.
Wildland fire management strategies are based on a thoughtful 
and systematic risk-based approach that considers firefighter 
and public safety, cause of the wildfire, location, existing land 
management plans, availability of resources, values at risk, and 
social and economic factors. Federal policy dictates that “initial 
action on human-caused wildfire will be to suppress the fire.”2 
The same federal policy allows naturally ignited wildfires (or 
parts of wildfires) to be managed for resource benefits, such as 
mitigating fuel loads to reduce the risk of high-severity fire, 
enhancing wildlife habitat, improving watershed health, and 
reducing risk to neighboring communities. Though multiple 
strategies are used to manage wildfires, it is important to 
note that federal agencies only recognize two types of fires: 
prescribed fire (planned) and wildfire (unplanned).
The 2020 Fire Season 
In 2020, wildfire burned 1,068,373 acres in the Southwest 
(Arizona and New Mexico), which is greater than the average 
number of acres burned annually in these two states over the 
previous ten-year period.” Arizona had significantly more 
wildfire (929,522 acres) than its ten-year average (305,623 acres), 
while New Mexico had fewer acres of wildfire (138,851 acres) 
than its ten-year average (299,773 acres). Unplanned human 
ignitions made up 28 percent and 12 percent of wildfire acres in 
Arizona and New Mexico respectively (though these estimates 
excluded wildfires with an unknown cause) (Figure 1). 
In 2020, wildfires over 100 acres represented 98 percent of the 
total acreage burned by wildfire in Arizona and New Mexico. 
In 2019, the Southwest Coordination Center recorded the 
strategies managers employed for wildfires, but that data was not 
available in 2020. During the fall and winter of 2019, managers 
were on track for a successful prescribed fire season. For example, 
the US Forest Service had completed 60,396 acres of prescribed 
burning in Arizona and New Mexico between October and 
end of December 2019. Then, during 2020, the COVID-19 
pandemic hit and made prescribed fire and all fire management 
more difficult. COVID-19 caused the temporary suspension of 
prescribed fires on many jurisdictions to reduce smoke impacts 
on people at risk from COVID-19 and to reduce transmission 
among fire personnel. Fire management strategies focused on 
rapid suppression to avoid extended exposure to smoke or spread 
of COVID-19. In an April 3, 2020 letter, the Chief of the US 
Forest Service identified objectives to respond to wildfires during 
the pandemic including:
•	
Minimize to the extent feasible COVID-19 exposure and 
transmission and smoke exposure to firefighters and com-
munities;
•	
Prioritize the use of local suppression resources with the 
predominant strategy being rapid containment; and 
•	
Commit resources only when there is a reasonable expec-
tation of success in protecting life and critical property and 
infrastructure.
The COVID-19 pandemic led to significant changes to fire 
management that are beyond the scope of this report. The 
Wildland Fire Lessons Learned Center compiled many of the 
pandemic impacts in a Coronavirus Lessons Summary.3
 
1	 2019, 2018, 2017, 2016, 2015, 2014, and 2013 Wildfire Season: An Over-
view, Southwestern U.S.  
https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/
id/877/rec/3
2	 Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy, 
2009 https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/uploads/2009-wfm-guid-
ance-for-implementation.pdf
3	 Lessons Learned Center https://www.wildfirelessons.net/orphans/view-
incident?DocumentKey=1d838a70-f78c-4c47-a949-bde579427760

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
2
This overview focuses on the 11 large fires, which include eight 
Arizona fires: Bush, Bighorn, Mangum, Griffin, Cow Canyon, 
Blue River, Valley, and Blue River 2; and three New Mexico 
fires: Cub, Luna, and Medio. The 11 large fires in this report 
represent 57 percent of the acres burned by wildfire in 2020 
(Figure 2).
 
Regional Context
Northeast Arizona and northwest New Mexico were in severe 
drought in early 2020. The Southwest had well below average 
precipitation through the winter and spring. Poor precipitation 
in the second half of 2019 led to reduced fine fuel growth 
and below normal carryover of warm-season fine fuels.5 
However, the 2019–2020 winter was wetter than average in 
the southern part of the region and facilitated above normal 
growth of fine fuels. Snowpack was less than 50 percent of the 
long-term median. Spring 2020 precipitation was sufficient 
to encourage growth of fine fuels toward average levels. Fuel 
moistures for 100-hour fuels were below five percent in the 
southern half of the region and less than ten percent in the 
northern half at the beginning of fire season in May. Even 
1,000-hour fuels had less than ten percent moisture in June. 
Strong wind events combined with these low fuel moistures 
and persistent hot and dry conditions facilitated large fires 
across the Southwest. Monsoons started later than usual across 
the Southwest. Due to the late onset and lack of significant 
precipitation in Arizona, much of the state remained at below 
normal precipitation with above normal temperatures through 
the summer. Persistent circulation anomalies during summer 
caused an abnormally inactive monsoon season with notable 
northerly component winds in the low-mid levels of the 
atmosphere. In fact, the wider Southwest (including California) 
had the warmest and driest July–September period on record.6 
Figure 1. Wildfire and prescribed fire acres burned in Arizona and New Mexico, 2002 to 2020.4
4 	National Interagency Coordination Center Wildland Fire Annual 
Reports www.predictiveservices.nifc.gov/intelligence/intelligence.htm
5	 https://www.drought.gov/news/2020-us-fire-outlook
6	 Center for Western Weather and Water Extremes https://cw3e.ucsd.
edu/2020-north-american-monsoon-recap/
Figure 2. Map indicating the location of the 11 large fires in 2020 analyzed in this report. Note the Blue River 2 
Fire is not labeled on the map but is located adjacent to the Blue River Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
3
This unusually warm and dry summer exacerbated existing 
drought conditions. Upper-level ridging over California and 
the Southwest led to well below normal precipitation and above 
normal temperatures during October.
The composite statewide Energy Release Component (ERC) 
was about average until August when it increased to the 
observed maximum. In October, the region-wide ERC spiked 
well above the previous maximum. The ERC is an index that 
estimates potential available energy released per unit area in 
the flaming front of a fire based on the fuel model and live and 
dead fuel moistures. The ERC is often used to track seasonal 
fire danger focused on fuel loading, woody fuel moistures, and 
larger fuel moistures. A graph of ERC from northern New 
Mexico shows the 2020 fire season (blue line) in comparison to 
the ten-year average (gray line) and ten-year maximums (red 
line) (Figure 3).7
Data Sources
Management, Objectives, and Cost
The InciWeb website (inciweb.nwcg.gov) provides background 
information on most large fires such as location and start date. 
InciWeb is an interagency information management system 
designed to provide the public with a single source of incident-
related information. Because InciWeb only sporadically 
reports costs, Incident Status Summary (ICS-209) reports 
were collected to document suppression or management 
costs. These costs do not reflect any post-fire costs such as 
rehabilitation or soil stabilization. The cost data from each fire 
is collected in a final table at the end of the document. Incident 
Status Summaries also provide “strategic objectives,” which 
briefly describe the desired outcome for the incident, high-
level objectives, and in some cases, strategic benefits. Though 
Figure 3. Energy release component (ERC) 
index for the 2020 fire season in northern New 
Mexico. Note the elevated ERCs at the start of 
the Luna Fire (black circle).
strategic objectives often change during a fire, review of the 
most common or persistent strategic objectives for each fire 
provides some insight into the overarching management goals. 
Perimeters
Boundaries for each fire were taken from the Geospatial Multi-
Agency Coordination (GeoMAC) archive of fire perimeter 
maps (rmgsc.cr.usgs.gov/outgoing/GeoMAC/). GeoMAC 
also provides perimeters of fires dating back to 2000, which 
provided a historic context for 2020 fires. 
Vegetation 
Basic information about vegetation and topography of burned 
areas was available from LANDFIRE (www.landfire.gov). 
LANDFIRE provides nationally consistent, scientifically based 
maps of existing vegetation as well as Vegetation Condition 
Class (VCC). Vegetation Condition Class displays how 
existing vegetation has departed from estimated natural or 
historic condition. In the Southwest, this departure is generally 
due to fire exclusion, past logging and grazing and results in 
greater density of trees and less healthy conditions. Vegetation 
Condition Class is a useful metric because it integrates 
information on existing vegetation, historic vegetation, and fire 
regimes into one variable and has been used to help determine 
where to focus restoration efforts. The most current VCC maps 
(2016) were used in this report.
Soil Burn Severity
Soil burn severity maps provide Burned Area Emergency 
Response (BAER) teams a tool to quantify soil impacts and 
assess potential for post-fire erosion (https://fsapps.nwcg.gov/
baer/baer-imagery-support-data-download). In the immediate 
aftermath of fire on federal lands, BAER teams perform an 
emergency assessment of post-fire soil conditions based on a 
combination of field observations and remote sensing change 
detection products derived from the differenced Normalized 
Burn Ratio (dNBR). The dNBR measures change in the ratio 
of near infrared reflected by healthy green vegetation to the 
7	 http://gacc.nifc.gov/swcc//predictive/fuels_fire-danger/nfdrs_charts/
Areawide.htm

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
4
shortwave infrared reflected by bare soil and rock. Most soil 
burn severity maps have four classes: high, moderate, low, and 
unburned; however, some maps combine the last two categories 
into a “low/unchanged” category. The distribution of soil burn 
severity is included in the individual fire discussions (where 
available) as well as in the final summary table.
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
(RAVG) maps estimate canopy mortality (https://fsapps.
nwcg.gov/ravg/). The USDA Forest Service Remote 
Sensing Applications Center provides RAVG analysis as a 
first approximation of areas that may require reforestation 
treatments because of canopy killed by high-severity fire. 
RAVG maps are created for wildfires that burn greater than 
1,000 acres of wooded Forest Service land or fires for which 
it is requested. The maps are produced by measuring the 
change between a satellite image before and immediately 
after a wildfire using an algorithm called relative differenced 
Normalized Burn Ratio (RdNBR), which is sensitive to 
vegetation mortality resulting from the wildfire event. The 
RdNBR is derived directly from the dNBR but is more 
sensitive to vegetation mortality than the dNBR. 
While soil burn severity maps and RAVG canopy mortality 
maps use similar satellite change detection methods, they 
measure fundamentally different forest attributes. In many 
areas, canopy mortality and soil burn severity patterns are 
similar. However, in some vegetation types, such as chaparral or 
grass, it is possible for a fire to cause complete canopy mortality 
with little effect on soils. 
Caveats
There are important caveats for all data used in this summary. 
First, the fire information presented here was taken from 
official sources between November 2020 and January 2021 and 
may not include updates or revisions. Second, the geospatial 
data used to generate the maps and tables are also based on 
the best available information, however these data contain 
errors and uncertainties. For example, the remote sensing data 
used in all these datasets can include errors introduced during 
collection, processing, and interpretation. As noted for specific 
fires in this report, soil burn severity and RAVG maps are not 
available for every wildfire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
5
Bush Fire, Arizona
The Bush Fire was a human-caused wildfire that started in 
the Tonto National Forest northeast of Phoenix, Arizona. 
The fire started on June 13, 2020 near the intersection of 
Bush Highway and SR 87 and burned 193,455 acres before 
it was fully contained on July 6, 2020. This was the largest 
fire in Arizona or New Mexico during the 2020 season and 
the fifth-largest wildfire in Arizona history. The Bush Fire 
presented numerous challenges with rugged terrain, extreme 
weather, and an abundance of dry invasive grasses coupled with 
the operational challenges around COVID-19 concerns. The 
fire was approached by fire managers with a full suppression 
approach according to the 209 report, using a values-driven 
strategy, incorporating a mix of tactics (direct and indirect) 
when and where the probability of success was high, and the 
risk was acceptable in relationship to the values. Suppression 
tactics were more active outside the designated wilderness areas 
with confine and monitor tactics utilized inside the wilderness.
Nearly 2,000 civilians were evacuated from their homes in 
response to the Bush Fire. Despite these evacuations and 
the fire’s proximity to metropolitan Phoenix only one non-
residential commercial property was damaged and no structures 
were lost. Arizona State Highways 87 and 188 were closed 
during the fire in addition to several smaller roads. No injuries 
or illnesses to responders were reported during on the Bush 
Fire. Wildfire management costs associated with the Bush Fire 
were estimated at $11.6 million, or about $60 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The primary vegetation types included scrub (25 percent), 
grass (23 percent), chaparral (19 percent), and piñon-juniper 
(12 percent). The scrub type often includes the iconic saguaro 
cactus, which is not fire adapted. Notably, there were also small 
patches of ponderosa pine on high elevation north-facing 
slopes and drainages. Nineteen percent of the area within the 
Bush Fire perimeter was classified as non-vegetated. Although 
LANDFIRE only classified 23 percent of the burned area as 
grass, the Incident Status Summary and several other resources 
cited that a primary factor that led to the immense size of 
this fire was abundant, fully cured, invasive and native grasses 
present at all elevations in nearly all habitat types. 
Most of the area affected by the Bush Fire had not burned in 
the past ten fire seasons, however fire return intervals of most 
vegetation types within the fire perimeter are significantly 
longer than ten years. There were only three relatively small 
fires in this area over this period: 2014 Browns (900 acres), 
2015 Peters (650 acres), and 2016 Peaks (850 acres). The 
124,000-acre Woodbury Fire of 2019 was just a few miles 
southeast of the Bush Fire. Arizona State Highway 188 served 
as the primary boundary along the fires 30-mile eastern edge 
while State Highway 87 served the same function on its 35-
mile western boundary. 
All but a few scattered acres within the Bush Fire perimeter 
were classified as low (88 percent) or moderate (11 percent) 
departure from historic vegetation conditions according to the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. Per Tonto 
National Forest staff, LANDFIRE data for the area within the 
fire perimeter greatly underestimated the presence of invasive 
grasses, therefore departure from historic vegetation conditions 
percentages are likely inaccurate. 
Fire Severity
The RAVG analysis indicated a relatively even distribution of 
acres across the canopy mortality categories with 19 percent 
showing more than 90 percent mortality and 18 percent showing 
zero percent canopy mortality (Figure 4). The Bush Fire primarily 
burned through vegetation types with relatively low canopy 
heights, and canopy mortality in these vegetation types can be 
less informative on fire severity than other vegetation types but 
can provide information on the variability across the burn area. 
The Sonoran Desert and semi-desert grassland ecosystem types 
in the Bush Fire footprint exhibited poor soil conditions before 
the fire. This made the soil burn severity analysis, which is based 
on change in condition, more challenging to interpret. The soil 
burn severity analysis showed 48% of the burn area with moderate 
severity and five percent with high burn severity.
Figure 4. RAVG canopy mortality in the Bush Fire burn area.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
6
(10 percent), and ponderosa pine (8 percent) and small areas 
of riparian forest, chaparral, mixed conifer, and non-vegetated 
areas. The majority of the Bighorn Fire was identified as low 
(44 percent) or medium (44 percent) departure from historic 
conditions but nearly 14,000 acres (11 percent) was identified 
as high departure, according to LANDFIRE Vegetation 
Condition Class analysis, which may underestimate the 
presence of invasive grasses, especially at low elevations. Most 
of the area affected by the Bighorn Fire had not burned in the 
previous ten fire seasons. It did however reburn approximately 
two-thirds of the 27,000-acre Burro Fire from 2017. A review 
of the Burro Fire was provided in the 2017 Fire Season 
Overview. The Bighorn Fire also reburned a few fires from 
2015 including the 750-acre Finger Rock and the 205-acre 
Buster Mountain Fire, as well as a portion of the Woods Tank 
Fire. A small area inside the fire perimeter was included in 
2015, 2017, and 2020 fires.
Fire Severity 
Canopy mortality, as depicted in the RAVG analysis, varied 
across the fire (Figure 5). More than 21,000 acres (17 percent) 
of the burn area experienced zero percent mortality. These 
areas of low canopy mortality were scattered around the burn 
area with the largest concentration lying in a 2,400-acre block 
of ponderosa pine and conifer-oak along the Mt. Lemmon 
Highway. There were also areas of near complete canopy 
mortality with over 20,000 acres (16 percent) exhibiting greater 
than 90 percent mortality. Areas of high canopy mortality 
were also scattered throughout the burn area with the largest 
concentration in a 7,200-acre block on the north slope of Mt. 
Lemmon. The soil burn severity analysis showed a similar 
spatial distribution of severity areas (Figure 6). The five percent 
(6,100 acres) of the burn area that showed high soil burn 
severity was primarily concentrated in the area on the north 
slope of Mt. Lemmon that had very high (greater than 90 
percent) canopy mortality.
Bighorn Fire, Arizona
Lightning started the Bighorn Fire on June 5 in the Catalina 
Mountains northwest of Tucson, Arizona. The Bighorn Fire 
burned for the next 54 days, eventually encompassing nearly 
120,000 acres making it the seventh-largest wildfire in Arizona 
history. The fire burned in and around the Coronado National 
Forest, including well-known areas like Mt. Lemmon and 
the upper Sabino Canyon watershed. The fire burned in the 
steep and rugged terrain of the Pusch Ridge Wilderness and 
extended out toward the Catalina Foothills making it visible 
throughout Tucson. In some areas, invasive grasses impacted 
the fire at low elevations, carrying it through stands of saguaro 
cactus, which are not fire adapted.
Land managers chose to utilize a full suppression approach to 
minimize the threat and impacts to communities and private 
infrastructure, but also sought to minimize the impacts of 
suppression activities where feasible in consideration of the 
natural and cultural values at risk. Consideration was also 
taken to allow for social distancing to reduce and prevent the 
potential exposure and transmission of COVID-19.
The area affected by the Bighorn Fire contained numerous 
cultural, biological, and recreational values, including numerous 
archeological and cultural resources, waterways, riparian areas, 
wildlife, and watersheds. The area also provides habitat for rare 
and threatened species such as the Gila chub, Gila top minnow, 
lesser long-nosed bat, lowland leopard frog, and Mexican 
spotted owl.
The Incident Status Summary indicated 10 responders lost 
time to injuries/illnesses on the Bighorn Fire and that 744 
residences had been evacuated during the blaze. Despite its 
proximity to Tucson and the number of evacuations, only two 
minor structures were reported destroyed in the fire. The cost 
for managing the Bighorn Fire was estimated at $50 million, or 
about $417 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Bighorn Fire burned through a mix of conifer-oak (42 
percent), piñon-juniper (20 percent), grass (15 percent), scrub 
Figure 5. Canopy mortality map for the Bighorn Fire.
Figure 6. Soil burn severity in the Bighorn Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
7
exact cause of the fire remains under investigation; however, 
fire officials confirmed it was human caused. The cost for 
managing the Mangum Fire was estimated at $25 million, or 
about $350 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Mangum Fire burned primarily through ponderosa pine 
(51 percent) and piñon-juniper (31 percent) with several other 
vegetation types, each representing less than 10 percent of the 
area. Thirty-nine percent of the Mangum Fire was classified as 
high departure from historic vegetation conditions based on the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. Most of the 
area affected by the Mangum Fire had not burned in any of the 
previous ten fire seasons. The exception being 970 acres that 
burned as part of the Cooper Fire in 2013. The Mangum Fire 
did share a 1.7-mile perimeter with the 2013 Castle Fire and 
was only about one mile north of the 2019 Castle Fire, which 
was reviewed in last year’s Southwest Fire Season Overview.
Fire Severity
Fifty-six percent of the area was in high (28 percent) or 
moderate (28 percent) soil burn severity categories (Figure 
7) and very little was classified as unburned or undetected (6 
percent). The RAVG analysis showed a similar pattern of high-
severity fire with nearly 50 percent of the burn area (35,000 
acres) classified as greater than 90 percent canopy mortality. 
This included nearly 75 percent of the piñon-juniper and 37 
percent of the ponderosa pine communities with near complete 
canopy mortality. 
Mangum Fire, Arizona
The Mangum Fire was reported on June 8 in the Kaibab 
National Forest near Mangum Camp, approximately two 
miles north of Big Springs, Arizona in Coconino County. 
The fire burned for 46 days and covered 71,450 acres on 
the Kaibab Plateau near the North Rim of Grand Canyon 
National Park. Fire managers used a full suppression approach 
on the Mangum Fire. This approach allowed for some point 
protection of infrastructure (buildings, transport routes, and 
power utility lines) and placed a concerted effort on limiting 
the size and acreage of the fire with a focus on limiting smoke 
impacts on the Navajo Nation and surrounding communities 
to not further complicate COVID-19 impacts. Gusty winds, 
warm temperatures, low humidity, and rugged topography led 
to challenges controlling the Mangum Fire. Non-motorized 
characteristics and values were maintained within the 
wilderness areas.
The Mangum Fire threatened the community of Jacob Lake, 
Arizona and resulted in area closures and evacuations. The 
fire remained in the Kaibab National Forest and did not enter 
Grand Canyon National Park, however, several highways 
were closed, including US Highway 89A and AZ 67, which 
resulted in closure of the North Rim of Grand Canyon NP. 
Additionally, areas of the Paria Canyon-Vermilion Cliffs 
Wilderness were inaccessible due to closures. 
The Incident Status Summary indicated 15 responders lost 
time to injuries/illnesses on the Mangum Fire. The fire 
destroyed two cabins and two outbuildings at Mangum 
Camp, a facility managed by the Grand Canyon Trust. The 
Figure 7. Soil burn severity in the Mangum Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
8
the Griffin Fire has burned several times in the last ten fire 
seasons, including the 33,800-acre Hilltop Fire—reviewed 
in the 2017 Fire Season Overview—and several fires in the 
summer of 2020 that are reviewed in this report such as the 
Blue River, Blue River 2, Valley, and Cassadore Springs fires. 
The area directly affected by the Griffin Fire, however, had not 
burned in the last ten fire seasons, except for 1,960 acres in the 
southern portion of the fire that burned in the summer of 2019 
as the Champion Fire. Ninety-five percent of the Griffin Fire 
had a low departure from historic vegetation conditions based 
on the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. 
Fire Severity
Fire severity in the Griffin Fire was patchy. There were more 
than 12,500 acres (21 percent) that experienced greater than 90 
percent canopy mortality, according to the RAVG analysis. The 
areas of highest canopy mortality were concentrated in the two 
northern spurs of the Griffin Fire (Figure 8). These spurs were 
dominated by piñon-juniper. 
The soil burn severity analysis was only available for 
approximately 16,000 acres (26 percent) of the total burn area 
that extended up toward the Tonto National Forest. Most of 
the area was identified as low (56 percent) or moderate (31 
percent) severity in this analysis. The area of highest soil burn 
severity correlated with the areas with the highest canopy 
mortality in the RAVG analysis.
Griffin Fire, Arizona
The Griffin Fire resulted from three lightning fires in the 
Apache Mountains north-northeast of Globe, Arizona that 
merged into a 61,821-acre fire over a 20-day span in late August. 
The Griffin and Gin Fires started on August 17 with the Gin 
Fire burning into the Griffin Fire on August 22. The Champion 
Fire was discovered on August 23, was located directly adjacent 
to the Griffin Fire, and burned into the Griffin Fire. All three 
fires were managed as the Griffin Fire. Fire managers chose to 
use a full suppression approach on the Griffin Fire with a values-
driven strategy that used a mix of tactics (direct, indirect, and 
point protection) when and where the probability of success was 
high, and the risk was commensurate to the identified values. 
Nearly 200 structures were threatened in communities that 
were elevated to either “Set” or “Go” status on the Ready, Set, 
GO model for evacuation; however, no structures were reported 
damaged or destroyed by the Griffin Fire. There were also 
several area and road closures, including shutting down US 
Highway 60 in both directions north of Globe due to threats to 
public safety. Two minor injuries were reported for responders 
during the fire. Management of the wildfire was estimated at 
$6 million, or $97 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The area affected by the Griffin Fire was predominantly 
chaparral (65 percent) with lesser components of piñon-juniper 
(20 percent) and scrub (11 percent). The greater area around 
Figure 8. RAVG canopy mortality in the Griffin Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
9
along with a few other minor fires. The rest of the area had not 
burned in over ten years but was located only about 0.5 miles 
southeast of the 538,000-acre 2011 Wallow Fire. The Cow 
Canyon Fire burned primarily in ponderosa pine (59 percent) 
with lesser components of conifer-oak (16 percent), mixed 
conifer (14 percent), and piñon-juniper (8 percent). The Cow 
Canyon burn area had the second highest percentage of high 
departure from historic vegetation conditions (56 percent) of 
any of the fires in this report according to the LANDFIRE 
Vegetation Condition Class analysis. 
Fire Severity
The Cow Canyon Fire had a relatively wide range of severity, 
according to the RAVG analysis (Figure 9). Nearly 18,000 
acres (53 percent) of the Cow Canyon Fire experienced no 
canopy mortality while there were pockets of canopy mortality 
greater than 90 percent scattered throughout the burn area 
totaling over 2,300 acres (7 percent). The soil burn severity 
analysis showed a similar spatial distribution of severity areas. 
Eighty-seven percent of the burn area was documented as low 
(15,000 acres) or unburned/undetected (13,900 acres) and only 
430 acres (1 percent) showed high soil burn severity.
Cow Canyon Fire, Arizona
The Cow Canyon Fire was ignited by lightning on August 
18 in the Alpine Ranger District on the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests about four miles southeast of Blue, Arizona. 
It burned in steep, rugged terrain with limited access, on the 
Arizona and New Mexico border. The fire eventually burned 
over 35,000 acres, with approximately 28,000 acres in the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests and 7,000 acres in Gila 
National Forest. Due to the steep and hazardous terrain 
with no roads, fire managers chose to use a full suppression 
approach utilizing point protection when needed. The fire was 
continually monitored as it burned through the Blue Range 
Primitive Area in Arizona and Blue Range Wilderness in New 
Mexico toward the desired holding features and structures 
along the Blue River.  
One non-specified injury to a responder was reported. No 
damaged structures were reported. The wildfire cost an 
estimated $3 million to manage, or about $85 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Cow Canyon Fire encompassed nearly all 3,800 acres 
burned in the 2014 Sycamore and 345-acre Tige (2014) fires 
Figure 9. RAVG canopy mortality in the Cow Canyon Fire. Note that the fire crosses the Arizona and New Mexico state line.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
10
Blue River Fire, Arizona
Lightning ignited the Blue River Fire on June 5 approximately 
seven miles southeast of Alpine and 10 miles northeast of San 
Carlos on the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation in Gila 
County, Arizona. Very heavy, continuous fine fuels coupled 
with low daytime humidity and gusty and erratic winds rapidly 
pushed the fire north and east to a total burn area of just over 
30,000 acres. Fire managers chose to use a full suppression 
approach with the strategic objective of containing the fire 
within the existing road system to prevent it from getting 
into more complex terrain and heavier fuels. This approach 
was chosen to protect cultural sites, dance grounds, and holy 
grounds from damage as well as provide protection for a 
commercial ponderosa pine forest, threatened and endangered 
fish habitat, and livestock/range improvements.
The Blue River Fire Incident Status Report identified 
operational challenges, including a shortage of type 1 hand 
crews, firefighter and community health and safety issues 
related to COVID-19, and the logistics of supporting multiple 
camps that made implementing appropriate strategies and 
tactics more challenging. These additional logistical challenges 
included temperature testing all firefighters and team members 
before entering tribal lands and having all firefighters spike 
camping in designated remote areas safely adjacent to the 
fires while team members assisting with incident support 
were working remotely from Globe, 22 air miles to the west-
southwest. Firefighters were fed and supported at their remote 
spike camps by local drivers that met the tribal COVID-19 
testing requirements, delivering food and supplies several times 
a day.
No injuries, structural damage, or evacuations were reported for 
this fire. Management of the Blue River Fire was estimated at 
$100,000, or about $3.30 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Blue River Fire burned through chaparral (42 percent), 
scrub (22 percent), grass (17 percent), and piñon-juniper (16 
percent). Eighty-seven percent of the vegetation within the 
Blue River Fire was classified as low departure from historic 
conditions according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition 
Class analysis (Figure 10). The Blue River Fire reburned 
approximately 3,000 acres of the 2015 Whitetail Fire but the 
remaining 27,000 acres had not burned in the last ten years. 
The Blue River was one of four large fires to burn in the San 
Carlos area in 2020. The others were Blue River 2, Valley, and 
Cassadore Springs. The Griffin Fire, summarized above, was 
not far to the northwest of these fires.
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Blue River Fire. 
Figure 10. Vegetation departure from historic conditions based on the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis for the four 
large fires that burned near San Carlos, Arizona in 2020. The Griffin Fire (yellow) was also in the San Carlos area. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 11
Valley Fire, Arizona
Lightning ignited two more fires on July 13 in the San Carlos 
Apache Indian Reservation a month after the Blue River Fire 
was contained. These two fires are the Blue River 2 and Valley 
fires. The Valley Fire consumed nearly 30,000 acres in twelve 
days approximately six miles northeast of San Carlos. Fire 
managers chose to use a full suppression approach with a direct 
attack to secure the fire’s edge and minimize burned acreage 
using existing control features. Within a couple days, the Valley 
Fire was contained to burning within the interior of identified 
containment lines through available fuel. One residence was 
reported destroyed in this fire. Management of the Valley Fire 
was estimated at $2 million, or about $67 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Valley Fire burned through a mix of scrub (55 percent), 
chaparral (30 percent), grass (8 percent), non-vegetated (4 
percent), and piñon-juniper (3 percent). Over one-third of the 
Valley Fire had burned just 12 months earlier as the Huck Fire. 
The Valley and Huck fires shared several of the same fire lines. 
On its eastern side the Valley Fire shared a nearly seven-mile 
perimeter with the 2019 Bronco Gulch Fire. Ninety-eight 
percent of the vegetation within the Valley Fire had low (63 
percent) or moderate (35 percent) departure from historic 
conditions according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition 
Class analysis (Figure 10). The Valley Fire was one of four large 
fires to burn in the San Carlos area in 2020. The others were 
Blue River, Blue River 2, and Cassadore Springs.
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Valley Fire.  
Blue River 2 Fire, Arizona
The Blue River 2 Fire was one of four large acreage fires to 
burn on the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation in Gila 
County, Arizona during 2020. The Blue River 2 Fire was 
ignited by lightning on July 13 and grew to over 28,000 acres 
about a month after the 30,000-acre Blue River Fire was 
contained immediately to the north. The Blue River 2 Fire 
posed a threat to ancestral oak groves for acorn gathering and 
commercial timber harvest areas. Fire managers chose to use 
full suppression tactics as much as safety allowed. COVID-19 
concerns played a role in fire responses with the use of 
additional aerial resources to assist hand crews in suppression 
efforts and line spiking crews to reduce travel and minimize 
COVID-19 exposure. Precipitation eventually slowed fire 
growth and aided in direct attack suppression tactics. The 
Incident Status Summary indicated that no structures were 
lost to the Blue River 2 Fire and that one responder lost time 
to injuries/illnesses while working the fire. Management of the 
Blue River 2 Fire was estimated at $4 million, or about $143 
per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Blue River 2 Fire burned through a mix of piñon-juniper 
(29 percent), grass (27 percent), chaparral (20 percent), scrub 
(17 percent), and non-vegetated (5 percent) areas. Over half of 
the Blue River 2 Fire had burned in the last ten fire seasons. 
Nearly 12,000 acres burned in the 2014 Skunk Fire and an 
additional 4,400 acres in the 2015 Whitetail Fire. The Blue 
River 2 Fire shared a roughly eight-mile boundary with the 
Blue River Fire from June 2020. Ninety-nine percent of the 
vegetation within the Blue River 2 Fire had low (79 percent) 
or moderate (20 percent) departure from historic conditions 
according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis (Figure 10). 
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Blue River 2 Fire. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
12
Cub Fire, New Mexico
The Cub Fire burned 25,950 acres during a 27-day stretch 
from late June into July, approximately three miles northeast 
of the Mogollon Baldy Lookout on the Gila National Forest 
in Catron County, New Mexico. The Cub Fire was entirely 
within the perimeter of the 2012 Whitewater-Baldy Complex 
Fire and fire managers noted minimal to no opportunity to 
engage the fire with direct handline due to a high volume of 
snags in the old burn scar. Fire managers chose to classify the 
approach as full suppression but utilized a variety of direct 
and indirect tactics on this lightning-caused fire due to the 
danger to fire personnel posed by the inaccessible terrain and 
numerous snags, its remote wilderness location, and limited 
threat to life, property, and communities.
 
Two injuries to responders were reported, including a chemical 
burn to a sawyer from leaking gasoline. No damaged structures 
were reported. Management of the Cub Fire was estimated at 
$442,500 or $17 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Cub Fire burned primarily through ponderosa pine (61 
percent), mixed conifer (22 percent), and piñon-juniper (9 
percent), with smaller amounts of conifer-oak, grass, and 
riparian areas. The Cub Fire lies entirely within the perimeter 
of the 298,000-acre Whitewater-Baldy Complex Fire (2012). 
Many of these areas also burned in 2011 as the Lilley, Jack, and 
Feather fires that were part of the Jack Complex. There have 
been no recorded fires within the Cub Fire perimeter since 
2012. The perimeter was located only about 0.2 miles from the 
2016 McKenna Fire (10,200 acres). Sixty-three percent of the 
vegetation within the Cub Fire perimeter had high departure 
from historic conditions according to the LANDFIRE 
Vegetation Condition Class analysis. 
Fire Severity
Only two percent (400 acres) of the Cub Fire was identified as 
having greater than 90 percent canopy mortality according to 
the RAVG analysis and over 75 percent of the burn area was 
identified as no canopy mortality (7,500 acres) or less than 25 
percent (10,600 acres) mortality (Figure 11). This pattern is 
consistent with the primary land cover in this area as the fire 
burned primarily through ponderosa pine and mixed conifer. 
There was a preliminary soil burn severity analysis, but these 
data were never finalized into a format usable for this report.  
Figure 11. RAVG canopy mortality in the Cub Fire. Note the Cub Fire was completely within the 2012 burn area of the 298,000-acre 
Whitewater-Baldy Complex Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 13
Luna Fire, New Mexico
The Luna Fire was reported on October 17 approximately 2 
miles north of the community of Chacon, New Mexico. This 
October fire burned more than 10,000 acres at elevations 
ranging from 9,000 to 11,000 feet. Despite being outside the 
traditional fire season, this fire burned through dry timber 
and brush with high winds leading to extreme fire behavior 
with crowning, running, and long-range spotting. Fire 
managers used a full suppression approach with a focus on 
opportunities to stop fire spread toward the communities of 
Black Lake, Sierra Bonita, Angel Fire, Chacon, Guadalupita, 
Valle Escondido, and Coyote Creek State Park, as well as 
working on point protection activities for outlying private 
residences and the Forest Service’s Cerro Vista Repeater. The 
Luna Fire threatened multiple critical watersheds supporting 
communities, ranching, and agriculture, along with acequias 
and irrigation infrastructure, and traditional tribal cultural 
places and religious sites. The fire also threated critical habitat 
for threatened, endangered, or sensitive species including the 
New Mexico meadow jumping mouse, Southwest willow 
flycatcher, Mexican spotted owl, Canada lynx, and aboriginal 
Rio Grande cutthroat trout. 
No injuries were reported. Several roads were closed, or 
restricted access, and the Luna Canyon area was voluntarily 
evacuated, but there were no mandatory evacuation orders. The 
Luna Fire cost $6,120,000 to manage, or about $600 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Luna Fire was a high-elevation fire with most of the 
vegetation classified as mixed conifer (71 percent) or spruce-
fir (24 percent). The area affected by the Luna Fire had not 
burned in any of the previous ten fire seasons. The 2018 
Sardinas Canyon Fire (2,300 acres), about three miles west, is 
the only fire during that timeframe to burn in the vicinity of 
the Luna Fire. Sixty-nine percent of the vegetation within the 
Luna Fire was classified as moderate departure from historic 
conditions in the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis (Figure 12). Only one percent, or approximately 
100 acres, was classified as a high departure from historic 
conditions.
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Luna Fire.
Figure 12. Vegetation departure from historic conditions based on the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis in the Luna 
Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
14
Figure 14. Soil burn severity in the Medio Fire.
Medio Fire, New Mexico
The Medio Fire was a lightning-caused wildfire reported on 
August 17, 2020 in the Española Ranger District of the Santa 
Fe National Forest. Conditions were unseasonably dry for 
August and resembled conditions typically observed in June. 
The fire burned for the next 27 days and had a final perimeter 
of 4,010 acres. There were numerous values at risk, including 
homes within Pacheco Canyon and the villages of Chupadero 
and En Medio, culturally sensitive sites, watersheds that 
provide water to communities downstream, recreational 
sites including the Santa Fe ski area, Aspen Vista, Big 
Tesuque, Hyde Park, a network of forest trails, and power and 
communication infrastructure. Fire managers chose to use a 
confine approach utilizing a variety of strategies, including 
burnouts and structure protection. Strong north winds 
increased the size of the fire but also pushed it toward the 
2011 Pacheco Fire scar and toward a significant fuel change 
of green quaking aspen, which greatly reduced fire behavior 
and movement.
These reports historically have provided a summary of only 
the largest fires in the region based on acres. The Medio Fire 
was included in this analysis due to its proximity to Santa Fe, 
New Mexico and the reported effectiveness of a long-term 
fire treatment plan for the area. Fire managers noted the 
effectiveness of fire lines from a previous prescribed burn that 
held the wildfire from racing up the mountain toward the 
Santa Fe Ski Basin. This highlighted the ability of prescribed 
fire to prevent wildfires from becoming uncharacteristically 
high intensity, causing widespread damage. 
Seven injuries or illnesses were reported on this fire. There were 
no reports of structural damage or mandated evacuations for 
the Medio Fire. Management of the Medio Fire was estimated 
at $5.5 million, or $1,370 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Medio Fire mainly burned through mixed conifer (92 
percent) with small areas of ponderosa pine (7 percent) and 
piñon-juniper (1 percent). Ninety-nine percent of the Medio 
Fire was identified as moderate departure from historic 
conditions according to the Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis. The area affected by the Medio Fire had not burned 
in the preceding ten fire seasons but roughly three-miles of 
the Medio’s eastern boundary was shared with the 10,000-acre 
Pacheco Fire from 2011. 
Fire Severity
The majority of the Medio Fire showed no canopy mortality 
(38 percent) or canopy mortality limited to less than 25 percent 
(30 percent), according to the RAVG analysis (Figure 13). 
There were, however, pockets of higher mortality with over 
20 percent of the burn area displaying greater than 90 percent 
mortality. Canopy mortality is more ecologically significant in 
a predominantly mixed conifer area than in some of the earlier 
fires described in this report that are dominated by grasses and 
low shrubs. Soil burn severity data indicated 28 percent of the 
fire had high (14 percent) or moderate (14 percent) severity 
(Figure 14).
Figure 13. RAVG canopy mortality in the Medio Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 15
Conclusion
This report covers the nine largest wildfires in Arizona and 
New Mexico, an unusual late season wildfire, and a wildfire that 
burned near a metropolitan area. These 11 wildfires represented 
57 percent of all acres in the Southwest burned by wildfire in 
2020. The most widespread vegetation types affected by these 
fires were scrub, piñon-juniper, and chaparral, with more than 
100,000 acres burned of each type (Figure 15). The largest fires 
reviewed in this report covered an additional 150,000 acres 
compared to the 12 largest fires covered in our 2019 report. 
As a result, more acres of all vegetation categories other than 
mixed conifer were burned in 2020. The starkest increase was 
in the conifer-oak type with a seven-fold increase. Much of the 
conifer-oak increase was in the Bighorn Fire. The large fires in 
2020 burned nearly 40,000 more acres of ponderosa pine than 
the largest fires in 2019 and about the same number of acres 
included in the 2018 analysis. 
Full soil burn severity data were available for five of the 11 
fires analzyed in this report, covering nearly 250,000 acres 
(40 percent of acres in report). Additional limited data were 
available for the Bush Fire. Sixty-two percent of the area 
covered by these five fires was classified as low or undetectable 
soil burn severity (Figure 16). Eleven percent of the acres for 
which soil burn severity data were available displayed high soil 
burn severity. Three-quarters of these high-severity acres were 
in the Mangum Fire and most of the rest were in the Bighorn 
Fire. Note that Soil Burn Severity data were only available for 
the northern 16,000 acres of the Griffin Fire. 
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
(RAVG) data were available for seven of the eleven large fires 
covered in this report (Figure 17). Of these 512,000 acres, 21 
percent (106,000 acres) showed no detectable canopy mortality, 
Figure 15. Summary of acres burned in the largest fires by vegetation type.
Figure 16. Summary of acres burned by soil burn severity class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
16
while nearly 107,000 acres (21 percent) showed greater than 
90 percent mortality. The Bush and Mangum fires account 
for two-thirds of the highest canopy mortality areas. In the 
Bush Fire, this highest canopy mortality class was primarily 
in chaparral, piñon-juniper, and grass with relatively low 
associated soil burn severity classifications. Much of the high 
canopy mortality in the Mangum Fire was also found in piñon-
juniper but also included 13,500 acres of ponderosa pine and 
had a much higher soil burn severity classification. Canopy 
mortality in these ponderosa pine communities can be more 
ecologically significant than fires that mainly burn in vegetation 
such as grass, scrub, and chaparral. 
Only 13 percent of the area in this analysis was highly departed 
from historic conditions based on the LANDFIRE Vegetation 
Condition Class analysis (Figure 18). It is reasonable to assume 
that the high proportions of wildfire burning with low-severity 
and the high portion of the area burned close to the historic 
condition are related. Nearly all the 79,000 high-departure 
acres were isolated to four fires: Mangum (35 percent), Cow 
Canyon (25 percent), Cub (21 percent), and Bighorn (17 
percent). The Mangum Fire had the highest percentage of 
high soil burn severity, canopy mortality, and vegetation that 
departed from historic conditions. Reports on several of these 
fires indicated that the LANDFIRE data for the area greatly 
underestimated the presence of invasive grasses, therefore 
some of the departure from historic vegetation conditions 
percentages are likely inaccurate.
The fires reviewed in this report led to some evacuation 
and smoke-related impacts, but despite the large numbers 
of acres burned, human communities were not significantly 
Figure 17. Summary of acres burned by canopy mortality class.
Figure 18. Summary of acres burned by vegetation condition class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 17
affected by any of the largest fires of 2020. There certainly 
were localized impacts that should not be minimized, but 
only one residence and a few non-residential structures 
were lost in these 11 fires; there were relatively few reported 
evacuations for most of the fires. In comparison, the 2018 
Tinder Fire destroyed 33 residences and 63 minor structures 
while the 2018 Ute Park Fire led to the evacuation of nearly 
3,500 civilians, consumed 14 buildings, and damaged critical 
power infrastructure. None of the 2020 fires listed in this 
report caused structure loss at this scale even though three 
of the fires burned near some of the Southwest’s largest 
metropolitan areas, such as the Phoenix (Bush), Tucson 
(Bighorn), and Santa Fe (Medio).
Past reports noted that the majority of the large fires in the 
Southwest are caused by lightning (naturally ignited). Only 
three of the eleven fires reviewed in this report were identified 
as naturally caused, while four were listed as human caused 
and another four were listed as undetermined at the time of 
this writing. 
The role of past fires was highly variable in the fires 
summarized in this report. Past fires played a role in many fires 
in this analysis, and in some cases, the edges of these past burn 
areas may have served as fire breaks with only limited overlap. 
There were also several fires in areas that had not burned in 
many years such as the Bush, Mangum, Griffin, and notably 
the Luna, which was a high-altitude fire. Other fires, such as 
the Cub Fire, fell completely within a past fire perimeter. The 
Valley Fire included several areas that were burned as recently 
as the 2019 fire season. It should be noted that fire regimes 
vary significantly across vegetation types and time since fire 
may be less or more meaningful depending on type.
The 11 fires in this analysis were managed at an estimated cost 
of nearly $114 million dollars, for an average of $186 per acre. 
This average cost was similar to the costs reported in the 2018 
and 2019 analyses, but roughly half of the cost in the 2017 
report. As noted above, managers identify the most appropriate 
strategy for each part of a wildfire to minimize threats and 
maximize positive outcomes. In 2020, managers classified their 
strategy as full suppression on all ten of the largest fires, with 
only the Medio Fire reported as a confine strategy. This differs 
from reported strategies in past fire season overviews, which 
had approximately 50 percent of the acres approached with 
full suppression. The human or unknown ignitions of the 2020 
fires likely factored into these approaches in addition to the 
variety of challenges that COVID-19 presented responders. It 
should also be noted that while the overall strategy may have 
been full suppression, the implementation of specific wildland 
fire strategies includes a variety of factors that often leads to 
a variety of approaches. While there was a wide variety of 
vegetation types and burn severity across these fires, it is likely 
that a significant portion of the 215,096 acres provided some 
ecological benefit. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2020 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
18
Appendix I. Fire Statistics
General 
Vegetation Departure
Name
Acres
Cost
cost/ac
Low
Medium
High
Bush
 193,455 
 $11,642,634 
 $60.18 
88%
11%
0%
Bighorn
 119,978 
 $50,000,000 
 $416.74 
44%
44%
11%
Mangum
 71,450 
 $25,000,000 
 $349.90 
56%
4%
39%
Griffin
 61,821 
 $6,000,000 
 $97.05 
95%
5%
0%
Cow Canyon
 35,371 
 $3,000,000 
 $84.82 
32%
12%
56%
Blue River
 30,408 
 $100,000 
 $3.29 
87%
12%
0%
Valley
 29,639 
 $2,000,000 
 $67.48 
63%
35%
2%
Blue River 2
 28,051 
 $4,000,000 
 $142.60 
79%
20%
0%
Cub
 25,950 
 $442,500 
 $17.05 
24%
12%
63%
Luna
 10,142 
 $6,120,000 
 $603.43 
30%
69%
1%
Medio
 4,010 
 $5,500,000 
 $1,371.57 
1%
99%
0%
Sum
610,275
$113,805,134
$186.48
Soil Burn Severity
RAVG Canopy Mortality
Name
Unburned
Low
Moderate
High
0%
0-25%
26-50%
51-75%
76-90%
>90%
Bush
7%
40%
48%
5%
18%
18%
17%
18%
11%
19%
Bighorn
22%
42%
31%
5%
17%
29%
18%
14%
7%
16%
Mangum
6%
37%
28%
28%
14%
23%
6%
5%
3%
49%
Griffin
12%
56%
31%
1%
21%
23%
15%
12%
7%
21%
Cow Canyon
42%
46%
11%
1%
53%
29%
5%
3%
2%
7%
Blue River
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Valley
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Blue River 2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Cub
-
-
-
-
31%
44%
12%
8%
3%
2%
Luna
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Medio
22%
50%
14%
14%
38%
30%
6%
3%
2%
20%

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
