Time to ante up funds to accelerate local forest restoration 
05/27/2000 
 
The revelation that a back-fire lit byfirefighters may have been the immediate cause of 
the inferno that swept through Los Alamos, N.M., earlier this month is no vindication of 
the National Park Service. The fact that the prescribed burn was lit at all is indictment 
enough. Subsequent lapses in judgment and procedure by unqualified personnel only set 
the stage for back-fires and other problematic fire control measures that should never 
have been necessary.  
That said, it is important to note that even under the best of conditions, prescribed burns 
are a risky business. Fire in a forest has a way of charting its own course despite intense 
human intervention, and the smoke alone is a hazard to all those downwind.  
That's why the message that NAU Professor Wallace Covington carried to Washington, 
D.C., late last week is an important one: Prescribed burns can't do the job alone. There 
has to be a mix of burning and cutting if overgrown forests like the ones around Los 
Alamos and Flagstaff are to be restored to health in a safe manner.  
The trouble is money, or the lack of it. Thinning, seeding and monitoring are costly, and 
so far, there has been no consistent market for the small-diameter trees being cut in pilot 
restoration projects. Covington went to Washington to lobby Interior Secretary Bruce 
Babbitt, Forest Service Chief Michael Dombeck and members of the Arizona 
congressional delegation to release emergency funds to accelerate efforts under NAU's 
Ecological Restoration Institute to use as a model for other forests in the Mountain West.  
We applaud Covington's private diplomacy. But we wonder why he had to go alone. 
Where were officials with the cities of Flagstaff and Williams and Coconino County? 
Why hasn't Governor Hull made forest restoration a top priority, in addition to the $3 
million she has released to help fight fires this summer in our overgrown forests?  
When the Daily Sun asked the eight candidates for mayor and council this spring if they 
favored increased city subsidies to the forest restoration project under way around 
Flagstaff, only two -- Chris Bavasi and Karen Cooper -- said yes.  
The other three candidates elected along with Cooper -- Joe Donaldson, Penny Trovillion 
and Al White -- all said no.  
It may be that these officials think they can't afford such an expense in addition to the 
thinning that their fire department is already doing. Maybe they think that because most 
of the forest is on federal land, it's not their problem. Whatever the reason, we think such 
a position is shortsighted. Restoring the health of the forest around Flagstaff should be 

one of the top public policy priorities of the 21st century, and if the feds or the state won't 
step up, then it's up to the locals to make the financial sacrifice and get the job done.  
Just how catastrophic would a major crown fire on the San Francisco Peaks be? In a 
climate with little rainfall and sparse soil nutrients, it would take decades and probably 
centuries to restore the ponderosa pine forest were a fire to kill a majority of the trees. 
And in a city whose identity and economy are inextricably linked to the natural beauty 
and recreational opportunities of its forest, a crown fire would sever that link, both now 
and well into the future.  
If the forests of the San Francisco Peaks lay wholly within the boundaries of the city of 
Flagstaff, we doubt there would be much debate. Citizens would not stand for a 
government that allowed the degradation of such an important natural resource. But 
somehow, perhaps because it is a forest largely managed by federal agencies, local 
residents don't feel a need to act.  
To date, Covington and others with the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership have not put a 
price tag on how much it would cost to cut and burn 10,000 acres a year for 10 years. 
They have been waiting for a niche to open up in the private market for doghair timber. 
With the example of the Los Alamos fire hot in our face, we say there's no time to wait. 
We urge Covington to put out a cost estimate, then challenge both public and private 
entities to come up with the funds to pay for the project.  
And when local politicians are asked 10 years from now what their most important 
accomplishment was as the new century dawned, we hope they can point to the 
ponderosa pine forest and still find it standing.  
 
