Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk 
Assessment and Treatment Prioritization
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
August 2021

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been significantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: Spatial, pre-fire planning tools can inform wildfire risk assessment and treatment 
prioritization decisions. However, there is a need to better understand the social and organizational aspects 
of using spatial, pre-fire planning tools. Photo courtesy of ERI
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: August 2021
Author: Melanie M. Colavito 
Reviewers: Emily Jane Davis, Ecosystem Workforce Program, Oregon State University; 
Michelle Greiner, Public Lands Policy Group, Colorado State University
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Colavito, M.M. 2021. Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and 
Treatment Prioritization. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 25 p.
 
Northern Arizona University is an equal opportunity provider.
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from 
discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten 
Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-5964 
(TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
This publication made possible through a grant from the USDA Forest Service.

Table of Contents
Executive Summary . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Introduction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Approach. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Results. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
A Framework for Organizing Spatial, Pre-Fire Planning  
    Decision Support Tools. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Conclusions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Acknowledgements . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

2	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary 
In recent years, there has been a growing emphasis on using spatial, pre-fire planning tools to inform wildfire risk 
assessment and treatment prioritization decisions. Yet, there are numerous spatial, pre-fire planning methods, 
products, and tools that can model fire behavior, assess wildfire risk, and inform treatment prioritization. The 
convergence of multiple policies and frameworks, along with numerous tools to support decision making can 
lead to confusion or resistance to new approaches. Thus, there is a need to better understand the social and 
organizational aspects of using spatial, pre-fire planning tools.  
The purpose of this white paper is to share findings from a study that analyzed the development and use of spatial, 
pre-fire planning tools—broadly referred to here as decision support tools (DSTs)—for assessing wildfire risk 
assessment and informing fuels treatment planning and prioritization. The audience for this white paper includes 
scientists and developers who create DSTs, the end users of DSTs, and policy and decision makers who develop 
and provide guidance for DST use in pre-fire planning. 
Semi-structured interviews with key informants identified using a purposive sampling approach were used to 
address the following research questions: 1) Which DSTs are commonly in use for assessing wildfire risk and 
prioritizing areas for fuels treatment in the Forest Service?; 2) How are DSTs defined?; 3) What are facilitators to 
the use of DSTs?; 4) What are barriers to the use of DSTs?; and 5) What are recommendations for facilitating the 
use of DSTs in decision making?
The results are organized according to major themes that emerged from analysis of the five research questions. Three 
facilitators were identified: 1) DSTs spur new conversations and facilitate communication; 2) the process of developing 
and using DSTs affects their perceived effectiveness; and 3) DSTs can enhance the legitimacy of decisions.
Seven barriers were identified: 1) persistent tensions and cultural issues affect the use of DST; 2) capacity issues 
inhibit both the development and use of DSTs; 3) an ineffective process to develop DST outputs can limit 
outcomes; 4) technical challenges in the use of DSTs can affect perceptions of their accuracy and usability; 5) 
determining how to select among multiple DSTs and proceed with competing priorities can be challenging and 
overwhelming; 6) institutional issues and governance barriers can inhibit DST use; and 7) implementation plans 
for using DST outputs are often lacking. 
Seven recommendations were identified: 1) communication and engagement about DSTs must be done in a 
common language and sustained through time to build relationships and trust; 2) determine the question that a 
DST is meant to inform and then develop and integrate it accordingly; 3) DST outputs should be validated and 
tested with end users; 4) implementation planning can ensure that DST outputs are used; 5) leadership intent for 
integrating and using DSTs should be clearly articulated through policies, guidance, and authorities; 6) Analytical 
capacity and funding to develop, integrate, and use DSTs needs to be increased; and 7) DST end users need both 
education and training in the concepts and tools. Finally, a conceptual framework is proposed to facilitate the 
organization of existing DSTs to support end user understanding and use of the different tools and the types of 
information they can provide in decision-making.  

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         3
Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing emphasis on using spatial, pre-fire planning tools to inform wildfire risk 
assessment and treatment prioritization decisions. Policies and guidance such as the National Cohesive Wildland 
Fire Management Strategy, Forest Service Shared Stewardship Initiative, the 2018 Omnibus Spending Bill 
(PL115-141), and Forest Service Manual Chapter 5140, among others, call for various forms of collaborative 
assessment of wildfire risk to inform fuels treatment prioritization using the best available science and technology 
(Greiner et al. 2020, Stratton 2020). Yet, there are numerous spatial, pre-fire planning methods, products, and 
tools that can model fire behavior, assess wildfire risk, and inform treatment prioritization. The convergence of 
multiple policies and frameworks that articulate a need for collaborative, spatial, pre-fire planning, along with 
numerous frameworks, models, and tools to support decision making in this context can lead to confusion or 
resistance to new approaches (Rapp et al. 2020). At the same time, spatial, pre-fire planning tools can facilitate a 
risk-informed, strategic approach to decision making before and during fires (Calkin et al. 2010, Thompson et al. 
2019), as well as provide added support for complex decision-making processes to facilitate effective restoration 
and hazardous fuels reduction treatments and the safe and effective use of fire (Caggiano 2020). Thus, there is a 
need to better understand the social and organizational aspects of using spatial, pre-fire planning tools to facilitate 
their application in decision making.  
The purpose of this white paper is to share findings from a study that analyzed the development and use of 
spatial, pre-fire planning tools—broadly referred to here as decision support tools (DSTs)—for assessing wildfire 
risk assessment and informing fuels treatment planning and prioritization by land managers, especially in the US 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service. The rationale for this project was informed by the “All-Lands 
Planning, Coordination, and Wildfire Risk Reduction Project” completed by the Ecological Restoration Institute 
in 2018. One of the lessons learned from that project was that although spatial, pre-fire planning tools can provide 
robust, scientific information to inform land management planning, there are social and organizational barriers 
to realizing their effective use. This project further explores those barriers, as well as facilitators, and develops 
recommendations. This white paper provides a summary of key results and recommendations. The complete results 
are available in the project report (Colavito 2020) or peer-reviewed manuscript (Colavito 2021). 
The audience for this white paper includes scientists and developers who create DSTs, the end users of DSTs, and 
policy and decision makers who develop and provide guidance for DST use in pre-fire planning. This white paper 
does not provide a comprehensive or technical summary of spatial, pre-fire planning DSTs, nor does it evaluate 
specific DSTs. Rather, it explores the social and organizational aspects of using spatial, pre-fire planning tools in 
collaborative processes and decision making and provides recommendations to enhance the use of these tools in 
strategic fire planning. 
The term DST is adopted for this white paper, but terminology ranges from DST to decision support system 
(DSS). These terms are sometimes used interchangeably, but there are also differences and nuances in terminology 
depending on the audience and users. It may be necessary to establish new terminology that captures the 
complexity of different tools and models that support decision making. The challenge of defining terms is discussed 
in more detail in the results. 
Key terms used in this paper are defined in Table 1. These terms and definitions may not capture the complexity of 
all the different spatial, pre-fire planning tools, but they do provide a common language (Thompson et al. 2016) for 
understanding the findings presented herein. 

4	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Table 1. Key concepts and definitions as used in this white paper. This table is also used in Colavito (2021). 
Key Concept
Definition
Decision 
Support System
Different frameworks, models, analysis methods, products, and tools (i.e., software) 
that provide information about wildfire risk assessment and treatment prioritiza-
tion to support pre-fire planning. DSS refers to specific tools, such as the Wildfire 
Decision Support System (WFDSS), as well as analysis methods and frameworks, 
such as Quantitative Wildfire Risk Assessments (QWRA) or Potential Operational 
Delineations (PODs).
Wildfire Risk 
Assessment
Approaches for assigning values to risks or benefits from fire to support decision 
making. The Thompson et al. (2016) definition is used, “A product or process that 
collects information and assigns values (relative, qualitative, quantitative) to risks for 
the purpose of informing priorities, developing or comparing courses of action, and 
informing decision making.”
Treatment 
Prioritization
Approaches for determining where to treat hazardous fuels to reduce wildfire risk as 
determined by a wildfire risk assessment or other ranking process. 
Approach
This white paper addresses the following research questions about spatial, pre-fire planning DSTs:
1.	 Which DSTs are commonly in use for assessing wildfire risk and prioritizing areas for fuels treatment in 
the Forest Service?
2.	 How are DSTs defined? 
3.	 What are facilitators to the use of DSTs?
4.	 What are barriers to the use of DSTs?
5.	 What are recommendations for facilitating the use of DSTs in decision making?
Semi-structured interviews with key informants identified using a purposive sampling approach were used to 
address each research question. The purposive sample required that interviewees be familiar with the development 
or use of DSTs for assessing wildfire risk and treatment prioritization planning, and interviewees were asked to 
provide suggestions for additional participants. Interviewees in multiple places and roles were contacted to ensure 
that different perspectives were represented (Table 2). There were 27 interviewees (n=27) conducted in the spring 
of 2020. There were respondents from Regions 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 9 of the USDA Forest Service. Respondent 
locations included New Mexico (n=6), Colorado (n=5), Montana (n=5), Oregon (n=4), Arizona (n=4), Idaho (n=1), 
California (n=1), Minnesota (n=1). Interviews were conducted until information saturation—meaning no new 
themes were emerging—was reached. Limitations of the sample include the lack of resource specialist participation, 
a heavy emphasis on Forest Service employees (81% (22) of the respondents worked for the Forest Service in either 
science or management capacities), and lack of respondents in southern and eastern states.

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         5
Table 2. Respondent demographics by interviewee classification (as assigned or self-identified during interview). 
Scientist/ developer refers to individuals who are focused primarily on the development of spatial, pre-fire planning 
DSTs. Boundary spanner refers to individuals who work in boundary organizations that span the realms of science, 
management, and policy and work to integrate science and management. Manager refers to individuals who work in 
land management agencies and are tasked with decision making. 
Interviewee Classification
Number of Interviewees
Percent of Interviewees
Scientist/Developer
6
22%
Boundary Spanner
8
30%
Manager
13
48%
A systematic approach called grounded theory was used to analyze interview transcripts by iteratively generating 
themes from both prior knowledge and the literature, as well as from the data. A detailed explanation of methods 
can be found in the full report (Colavito 2020) or manuscript (Colavito 2021). 
Results
The results are organized according to major themes that emerged from analysis of the five major research 
questions.
What DSTs are commonly in use for assessing wildfire risk and prioritizing areas for fuels treatment in 
the Forest Service?
Interviewees referred to numerous spatial, pre-fire planning DSTs, which are classified below (Table 3) into four 
primary types. This is not an exhaustive list of wildfire risk assessment and treatment prioritization DSTs, rather it is a 
list of the tools that were referenced by interviewees to provide context for the findings that follow. Some interviewees 
referred to DSTs developed for specific projects or collaborative groups, which are not included in this list.

6	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Table 3. DSTs referenced by interviewees and classified into four primary types. Modified from Colavito 2021.
DST Type
DSTs Referenced by Interviewees
Data Sources/ DST 
Inputs                   
(i.e., the data used as model 
or tool inputs)
LANDFIRE: a database of more than 20 geospatial layers such as vegetation, fire 
regimes, and fuels for the United States.
Field Sampled Vegetation (FSVeg): stores data about trees, fuels, down woody 
material, surface cover, and understory vegetation.
Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA): a nationally coordinated inventory of US 
forest data.
Wildfire Risk Probability 
Simulators/ Models 
(i.e., first-order products 
that generate wildfire 
simulations, such as 
wildfire probability and fire 
behavior)
FlamMap: a fire analysis system that calculates pixel-based measures of fire 
behavior; smaller scale but similar to LFSim.
FARSITE: a computational approach to estimating wildfire growth and behavior 
integrated in FlamMap.
Large Fire Modeling Simulation System (FSim or LFSim): a method for 
simulating fire across larger scales and across seasons than FlamMap or FARSITE 
but using similar parameters.
Fire Spread Probability (FSPro): a probabilistic model that estimates where fire 
may go. Only available within the Wildland Fire Decision Support System.
BEHAVE: a fire modeling system that simulates surface and crown fire rate of 
spread and intensity, ignition probability, fire size, spotting, and mortality.
Methods or Products 
that Use Wildfire Risk 
Simulations
(i.e., second-order products 
that use wildfire simulations 
with additional data, such 
as highly valued resources 
and assets, to create higher-
level decision support 
information)
Wildfire Hazard Potential: a national map that combines flame-length and burn 
probability estimates across large landscapes.
Wildfire Risk to Communities: an interactive website that provides a national scale 
assessment of wildfire risk among communities, created in response to a 2018 law 
(PL115-141) requiring the Forest Service to map hazards by community.
Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS): system that supports fire 
managers, agency administrators, and analysts in making decisions on fires; 
includes fire modeling capability and decision documentation processes.
Quantitative Wildfire Risk Assessment (QWRA): a fire modeling process that 
assesses how highly valued resources and assets respond to modeled fire behavior 
and determines associated benefits and threats.
Potential Operational Delineation (POD): Boundaries or polygons that provide 
different fire response options across a landscape and an overview of fire risk 
according to potential control features and values at risk.
Wildfire Hazard 
Assessment Approaches, 
Models, and Tools 
(i.e., DSTs that characterize 
fuels, simulate forest growth 
and landscape processes, 
and analyze effects of 
fuels management on fire 
behavior)
Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS): forest vegetation modeling tool that simulates 
forest growth in response to natural processes and management actions.
LSim: a forest landscape simulation model integrating FSim into a modified FVS 
Parallel Processing Extension.
Scenario Investment Planning Platform (SIPP): spatial scenario planning model 
(FORSYS), formerly Landscape Treatment Designer (LTD), scenario planning 
approach for resource allocation and budgeting.
ArcFuels: ArcGIS extension that uses FVS and fire behavior models to inform fuel 
treatment planning, fire behavior modeling, and wildfire risk assessment.
Interagency Fuel Treatment Decision Support System (IFTDSS): online system 
for fuels treatment planning, including fire behavior modeling for testing fuels 
treatment effects on fire behavior to determine priority treatment areas.

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         7
How are DSTs defined? 
Since there was no established definition of DST, respondents were asked to define what the term means to them. 
Defining DSTs in the context of spatial, pre-fire planning proved challenging for many respondents but a number 
of key themes emerged. Notably, respondents emphasized a distinction between: 1) primary data that go into a 
DST (e.g., geospatial data layers); 2) DST platforms that provide higher level analytic functions (e.g., software 
program); and 3) DST outputs or visuals that inform discussions and decision-making processes (e.g., maps, 
visuals, or tables). One boundary spanner said, “An important distinction for me is that a decision support tool provides 
some capability to either evaluate scenarios or prioritize something” (DST11). In some cases, the DSTs referenced in 
Table 3 played multiple roles, which made classification and distinction among tools more challenging. 
Asking respondents to define DSTs also provided insight into the perceived purpose(s) of DSTs. Many 
interviewees described DSTs in broad terms. One manager described a DST as, “Anything that helps inform 
a decision better than what you would have otherwise had available to you is a decision support tool” (DST24). 
Interviewees emphasized that DSTs do not make decisions, rather they support decisions. One manager stated, “It 
doesn’t make a decision, but it helps us take a quick look at what we might expect and consider that when we need to move 
forward with a decision” (DST21). 
As some interviewees noted, this may warrant new or different terminology to better capture the complexity of 
spatial, pre-fire planning tools, as well as better elucidate the potential roles they can play in decision making. As 
one scientist/developer stated, “I think decision support tools help people think about problems. They shouldn’t be called 
decision support tools; they probably should be called something else. Thought, thought analytics, you know? Or, I call it 
conversational analytics. It’s a way of starting a conversation that takes advantage of all the tools” (DST4).
What are facilitators to the use of DSTs?
DSTs spur new conversations and facilitate communication 
One of the most frequently cited DST facilitators was that they helped to spur 
conversations among fire staff, line officers, resource specialists, decision makers, 
and stakeholders—who have historically not always worked closely together—
especially when the development involved collaborative participation from end 
users. One scientist/developer noted, “One of the biggest and most beneficial outcomes 
is conversations between the fire folks and line officers and their resource specialist staff. 
Conversations that have rarely happened in the past” (DST27). When diverse groups 
gathered to discuss pre-fire planning, a DST and its outputs served as a common 
space from which to share varying perspectives. One scientist/developer noted that it takes time and iteration to 
build trust and relationships and have candid conversations. “Once there’s shared mutual respect across the room, then we 
could just have conversations and work through all of these over time” (DST27). 
“One of the biggest and most beneficial outcomes is conversations between the fire folks and line officers 
and their resource specialist staff. Conversations that have rarely happened in the past”
DSTs also facilitated conversations between agencies and stakeholders. As one boundary spanner noted, “We’re talking 
with our partners about this stuff long before the fires ever occur” (DST1). DST outputs served as communication tools 
that helped fire managers to better explain their decision-making rationale. As one boundary spanner noted, “It can be 
a great communication tool to explain why we’re actively suppressing a fire on one portion of the landscape, while we’re letting 
a fire burn in another portion at the same time. Realizing that all fire in all places is not the same” (DST10). 

8	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
DST outputs, such as visuals and maps, also facilitated communication and collective knowledge development. For 
example, one manager referred to the following process, “We had the fire management officers, line officers drawing 
maps together, putting lines on the maps and thinking about things, from all the various history that was in their heads in 
addition to all the data” (DST13). Visuals also facilitated creative thinking. As one manager noted, “That graphic 
illustration gives you some pause and makes you ask some different questions” (DST7). 
The process of developing and using DSTs affects their perceived effectiveness 
One of the key facilitators in the development and use of DSTs was a collaborative 
and iterative process in which DSTs were co-developed with multiple perspectives 
to facilitate building relationships, trust, and respect. On the other hand, a lack 
of or ineffective co-development led to many of the barriers identified in the next 
section. Nonetheless, when co-development was employed, it was considered a 
facilitator. One manager put it this way, “The biggest thing was partnership buy-in 
and collaboration … These tools are helping us literally come around the table and agree to 
doing the same thing, regardless of who you work for” (DST18). Interviewees noted that 
an iterative and interactive process increased operational relevance. One scientist/developer noted, “This iterative 
process of working with the fire managers so that they’re owning it, it is their information. We’re just helping support the 
development of it and learning where our model’s working well and where our model’s not working well became really 
powerful” (DST3). 
Another benefit of a co-development process was having multiple perspectives represented, including leadership, 
to provide the necessary information and generate support. As one manager noted, “The fact that leadership was 
involved and pushing to get it done, and to come up with a new way of looking at the problem was very useful” (DST22). 
An iterative, participatory process helped to generate buy-in. As one manager explained, “It created a fair amount of 
buy-in because having the right people in the room to be a part of the process is more or less a verbal agreement about the end 
products, especially with agency or line officers, so if that situation arises where there’s a disagreement about how to manage 
a wildfire, there’s at least a start point to say, ‘Hey, you remember we talked about this?’” (DST26).
Boundary spanning organizations, which span the spheres of science and management (e.g., the Southwest 
Ecological Restoration Institutes), were also referenced as key process facilitators by providing added expertise, 
organization, and facilitation capacities. One manager noted, “Having CFRI [Colorado Forest Restoration Institute] 
as someone who can do the legwork of a lot of the spatial analysis and with all of the capacity issues that we have, is really 
important” (DST23). Boundary organizations also made DSTs more accessible. One boundary spanner explained, 
“I’m making a lot of these risk assessment tools more accessible … because that seems to be a major barrier, is you can go out 
and find a lot of this information, but most people don’t have the skills to link it together” (DST11). 
Interviewees also noted that consistency in participants and limited turnover were process facilitators. As one 
scientist/developer explained, “There’s one or two people on that forest that I would refer to as those champions. They came 
to us; they wanted the risk assessment; they saw the application for it; and they haven’t retired or took a new job or anything; 
they’re still at the forest” (DST9). Local champions who articulated the need for a DST, drove progress, and created 
buy-in and support were also important. One boundary spanner noted, “In order for these efforts to be successful on each 
landscape, there has to be one or two people who really act as a champion … That’s the magic sauce” (DST14). 
“In order for these efforts to be successful on each landscape, there has to be one or  
two people who really act as a champion … That’s the magic sauce”

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         9
DSTs can enhance the legitimacy of decisions 
DSTs are inherently designed to generate better information for decision making, 
though their success in doing this can vary. DST-developed processes and outputs 
generated robust narratives about why, where, and when to conduct treatments and 
to justify funding requests and decisions. As one scientist/developer noted, “[Forest 
Service leadership] want better analytics to understand what outcomes can be produced 
from investments” (DST4). 
Another benefit was that DSTs served as centralized repositories for information. 
As one manager explained, “There’s some utility in having a central spot for all this information that’s preloaded and 
pre-thought out” (DST12). DSTs quantified existing knowledge and provided access to information in a usable 
format. As one manager noted, “One of the big benefits was coming up with the data set across the landscape that allowed 
us to quantify all this information to a degree that no one’s had access to before” (DST22). DSTs helped to capture and 
institutionalize local knowledge and experiences. As one manager explained, “That institutional knowledge, I feel it 
lies in a few hands on the forest. Some folks have that. But if those folks retire … that information is lost. But if you capture 
it in a process like PODs or something, then it’s more institutional. It’s more corporate knowledge, it will be retained” 
(DST20).  
DSTs also facilitated increased decision quality or confidence. For example, DSTs demonstrated how treatments 
lowered risk. One boundary spanner noted, “It really allows people to look, take a step back, and say, wow, this work 
does show up, at least on the map, as being significantly reduced. And there’s this nice hole in the middle of the map that’s 
relatively low risk compared to everything else” (DST15). DSTs also boosted public confidence in decisions. One 
manager explained how the science behind a DST provided an added level of credibility to decisions. “Having more 
of that scientific or analysis background and being able to show that to some of the concerned people about your project, it 
really helps clear the air and make it clear to them that you’re not just willy nilly picking things” (DST25). 
Lastly, interviewees noted that DSTs encouraged creative or strategic thinking. One manager said, “It feels like a 
new generation, a new culture in resource management that’s recognizing that we’ve got some really cool technology and a 
lot of smart people that can help us make better decisions” (DST18). 
What are barriers to the use of DSTs?
Persistent tensions and cultural issues affect the use of DSTs
Several persistent tensions and cultural issues were articulated by interviewees and 
manifested in two primary ways. Cultural issues referred to dominant paradigms 
or organizational behaviors that were often subtle and difficult to overcome. First, 
respondents highlighted a tension between a desire for top-down directives on what 
DSTs to use and how to use them versus a desire for a more organic, grassroots, 
bottom-up development and integration of DSTs. One manager articulated a desire for 
the grassroots approach. “Everybody wants to be the tip of the spear, be the most advanced 
or whatever, but you got to organically build that within your fire program for it to be a 
useful tool” (DST24). Another manager argued that a lack of interest in DSTs at a local level warranted top-down 
intervention. “I think there needs to be really tight, good communication from the top down … having those unit line officers, 
the district rangers giving that same message so everyone’s on the same page from the communication standpoint” (DST23). 

10	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Second, interviewees noted tension between a desire for scientists to co-develop DSTs in a collaborative manner 
with the intended end users of those tools versus a desire to not use the limited time of end users like managers in 
the process of building and validating a new DST, which may not ultimately be adopted. As one manager noted, 
“There’s the disconnect between the people that are running and building these tools and the folks that are ultimately using 
the tools” (DST22).
“There’s the disconnect between the people that are running and  
building these tools and the folks that are ultimately using the tools” 
Interviewees also alluded to persistent cultural issues, such as the challenge of changing existing paradigms and 
perceptions of the role of fire. As one manager noted, “We haven’t had that cultural shift. It’s still, despite the messaging, 
very much viewed as, fire is a bad thing and the less of it we can have the better” (DST24). One scientist/developer 
noted, “I would say cultural barriers exists all around smart and thoughtful fire management” (DST16).
Capacity issues inhibit both the development and use of DSTs
Capacity issues were described within and across organizations. As one scientist/
developer noted, “We need capacity on both sides. Those folks that can communicate 
and work with groups, as well as those folks that can create the analytics. And both lack” 
(DST27). 
One of the most persistent capacity issues was simply a lack of time. As one 
boundary spanner said, in reference to personnel learning new DSTs, “They’re so 
strapped for time that some people might even have the skills to do some of these things if 
they actually had the time to sit down and think and learn” (DST11). Interviewees also noted that there was a general 
lack of personnel capacity. As one manager said, “Across the Forest Service, we just don’t have the capacity to get a lot of 
work done. We’ve got a lot of vacant positions and that causes a lot of other issues” (DST23). Turnover in personnel also 
led to a persistent need to re-educate and familiarize new staff with DSTs. 
Interviewees also noted that analysts and scientists were oversubscribed. One scientist/developer explained, “The 
biggest gap we have is there is a small number of people who can develop the models and facilitate a full workshop and 
most of them are here on our team” (DST3). Another scientist/developer noted that the lack of analytic capacity in 
the agency led to a lack of capacity in research. “Instead of advancing research, we do a lot of the development and 
application piece because we know it’s important” (DST27). This also manifested in a lack of specialists who were 
comfortable in science and management. As one boundary spanner noted, “I don’t think there’s enough people who act 
in that tech transfer role … And I think you need someone who’s familiar in both worlds” (DST14). 
Funding also presented persistent capacity issues. For example, one manager described a scenario in which funding 
concluded when final DST data was delivered but funding for integrating that data into the regular program of 
work on the forest was lacking. “I didn’t really think that through when we first started down the process, and so we’d used 
up all the money by the time we got to the end” (DST25). 

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         11
An ineffective process to develop DST outputs can limit outcomes
Interviewees referred to procedural challenges that inhibited DST development 
and use. For example, limited participation led to a lack of buy-in and trust for non-
participants. One manager said, “One of the bigger challenges is just to get people to sit 
around the same table” (DST18). When integrating new DSTs into a program of work 
was optional, a lack of buy-in inhibited creative thinking. As one manager noted, “To 
some degree there’s limited desire to re-think the processes that they have been using in the 
past” (DST22).
There were diverse perspectives among Forest Service personnel from fire to fuels to resource areas. Several 
managers noted that resource specialist perspectives, such as archeology, biology, range, and others, were often 
missing from DST development discussions. One manager noted there was some fatigue in trying new approaches. 
“I think a lot of resource specialists feel that, if it’s not going to really lead to anything meaningful, they’re not interested in 
investing a lot of time into it” (DST23).
Interviewees also noted that poor communication created barriers. For example, one scientist/developer described a 
process that lacked champions. “I heard in the meetings … ‘We only did this because we had to, because 5140 tells us that 
we have to.’” (DST9). These issues arose, in part, because of poor communication from leadership. As one manager 
explained, “There wasn’t a lot of communication about the need for this type of tool, or how this type of information would 
impact the ultimate users on the districts coming up with their five-year plan” (DST22). 
Several managers noted that the process to learn and integrate new DSTs, as well as shift paradigms, took time. As 
one manager noted, “The criticism that we hear is it takes a lot of time … I went into the meeting thinking this, and I 
had a really good conversation, I understood why I thought that better at the end of it, but that didn’t change anything, so I 
don’t know if it was a good use of my time” (DST17). 
Technical challenges in the use of DSTs can affect perceptions of their accuracy and usability 
The most frequently cited technical barrier was data or model limitations. One 
scientist/developer noted, “The best way to uncover bad data is to start using it” (DST4). 
Another boundary spanner explained, “The outlook that we’re going to get for these DSTs is 
heavily influenced by the data that is available. And if you don’t understand that limitation, 
you might just run with the results without factoring in those considerations that are a little 
more difficult to map” (DST14). But when models were perceived to be “wrong” it led to 
negative perceptions. One manager explained, “For some people on the ground-truthing 
side of things … if it’s not 100 percent, the model has failed” (DST7). 
Data management issues, such as accessibility, also affected DST use. One manager explained, “The issue is that 
as we try to update what makes this corporate knowledge, there’s often a gap on where things were filed in the T drive, for 
example” (DST20). Data management was also challenging across organizations. One scientist/developer explained, 
“State GIS and federal GIS people have tons and tons of data, but there really lacks a coherent way to bring the data 
together” (DST4). 
There were also differences in data across geographic or temporal scales. One manager brought up tensions about 
what data to use, “Some of these regional modeling efforts have used the best available data from the regional perspective, 
where individual forests might have a better perspective or a better data set to use for their specific forest” (DST20). Some 

12	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
geographic areas have DSTs that overlapped geographic scales, which created confusion when the tradeoffs were 
not clear. One boundary spanner said, “A risk assessment at the national level is not going to look anything like the risk 
assessment at the regional level, and that’s not going to look anything like the risk assessment at the local level” (DST14). 
Interviewees also brought up technology malfunctions and limitations. One manager noted that if a DST did not 
work in the field, people were likely to resort to the tools with which they were familiar. “When you’re running a fire, 
if you have to monkey with your iPad, and now this isn’t working and whatever’s going on, you’re just going to go back to 
your steno pad” (DST17). 
Determining how to select among multiple DSTs and proceed with competing priorities  
can be challenging and overwhelming 
Interviewees highlighted that DST concepts and information were complex and 
often in competition with many other sources of information and priorities. As one 
manager explained, there were many priorities in fire management that required 
attention and time and often competed with information from DSTs. “We have our 
hands full just trying to manage people and fleet and budgets, et cetera. And, so these new 
tools, or new to some of us, they’re difficult to understand, and if you don’t use them, they’re 
easy to forget” (DST20). 
Respondents noted that the sheer amount of information and different approaches for conducting a risk assessment 
and prioritization process was confusing. One manager said, “It definitely can get overwhelming to even stay up with 
everything that a ton of different folks are doing” (DST24). Similarly, one scientist/developer said, “It’s really easy, even 
for somebody like me who now works in this stuff day in, day out, to get confused” (DST16). One boundary spanner 
explained, “It just gets confusing for people if there’s so many different options out there of how you prioritize, what a risk 
assessment is, and what it means” (DST10).
Interviewees noted that even when there was an awareness of DSTs, there still was often a lack of understanding of 
how to use them. One scientist/developer noted, “There’s a lack of understanding of the information fundamentally, and 
then a lack of its intended use, I would say both” (DST27). Another scientist/developer noted that it was difficult to use 
a DST without a foundation in certain scientific and technical concepts. “The basis of a lot of the things we do is fire 
behavior modeling, and there are definitely some barriers to people understanding where to start or where to learn the basics to 
fire behavior modeling. You can get into the system and click the buttons, but are you producing meaningful outputs?” (DST5).
Finally, interviewees noted that DST outputs can also be disregarded if they don’t align with existing knowledge. 
One boundary spanner explained, “It either validates what they’ve been thinking and then they’ll use it … or it is 
contrary to their beliefs, and they move forward without it” (DST15). 
Institutional issues and governance barriers can inhibit DST use 
Institutional issues within the organizations responsible for developing, transferring, 
and using DSTs inhibited their use; although, the barriers tended to vary based on 
the context. As one boundary spanner noted, “There’s probably different kind of barriers 
to use within different types of organizations” (DST11). 
One institutional barrier in management agencies was a lack of direction on DST 
use. Across administrative levels of the Forest Service, interviewees noted a lack of 

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         13
alignment and articulation of leadership intent about DST use. As one scientist/developer noted, “There just hasn’t 
been a lot of help out there to direct forests on … how do we take that next step, we have all this great information, how do 
we integrate it into our program of work?” (DST9). 
Another issue that interviewees cited were restrictions on the use of technology. One boundary spanner described 
it this way. “There just seems to be a delay on the government side to effectively support emerging research … It’s as if the 
government can’t keep up with those changes because we’re not able to adapt as quickly as technology changes. You’ve got 
researchers that are coming up with really cool stuff, and they’re usually able to leverage the new IT technologies” (DST8). 
There was also limited IT capacity that resulted in analysts devoting time to solving IT issues rather than focusing 
on analytics. 
There were also barriers within scientific organizations. For example, the science reward system does not 
incentivize scientists to focus on DST application, rather it is more focused on the production of peer-reviewed 
manuscripts. As one boundary spanner noted, “If a scientist makes something really useful that the field needs, there’s 
not a lot of incentives on their end to keep it going” (DST1). The same boundary spanner noted that infrastructure to 
incubate new DSTs was largely nonexistent. “Once we’re onto something, how do we grow it, and then implement it, 
and teach it, and maintain it? We just don’t really have a mechanism to do that” (DST1). 
“Once we’re onto something, how do we grow it, and then implement it, and teach it, 
and maintain it? We just don’t really have a mechanism to do that” 
Implementation plans for using DST outputs are often lacking 
Many interviewees highlighted that another challenge was a lack of implementation 
planning for integrating DST outputs into existing processes. As one scientist/
developer noted, there was a tendency for efforts to end with the production of data, 
not the integration of that data into a planning process or program of work. “A big 
issue is, then, the forest and regions, they get the data, and they say, ‘We have our QWRA, 
now what?’ … ‘We have our PODs, now what?’ And people don’t know how to interpret 
it, so they need a little bit of assistance or a little bit of additional training on how to 
interpret it” (DST9). Although this was not as big of an issue with collaboratively-
developed DSTs, there were still issues in operationalizing DST outputs when staff who were not involved in the 
development of DSTs tried to use them or when staff turned over or move to a new position. 
Furthermore, even when end users used DSTs, they may not have known how to appropriately interpret the 
outputs. One scientist/developer noted, “The tools aren’t challenging, I mean they take a while to build, but that’s not the 
hard part. It’s the interpretation of the outputs that you’re using to make your decisions and really having solid foundation 
and training to understand what you’re looking at is really important” (DST5). 
What are recommendations for facilitating the use of DSTs in decision making?
These recommendations are organized according to the major themes that emerged from the interviews, as well as 
according to the primary audience for which they are relevant. Many of these recommendations were underway to 
varying degrees, and they varied in terms of their potential difficulty to implement. Nonetheless, these themes were 
prevalent among interview participants in this study. 

14	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Universal Recommendation: Communication and engagement about DSTs must be done in a 
common language and sustained through time to build relationships and trust 
Respondents across groups emphasized the importance of using a common language. 
As one manager explained, “Require some training and education so we get to some 
common language and understanding about their role in decision making and what quality 
decision making is, what risk-informed decision making is” (DST7). One boundary 
spanner explained that establishing a common framework and language was critical 
in engaging with partners across a landscape. “Have, at least, an established framework, 
so that everybody’s cross boundary communication can be the same … so that you can talk to 
your neighbors about what they’re doing” (DST10). 
Have, at least, an established framework, so that everybody’s cross boundary communication can  
be the same … so that you can talk to your neighbors about what they’re doing” 
Interviewees noted that it was important to set expectations up front. One boundary spanner explained, “From 
the outset, set the expectations... And just keep coming back to the plan and keep coming back to the purpose” (DST15). 
Respondents emphasized that it was important to ensure that DST end users are involved in development from 
the beginning. One manager noted, “It’s coming up with a more robust conversation before you even enter into running a 
model. Really talking about what do we need the model to do, what information do we need to know, what do we need the 
model to output, and whether that model is the right one to use for any particular situation” (DST20).
In addition to engaging end users from the outset of DST development and integration, respondents highlighted 
the importance of sustaining engagement. As one scientist/developer explained, this was often an iterative process 
with give and take from both ends. “It was an interesting process of … trying to nudge it in the right direction when I 
felt like it was appropriate, but then also making sure that the local specialists participating had ownership in the process” 
(DST16). Sustained communication also forged new relationships, and as one manager noted, new relationships 
facilitated progress. “Where the rubber meets the road, is where you have and you forge these individual relationships, 
either which way the road’s going. Whether it’s the scientist approaching the manager or the manager approaching the 
scientist” (DST12). 
Interviewees also highlighted the importance of sharing success stories and case studies that provided examples of 
successful DST use. For example, one boundary spanner said, “I wish there were better examples of case studies that 
showed how other places have gone through the process … to give the folks that I was coaxing to the table more confidence” 
(DST19). 
Scientist/Developer Recommendation: Determine the question that a DST is meant to inform and 
then develop and integrate it accordingly
Many respondents emphasized the importance of first determining what question a 
DST was meant to inform and then developing it so that it was tailored to produce 
information for that question. As one boundary spanner noted, “Early on in a 
process, define what a management question actually is that needs decision support … For 
people who are developing decision support tools, or applying decision support tools, that’s 
a necessary skill beyond just the technical capacity is really helping coach people through 
a process of helping them define what are the questions they’re trying to answer, what 
information do they need and then how are they going to use that information.” (DST11). 

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         15
Scientists/developers also noted that identifying ways to use DST outputs was critical. As one scientist/developer 
said, “Listening to the forest or region, those stakeholders ... ‘Okay, so what does your program of work look like? How do 
you think this information can be useful? How are you identifying and prioritizing your fuel treatments now?’ Working 
with them together in, sort of, a workshop setting to identify ways in which the QWRA results could be integrated into their 
program of work” (DST9). 
At the same time, there were numerous DSTs that could be brought to bear on certain questions, and it was 
challenging to select the best DST for a given context. One scientist/developer emphasized that it was critical to 
articulate what kinds of questions an existing DSTs could answer. “I certainly have tried, whenever I present on the 
analyses that I’m working on … look, what I’m giving you provides one type of information but doesn’t provide all the 
answers, and this is what you can do with the information I’m giving you and these are the types of questions that this 
information can answer. But if you want answers to these questions, which are different, you maybe need to turn to different 
tools” (DST16). 
Scientist/Developer Recommendation: DST outputs should be validated and tested with end users
Interviewees emphasized the importance ground-truthing DST outputs to validate 
and monitor the decisions they inform. One boundary spanner noted, “After you’ve 
drawn stuff on a map, you need to get out in the woods” (DST10). The importance of 
ground-truthing was also identified by managers. One manager said, “Any model that 
you use, you need to ground-truth anyways, because you never know how good the data 
is” (DST25). Validation was perceived to improve DSTs, as well. One manager said, 
“Verify it on the ground with the folks that are closest to it, because all the models in the 
world, applying all of the pieces that we might know in a geospatial lab sense out on the 
ground always is improved by ground-truthing” (DST7). One boundary spanner noted that to effectively validate 
DSTs, there also needed to be documentation of their use and outcomes. “In order to validate them, we need to 
use them extensively and then document not only what they said might happen, but what actually happened” (DST2). 
Implementation plans for using DST outputs could also include time and capacity for validation. 
Interviewees recommended that DSTs be specifically tested with end users to ensure that they were user-
friendly. One manager said, “Make sure that things are tested with folks that are out there doing it … make sure that it’s 
operationally sound. If it doesn’t make sense on the ground, then people are going to ignore it or be resistant to it” (DST17). 
Many end users wanted to be able to run DSTs themselves so that they had some control over the process and felt 
ownership in the information. As one boundary spanner explained, “A lot of people want to be able to actually run 
this tool … They actually want to be able to click on the buttons, change the numbers, rerun the analysis, and learn and 
understand how the tool works” (DST11).
It was perceived to be important to improve tools over time based on user feedback. One scientist/developer 
explained how a user advisory group and forum was developed to improve a new DST. “The user advisory group’s 
a new concept, so we’re still figuring out the best way to utilize their time, their skills, and their input with it, but I think 
it’s much better than us just sitting in a cave and building a tool that we think is most important” (DST5). The same 
respondent explained how a user forum connected end users with DST developers to improve the DST, “… a user 
forum where anyone can post questions or suggestions, and a lot of times, we use what they have posted to enhance, update, 
or change something” (DST5). 

16	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Manager/End User Recommendation: Implementation planning can ensure that DST outputs are used 
Respondents emphasized the importance of developing implementation plans and 
schedules to ensure that DST outputs were integrated into planning and updated as 
needed. One manager noted, “The biggest recommendation I have is once you start and 
you pick the tool you want to use, whether it’s PODs or whatever it is, to get your stuff, get 
your folks on a schedule and stick to it … because we’ve moved the process along and then 
stalled out, and people got disengaged. And, so my biggest recommendation would be just 
once you started, bringing it all the way through to the end, keep yourself on a schedule. 
Don’t drop it” (DST23). 
Respondents also noted that it was important to update data and DST outputs on a pre-determined schedule. One 
manager explained, “It shouldn’t be a static thing. Conditions on the ground change. There could be something out there 
that wasn’t captured in your risk assessment when you made it. They’re all not static tools. They need to be updated to have 
relevance” (DST24). Another manager suggested that annual updates would be appropriate and could be scaled 
back. “I think a good starting point would be annually, and we may find that maybe it’s biannually or every three years or 
something” (DST20). 
Leadership/Policy Recommendation: Leadership intent for integrating and using DSTs should be 
clearly articulated through policies, guidance, and authorities 
Interviewees recommended several ways in which leadership intent for using 
DSTs in risk assessment and treatment prioritization could be better articulated. 
Developing guidance for DSTs was described as challenging, in part, because DSTs 
were always evolving. As one scientist/developer noted, “Science is constantly changing 
… Now, some forests are waiting for somebody to tell them, thou shalt do this. Other 
forests are willing to just kind of dive in” (DST14). Although there were policies that 
articulated the need for doing risk assessments, as one scientist/developer noted, they 
were not explicit. “The policies are there. They’re just not as explicit as, you should do this 
and use these tools, which at any point in time is useful in setting an agenda and a direction for an agency” (DST27). 
One of the ways respondents felt that more clarity could be gained was through a clear articulation of leadership 
intent. One boundary spanner said, “I think we need national guidance saying, just like we did with LANDFIRE, we 
need these risk assessments … we’re going to create these risk assessments for, at least the western states, every few, four years” 
(DST1). Another manager argued, “There has to be some sort of directive or emphasis, literally stated from top leadership, 
that this is something that they want to see completed and give people a reasonable amount of time” (DST18). 
However, as another manager argued, it was also important that leadership intent recognize and encompass 
perspectives from local units. “Having leadership know and communicate their desires to have their people involved in 
it, knowing the benefits of having local experts involved from the very beginning and throughout the process, knowing the 
value of that on the back end would facilitate the use of these tools and making the outputs more usable and making people 
more likely to use them in the end” (DST22). As one boundary spanner explained, this requires communication from 
local units up the chain of leadership to communicate that local perspective. “It’s really important that these higher-up 
decision makers know that there’s a lot of nuance to planning and prioritization at a local level” (DST11). Thus, it was 
described as important to strike a balance between articulating leadership intent from the top, while also making 
sure to communicate local and public perspectives to leadership. In short, there needs to be clear and consistent 
two-way communication across the different levels of the Forest Service.

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         17
“Having leadership know and communicate their desires to have their people involved in it, knowing the 
benefits of having local experts involved from the very beginning and throughout the process, knowing 
the value of that on the back end would facilitate the use of these tools and making the outputs more 
usable and making people more likely to use them in the end”
Respondents also noted that leadership communication should include a compelling “why” for using a DST to 
garner support. Respondents argued that one of the ways that compelling “why” could be communicated was 
by supporting and empowering thought leaders and change agents. As one manager explained in reference to 
attending a PODs workshop, “A lot of the people that went to these workshops, they’re not your 25-year seasoned fire 
managers … So, you’ve got a bunch of young people coming back. And I say young, but I mean change agents coming back. 
And then, they basically just get shoved down because there isn’t any parallel policy pressure placed on it. And, so, it loses 
traction” (DST18). 
Interviewees noted that it was important to develop incentives and accountability for using DSTs in decision 
making. As one scientist/developer explained, “We don’t have incentives and accountability … There’s no clear direction 
on how we’re incentivizing good fire management. We don’t even really know how to define good fire management. So how 
do you incentivize it when you haven’t defined it?” (DST3). Another scientist/developer recommended, “This process of 
risk management requires that we get away from outcome-based metrics and get to a decision to really be able to evaluate the 
quality of our decisions and that requires us to plan and document” (DST3). 
In short, many respondents argued for a structured approach to decision-making, which has been articulated by 
other researchers (see Calkin et al. 2010, Thompson et al. 2019). One manager explained, “I have a dream. We need 
an integrated approach and commitment to structured, risk-informed decision making. And this is where you can start 
throwing around all the rest of the buzzwords, evidence-based, data-driven … And one of the next steps is some assessment 
of the analytic capability in the agency and how we want to leverage it … We’ve got to bring these pieces together … And if 
we use a structured decision-making approach, I actually might come up with a fairly reasonable set of next steps” (DST7). 
Leadership/Policy Recommendation: Analytical capacity and funding to develop, integrate, and use 
DSTs needs to be increased 
Respondents emphasized a need for more analysts who could assist in the 
development, integration, and use of DSTs. One manager explained, “Nationwide, 
having more analysts is important because those are the people that can, at least, if they 
can’t run them all, they can understand what went into it and explain it and interpret 
it” (DST24). One manager noted the importance of having access to analysts with 
strong listening and collaborative skills, “I want that analyst in the room listening to me, 
having these conversations with the stakeholders, and be thinking about what could help 
them, not tell me the answer, but help me have this conversation” (DST7).
The ways in which additional analytical capacity could be realized varied, but in general, locating analysts within 
national forests or regional offices who are tasked with learning DSTs, as well as translating and transferring them 
to intended end users would be beneficial. As one boundary spanner stated, “We need more analysts. It’s that simple 
… I wish we could have that capacity at every one of those forests. And then we would have national vision and direction 
to help them” (DST1). Another manager noted the importance of consistency across geographic areas. “Some forests 
have people that are good at this stuff, some forests don’t … If we want people to be using these tools, all the forests need to 
invest in people that can use the tools” (DST25).

18	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Interviewees also talked about the need for additional assistance from boundary spanners and boundary spanning 
organizations to explain the need for DSTs, interpret and communicate outputs, and facilitate conversations. As 
one scientist/developer noted, “We need a capacity on both sides. Those folks that can communicate and work with groups, 
as well as those folks that can create the analytics (DST27). 
Acknowledging the time needed for integrating a new DST was noted as being critical, because as one scientist/
developer noted, it takes time to develop trust and buy-in. “If we get it in a vacuum, simple, fast, done. But if you 
really want to bring people along and have a shared stewardship or shared ownership of the outcome and the direction you’re 
going, that’s what takes time” (DST27). Another manager noted, “My recommendation would be to understand that it 
could take a full year, maybe even a little bit more, to complete the process so you can actually start incorporating into your 
planning efforts” (DST23). 
Respondents also noted that it was critical to ensure funding to support analytical work and DST use. As one 
manager stated, “A lot of the intent is being met supporting the ground with these analyses and scientific support for field 
operations. But money could be leveraged much better if there was kind of a cohesive agreement that this was going to be a 
priority” (DST18). 
Leadership/Policy Recommendation: DST end users need both education and training in the 
concepts and tools
Respondents emphasized that education and training need to be designed to facilitate 
DST use. One boundary spanner said, “Our line officers and fire managers need to be 
educated in risk, not trained but educated. Training tells you how to go through step A to step 
B, and C or D, or whatever. Education gives you the ability to work on a problem and apply 
concepts to the problem. Right now, most of our folks are not well educated in risk or educated 
at all in risk … The perfect example is it’s very difficult to get the agency administrator to look 
at an individual fire and the risk associated with it, as well as the risks associated down the 
road that will occur based on the actions they take on that fire” (DST2). 
Education could also help change existing paradigms and cultures. One manager explained, “I don’t know what 
that education campaign would look like, but I think just as you go to more places that are doing different things with fire, 
eventually you change the culture of the people that are eventually going to be the fire staff and the directors” (DST24). 
Some interviewees recommended that continuing education programs and revised or new qualifications could 
facilitate DST use. One boundary spanner said, “If we knew every five years there was this mandatory continuing 
education piece, so to get everybody up to speed on what’s the latest and greatest science and tools and information that we’re 
all sharing during wildfires” (DST8). Another manager noted that qualifications could be modified to facilitate an 
understanding of DSTs. “We have those IFPM [Interagency Fire Program Management] qualifications and I think if 
they went back and revised them to include more of that fire ecology, fire behavior, fire analysis type of things, they could start 
there to where you have to have some certain basic classes” (DST25).
One training approach called “train-the-trainer,” in which a local representative receives DST training and 
subsequently trains his or her colleagues, was mentioned by several respondents as a useful strategy to deliver new 
concepts and DSTs. One scientist/developer explained it this way, “Train-the-trainer is a model that we’re really 
trying to work on … trying to find people that are self-motivated and want to learn it and willing to go teach beyond 
just their small groups” (DST5). One scientist/developer noted that many people prefer in-person training (e.g., 

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         19
including but not limited to train-the-trainer approaches). “One of the questions was, how would you most like to get 
training? And the most common answer is: in-person training” (DST5).
Respondents also noted that workshops that provided instruction on both the concepts and development of DSTs, 
as well as on the use and integration of DST outputs were critical. One manager noted, “We’re working on … more 
of a user type of workshop, how do you use this data in ArcGIS, how can you put it in a NEPA analysis, how could you use 
it in a burn plan” (DST25). Another scientist/developer explained that working through exercises was helpful. “If 
you have two or three exercises that show how you work through that seems to, in my experience anyway, resonate with folks 
better” (DST2). One scientist/developer noted that user manuals could also provide long-term support for local 
technical experts. 

20	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
A Framework for Organizing Spatial, Pre-Fire Planning Decision Support Tools
DSTs are helpful for facilitating conversations about pre-fire planning across geographic and temporal scales, as 
well as across jurisdictional boundaries. There are multiple robust DSTs in existence that can inform strategic, risk-
informed decision-making. However, existing DSTs and their outputs need to be better organized and leveraged 
to assist end users. One theme that emerged throughout the barriers and recommendations was the challenge of 
selecting among multiple DSTs when there are competing priorities and decision-making needs, as well as the 
challenge of understanding which DST(s) could provide information to address specific management questions. 
Because the selection of a DST for a given planning or decision-making process is critical to the other social 
and organization aspects of using that DST, there is a need to better organize and explain the characteristics of 
existing DSTs in a cohesive way so that end users understand how to select an appropriate DST for their unique 
circumstance(s) or question(s) or recognize the tradeoffs among a suite of DSTs to which they may have access. To 
that end, the following framework is proposed as a way to facilitate the organization of existing DSTs to support end 
user understanding and use of the different tools and the types of information they can provide in decision-making.  
Figure 1. Framework for organizing spatial, pre-fire planning DSTs. Decision space (white boxes) includes long-term 
strategic planning, short-term tactical planning, and scene-of-action decision making.

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         21
Conclusion 
The purpose of this white paper is to share findings from a study that analyzed the use and adoption of spatial, 
pre-fire planning DSTs used to inform wildfire risk assessment and fuels treatment planning and prioritization 
by federal land managers, especially in the USDA Forest Service. It explores the social and organizational 
aspects of spatial, pre-fire planning DST use and provide recommendations to facilitate the effective 
development and use of these tools in decision making. Although there were many barriers identified to the 
effective development, integration, and use of DSTs in pre-fire planning, interview respondents highlighted 
important facilitators to DST use and provided constructive recommendations for improving their use. These 
findings are consistent with growing research on the pre-fire planning DSTs (e.g., Greiner et al. 2020). These 
recommendations can help to inform and shape the perspectives of science, management, and decision-making 
audiences to effectively meet the goals of national policies and frameworks and promote strategic, risk-
information pre-fire planning and decision-making.  

22	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Acknowledgements 
Thank you to the interview participants whose time, contributions, and perspectives informed this research.  

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         23
References
Caggiano, M.D. 2020. Potential Operational Delineations and Northern New Mexico’s 2019 Fire Season. CFRI-
2002; Colorado Forest Restoration Institute: Ft. Collins, CO, USA. 8 p. Available online: https://cfri.colostate.
edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2020/02/Caggiano_PODs-New-Mexico-Case-Study-2.14.20.pdf   
Calkin, D.E., A.A. Ager, J. Gilbertson-Day, eds. 2010. Wildfire risk and hazard: procedures for the first 
approximation. General Technical Report 235. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 62 p.
Colavito, M. 2020. The Role of Risk Management Prioritization Decision Support Tools: An Overview of 
Barriers, Facilitators, and Recommendations. ERI Technical Report. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 49 p. 
Colavito, M. 2021. The Human Dimensions of Spatial, Pre-Wildfire Planning Decision Support Systems: A Review 
of Barriers, Facilitators, and Recommendations. Forests, 12 (4): 483. https://doi.org/10.3390/f12040483.
Greiner, S.M., C.A. Schultz, C. Kooistra. 2020. Pre-season fire management planning: The use of Potential 
Operational Delineations to prepare for wildland fire events. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 30(3): 170–
178. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF20124 
Rapp, C., E. Rabung, R. Wilson, and E. Toman. 2020. Wildfire Decision Support Tools: An Exploratory Study of 
Use in the United States. International Journal of Wildland Fire. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF19131.
Stratton, R. 2020. The Path to Strategic Wildland Fire Management Planning. Wildfire, 29 (1): 24–31.
Thompson, M.P., Y. Wei, D.E. Calkin, C.D. O’Connor, C.J. Dunn, N.M. Anderson, and J.S. Hogland. 2019. 
Risk Management and Analytics in Wildfire Response. Current Forestry Reports, 5 (4): 226–39. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40725-019-00101-7.
Thompson, M.P., T. Zimmerman, D. Mindar, and M. Taber. 2016. Risk Terminology Primer: Basic Principles and 
a Glossary for the Wildland Fire Management Community. General Technical Report 349. USDA Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 19p.

24	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
About the ERI White Paper Series: Issues in Forest Restoration 
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines 
ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with 
respect to its health, integrity and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic 
trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once-diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to 
damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers 
on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural 
processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every 
forest restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers 
elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does 
not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization         25
ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1. 	 Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. 	 Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. 	 Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. 	 Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests
5. 	 Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. 	 Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern 
Arizona
7. 	 Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. 	 Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. 	 Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. 	What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for 
Practitioners
11. 	Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. 	Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. 	Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. 	Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest 
Lands
15. 	Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16. 	Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. 	A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. 	Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. 	The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. 	Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. 	Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. 	The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
23. 	Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West
24. 	Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Projects
25. 	Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West
26. 	Wildfire Trends Across the Western US: Forest Fires Have Increased in Size, Severity, and Frequency 
Across Western Forests
27. 	Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area 
Residents
28. 	Full-Cost Accounting Remeasurement of the 2010 Schultz Fire: Understanding the Long-term Socio-
Economic Implications of High-Severity Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flooding

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
