The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of com-
munities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues 
related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Effectiveness of Restoration Treatments for Reducing Fuels and Increasing Understory 
Diversity in Shrubby Mixed-Conifer Forests of the Southern Rocky Mountains 
By Mike Stoddard, Research Associate 
Introduction 
In fire-dependent forests of the West, land managers implement restoration treatments to reduce a forest’s 
susceptibility to crown fire, restore more resilient ecological conditions, and promote diverse understory 
communities. These treatments often include mechanically thinning trees and applying prescribed fire. 
However, in forests where resprouting woody species (e.g., Querus gambelii (Gambel oak) Amelanchier 
spp. (serviceberry), and Symphoricarpos spp., (snowberry)) are abundant in the understory, there is a need 
to better understand the effectiveness of restoration treatments, especially those designed to sustain mixed-
conifer forests. On sites where sprouting woody species are abundant in the understory, their rapid increase 
following restoration treatments may inhibit the establishment of other less competitive species (e.g., 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa)) and affect ecosystem trajectories, particularly in the event of subsequent 
severe fire. Further, the effects of sprouting species on treatment 
longevity remain unclear for land managers. In 2002, we initiated a 
replicated field experiment in a mixed-conifer forest to compare two 
commonly applied restoration treatments (thin-plus-burn and burn-only) 
and no-treatment controls. Our objectives were to compare forest 
structure and understory responses in the three alternatives to better 
understand the resilience and longevity of restoration treatments 
designed to sustain mixed-conifer species. 
  
Key Research Findings 
• 
Tree density, canopy cover, and crown fuels were consistently lower 
and crown base height was consistently higher in thin/burn 
treatments compared with burn or control, but the effects start to 
diminish 10 years post-treatment. 
• 
Burn and control units showed similar structural characteristics, 
indicating that the burn-only treatment has low effectiveness for 
altering stand characteristics and meeting restoration goals. 
• 
Ten years following treatment, >99% of all plant species in all 
treatments were native in origin. We observed no differences 
between treatments in understory richness, diversity, or cover. Cover 
of grasses and grass-like plants more than doubled in the three 
treatments over the 15-year monitoring period (2003–2018). 
• 
Shrub densities increased by 86% (control), 76% (burn), and 144% 
(thin/burn) over the study period. Furthermore, the size class 
distribution shifted toward taller shrubs, which was especially 
pronounced in the thin/burn. 
• Conifer seedling density was significantly lower in the thin/burn 
compared with burn and control treatments after 10 years.  
 
August 2021 
Figure 1. Proportion (bars and left y-
axis) of the total shrub stem density 
(line and right y-axis) in three height 
classes in 2003 (pretreatment) and 
three post-treatment measurement 
years; 2009 (1-year post), 2013 (5-year 
post), 2018 (10-year post 2018). Each 
panel represent a treatment type. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions and Management Implications 
In our study, 10 years after thinning followed by prescribed fire and prescribed fire-only treatments, 
some initial treatment benefits that promote resiliency to future disturbances were starting to diminish 
(e.g., increasing shrub density, decreasing crown base heights, and increases in surface and canopy fuels). 
Shrub increases were evident across both treatment and control units, but most prolific in the thin/burn 
areas. Conifer seedling density was lower in thin/burn compared with burn and control treatments after 
10 years. Taken together, these conditions create challenges for managers aiming to reestablish natural 
fire patterns and sustain mixed-conifer forests. Our findings suggest that understory dynamics in these 
forests are complex and other variables, such as climate and competition, may play roles on par with 
thinning and prescribed fire in determining understory responses. As a result, managers will need to 
balance long-term restoration and fuel mitigation goals, which may conflict given the variable treatment 
responses we identified in our study. Overall, there is a need for additional long-term studies that 
quantify long-term forest restoration effects to provide land managers the information they need to 
allocate limited funds and resources to maintain existing treatments or implement novel restoration 
treatments to address future uncertainties. 
 
 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Korb, J.E., M.T. Stoddard, and D.W. Huffman. 2020. Effectiveness of restoration treatments for reducing 
fuels and increasing understory diversity in shrubby mixed-conifer forests of the southern Rocky 
Mountains, USA. Forests, 11, 508.  
 
 
Contact: Mike Stoddard, Mike.Stoddard@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2. Repeat photos taken 
from alternative restoration 
treatments before treatment 
(2003), 5 years after treatments 
(2013) and 10 years after (2018). 
