The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of 
communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic 
issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Climate Change and Western Wildfires: 
The Science Supports Restoration with Climate Adaptation 
 
 
Introduction 
A new set of papers1 reviews the established science on wildfires and forest management. In the 
three papers, the authors summarized more than 1,000 published papers covering more than a 
century of research and observations across a vast range of western North American forests.  
 
These ambitious articles were inspired by the reality that wildfires and drought are now changing 
western North American forests at a magnitude and scale that jeopardizes ecological and social 
values. There is an urgent need to change current forest and wildfire management to better apply 
ecologically and scientifically credible approaches at a pace and scale that matches the scope of 
the problem.  
 
What Does the Science Say? 
• The seasonally dry forests of interior western North America have been shaped and 
maintained by low-severity and some high-severity fire through evolutionary time.  
• More than a century of human-induced fire exclusion has substantially altered fire regimes 
and forest conditions, resulting in forest densities up to 10 times that of historical densities, 
with unprecedented amounts of dead forest material that leave today’s forests vulnerable to 
fire and drought. 
• A warming climate exacerbates these changes, leading to contemporary high-severity fire 
patches that can be 4–10 times higher than that of historical fire occurrence.  
• Uncharacteristically large or abundant high-severity burn patches further reduce ecosystem 
resiliency in many forest types by converting forest to shrubland or grasses.  
• Comparisons of variable suppression strategies show that the national policies that favor 
active fire suppression methods often inadvertently defer fire risk into the future. Blanket 
policies of fire suppression do not allow for the use of low- to moderate-severity fires, 
burning under favorable conditions, that would facilitate the reduction of forest fuels and 
restoration to more resilient fire regimes.  
1 Collection of papers published on August 2, 2021 in Ecological Applications: 
•  Adapting western North American forests to climate change and wildfires: ten common questions 
•  Wildfire and climate change adaptation of western North American forests: a case for intentional management 
•  Evidence for widespread changes in the structure, composition, and fire regimes of western North American forests 

 
Forest Treatments that Effectively Increase Western Forest Resiliency 
• Thin dense forests to selectively remove some young trees from stands where forest 
densities exceed those with demonstrated resilience to fire and drought (frequent-fire 
forests). 
• Reduce fuels on the ground left over from thinning, either by biomass utilization or fire. 
• Use landscape planning to allow more wildfires to burn in backcountry settings, under 
favorable fuel and weather conditions, before or after peak fire season. 
• Revitalize Indigenous fire practices that have sustained forest health and resilience for 
centuries. 
• Allow fire to return as an ecological process to fire-adapted forests. 
 
Key Takeaways and Implications 
• Today’s wildfires are the result of human-induced fire exclusion, combined with climate 
change warming.  
• Pro-active, intentional forest management—which includes fuels reduction—is necessary to 
create and maintain sustainable western forests that are resilient to climate change.  
• Active forest management activities should be applied on a landscape scale and within a 
landscape context; treatments should not be limited to the wildland-urban interface, or WUI.  
• There are published articles that attempt to refute the findings of this large body of work and 
promote misinformation about active forest management. However, these papers and a large 
body of evidence illustrate that these articles include problems in methodology, analysis, 
and false conclusions.  
Contact: Tayloe Dubay, tayloe.dubay@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
A wildland firefighter lights a 
prescribed fire in a 
southwestern ponderosa pine 
forest that had been previously 
thinned. Every four years, 
understory fuels in this unit are 
burned to maintain healthy 
forest conditions and reduce 
the risk of unnaturally severe 
wildfire. Photo courtesy of ERI 
