The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of com-
munities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues 
related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Adapting western North American forests to climate change and wildfires:  
Ten common questions 
 
By Susan Prichard, Research Scientist, University of Washington 
Introduction 
Rapid climate change is bringing warmer, drier, and longer wildfire seasons to western North 
America, and wildfires have been increasing in severity and area-burned in recent decades. Through 
years of record-setting wildfires, the key ingredients to big fire years are clear—drought, tinder dry 
fuels, lightning ignitions, and escaped human-started fires followed by strong wind events. However, 
what—if anything—we can do about the worsening wildfire problem remains hotly debated in the 
popular media and a limited set of scientific literature.  
 
There is strong scientific evidence for why and how to adapt western forests to climate change 
and future wildfires. As part of an invited feature in the scientific journal Ecological Applications 
titled “Climate change and western wildfires,” Susan Prichard and coauthors addressed 10 common 
questions about adaptive forest and wildfire management.  
  
Question 1: Are the effects of fire exclusion overstated? If so, are treatments 
unwarranted and even counterproductive? 
There is strong and broad-scale scientific evidence that 20th-century fire exclusion has markedly 
changed the composition and structure of fire-prone forests of western North America and predisposes 
them to large and often more severe wildfires. See Hagmann et al. (2021) for careful documentation of 
the evidence for changes in forest condition and fire regimes.  
• Forests that were once characterized by dynamic patchworks of forest, woodlands, grasslands and 
shrublands in the early 20th-century gradually became more continuously covered in forest and 
densely stocked with fuels.  
• As a result, many western forests are indeed more 
vulnerable to wildfire and drought, particularly 
under a rapidly warming climate. 
 
Question 2: Is forest thinning alone sufficient 
to mitigate wildfire hazard?  
In historically dry, frequent-fire forests, thinning can 
reduce ladder fuels and make it safer to reintroduce 
fire. However, forest thinning is not appropriate in all 
forests and often isn’t effective on its own. Without 
associated reduction in surface fuels, many thinning 
projects effectively reduce crown fire hazard but still 
support high-intensity surface fires that contribute to 
high tree mortality in the event of a wildfire. 
 
 
September 2021 
Thinning treatments followed by prescribed fire (see 
above) effectively reduces ladder and surface fuels 
and lowers the risk of catastrophic wildfire. 

 
Question 3: Can forest thinning and prescribed burning solve the problem? 
Combined thinning and prescribed burning are often highly effective at mitigating the severity of 
subsequent wildfires. Prescribed burning, alone or in combination with mechanical thinning, not only 
makes fire-prone, dry forests more resilient to future wildfires but can also increase their resilience to 
drought, insects and diseases. In seasonally dry pine, mixed conifer, and oak forests woodlands, 
thinning and burning in partnership with local Indigenous knowledge and practice support culturally 
valued practices, traditions, livelihoods, and food and medicine security. However, the current scale 
and pace of these treatments do not match the scale required for western forests, and these fuel reduction 
treatments are not appropriate for all conditions or forest types (e.g., temperate rainforests or cold 
forests dominated by thin-barked conifers). 
 
Question 4: Should active forest management, including forest thinning, be 
concentrated in the wildland urban interface (WUI)?  
Prioritizing only the WUI for fuel reduction treatments is often too narrow in scope to address 
wildfire risk and forest health. There is increasing evidence that treating fuels across larger spatial 
extents in strategically planned locations, rather than immediately adjacent to WUI, can reduce risk to 
communities. Benefits of this strategy can include increased initial attack and short-term suppression 
effectiveness, reduced crown fire potential and ember production, reduced smoke impacts to 
communities, and increased forest resilience. Across complex forest landscapes of the western US, it is 
more effective to prioritize fuel treatments that maximize benefits across large areas and over long time 
frames, rather than constrain them to the WUI. 
 
Question 5: Can wildfires on their own do the work of fuel treatments?  
Escaped wildfires generally burn at the height of fire season under extreme weather conditions, often 
leading to explosive fire growth, leaving large patches of tree mortality. Although 2-3% of fire starts 
escape suppression, they account for over 90% of annual area burned in the US. Inadvertently, 
escaped wildfires are now a dominant change agent of western forests and are likely accelerating 
rates of climate-driven vegetation change. With few exceptions, the current approach to modern 
wildfire management in the US and Canada is initial attack of unplanned fire starts. However, 
expanding opportunities to manage wildfires under milder weather conditions holds promise. Some 
land managers—including those managing national parks and wilderness areas—have designated 
remote areas where most wildfires are allowed to burn under moderate fire weather and fuel 
conditions.  
 
Question 6: Is the primary objective of fuel reduction treatments to assist in future 
firefighting response and containment?  
Fuel treatments are not designed to prevent or stop fires but to moderate fire behavior when fire 
inevitably returns. However, there is a frequent misconception that fuel treatments should facilitate 
suppression and limit the size of wildfires. If fuel treatments simply assist fire suppression, then 
wildland fuels will continue to accumulate, creating even more hazardous conditions. However, if 
fuel treatments are designed such that the next wildfire can be allowed to burn with limited or no 
suppression, then three economic and ecological objectives can be achieved: reduced suppression 
costs and actions; management of future wildfires as effective fuel treatment maintenance; and 
favorable ecological outcomes in areas treated before wildfire. As the pace and scale of fuel 
treatments increases, emphasis on resilient forest structure and composition, long-term reduction of 
surface and canopy fuels, and adaptation to climate change are critical components of treatment 
objectives rather than creating conditions that are simply more conducive to fire suppression.  

 
Question 7: Do fuel treatments work under extreme fire weather?  
There is strong scientific evidence that even under extreme weather conditions, fuel treatments are 
effective at moderating fire severity across a range of forest types and wildfire events. Treatment 
areas within large fires are associated with increased conifer survival and reduced severity compared 
with adjacent, untreated areas. Past wildfires are also effective at mitigating wildfire severity. While 
fuel reduction treatments, 
including managed wildfires, are 
designed to mitigate future 
wildfire intensity and effects, 
they are not necessarily intended 
to impede fire spread or reduce 
fire size. Large fires have 
always been a part of fire-prone 
forests, and within large fire 
events, fuel treatments can allow 
fires to continue burning but 
mitigate fire severity and 
enhance the variability of fire 
effects. 
 
Question 8: Is the scale of the problem too great — can we ever catch up?  
There is strong scientific evidence that fuel reduction treatments, including prescribed burning, 
cultural burning, forest thinning combined with prescribed burning, and managed wildfires, are 
effective approaches for mitigating future fire severity. However, we can’t expect them to work if 
we are only applying them to a small percentage of western forest landscapes. In fact, recent analyses 
of fuel treatment effectiveness demonstrate that at landscape and regional scales, fuel treatments 
account for only a small fraction (~1%) of the area burned by wildfires. At this current pace and scale 
of treatment, wildfires may rarely encounter treated areas while the treatments are still potentially 
effective. There is no single management tool adequate to increase the resilience of western forests to 
wildfire. However, with expanded investment and with the use of managed wildfires, treatments can 
be used strategically to multiply their benefits and promote greater opportunities for applying wildland 
fire across landscapes.  
 
Question 9: Will planting more trees mitigate climate change in western forests?  
In fire-adapted dry pine and mixed-conifer forests, dense tree plantations are highly susceptible to 
future wildfires and drought. A promising alternative approach to retaining and sequestering carbon 
in dry, fire-prone forests is to thin forests and retain the larger, more fire-resistant trees (for example, 
ponderosa pine or western larch) to increase their productivity and improve their chances of survival 
from drought, insects, disease, and wildfires.  
 
Question 10: Is post-fire management needed or even ecologically justified? 
As more area is burned by wildfires, studies found a need to evaluate opportunities to foster greater 
resilience of these post-fire landscape. After over a century of fire exclusion, recent wildfires are 
generally not restoring climate and fire-resilient forest landscapes on their own. In patches of high 
tree mortality, accumulated wood from downed trees can create conditions for high-intensity reburn 
events that can kill young regenerating forests and delay forest recovery. Even where wildfire effects 
are variable, post-fire fuels reduction may be required to protect the remaining forest for future forest 
resilience to disturbance and climate change and to protect valued cultural resources.  

Conclusions and Management Recommendations 
During this time of rapid environmental change, the impacts of climatic changes on forests and their 
associated fire regimes cannot be overstated. Intentional management focused on adapting current 
forest conditions to a rapidly evolving future climate future climate is urgently needed.  
 
Although the management situation for western forests is daunting, review of the scientific 
literature offers clear guidance. Across a wide range of western forests, landscape-level treatment 
strategies, including use of managed wildfires and the revitalization of Indigenous burning practices, 
can promote resilient patchworks and reduce the extent of high-severity wildfires as well as insect 
and disease outbreaks. These recommendations are in close alignment with Indigenous knowledge, 
cultural resource values, and desired land management strategies.  
 
• In seasonally dry forests historically 
dominated by fire-resistant species, 
restoring open, fire-tolerant canopy 
structure and composition, favoring 
larger tree sizes, and reducing surface 
fuels can effectively mitigate 
subsequent wildfire and stabilize 
carbon stocks.  
• This restoration work, with ongoing 
maintenance by fire, can be done 
strategically across different spatial 
scales to better allow managed 
wildfire to appropriately work for 
added resiliency. In many instances, 
this will enable future wildfire events 
to further reinforce resilient forest 
structure and composition.  
• Actively suppressing fire is an active 
management decision that continues 
to promote surface and canopy fuel 
accumulation. While protection of 
communities and resources will 
always require suppression, 
landscape use of fire is needed to 
develop long-term resiliency. 
Continued forest infilling and fuel 
accumulation predisposes forests to 
high-severity fire when fire inevitably 
returns. 
• Given the urgent need for adaptive 
forest management in the 21st-century, an intentional merging of Indigenous and western 
knowledge is needed to guide future forest conditions and restore active fire regimes to western 
forests. 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following journal article: 
Prichard, S.J., P.F. Hessburg, R.K. Hagmann, N.A. Povak, S.Z. Dobrowski, M.D. Hurteau, V.R. Kane, R.E. 
Keane, L.N. Kobziar, C.A. Kolden, M. North, S.A. Parks, H.D. Safford, J.T. Stevens, L.L. Yocom, D.J. 
Churchill, R.W. Gray, D.W. Huffman, F.K. Lake, P. Khatri-Chhetri 2021. Adapting western North American 
forests to climate change and wildfires: ten common questions. Ecological Applications, doi:10.1002/eap.2433   
Contact: Amy Waltz, Amy.Waltz@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Conceptual diagram of low and moderate severity fire effects on post-
fire residual structure. Top: Frequent fire reduces surface and ladder 
fuels. Middle: Gradual accumulation of live and dead fuels between 
fires. Bottom: Conditions after prolonged fire exclusion. Forest are 
denser and more layered, and high-severity fire is likely. Credit: 
Robert Van Pelt 
