View this email in your browser
State of the science on western wildﬁres, forest
management and climate change
A new set of papers reviews the established science on wildﬁres and forest
management. In the three papers, the authors—which include several
ecologists from the ERI and NAU’s School of Forestry—summarized more than
1,000 published papers covering more than a century of research and
observations across a vast range of western North American forests. 
 
These ambitious articles were inspired by the reality that wildﬁres and drought
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

are now changing western North American forests at a magnitude and scale
that jeopardizes ecological and social values. There is an urgent need to
change current forest and wildﬁre management to better apply ecologically and
scientiﬁcally credible approaches at a pace and scale that matches the scope
of the problem. 
 
These papers review the strength of the science on the beneﬁts of adapting
ﬁre-excluded forests to a rapidly warming climate. The authors address 10
common questions, including whether management is needed after a wildﬁre,
or whether fuel treatments (thinning, prescribed burning) work under extreme
ﬁre weather. They also discuss the need to integrate western ﬁre science with
traditional ecological knowledge and Indigenous ﬁre uses that managed
western landscapes for thousands of years. 
 
Although climate change brings with it many uncertainties, the evidence
supporting intentional forest adaptation is strong and broad based. The authors
clearly demonstrate that lingering uncertainties about the future should no
longer paralyze actions that can be taken today to adapt forests and
communities to a warming climate and more ﬁre.
 
UPCOMING SEMINAR: Innovations in Forest Operations
and Biomass Utilization in the Southwest
Registration is now open for the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes
READ THE FACT SHEET
READ THE TOPICS PAPER

(SWERI) Wood Utilization Team in-person seminar, “Innovations in Forest
Operations and Biomass Utilization in the Southwest.” The event will take
place November 17–18 at the Hotel Andaluz in downtown Albuquerque, New
Mexico. Over 20 presentations will cover topics including value-added products
from small-diameter wood, innovations in forest operations, railroad
transportation of forest products, Forest Service and state agency timber
contracting, and issues facing Southwest forestry contractors. Please visit our
website (https://eri.nau.edu/wood-utilization-seminar/) for registration and
additional information. We hope to see you in November!
 
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
REGISTER NOW

You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
