 
 
Leroux fire site of noxious weed research at ERI 
By BONNIE STEVENS 
Special to the Sun 
06/01/2003 
There is a carpet of green life among the 
charred, dead trees that remain in the 
burned area of the Leroux fire of June 2001.  
Much of it is Dalmatian toadflax, a plant in 
the snapdragon family that shoots up 
multiple stems of waxy leaves with blooms 
of medium-sized yellow flowers.  
Many consider it to be attractive, until they 
learn more about it.  
Toadflax is a noxious weed. It has been 
detrimental to rangelands of the Northwest 
and Canada because it changes the makeup 
of the ecosystem. It out-competes native 
grasses and forbs, creates a monoculture of 
itself and is indigestible to cattle. It is 
extremely prevalent in the ponderosa pine 
forest around Flagstaff.  
Toadflax, or Linaria dalmatica, was 
brought to North America from the 
Mediterranean region, between what was 
Yugoslavia and Iran, in the 1890s for its 
ornamental qualities.  
 
Courtesy Photo Northern Arizona University forestry 
student Rita Reisor will be studying toadflax in more 
than 300 research plots on the San Francisco Peaks 
this summer.  
Ecological Restoration Institute graduate student and research assistant Rita Reisor, 26, 
will warn you that this plant is extremely persistent and adaptable.  
It has a very long tap root and a broad-reaching lateral root system up to three meters 
long. It continues to grow and bloom from spring to fall. One plant with 10 stems can 
produce half a million seeds!  
"It's extremely difficult to get rid of and it loves disturbance," she said.  
In fact, the more disturbance, the better, is what she's finding from her research.  

Reisor is studying how toadflax responds to wildfire, especially severe wildfire.  
Her research takes her to the areas that burned the hottest in the 1,200-acre Leroux Fire. 
She gathers data on the vegetation in more than 300 plots on the San Francisco Peaks.  
"We can guess why the weed does so well after an intensely hot wildfire. It could be 
because of the lack of competition from other vegetation, it could be because there's more 
sunlight after a severe fire or it could be a change in the nutrients in the soil," she said.  
Funded by the Forest Service's Rocky Mountain Research Station in collaboration with 
Northern Arizona University's ERI and School of Forestry, Reisor's research began last 
summer after the monsoon rains began. She expects that her three-year project will more 
clearly identify the effects of wildfire on this exotic species and help land managers more 
successfully control toadflax by knowing where the plant is most likely to start growing.  
For homeowners who want to stop this invasive species in their yards, Reisor says keep 
after it.  
"The best thing to do is pull it and dig out as much of the root as possible. It has a huge 
carbohydrate reserve in its roots and will keep sprouting, so you have to stay on it until it 
has no more energy to resprout."  
Reisor's drive is in ecological restoration.  
"I hope my career will focus on two things: controlling exotic species through education, 
research and management practices; and promoting native plant growth."  
She earned her undergraduate degree in environmental science at Concordia University in 
Austin, Texas.  
"I came to NAU because I was looking for one of the best schools in fire ecology for my 
graduate work."  
Bonnie Stevens is the media coordinator for NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute.  
Photo captions:  
Forestry graduate student Rita Reisor will be studying toadflax in more than 300 research 
plots on the San Francisco Peaks this summer.  
Toadflax grows fast and strong. This plant growing in the severely burned area of the 
Leroux fire spread approximately two feet in one growing season. It is now more than 
five feet across and nearly 4 feet high.  
 
