View this email in your browser
An illustrative line of evidence: What photos can teach us
about ecosystem change and restoration
Scientists and land managers use many different lines of evidence, including
dendrochronology, forest structure data, and historical documents and
photographs, to reconstruct a landscape’s historical forest conditions and ﬁre
regimes. One line of direct evidence, historical photos, is qualitative by nature
but provides valuable visual information of conditions before the effects of ﬁre
exclusion changed forests throughout much of the Southwest. 
 
While historical photos provide an abundance of historical information about a
place, they represent a snapshot in time. Repeat photography can offer visual
evidence of tree encroachment on a landscape scale. Additionally, repeat
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

photos can show tree density, fuel loads, and understory response before and
after restoration treatments and are an effective communication tool to reach
diverse audiences.
 
In recent years, the ERI has compiled historical-current photos and repeat
photos of before and after restoration treatments to use as visual
communication tools. We often receive requests from partners for these
photos, and we are pleased to share that they are now available on our
website.
Each set of photos is taken from the same photo point and the photos are
overlaid to be interactive; they allow you to slide back and forth from the
“before” (or historical) photo to the “after” (or present-day image). 
In addition to our photo blog, we also recommend reading Larissa Yocom
Kent’s 2014 working paper, An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction
Methods, for a detailed review of the strengths and weaknesses of the methods
used, including historical and repeat photography, to reconstruct historical ﬁre
regimes.
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
ERI PHOTO SERIES BLOG
READ THE WORKING PAPER

Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
