Implications for Tribal Forest Management  
Under New Federal Legislative Directions
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
November 2021

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been significantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: Photo by Marshall Masayesva, Ancestral Lands Hopi
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: November 2021
Author: Jonathan Martin, Director of the Native American Forest and Rangeland Management 
Program, ERI
Reviewers: Alicia Bell-Sheeter, Office of Tribal Relations, USDA Forest Service; Jim Durglo, 
Intertribal Timber Council; Ian Fox, Forest Health and Cooperative Forestry, USDA Forest 
Service 
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Martin, J. 2021. Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative 
Directions. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 15 p.
Northern Arizona University is an equal opportunity provider.
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from 
discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten 
Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-5964 
(TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. A portion of the research was also supported by 
funding provided by the Arizona Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF)

Table of Contents
Executive Summary . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Introduction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
History of Tribal Forest Management in the United States . .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 4
Tribal Forests . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Federal Policies Relevant to Tribal Forest Management. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 7
Tribal Forest Management Policies . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Additional Federal Policies Affecting Tribal Forest Management. .  . . 9
Implementing Cross-Boundary Forest Management Projects  
with Tribes. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
The Future of Tribal Forest Management. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary 
In recent decades, catastrophic wildfires and other disturbances like insect or disease outbreaks have increasingly 
crossed from federally managed lands onto tribal lands, causing damage to and loss of valuable land and resources. 
These recent events necessitate cross-boundary approaches and shared stewardship to facilitate restoration and 
resilience.
Recent federal legislative directions in the US have opened up new opportunities for federally recognized tribes 
to manage their own forest resources, as well as share the stewardship of forest management on federal lands. 
These opportunities are the result of a series of legislative actions by the US Congress that not only address the 
management of tribes’ forest resources but also their standing as equal partners with federal land management 
agencies. Recent federal legislative actions also reflect changes to forest management policies and frameworks that 
promote shared stewardship across jurisdictional boundaries to facilitate benefits over larger landscapes. These 
directions provide tribes the opportunity to be more active participants in the management of forest resources 
outside of reservation boundaries and to have a greater influence in decisions that determine land management 
directions.
The ability to navigate and apply recent federal legislative authorities and regulations requires a solid understanding 
of the history and purpose of legislative actions as they pertain to tribal forest management. This white paper 
provides an overview of relevant federal and tribal forest management history and policies, as well as a summary of 
how to identify, plan for, and implement cross-boundary restoration treatments on tribal and federal agency lands.  
Tribes and tribal forest managers are in the strongest position they have ever been to pursue cross-boundary forest 
restoration projects. Recent legislative actions have allowed tribes to gain greater management control of their 
forest resources, as well as pursue treatments beyond reservation boundaries to address resource concerns of cultural 
significance. This is crucial to the survival and sustainability of tribes’ identities, cultures, and histories.
Logs are piled into decks from a northern Arizona forest restoration project. The timber will be used for the 
“Wood for Life” project, which is a collaborative program comprised of a network of organizations working to 
provide a sustainable source of firewood to local tribes through forest restoration efforts. Photo courtesy of the 
USDA Forest Service

Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions      3
Introduction
In recent decades, catastrophic wildfires have increasingly crossed from federally managed lands onto tribal lands, 
causing damage to and loss of valuable land and resources. For example, New Mexico’s Las Conchas Fire ignited on 
June 26, 2011 on the Santa Fe National Forest and burned more than 150,000 acres. The wind-driven fire spread 
onto Santa Clara Pueblo land, burning 16,000 acres in the Pueblo’s sacred watershed, which led to severe flooding 
months later in August 2011. The Pueblo is still recovering and is receiving substantial funding from several federal 
agencies to mitigate the threat of continued flooding. Another notable fire was the 2012 Little Bear Fire near 
Ruidoso, New Mexico, which burned from the Lincoln National Forest onto Mescalero Apache Tribe land and 
caused damage to the watershed that supports the tribe. Other disturbances such as insect or disease outbreaks that 
have originated on federally managed lands have impacted tribal lands and resources, as well. These recent events 
highlight the landscape-scale effects of disturbances that cross jurisdictional boundaries and necessitate cross-
boundary approaches and shared stewardship to facilitate restoration and resilience.
The majority of tribal lands are held in trust status by the federal government. The US Department of Interior 
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) historically has been responsible for the management of tribal forests and other 
natural resources on tribal lands. As such, tribal forest resources are managed according to the same regulatory 
requirements as federal lands, such as those managed by the US Department of Agriculture Forest Service or the 
US Department of Interior Bureau of Land Management (BLM). However, in recognition (25 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 163) of the unique status of tribal lands, separate regulations have been enacted. These apply 
to tribal forest resources that meet federal requirements but also acknowledge key tribal policies, such as the 
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (1975). These regulations are specific to tribal forest 
management and acknowledge the sovereignty of tribal nations while embracing the trust relationship that exists 
between federal and tribal governments.
Recent federal legislative directions in the US have opened up new opportunities for federally recognized tribes, 
 to manage their own forest resources, as well as share the stewardship of forest management on federal lands. 
These opportunities are the result of a series of legislative actions by the US Congress that not only address the 
management of tribes’ forest resources but also their standing as equal partners with federal land management 
agencies. Recent federal legislative actions also reflect changes to forest management policies and frameworks 
that promote shared stewardship across jurisdictional boundaries to facilitate benefits over larger landscapes. This 
further provides tribes the opportunity to be more active participants in the management of forest resources outside 
of reservation boundaries and to have a greater influence in decisions that determine land management directions.
Recent legislative directions have placed tribes in a strong position to guide their own forest resource management, 
as well as the management of adjacent Forest Service and BLM lands that affect tribal resources.1, 2 For example, 
tribes now have the ability to assume management of their forest resources from the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA), the authority to propose treatments on adjacent federal lands, and the ability to enter into “638 agreements” 
with the Forest Service to implement treatments under the Tribal Forest Protection Act (TFPA) passed in 2004. 
Collaboration between tribes and federal land management agencies will require a full understanding of the intent 
of relevant legislative actions and their associated authorities and regulations. A greater understanding will also 
1	 “A federally recognized tribe is an American Indian or Alaska Native tribal entity that is recognized as having a government-to-
government relationship with the United States, with the responsibilities, powers, limitations, and obligations attached to that 
designation, and is eligible for funding and services from the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Furthermore, federally recognized tribes are 
recognized as possessing certain inherent rights of self-government (i.e., tribal sovereignty) and are entitled to receive certain federal 
benefits, services, and protections because of their special relationship with the United States.” (Bureau of Indian Affairs:  
https://www.bia.gov/frequently-asked-questions). 
2	 Eligibility for tribes is listed at 25 US Code 46 Sec. 5304, and a list of federally recognized tribes is published annually per 25 US Code 
479a.

4	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
increase the efficiency and productivity of collaborative efforts and lead to healthier forest conditions for the benefit 
of tribal and non-tribal communities. 
The ability to navigate and apply recent federal legislative authorities and regulations requires a solid understanding 
of the history and purpose of legislative actions as they pertain to tribal forest management. This white paper 
provides an overview of relevant federal and tribal forest management history and policies, as well as a summary of 
how to identify, plan for, and implement cross-boundary restoration treatments on tribal and federal agency lands.  
History of Tribal Forest Management in the United States 
Tribal Forests 
According the BIA, there are currently 574 federally recognized tribes in the US. There are 310 reservations with 
forested land in 24 states (Black 2016). Approximately 10 million of those acres are considered “commercial” 
timber or woodlands (Black 2016). The combined acreages and distribution of tribal lands is significant relative to 
lands managed by federal agencies. For example, in the Forest Service’s Rocky Mountain Region (Region 2) and 
Southwestern Region (Region 3), there are 33 federally recognized tribes across more than 30 million acres. In 
Region 3 alone, there are 10 million acres of forested land held in trust by tribes (Figure 1). The Forest Service, in 
comparison, manages approximately 60 million acres in Regions 2 and 3. Across the entire US, the Forest Service 
and tribes share approximately 2,100 miles of boundary, and there are increasing examples of wildfires spreading 
from Forest Service lands to tribal lands, putting tribal forest assets at risk (Nie 2008). 
Figure 1. Map of Arizona and New Mexico with Forest Service, BLM, Park Service and tribal lands.  
Map by Joe Crouse, ERI

Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions      5
The relationship of tribes to the land is highly significant. In the past, tribes used ceded lands in a seasonal cycle, 
such as traveling to places with available food sources and visiting sites with ties to creation stories and places 
where significant events took place during the course of the year. The land is sacred to tribes because of its ancestral 
ties; countless generations of indigenous relatives have become part of the land itself. 
In the present day, the values and uses of natural resources that exist on tribal forest lands are still highly 
significant and include economic, social, cultural, spiritual, and traditional activities that support both tribal 
communities and individual tribal members. These natural resources are often the first place tribes turn 
to address community needs. For example, on the Navajo Nation, forest resources provide wood products, 
firewood, ceremonial needs, and habitat for wildlife (Yazzie 1987). Tribes also rely on natural resources located 
on federally managed lands. For example, in Arizona, the Apache people cherish Emory oak trees, which 
occur in groves on the Coconino and Tonto national forests. Emory oaks have been declining in recent years, 
which has initiated collaborative efforts to monitor and restore the Emory oaks by multiple Apache tribes 
and federal land management agencies (Lyndon et al. 2021). Thus, the need for federal legislative actions 
that address the management of natural resources with important values and uses for tribes, as well as ensures 
that tribes are equipped to manage these natural resources for the sustainability of tribal communities is of 
paramount importance.
Assimilation (1870s–1930s)
In 1887, Congress passed the General Allotment Act, also known as the Dawes Act, which allowed the 
government to break up tribal land into parcels and apportion them to individual Indian landowners. 
This effectively weakened tribal structure and opened up vast areas of land for white settlement. The 
act was repealed in 1934, but by that time the government had stripped Native Americans of two-
thirds of their land, or about 90 million acres.   
Self-Rule or Reorganization (1930s–1950s)
A 1928 report revealed shocking conditions on tribal lands—a direct result of the Dawes Act—and 
spurred demands for reform. The Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 was designed as a response and 
focused on promoting tribal self-governing powers. It ended the allotment of tribal lands, recognized 
tribal governments, and encouraged tribal economic growth.
Termination (assimilation) (1950s–1960s)
This era rolled back many of the gains achieved in the self-rule era. It is called the Termination Era 
because the federal government aimed to terminate the special trustee relationship tribes held with 
the US. This was achieved through relocation initiatives that encouraged tribal members to move 
to urban area for economic opportunities. But as a result, these initiatives fostered high levels of 
unemployment and poverty in Native communities.
Self-Determination/Self-Governance (1960s–present)
The sweeping Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s ushered in a new wave of tribal leadership, giving 
tribes greater autonomy over their governments, programs and services, and natural resources. Since 
1975, the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act has given tribes a legal framework 
to exercise their sovereign powers (Wilkins 2010).
Box 1. Four Recent Eras of Federal Tribal Policy

6	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Multiple principles guide the management of tribal 
forests and have evolved from the key eras of federal tribal 
policy (Box 1). First, the US federal government has a 
trust responsibility to tribes, which obligates the federal 
government to act in the best interests of tribes and tribal 
members. More recently, the concept of tribal sovereignty 
has been prominent in federal policy and direction and 
acknowledges that tribes have a right to govern themselves 
and regulate their internal affairs, including the regulation 
of natural resources. Another key principle is that of 
government-to-government relations, which ensures 
that negotiations among government entities must be 
conducted with full recognition of each government’s 
sovereignty. In combination, these principles have shaped 
recent tribal forest management practices and policy 
directions. 
A number of key federal policies have shaped tribal forest 
management and are detailed in the next section. However, 
a few are highlighted here as catalysts for major changes in 
tribal forest management practices. In particular, the passage 
of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance 
Act (ISDEAA) of 1975 marked a new era in federal tribal 
policy that has had reverberating impacts still recognized 
today. The ISDEAA was the first federal policy to give 
tribes the ability to enter into contracts to perform services 
previously performed by entities like the BIA or Indian 
Health Services. In the context of forest management, 
ISDEAA precipitated the development of tribal forestry 
programs for tribes that wanted to enter into contracts with 
the BIA to perform forest management responsibilities. 
Prior to the passage of ISDEAA, forest management on tribal lands was largely driven by the BIA, which has 
a long history of tribal forest management. The BIA Division of Forestry and Wildland Fire Management is 
comprised of several programs, including inventory and planning, forest development, woodland management, 
timber management, fuels management, and wildland fire management. These programs are funded through 
annual congressional appropriations. Prior to ISDEAA, tribal forest management under the BIA was based on 
the principle of sustained-yield to produce jobs and revenue from timber sales to tribal and non-tribal entities. 
Although the jobs and revenue generated by timber sales from tribal lands represented an important source of 
income for tribes, there were questions about whether the rates that the BIA negotiated for tribes were sufficient or 
whether tribal forests should be managed for other uses such as spiritual and cultural values. 
Another key act was the 2004 Tribal Forest Protection Act (TFPA) (25 US Code 3115a), which allows tribes 
to propose projects on adjacent federal forest or range lands managed by the Forest Service or BLM to address 
threats to tribal trust resources from wildland fire or other disturbances that might cross over from adjacent federal 
lands. The importance of cross-boundary, landscape-scale management is further articulated in the Forest Service’s 
Federal government’s trust responsibility
•	
Obligation to act in the best interests of 
the tribe and tribal members.
•	
Ensure sound management of tribes’ 
natural resources.
Tribal sovereignty
•	
The right of tribes to govern 
themselves.
•	
Tribal governments have the 
same rights as federal and state 
governments to regulate their internal 
affairs. This includes natural resource 
management.
Government-to-government relations
•	
Tribal governments have same status 
as state governments.
•	
Negotiations are conducted in full 
recognition of each government’s 
sovereignty.
Note: Per Executive Order 13175 (November 6, 2000) and 
Presidential Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and 
Strengthening Nation-to-Nations Relationships (January 26, 
2021): Tribes are sovereign governments recognized under 
the Constitution of the United States.
Federal and Tribal Relations Principles

Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions      7
2018 Shared Stewardship Initiative (USDA 2018). Shared Stewardship is a framework for collaborative forest 
management that emphasizes “doing the right work in the right places at the right scale” and “using all available 
tools for active management.” It builds on the foundation of the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management 
Strategy and the concept of “all lands, all hands” management by acknowledging that landscapes do not always 
align with jurisdictional boundaries. In recent years, the parallel efforts of the TFPA with Shared Stewardship 
encapsulates tribal and federal land management’s mutual desire to restore forest landscapes across boundaries for 
the benefits they provide to communities while reducing the risk of wildland fire and disease. 
With new opportunities available, tribes are taking an ever-increasing role in the management of forest resources, 
not only within their reservation boundaries but also on adjacent federal lands. The combined impacts of recent 
federal forest management principles and practices have the opportunity to shape current and future tribal forest 
management policy. A historical review of significant legislative actions and an assessment of the guidelines for 
their implementation will provide a clearer understanding of their intent and reveal some best practices for on-the-
ground planning and implementation.
Federal Policies Relevant to Tribal Forest Management
Tribal Forest Management Policies
The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975 (Public Law 93-638)
The passage of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA) marks the beginning of 
the self-determination era of federal tribal policy (Box 1). The self-determination era acknowledges tribes’ abilities 
to self-govern and manage existing federal programs that provide services to tribes and individual tribal members. 
At the same time, the passage of the self-determination act codifies the federal government’s trust responsibility, 
and also provides a definition of tribes3 and tribal entities.4 
 
With respect to forest management, the ISDEAA opened the door for tribes to directly take the lead on tribal 
resource management rather than the BIA. Although tribes are able to assume management of federal programs 
under ISDEAA, the BIA retains the responsibilities necessary to meet its federal trust obligations to tribes and 
individual tribal members, such as approval of environmental clearance documents, land management plans, 
issuance of use permits on tribal lands, coordination with other federal agencies, and administration of revenues 
generated from natural resources, including forest resources.
The ISDEAA also established self-determination contracts, commonly referred to as “638 contracts,” which 
provide tribes the ability to assume management of federal programs, such as those under the BIA, including forest 
management programs. These contracts are named after the public law number they reference and allow tribes to 
operate federal programs, functions, services, or activities. Additionally, 638 contracts enable tribes to contract with 
the BIA using existing resources, such as program funding, facilities, and equipment. These contracts include common 
contract requirements such as: scope of work, funding levels, denial and appeal processes, compliance and monitoring 
specifications, facilities and equipment requirements, and federal actions available to address non-compliance.
3	 25 US Code 46 Sec. 5304: “ … any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native 
village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (85 Stat. 688) 
[43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.], which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians 
because of their status as Indians.” (https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:25%20section:5304%20edition:prelim))
4	 25 US Code 46 Sec 5304: The “recognized governing body of any Indian tribe; any legally established organization of Indians which 
is controlled, sanctioned, or chartered by such governing body or which is democratically elected by the adult members of the Indian 
community to be served by such organization and which includes the maximum participation of Indians in all phases of its activities …” 
(https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:25%20section:5304%20edition:prelim))

8	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Since 1975, ISDEAA has been amended several times and has been used as a fundamental tool for tribes to address 
their needs and goals. Numerous legislative actions have since referenced ISDEAA with respect to definition of tribes 
and tribal entities, the federal trust responsibility, government-to-government relationships, and the sovereignty of 
tribal governments. The influence of the ISDEAA on federal tribal policy is far-reaching. It is a benchmark that has 
been favorable to tribes and as such, tribes rely on it to address their needs and goals for forest management.
The National Indian Forest Resources Management Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-630)
The passage of the National Indian Forest Resources Management Act was intended to address limited capacity 
in staffing, funding, and management of tribal forestry programs. It required the BIA to establish a funding 
mechanism for tribal forestry programs using BIA appropriations and mandated the BIA to use 638 contracts as 
the mechanism for implementing tribal forestry programs for tribes interested in pursuing that option. Facilities 
and equipment were also available for inclusion in these contracts.
The act’s directives are codified in 25 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Chapter 33. These regulations provide 
specific guidance for federal management of tribal forests, definitions for the terms “Indian Tribe” and “Indian 
Forestland,” the establishment of education programs, minimal professional staffing levels, and the administration 
of revenues generated from the use of tribal forest resources.
The act also established the Indian Forest Management Assessment Team (IFMAT). This team conducts assessments 
of Indian forests and forest management in the US every 10 years and generates a report to Congress. Currently, 
IFMAT IV is conducting its third-party independent assessment. Previous IFMAT assessments5 have been used 
5	 IFMAT reports and periodic assessments on Indian forest lands:  https://www.itcnet.org/issues_projects/issues_2/forest_management/
assessment.html
The Reserve Treaty Rights Lands (RTRL) is a funding program within the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
“that enables tribes to participate in collaborative projects with non-tribal landowners to enhance the 
health and resilience of priority tribal natural resources at high risk to wildland fire” (BIA 2015). These 
ancestral priority resources may not be within reservation boundaries but may be significant to tribes 
for cultural, spiritual, hunting, fishing and gathering purposes.  
Administered by the Fuels Management Program within the BIA’s Division of Forestry and Wildland 
Fire Management, allocations are determined with a fire risk assessment process and considerations 
for a BIA region’s capacity for developing and completing collaborative projects with federal and other 
land management agencies. Based on these criteria, funding is made available to tribes to pursue 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments on non-tribal, federal lands (excluding private lands) to protect 
resources of critical interest.
The program is intended to enhance tribal capacities for pursuing restoration treatments in a 
collaborative manner and to meet federal trust obligations for the management of critical tribal 
resources. It also acknowledges tribes’ ancestral rights to non-tribal lands and their desire to be active 
participants in the management of those resources. It provides a unique opportunity for tribes to 
address their concerns and to contribute to the shared stewardship of the landscape.
Box 2. Reserve Treaty Rights Lands 

Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions      9
to justify funding and staffing increases and the need for more professionally trained tribal foresters. It also provides 
tribes with a means of advancing further legislation intended to improve the management of tribal forestland.
The Tribal Forest Protection Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-278)
The Tribal Forest Protection Act (TFPA) of 2004 provides tribes the authority to propose projects on Forest 
Service and BLM forested lands adjacent to their respective reservations. The TFPA was passed in response to 18 
wildland fires in the summer of 2003 that originated on federal land and spread to tribal lands. The fires resulted 
in major damages and significant costs to tribes and individual tribal members. The legislation was supported by 
the Intertribal Timber Council, Council of Energy Resource Tribes, Tule River Tribe of California, Viejas Band 
of Kumeyaay Indians of California, Mescalero Apache Nation of New Mexico, and the Jicarilla Apache Nation of 
New Mexico.
One of the mechanisms that allows tribes to enter into project agreements under TFPA with the Forest Service and 
BLM are 638 contracts. The Forest Service does not currently have authority to enter into 638 agreements outside 
of an approved TFPA proposal. However, because 638 contracts, also known as self-determination contracts, are a 
type of contract only available to tribes and not other entities like states, they are often used to implement TFPA 
projects. No federal funding has been appropriated for TFPA to accomplish the work proposed by tribes. The 
act outlines the types of activities that are eligible, as well as a process for tribes to submit a proposal. The Forest 
Service has established procedures for implementing TFPA proposals in its Renewable Resources Handbook, 
Chapter 60 – Stewardship Contracting.
Additional Federal Policies Affecting Tribal Forest Management 
Additional legislative actions not specific to tribes have also affected tribal forest management and highlight an 
increasing emphasis on cross-boundary management and shared stewardship of landscapes.  
The Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-148)
Notably, the 108th US Congress, which passed the TFPA, also passed the Healthy Forest Restoration Act 
(HFRA). The purpose of the HFRA was to advance hazardous fuel reduction on federal lands, as well as assist 
communities-at-risk from wildfire in reducing hazardous fuels. The HFRA references the ISDEAA to define 
tribes and includes tribes as part of multi-party monitoring efforts. Section 303 of HFRA—Watershed Forestry 
Assistance—includes a section on tribal watershed forestry assistance and is the first mention of stewardship to 
address watershed technical assistance to tribes. The inclusion of this provision further highlights the growing 
emphasis on cross-boundary management to enhance both ecosystem and watershed health through the reduction 
of catastrophic fire risk.  
The Agriculture Improvement Act (or Farm Bill) of 2018 (Public Law 115-334)
Another notable piece of legislation was the 2018 Agriculture Improvement Act, commonly known as the Farm 
Bill. With respect to tribes, the 2018 Farm Bill further expanded the potential for cross-boundary management 
by allowing the Forest Service to enter into 638 agreements with tribes to pursue forest and range management 
activities on Forest Service lands under an approved TFPA proposal using TFPA guidelines. The 2018 Farm Bill 
authorizes the Forest Service to pursue demonstration projects using 638 contract authorities (PL 115-334 Sec. 
8703). The Farm Bill uses TFPA and Forest Service guidance for Stewardship Contracting for project criteria. The 
guidance for implementing TFPA is critical for the 638 agreement proposal processes. 

10	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
The 2018 Farm Bill also expands to tribes and counties 
the use of Good Neighbor Authority (GNA) (PL 115-334 
Sec. 8624), which allows the Forest Service to enter into 
formal agreements with other land management entities to 
increase the potential for cross-boundary collaboration. The 
expansion of GNA to tribes further increases Forest Service 
capacity to develop cross-boundary projects while meeting 
local and rural community needs. The opportunity for tribes 
to use GNA is also significant in that it expands eligibility 
to tribes and counties and acknowledges the sovereignty 
of tribal governments and their abilities to manage tribal 
forestry programs. At the same time, there is a lack of 
awareness of the opportunities presented by GNA within 
tribes, as well as a lack of financial incentive for tribes to use 
GNA (Harris 2020). The 2018 Farm Bill did not provide 
tribes the ability to retain revenue generated from these 
projects for future conservations efforts. There is proposed 
legislation attempting to address this disparity. 
These legislative actions have increased opportunities 
for tribes to pursue collaborative, cross-boundary forest 
management projects with federal land management 
agencies. These legislative actions also illustrate increasing 
opportunities for federal entities, such as the Forest Service 
to engage in cross-boundary management to meet the goals 
of shared stewardship. 
Implementing Cross-Boundary Forest Management Projects with Tribes 
With these new legislative actions, there is a need to explain how their associated authorities can be used to 
implement forest management projects on tribal lands, as well as on bordering or adjacent federal lands that might 
impact tribal forests and resources. This section provides an overview of how to use recent authorities—specifically 
638 agreements—to implement tribal forest management projects. 
The guidelines for implementing 638 agreements within the Forest Service are currently in draft form. In early 2021, 
the Forest Service conducted workshops in partnership with the Intertribal Timber Council (ITC) to train and 
educate tribal and agency staff interested in pursuing 638 demonstration projects. When the ISDEEA was passed, 
the BIA engaged in demonstration projects to develop specific guidelines for contracting federal programs. The same 
approach is being applied to establish the use of 638 agreement between tribes and the Forest Service. Tribal forest 
demonstration projects will be critical in determining the final guidelines for implementing 638 agreements.  
Tribes are encouraged to submit TFPA proposals and request 638 agreements as a tool to meet cross-boundary 
forest management objectives. Any 638 agreement with the Forest Service must first meet TFPA criteria and be 
done under a TFPA proposal, which can be a limitation. “The Best Practices Guide to Execute a USDA Forest 
Service 638 Agreement Under the Tribal Forest Protection Act” is currently in draft form as of August 2020. 
Each 638 Agreement will be comprised of:
Required:
•	
Cover Sheet (FS Form in draft awaiting 
OMB Approval)
•	
638 Template Provisions
•	
Scope of Work
•	
Financial Plan/Budget (recommend 
using SF-424A)
•	
TFPA Proposal with approval letter
Optional:
•	
Tribal Resolution
•	
Maps
•	
Other attachments necessary to 
provide information required by the 
Tribal Cooperator for the best outcome 
of the project 
* Found on p. 5 of the draft 638 agreement best practices 
guide published in August 2020.
Box 3: Elements of a 638 Agreement  
with the Forest Service*

Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions      11
Once a tribe submits a proposal, the Forest Service or BLM has 120 days to deny or approve the proposal. If the 
proposal is denied, the federal agency must provide reasons for the denial, propose corrective actions to address 
the denial, and enter into consultation on how to protect the tribal resources of concern. When a federal agency 
is evaluating a proposal, they may give special consideration to tribal interests,6 such as cultural, archeological, 
historic, or biological issues or features unique to tribes.
The authority to approve a TFPA project using a 638 agreement has been delegated to regional foresters within 
the Forest Service. Because TFPA was intended to promote cross-boundary collaboration between tribes and the 
Forest Service, project identification, development, and planning is best initiated at the forest or district level. 
Furthermore, the contractual and administrative requirements of managing a TFPA project must be considered. 
This makes early consultation on project proposals essential.
The ability of tribes to pursue a 638 agreement to implement TFPA projects is a new—and potentially confusing—
method to pursue cross-boundary restorations projects. Tribes have past experience using 638 contracts with the 
BIA. These contracts between tribes and the BIA included access to existing funding, facilities, and equipment. 
However, 638 agreements between the Forest Service and tribes do not come with funding, facilities, or equipment, 
6	  Special considerations in the statute:
(A) 	the status of the Indian tribe as an Indian tribe;
(B) 	 the trust status of the Indian forest land or rangeland of the Indian tribe;
(C) 	the cultural, traditional, and historical affiliation of the Indian tribe with the land subject to the proposal;
(D) 	the treaty rights or other reserved rights of the Indian tribe relating to the land subject to the proposal;
(E) 	the indigenous knowledge and skills of members of the Indian tribe;
(F) 	 the features of the landscape of the land subject to the proposal, including watersheds and vegetation types;
(G) 	the working relationships between the Indian tribe and Federal agencies in coordinating activities affecting the land subject to the 
proposal; and
(H) 	the access by members of the Indian tribe to the land subject to the proposal.
Wood from a meadow restoration project near Hart Prairie, north of Flagstaff, Arizona. It will be transported and 
distributed to regional tribes for the “Wood for Life” project. Photo courtesy of the USDA Forest Service

12	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
at least at the time of this report. Because many tribal 
forest management programs are fairly new and face 
organizational issues, such as limited staffing and funding, 
the lack of funding associated with 638 agreements with 
the Forest Service may limit tribes’ ability to pursue TFPA 
projects. Furthermore, there may be more critical issues 
within their reservation boundaries that are a higher priority. 
There is concern that 638 agreements for TFPA projects 
dilutes the intent of the ISDEAA and self-determination. 
Although TFPA allows tribes to pursue projects beyond their 
boundaries, the use of 638 agreements to facilitate this may 
not be entirely in line with the policies of self-determination. 
The use of 638 authorities to enter into an agreement, which 
is not specific to the goals of ISDEEA, may introduce the 
idea of using these agreements in a manner that disregards 
the fundamental principles of federal Indian policy such as: 
sovereignty, government-to-government relations, and the 
federal government’s trust obligations.  
Another challenge is that Forest Service employees, without 
a strong understanding of federal tribal policy and a lack of clear, finalized guidelines, may be uncertain about how 
to use 638 agreements. The ability to use 638 agreements is also challenging for tribal forest managers who are 
more familiar with BIA processes for 638 contracting. Tribal programs have the responsibility to propose TFPA 
projects, and so the scope of these efforts is not always clear and may not be in line with tribal priorities. A shared 
understanding of management objectives developed from collaborative efforts between tribes and the Forest 
Service increases the chances of successful use of 638 agreements in the future.  
Any successful TFPA project using 638 agreements will require stronger relationships between federal agency staff 
and tribal foresters. Tribes have the responsibility to initiate TFPA proposals and thus, there is a need for greater 
communication between tribes and federal agencies early in planning phases to identify projects of mutual benefit 
to the tribes and the agency that can also increase shared stewardship of the landscape. 
The Future of Tribal Forest Management 
Tribal forest managers have an expanded opportunity with recent federal legislative directions to pursue cross-
boundary forest management projects that protect their valuable forest resources both within and outside tribal 
reservation boundaries. These forest resources are critical to tribes’ sustainability and provide economic, cultural, 
historical, and biological benefits for tribes and individual tribal members. Additionally, these cross-boundary 
projects can provide benefits for adjacent federal, state, local, and private land managers. 
This ability to pursue cross-boundary treatments is the result of decades of legislative actions that can be traced to 
the passage of the Indian Self-Determination and Indian Education Act. Most recently, these legislative directions 
have culminated in the passage of the 2018 Farm Bill that authorizes tribes to propose 638 agreements to conduct 
forest management treatments on Forest Service lands. These new and expanded opportunities highlight the 
sustained impact of the ISDEAA on federal tribal policy. Not only did the ISDEAA initiate a new era of self-
determination, it has been repeatedly referenced in subsequent legislation affecting tribal forest management and 
used as a model for cooperative forest management with tribes.
The Intertribal Timber Council (ITC) is a 
“non-profit nation-wide consortium of 
Indian Tribes, Alaska Native Corporations, 
and individuals dedicated to improving 
the management of natural resources 
of importance to Native American 
communities” (ITC website). Since its 
establishment in 1976, the ITC has been 
influential in advocating for legislative 
actions that increase tribes’ role in the 
cross-boundary management of forest 
resources. The ITC offers members 
the opportunity to engage in efforts to 
increase tribal participation in the sound 
management of tribal forest resources.
The Intertribal Timber Council 

Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions      13
At the same time, the ISDEAA was funded using existing BIA funds, and recent policies such as TFPA or the use 
of 638 agreements by the Forest Service authorized in the 2018 Farm Bill have not been funded. The use of GNA 
by tribes also lacks financial incentives. This lack of funding may potentially be addressed in the 2021 Energy 
Infrastructure Act that—if passed—would provide funds to both the Department of Interior and the Forest Service 
for TFPA projects. Should funds become available through the Energy Infrastructure Act, additional guidance for 
TFPA would need to be developed. Because tribes are the entities that initiate TFPA project proposals, it is not yet 
clear what level of access they might have to potential funding in the Energy Infrastructure Bill. Nonetheless, 638 
agreements between tribes and the Forest Service may be a viable alternative to use this funding.   
Legislation specific to tribal forest management during this time has increased tribes’ abilities to manage their forest 
resources. By assuming management activities formerly conducted by the BIA, tribes have gradually increased their 
capabilities for managing their forest resources. Additionally, their organizational strength has increased, and they are 
increasingly represented in cross-boundary forest restoration project development and implementation.
Tribes and tribal forest managers are in the strongest position they have ever been to pursue cross-boundary 
forest restoration projects. Building on the recognition of tribes’ capabilities for self-governance as a premise for 
the passage of the ISDEAA, tribes have gained greater management control of their forest resources. They are 
also now able to pursue treatments beyond their reservation boundaries to address resource concerns of cultural 
significance. This is crucial to the survival and sustainability of tribes’ identities, cultures, and histories.
Forest resources are critical to tribes’ sustainability and provide economic, cultural, historical, and biological 
benefits for tribes and individual tribal members. Photo by Marshall Masayesva, Ancestral Lands Hopi

14	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Recent federal legislative directions have opened up new opportunities for federally recognized tribes to manage 
their own forest resources, as well as share the stewardship of forest management on federal lands. Photo by 
Marshall Masayesva, Ancestral Lands Hopi

Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions      15
References
BIA (Bureau of Indian Affairs). 2015. “Bureau of Indian Affairs Fiscal Year 2015 Reserved Treaty Rights Lands 
Plan.” Available online: https://www.bia.gov/sites/bia.gov/files/assets/public/pdf/idc1-030969.pdf 
Black, M. 2016. “Improving interagency forest management to strengthen tribal capabilities for responding to 
and preventing wildfires.” US Department of the Interior before the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs 
Oversight Hearing. Testimony of Mike Black, Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs. June 8, 2016. Available 
online: https://www.doi.gov/ocl/tribal-wildfires
Harris, C.R. 2020. Reasserting Tribal Forest Management Under Good Neighbor Authority. The Regulatory 
Review. Dec. 7, 2020. Available online: https://www.theregreview.org/2020/12/07/harris-reasserting-
tribal-forest-management-good-neighbor-authority/ 
Lyndon, N., V. Randall, and S. Souther. 2021. Emery Oak Collaborative Tribal Restoration Initiative. International 
Oak Society. Available online: https://www.internationaloaksociety.org/content/emory-oak-collaborative-
tribal-restoration-initiative 
Nie, M. 2008. The Use of Co-Management and Protected Land-Use Designations to Protect Tribal Cultural 
Resources and Reserved Treaty Rights on Federal Lands. Natural Resources Journal. Available online: 
https://www.cfc.umt.edu/bolle/files/BadgerTwoMedicineReport.pdf#page=27 
Yazzie, V.R. 1987. The Values and Uses of the Navajo Forest. Rangelands, 9(4): 181-182.  
USDA Forest Service. 2018. Toward Shared Stewardship Across Landscapes: An Outcome-Based Investment 
Strategy; USDA Forest Service National Headquarters (WO): Washington, DC, USA. 28p. Available 
online: https://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/toward-shared-stewardship.pdf.
Wilkins, D.E. 2010. A history of federal Indian policy. In S. Lobo, S. Talbot, and T.L. Morris (Eds). Native 
American voices: A reader (3rd ed., pp. 104-112). Boston, MA: Prentice Hall.

16	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
About the ERI White Paper Series: Issues in Forest Restoration 
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines 
ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with 
respect to its health, integrity and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic 
trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once-diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to 
damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers 
on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural 
processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every 
forest restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers 
elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing 
the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does 
not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions      17
ERI White Papers — Issues in Forest Restoration
1. 	 Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. 	 Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. 	 Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. 	 Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests
5. 	 Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. 	 Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern 
Arizona
7. 	 Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. 	 Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. 	 Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. 	What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for 
Practitioners
11. 	Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. 	Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. 	Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. 	Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest 
Lands
15. 	Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16. 	Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. 	A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. 	Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. 	The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. 	Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. 	Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. 	The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
23. 	Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West
24. 	Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Projects
25. 	Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West
26. 	Wildfire Trends Across the Western US: Forest Fires Have Increased in Size, Severity, and Frequency 
Across Western Forests
27. 	Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area 
Residents
28. 	Full-Cost Accounting Remeasurement of the 2010 Schultz Fire: Understanding the Long-term Socio-
Economic Implications of High-Severity Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flooding
29.	 Integrating Decision Support Tools for Wildfire Risk Assessment and Treatment Prioritization

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
