1
Journal of Forestry, 2021, 1–14
https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvab058
Research Article - social sciences
Received June 12, 2021; Accepted November 28, 2021
Advance Access publication November 22, 2021
Research Article - social sciences
New Hands in US Public Lands Management: 
The Role and Influence of Nonagency Partners 
in Forest Service Stewardship Agreements
Emery R. Cowan1, , Kerry E. Grimm1, , Emily Jane Davis2, Erik A. Nielsen1, 
and Amy E.M. Waltz3,
1School of Earth and Sustainability, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ, 86011, USA (emerycowan@nau.
edu; kerry.grimm@nau.edu; Erik.Nielsen@nau.edu). 2Department of Forest Ecosystems and Society, Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA (EmilyJane.Davis@Oregonstate.edu). 3Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA (amy.waltz@nau.edu).
*Corresponding author: Email: emerycowan@nau.edu
Abstract
The USDA Forest Service (USFS) is increasingly turning to partnership tools such as stewardship 
agreements (SAs) to accomplish land management objectives. In these arrangements, nonagency 
partners (partners) often bring resources, capabilities, and preferences that can influence manage­
ment processes and activities. We explored the nature of partner influence in SAs through inter­
views with USFS and partner staff in four SA case studies in Arizona, California, and New Mexico. 
Interviewees perceived that partners influenced project prioritization; implementation pace, scope, 
and approach; and SA participants’ ways of working. Influence was linked to partners’ involvement 
in SA project selection; contribution of resources, expertise, and capabilities; and assumption of 
some project implementation responsibilities. USFS-partner relationships also appeared to en­
courage partnership-oriented approaches beyond the original project. Our research suggests SA 
partners are uniquely influential in the implementation of USFS management activities and re­
commends additional exploration of SAs in the context of collaborative implementation.
Study Implications: Participants in Forest Service stewardship agreements (SAs) reported that SA 
partner involvement influenced forest restoration implementation in numerous ways. The direct 
and operationally oriented nature of partner influence also appeared unique from the more widely 
studied involvement of collaborative groups in agency activities. Although SA partners report­
edly expanded pace and scope of work, they also introduced other implementation priorities and 
approaches, added complexity to agency processes, and caused shifts to participant roles and 
norms, effects that suggest a need for further research into outside partner influence as well as 
investment in agency training and staff to support partnership work.
Keywords:  US Forest Service, forest policy, stewardship authority, stewardship agreements, forest restoration, partnerships, col­
laboration, restoration implementation
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of American Foresters. 
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

2
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
Over the past three decades, USDA Forest Service 
(USFS) policy has increasingly supported the inclu­
sion of partners and other stakeholders in aspects of 
the agency’s work (Cheng 2006, USDA Forest Service 
2018). In the face of declining agency resources and 
growing complexity of natural resources issues such as 
wildfire, external entities can provide additional sup­
port and capabilities to help accomplish management 
activities at larger scales and across boundaries (Abrams 
2019, Cyphers and Schultz 2019). Stewardship agree­
ments (SAs) are one USFS partnership tool that enables 
the agency to formally and directly work with entities 
like nonprofit organizations, local governments, and 
tribes to implement restoration-oriented projects. Since 
they came about in the late 1990s, SAs have been widely 
adopted across the National Forest System and recog­
nized for their potential to support forest restoration 
(Moseley and Charnley 2014, Mattor et  al. 2019). 
Despite their growing use, Davis and Moseley (2012) 
stated that USFS agreements like SAs have received 
limited study, and after extensive review, we found that 
SAs remain an understudied topic in academic literature.
Additionally, SAs present an opportunity to increase 
understanding of how USFS agreement partners influ­
ence forest management activities. Prior governance 
research suggests the agency’s inclusion of other public 
or private-sector entities as partners in land manage­
ment activities inevitably shapes approaches, prior­
ities, and outcomes associated with those activities 
(Abrams 2019). SAs, in establishing nonagency entities 
as coimplementors in USFS projects, would thus seem 
to present potential for these partners to affect forest 
management activities.
Our study explored this potential through exam­
ining the role and influence of nongovernment agency 
partners (henceforth referred to as “partners”) in four 
SAs developed to carry out forest restoration projects. 
Specifically, we examined partners’ involvement with 
planning, design, and implementation of SA projects 
and direct and indirect impacts of this involvement, as 
perceived by USFS and partner interviewees. In doing 
so, our research addresses the knowledge gap on SAs 
and provides a ground-level perspective on perceived 
effects of incorporating external actors into public 
lands management through these agreements.
A Brief Background of USFS SAs
The history of SAs traces back to the 1990s. Rural 
communities, the timber industry, environmental 
groups, and others with a stake in forest management 
had begun to see that working together collaboratively 
could achieve both conservation and economic ob­
jectives while benefiting those living near public lands 
(Enzer and Goebel 2014). Recognizing a disconnect 
between these emerging collaborative efforts and 
traditional timber sale and service contracting path­
ways, these groups called for new policy mechanisms 
that could support a more multifaceted approach to 
federal forest management (Enzer and Goebel 2014, 
Moseley and Charnley 2014). Their efforts intersected 
with a growing need for avenues to more effectively 
accomplish ecosystem restoration as funding declined 
for such work (Moseley and Charnley 2014, Mattor 
and Cheng 2015). In response, Congress in 1998 es­
tablished stewardship end result contracting. The 
associated authorities (referred to as “stewardship con­
tracting authorities” or “stewardship authority”) allow 
the USFS and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 
to use a number of innovative contracting approaches 
to implement stewardship projects that have been ap­
proved through agency planning processes (United 
States Government Accountability Office 2008).1 The 
following paragraphs address aspects of stewardship 
authority related to the USFS.
Stewardship projects can be carried out through 
either stewardship contracts or SAs. Whereas contracts 
involve services performed by for-profit entities, SAs 
involve partner resource contributions (e.g., funding, 
staff time, indirect costs) and require mutual interest 
and mutual benefit (FSH 1509.11 sec 72.61). SA part­
ners can be any entity able to perform agreed-upon 
work or contract it out, including—but not limited 
to—nonprofits, local or state governments, and 
tribes (FSH 1509.11  sec 72.61). Agreements can be 
pursued through two structures: Master Stewardship 
Agreements (MSAs) with tiered Supplemental Project 
Agreements (SPAs) or Standalone Agreements2 (USDA 
Forest Service, n.d.). MSAs provide overarching agree­
ment terms, whereas SPAs address details of indi­
vidual projects and can be modified as projects change. 
Standalone Agreements incorporate elements of 
MSAs and SPAs and cover a single project. According 
to statute, stewardship projects must accomplish 
restoration-focused resource management objectives 
such as forest, soil, and watershed health, while ad­
dressing “local and rural community needs” (16 USC 
§ 6591c). SA activities are implemented on National 
Forest System lands (FSH 1509.11 sec.70.3)
Together, the stewardship contracting author­
ities 
uniquely 
enable 
forest 
restoration 
work 
while emphasizing local benefit. For example, 
a single contract or agreement can encompass 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

3
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
revenue-generating timber sales as well as costly ser­
vice activities (e.g., noncommercial thinning or forest 
road decommissioning). This structure has potential to 
better match the diverse activities needed in restoration 
projects while enabling timber revenues to fund restor­
ation services in the same area (Moseley and Charnley 
2014). There is also authorization for contracts and 
agreements of up to 10 (and in certain cases 20) years3, 
a timeline often necessary to implement significant 
restoration (Davis 2021). Furthermore, social, envir­
onmental, and economic goals are more comprehen­
sively addressed through “best value” language that 
directs the USFS to consider criteria other than price 
to evaluate stewardship project contracts or proposals 
(16 USC § 6591c). Those additional criteria include 
potential benefit to the local community, past perform­
ance, and work quality (Hausbeck 2007). A multiparty 
monitoring requirement helps ensure stewardship pro­
jects address their intended environmental, social, and 
economic aims (Hausbeck 2007). Finally, in addition 
to statutory language, USFS directives require collab­
oration throughout stewardship project development 
and implementation, which is theorized to add ac­
countability to local stakeholders (Mattor et al. 2019).
SAs and USFS Policy Trends
SAs are representative of a trend within USFS policy 
toward greater incorporation of external actors 
in agency processes and practices (Cheng 2006, 
McIntyre and Schultz 2020). Partnerships and col­
laboration have become two key avenues through 
which the agency engages with nonfederal entities, 
including nonprofits, states, tribes, and the private 
sector (Abrams 2019). Partnerships, according to the 
USFS, are either informal cooperation between entities 
with shared interests or formal, mutually beneficial ar­
rangements (such as SAs) that relate to specific agency 
instruments and authorities (USDA Forest Service 
2014; FSM 1580.5). Collaboration features diverse 
stakeholders cooperatively working together and 
engaging in dialogue around a common purpose re­
lated to forest management (Carr et al. 1998, Monroe 
and Butler 2016, USDA Forest Service National 
Collaboration Cadre 2021).
Despite representing distinct models of engagement, 
partnership and collaborative approaches have some 
common themes that are informative to our research. 
Both arose in response to challenges facing the agency, 
including loss of legitimacy among key constituencies, 
increased dependence on nonfederal resources, and, 
more recently, the need to increase pace and scale of 
restoration (McIntyre and Schultz 2020, Wondolleck 
and Yaffee 2000, McIver and Becker 2021). 
Incorporating entities from outside the USFS has the 
potential to address these challenges by bringing add­
itional resources and expertise, increasing public and 
community engagement, and improving efficiency and 
solution identification (McCreary et al. 2012, Abrams 
2019; FSH 1909.12  sec 43.1). However, sharing re­
sponsibilities and decision space with external entities 
also has drawbacks. Partnerships and collaboration 
can complicate agency decision-making authority and 
public accountability, while often requiring extra re­
sources and time that are not always available, ac­
counted for, or rewarded (Gazley and Brudney 2007, 
McCreary et al. 2012, Butler 2013).
In addition to providing important context for our 
research, previous literature on collaboration in par­
ticular—and gaps in that literature—informed our 
focus. Specifically, scholars have noted the relatively 
minimal research on how collaboration functions in 
the implementation phases of federal forest manage­
ment (Cheng et al. 2015, Schultz and McIntyre 2019). 
Because SAs incorporate nonagency actors into imple­
mentation, researching their use addresses an under­
studied area of research.
Effects of Partner Involvement in 
Collaborative and Partnership Approaches
Previous examinations of collaborative and partnership-
oriented governance have found the entities involved 
in these arrangements shape environmental outcomes 
and approaches in various ways (Newig and Fritsch 
2009, Abrams 2019). Examples of this influence are 
wide-ranging. For instance, collaborative groups and 
other partners working on USFS projects often ac­
quire nonfederal funding that enables work beyond 
the agency’s own capacity (Cheng 2006, Ryan and 
Urgenson 2019). By bringing together various forms 
of knowledge and information, collaborative groups 
also help define problems and potential solutions in 
ways traditional agency processes cannot (Cheng and 
Sturtevant 2012). Similarly, partnerships among govern­
mental and nongovernmental actors have been found 
to help leverage resources, improve understanding of 
management issues at different scales, and enhance 
communication and coproduction of knowledge be­
tween managers, scientists, and the public (Timberlake 
and Schultz 2017, Schultz et al. 2018).
Alongside these capacity-building effects, how­
ever, researchers note potential for collaborative and 
partnership approaches to produce outcomes biased 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

4
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
toward the priorities of only some of the involved or 
affected parties (Purdy 2012, Alexander et al. 2016). 
For example, scholars have expressed concern that in­
volvement of private-sector stakeholders in environ­
mental governance could result a greater emphasis on 
the extraction or utilization of resources (Lemos and 
Agrawal 2006). Davis (2019) also points out that a 
common critique of forest collaboratives is that they 
allow certain groups to have outsized influence on 
the USFS.
Taken together, these lines of research support a 
deeper examination of external partners’ role in part­
nerships and collaborations related to federal forest 
management, as they suggest partner involvement has 
the potential to affect various aspects of this work. 
A  small number of researchers have begun exam­
ining this topic in relation to forest restoration im­
plementation, the arena in which SAs operate. In two 
studies of collaborative group involvement in imple­
mentation through the USFS’s Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program, interviewees re­
ported that the group’s input led to adjustments in 
treatment prescriptions and influenced how the USFS 
prioritized treatment types and locations (Butler et al. 
2015, Bergemann et al. 2019). Collaborative groups 
also influenced implementation by adding staff or 
other resources that expanded the pace or scope of 
work and educating field staff and contractors on the 
collaborative’s values and rationale behind treatment 
plans (Butler et  al. 2015). In congressionally man­
dated reviews of stewardship projects (completed via 
both contract and agreement), the Pinchot Institute 
for Conservation similarly tracked examples of in­
fluence by nonagency stakeholders, defined as both 
formal partners and other interested parties including 
contractors, nonprofits, and collaborative groups. 
Stakeholders reportedly augmented agency capacity 
for implementation and influenced size and treat­
ment complexity of stewardship projects by, for ex­
ample, developing more complex restoration-oriented 
silvicultural prescriptions (e.g., Pinchot Institute for 
Conservation 2018). In a review of stewardship 
contracts and agreements in USFS Region 6,4 Davis 
(2021) found SA partners influenced aspects of imple­
mentation by adding capacity for management, ad­
ministration, and on-the-ground work and exercising 
some discretion over how activities were bundled and 
implemented.
These examples of collaborative group, stakeholder, 
and partner involvement in implementation are in­
formative to our research as they that indicate partners 
can be influential in arenas beyond planning if avenues 
for such influence exist. However, there are also po­
tentially meaningful differences between SA partners, 
who formally engage with implementation, and col­
laborative groups or other stakeholders who do not 
have that sort of official role in implementation. Key 
among these distinctions is that SAs put partners into 
coimplementor and coinvestor roles, with avenues for 
direct, integrated, and sustained participation in man­
agement activities (Davis and White 2015, Mattor 
et  al. 2019, Davis 2021). Meanwhile, collaborative 
groups and stakeholders who are not agreement part­
ners are often involved in implementation through 
less direct or formal processes such as providing feed­
back during meetings and participating in monitoring 
(Pinchot Institute for Conservation 2017, Bergemann 
et al. 2019). Given SA partners’ more direct role, it ap­
pears possible that they may influence land manage­
ment activities in unique ways. Considering the limited 
research on USFS SAs and collaborative approaches 
to forest restoration implementation, our study exam­
ines the nature of partners’ involvement in SAs and the 
effects of that involvement as perceived by key USFS 
staff and partners.
Methods
Case Study Selection
To examine partner involvement, we analyzed four 
USFS SA projects in Arizona, California, and New 
Mexico (within USFS Regions 3 and 5). This case 
study approach is commonly used to explore collab­
orative or partnership-related governance and is well-
suited for in-depth exploration of the “how” or “why” 
of processes, relationships, or situations (Yin 2009, 
Denscombe 2010, Butler 2013, Walpole et al. 2017). 
Following replication logic outlined by Yin (2009), we 
purposively selected SA projects on the basis of similar­
ities in timeline, scale, forest conditions, activity type, 
and partner type (Table 1). More specifically, these 
agreements all had 10-year terms and goals of treating 
larger areas (more than 2,000 acres) with extensive 
portions of conifer forest that historically evolved 
with frequent wildfire.5 The primary focus of restor­
ation was also similar: to reduce unnaturally dense 
trees and other forest materials that resulted from log­
ging, fire suppression, grazing, and human settlement 
throughout the 20th century. In all our cases, the SA 
partner was a national- or global-scale nonprofit, which 
we intentionally chose because, based on our analysis 
of SA data provided by the USFS, larger organizations 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

5
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
were the most common SA partner type in agreements 
between 2008 and 2018.
Data Collection
Data collection consisted of semistructured inter­
views (Appendix) and a review of agreement docu­
ments (MSAs and SPAs) from each SA case study. 
We conducted key informant interviews with USFS 
and partner staff directly involved with day-to-day 
operations of the SA project. In three cases, we also 
interviewed staff of private, for-profit entities such as 
timber companies because, although not signatories to 
the SA, they were directly involved in decision-making 
and implementation. Unless otherwise noted, we use 
the term “partners” to refer to participants associated 
with the nonprofit signatories as well as these private 
entities. We selected study participants via both pur­
posive and snowball sampling (Berg 2004). The lead 
author contacted USFS and partner staff listed on the 
agreement document, then asked for names of all other 
USFS and partner staff who had direct and sustained 
involvement in SA project development and/or imple­
mentation. We contacted 44 interviewees initially via 
email. For those who did not respond, we followed up 
with another email and a phone call.
During May–September, 2019, the lead author inter­
viewed 32 people over the phone or in-person. Twelve 
people either could not be reached, were not available 
Table 1.  USFS SA project case studies
USFS 
region
Forest 
label
Date and 
agreement term
Planned treatment 
acres (range)
Potential types of work
Primary 
ecosystem type
R3
Forest A
2010 & 2018
>10,000
Forest thinning
Ponderosa pine, 
Pinyon-juniper
10 years each
Prescribed burning
Support for vegetation seeding and 
regeneration
Road maintenance and improvement
Noxious weed control
Restoration of ephemeral channels 
and springs
R3
Forest B
2017
>10,000
Forest thinning
Ponderosa pine
10-year
Prescribed burning
Support for vegetation seeding and 
regeneration
Road maintenance and improvement
Noxious weed control
Restoration of ephemeral channels 
and springs
R5
Forest C
2018
5000–10,000
Forest thinning
Mixed conifer
10-year
Prescribed burning
Removal and utilization of forest 
byproducts
Reforestation
Noxious weed control
Restoration of meadow, stream, 
wetland, and riparian areas
Hydrologic system improvement
Cultural site protection
R5
Forest D
2017
<5000
Hazardous fuels treatments
Mixed confer
10-year
Prescribed burning
Habitat restoration
Noxious weed control
Road and trail work
Soil and water quality restoration 
and maintenance
Recreational facility management
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

6
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
during data collection, or declined to be interviewed. 
Interviews lasted 30 minutes to two hours. The number 
of participants interviewed from each case ranged 
from five participants to 15 participants, reflecting 
differences in the geographical scale and complexity 
of their work. Semistructured interviews allowed for 
flexibility and adaptability while producing qualita­
tive data that could be compared between interviewees 
(Bernard 2006). Our questions, which followed an 
Institutional Review Board-approved interview guide, 
asked participants about the role, involvement, and in­
fluence of partners in the stewardship project. We also 
asked about effects of the partners’ participation both 
within and beyond the scope of the original project. 
Interviews were transcribed using Temi and Otter on­
line transcription programs and then reviewed, com­
pared against the original recording, and edited for 
accuracy. To ensure confidentiality, we assigned alpha­
numeric codes to each interviewee based on their af­
filiation with the USFS (FS) or the nonagency partner 
(NA).
Analysis
We coded interview transcripts following a general 
inductive approach in which data were examined 
for emergent themes related to partners’ involvement 
and the effects of that involvement (Thomas 2006). 
Following this approach, we established initial coding 
categories based on frequently mentioned examples of 
partner involvement and effects, as identified through 
multiple readings of the interview data. We then exam­
ined commonalities between categories to establish 
broader themes that were applicable to all case studies 
(Thomas 2006). As the only coder on the project, the 
primary author established coder reliability through 
repeated examinations of the data (Castleberry and 
Nolen 2018). The author first took more general ana­
lytical notes on the interview transcripts, then, several 
weeks later, coded each interview using NVivo soft­
ware. To ensure internal consistency, we compared the 
analytical notes and coding. We analyzed participant 
answers collectively, both to ensure confidentiality 
when few individuals were involved in a project and 
because distinguishing between cases was not neces­
sary for our exploration of the effects of SA partner 
involvement.
We also analyzed the MSAs and SPAs associated 
with each case study. For each, we identified language 
that addressed either partner roles and responsibil­
ities or referenced opportunities for partner input or 
influence via collaborative or cooperative approaches 
that implied some level of joint decision-making. 
Within each category (partner roles/responsibilities 
and opportunities for partner input), we compared 
language across cases to identify common themes in 
how partner involvement was enabled and formal­
ized. Triangulation of data from SA documents and 
semistructured interviews provided a more thorough 
understanding of the relationship and interactions be­
tween USFS staff and partners (Mathison 2007).
Results
We interviewed 20 USFS staff and twelve partner staff, 
all of whom worked directly on the SA project in some 
manner. Twelve of the 32 interviewees were classi­
fied by the authors as supervisory level staff, based on 
having roles in the SA that were largely dedicated to 
overseeing other employees. Twenty of the 32 inter­
viewees were classified as field-level staff. Those staff 
were more directly involved with on-the-ground im­
plementation and included biologists, forest ecologists, 
silviculturists, and resource officers.
All agreement participants reported that part­
ners influenced stewardship projects in some way. 
According to interviewees, partner involvement af­
fected the development and implementation of SA 
projects, as well as partnership work beyond the ori­
ginal project. We explore these findings in greater de­
tail below, noting that all references to the effects or 
influence of partners’ involvement are based on inter­
viewees’ perceptions.
Project Prioritization
In all cases, interviewees indicated that partners were 
involved in determining which projects were accom­
plished through the SA, which indirectly influenced 
project prioritization. More specifically, agreement par­
ticipants reported that partners took part in selecting 
which projects were included in the SA, choices that 
were motivated by their organizations’ mission and 
goals such as a desire to restore specific locations or 
habitat types. By adding resources and accountability 
through involvement in the SA, partners then made 
their favored projects more economically viable and 
elevated their priority among other agency work, ac­
cording to agreement participants. Describing this ef­
fect from the agency’s perspective, FS16 said, “we want 
things to work, so we’re having to put…future projects 
on the back burner to do this, to keep up.”
In three cases, interviewees indicated partners fur­
ther improved the outlook for their chosen projects by 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

7
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
using their connections, reputations, and resources to 
build support for the work. For example, USFS staff in 
these cases said partners’ conservation-oriented repu­
tation helped the projects gain more social support 
(i.e., “social license”) by demonstrating that logging-
oriented projects also had backing from nontimber 
interests. “Instead of it being the Forest Service says, 
or our scientists say ‘this is the best thing,’ it’s many 
organizations’ scientists saying ‘yeah, that really is the 
best thing in this particular spot.’ So, it does get a lot 
of buy-in,” FS12 said. Partners also generated positive 
attention around their SA project and promoted the 
work to agency leadership and elected officials, which 
furthered progress and, in one case, seemed to clear 
away some bureaucratic hurdles, according to inter­
viewees. As NA20 said, “We bring a whole institution 
that can lobby in Congress.”
However, this influence also had clear limitations 
due to the nature of SAs. As implementation tools, 
these agreements are used to carry out activities that 
have already been defined through planning and ana­
lysis processes such as those required by the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Therefore, partners 
could only choose from, and put their support behind, 
existing projects developed by the agency, not create a 
new project to their liking.
Aspects of Implementation: Timeline, 
Scale, and Scope
Once USFS and partner staff decided on an SA pro­
ject, they continued to work as coimplementors of the 
planned activities. This coimplementor role for the 
partner was supported by the language of SA docu­
ments, which frequently mentioned consultation, 
cooperation, coordination, and collaboration. For ex­
ample, all agreements required USFS and partner staff 
to meet at least annually, and the majority specified 
that the two entities should work together on certain 
elements such as determining habitat improvements 
(3/4 agreements), preparing technical work proposals 
(4/4 agreements), and monitoring performance (4/4 
agreements). The documents also delegated implemen­
tation responsibilities such as contractor hiring and 
oversight to the partner, although the USFS retained 
final decision-making authority. This formalization 
of shared responsibility between the USFS and part­
ners presented opportunities for partners to influence 
the SA project’s implementation with their own ap­
proaches, resources, and skillsets.
Our analysis of interview data found this influ­
ence occurred through several avenues, one of which 
involved the partner implementing restoration activ­
ities differently than the agency would have. In one 
case, for example, interviewees said the partner took 
slightly different approaches from the agency by plan­
ning forest thinning activities to better support subse­
quent prescribed fire and offering timber sales as several 
smaller units instead of a single large one. In another 
agreement, the partner introduced new timber prep­
aration technologies, a new model for evaluating pro­
ject economics, and new processes to make harvesting 
more cost-effective, according to interviewees. On that 
project, FS27 noted that “a lot of the stuff we’re doing 
in terms of the tablet [tree] marking and all the prep 
on these projects has changed completely since [the 
partner] has been involved.”
In examining this influence across cases, we note 
that the extent to which the partner shaped project im­
plementation varied based on the extent to which the 
USFS was willing to hand over responsibility, as well as 
the partner’s desire to help steer the project in certain 
ways. On one project where the USFS retained many 
oversight and administration duties, interviewees indi­
cated the partner’s involvement made little noticeable 
impact on how restoration activities were executed. SA 
participants perceived greater partner influence on a 
project where the partner was explicitly charged with 
finding ways to make USFS restoration activities more 
efficient and effective, which even prompted a change 
to USFS directives.
Another avenue of project-level influence related to 
the experience and capacities the partners brought to 
the SA. Partners added expertise in a range of topics, 
including economic aspects of logging, wildlife habitat 
needs, and timber preparation technology, according 
to interviewees. SA participants indicated this outside 
knowledge affected project scope and progress by, for 
example, facilitating more efficient agreement admin­
istration or enabling use of technologies that other­
wise would not have been incorporated. Interviewees 
also noted that partners had more financial flexibility 
than the agency. In two cases, participants said part­
ners’ ability to access private-sector financing enabled 
prompter contractor payment and, in one case, helped 
accomplish work on a faster timeline.
Partner resource contributions, such as staff time 
and funding, were also important.6 Interviewees de­
scribed partner staff assisting with tasks like writing 
agreements and building and maintaining databases 
when the USFS lacked sufficient capacity. Partner staff 
time and financial contributions also allowed for the 
incorporation of more expensive “wish list” items like 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

8
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
treatments for sensitive ecosystems and experimenta­
tion with new technologies and processes, according to 
interviewees in two cases. In addition to their own con­
tributions, SA participants said partners helped recruit 
grant funding and investments from other sources. 
Interviewees said partners’ tangible and intangible 
contributions put projects on faster timelines, facili­
tated more work, or helped circumvent challenges as­
sociated with federal appropriations and budget cycles. 
USFS interviewees in every case said that without the 
partner’s contributions, the project would not be where 
it was at that point.
Interviewees also reported that partners engaged 
with a greater constellation of entities beyond the 
agreement’s signatories, representing a third avenue 
of influence on stewardship projects. Partners, as 
actors not associated with the federal government, 
were able to solicit funding from and more easily en­
gage with a range of private sector entities, according 
to interviewees. Through these relationships, SA par­
ticipants indicated that partners broadened project 
scope by incorporating other activities and inter­
ests. Interviewees in every case said this engagement 
brought in additional resources and created oppor­
tunities that would not have been available under a 
nonpartnership model.
In addition to engagement with the private sector, 
partners sometimes acted as direct links to forest col­
laborative groups working on land management plan­
ning in geographies that overlapped with SA project 
areas. In three cases, at least one SA partner belonged 
to the nearby collaborative group. In two of these 
cases, participants indicated that the partner acted as 
an advocate for the values and perspectives of the col­
laborative group in ways that influenced project im­
plementation. On one SA project, for example, a USFS 
interviewee recounted that the local forest collabora­
tive group requested that the agency prohibit cutting of 
trees over 24 inches in diameter. One of the partners, 
who was the primary project contractor, supported the 
idea because they were a member of the collaborative, 
although it would affect timber profits. On another 
SA project, NA29 said, “our stewardship agreement 
has allowed us to help the Forest Service understand 
what the stakeholder perspective was, and I  think 
that is something we’re talking a lot more about as 
we do more implementation.” Thus, by filling the role 
of both implementor and collaborative group stake­
holder, some partners appeared to strengthen their 
SA projects’ relationship with and accountability to 
collaboratives in the area.
Partner and USFS Ways of Working
As partners took over some tasks within the steward­
ship project, interviewees described many instances 
of both partner and USFS staff changing their ways 
of working. Partner staff mentioned doing previously 
unfamiliar tasks such as sale preparation, contracting, 
and navigating the USFS bureaucracy. USFS staff de­
scribed taking on partner coordination and oversight 
responsibilities that were outside their usual duties. 
As FS16 said, “I’m doing more conference calls, more 
meeting management, and more managing people than 
managing what’s going on the ground, which is my 
normal position.”
SA partners’ involvement also was associated with 
changes in USFS culture and operating norms. USFS 
staff on three projects said the partner’s presence 
spurred more outside-the-box thinking, prompting 
new approaches and more experimentation within 
agency regulatory and policy sideboards. Thanks to 
one partner’s involvement, for example, a USFS staffer 
said their local unit began integrating fuels teams into 
what was normally timber-only work. In speaking 
about the partner’s influence on a different project, 
FS27 said:
I think the Forest Service definitely gets set in our 
ways on how we do things … I think they’ve opened 
my eyes to be less set in how the guy before me did 
my job and thinking more outside the box in terms 
of pushing the envelope.
Agency staff also said working closely with partners 
increased their receptivity to external involvement and 
input. “We’ve learned to reach outside of what we’re 
doing… to working with these outside partners on the 
ground,” FS16 said.
However, SA partners’ involvement created chal­
lenges as well. USFS staff in all cases said coordin­
ation associated with the partners’ role proved more 
complicated and time-consuming than nonpartnership 
work like conventional timber sales. The partnership 
model was believed to create more complex chains 
of communication and command. As FS26 said, 
“just getting space and everybody scheduled to have 
a meeting is huge… Not to mention, really thinking 
through complex issues and really having two very 
different drastic, conflicting takes on things.” Partner 
involvement also presented challenges associated with 
navigating complementary roles, joint decision-making 
processes, and differences in work products, expect­
ations, and hierarchies of authority, interviewees said. 
As FS12 put it, “We’ve had to find a new way of getting 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

9
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
work done. And it’s a lot easier when you can tell a 
subordinate ‘this is what we’re going to do for the next 
year’ than when you have to cooperate with a partner 
and make sure everybody gets it and everybody’s as­
sumptions are the same.”
Indirect Effects of Partner Involvement
In all cases, interviewees noted examples of second- 
and third-order effects of partner involvement in the 
SA. Second- and third-order effects are those that 
extend beyond the geographic or temporal scope of 
the original project (Bryson et al. 2006, Schultz et al. 
2018). Several interviewees mentioned approaches or 
ideas that came about in the SA and were then adopted 
more widely. In one case, for example, a USFS inter­
viewee said working with the partner inspired a greater 
appreciation of the need for more flexibility in forest 
restoration contracts, which the agency applied to the 
writing of another large-scale contract on the forest.
USFS staff also said they gained new insights into 
the value of partnerships and ways to work better with 
partners more generally. What came out of the SA, 
FS03 said, was “trying to look to the future and see 
how we can…reconfigure and what we can do to be 
more efficient and effective with our partnerships and 
our dollars.” In three cases, the SA spawned additional, 
related partnership work, such as new SA projects and 
larger-scale forest restoration planning efforts that 
built on relationships, techniques, and successes from 
the initial agreement. On the partner side, interviewees 
in at least two cases said gaining a deeper knowledge 
of USFS timber practices and the language of forest 
restoration changed how they approached subsequent 
work in the same arena.
Discussion
Summary of Key Findings
Our results show partners influenced SA projects in 
several ways. Partners introduced their own imple­
mentation approaches and priorities and added re­
sources, capabilities, connections, and expertise that 
interviewees said advanced or expanded the scope 
of work on the ground. Interviewees also reported 
that partners’ involvement prompted change to 
USFS and partner staff’s ways of working and atti­
tudes toward partnerships both within and beyond 
the scope of the original project. These findings in­
dicate both direct (i.e., first-order) and indirect (i.e., 
second- and third-order) effects of partner participa­
tion in the SA.
Characterizing SA Partner Involvement
Several aspects of SA partners’ involvement and per­
ceived influence align with findings about the involve­
ment of stakeholders in collaborative efforts, adding 
to evidence that these potentially more inclusive gov­
ernance approaches have some common characteris­
tics. For one, SA partners added expertise in agreement 
administration, financing, and restoration activities, 
according to participants, which echoes previous find­
ings that outside stakeholders often contribute diverse 
expertise during collaborative efforts (Wondolleck and 
Yaffee 2000). Perceptions that SA partners increased 
social acceptance for a proposed action and brought 
financial and technical resources to expand capacity 
for work are also similar to effects of stakeholder en­
gagement observed in collaborative models (Cheng 
2006, Maier and Abrams 2018). Challenges related 
to the involvement of partners in SAs similarly mir­
rored those faced in collaborative approaches to nat­
ural resource management. Those drawbacks include 
the time-consuming nature of engaging with multiple 
entities in governance processes (Biddle 2017, Orth 
and Cheng 2019) and cultural, legal, and policy struc­
tures within the USFS that often complicate partner 
involvement and input in the agency’s work (Butler 
2013). Parallels between SAs and collaborative gov­
ernance arrangements suggest SA participants could 
consider approaching challenges and opportunities of 
this agreement tool as they would other collaborative 
processes.
At the same time, our analysis found key differences 
between SA partners’ involvement in USFS manage­
ment and the ways forest collaborative groups and 
their stakeholders are typically involved in agency ac­
tivities. For example, SA partners worked directly with 
USFS staff to coordinate and carry out projects defined 
through NEPA, which differs substantially from col­
laborative groups that aim to convene diverse inter­
ests for collective consensus-building and deliberation, 
usually with a focus on planning (Davis et al. 2018, 
Butler et  al. 2019). Further, in their formal role as 
coimplementors, we found SA partners had firsthand 
engagement with, and potential to influence, aspects 
of project management and decision-making (within 
the constraints of the associated NEPA decision). For 
example, partners were involved with the selection of 
projects included in the agreement and approaches for 
implementing restoration activities. In contrast, col­
laborative groups tend to engage in implementation 
less formally and directly and through avenues such 
as meetings and fieldtrips with USFS staff or shared 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

10
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
learning and training opportunities (Butler et al. 2015, 
Bergemann et al. 2019). These differences in the nature 
and focus of their work support the notion that SA part­
ners likely influence agency processes and activities in 
ways that are distinct from forest collaborative groups.
These findings align with previous research that has 
found that in partnership and collaborative governance 
approaches, the motivations, capacities, and identities 
of nonagency partners and collaborators can shape 
management actions and priorities (Abrams 2019). 
Although our research found some potentially benefi­
cial effects of SA partner involvement, we acknowledge 
concerns that these approaches enable some entities to 
have undue influence on decision-making, potentially 
undermining government agency authority or account­
ability to the public interest (Gazley and Brudney 2007, 
Davis 2019). We did not ask interviewees whether they 
shared these types of concerns, but we see opportunity 
to explore this topic in future research on SAs and 
other partnership approaches to land management.
To establish a more complete picture of SA use 
within the USFS, we also see opportunity for future 
research to examine how SA partnerships play out 
in different contexts, given that SAs are used to im­
plement projects that vary widely in spatial size, eco­
logical complexity, objectives, and partner type. For 
instance, other partners besides large nonprofits may 
bring distinct capacities, resources, and priorities that 
would influence SA projects differently. SA dynamics 
also may vary by USFS region. For example, research 
into SAs in USFS Region 6 produced several findings 
similar to ours about the nature and effects of partner 
involvement (Davis 2021). However, another analysis 
of stewardship projects across the USFS found signifi­
cant differences between regions in level of perceived 
collaboration in these projects (Mattor et  al. 2019). 
Such findings indicate agency approaches to these 
tools, and the resulting effect on engagement with ex­
ternal entities, likely varies (Mattor et al. 2019).
Recommendations
Our findings suggest a need to improve the clarity 
and efficiency of implementation-focused partner­
ships, given the USFS’s increasing emphasis on these 
cooperative approaches. In SAs, participants said 
partner involvement added greater complexity and 
increased USFS staff workloads due to the coordin­
ation, joint planning, and mutual agreement neces­
sary on some elements. Expanding agency and partner 
training on development and use of agreement tools 
could help address these challenges. Additionally, we 
would emphasize the crucial role of, and continued 
need for, partner coordination positions, which often 
perform important communication and boundary-
spanning functions in these types of arrangements 
(McGuire 2006).
We also see benefit in further investigating SAs as 
an avenue for collaborative group engagement in im­
plementation. We found several instances in which SA 
partners advocated and represented collaboratives’ 
values during implementation of collaboratively 
planned projects. Additionally, adaptive management, 
which depends on feedback between planning, imple­
mentation, and monitoring, could benefit from a col­
laborative group stakeholder partnering with the USFS 
on project implementation, then using that experience 
to inform collaborative planning (Butler et al. 2015). 
This potential for SAs to enable collaborative imple­
mentation, evaluation, and learning, seems especially 
relevant to USFS programs like the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program and the Joint 
Chiefs Landscape Restoration Partnership that man­
date collaborative processes in large-scale restoration 
work (McIver and Becker 2021).
Conclusion
Agreements such as SAs represent a key avenue for op­
erationalizing partnership-based approaches that the 
USFS has increasingly embraced. Our research found 
SA partners add capacity, resources, connections, and 
expertise that can address agency limitations and po­
tentially increase pace and scope of work. However, 
these more inclusive management approaches also 
bring up questions and concerns about undue influence 
that does not represent all public land stakeholders. If 
partnerships remain central within USFS policy, there 
is benefit to continued exploration of the ways external 
partners may influence the implementation of public 
land management.
Endnotes
1.	 More information on the use of stewardship end result con­
tracting by the USFS is available at https://www.fs.fed.us/res­
toration/Stewardship_Contracting/index.shtml
2.	 The acronym “SA” has been used by the USFS to refer to stew­
ardship agreements and standalone agreements (see https://
www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprd3812793.
pdf). We use “SA” to refer to stewardship agreements 
throughout the entirety of this paper.
3.	 The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 authorizes the 
USFS or BLM to award stewardship contracts and agreements 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

11
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
for up to 20 years in areas where the majority of federal lands 
are in Fire Regime Groups I, II, and III.
4.	 USFS-managed lands are divided into nine regions; western 
regions include 1–6 and 10; eastern regions include 8 and 9 
(there is no region 7).
5.	 Sources to support specific statements about our case studies 
are not provided to preserve their confidentiality.
6.	 Contributions are a core feature of USFS agreements; agency 
directives state that cooperators should contribute at least 
20% of total project costs.
Literature Cited
Abrams,  J. 2019. The emergence of network governance 
in U.S. National Forest Administration: Causal factors 
and propositions for future research. For. Policy Econ. 
106:1–11.
Alexander,  S.M., M.  Andrachuk, and D.  Armitage. 2016. 
Navigating governance networks for community-based 
conservation. Front. Ecol. Environ. 14(3):155–164.
Berg, B.L. 2004. Qualitative research methods for the social 
sciences. 5th ed. Pearson Education, Boston, MA. 336 p.
Bergemann,  H.A., C.A.  Schultz, and A.S.  Cheng. 2019. 
Participating in collaborative implementation: The role 
of collaborative history and context. P. 178–194 in A 
new era for collaborative forest management: Policy and 
practice insights from the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program, C.A. Schultz and W.H. Butler (eds.). 
Routledge, New York.
Bernard,  H.R. 2006. Research methods in anthropology: 
Qualitative and quantitative approaches. 4th ed. AltaMira 
Press, Lanham, MD. 803 p.
Biddle, J.C. 2017. Improving the effectiveness of collabora­
tive governance regimes: Lessons from watershed partner­
ships. J. Water Resour. Plann. Manage. 143(9):1–12.
Bryson,  J.M., B.C.  Crosby, and M.M.  Stone. 2006. The 
design and implementation of cross-sector collab­
orations: Propositions from the literature. Public 
Adm. Rev. 66(Special Issue: Collaborative Public 
Management):44–55.
Butler, W.H. 2013. Collaboration at arm’s length: Navigating 
agency engagement in landscape-scale ecological restor­
ation collaboratives. J. For. 111(6):395–403.
Butler  W.H., A.  Monroe, and S.  McCaffrey. 2019. 
Collaborative implementation: implications for adaptive 
management and restoration. P. 161–177 in A new era 
for collaborative forest management: Policy and prac­
tice insights from the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program, C.A. Schultz and W.H. Butler (eds.). 
Routledge, New York, NY.
Butler,  W.H., A.  Monroe, and S.  McCaffrey. 2015. 
Collaborative implementation for ecological restor­
ation on US public lands: Implications for legal con­
text, accountability, and adaptive management. Environ. 
Manage. 55(3):564–577.
Carr,  D.S., S.W.  Selin, and M.A.  Schuett. 1998. Managing 
public forests: Understanding the role of collaborative 
planning. Environ. Manage. 22(5):767–776.
Castleberry, A., and A. Nolen. 2018. Thematic analysis of 
qualitative research data: Is it as easy as it sounds? Curr. 
Pharm. Teach. Learn. 10(6):807–815.
Cheng, A.S. 2006. Build it and they will come? Mandating 
collaboration in public lands planning and management. 
Nat. Resour. J. 46(4):841–858.
Cheng, A.S., and V.E. Sturtevant. 2012. A framework for as­
sessing collaborative capacity in community-based public 
forest management. Environ. Manage. 49:675–689.
Cheng,  A.S., A.K.  Gerlak, L.  Dale, and K.  Mattor. 2015. 
Examining the adaptability of collaborative governance 
associated with publicly managed ecosystems over time: 
Insights from the Front Range Roundtable, Colorado, 
USA. Ecol. Soc. 20(1):35.
Cyphers, L.A., and C.A. Schultz. 2019. Policy design to sup­
port cross-boundary land management: The example of 
the Joint Chiefs Landscape Restoration Partnership. Land 
Use Policy 80:362–369.
Davis,  E.J. 2019. Commentary on collaborative govern­
ance dynamics. P. 96–100 in A new era for collaborative 
forest management: Policy and practice insights from the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program, 
C.A.  Schultz and W.H.  Butler (eds.). Routledge, New 
York.
Davis,  E.J. 2021. Understanding stakeholder experiences 
with long-term, landscape-scale stewardship contracting 
in the Pacific Northwest. Ecosystem Workforce Program 
Working Paper #106, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR. 
43 p.
Davis,  E.J., and C.  Moseley. 2012. The social and liveli­
hood benefits of USDA Forest Service Agreements with 
community-based organizations. Ecosystem Workforce 
Program Working Paper #38, University of Oregon, 
Eugene, OR. 9 p.
Davis, E.J., L.K. Cerveny, D.R. Ulrich, and M.L. Nuss. 2018. 
Making and breaking trust in forest collaborative groups. 
Humboldt J. Soc. Relat. 40:211–231.
Davis,  E.J., and E.  White. 2015. Collaboration and stew­
ardship authority, the Ashland Forest Resiliency Project. 
Ecosystem Workforce Program Factsheet #9. University 
of Oregon, Eugene, OR. 2 p.
Denscombe, M. 2010. The good research guide. 4th ed. Open 
University Press, Maidenhead, UK. 373 p.
Enzer,  M., and M.  Goebel. 2014. Place-based conserva­
tion finds its voice: a case study of the Rural Voices for 
Conservation Coalition. P. 101–117 in Stitching the West 
back together: Conservation of working landscapes, 
S.  Charnley, T.E.  Sheridan, and G.P.  Nabhan (eds.). 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Gazley, B., and J.L. Brudney. 2007. The purpose (and perils) 
of government-nonprofit partnership. Nonprofit Volunt. 
Sect. Q. 36(3):389–415.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

12
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
Hausbeck, K. 2007. The little engine that could: The success 
of the stewardship contracting authority. William Mary 
Environ. Law Policy Rev. 32(1):32–55.
Lemos, M.C., and A. Agrawal. 2006. Environmental govern­
ance. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 31:297–325.
Maier,  C., and J.B.  Abrams. 2018. Navigating social 
forestry—a street-level perspective on national forest 
management in the US Pacific Northwest. Land Use 
Policy 70:432–441.
Mathison, S. 2007. Why triangulate? Educ. Res. 17(2):13–17.
Mattor,  K.M., and A.S.  Cheng. 2015. Contextual factors 
influencing collaboration levels and outcomes in na­
tional forest stewardship contracting. Rev. Policy Res. 
32(6):723–744.
Mattor, K.M., A.S. Cheng, B. Kittler, and M. McDonough. 
2019. Assessing collaborative governance outcomes and 
indicators across spatial and temporal scales: Stewardship 
contract implementation by the United States Forest 
Service. Soc. Nat. Resour. 33(4):484–503.
McCreary, A., E. Seekamp, L.K. Cerveny, and A.D. Carver. 
2012. Natural resource agencies and their motivations 
to partner: The public lands partnership model. Leis. Sci. 
34:470–489.
McGuire,  M. 2006. Collaborative public management: 
Assessing what we know and how we know it. Public 
Adm. Rev. 66(Special Issue: Collaborative Public 
Management):33–43.
McIntyre, K.B., and C.A. Schultz. 2020. Facilitating collab­
oration in forest management: Assessing the benefits of 
collaborative policy innovations. Land Use Policy 96:1–8.
McIver, C.P., and D.R. Becker. 2021. An empirical evaluation 
of the impact of collaboration on the pace and scale of na­
tional forest management in Idaho. For. Sci. 67(1):49–59.
Monroe, A.S., and W.H. Butler. 2016. Responding to a policy 
mandate to collaborate: Structuring collaboration in the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. J. 
Environ. Plann. Manage. 59(6):1054–1072.
Moseley, C., and S. Charnley. 2014. Understanding micro-
processes of institutionalization: Stewardship contracting 
and national forest management. Policy Sci. 47:69–98.
Newig, J., and O. Fritsch. 2009. Environmental governance: 
Participatory, multi-level—and effective? Environ. Pol. 
Gov. 19:197–214.
Orth, P.B., and A.S. Cheng. 2019. Organizational change in 
the US Forest Service: Negotiating organizational bound­
aries in the collaborative process. Environ. Manage. 
64:64–78.
Pinchot Institute for Conservation. 2017. The role of commu­
nities in stewardship contracting: FY 2016 programmatic 
monitoring report to the USDA Forest Service. Available 
online 
at 
https://pinchot.org/stewardship-contracting. 
Date accessed September 3, 2021.
Pinchot Institute for Conservation. 2018. Case studies of 
public engagement and stewardship contracting: FY 
2017 programmatic monitoring report to the USDA 
Forest Service. Available online at https://pinchot.org/
stewardship-contracting. Date accessed September 3, 
2021.
Purdy,  J.M. 2012. A framework for assessing power in 
collaborative governance processes. Public Adm. Rev. 
72(3):409–418.
Ryan, C.M, and L.S Urgenson. 2019. Creating and sustaining 
collaborative capacity for forest landscape restoration. 
P. 78–95 in A new era for collaborative forest manage­
ment: Policy and practice insights from the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program, C.A. Schultz and 
W.H. Butler (eds.). Routledge, New York.
Schultz,  C.A., and K.B.  McIntyre. 2019. Commentary on 
collaborative implementation. P. 212–216 in A new era 
for collaborative forest management: Policy and prac­
tice insights from the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program, C.A. Schultz and W.H. Butler (eds.). 
Routledge, New York.
Schultz,  C.A., K.B.  Mclntyre, L.  Cyphers, C.  Kooistra, 
A. Ellison, and C. Moseley. 2018. Policy design to sup­
port forest restoration: The value of focused investment 
and collaboration. Forests 9:512.
Thomas,  D.R. 2006. A general inductive approach for 
analyzing qualitative evaluation data. Am. J.  Eval. 
27(2):237–246.
Timberlake,  T.J., and C.A.  Schultz. 2017. Policy, practice, 
and partnerships for climate change adaptation on US na­
tional forests. Clim. Change 144:257–269.
United States Government Accountability Office. 2008. Use 
of stewardship contracting is increasing, but agencies 
could benefit from better data and contracting strategies. 
Available online at https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-
09-23. Date accessed September 3, 2021.
USDA Forest Service. 2014. Partnering with the USDA Forest 
Service (Draft). Available online at https://www.fs.usda.
gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprd3828323.pdf. 
Date accessed September 3, 2021.
USDA Forest Service. 2018. Toward shared stewardship 
across landscapes: An outcome-based investment strategy. 
FS-1118. USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C.
USDA Forest Service. 2021. Understanding collaboration. 
FS-1166. USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C.
USDA Forest Service. n.d. Stewardship contracting reporting, 
guidance, and directives. Available online at www.fs.fed.
us/restoration/Stewardship_Contracting/guidance.shtml. 
Date accessed September 3, 2021.
Walpole,  E.H., E.  Toman, R.S.  Wilson, and M.  Stidham. 
2017. Shared visions, future challenges: A case study of 
three collaborative forest landscape restoration program 
locations. Ecol. Soc. 22(2):35.
Wondolleck, J.M., and S.L. Yaffee. 2000. Making collabor­
ation work: Lessons from innovation in natural resource 
management. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Yin, R.K. 2009. Case study research: Design and methods. 
R.K. Yin (ed.). 4th ed. SAGE, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

13
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
Appendix
Sample Interview Script
Interview Script and Questions for Forest 
Service Staff Participating in Forest Service 
Stewardship Agreement
•	 I would like to start off by thanking you for taking 
the time to participate in my study. Over the course 
of this interview, I will ask about (1) your involve­
ment with the stewardship agreement, (2) the pro­
cess of planning and implementing the stewardship 
agreement, (3) the effects of the stewardship agree­
ment framework on different aspects of the pro­
ject, and (4) processes and outcomes of the Forest 
Service’s partnership with (insert nonagency organ­
ization name). In addition to open-ended questions, 
several questions will be phrased as statements and 
I will ask you to choose the degree to which you 
agree or disagree with the statement. The scale will 
always be structured like this:
Strongly 
agree
Agree
Undecided or 
neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
disagree
•	 Before proceeding, I will provide you the necessary 
information about this project and ask for your in­
formed consent to proceed. If you have questions, 
please feel free to stop me at any point.
		 [read all information in informed consent form or 
allow participant to read the form, obtain informed 
consent]
•	 As described in the informed consent, your partici­
pation in this study is completely voluntary. You 
may ask to stop the study at any point and may skip 
any questions without penalty. Do you have any 
questions before we begin?
Interview questions:
	1.	 My first questions are about your position, duties, 
and involvement or role in the stewardship agree­
ment project.
a.	 Could you tell me your current position with the 
Forest Service and how long you have worked 
with the agency?
b.	 Generally, what is your role and what are your 
responsibilities in relation to this stewardship 
agreement?
	2.	 My next set of questions will focus on the planning 
and implementation of the stewardship agreement or 
master stewardship agreement and the supplemental 
project agreement project(s), hereafter collectively re­
ferred to as “agreements” and “projects.”
a.	 Can you tell me about which partner initiated 
the idea of the agreement?
b.	 I read that the goals of the agreement are (insert 
goals of the project here). How were those goals 
decided upon?
c.	 How did the partners decide on the type and lo­
cation of restoration work to be done under this 
SPA?
d.	 Can you describe in general terms both the role 
of the Forest Service staff and the role of (in­
sert nonagency organization name) staff when it 
comes to carrying out the project(s)?
e.	 To what extent do you agree or disagree with the 
statement: In the course of this project, Forest 
Service staff have taken on roles or responsibil­
ities that are different from their normal duties 
before this agreement was established.
Strongly 
agree
Agree
Undecided 
or neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
disagree
i.	 [if answered strongly agree or agree, ask for 
examples]
f.	 Over the past six months, how many times per 
week on average have your communicated with 
(insert nonagency organization name) staff either 
face to face, over the phone or via email, texting 
or other messaging platforms?
g.	 Can you tell me more about your interactions 
and communication with the (insert nonagency 
organization name) staff? What do interactions 
consist of and what do your communications 
generally cover?
h.	 How many different entities are involved with 
this stewardship agreement project in some way, 
from planning the restoration work or other 
parts of the project to funding its implementa­
tion to executing it on the ground?
i.	 My next three questions focus on decision-making.
i.	 How are decisions made about things that 
get included or modified in the SPA, such as 
broader scope and direction of the project?
ii.	 What is the process involved in making 
smaller scale, day-to-day decisions that don’t 
require amending the SPA?
iii.	My next question is about consensus and what 
I mean by consensus is when the parties generally 
agree on a decision, even if all parties don’t get 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021

14
Journal of Forestry, 2021, Vol. XX, No. XX
exactly what they want. To what extent do you 
agree or disagree with the statement: Decision-
making related to this stewardship agreement 
and SPA project is consensus-oriented.
Strongly 
agree
Agree
Undecided or 
neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
disagree
j.	 What 
resources, 
both 
monetary 
and 
nonmonetary, does (insert nonagency organiza­
tion name) bring to the stewardship project?
i.	 PROMPT: 
Nonmonetary 
could 
include 
knowledge, expertise, previous relationships 
or connections.
ii.	 How have those contributions affected the 
way the project has proceeded or the out­
comes it has achieved?
	3.	 My next set of questions will focus on the influence 
of the partnership framework on different aspects 
of the stewardship agreement.
a.	 To what extent do you agree or disagree with the 
statement: More work is happening on the ground 
as a result of the stewardship agreement as com­
pared to if a stewardship agreement wasn’t in place.
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Undecided 
or neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
b.	 How has working through the vehicle of a stew­
ardship agreement affected the timeline, general 
scope and complexity of the work?
i.	 PROMPT: For example, would the timing, 
scope and complexity of this work have been 
the same if it wasn’t being done via a steward­
ship agreement?
c.	 To what extent do you agree or disagree with the 
statement: The (insert name of nonagency organ­
ization) staff have contributed ideas, knowledge or 
approaches during project planning and/or imple­
mentation that were new to Forest Service staff.
Strongly 
agree
Agree
Undecided or 
neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
disagree
d.	 Can you briefly describe those new ideas, know­
ledge or approaches?
e.	 To what extent do you agree or disagree with 
the statement: The partners have learned from 
each other during the process of planning and 
implementing the project.
Strongly 
agree
Agree
Undecided or 
neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
disagree
f.	 What specifically have partners learned from 
each other?
g.	 Have you learned or gained anything from the ex­
perience of being involved in this stewardship pro­
ject that you or the agency have applied in other 
instances or situations outside of this project?
i.	 Have any ideas or approaches brought up 
during the project been used or adopted by 
you or the Forest Service in other situations 
or instances outside the scope of this project?
ii.	 Has working with (insert name of nonagency 
organization) in this context changed the way 
the Forest Service approaches working with 
them in other situations?
iii.	Has the Forest Service changed anything 
about the way it approaches this type of res­
toration or its general processes or outlook on 
restoration after the work on this project?
	4.	 My next set of questions will focus more generally 
on project processes and outcomes.
a.	 In your opinion, what has worked well about 
this partnership agreement?
b.	 What challenges have come up during this part­
nership arrangement?
c.	 Please think about your relationship with (insert 
name of nonagency organization) staff before the 
project (or before your work together with stew­
ardship agreements in this area). Between then and 
now, has that relationship changed? If so how?
d.	 To what extent do you agree or disagree with the 
statement: I believe trust between the steward­
ship agreement partners has increased as a result 
of working together on this project.
Strongly 
agree
Agree
Undecided or 
neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
disagree
e.	 To what extent do you agree or disagree with the 
statement: The process of planning and carrying 
out this project has been collaborative.
Strongly 
agree
Agree
Undecided or 
neutral
Disagree
Strongly 
disagree
i.	 Can you tell me why you answered the way 
you did?
	5.	 Would you like to add anything else about any of 
the topics we discussed?
	6.	 Do you have any questions for me?
	7.	 Do you have suggestions for other people who 
I could interview who are involved with this project?
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvab058/6433035 by Northern Arizona University user on 23 November 2021
