The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of com-
munities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues 
related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Natural Regeneration Responses to Thinning and Burning Treatments in  
Ponderosa Pine Forests and Implications for Restoration 
 
 
By Tzeidle Wasserman, Research Coordinator, Sr. 
Introduction 
Understanding regeneration dynamics in frequent-fire forests and expected needs in a climate-altered 
future are integral for managing for resilience. Successful ponderosa pine regeneration is episodic in 
nature, constrained by climate, and sensitive to specifically timed precipitation and temperature 
patterns. Historically, ponderosa pine regeneration was naturally limited by frequent, low-severity 
fires. In recent decades, fire regimes in the western US have changed dramatically due to human 
influence and a history of fire suppression, in addition to warming temperatures and drought. Today’s 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Douglas ex P. Lawson & C. Lawson) forests are five to 20 times 
denser than estimates of historical forests, and often burn with high severity from both natural and 
human-caused fire starts. Current management priorities include reducing tree density and fuels via 
mechanical thinning and prescribed burning treatments, thereby decreasing fire hazards and severity, 
enhancing forest ecosystem components, and improving biological diversity. Quantifying naturally 
occurring ponderosa pine regeneration dynamics in response to thinning and burning is necessary to 
measure the longevity of restoration or fuels treatments, and to assess how well regeneration meets 
forest sustainability guidelines. 
 
We conducted an evidence-based review that synthesized publications to better understand natural 
regeneration following restoration or fuel reduction treatments in frequent-fire ponderosa pine forests. 
We examined the directional and temporal responses of natural regeneration to thinning and burning 
treatments, and how time-since-treatment influences the presence/absence and abundance of 
ponderosa pine regeneration.   
 
Key Research Findings 
We systematically reviewed 29 papers that addressed ponderosa pine, natural regeneration, and 
treatments (thinning, burning, thinning plus burning) across western US forests.  
 
Our analyses found varying time-since-treatment effects on regeneration responses: 
• <1-year post-treatment: Studies displayed both increases and decreases in regeneration 
immediately following treatment (≤1 year) across all treatment types due to site variability and 
treatment goals. 
• 2–10 years post-treatment: Both increases and decreases in regeneration were observed 2−10 
years post-treatment across all treatment types and are attributed to site-specific drivers and 
differences in biotic and abiotic factors associated with post-treatment seedling establishment. 
 
 
December 2021 

• 11–20 years post-treatment: Regeneration tended to 
increase in presence and abundance 11−20 years 
following all treatment types. This is consistent with 
research that shows ponderosa pine seedlings 
establish 10 years post-disturbance. 
• >20 years post-treatment: In studies where time 
since treatment was greater than 20 years, there was 
a trend in decreased regeneration. Some long-term 
studies reported that stands return to pre-treatment 
density and forest floor duff levels without 
subsequent maintenance treatments applied every 2
–10 years. 
 
The literature review also found: 
• Regeneration rates varied by site and study: these 
responses are dependent on local precipitation and temperature, soil type, fire history, understory 
production, and other biotic and abiotic factors.  
• Ponderosa pine regeneration is also highly influenced by parent material and soil type, with 
sedimentary soils most often having more water availability and soil moisture than basalt soils. 
• Several studies showed that the average ponderosa pine seedling density found in current forests 
was significantly higher than the historical density needed to maintain multi-aged, heterogeneous 
stands. In some study areas, regeneration density was more than twice the recommended 
stocking level. 
• Studies showed that using prescribed fire to limit emerging regeneration and reduce 
accumulation of surface and ladder fuels can maintain fuel treatment goals. 
 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
Restoring forest structure that is more resistant to crown fire will require maintaining ponderosa pine 
overstory at densities within the historical range of variability. Ponderosa pine regeneration often 
establishes by 10 years post-treatment, and in many areas it is prolific with more than 1,000 seedling 
per hectare (405 seedlings/acre) (Figure 1). In the absence of additional mechanical treatments or 
prescribed fire, these seedlings grow to saplings that develop into ladder fuels 10–20 years post-
treatment. If regeneration densities are not regulated by additional prescribed fire entries or fuel 
treatments, the potential for crown fire increases.  
• This review suggests management evaluation of regeneration should not be assessed until 10 
years post-treatment in frequent-fire, pine-dominated forests. Prior to 10 years, sites display both 
increasing or decreasing amounts of regeneration, not dependent on the treatment. 
• Managers should consider maintaining the historical frequent-fire regime after thinning 
treatments, using both managed and prescribed fire, to limit overabundant pine regeneration and 
maintain tree densities at levels similar to the historical range of variability.  
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Wasserman, T.N., A.E.M. Waltz, J.P. Roccaforte, J.D. Springer, J.E. Crouse. 2021. Natural regeneration responses 
to thinning and burning treatments in ponderosa pine forests and implications for restoration. Journal of 
Forestry Research, 177.  
Contact: Tzeidle Wasserman, PhD, Tzeidle.Wassernan@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 1. Ponderosa pine regeneration often 
establishes by 10 years post-treatment, and in many 
areas it is prolific with more than 1,000 seedling 
per hectare (405 seedlings/acre).  
