View this email in your browser
Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop
20 years of Megaﬁre: Compounding Disturbances
in a Climate-Altered West
March 8–10, 2022 Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado
The 2022 Cross-Boundary Landscape Restoration Workshop will bring
together land and ﬁre managers, researchers, and stakeholders to develop
strategies that apply evidence-based collaborative management of forest
landscapes in the Intermountain West. We invite partners to share lessons
learned from their engagement in local, regional, and national collaborative
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

forest and ﬁre restoration processes on federal and non-federal lands. 
 
Who should attend?
Government, tribal, and non-government foresters, ﬁre managers, planners,
biologists, line ofﬁcers, regional and national program managers, forest
researchers, conservation organizations, funding partners, forest operations
companies, and other stakeholders interested in applying science and tools for
all-lands collaborative forest landscape restoration.
 
Workshop objectives
Share successes and lessons learned on cross-boundary, collaborative
efforts to restore and reimagine ﬁre-adapted forest landscapes.
Co-develop recommendations, strategies, and resources for collaborative
landscape-scale restoration projects. 
Explore gaps and needs to better incorporate diversity, equity, inclusion,
and justice in forestry, fuels, and ﬁre research, and management.
Don’t miss out on this peer-learning opportunity on all-lands forest and
ﬁre management in Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and surrounding
states.
Hurry. Early bird pricing ends February 7th!
 
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
CLICK TO REGISTER NOW!

NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2022 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
