View this email in your browser
 
Advancing Tribal Forest Management
New Federal Legislative Directions Increase Collaboration Opportunities
Between Tribes and Agencies
In Arizona and New Mexico, there are 10 million acres of tribal forested land.
Across the US, tribes share thousands of miles of forested boundaries with
federal land management agencies. For example, tribes share approximately
2,100 miles of boundary with the Forest Service. Increasingly, wildﬁres and
other disturbances such as insect and disease outbreaks are spreading from
federally managed lands to tribal lands, putting tribal forest assets at risk. 
 
In response, recent federal legislative directions present new opportunities for
federally recognized tribes to manage their own forest resources and share
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

forest management stewardship on adjacent federal lands. Tribes can now
assume management of their forest resources from the Bureau of Indian
Affairs; propose treatments on adjacent federal lands; and enter into “638
agreements” — also known as self-determination agreements — with the
Forest Service to implement treatments under the Tribal Forest Protection
Act of 2004.
 
A new white paper written by Jonathan Martin, director of ERI’s Native
American Forests and Rangeland Management Program, examines these new
legislative actions and their implications for tribal forest management. It details
relevant federal and tribal forest management history and policies and explains
how to identify, plan for, and implement cross-boundary restoration treatments
on tribal and federal agency lands.
 
Forest resources are critical to tribes’ sustainability and provide economic,
cultural, historical, and ecological beneﬁts for tribes and tribal members. A
greater understanding of legislative actions and associated authorities and
regulations can facilitate collaboration between tribes and federal land
management agencies and lead to healthier forest conditions for the beneﬁt of
tribal and non-tribal communities.
 
READ THE WHITE PAPER

Subscribe to Our YouTube Page
We are updating the ERI YouTube page with new videos from our spring wood
innovation conference and climate adaptation workshop.
 
See our playlist page to subscribe and browse more videos.
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2021 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.

