Workforce Training Needs of  
Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest:  
Results of an Industry Survey
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
February 2022

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been significantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: A robust forest industry in the Southwest is needed for forest restoration efforts to be 
successful. This includes a large base of contractors—specifically loggers, masticators, and truck drivers. 
Photo courtesy of the USDA Forest Service, Coconino National Forest
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: February 2022
Authors: Damon Vaughan, Catrin Edgeley, and Han-Sup Han
Reviewers: Anne Mottek, Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership; Patrick Rappold, Wood 
Utilization Specialist, USDA Forest Service, Region 9; and Robert Rich, Forest Engineer, USDA 
Forest Service, retired
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Vaughan, D., C. Edgeley, and H.-S. Han. 2022. Workforce training needs of forestry contractors 
in the US Southwest: Results of an industry survey. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest 
Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 16 p.
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. A portion of the research was also supported by 
funding provided by the Arizona Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).

Table of Contents
Executive Summary . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Introduction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
	
Existing Forest Workforce Research Throughout the US. .  .  .  . . . . . 3
	
Current Status of Forest Operations in the US Southwest . .  .  . . . . 4
	
Study Objectives. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Methods: Survey Administration. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Results. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
	
General Business Information and Barriers to Success. .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 7
	
Number of New Hires Needed and Availability  
	
of External Training. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
	
Equipment Used in Forestry Operations in the Southwest . .  .  . . . 10
Discussion . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
	
Industry Characteristics and Training Needs . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 10
	
Increasing Mechanization of Forestry Operations  
	
in the Southwest. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Conclusion and Recommendation. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary
Much of the forested land in the western United States needs active management to restore forest health and 
prevent catastrophic wildfire. However, forest restoration efforts are not likely to be successful without a robust 
forest industry that includes a large base of contractors—specifically loggers, masticators, and truck drivers. The 
forest industry in the Southwest has not recovered from a decline that began in the 1990s; currently, capacity 
for harvesting, transportation, and processing is not sufficient to meet the need for increasing the pace and scale 
of forest restoration and fuel reduction operations. To better understand current demographic and background 
information on contractors and whether a forest operations training program might address their employee training 
needs, we conducted a survey of forestry contractors in the Southwest. This paper summarizes findings from that 
survey and concludes with recommendations for workforce training needs. 
We surveyed owners of 299 logging, mastication, and trucking businesses in Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico 
during the winter of 2020/2021, and received 66 completed surveys for a 22% response rate. We found that most 
of the business owners were over 50 years old, while most employees were under 40. The majority of logging outfits 
were hoping to increase their harvesting productivity; the average current productivity was 5.2 loads per day and 
the average ideal productivity was 7.9 loads per day. Respondents shared that chainsaws and feller-bunchers were 
tied as the dominant machines for felling trees, while skidders were the dominant machines for stump-to-landing 
extraction. The biggest barrier to the success of contracting business operations was “finding skilled workers.” 
Surveyed business owners anticipated hiring a total of 465 new employees (169 prior to 2024 and 296 after and 
including 2024) to work as forest equipment operators, specialized maintenance technicians, and truck drivers. 
Despite these goals, respondents said they had little access to external training, meaning that the burden of training 
all these new employees will be on the business owners themselves. 
Survey results indicate a strong need for the establishment of a forest operations training program to serve 
the Southwest to address workforce issues. Such a program can produce trained graduates to increase current 
workforce capacity, particularly by supporting the provision of trained forest machine operators to match 
the current needs of the industry. Additionally, the program can promote a transition toward mechanized 
operations, which are generally more productive and safer for operators. A regional program would be well-
positioned to provide trained graduates for a job market that needs skilled operators. This would be a benefit 
to the graduates of the program, to the contractors that need to hire them, and to forest restoration efforts in 
the Southwest as a whole.

Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey      3
A regional forest operations training program would provide trained graduates for a job market needing skilled operators. Photo 
courtesy of ERI 
Introduction 
Much of the forested land in the western United States needs active management (such as mechanical thinning 
of low-value, small-diameter trees) to restore forest health and prevent catastrophic wildfire (Hessburg et al. 
2021). A legacy of forest management practices such as fire exclusion, as well as unsustainable logging and 
grazing, have led to overly dense stands that predominate the landscape (Covington et al. 1997). Additionally, 
the Southwest region is experiencing warmer and drier weather due to climate change. These conditions 
promote damaging wildfires that threaten forest ecosystems, human lives, and property, while releasing large 
amounts of carbon into the atmosphere. Forest restoration and fuel reduction thinning projects can reduce this 
wildfire danger, but efforts are unlikely to be successful without a robust forest industry that includes a large 
base of forestry contractors.1  The forest industry in the West has been in decline for several decades (Keegan 
et al. 2011), and there are concerns about the number and availability of trained forestry contractors required 
to advance this work. This paper summarizes survey results that reveal the current profile and capacity of 
forestry contractors in three southwestern states (Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico) and concludes with 
recommendations for training forest operations professionals.
Existing Forest Workforce Research Throughout the US
A recent review that synthesized information from decades of logging industry surveys (Conrad et al. 2018a) 
identified several major trends in the US forestry workforce. These trends include increased consolidation (e.g. 
small firms being purchased by larger ones), a reduction in the workforce, decreased profitability of firms, increased 
mechanization of operations, and an aging population of business owners. Most of the studies synthesized in 
Conrad et al. (2018a) were from the eastern US (east of the Mississippi), likely because research has predominantly 
1	
In this paper, ‘forestry contractor’ refers to a private business that implements forest health and fuels reduction projects prescribed by private landowners, 
and municipal, state, and federal agencies. We refer specifically to businesses that are classified as loggers, masticators, or forest product truck drivers.

4	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
focused on that region. In the Southeast, surveys have been conducted at regular intervals (every five years) for 
many decades, and have provided a good source of data to track changing trends (Conrad et al. 2018b). Other 
eastern US areas, including the Northeast and the Lake States, have conducted regular logging industry surveys 
as well (Gc et al. 2020). However, there is a distinct absence of survey literature that represents the western US, 
especially in the Southwest region.
Current Status of Forest Operations in the US Southwest
Forest management in the US Southwest is greatly needed to improve forest health and mitigate fire danger, but 
the economics of the necessary forest operations are challenging. The goal of forest restoration treatments is to 
remove small-diameter trees and preserve large, old trees—so the value of the timber to be removed is often not 
high enough to cover the cost of operations. Because profit margins of small-diameter trees are much thinner 
than those of large trees, increased operational efficiencies and economies of scale are necessary for firms to 
remain profitable.  
The emphasis on harvesting small-diameter trees is a relatively recent development. Until the 1990s, many 
large, old trees were harvested, and timber sales generated profits (Covington and Vosick 2016). This 
approach led to an over-harvesting of old growth and contributed to the forest health issues faced today. Old 
growth ponderosa pine forests are adapted to low-intensity surface fires, while dense second-growth forests 
are more susceptible to high-intensity crown fires. The harvesting of large, old trees was curtailed by litigation 
from environmental groups in the 1990s, and the availability of logging contracts severely declined (Vosick 
2016). Coupled with the already-existing issues with timber supply, this led to a collapse of the harvesting 
and processing infrastructure in the region (Mottek Lucas et al. 2017). With the rise of large, catastrophic 
wildfires (severe wildfires over 100,000 acres), the need for active forest management has become increasingly 
urgent. Collaborative groups have worked to build consensus and set the stage for landscape-scale forest 
restoration contracts. However, the industry has yet to recover from the challenges of the 1990s. Moreover, 
concerns and issues associated with forest thinning operations still remain, and projects still face litigation 
from environmental groups. Recently, questions surrounding the adequacy of Mexican spotted owl monitoring 
by the US Forest Service led to an injunction that temporarily halted harvesting on six national forests in 
Arizona and New Mexico in 2019–2020. 
The wood processing industry in the Southwest continues to struggle; many sawmills have shut down in the last 
several decades and few new mills have opened (Keegan et al. 2011, Sorensen et al. 2016). The largest public 
land forest restoration project in the country, the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI), has an ambitious 
goal of treating 50,000 acres per year in northern Arizona. However, it has consistently fallen short of this goal 
since implementation began in 2014. These shortcomings arise, in part, from relying on an under-developed 
forest industry to harvest, transport, and process byproducts from forest restoration treatments. When trees 
are cut in thinning projects, low-value small-diameter logs and biomass (i.e., forest residues like tree limbs and 
branches generated as a result of restoration treatments) must be removed from the forest to effectively mitigate 
wildfire risks and improve forest health. This means that woody materials must be hauled to a processing facility 
and converted into products that should, at a minimum, cover the cost of transportation to the facility. However, 
due to the sparse industry in the Southwest, transportation distances are often very long (>150 miles) and the 
value of the material does not cover these costs. This makes it practically impossible for forest operations to 
be economically self-sustaining, and contractors must rely on favorable contract terms (e.g., being paid the 
difference between the cost of removing biomass and the receipts from merchantable trees; Mottek Lucas et al. 
2017) to break even or make a profit. 

Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey      5
During a whole-tree harvesting operation, entire trees are felled and extracted to the landing, where 
they are then processed and loaded onto trucks. In a cut-to-length operation, the tree is felled, 
processed at the stump, then the logs are brought to a centralized location (the “landing”) to be 
loaded onto trucks. The various machines involved include:
•	
Feller-buncher: An operator, seated in a cab, drives the machine to the tree. The machine is 
equipped with an attachment that can sever the tree at its base, pick it up, and place it in a pile 
with other trees.
•	
Chainsaw: The chainsaw operator fells the tree by cutting its base. Wherever the tree falls is where 
the extraction machine must collect it (no option to group into piles as with feller-buncher).
•	
Skidder: An operator, seated in a cab, collects the felled trees and moves them to the landing or 
roadside. If the trees were felled using feller-bunchers, they are typically in a pile that is easy for a 
grapple skidder to pick up. If they were felled using chainsaws, the skidder must collect individual 
stems.
•	
Harvester: This machine is capable of felling a tree, delimbing it, and cutting it to log-length 
segments (typically less than 16 ft). Therefore, processing takes place at the stump, and branches 
are typically left in the woods.
•	
Forwarder: This machine picks processed logs up with a loading grapple, places them into a bunk, 
and carries them from the forest to the landing. Forwarders typically operate in tandem with 
harvesters, following the same off-road trail paths the harvester created and traveled.
Box 1. Definitions of Machines Used for Forest Harvesting Operations
Photo credits: Han-Sup Han and Heesol Chang
Feller-buncher
Chainsaw
Skidder
Whole-Tree
Cut-to-Length
Forwarder
Harvester

6	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Collectively, these factors have contributed to concerns about workforce capacity to satisfy the demand for forest 
restoration in the Southwest. Lack of workforce capacity is currently a major barrier to increasing the pace and 
scale of forest restoration. For example, 4FRI treated 12,450 acres in 2017 using a workforce of 87.1 full-time 
equivalent loggers and truckers (Hjerpe et al. 2021). Scaling up to the stated goal of 50,000 acres per year, and 
assuming a linear expansion (Combrink et al. 2012), would require a workforce of 349.8 trained loggers and 
truckers for the 4FRI forestlands in Arizona alone. These jobs require unique skill sets; loggers need to be able 
to operate a variety of forest machines (Box 1), and truck drivers must be capable of operating log trucks and 
chip vans on forest roads in addition to paved highways. Additionally, specialized maintenance technicians are 
needed to assure the equipment is in good working order.
Study Objectives
The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) administered a survey of forestry contractors throughout the 
Southwest. We surveyed logging, mastication, and trucking contractors based in Arizona, Colorado, and New 
Mexico to seek their input and fulfill three primary objectives:
1.	 Characterize the current status of the forestry contracting businesses operating in the Southwest.
2.	 Determine if there is a need for a Southwest-based forest operations training program to increase workforce capacity.
3.	 Identify specific needs for training among forestry contractors for machine operators, truck drivers, and 
specialized maintenance technicians. 
Methods: Survey Administration
We developed a survey with input from key informants that include forestry contractors, land management 
agencies, and researchers in the Southwest region. The survey questions were written to provide findings 
specific to the objectives defined above. The target audience for the survey was owners of logging, mastication, 
and trucking contracting businesses in Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico. After developing a contact list 
and excluding businesses that were not relevant or for whom we could not verify accurate contact information, 
our sample frame consisted of 299 businesses in the three states. It is important to note that this number, by 
necessity, includes some businesses not relevant to the survey—limited information exists online for many of 
them, so it was often impossible to verify their business focus before making contact. We sent the surveys in 
November 2020 and received responses until March 2021. In total, we received 66 responses, which represents 
a 22% response rate (Table 1). For a more thorough description of the methods for this study, please see 
Vaughan et al. (2021).
Table 1. Response rate of the 2020 forestry contractor survey in the Southwest.
Mailed
Responded
Response Rate
Arizona
55
11
20.0%
Colorado
174
39
22.4%
New Mexico
70
16
22.9%
Total
299
66
22.1%

Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey      7
Results
General Business Information and Barriers to Success
We asked several questions to gain basic demographic information about the forestry contractors (Table 2). Small, 
medium, and large-sized businesses were represented, with the largest portion (28.6%) being small businesses (i.e., 
“chainsaw and truck,” or non-mechanized operations) that indicated their total capital investment was “less than 
$100,000.” Respondents have been operating for a relatively long amount of time at an average of 22.0 years in 
business, and with an average of 27.7 years of experience. The vast majority of contracting business owners had 
high school degrees or greater (including associate degrees, bachelor’s degrees, or graduate degrees). More than 
half had two-year degrees, certificates from vocational school, bachelor’s, or graduate degrees. Results showed 
that 35.9% of respondents were 60 years of age or older, and none of the respondents were under 30. However, 
employee ages were much younger, with 30.8% under 30. 
The survey also included many questions related to contract availability, business productivity, and barriers to 
success. Approximately 34.9% of respondents had only a short window of planned work (0–5 months), 44.4% 
reported 16 or more months, with the remaining respondents (20.6%) distributed between these two ends of the 
continuum. For loggers, the mean truckload productivity was 5.2 loads per day, with an ideal productivity of 7.9 
loads per day. The most commonly identified barrier to the success of operating forestry contracting businesses was 
“finding skilled workers” (Table 3).
The wood processing industry in the Southwest continues to struggle. Many sawmills have shut down in the last several decades and 
few new mills have opened. Photo courtesy of ERI

8	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Table 2. Responses to questions in the demographics and general information section of the survey. For categorical 
questions (rows 1–5), the most frequent answers are displayed in bold. For numerical questions (rows 6–9), the mean 
and standard deviation are presented.
Question
Category or range
Response 
frequency
Mean (SD)
Please indicate the highest level of formal 
education that you have completed
Elementary school 
High school graduate 
Vocational school 
Associate degree 
College graduate 
Graduate degree 
3.0%
31.8%
18.2%
6.1%
30.3%
10.6%
N/A
What is your (business owner) age category?
Under 18 
18–29 
30–39 
40–49 
50–59 
60+ 
0%
0%
7.8%
26.6%
29.7%
35.9%
N/A
Please estimate how many of your employees 
fell under each of the following age categories 
in 2020
Under 18 
18–29 
30–39 
40–49 
50–59 
60+ 
3.3%
27.5%
24.4%
19.9%
15.3%
9.5%
N/A
Please estimate the total capital investment in 
equipment related to logging, mastication, or 
trucking of your operation
< $99,999 
$100,000–$499,999 
$500,000–$999,999 
$1,000,000–$1,499,999 
> $ 1,500,000 
28.6%
23.8%
17.5%
4.8%
25.4%
N/A
Ignoring any seasonal restrictions, how 
many months of logging, mastication, and/
or trucking work do you currently have 
scheduled?
0–5 months 
6–10 months 
11–15 months 
16+ months 
34.9%
9.5%
11.1%
44.4%
N/A
How many years of experience do you have 
with logging, mastication, and/or trucking?
0–75 years
N/A
27.7 (15.8)
How many years has your business been in 
the logging, mastication, and/or trucking 
business?
0–90 years
N/A
22.0 (17.1)
Approximately how many standard log truck 
loads (23–25 tons/trip) does your company 
move per day?
0–35 truckloads/day
N/A
5.2 (7.7)
What is your ideal daily productivity?
0–50 truckloads/day
N/A
7.9 (11.1)

Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey      9
Table 3. Ranking of seven different barriers to successful business operations in terms of how impactful they were to 
the respondents’ businesses. A rank of one indicates the most impactful barrier and seven indicates the least.
Rank
Barriers
1
Finding skilled workers
2
Limited access to forest products markets
3
Limited contract availability
4
High transportation costs
5
Lacking the appropriate equipment for the job
6
Short operating seasons
7
Strict merchandising specifications and biomass disposal requirements of landowners
Number of New Hires Needed and Availability of External Training
Respondents indicated that they anticipate hiring a large number of new employees in the next several years (Table 
4). The timeframes of “before 2024” and “2024 or later” were chosen to show short-term (3 years from receipt of 
survey) as well as long-term plans. The job category with the greatest demand is forest equipment operators (such 
as feller-bunchers, skidders, etc.), but there is also need for more specialized maintenance technicians and truck 
drivers. The findings in Table 4 are only representative of respondents who participated in this survey, so the actual 
number of required employees in the study region is likely much higher. 
Table 4. Total anticipated number of new hires over short and long-term time frames. 
Before 2024
2024 or later
Total
Forest equipment operators
99
231
330
Specialized maintenance
32
35
67
Truckers
38
30
68
Total
169
296
465
Survey results indicated that business owners will likely have sole responsibility for providing training for these new 
hires. Overall, 86% of respondents did not utilize any external training. Of those who relied on internal training, 
85% reported that it was their only option, 11% reported that external training was too expensive, and 4% reported 
that available external training was of low quality. 
I would like to eventually move to a more mechanized 
operation but that would require additional training…
To be perfectly honest I would like to have additional 
training opportunities to operate equipment myself.

10	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Equipment Used in Forestry Operations in the Southwest
Of those forestry contractors who reported using equipment to fell trees, the number that primarily used chainsaws 
was equivalent to the number that used feller-bunchers (Table 5). For stump-to-landing extraction, the primary 
machines used were skidders. The percentage of contractors relying primarily on harvesters for felling and 
forwarders for extraction was roughly equal, which correlates because these machines are typically used in tandem 
for cut-to-length operations. For an explanation of these machines and others commonly used in southwestern 
forest operations, see Box 1.
Table 5. Percent of respondents relying primarily on each piece of equipment in felling and extraction operations.
Category
Equipment
Percent response
Felling
Chainsaw
43.4%
Feller-buncher
43.4%
Harvester
13.2%
Extraction
Skidder
85.7%
Forwarder
14.3%
Discussion
Industry Characteristics and Training Needs
Respondents generally expressed a desire to grow their businesses and expand the workforce in coming years. 
The largest barrier to business success identified by respondents was “finding skilled workers,” with the majority 
indicating that this was due to a scarcity or lack of accessibility to external training programs for forest operations. 
This aligns with broader existing concerns about maintaining a skilled workforce in the forest products industry 
(Xu et al. 2014), which has led to a resurgence in training programs and provided a motivation for our study. Our 
results indicate a need to provide opportunities to learn safe and productive practices in a dedicated environment. 
In turn, as these training programs are implemented, this will promote dedication, commitment, and increased 
retention of skilled workers by contracting foresters. 
Conversely, if this problem is not addressed, existing concerns about workforce capacity in southwestern forest 
restoration projects could be amplified by looming retirements. Our survey showed that most owners of forestry 
contracting businesses are over 50, and an aging managerial population is a consistently documented challenge 
in other forest operations surveys (Conrad et al. 2018a). Employee ages skewed the other way, with respondents 
reporting that the majority of their employees were under 40 years old. This signals the potential emergence of 
a new generation of forestry professionals, and any training programs developed to serve this population must 
consider how their curriculum and course content will contribute to retention of this younger workforce. In the 
end, the new generation of workers will eventually need to acquire the skills to establish or oversee contracting 
businesses as the current older population of business owners transitions into retirement. 

Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey      11
Increasing Mechanization of Forestry Operations in the Southwest
Survey results showed that chainsaws and feller-bunchers are widely used as primary felling tools by contractors in 
the US Southwest and are much more common than harvesters. Chainsaw felling is sometimes necessary on steep 
slopes or rocky ground, but operations on gentler slopes are considerably safer and more productive with machines 
such as feller-bunchers or harvesters (Lagerstrom et al. 2019). However, business owners may be reluctant to 
allow untrained workers to operate feller-bunchers or harvesters due to high up-front capital costs, expensive 
maintenance, and potential safety issues. Additionally, our survey results showed that some business owners 
themselves would need training on these machines before changing their business models. Conrad et al. (2018a) 
reported that chainsaw use for felling dominates in the Northeast—specifically Vermont, New York, and Maine. 
Despite the prevalence of chainsaw use in these states, mechanized systems accounted for most of the volume 
removed in all cases (Conrad et al. 2018a). This highlights an opportunity to encourage mechanized operations 
through specialized training programs.
Our survey respondents typically reported that their current productivity (in truckloads) was lower than their ideal 
productivity. This desire to grow their businesses may be well-supported by increased mechanization. Another 
explanation for the gap between actual and ideal productivity could be limited availability of truck drivers to haul 
the wood. In either case, training programs can help close that gap by providing qualified operators. 
When mechanized harvesting is performed in the Southwest, our survey results show that a whole-tree harvesting 
system consisting of feller-bunchers and skidders is by far the most dominant system employed. This reflects the 
need for removing whole trees and the biomass (including treetops and limbs) to effectively reduce forest fuel loads. 
Cut-to-length harvesting systems typically leave the treetops and limbs on the forest floor, which goes against 
some contract requirements in the Southwest. Similarly, Vaughan and Mackes (2015) reported that only one 
survey respondent (of 77 Colorado forestry contractors that responded to their survey) engaged in cut-to-length 
harvesting. Cable yarders and helicopters are a minor component of the picture in the Southwest, likely due to the 
low value of the timber and the high cost of such operations (Chang 2021). Our results suggest that in order for 
a training center to produce graduates who are hirable by operating businesses in the Southwest, the curriculum 
should have a strong training component for whole-tree harvesting machines, such as feller-bunchers and skidders. 
There has been a need for a training center 
for this industry for a long time.

12	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Conclusion and Recommendations
Survey results indicate a strong need for a forest operations training program (see Box 2) that serves the Southwest 
region. To maximize support and utility for contracting businesses and their work in this area, that program should: 
• 
Produce trained graduates who can increase current workforce capacity as demand for forest restoration 
continues to increase.
• 
Offer training on whole-tree harvesting machines (e.g., feller-bunchers and skidders) to match the current 
needs of the southwestern industry.
• 
Promote a transition toward more mechanized operations to support safer and more efficient large-scale 
operations. 
• 
Offer training for specialized maintenance technicians and forest products truck drivers.
• 
Tailor training efforts to facilitate business succession. This could include going beyond technical operation-
focused training to incorporate business management skills as current business owners begin to retire.
Given the scope of these recommendations, it is recommended that any training program established in the 
Southwest should consider:
• 
Developing micro-credentials or certificates, covering topics on safety, business, and operational practices, 
aimed at increasing the hiring potential for graduates.
• 
Partnering with forest operations business owners during the development of courses to ensure that training 
content and goals meet both the needs and standards of their companies; this could take the form of an 
advisory group or listening sessions, for example.
• 
Establishing industry connections to foster an employment pipeline into the southwestern forestry industry 
upon training completion.
• 
A range of outlets for recruiting trainees; for example, focusing on high school graduates who are interested in 
forest management career paths, or veterans who increasingly seek non-military vocational training programs.
Overall, our findings illustrate that novel training programs across the Southwest would be well-positioned to 
provide trained graduates to a burgeoning job market. The beneficiaries and benefits are exponential and include 
the graduates, forestry contractors, and achieving accelerated landscape-scale forest restoration activities. On 
a broader level, support for forest industry is crucial in maintaining forest health, mitigating severe wildfires, 
protecting communities, and promoting social and economic sustainability across the Southwest.
Our main problem is finding decent help. 
No one we find is trained. We have to train 
every person that comes to work for us.

Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey      13
Concerns about maintaining a skilled workforce in the forest products industry (Xu et al. 2014) 
have led to a resurgence in training programs nationwide. To address the workforce needs 
of southwestern forestry contractors, the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona 
University received a planning grant in September 2020 from the US Economic Development 
Administration to develop a Forest Operations Training Program (FOTP). The FOTP will focus on 
three training areas and career paths: 
Forest equipment operator course: Workers will operate mechanized forest equipment to cut, skid, 
process, and load logs onto trucks. Upon completion, students will have both the professional logger 
and equipment operator certifications. 
Truck driver training course: There is a critical need throughout the US for trained truck drivers 
(Costello and Karickhoff 2019). The lack of certified truck drivers in forest operations is particularly 
acute since highway drivers are not trained to haul logs and operate chip vans and forest equipment 
on forest roads that pose unique situations. The FOTP will focus on operating log trucks, chip vans, 
and low-bed trailers hauling heavy equipment to meet this expanding need.
 
Heavy equipment (diesel) repair and maintenance course: Forest equipment requires extensive, 
regular maintenance and repair, and contractors find it difficult to get qualified, experienced 
professionals into the forest to effectively maintain and efficiently repair this equipment. The FOTP will 
work with equipment manufacturers such as John Deere, Ponsse, Tigercat, and Caterpillar to develop 
thorough and effective training to meet this essential need.
A team effort is integral to the success of the FOTP, and it includes the following partners: 
•	
Coconino Community College 
•	
Yavapai Community College 
•	
Coconino and Yavapai County/Workforce Development Board 
•	
Arizona Department of Veterans’ Services 
•	
Arizona Department of Forestry and Fire Management 
•	
Community-based organizations: Economic Collaborative of Northern Arizona (ECoNA), Northern 
Arizona Council of Governments (NACOG), and Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership (GFFP) 
•	
Equipment manufacturers: forestry machines and trucks 
•	
Forest industry companies 
•	
USDA Forest Service 
The Future of the Forest Operations Training Program 
The ERI plans to open the FOTP to students in August 2022 with additional funding from the EDA and 
other potential sources, as well as collaboration with partners and stakeholders. The FOTP will benefit 
the private forestry sector by providing the needed training areas, facilities, and qualified instructors 
to train students in new techniques, equipment safety, and industry standards and practices. These 
courses and certificates will introduce forestry practices to a new generation of students while 
instilling knowledge, reducing risk, increasing efficiency, and creating a new cadre of workers with 
increased investment in the private forest industry.
Box 2. Developing a Forest Operations Training Program 

14	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
The most commonly identified barrier to the success of operating forestry contracting businesses was 
“finding skilled workers.” Here, a skidder extracts whole trees and transports them to a landing area for 
processing. Photo courtesy of ERI.
The site of a recent thinning project reveals a more open ponderosa pine forest, which is now less 
dense and more resilient to uncharacteristically severe wildfires and drought. Photo courtesy of ERI

Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey      15
References
Chang, H. 2021. The cost of forest thinning operations in the United States West: A systematic literature review 
and model development. MS Thesis, Northern Arizona University.
Combrink, T., W. Fox, and J. Peterson. 2012. Workforce needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative project: An 
analysis. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute. 17 pp.
Conrad, J.L., W.D. Greene, and P. Hiesl. 2018a. A review of changes in US logging businesses 1980s–present. 
Journal of Forestry, 116: 291–303.
Conrad, J.L., W.D. Greene, and P. Hiesl. 2018b. The evolution of logging businesses in Georgia 1987–2017 and 
South Carolina 2012–2017. Forest Science, 64: 671–81.
Costello, B., and A. Karickhoff. 2019. Truck Driver Shortage Analysis 2019. American Trucking Associations 
report.
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore et al. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the 
Southwest. Journal of Forestry, 95: 23–9.
Covington, W.W., and D. Vosick. 2016. Restoring the sustainability of frequent-fire forests of the Rocky Mountain 
West. Arizona State Law Journal, 48: 11–33.
Gc, S., K. Potter-Witter, C.R. Blinn, and M. Rickenbach. 2020. The logging sector in the Lake States of 
Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin: Status, issues, and opportunities. Journal of Forestry, 118:501–14.
Hessburg, P.F., S.J. Prichard, R.K. Hagmann, N.A. Povak, and F.K. Lake. 2021. Wildfire and climate change 
adaptation of western North American forests: A case for intentional management. Ecological Applications, 
DOI: 10.1002/eap.2432.
Hjerpe, E., A. Mottek Lucas, and H. Eichman. 2021. Modeling regional economic contributions of forest 
restoration: A case study of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative. Journal of Forestry, 1–15.
Keegan, C.E., C.B. Sorenson, T.A. Morgan, S.W. Hayes, and J.M. Daniels. 2011. Impact of the Great Recession 
and housing collapse on the forest products industry in the western United States. Forest Products Journal, 
61: 625–34.
Lagerstrom, E., S. Magzamen, P. Kines, W. Brazile, and J. Rosecrance. 2019. Determinants of safety climate in the 
professional logging industry. Safety, 5: 1–12.
Mottek Lucas, A., Y. Kim, B. Greco, D.R. Becker, E.E. Hjerpe, and J. Abrams. 2017. The Social and economic 
contributions of the White Mountain Stewardship Project: Final 10-year assessment—Lessons learned 
and implications for future forest management initiatives. Journal of Forestry, 115: 548–58.
Sorenson, C.B., S.W. Hayes, T.A. Morgan, E.A. Simmons, M.G. Scudder, C.P. McIver, M.T. Thompson. 2016. 
The Four Corners timber harvest and forest products industry, 2012. Resour. Bull. RMRS-RB-21. Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 62 p.
Vaughan, D., C. Edgeley, and H. Han. 2021. Forest contracting businesses in the US Southwest: Current profile 
and workforce training needs. Journal of Forestry, 1–12.
Vaughan, D.R., and K.H. Mackes. 2015. Characteristics of Colorado forestry contractors and their role in current 
forest health issues. Forest Products Journal, 65: 217–25.
Vosick, D. 2016. Democratizing federal forest management through public participation and collaboration. Arizona 
State Law Journal, 48: 93–109.
Xu, Y., M. Smidt, and Y. Zhang. 2014. Logging worker wage, performance, and experience. Forest Products Journal, 
64: 210–6.

16	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
About the ERI White Paper Series: Issues in Forest Restoration 
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines 
ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with 
respect to its health, integrity and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic 
trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once-diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to 
damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers 
on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural 
processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research 
and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every forest 
restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not 
constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey      17
ERI White Papers — Issues in Forest Restoration
1. 	 Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. 	 Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. 	 Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. 	 Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests
5. 	 Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. 	 Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern 
Arizona
7. 	 Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. 	 Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. 	 Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. 	What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for 
Practitioners
11. 	Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. 	Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. 	Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. 	Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest 
Lands
15. 	Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16. 	Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. 	A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. 	Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. 	The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. 	Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. 	Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. 	The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
23. 	Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West
24. 	Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Projects
25. 	Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West
26. 	Wildfire Trends Across the Western US: Forest Fires Have Increased in Size, Severity, and Frequency 
Across Western Forests
27. 	Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area 
Residents
28. 	Full-Cost Accounting Remeasurement of the 2010 Schultz Fire: Understanding the Long-term Socio-
Economic Implications of High-Severity Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flooding
29. 	Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
