The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of com-
munities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues 
related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest 
 
 
By Damon Vaughan, Catrin Edgeley, and Han-Sup Han 
Introduction 
Much of the forested land in the western US requires active management to restore forest health and 
prevent catastrophic wildfire. However, forest restoration is unlikely to be successful without a robust 
forest industry, including key contractor personnel such as equipment operators (e.g., for masticators, 
feller-bunchers, skidders), truck drivers, and specialized maintenance technicians.  
 
The forest industry in the Southwest has not recovered from a decline that began in the 1990s; currently, 
capacity for harvesting, transportation, and processing is not sufficient to meet forest management needs. 
Increasing workforce capacity will require appropriate training programs designed for the southwestern 
forest industry now and into the future. However, there is a lack of forest industry research in the 
Southwest to inform the development of such programs.  
 
Methods 
We conducted a survey of forestry contractors in the Southwest to better understand existing contractors 
and their employee training needs. We developed the survey with input from forestry contractors, land 
management agencies, and researchers in the Southwest region. The target audience was owners of 
logging, mastication, and trucking contracting businesses in Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico. After 
developing an appropriate contact list, our sample frame consisted of 299 businesses. We mailed the 
questionnaires in November 2020 and received responses until March 2021. We received 66 responses, 
which represents a 22% response rate.  
 
Findings and Implications 
 
Need for More Trained Employees 
 
• 
Most surveyed business owners were over the age of 50; most employees were under 40. This could 
signal a potential wave of retirements in the near future and a need to plan ahead to ensure continuity. 
• 
The most significant barrier identified by the respondents was “finding skilled employees,” outranking 
other barriers, such as “limited access to forest products markets” and “limited contract availability.” 
• 
Surveyed business owners anticipated hiring a total of 465 new employees (169 prior to 2024 and 
296 after and including 2024) (Table 1).  
 
Table 1. Total anticipated number of new hires over short and long-term time frames.  
 
February 2022 
  
Before 2024 
2024 or later 
Total 
Forest equipment operators 
99 
231 
330 
Specialized maintenance 
32 
35 
67 
Truckers 
38 
30 
68 
Total 
169 
296 
465 

Availability of External Training 
• Respondents reported having little access to 
external training, meaning that the burden of 
training an influx of new employees will be on 
the business owners themselves.  
• Overall, 86% of respondents did not utilize any 
external training. Of those who relied on 
internal training, 85% reported that it was their 
only option. 
 
Mechanization and Productivity 
• Chainsaws and feller-bunchers were tied as the 
dominant machines for felling trees, while 
skidders were the dominant machines for stump-
to-landing extraction.  
• The majority of business owners were hoping to 
increase their harvesting productivity; average 
current productivity was 5.2 loads/day and 
average ideal productivity was 7.9 loads/day.  
• A transition toward more mechanized 
equipment (decreased reliance on chainsaws for 
felling trees) could lead to safer and more 
productive operations. 
 
Summary and Conclusions  
Survey results indicated a strong need for a forest 
operations training program that serves the 
Southwest. To maximize support and utility for 
contracting businesses, that program should:  
• Produce trained graduates who can increase current workforce capacity as demand for forest 
restoration continues to increase. 
• Offer training on whole-tree harvesting machines (e.g., feller-bunchers and skidders) to match 
the current needs of the southwestern industry. 
• Promote a transition toward more mechanized operations to support safer, more efficient, and 
more productive large-scale operations.  
• Offer training for specialized maintenance technicians and forest products truck drivers. 
• Tailor training efforts to facilitate business succession. This could include going beyond 
technical operation-focused training to incorporate managerial skills as current business owners 
begin to retire. 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publications: 
Vaughan, D., C. Edgeley, and H.S. Han. 2021. Forest Contracting Businesses in the US Southwest: Current 
Profile and Workforce Training Needs. Journal of Forestry, 1–12. 
 
Vaughan, D., C. Edgeley, and H.S. Han. 2022. Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US 
Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 16 p. 
Contact: Han-Sup Han, Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Forest Operations Training Program 
 
A training program would produce trained 
graduates for a job market in need of them. To 
that end, the ERI is developing a Forest 
Operations Training Program (FOTP)— 
scheduled to open to students in August 2022. 
It will focus on three training areas and career 
paths:  
 
• Forest equipment operator course: Students 
will operate mechanized forest equipment 
to cut, skid, process, and load logs onto 
trucks. Upon completion, students will have 
both professional logger and equipment 
operator certifications.  
• Truck driver training course: Students will 
receive truck driver training with an 
emphasis on forest roads and will gain 
practice operating log trucks, chip vans, 
and low-bed trailers hauling heavy 
equipment. 
• Heavy equipment (diesel) repair and 
maintenance course: Forest equipment 
requires extensive, regular maintenance and 
repair. The FOTP will work with 
equipment manufacturers such as John 
Deere, Ponsse, Tigercat, and Caterpillar to 
develop thorough and effective training to 
meet this essential need. 
