Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
Available online 17 September 2021
2666-0172/©
2021
The
Authors.
Published
by
Elsevier
B.V.
This
is
an
open
access
article
under
the
CC
BY-NC-ND
license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Integrating airborne and mobile lidar data with UAV photogrammetry for 
rapid assessment of changing forest snow depth and cover 
Jonathon Donager a, Temuulen Ts. Sankey a,*, Andrew S´anchez-Meador b, Joel B. Sankey c, 
Abraham Springer a 
a Northern Arizona University, School of Earth and Sustainability, School of Informatics, Computing, and Cyber Systems, 1295 S. Knoles Drive, PO Box 5695, Flagstaff, 
AZ, 86011, USA 
b Northern Arizona University, School of Forestry, 200 East Pine Knoll Drive, PO Box 15018, Flagstaff, AZ, 86011, USA 
c U. S. Geological Survey, Southwest Biological Science Center, Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center, 2255 N. Gemini Drive, Flagstaff, AZ, 86001, USA   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Forest structure 
Structure-from-motion 
SfM 
Tree height 
Tree segmentation 
UAV lidar 
Forest thinning 
Snow-on lidar 
Snow-off lidar 
A B S T R A C T   
Forest structure and topography can influence the ecohydrologic function and resiliency to drought and changing 
climate. It is, therefore, important to understand how forest restoration treatments alter snowpack distribution 
and design the treatments accordingly. We use a combination of aerial lidar, multi-temporal terrestrial mobile 
lidar, and UAV photogrammetry to estimate rapidly changing snow depth and cover in northern Arizona, USA. 
We then examine the impact of forest structure and topography on snow depth and snow cover persistence to 
inform forest restoration treatments. Our results show that mobile lidar data can be used to estimate snow depth 
with standard errors of 8 cm when differenced with snow-off airborne lidar data. UAV-based Structure-from- 
Motion data can be used to estimate snow cover persistence with 92–97% overall accuracies in forested eco­
systems. Random forest models indicate spatially varying importance of forest structural and topographic var­
iables in predicting snow depth and cover persistence, when summarized at different spatial scales (from 5 m to 
250 m) and with variable directional location offsets. Forest snow depth was best explained (R2 ≈0.46) by 
canopy height metrics at summary scales of >75 m, while canopy cover was most important at summary scales of 
<40 m (R2 ≈0.3). Snow cover persistence was best explained at very local scales by canopy cover (R2 ≈0.38) 
and less so at larger scales (>75 m) by topographic and forest patch characteristics (R2 ≈0.34). Our results 
demonstrate that 3-dimensional datasets are critical in rapidly characterizing changing snowpack to better un­
derstand the impacts of forest structure and topography to inform forest restoration treatment designs. The re­
lationships observed in our study can inform currently ongoing regional-scale forest restoration in the southwest 
to improve forest health and resiliency.   
1. Introduction 
Increasing temperatures, drought frequency and duration, as well as 
altered precipitation regimes threaten the health and resiliency of for­
ests (Seager et al., 2007; Allen et al., 2002; Cayan et al., 2010; Mac­
Donald, 2010; Overpeck et al., 2012; Williams et al., 2013; Keane et al., 
2015; Kolb et al., 2016). In particular, increasing winter temperatures 
impact snowpack in high elevation forests of the southwestern USA, 
where approximately half of yearly precipitation comes as snow (Her­
eford, 2007) but is currently trending towards earlier seasonal melt 
(Sankey et al., 2015) and is further impacted by seasonal drought. The 
alteration of forest structure through management activities influences 
forest health and resiliency by changing the water balance and snow 
accumulation and persistence (Baker, 1986; Ffolliott et al., 1989; 
Simonin et al., 2007; Molotch et al., 2009; Varhola et al., 2010; D’Amato 
et al., 2013; Lundquist et al., 2013; Gleason et al., 2017). The structural 
arrangement of trees plays an exceedingly important role due to canopy 
shading of the ground surface, interception, and re-radiation of absorbed 
energy by trees (Lundquist et al., 2013; Sankey et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 
2018; Belmonte et al., 2021). These effects are further exacerbated by 
latitude. Snow cover that occurs closer to the equator is increasingly 
constrained by warming temperatures resulting from climate change. 
Specifically, dryland forests at the southern latitudes are at greater risk 
from drought and its effects on disturbance events (Kolb et al., 2016; 
* Corresponding author. 1298 S. Knoles Drive, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ, 86011, USA. 
E-mail address: Temuulen.Sankey@nau.edu (T.Ts. Sankey).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Science of Remote Sensing 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/science-of-remote-sensing 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.srs.2021.100029 
Received 26 February 2021; Received in revised form 15 September 2021; Accepted 16 September 2021   

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
2
Sankey et al., 2015; Reynolds et al., 2013; Kolb et al., 2016). A better 
understanding of the relationships among snow accumulation, persis­
tence, and forest structure is necessary as climate change intersects with 
forest management and restoration activities (Bradford and Bell, 2017). 
Across North America, large scale forest restoration is taking place as 
the need for forest ecosystem services is increasingly recognized 
(Mueller et al., 2013; Schultz et al., 2012). In Arizona, a regional-scale 
restoration effort, known as the Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
(4FRI; USDA, 2015), is attempting to restore the historic structure and 
function of semi-arid ponderosa forests through mechanical thinning 
and managed fire treatments (Allen et al., 2002; Ffolliott and Baker, 
2000; Reynolds et al., 2013). Historically, these forests are resilient to a 
variety of disturbances, including wildfire and drought, although these 
characteristics have been lost due to the current high tree density and 
canopy cover (Allen et al., 2002; Bradford and D’Amato, 2012; Reynolds 
et al., 2013; USDA, 2015). Restoration treatments can increase resiliency 
of the forest stand and lessen the effects of drought-related mortality 
(Simonin et al., 2007; Zou et al., 2008; Dore et al., 2010; Kerhoulas et al., 
2013b; Bottero et al., 2017; Bradford and Bell, 2017; Gleason et al., 
2017; Sankey et al., 2020). Less understood in these warm, 
snow-dependent forests is how forest structure and topography influ­
ence snow deposition and ablation. Here we quantify the effects of forest 
structure and topography on snowpack to inform the current restoration 
efforts and treatment prescriptions that can be implemented. 
Lidar datasets can capture both the horizontal and vertical structure 
of forests as well as snow cover and depth through time with repeat 
measurements (Lefsky et al., 2002; D’Amato et al., 2013; Dore et al., 
2010; Ellis et al., 2013; White et al., 2016). However, manned and un­
manned airborne, and terrestrial lidar data acquisitions each have 
challenges that currently limit their widespread use in forest snow 
monitoring. Manned airborne lidar is well suited for forest structure 
estimates (Jakubowski et al., 2013; Richardson and Moskal, 2011), but 
is expensive and logistically challenging to acquire for forest snow depth 
estimates in Arizona, where snow rapidly melts and disappears in <2 
weeks following a storm (Breshears et al., 2005; Ffolliott et al., 1989; 
Sankey et al., 2015). Terrestrial lidar, including mobile lidar systems 
(MLS), can provide spatially explicit forest structure and snow depth 
estimates at high temporal frequencies (Tang et al., 2015; Bauwens 
et al., 2016; White et al., 2016; Donager et al., 2018), but is limited in 
spatial extent and newly-developed MLS data acquisitions have not been 
well tested for their accuracies. Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based 
lidar is an alternative, but is also limited in spatial extent (Sankey et al., 
2017). Lighter weight UAV-based photogrammetrically-derived point 
clouds, often referred to as Structure-from-Motion (SfM), can cover a 
much larger spatial extent at a user-defined temporal frequency (Sankey 
et al., 2018, 2019; Shin et al., 2018; Belmonte et al., 2019). However, 
their accuracies in forest snow monitoring has not been commonly 
quantified (Harder et al., 2016; Lendzioch et al., 2019; Mizi´nski and 
Niedzielski, 2017), while UAV SfM models are increasingly used in 
forest inventorying (Alonzo et al., 2018; Diaz-Varela et al., 2016; Iizuka 
et al., 2018; Puliti et al., 2015; White et al., 2013). 
We integrate manned airborne lidar, mobile lidar, and UAV SfM data 
to optimize timely 3-dimensional data acquisition and to evaluate their 
accuracies in estimates of rapidly changing snow dynamics in a forested 
environment. To better understand the relationships between forest 
structure and snowpack dynamics in the southwest, we create spatially 
continuous estimates of snow cover and depth, topography, and forest 
structural attributes from these datasets. We sought to determine the 
relative importance and spatial scales of effective influence of forest 
structural attributes and topography on snowpack dynamics, ranging 
from the very local scale (5 m radius) to large areas of influence (250 m 
radius). We expected forest structure summarized at smaller scales (e.g. 
< 30 m, or 1 to 1.5x the height of trees) to be more important for snow 
persistence (duration of consistent snow cover over our time-series im­
ages in each winter), while structure and topography to be more 
important for snow depth at larger scales. These influences of forest 
structure and topography can be considered in forest restoration and 
thinning efforts to create the optimum forest canopy cover, density, and 
patch characteristics for accumulating and maintaining persistent 
snowpack (Belmonte et al., 2021). 
2. Methods 
2.1. Study area 
Rudd Tank study area in Arizona is managed by the US Forest Service 
and includes forest treatment sites (Fig. 1) (Faiella and Bailey, 2007). 
The treatments attempted to create an uneven-aged, patchy forest 
structure, which mimicked the range of regional historical tree densities 
(Faiella and Bailey, 2007). Treatment goals included reduction of forest 
fuels (Faiella and Bailey, 2007), as well as testing ecosystem functions 
such as carbon cycling as they varied following treatment. For this study, 
we focused on three treatments at Rudd Tank: a mechanically thinned 
treatment, a thinned-and-burned treatment, and a control (no tree 
removal) treatment (Fig. 1). These three treatments represent a diverse 
set of forest densities, patch sizes, and openings over an area of 
approximately 80 ha. The dominant forest type at the study site is 
exclusively ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forest, common 
throughout northern Arizona, and dominates over 27 million ha of dry 
forests of the western US (Gleason et al., 2017). The mean elevation at 
the study site is 2,270 m with slight variation in slope (<5%) and aspect 
that ranged from southerly in the southern portion of the site to north­
erly at the northern portion of the site with little overall change in 
elevation. Given the limited variability in slope and elevation at our 
study site, any observed topographic influence is likely due to the 
variability in aspect. We used the mean value among four weather sta­
tions within a 30 km radius to estimate overall climate and snowfall 
descriptors for the study site. Mean maximum and minimum tempera­
tures (1989–2018) in January are 5.4 ◦C and −12.2 ◦C, respectively 
(Western Regional Climate Center, 2018). Mean annual precipitation is 
54.6 cm (Western Regional Climate Center, 2018). Mean annual snow 
depth is 247.8 cm (Western Regional Climate Center, 2018), with a 
maximum of 403.6 cm and a minimum of 72.4 cm (Western Regional 
Climate Center, 2018). For the two years that we measured snow depth 
and duration (2015–16, 2016–17), total snowfall was 198.8 cm and 
245.1 cm, respectively (Western Regional Climate Center, 2018). 
2.2. Data overview 
We used a diverse set of 3-dimensional and multi-temporal datasets 
to examine the drivers of snow depth and snow cover persistence dy­
namics (Figs. 2–5). Derived predictor variables include vertical (canopy 
height) and horizontal (projected forest canopy and associated metrics) 
forest structure as well as topographic (elevation and derived metrics) 
features. These products were spatially summarized across a range of 
spatial scales (5 m–250 m buffer radii), and directional location offsets, 
centered at a given location as well as offset to the north and south 
(Fig. 5; section 2.4). Vertical forest structure features considered were 
mean and standard deviation in canopy height, both including (0 m–35 
m) and excluding non-canopy heights (1.5 m–35 m). Horizontal forest 
structure features included mean and standard deviation in percent 
canopy cover, size, and tree density within forest cover patches. Patches 
here are defined as individual contiguous areas of forest canopy, which 
could be discriminated against non-canopy. Topographic features 
included variation in ground height, percent slope, and aspect. The 
representation of “southness” was important to isolate the effects of 
solar insolation. Aspect was, therefore, converted into a linear value, 
whereby south-facing aspect was equal to 1 and north-facing equal to 
−1, with west- and east-facing aspects equal to 0 by inverting the cosine 
as follows (Eq. (1)):  
Absolute value=(Cosine( (Aspect Degrees / 180) * pi) - 1) / 2                
(1) 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
3
Both slope and aspect were calculated at a 5 m resolution to better 
match summary windows and to capture large scale topography. Mean 
and standard deviation of ground height were calculated at 0.5 m res­
olution to better capture fine-scale variation in the ground surface. 
2.3. Manned aerial lidar 
Manned aerial laser swath (ALS) mapping data was used to create no- 
snow digital elevation models (DEM), individual tree segmentation 
(Fig. 2), canopy height models (CHM) and their derivatives, including 
canopy cover, openings, and patch metrics (see Fig. 2), but was not used 
Fig. 1. Rudd Tank study area (Panel A), where 
colored symbols represent the dates of field-based 
snow depth measurements. The location of Rudd 
Tank within Arizona is shown in the inset map 
(Panel A). Zoomed area illustrating lidar-derived 
tree height estimates overlaying UAV snow cover 
data is shown in Panel B, where ground points show 
coloring of snow and non-snow, while brighter 
colors correspond to the estimated tree heights. 
Panel C shows the UAV instrument used for the 
snow cover estimates (extent delineated as a solid 
red line in Panel A), whereas Panel D illustrates 
mobile lidar instrument used to derive snow depth 
(extent also shown as a dashed red line in Panel A). 
The northern half of the study area was mechani­
cally thinned, while the southern half of the study 
area was not treated and has much higher overall 
tree density and continuous canopy. (For interpre­
tation of the references to color in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of 
this article.)   
Fig. 2. Workflows for creating the variables used in predictive models. Predictor variables were derived from manned airborne lidar data, while response variables 
were derived from UAV structure from motion (SfM) point clouds and mobile lidar point clouds. Colors correspond to plot colors for variable importance (Fig. 9). (For 
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
4
for identification of snow. Importantly, the no-snow ALS dataset served 
as a reference for all other point-cloud data (Fig. 3), given its largest 
spatial extent, geometric accuracy, and no-snow condition, whereas the 
other datasets were acquired in snowy conditions. The ALS data was 
collected by the National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM) 
on October 7th, 2017 using an Optech Titan multi-beam lidar sensor 
aboard a Piper PA-31 Navajo fixed-wing aircraft. The sensor was flown 
at an altitude of 1,000 m aboveground with 50% side overlap resulting 
in an average volumetric point-density of 9 points m−3. The errors in the 
point cloud data were <15 cm in both the horizontal and vertical 
dimensions. 
2.3.1. UAV imagery and SfM point cloud data 
To classify snow cover and persistence through the winter season, we 
flew a fixed-wing UAV over the study area multiple times through the 
winter seasons of 2015–16 and 2016–17. Areas with continuous snow 
cover throughout the image acquisition period are defined as persistent 
snow, which has important ecohydrological benefits in dryland forests 
(Belmonte et al., 2021). Aerial images were captured using the S110 NIR 
camera mounted on a SenseFly eBee AG platform in three spectral 
bands: green (550 nm), red (625 nm), and NIR (850 nm) at 12 cm spatial 
resolution (www.sensefly.com/drones/accessories.html). UAV flights 
were conducted following each snow storm for approximately every 1–2 
weeks during snow melt (Fig. 4; Table 1). Flight dates during the first 
winter season were less numerous compared to the second winter 
(Table 1). Multiple flights were conducted each day within 1 h of solar 
noon to acquire at-nadir images with limited shadows and increase 
image density and capture images along perpendicular flight lines. The 
number of images for a given day ranged between 250 and 900 
(Table 1). Images were initially processed using Sensefly’s eMotion 
Fig. 3. Comparison of mobile lidar scanner (MLS) 
point cloud data (A) and manned airborne lidar 
swath (ALS) data (B). Points are colored by height. 
The ground point (blue points) density is much 
greater but the data are also noisier for the MLS 
compared to the ALS data, resulting in a “thicker” 
ground layer. The MLS data was registered to the 
ALS data by removing points less than 1 m in 
height, using a closest point iteration technique to 
align canopy points, and then rejoining the ground 
points using the same transformation as the canopy 
points. (For interpretation of the references to color 
in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the 
Web version of this article.)   
Fig. 4. Example of UAV image time-series (A–C) for three dates in 2016, showing evolution of snow cover following a storm. These data are then combined to 
produce a snow persistence probability map by creating an average from the individual binary classifications of snow cover, resulting in a persistence value ranging 
from 0 to 1 (D). Outlines show example locations of brief snow cover (red) and persistent snow cover (yellow) resulting from the classification. Examples of model 
inputs before applying focal window summaries included in the study are canopy height in meters (E), variation in bare earth microtopography in meters (F), in­
dividual tree locations (G), and landscape patch delineation resulting from the canopy cover model (H). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
5
software, which converts the raw images into geotagged image files. 
Images were then processed using Agisoft Photoscan 1.4 software 
(Agisoft,2014) to create georeferenced 3-dimensional point clouds 
(point density of ~60 pts/sq.m) via structure from motion (SfM) and 
orthomosaic composites. This process included an initial image align­
ment, an incorporation of GCP locations, an image alignment optimi­
zation, a gradual filtering out of inaccurate and error-inducing points, 
and lastly a full image realignment before data product creation (Puliti 
et al., 2015; USGS, 2017). Point clouds were then manually cleaned in 
CloudCompare (CloudCompare, 2018; Girardeau-Montaut, 2016) to 
remove erroneous and outlier points and then subsampled using an 
octree filter (level = 12 depth) to “normalize” densities among the 
datasets. Finally, the SfM point clouds were manually registered to the 
ALS data similar to the mobile lidar data (section 2.2.3) before snow 
cover information was derived. 
2.3.2. Mobile lidar data 
To estimate initial and changing snow depth through the winter of 
2016–17, we employed a Velodyne HL-32 E mobile lidar system (MLS; 
Fig 1 and 3) in snow-on conditions and compared to the snow-off ALS 
data. The scans were completed across an approximately 30 ha area at 
our study site on four dates roughly one week apart through winter of 
2017 following a winter storm on January 25th, 2017 (January 26th, 
February 3rd, February 8th, and February 17th). The sensor records 
approximately 70,000 points per second among 16 individual scan lines. 
The mobile lidar data were collected (Fig. 1) by moving the sensor along 
variable length transects. Individual files for each date were merged 
together with a localization, odometry and mapping (LOAM) algorithm 
through uploading the data to www.kaarta.com (Zhang and Singh, 
2014). This algorithm matches individual scenes to determine the 
movement of the sensor between frames, which is then used to rotate 
and translate those individual scenes into a single, cohesive point cloud. 
This method has been shown to work well in situations where GPS in­
formation alone is either not available or not accurate enough to join the 
individual point cloud scenes (Tang et al., 2015). A manual evaluation of 
point-cloud registration errors resulting from the LOAM algorithm 
suggested approximately 12 cm maximum horizontal error, and 18 cm 
maximum vertical error (see Fig. 3). 
Individually processed mobile lidar point clouds were then regis­
tered to the ALS data to further reduce the errors. Ground points from 
both the ALS and MLS data were removed (all points less than 1.37 m in 
height, corresponding to mean “breast height”) so that only above- 
ground points were matched to one another, as snow depth changed 
over time resulting in varying ground elevations. Above-ground ALS and 
MLS points were manually co-registered by choosing stationary objects 
in each dataset. Fine registration using the Iterative Closest Points (ICP; 
Zhang, 1994) algorithm rotated and translated overlapping tree shapes 
through an iterative process in which the distance between points 
among the point clouds is minimized (see Zhang, 1994), resulting in an 
overall point cloud-to-cloud RMSE of approximately 9 cm in all three 
dimensions. 
2.3.3. Field-based snow depth validation 
Measurements of snow depth were made during the time mobile 
lidar data was collected (Fig. 1 Panel A). A snow probe was used to 
measure the depth to soil and the depth to the nearest mm was recorded. 
GPS locations were collected concurrently with a Trimble GeoXH, which 
were later differentially corrected with average horizontal accuracy of 
30–50 cm. On four dates in 2017 (January 26th, February 3rd, February 
8th, and February 17th), a total of 180 snow depth measurements were 
made, including locations with an absence of snow (0 depth). Snow 
depth measurements using a snow probe are generally regarded as 
having ±5 cm accuracy due to the tip of the probe potentially entering 
the soil surface below the snowpack (Sturm and Holmgren, 2018). 
2.4. Data processing 
2.4.1. Individual tree segmentation 
To estimate tree density across the study site, we implemented a 
within-cloud tree classification method (Li et al., 2012) to segment each 
individual tree within the ALS dataset (Fig. 4 Panel G), which was first 
subset to the forested areas of the study site using a 0.7 NDVI threshold 
in a Sentinel-2 NDVI image (Fig. 2). The tree segmentation algorithm 
classifies individual laser points by examining the horizontal distances 
between points along the height of a potential tree. The algorithm relies 
upon two distance parameters, which relate to the average distance of 
trees from one another (see Li et al., 2012). We implemented two sets of 
parameters for high- and low-tree density (dt1 = 1.5, dt2 = 2; dt1 = 1.3, 
dt2 = 1.7; see Li et al., 2012), which were merged together without 
duplicating tree locations. We chose these parameters by comparing our 
iteratively-generated tree density maps to field-based tree count data 
from 32 long-term monitoring plots to minimize overall tree count er­
rors (see Donager et al., 2018). 
Fig. 5. Three examples of summary focal windows relative to a single snow 
location (yellow pointer). Example focal windows shown are: 25 m radius north 
of center (blue), 10 m radius south of center (red), and 5 m radius from center. 
We chose a north-south dichotomy as these are important for snowpack energy 
balance. Only raster cells from input variables which were fully inside the 
summary window were included in that window’s summary. (For interpretation 
of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web 
version of this article.) 
Table 1 
Summary of flights through the winter of 2015–16 and 2016–17. The asterisk 
denotes datasets that were not used due to errors in generating point cloud 
datasets via structure from motion (SfM).  
UAV Flight Summary 
Flight Date  
Number of Images 
2016-02-09 
* 
343 
2016-02-12  
335 
2016-02-23 
* 
255 
2017-01-03  
592 
2017-01-10 
* 
576 
2017-01-17  
820 
2017-01-25  
637 
2017-02-02 
* 
620 
2017-02-08  
758 
2017-02-16  
675 
2017-02-24  
587 
2017-03-01 
* 
702 
2017-03-09  
808 
2017-03-17  
848  
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
6
2.4.2. Snow depth estimate from mobile lidar data 
Snow depth was derived by differencing continuous rasterized snow 
surfaces generated from snow-on MLS data and rasterized ground sur­
face generated from snow-off ALS. We first classified ground points 
using the cloth simulation filter (CSF) implemented in CloudCompare 
software (Girardeau-Montaut, 2016; Zhang et al., 2016) and applying a 
thickness threshold of 1 m, based on the average height range of ground 
points in the MLS point clouds (Fig. 3, Panel A). From these ground 
points, we extracted the 75th percentile of ground height for each raster 
cell due to the noise inherent in the MLS dataset. The use of the 75th 
percentile of ground heights minimized overall error in snow depth es­
timates and enabled more reliable snow surface estimates. To be 
consistent, ground points from ALS data were also classified using the 
CSF classifier. Once rasterized MLS surfaces were prepared, we differ­
enced them each from the ALS ground surface raster to create contin­
uous estimates for each data acquisition date. Snow depth was 
summarized at a raster resolution of 1 m, but aggregated to 2 m for 
subsequent analysis to smooth the variability in snow depths resulting 
from noise in the data. 
2.4.3. Snow cover persistence from UAV SfM data 
Snow cover was classified from the UAV SfM point cloud data rather 
than from the orthomosaic images to maximize detection of snow and 
non-snow surface below tree canopies, as the orthomosaic can obscure 
ground points by large and continuous forest canopies. We first selected 
sets of snow and non-snow points from several dates to create a decision 
tree model using the spectral reflectance values corresponding to each 
point ranging from 0 to 1, calculated NDVI value, the difference between 
near-infrared and green values, and the mean value of the three spectral 
bands. Individual points within the point cloud were classified as po­
tential snow points if the NDVI value was lower than 0.1, the maximum 
difference among all reflectance values was less than 0.04, and the mean 
reflectance value among all reflectance bands was greater than 0.3. 
Point clouds were then summarized within 1 m3 voxels and returned 
based on the number of points, which fit the decision tree criteria using 
the centroid of each voxel as a summary of the point cloud within each 
voxel. These summary points were then rasterized into 1 m grids to 
represent continuous snow cover and bare ground cover. We assessed 
the accuracies of the snow cover classification using the ground-based 
GPS data collected along the transects, which included attributes of 
snow versus no-snow cover and snow depth, as well as randomly 
selected points among the five dates for each winter season. Using 
Agisoft Photoscan 1.4 software (Agisoft, 2014), coordinates of randomly 
chosen points were overlaid on the UAV multispectral image after initial 
processing was completed. A binary value of snow cover (snow cover at 
>0%) was then determined at that point location. Once individual dates 
of images were converted to raster data, they were combined by stacking 
the raster and averaging across the individual date rasters on a per-pixel 
basis to create a continuous probability (0–1) of snow in a given location 
at the end of the period of measurement as a measure of spatially explicit 
representation of snow persistence (Fig. 4 Panel D). 
2.5. Analysis 
Multiple factors influence snow dynamics in forested ecosystems. To 
better understand how each contributes to this influence, we examined 
the relationships within the data in two ways: 1) a series of random 
forest models for assessing variable importance across the gradient of 
summary window radii (section 2.5.2), and 2) analysis of individual 
predictors’ relationships to snow dynamics using general additive 
models (GAM) (section 2.5.3). The random forest models were used to 
evaluate the relative influence of each predictor variable across the 
summary radii sizes, because we wanted to better understand the rela­
tive influence of insolation as it relates to melting and sublimation, as 
well as re-radiation of absorbed energy by trees as it relates to increased 
melting. The GAMs were used to examine the nature of the individual 
predictor’s relationships with snow dynamics. All input variables were 
summarized using a series of moving summary windows to examine the 
scale and direction of influence of these variables on snow at a given 
location (Fig. 5). 
2.5.1. Focal window summaries 
To identify the spatial scale at which each variable was important, 
we summarized predictor variables (Fig. 2) across a gradient of focal 
window radius and directional location offsets relative to each pixel of 
the response variables (Fig. 5). Window radii were calculated at 5 m 
intervals starting at 5 m up to 250 m, resulting in summary areas ranging 
from approximately 0.001 and 20ha, within which each variable was 
summarized. Three different directional location offsets were used: 
centered at the location (no offset), north of the location to capture the 
effects of re-radiation of longwave energy (north offset), and south of the 
location to capture the effects of direct insolation and shading to the 
snowpack (south offset; see Fig. 5). We randomly chose 2,500 locations 
within the study area to summarize predictor variables according to 
these summary window buffer sizes and location offsets. This relatively 
large number was chosen to capture the variability in forest structure 
across the study site. 
2.5.2. Relative predictor variable importance across scales 
We used several methods to estimate the relative importance of the 
forest structure and topographic predictor variables. Specifically, we 
used the random forest models to understand overall predictive capa­
bility with scale based on our inputs (Breiman, 2001), the Boruta algo­
rithm to understand which specific predictors are the most important at 
each summary scale (Kursa and Rudnicki, 2010), and finally 
Mann-Kendall trend tests (p-value of 0.05) to determine if relative 
importance of each predictor generally increases or decreases with 
increasing summary scales (Hipel and McLeod, 2005). Random forest 
models are a non-parametric statistical learning model approach, which 
are an extension of classification and regression trees, in which many 
individual trees are grown using a bagging approach, or sampling with 
replacement of the dataset (Hastie et al., 2009). At each tree decision 
node, a randomly chosen subset of the predictor variables is considered, 
which serves to decorrelate each tree from other trees within the random 
forest model (Hastie et al., 2009). Overall model fit is assessed using an 
out-of-bag estimate of model error, in which one third of the data is set 
aside with each tree, and then run through the model to assess the 
relative error rate, which is similar to an R2 value. Boruta is a statistical 
learning feature selection algorithm, which examines variable impor­
tance through repeated random forest models in which potential pre­
dictor variables are compared to random reshuffling of variables, and 
outputs a variable importance metric (Kursa and Rudnicki, 2010). We 
then normalized the variable importance values to a value between 
0 and 1 so that comparisons along the gradient of summary scales and 
location offsets could be made, with values closer to 1 suggesting greater 
importance in the model. The Mann-Kendall test uses a non-parametric 
rank correlation statistic, Kendall’s tau, to test for monotonic trend in a 
vector of data (Hipel and McLeod, 2005) and is thus applicable to this 
specific use case. 
First, we developed a random forest model for each of the location 
offsets and summary window radii (2 m through 250 m) to predict snow 
depth and persistence and to understand how prediction accuracy varies 
with spatial scale and location (Fig. 5). These models were created in the 
ranger package in R (Wright and Ziegler, 2017; R Core Team, 2018). 
Following this, we used the Boruta algorithm to quantify variable 
importance among each of those models and understand the scales at 
which our predictor variables influenced snow depth and persistence. 
Boruta variable importance values for each summary window radius 
model were compiled and examined for mean importance values at 
small and large scales, as well as using the Mann-Kendall test to un­
derstand whether those importance values were increasing or 
decreasing across the range of summary window radii. 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
7
2.5.3. Relationships among forest structure, topography, and snow 
dynamics across scales 
We used general additive models (GAMs) to examine relationships 
between snow depth and persistence and forest structural and topo­
graphic summaries for all focal window sizes and location offsets 
(Fig. 5). GAMs are useful for this purpose, as relationships in the data are 
not typically linear, and dynamically changes throughout the range of 
spatial scales (e.g., focal window radii). These complicated non-linear 
relationships are not easy to understand from a random forest model 
since random forest models simply identify significant predictor vari­
ables to make predictions and do not describe the complicated nature of 
the relationship. GAMs use a combination of base functions which, when 
combined, can approximate a non-linear relationship (Witten et al., 
2013; Wood, 2017). A relatively straight line, for example, would only 
require one or two base functions, while a more complex relationship 
would require many base functions. The amount of “wiggliness” of the 
relationship is represented by the effective degrees of freedom, resulting 
from the number of base functions needed to fit the data as well as a 
smoothing parameter, which dictates how much wiggle is allowed in the 
model. 
Interactions 
between 
variables 
are 
considered 
as 
a 
two-dimensional surface, in which a greater number of base functions 
are used to represent both axes of the surface. We examine the GAM 
relationship for each variable as well as select interactions of variables 
for each focal summary window using the “mgcv” library in R (Wood, 
2011). For all models, we fit GAMs using a “reduced” maximum likeli­
hood method for fitting the smoothing parameter, which is especially 
appropriate for noisy data (Witten et al., 2013). We examined the 
relationship of each predictor with snow dynamics at each scale, but 
only for summary windows with no location offset. 
3. Results 
3.1. Snow depth 
Extracted snow depths were strongly correlated (R2 = 0.86) with 
measured snow depths when all dates were considered together (Fig. 6). 
The slope of the linear relationship was very close to 1 among all four 
measurement dates. When only individual dates were considered, re­
lationships to measured snow depths varied (R2 = 0.44 to 0.59) but were 
consistent (Fig. 6). In summary, 84% of errors in snow depth estimates 
were less than 10 cm with a standard deviation of 7.8 cm (RMSE = 13.2 
cm). 
3.1.1. Variable importance in snow depth across scales 
We examined 150 random forest models summarizing forest struc­
ture and topography at 50 increments of summary radii and 3 summary 
offset locations as predictors of snow depth (Fig. 7). In general, models 
increased in accuracy up to summary extents of 75 m (Fig. 7), after 
which they remained relatively constant (R2 ~ 0.45). Generally, models 
without any location offset had better accuracy among very small (≤25 
m) summary scales (R2 ~ 0.3), but were consistent with offset models at 
larger scales (>25 m). Beyond these small scales, directional offsets did 
not contribute to any greater understanding of snow depth variability. 
We further examined a suite of models with predictor interactions, but 
none of these models improved model accuracy. 
Variable importance metrics from the Boruta algorithm suggest that 
snow depth was largely influenced by canopy height standard deviation 
values (Fig. 8), which were consistently more important than every 
other metric at all scales greater than 40 m. Canopy cover was the most 
important variable at summary scales less than 40 m. Mean canopy 
height was also consistently important at these smaller scales. Mann- 
Kendall tests suggest the majority of topographic and patch metrics, 
including interactions between canopy cover and topography, increased 
in importance values at larger scales, while tree density and mean patch 
area became less important with scale. 
3.1.2. General additive model relationships in snow depth 
Based on the Boruta variable importance values, we examined the 6 
most important variables in relation to snow depth at either small (<40 
m) or large (≥40 m) scales (Fig. 9). Total variation (standard deviation) 
in canopy height changed from a negative relationship with snow depth 
at small summary radii to a somewhat positive relationship at larger 
summary radii among low (<7 m) and high (>9 m) standard deviation 
values (Fig. 9). Among canopy height summaries, both low (<13.5 m) 
and high (>15 m) mean height values showed a negative relationship 
Fig. 6. Comparison of measured snow depth to derived snow depth from the 
mobile lidar (MLS) point clouds. Colors correspond to date MLS data was 
collected, following a large winter storm on January 25th, 2017. All ground 
points representing the snow surface within a 1 m radius around differentially- 
corrected GPS locations of measured snow depth were used. Across all mea­
surement dates R2 = 0.86. The relationship with individual dates ranged from 
slopes of 0.77–0.95 (R2 = 0.44 to 0.59). Dashed line shows 1 to 1 relationship. 
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the Web version of this article.) 
Fig. 7. Random forest models for snow depth summarized by out-of-bag ac­
curacy (R2). Models were created using variables summarized within window 
radii from 5 m to 250 m in 5 m increments as well as three summary offset 
locations: none (black), to the north (blue), and to the south (red) of a given 
point location. Point locations (n = 975) were randomly selected within the 
snow depth study area. (For interpretation of the references to color in this 
figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
8
with snow depth, while high standard deviation in canopy height (>6 m) 
similarly had negative relationship with snow depth. Canopy cover and 
mean canopy patch area were related to the greatest snow depth at the 
lowest values with generally decreasing snow depth across the canopy 
cover gradient. Aspect related to snow depth such that east and west 
aspects had generally lower snow depth than north aspects, especially at 
larger scales. North aspects also had greater snow depth compared to 
south aspects across scales. In general, deviance explained by GAMs 
coincided with the variable importance. 
3.2. Snow cover persistence 
Classification of snow cover presence/absence within the point cloud 
had 97.7% accuracy when compared to field measurements (Table 2). In 
addition, UAV image mosaics from multiple dates were used to visually 
Fig. 8. Standardized Boruta random forest variable 
importance from snow depth models. All variables 
were summarized at each window radius from 5 m 
to 250 m in 5 m increments (40 m is highlighted to 
separate small versus large spatial scales). The solid 
lines show the 6 most important variables based on 
variable importance values, whereas variables 
which had an average variable importance metric 
less than the mean variable importance value 
(dashed line) are semi-transparent. The gray area 
represents all permuted data in the Boruta 
algorithm.   
Fig. 9. Relationships between the most 
important variables from the Boruta metrics 
and snow depth using general additive 
models. A model was built for each of the 
summary window radii for variables and 
plotted on top of one another using a color 
ramp to denote the summary window radius. 
Most relationships demonstrate an inflection 
point, around which low or high values vary 
with summary window radius size. The 
stacking order of GAM relationships are 
based on whether variables were most 
important at small (<40 m) or large (≥40 
m) scale. (For interpretation of the refer­
ences to color in this figure legend, the 
reader is referred to the Web version of this 
article.)   
Table 2 
Field measurements of snow cover (A) and accuracy assessment of snow cover 
classification at randomly chosen points among 10 image collection dates (B).  
A 
Field Measurements 
Classification 
Class 
Snow 
Depth <0.1 m 
Total: 
Snow 
163 
1 
164 
Bare Ground 
3 
13 
16 
Total: 
166 
14 
180  
B 
UAV Imagery Assessment 
Classification 
Class 
Snow 
Bare Ground 
Total: 
Snow 
132 
6 
138 
Bare Ground 
11 
51 
62 
Total: 
143 
57 
200  
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
9
assess vectorized classifications of snow cover. Imagery and classified 
vector boundaries had 91.5% agreement, when 40 random points were 
assessed for snow presence and absence for 5 randomly chosen ortho­
mosaicked image dates for each winter season, for a total of 200 random 
sample locations (Table 2). 
3.2.1. Variable importance in snow cover persistence across scales 
We again examined 150 random forest models summarizing forest 
structure and topography at 50 increments of summary radii and 3 
summary offset locations as predictors of snow cover persistence (Fig 2 
and 5). Models including variables summarized without any location 
offset had the highest accuracy (R2 = 0.38) at the smallest summary 
scales, but had a minimum accuracy at 25 m summary scales. For 
summary window radii greater than 25 m, all models were similar in 
accuracy. All location offset models increased in accuracy up to 
approximately 150 m summary window radius (R2 ≈0.34), after which 
there was little change in prediction accuracy and subsequent analyses 
included no location offset. We examined an additional set (150 models) 
of random forest models which included interactions between variables, 
but the inclusion of these variables did not influence the overall accu­
racy of the models. 
Variable importance metrics from the Boruta algorithm suggest that 
snow cover persistence was largely influenced by canopy cover and 
mean patch size at summary scales less than 25 m, after which mean 
aspect was consistently the most important variable (see appendix). 
However, canopy cover, tree density, and variation in canopy height 
remained important among larger summary radii. Mann-Kendall tests 
suggest the two most important variables, canopy cover and aspect, 
decrease in importance at larger summary scales. Fine scale variability 
in ground elevation became increasingly important out to 250 summary 
window radius. 
3.2.2. General additive model relationships in snow cover persistence 
Based on the Boruta variable importance results, we examined the 
relationship of the 6 most important variables. Snow cover persistence 
was highest among northerly aspects, generally decreasing towards 
southerly aspects. Canopy cover proportion and mean patch area were 
associated with higher snow persistence at smaller scales. In general, 
deviance explained by GAMs coincided with variable importance. 
4. Discussion 
4.1. 3D estimates of snowpack dynamics 
We integrate varying sources of 3-dimensional data to comprehen­
sively evaluate rapidly changing snowpack: snow-off airborne lidar data 
for forest structure and topography estimates, snow-on mobile laser 
scanner (MLS) data for snow depth estimates by comparing them to the 
snow-off airborne lidar data, and UAV SfM point cloud data for snow 
cover classification during snow melt. The combination of these datasets 
offer spatially continuous estimates of changing snow depth and snow 
cover during ~2 weeks following a storm along with forest structure and 
topography characterization. The individual datasets used in this study 
showed overall accuracies consistent with other applications of lidar 
(Jaakkola et al., 2014; Mazzotti et al., 2019), but required a good deal of 
preprocessing and customization to work properly. The MLS system 
used for this study is a low-cost system, which lacked dedicated soft­
ware. Commercial MLS systems are increasingly developed, which will 
likely reduce the amount of time needed to process and overall error (e. 
g. kaarta.com, geoslam.com; Cadena et al., 2016; Nocerino et al., 2017). 
For UAVs, tree shadows and differences in illumination can make pro­
cessing SfM point clouds difficult. Future developments in algorithms 
would likely make processing workflows more efficient (Belmonte et al., 
2019). 
Mobile lidar snow depth estimate errors were typically less than 10 
cm, or approximately 12% of the deepest snow measured (83 cm) 
(Fig. 6). We attribute the errors to the LOAM algorithm itself, the ground 
classification used to estimate the snow surface, and the registration of 
the point clouds to the ALS dataset. The accuracy of snow depth esti­
mates is high given the errors involved in the data due to the many 
points collected, which represent the snowpack and the consensus of 
which tend toward the true snow depth (Fig. 6). In other words, the 
aggregate tendency of 3-dimensional points overcomes the error. 
Average errors (RMSE = 13 cm) in snow depth did not vary considerably 
among the collection dates, suggesting the error is relatively stable, and 
would be similar in deeper snowpack, where errors of <10 cm would be 
more negligible. The low accuracy of spatially explicit snow depth 
models (R2 = 0.44–0.59) can be attributed to the instruments, their 
inherent errors in shallow snow depth, and low variability in snow depth 
across the study site, itself a result of the low variability in topographic 
variation across the site. At such a fine scale, snow depth was relatively 
consistent across the study area, and the low predictive value suggests 
that this combined with relatively open forest canopy led to low levels of 
variability in snow depth. 
Snow cover classification accuracies were generally high (Table 2) 
suggesting that applications of UAV SfM are promising for snowpack 
monitoring. However, more robust accuracy assessments are needed in 
future studies, since we did not measure snow depths in the field, for 
example, in the densest canopy cover conditions. Our UAV SfM classi­
fication accuracy was reliant upon point clouds produced from the 
photogrammetric software. UAV SfM point cloud data application in 
snow dynamics requires much greater geopositional accuracies and 
precision than required in forest and rangeland vegetation structure 
estimates (Shin et al., 2018; Belmonte et al., 2019; Sankey et al., 2018, 
Sankey et al., 2019, 2021). While post-processing steps reduce the UAV 
SfM point cloud errors, recent integration of RTK GPS systems aboard 
the platforms can further reduce these errors. Images acquired from 
multiple angles in addition to at-nadir images might further increase 
detection of snow cover underneath tree canopies. 
4.2. Forest structure and topography effects on snow depth and cover 
persistence 
Few studies have analyzed the effects of spatially explicit forest 
structure features on snow at multiple scales (Harder et al., 2016). Our 
random forest model results indicate that snow depth estimate is more 
informed by variables summarized at larger scales (>75 m) than at 
smaller scales (<40 m) (Fig. 8). Among them, tree canopy height and 
specifically standard deviation in height was far more important for 
snow depth than any other predictor variable (Fig. 8). This suggests that 
trees influence snow accumulation in their surrounding areas and 
further supports previous findings that snowpack is significantly 
impacted in areas within their height multiplied by 1.5 (Belmonte et al., 
2021). Furthermore, forest structure and processes operating at larger 
scales, consistent with about 3 times the height of tall trees (~70 m 
radius), or 1.5 ha summary area, are important for snow deposition at 
this site (Fig. 8). Our results also support previous findings that canopy 
variation from multi-age trees (e.g., tree height standard deviation 
(Fig. 8)) and patch edges influence snow deposition and wind patterns 
(Pomeroy et al., 1998; Marks and Winstral, 2001; Winstral and Marks, 
2002). The GAM outputs indicate that lower canopy height values (<15 
m) have a negative relationship with snow depth, but larger canopy 
height values (>15 m) have a positive relationship (Fig. 9). There is a 
pronounced inflection in the GAM relationship with mean tree height at 
approximately 15 m (Fig. 9). At small summary scales (<40 m), canopy 
cover was most important and snow depth generally decreases with 
increasing canopy cover. Smaller mean patch sizes are also associated 
with greater snow deposition (<500 m2, 0.05ha), while relationships 
vary at summary scales greater than 0.1ha. Our results suggest that 
lower overall stem densities coupled with variability in the horizontal 
distribution of forest canopy is ideal for promoting greater snow accu­
mulation (Ffolliott et al., 1989; Veatch et al., 2009; Varhola et al., 2010; 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
10
Ellis et al., 2013; Revuelto et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2018). Taken 
together, these results support other studies that have found vegetation 
has a stronger control on snow depth at small scales, while topography 
exerts a stronger influence at larger, landscape scales (e.g. Harpold et al., 
2014). 
The most informative snow cover persistence descriptors were found 
at the smallest summary radii (<40 m) and included canopy cover, mean 
patch size, and dominant topographic aspect. At increasingly larger 
summary radii (e.g. > 50 m), aspect was consistently the greatest 
determiner of snow persistence and the only important topographic 
feature at this study site, although dominant aspect in other studies have 
been found to mute or amplify the effects of canopy shading and long­
wave radiation (Pomeroy and Brun, 2001). Our results suggest an 
interaction of shading from tree canopies and release of longwave ra­
diation from tree boles and canopy (Ffolliott et al., 1989; Ffolliott and 
Baker, 2000; Lundquist et al., 2013). Importantly, the relationship of 
snow cover persistence and canopy cover from GAM models reflect an 
inflection point across scales such that less than 50% canopy cover has a 
negative relationship with snow persistence at small scales, but the 
relationship becomes increasingly positive at larger scales. Mean patch 
size also has a consistently negative relationship with snow cover 
persistence across summary radius up to approximately 5000–10,000 
m2 (0.5–1.0ha), after which persistence relationships fluctuate. This 
might suggest much smaller mean patch sizes (e.g. < 500 m2, 0.05ha) 
are associated with the greatest snow persistence. This relationship in 
the model suggests that restoration treatments, which reduce tree den­
sity and reduce average patch size, likely promotes snow cover persis­
tence and can benefit ponderosa pine forests, a conclusion in line with 
similar studies focused on tree density (Kerhoulas et al., 2013a, 2013b; 
Belmonte et al., 2021). 
4.3. Forest restoration and ecohydrological benefits 
The impacts of forest structure on the water balance, including snow 
deposition and ablation, have important implications for forest man­
agers. Changes to forest structure can have a large impact on the overall 
water balance (Molotch et al., 2009; Kerhoulas et al., 2013a) helping to 
promote 
initial 
snow 
accumulation 
and 
providing 
for 
micro-environments to maintain snow persistence. As climatic pressures 
on the forest water balance increase over the coming century (Seager 
et al., 2007; Cayan et al., 2010; Overpeck et al., 2012; Williams et al., 
2013; Gleason et al., 2017), canopy effects on ecohydrology will become 
increasingly important. In moisture-limited ponderosa forests of the 
southwest, which preferentially use water originating from snowmelt 
(Kerhoulas et al., 2013a), forest health will be directly proportional to 
the average density (Kerhoulas et al., 2013b) and the spatial arrange­
ment of the stand. In general, lower density forests are at a reduced risk 
of drought-induced mortality (Flathers et al., 2016; Simonin et al., 2007; 
Varhola et al., 2010; Bradford and Bell, 2017). 
We demonstrate snow-on and snow-off lidar remote sensing methods 
that can be easily adapted to employ at large spatial scales to analyze 
restoration impacts on ecohydrologic function and inform forest treat­
ment designs specifically for watershed health (Mueller et al., 2013; 
Sankey et al., 2017, 2020; Belmonte et al., 2019, 2021). Future lidar and 
UAV SfM datasets need to be expanded to a greater range of variability 
in topographic features, forest structure, and other forest types. The 
greater variety of treatment sites and landscape positions can better 
identify how forest structure interacts with topography to promote snow 
persistence, and thereby identify sites that hold more promise for 
maintaining snow cover (Pomeroy and Gray, 1995). These methods and 
findings could be integrated into management plans to address 
improved soil moisture later into the growing season and reduce the risk 
of mortality from drought and fire disturbances (D’Amato et al., 2013; 
Bradford and D’Amato, 2012; Bradford and Bell, 2017; Sankey et al., 
2020). Furthermore, this method could be coupled with climate pro­
jections to better understand how these relationships might change in 
the coming decades as the frequency of widespread drought and fire 
disturbances increase (Breshears et al., 2005; Allen et al., 2002; Williams 
et al., 2013; Kolb et al., 2016). 
5. Conclusion 
A better understanding of the interactions of management activities 
with snowpack dynamics is needed to effectively manage semi-arid 
forests into the next century. We employ a diverse set of snow-on and 
snow-off 3-dimensional remote sensing data to uncover detailed and 
spatially variable relationships between forest structure, topography, 
solar insolation, and snowpack dynamics. These datasets and resulting 
relationships are well suited to be integrated into forest management 
decision making. Restoration treatments are reducing canopy cover and 
tree density, while increasing heterogeneity at treatment to landscape 
scales. We recommend a multi-age forest canopy that offer greater snow 
deposition and cover persistence. 
Declaration of interests 
☒ The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
☒The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests. 
6. Peer review DISCLAIMER 
This draft manuscript is distributed solely for purposes of scientific 
peer review. Its content is deliberative and pre-decisional, so it must not 
be disclosed or released by reviewers. Because the manuscript has not 
yet been approved for publication by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 
it does not represent any official USGS finding or policy. 
Disclaimer 
This manuscript is submitted for publication with the understanding 
that the US Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute re­
prints for Governmental purposes. Any use of trade, product, or firm 
names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement 
by the US Government. 
Acknowledgements 
This study was supported by the Bureau of Reclamation and Salt 
River Project. This manuscript is submitted for publication with the 
understanding that the US Government is authorized to reproduce and 
distribute reprints for Governmental purposes. Any use of trade, prod­
uct, or firm names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply 
endorsement by the US Government. This study was funded by a Bureau 
of Reclamation grant RC13AC80032. Additional funding for time spent 
finishing this manuscript was provided by the Ecological Restoration 
Institute and the USDA Forest Service. Joel Sankey was supported by the 
USGS Ecosystems Mission Area.Processed datasets are accessible at 
https://rcdata.nau.edu/rsglab/Pub_Data/. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.srs.2021.100029. 
References 
Allen, S.R., Savage, M., Falk, D.A., et al., 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecol. Appl. 12 (5), 1418–1433. 
Alonzo, M., Andersen, H.-E., Morton, D., Cook, B., Alonzo, M., Andersen, H.-E., 
Morton, D.C., Cook, B.D., 2018. Quantifying boreal forest structure and composition 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
11
using UAV structure from motion. Forests 9 (3), 119. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
f9030119. 
Baker Jr., M.B., 1986. Effects of ponderosa pine treatments on water yield in Arizona. 
Water Resour. Res. 22 (1), 67–73. 
Bauwens, S., Bartholomeus, H., Calders, K., Lejeune, P., 2016. Forest inventory with 
terrestrial LiDAR: a comparison of static and hand-held mobile laser scanning. 
Forests 7 (6), 127. 
Belmonte, A., Sankey, T., Biederman, J.A., Bradford, J., Goetz, S.J., Kolb, T., Woolley, T., 
2019. UAV-derived estimates of forest structure to inform ponderosa pine forest 
restoration. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation 6 (2), 181–197. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/rse2.137. 
Belmonte, A., Sankey, T., Biederman, J., Bradford, J., Goetz, S., Kolb, T., 2021. UAV- 
based estimate of snow cover dynamics: optimizing semi-arid forest structure for 
snow persistence. Rem. Sens. 13 (5), 1036. 
Bottero, A., D’Amato, A.W., Palik, B.J., Bradford, J.B., Fraver, S., Battaglia, M.A., L A, 
2017. Effects of ponderosa pine treatments on water yield in Arizona. Water Resour. 
Res. 22 (1), 67–73. 
Bradford, J.B., D’Amato, A.W., 2012. Recognizing trade-offs in multi-objective land 
management. Front. Ecol. Environ. 10 (4), 210–216. 
Bradford, J.B., Bell, D.M., 2017. A window of opportunity for climate-change adaptation: 
easing tree mortality by reducing forest basal area. Front. Ecol. Environ. 15, 11–17. 
Breiman, L., 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45, 5–32. https://doi.org/10.1023/A: 
1010933404324. 
Breshears, D.D., Cobb, N.S., Rich, P.M., Price, K.P., Allen, C.D., Balice, R.G., et al., 2005. 
Regional vegetation die-off in response to global-change-type drought. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. Unit. States Am. 102 (42), 15144–15148. 
Cadena, C., Carlone, L., Carrillo, H., Latif, Y., Scaramuzza, D., Neira, J., et al., 2016. Past, 
present, and future of simultaneous localization and mapping: toward the robust- 
perception age. IEEE Trans. Robot. 32 (6), 1309–1332. 
Cayan, D.R., Das, T., Pierce, D.W., Barnett, T.P., Tyree, M., Gershunov, A., 2010. Future 
dryness in the southwest US and the hydrology of the early 21st century drought. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Unit. States Am. 107 (50), 21271–21276. 
CloudCompare, 2018. GPL software (version 2.9.1),Retrieved from. http://www. 
cloudcompare.org/. 
D’Amato, A.W., Bradford, J.B., Fraver, S., Palik, B.J., 2013. Effects of thinning on 
drought vulnerability and climate response in north temperate forest ecosystems. 
Ecol. Appl. 23 (8), 1735–1742. https://doi.org/10.1890/13-0677.1. 
Diaz-Varela, R., Gonzalez-Ferreiro, E., Correia, A.C., Nunes, A., Tom´e, M., Guerra- 
Hernandez, J., Silva, J., Sarmento, A., Fontes, L., 2016. Using high resolution UAV 
imagery to estimate tree variables in Pinus pinea plantation in Portugal. Forest 
Systems 25 (2), eSC09. https://doi.org/10.5424/fs/2016252-08895. 
Donager, J.J., Sankey, T.T., Sankey, J.B., Sanchez Meador, A.J., Springer, A.E., Bailey, J. 
D., 2018. Examining forest structure with terrestrial lidar: suggestions and novel 
techniques based on comparisons between scanners and forest treatments. Earth and 
Space Science 5 (11), 753–776. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018EA000417. 
Dore, S., Kolb, T.E., Montes-Helu, M., Eckert, S.E., Sullivan, B.W., Hungate, B.A., et al., 
2010. Carbon and water fluxes from ponderosa pine forests disturbed by wildfire and 
thinning. Ecol. Appl. 20 (3), 663–683. 
Ellis, C.R., Pomeroy, J.W., Link, T.E., 2013. Modelling increases in snowmelt yield and 
desynchronization resulting from forest gap-thinning treatments in a northern 
mountain headwater basin. Water Resour. Res. 49, 41640. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
wrcr.2008. 
Ffolliott, P.F., Gottfried, G.J., Baker Jr., M.B., 1989. Water yield from forest snowpack 
management: research findings in Arizona and New Mexico. Water Resour. Res. 25 
(9). 
Ffolliott, P.F., Baker, M.B., 2000. Snowpack hydrology in the southwestern United States: 
contributions to watershed management. In: Ffolliott, Peter F., Baker Jr., , 
Malchus, B., Edminster, Carleton B., Dillon, Madelyn C., Mora, Karen L. (Eds.), Tech. 
Coords. Land Stewardship in the 21st Century: the Contributions of Watershed 
Management; 2000 March 13-16; Tucson, AZ. Proc. RMRS-P-13, 13. US Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO, 
pp. 274–276. 
Flathers, K.N., Kolb, T.E., Bradford, J.B., Waring, K.M., Moser, W.K., 2016. Long-term 
thinning alters ponderosa pine reproduction in northern Arizona. For. Ecol. Manag. 
374, 154–165. 
Girardeau-Montaut, D., 2016. CloudCompare Version 2.9.1. 
Gleason, K.E., Bradford, J.B., Bottero, A., D’Amato, A.W., Fraver, S., Palik, B.J., 
Battaglia, M.A., Iverson, L., Kenefic, L., Kern, C.C., 2017. Competition amplifies 
drought stress in forests across broad climatic and compositional gradients. 
Ecosphere 8, e01849 (n/a).  
Harder, P., Schirmer, M., Pomeroy, J., Helgason, W., 2016. Accuracy of snow depth 
estimation in mountain and prairie environments by an unmanned aerial vehicle. 
Cryosphere 10 (6), 2559. 
Harpold, A.A., Biederman, J.A., Condon, K., Merino, M., Korgaonkar, Y., Nan, T., et al., 
2014. Changes in snow accumulation and ablation following the las conchas forest 
fire, New Mexico, USA. Ecohydrology 7 (2), 440–452. 
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J., 2009. The Elements of Statistical Learning, 
second ed. Springer, New York.  
Hereford, R., 2007. Climate Variation at Flagstaff, Arizona–1950 to 2007. US Geological 
Survey. 
Hipel, K.W., McLeod, A.I., 2005. Time Series Modelling of Water Resources and 
Environmental Systems. Electronic reprint of our book orginally published in 1994. 
http://www.stats.uwo.ca/faculty/aim/1994Book/. 
Iizuka, K., Yonehara, T., Itoh, M., Kosugi, Y., 2018. Estimating tree height and diameter 
at breast height (DBH) from digital surface models and orthophotos obtained with an 
unmanned aerial system for a Japanese cypress (chamaecyparis obtusa) forest. Rem. 
Sens. 10 (1), 13. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10010013. 
Jaakkola, A., Hyypp¨a, J., Puttonen, E., 2014. Measurement of snow depth using a low- 
cost mobile laser scanner. Geosci. Rem. Sens. Lett. IEEE 11 (3), 587–591. 
Jakubowski, M.K., Guo, Q., Kelly, M., 2013. Tradeoffs between lidar pulse density and 
forest measurement accuracy. Rem. Sens. Environ. 130, 245–253. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rse.2012.11.024. 
Keane, R.E., Loehman, R., Clark, J., Smithwick, E.A., Miller, C., 2015. Exploring 
interactions among multiple disturbance agents in forest landscapes: simulating 
effects of fire, beetles, and disease under climate change. Simulation Modeling of 
Forest Landscape Disturbances. Springer, Cham, pp. 201–231. 
Kerhoulas, L.P., Kolb, T.E., Koch, G.W., 2013a. Tree size, stand density, and the source of 
water used across seasons by ponderosa pine in northern Arizona. For. Ecol. Manag. 
289, 425–433. 
Kerhoulas, L.P., Kolb, T.E., Hurteau, M.D., Koch, G.W., 2013b. Managing climate change 
adaptation in forests: a case study from the US Southwest. J. Appl. Ecol. 50 (6), 
1311–1320. 
Kolb, T.E., Fettig, C.J., Ayres, M.P., Bentz, B.J., Hicke, J.A., Mathiasen, R., et al., 2016. 
Observed and anticipated impacts of drought on forest insects and diseases in the 
United States. For. Ecol. Manag. 380, 321–334. 
Kursa, M.B., Rudnicki, W.R., 2010. Feature selection with the Boruta package. J. Stat. 
Software 36 (11), 1–13. 
Lefsky, M.A., Cohen, W.B., Parker, G.G., Harding, D.J., 2002. Lidar remote sensing for 
ecosystem studies: lidar, an emerging remote sensing technology that directly 
measures the three-dimensional distribution of plant canopies, can accurately 
estimate vegetation structural attributes and should be of particular interest to 
forest, landscape, and global ecologists. AIBS (Am. Inst. Biol. Sci.) Bull. 52 (1), 
19–30. 
Lendzioch, T., Langhammer, J., Jenicek, M., 2019. Estimating snow depth and leaf area 
index based on UAV digital photogrammetry. Sensors 19 (5), 1027. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/s19051027. 
Li, W., Guo, Q., Jakubowski, M.K., Kelly, M., 2012. A new method for segmenting 
individual trees from the lidar point cloud. Photogramm. Eng. Rem. Sens. 78 (1), 
75–84. 
Lundquist, J.D., Dickerson-Lange, S.E., Lutz, J.A., Cristea, N.C., 2013. Lower forest 
density enhances snow retention in regions with warmer winters: a global 
framework developed from plot-scale observations and modeling. Water Resour. 
Res. 49 (10), 6356–6370. 
MacDonald, G.M., 2010. Water, climate change, and sustainability in the southwest. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Unit. States Am. 107 (50), 21256–21262. 
Marks, D., Winstral, A., 2001. Comparison of snow deposition, the snow cover energy 
balance, and snowmelt at two sites in a semiarid mountain basin. J. Hydrometeorol. 
2 (3), 213–227. 
Mazzotti, G., Currier, W.R., Deems, J.S., Pflug, J.M., Lundquist, J.D., Jonas, T., 2019. 
Revisiting snow cover variability and canopy structure within forest stands: insights 
from airborne lidar data. Water Resources Research. 
Mizi´nski, B., Niedzielski, T., 2017. Fully-automated estimation of snow depth in near real 
time with the use of unmanned aerial vehicles without utilizing ground control 
points. Cold Reg. Sci. Technol. 138, 63–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
coldregions.2017.03.006. 
Molotch, N.P., Brooks, P.D., Burns, S.P., Litvak, M., Monson, R.K., McConnell, J.R., 
Musselman, K., 2009. Ecohydrological controls on snowmelt partitioning in mixed- 
conifer sub-alpine forests. Ecohydrology: Ecosystems, Land and Water Process 
Interactions, Ecohydrogeomorphology 2 (2), 129–142. 
Mueller, J.M., Swaffar, W., Nielsen, E.A., Springer, A.E., Lopez, S.M., 2013. Estimating 
the value of watershed services following forest restoration. Water Resour. Res. 49 
(4), 1773–1781. 
Nocerino, E., Menna, F., Remondino, F., Toschi, I., Rodríguez-Gonz´alvez, P., 2017. June). 
Investigation of indoor and outdoor performance of two portable mobile mapping 
systems. In: Videometrics, Range Imaging, and Applications XIV, 10332. 
International Society for Optics and Photonics, p. 103320I. 
Pomeroy, J.W., Brun, E., 2001. Physical properties of snow. Snow Ecology: an 
Interdisciplinary Examination of Snow-Covered Ecosystems, pp. 45–126. 
Pomeroy, J.W., Gray, D.M., 1995. Snowcover accumulation, relocation and 
management. Bulletin of the International Society of Soil Science no 88 (2). 
Pomeroy, J.W., Parviainen, J., Hedstrom, N., Gray, D.M., 1998. Coupled modeling of 
forest snow interception and sublimation. Hydrol. Process. 12, 2317–2337. 
Puliti, S., Ørka, H.O., Gobakken, T., Næsset, E., 2015. Inventory of small forest areas 
using an unmanned aerial system. Rem. Sens. 7 (8), 9632–9654. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/rs70809632. 
R Core Team, 2018. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL. https://www.R-project. 
org/.  
Revuelto, J., L´opez-Moreno, J.I., Azorín-Molina, C., Vicente-Serrano, S.M., 2015. Canopy 
influence on SD distribution in a pine stand in the Pyrenees from terrestrial laser 
data acquisition. Water Resour. Res. 51 https://doi.org/10.1002/2014WR016496. 
Reynolds, R.T., Meador, A.J.S., Youtz, J.A., Nicolet, T., Matonis, M.S., Jackson, P.L., 
et al., 2013. Restoring Composition and Structure in Southwestern Frequent-Fire 
Forests. 
Richardson, J.J., Moskal, L.M., 2011. Strengths and limitations of assessing forest density 
and spatial configuration with aerial LiDAR. Rem. Sens. Environ. 115 (10), 
2640–2651. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2011.05.020. 
Sankey, T., Donald, J., McVay, J., Ashley, M., O’Donnell, F., Lopez, S.M., Springer, A., 
2015. Multi-scale analysis of snow dynamics at the southern margin of the North 
American continental snow distribution. Rem. Sens. Environ. 169, 307–319. 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Science of Remote Sensing 4 (2021) 100029
12
Sankey, T., Donager, J., McVay, J., Sankey, J.B., 2017. UAV lidar and hyperspectral 
fusion for forest monitoring in the southwestern USA. Rem. Sens. Environ. 195, 
30–43. 
Sankey, T., McVay, J., Swetnam, T., McClaran, M., Heilman, P., Nichols, M., 2018. UAV 
hyperspectral and lidar data and their fusion for arid and semi-arid land vegetation 
monitoring. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation 1, 20–23. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/rse2.44. 
Sankey, T., Leonard, J., Moore, M., 2019. Unmanned aerial vehicle-based rangeland 
monitoring: examining a Century of vegetation change. Rangel. Ecol. Manag. 72 (5), 
858–863. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rama.2019.04.002. 
Sankey, T., Belmonte, A., Massey, R., Leonard, J., 2020. Regional-scale forest restoration 
effects on ecosystem resiliency to drought: a synthesis of vegetation and moisture 
trends on Google Earth Engine. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation 7 (2), 
259–274. https://doi.org/10.1002/rse2.186. 
Sankey, J., Sankey, T., Li, J., Ravi, S., Wang, G., Caster, J., Kasprak, A., 2021. 
Quantifying plant-soil-nutrient dynamics in rangelands: fusion of UAV 
hyperspectral-LiDAR, UAV multispectral-photogrammetry, and ground-based 
LiDAR-digital photography in a shrub-encroached desert grassland. Remote Sens. 
Environ. 253, 112223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2020.112223. 
Schultz, C.A., Jedd, T., Beam, R.D., 2012. The collaborative forest landscape restoration 
program: a history and overview of the first projects. J. For. 110 (7), 381–391. 
Shin, P., Sankey, T., Moore, M., Thode, A., 2018. Evaluating unmanned aerial vehicle 
images for estimating forest canopy fuels in a ponderosa pine stand. Rem. Sens. 10, 
1266–1288. 
Simonin, K., Kolb, T.E., Montes-Helu, M., Koch, G.W., 2007. The influence of thinning on 
components of stand water balance in a ponderosa pine forest stand during and after 
extreme drought. Agric. For. Meteorol. 143 (3–4), 266–276. 
Sturm, M., Holmgren, J., 2018. An automatic snow depth probe for field validation 
campaigns. Water Resour. Res. 54, 9695–9701. https://doi.org/10.1029/ 
2018WR023559. 
Tang, J., Chen, Y., Kukko, A., Kaartinen, H., Jaakkola, A., Khoramshahi, E., et al., 2015. 
SLAM-aided stem mapping for forest inventory with small-footprint mobile LiDAR. 
Forests 6 (12), 4588–4606. 
Varhola, A., Coops, N.C., Weiler, M., Moore, R.D., 2010. Forest canopy effects on snow 
accumulation and ablation: an integrative review of empirical results. J. Hydrol. 392 
(3–4), 219–233. 
Veatch, W., Brooks, P.D., Gustafson, J.R., Molotch, N.P., 2009. Quantifying the effects of 
forest canopy cover on net snow accumulation at a continental, mid-latitude site. 
Ecohydrology: Ecosystems, Land and Water Process Interactions, 
Ecohydrogeomorphology 2 (2), 115–128. 
Western Regional Climate Center, 2018. Cooperative Climatological Data Summaries. 
Retrieved from. http://wrcc.dri.edu/summary/. 
White, J.C., Wulder, M.A., Vastaranta, M., Coops, N.C., Pitt, D., Woods, M., 2013. The 
utility of image-based point clouds for forest inventory: a comparison with airborne 
laser scanning. Forests 4 (3), 518–536. https://doi.org/10.3390/f4030518. 
White, J.C., Coops, N.C., Wulder, M.A., Vastaranta, M., Hilker, T., Tompalski, P., 2016. 
Remote sensing technologies for enhancing forest inventories: a review. Can. J. Rem. 
Sens. 42 (5), 619–641. 
Williams, A.P., Allen, C.D., Macalady, A.K., Griffin, D., Woodhouse, C.A., Meko, D.M., 
et al., 2013. Temperature as a potent driver of regional forest drought stress and tree 
mortality. Nat. Clim. Change 3 (3), 292. 
Winstral, A., Marks, D., 2002. Simulating wind fields and snow redistribution using 
terrain-based parameters to model snow accumulation and melt over a semi-arid 
mountain catchment. Hydrol. Process. 16, 3585–3603. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
hyp.1238. 
Witten, J.G.D., Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., 2013. An Introduction to Statistical Learning, 
112. Springer, New York, p. 18. 
Wood, S.N., 2011. Fast stable restricted maximum likelihood and marginal likelihood 
estimation of semiparametric generalized linear models. J. Roy. Stat. Soc. 73 (1), 
3–36. 
Wood, S.N., 2017. Generalized Additive Models: an Introduction with R, second ed. 
Chapman and Hall/CRC. 
Wright, M.N., Ziegler, A., 2017. ranger: a fast implementation of random forests for high 
dimensional data in C++ and R. J. Stat. Software 77, 1–17. https://doi.org/ 
10.18637/jss.v077.i01. 
Zhang, J., Singh, S., 2014. July). LOAM: lidar odometry and mapping in real-time. In: 
Robotics: Science and Systems, 2. 
Zhang, Zhengyou, 1994. Iterative point matching for registration of free-form curves and 
surfaces. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 13 (12), 119–152. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF01427149. Springer.  
Zhang, W., Qi, J., Wan, P., Wang, H., Xie, D., Wang, X., Yan, G., 2016. An easy-to-use 
airborne LiDAR data filtering method based on cloth simulation. Rem. Sens. 8, 501. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs8060501. 
Zheng, Z., Ma, Q., Qian, K., Bales, R.C., 2018. Canopy effects on snow accumulation: 
observations from lidar, canonical-view photos, and continuous ground 
measurements from sensor networks. Rem. Sens. 10, 1769. 
Zou, C.B., Breshears, D.D., Newman, B.D., Wilcox, B.P., Gard, M.O., Rich, P.M., 2008. 
Soil water dynamics under low-versus high-ponderosa pine tree density: 
ecohydrological functioning and restoration implications. Ecohydrology: 
Ecosystems, Land and Water Process Interactions, Ecohydrogeomorphology 1 (4), 
309–315. 
J. Donager et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
