

Citation: Nicholls, D.; Vaughan, D.;
Mitchell, D.; Han, H.-S.; Smidt, M.;
Sessions, J. Forest Bio-Hubs to
Enhance Forest Health While
Supporting the Emerging
Bioeconomy—A Comparison
between Three U.S. Regions. Energies
2022, 15, 931. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en15030931
Academic Editor: Idiano D’Adamo
Received: 19 November 2021
Accepted: 12 January 2022
Published: 27 January 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
energies
Article
Forest Bio-Hubs to Enhance Forest Health While Supporting
the Emerging Bioeconomy—A Comparison between
Three U.S. Regions
David Nicholls 1,*, Damon Vaughan 2
, Dana Mitchell 3, Han-Sup Han 2
, Mathew Smidt 3
and John Sessions 4
1
Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Juneau, AK 99801, USA
2
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA;
Damon.Vaughan@nau.edu (D.V.); Han-Sup.han@nau.edu (H.-S.H.)
3
Southern Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Auburn, AL 36849, USA; Dana.Mitchell@usda.gov (D.M.);
Mathew.Smidt@usda.gov (M.S.)
4
Forest Engineering, Resources & Management, College of Forestry, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA; John.Sessions@oregonstate.edu
*
Correspondence: David.l.Nicholls@usda.gov
Abstract: The emerging bioeconomy requires new supply chain paradigms for biomass materials
to reach processing centers. Forest bio-hubs can be thought of as networks of collection points to
facilitate biomass supply chains that feed from forest to central processing facilities. The design and
functionality of forest bio-hubs depends on the form (e.g., vertically and horizontally integrated),
and the quality and volume of feedstocks. In this paper we conceptually develop the potential
role of forest bio-hubs. We then compare current bio-hub development in three U.S. regions—the
Paciﬁc Northwest, the southwest region, and the southeastern U.S. We use a “SWOT” framework to
compare strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats for each region. We consider transportation
distances, topography, proximity to markets, harvesting methods, and wood products development.
Innovation and adaptability would play key roles in forest bio-hub development, especially with
dynamic conditions related to markets, wildﬁre risks, biomass utilization policy, and community
socioeconomic factors.
Keywords: forest depot; bio-hub; biomass supply chain; bioreﬁnery; log sort yard; wood yard
1. Introduction
1.1. Forest Bio-Hubs: Context and Deﬁnition
There is a need to scale up the capacity of bioreﬁneries producing liquid fuel from
bio-based feedstock in order to meet targets set by the Renewable Fuels Standards [1]
and other initiatives. At the same time, restoration of western U.S. forests is creating an
abundance of woody material that has limited markets [2]. Forest bio-hubs, a potential
solution to both of these problems, can be thought of as networks of collection points to
facilitate biomass supply chains linking forests to a central processing facility. However,
forest bio-hubs can be different in format, function and deﬁnitions, and this can vary
by region, forest type, processing technologies, and scale of utilization. Forest bio-hubs
have numerous advantages in supplying wood and biomass to manufacturing facilities
compared to traditional biomass transportation chains and can result in more efﬁcient and
economical feedstock transportation. A key characteristic of forest bio-hubs is that they
include some level of intermediate biomass processing, from minimal to more sophisticated.
Examples include drying, chipping, grinding, torrefaction, pelletizing, biochar production,
and pyrolysis oil. Forest bio-hubs can incorporate a variety of biomass feedstocks including
forest residues, mill residues, agricultural residues, and municipal solid wastes. Effective
forest bio-hubs can also enable a wide diversity of bio-products produced at a central
bioreﬁnery, and could play a key role in the future development of the bioeconomy.
Energies 2022, 15, 931. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15030931
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

Energies 2022, 15, 931
2 of 15
In this paper, we deﬁne a bio-hub as a collection that includes the following essential
components: (1) a bioreﬁnery that could produce a number of end products such as
cellulosic ethanol, energy, or bio-chemicals; (2) any number of intermediate processing
facilities often referred to as depots, supplying the centralized facility; (3) harvest sites;
and (4) transportation connections between these elements. The term bio-hub refers to
the entire supply chain, including transportation legs, intermediate processing facilities,
and the central bioreﬁnery. Bio-hub elements could be state- or privately-owned Figure 1
shows an example bio-hub conﬁguration (Figure 1b) compared to a traditional supply
chain (Figure 1a).
Figure 1. (a). traditional forest biomass supply chain, showing transportation from forest directly to
central manufacturing facility; (b). bio-hub conﬁguration, showing intermediate processing centers
located between forest and central processing facility.
1.2. Overview of Bio-Hub Research
The concept of “advanced uniform feedstock design systems” [3], a pre-cursor to the
bio-hub idea, refers to a distributed supply chain where strategically placed depots are
used to pre-process biomass and provide a uniform feedstock to centralized bioreﬁner-
ies. These depots serve to improve the ﬂowability, transportability (bulk density), and
stability/storability (dry matter loss reduction) of the biomass [3]. Many techno-economic
studies have compared this approach to “conventional systems”, primarily with regard
to agricultural residues [4,5] but occasionally focusing on forestry residues [6]. One of the
major advantages of the advanced system is that it can de-risk the supply chain for the
bioreﬁnery and reduce the spatial variability of feedstock costs, often leading to lower inter-
est rates for investments. The drawbacks of such a system are that it can add considerable
processing and transportation costs for feedstock procurement.
Generally, as the procurement radius increases, or the capacity of the bioreﬁnery in-
creases, the advanced uniform system becomes competitive with conventional systems and
eventually can lead to cost reductions [4]. This can be aided by multi-modal transportation,
for example truck transport to the depot for pre-processing and blending, followed by rail
transport to the central reﬁnery [4]. To reduce capital investment costs, Martinkus et al.
(2018) [7] explored repurposing existing sites rather than building greenﬁeld facilities, and
provided a decision support tool to help with siting these facilities (Figure 2). Muth et al.
(2014) [6], regarding forestry residues in the southeastern US, concluded that the advanced
feedstock system slightly raised the “minimum ethanol selling price” for a bioreﬁnery as
compared to the conventional system. The beneﬁts provided were reduced moisture and
ash in the system (improving storage and conversion processes), and a reduced supply
chain risk for processing facilities. These examples serve to highlight the fact that in some
cases distributed supply chains can lead to beneﬁts, but in others their added complexity
may not pay off.

Energies 2022, 15, 931
3 of 15
 
Figure 2. Proposed forest depot conﬁguration in northern WA, ID and MT. Included are processing
facilities (black triangles), forest depots (red circles), and biomass sources (green dots). Source:
Martinkus et al., 2018.
Internationally, forest bio-hubs have gained increasing attention, including recent
work by the International Energy Agency [8] to consider supply chain structures conducive
for bioreﬁneries. The IEA Bioenergy work plan identiﬁes a need to explore “The role of pre-
processing or pre-treatment of biomass at different points in the supply chain to increase
the value and quality of biomass for given technologies” [8]. An essential element of a bio-
hub is the scale and volume of biomass feedstocks processed. Large-scale bioreﬁneries
receiving feedstocks from multiple depots could produce a range of products including bio-
plastics, automotive fuels, aviation fuels, thermal and/or electrical energy. This research
has been largely motivated by cellulosic ethanol production, focusing on agricultural
residues [9]. Often bio-hub operations can be formulated as multi-commodity network.
Others have considered the role of innovation in forestry operations using an SWOT
analysis framework [10].
1.3. Forest Bio-Hubs in U.S. Forests
There are few working examples of forest bio-hubs in U.S. forests, but there are
examples of some of the components (depots, bioreﬁneries), and development of some full-
scale forest bio-hubs may be on the horizon. In the southeastern U.S., wood pellet exports
to Europe provide a large-scale example in which the depots are located in the U.S. and
provide a uniform feedstock (i.e., pellets) to central processing facilities in Europe [11,12].
By allowing access to faraway markets, forest bio-hubs could provide clear beneﬁts in
areas that have under-developed markets for wood products. In the Southwest, this
approach was tested at the pilot scale in 2019, when researchers shipped approximately
(1270 metric tons) of wood chips to South Korea for bioenergy markets [13]. In other
cases, forest bio-hubs might not have clear advantages versus traditional biomass supply
chains, especially when large biomass volumes are processed and handled multiple times
under short transportation distances (versus transporting biomass directly to its end use
location) [14].
The use of forest bio-hubs to manage forest residues could facilitate the Collabora-
tive Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) that the USDA Forest Service has
underway in many western states (Figure 3). A goal of the CFLRP is to “encourage the
collaborative, science-based ecosystem restoration of priority forest landscapes” [15], with
a key feature being to utilize woody biomass from restoration treatments. Other objectives
include promoting the ecological, economic, and social sustainability, while leveraging
local resources to accomplish forest management goals [16]. Often, this involves local

Energies 2022, 15, 931
4 of 15
organizations such as non-proﬁts and private entities to train workers who carry out forest
restoration activities [17].
 
Figure 3. The three U.S. regions detailed in this paper: the Paciﬁc Northwest (left), the southwest
(center), and the southeast (right). National Forest land is shown in green shading and Collaborative
Forest Restoration Projects are shown as pink polygons.
An overarching goal of biomass removals in many western forests is to reduce wildﬁre
risks. Thus, biomass utilization within the framework of forest bio-hubs can provide
an array of beneﬁts for forest-dependent communities. Modern megaﬁres are driven both
by climate change and fuel buildup that has resulted from past land management practices.
Proper forest management can not only address fuel buildup but also make forests more
climate resilient. Local use of forest resources can result in greater employment while
reducing ﬁre risk at community-forest interfaces [18]. At the landscape level, mechanical
removal of small-diameter trees in overstocked stands can also provide numerous forest
health beneﬁts [19]. Over the past several decades, many western wood products facilities
have closed or now operate at reduced capacities. Given new paradigms for timber
harvest and use, including increased utilization of small-diameter logs and forest residues,
innovative approaches are needed for adding value to forest resources. Connecting various
manufacturing facilities through forest bio-hubs requires new infrastructure, transportation
systems, and workforce skills versus traditional models. Although forest bio-hubs have
many potential advantages, their feasibility must be assessed on an individual basis to
determine the speciﬁc beneﬁts present and whether they can be economically justiﬁed
versus conventional supply chain structures. Increasingly, bio-hub supply chains can lead
to socially accepted practices regarding sustainability of forest resources and provision
of ecosystem services such as enhancing water quality and reducing wildﬁre risk. This
broad-based acceptance is expected to continue as new innovative bio-based products
reach commercialization as part of the bioeconomy.
1.4. Scope and Objectives
This paper explored potential pathways for bio-hub development in the U.S. to fa-
cilitate the sustainable use of biomass. Bio-hub development in three U.S. regions was
considered- the Paciﬁc Northwest, the southwest, and the southeast. We felt it was im-
portant to include all 3 of these regions since they encompass some of the primary timber
producing regions, while having distinctly different forest types, harvesting conditions, mill
structures, and markets. We considered it outside the scope of this paper to conduct eco-
nomic analyses of the feasibility of a bio-hub approach, due to the variability involved. For
each region, we used a “SWOT” analysis format (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and

Energies 2022, 15, 931
5 of 15
threats). Here SWOT refers to strengths and weaknesses of forest bio-hubs in a given region,
comparing traditional biomass supply chains to forest bio-hubs. We did not explicitly make
interregional comparisons of strengths and weaknesses, although these points become
apparent in the discussion. We considered only forest-derived woody biomass, including
logging residue from traditional timber harvesting, thinnings, restoration treatments, and
purpose grown energy woody crops [20] in addition to wood products manufacturing
residues. Not included are municipal solid wastes or agricultural residues.
The two speciﬁc objectives of this research were:
1.
To provide regional summaries of three U.S. regions regarding what bio-hub conﬁgu-
rations are closest to being commercialized, and
2.
To conduct a “SWOT” assessment of the three regions regarding forest bio-hub potential
2. Summary of Forest Bio-Hub Potential in Three Regions
2.1. Paciﬁc Northwest Region
The Paciﬁc Northwest region (PNW) can be characterized as having a thriving industry
on private forestlands with established milling infrastructure, although domestic consumers
for pulp chips have been declining for several years. Pulp chip markets do not exist in
Northern California and pulp chips face long transport distances in many areas east of
the Cascades. There is a need for forest restoration on public lands, particularly east of
the Cascades. Biomass pre-processed at depots could facilitate transportation as well as
provide product diversiﬁcation. A large private and public land base, low electricity rates
in much of the region, barge and rail access, and a developed forestry infrastructure are
regional strengths.
A number of collection points exist in the Paciﬁc Northwest between the forest and
the processing facility which serve to add value to various forestry feedstocks. They are
much simpler than the depots proposed by Lamers et al. (2015b) [5] and can include
some level of in-woods or near-woods biomass processing (for example drying, chipping,
grinding, log bucking). Successful examples, illustrated in Figure 4, include chip yards
(e.g., Hermann Brothers Port Angeles), transfer yards, sort yards (e.g., Thompson Sort
Yard), merchandizing yards, and centralized landings (e.g., Steve Morris, Arcata, CA) for
in-woods grinding. To date, no bioreﬁneries in the Paciﬁc Northwest plan to use satellite
depots to preprocess their feedstock in the format suggested by Lamers et al. (2015b) [5].
The Red Rock Biofuels plant scheduled to start up in Lakeview, Oregon will use forest
biomass delivered directly by truck from the forest to the bioreﬁnery. Delta Airlines, before
COVID-19, was reportedly considering constructing a bioreﬁnery in western Washington. It
would use direct delivery of ground forest harvest residues from the forest to the bioreﬁnery.
Centralized landings for accumulating and densiﬁcation of biomass may be part of the
supply chain.
Although several recent studies in the Paciﬁc Northwest have shown forest bio-hubs
could be economically viable, particularly at longer transport distances, the two most
likely bioreﬁneries to be constructed in the short term will likely not use forest bio-hubs
due to relatively short transport distances from forest to facility. Simpler aggregation
and conversion facilities such as chip yards, sort yards, and centralized landings would
continue where economically viable. A demand for biofuels that exceeds the biomass
supply potential of westside industrial forest lands coupled with a dependable supply of
biomass from public dry forest restoration programs could bring the forest biomass bio-hub
concept to fruition.

Energies 2022, 15, 931
6 of 15
a 
b 
c 
Figure 4. (a). (upper left) Hermann Brothers chip yard, Port Angeles, WA. (b). (upper right)
Thompson Merchandizing Yard. (c). (bottom center) Centralized landing showing delivery of forest
harvest residues by off-highway dump truck, grinding, and transport by all-wheel drive truck to
paved road staging area for transport by on-highway truck to power plant. (Steve Morris contractor,
Arcata, CA, USA).
2.2. Southwest Region
The Southwestern U.S. has high levels of public ownership of forestlands (68 percent
in Colorado, 57 percent in New Mexico, and 61 percent in Arizona), and today’s forest
management activities on these public forestlands often focus on improving forest health
and reducing wildland ﬁre hazard. For example, several Collaborative Forest Landscape
Restoration Projects (CFLRPs), which are large projects that can have contracts of up
to 20 years with possibility for renewal, are underway throughout the region. Small-
diameter trees and biomass resulting from forest restoration thinning treatment activities
are not fully utilized and are often wasted (e.g., burned or decayed) on site due to low
value and lack of market for those materials. Poor utilization of small-diameter trees and
biomass, referred to as the “biomass bottleneck”, has been a key barrier to successful
implementation of forest restoration activities on public forestlands. Active management
of private forestlands in this region augments timber resources available for manufacturing
wood-based products. Existing markets for woody materials include pallets, house logs,

Energies 2022, 15, 931
7 of 15
hog fuel, pellets, lumber, and ﬁrewood. Firewood is currently a particularly large sector
due to the prevalence of small-diameter and low-quality timber, high product demand, and
low capital investment requirements.
Public and community support has been identiﬁed as essential to successfully imple-
ment fuel reduction programs [21]. For example, voters in Flagstaff, Arizona voted in 2012
to approve a ten-million-dollar bond for forest restoration on city land and neighboring
national forest land [22]. Much of this community support has arisen since stakeholders
realize the full cost of wildﬁres, including post-ﬁre ﬂooding, is vastly greater than the cost
of preventative forest restoration [23]. Nicholls (2014) [24] further emphasized the need
for coordinated wood and biomass utilization efforts to increase as broad-scale restoration
treatments across Arizona’s national forests remove large amounts of wood ﬁber. However,
the skilled timber harvesting and transportation workforce is currently limiting in this
region, especially if large-scale forest restoration projects ramp up in coming years [25].
The Southwest may most effectively contribute to U.S. bio-hub development by pro-
viding a source of raw and pre-processed wood for existing markets elsewhere. Due to
a lack of existing markets for wood and the instability of the supply from public forestland,
development of a central bioreﬁnery would be an unlikely endeavor in the Southwest.
However, pre-processing depots could be used to improve the transportation character-
istics of wood from restoration treatments and mill residues from the existing industry.
By increasing bulk density and ﬂowability, and decreasing moisture content, such depots
could facilitate long-distance transportation to thriving markets in the Paciﬁc Northwest or
Asia. This would allow the region to capitalize on the extensive rail network that is often
close to planned restoration activities [13].
2.3. Southeast Region
In the Southeastern US, timber lands are primarily under non-industrial private
ownership. Most forest land is owned by individuals or organizations who have harvested
trees from their land [26]. While there are several stressors (e.g., aging workforce, ﬁnancial
health, transportation) on the logging industry, logging capacity currently satisﬁes demand
and some excess logging capacity exists [27]. The production of residual chips and bark is
an important component of southern sawmill economics accounting for 30 to 40 percent of
sawlog volumes [28]. Sawmills can affect the residual chip volume by altering incoming
material speciﬁcations. Increased conversion efﬁciency of solid wood products generally
indicates better mill revenue. Changing those limits can increase the volume and types of
material delivered to the mill.
Chip mills and pellet plants are a common way to pre-process biomass and facilitate
transportation in the Southeast. Enviva Company is exploring changes to its traditional
supply chains by sourcing feedstocks from wood chip mills and/or from suppliers that
dry chips in-woods before delivery to pellet mills [29]. Throughout the region, substantial
quantities of biomass are processed into wood pellets to serve export markets in Europe,
providing one example of a bio-hub. In this case, the depots are located in the southeastern
U.S. and provide a uniform feedstock (pellets) to central processing facilities in Europe.
With local market support, harvesting trees and producing bioenergy as a co-product
has been viable across the southeast. Co-production of biomass with roundwood typically
minimizes cost since incremental or marginal costs are quite low and volume per piece
is maximized. Among bioenergy producers in Virginia, nearly all produced roundwood
and bioenergy as co-products [30]. While chip production costs decline with increased
chip volume, higher biomass volumes could increase roundwood costs by interfering
with production [31]. Shresthra and Lanford (2002) [32] found that marketing pulp chips
and logs increased total yield compared to roundwood only harvests, but diversion of
roundwood to chips reduced total value.
Biomass harvests are currently uneconomical as single product silvicultural treat-
ments. Most multi-product harvests require product separation at landings, and perhaps
merchandising again at the mill or woodyard. The intensity and methods used in product

Energies 2022, 15, 931
8 of 15
separation are primarily driven by differentiation in available markets. Most beneﬁts
from increased processing and sorting are related to avoidance of quota limits through
diversiﬁcation of markets [33] However, beyond some threshold of three to ﬁve products,
sorting can have a negative impact on harvesting and landowner revenue. For very low
value products like biomass, the products can be left onsite without signiﬁcant impact [34].
Since the production of biomass co-products is dependent on the presence of multi-product
harvesting, wood energy facilities are viewed as signiﬁcant competitors by traditional ﬁber
mills [35].
In summary, the previous section provides an overview of the current status and
potential of forest bio-hubs in 3 regions. In the next section we focus on a SWOT analysis,
reinforcing key points, and assessing future potential.
3. Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats Analysis
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats of bio-hub development vary
between the three regions (Table 1). In this analysis, strengths and weaknesses refer to
the potential positive or negative results of moving away from traditional supply chains
towards bio-hub models. Opportunities and threats refer to changes that could either make
a bio-hub approach more feasible or provide challenges to implementation.
The Paciﬁc Northwest region is closest to having a bio-hub in place, with well-
developed forest products industry, and several liquid biofuels facilities planned. Bio-hub
strengths include de-risking the supply chain for the planned bioreﬁneries. Weaknesses
result from inefﬁciencies that such a model would bring, such as potentially longer trans-
port distances and complicated chain-of-custody. There are opportunities to improve the
feasibility of forest bio-hubs, such as incorporating under-utilized feedstock into supply
chains, and using forest biomass as a biooil feedstock. Threats to bio-hub development in
the Paciﬁc northwest include a general lack of collaboration among ﬁrms and differences
in transportation economics when considering east-side versus west-side forests (Table 1).
Other threats include the capital costs associated with bioreﬁnery development which can
be $500 million or more and require a guaranteed fuel supply. Further, woody biomass
from harvesting residues is linked to timber harvest levels which in turn vary based on
broad economic cycles. These factors can provide disincentives for landowners to enter
into long term supply agreements.
The Southwest is unlikely to have a self-contained bio-hub. However, the region could
provide depots to ship pre-processed woody byproducts outside the region. Strengths of
this approach would be greater market access for under-utilized feedstock, thus improving
the economics of forest restoration treatments. Weaknesses could be an overall increase in
transportation distances. Opportunities to address these weaknesses include improving the
infrastructure and utilization of railroad for shipping forest products, as well as a workforce
training center. Policies favorable to forest bioenergy may provide opportunities to keep
the material local, favoring a self-contained bio-hub. Threats stem primarily from the
instability of wood supplies from national forests.
For the southeast region, more diverse and competitive markets could provide an op-
portunity for bio-hub development as co-production of roundwood and bioenergy feed-
stocks from harvesting operations. Recent developments in logging technology have
increased product marketing options which in turn create greater economic incentives
to retain private land holdings. There would be signiﬁcant threats to depots that accept,
process and transport material if the market destinations are also directly accessible by
wood producers. Many current mills already manufacture primary products, and produce
and market co-products, ﬁlling a role similar to depots. Thus, one scenario could include
direct competition between depots and existing mills for raw materials.

Energies 2022, 15, 931
9 of 15
Table 1. Regional summary of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats of a bio-hub model
compared with traditional supply chains. General items (not speciﬁc to a region) are discussed in the
paper’s Introduction.
Paciﬁc Northwest (PNW)
Southwest (SW)
Southeast (SE)
Strengths
•
Ability to achieve forest
restoration objectives in
areas distant to central
bioreﬁnery
•
Takes better advantage of
low PNW electricity costs
•
Allows for use of
Columbia River coastal
barge routes to access
distant markets
•
Greater market access to
achieve forest restoration
objectives throughout
region
•
Increased utilization of
neglected feedstock in
CFLRPs
•
Enhanced
roundwood/bioenergy
co-production
•
Incentive for landowners
to retain private land as
forests
•
Provide market for
secondary wood products
from sawmills
Advantages of bio-hub
compared with
a traditional supply
chain?
Weaknesses
•
May increase total
transport distance if not
optimized
•
Complicates log
accounting and
chain-of-custody for
certiﬁed products
•
Limited suitable locations
for intermediary
processing facilities,
requiring long-distance
transportation
•
May shift job creation and
wood product markets
away from the region
•
Lack of advantages and
needs for bio-hub based
supply chains due to
existing opportunities for
direct sale of most forest
products
•
Handling biomass can
interfere with higher-value
roundwood production
•
Limited experience in
running sort yard
operations
Disadvantages of
bio-hub compared with
a traditional supply
chain?
Opportunities
•
Incorporate under-utilized
feedstock into supply
chains
•
Improve truck scheduling
•
Forest biomass
competition in biooil
markets
•
Capitalize on
well-established forest
products industry
infrastructure
•
Promote policies favorable
to renewable energy and
improved biomass
utilization
•
Develop a workforce
training center
•
Utilize railroad network to
access distant markets
•
Capitalize on community
support for active forest
management and wood
utilization
•
Capitalize on diverse array
of land ownership and
forest products markets
•
Increase efﬁciency of
in-woods separation
•
Whole-tree delivery to
processing centers
•
Enhance use of logging
residues and mill
byproducts
How to improve
feasibility of developing
bio-hub?
Threats
•
Lack of collaboration
among ﬁrms
•
West of Cascades many
sources are relatively short
transport distances from
forest to mill.
•
East of Cascades timber
supply from National
Forests long- and short
term
•
Timber supply from
National Forests: long-
and short-term
•
Limited forestry workforce
and contractors
•
Local opposition to
moving wood products
out of the region
•
Competition for biomass
among forest products
companies
•
Negative impact of
biomass on harvesting and
landowner revenue
•
Pellet manufacturers and
co-generation facilities
viewed as competitors
What may stand in the
way of developing
bio-hub?
The SWOT approach helps to determine if a bio-hub model would be appropriate and,
if so what it may look like. For example, the strengths of a bio-hub model may not outweigh
the weaknesses, as in certain parts of the PNW or Southeast where transport distances are
already short. This could inﬂuence the conﬁguration of the forest bio-hubs (Figure 1b).
On the other hand, bio-hub strengths could outweigh the weaknesses but with signiﬁcant
threats to implementation that would need to be addressed. This could be the case in the
Southwest, where limited workforce and instable wood supply may cause problems. It

Energies 2022, 15, 931
10 of 15
would be necessary to resolve these threats to justify the investment necessary in bio-hub
infrastructure. Therefore, future research on bio-hub feasibility could rate strengths and
weaknesses quantitatively on site-speciﬁc locations. Relevant criteria could include biomass
supplies, prices, products, markets, and capital investment requirements.
4. Discussion
Forest bio-hubs represent a new paradigm for biomass supply chains in the U.S., and
can increase ﬂexibility from the woods to a central processing facility. In many cases, they
represent a model to enhance optimal use of all parts of a tree. They are ﬂexible in the
sense that, although broadly classiﬁed as being distributed or centralized, many types of
conﬁgurations are possible. For example, bio-hub depots can process biomass, then feed
one or more centrally located processing facilities. Distributed models are also possible,
where multiple forest depots may be present and feedstocks may be transported directly
from outlying sources to a centralized bioreﬁnery [36]. Lamers et al. (2015b) [5] indicate
two primary designs. Standard depots can function primarily to improve supply stability,
while quality depots can increase feedstock quality by pre-processing raw materials at
a bio-hub.
4.1. Bio-Hub Conﬁgurations Must Be Tailored to the Unique Characteristics of a Region
The scale of operation has a direct bearing on supply chains and the design of bio-hub
networks. The well-developed wood processing industries of the Paciﬁc Northwest and
the Southeast could lend themselves toward large-scale bio-hub development. At larger
scales, bioreﬁneries may produce cellulosic ethanol, aviation fuels, and related products,
requiring more sophisticated designs. At smaller scales, in-woods depots could be used
primarily to provide stability in feedstock supplies [5], providing dependable supplies to
one or more wood products producers, either at a cluster site or strategically along the
supply chain. Here, each producer could use a different feedstock component, encouraging
niche products to be manufactured. In other cases, more traditional models including sort
yards could be considered. Log sort yards often include at least minimal log processing
operations, and share many of the same principles inﬂuencing the economic and practical
feasibility of forest bio-hubs. Financially viable sort yards would need to consider local log
supplies, wood market conditions, and the number of product sorts required, and this is
especially true for small diameter timber [37].
In resource-rich regions in the U.S., forest bio-hubs are sometimes unneeded if sufﬁ-
cient feedstocks can be transported directly to a centralized facility at minimum cost. Here,
the additional handling costs and transportation distances of intermediary processing
centers outweigh the potential value added. This may be the case in some southeastern
and northwestern locations.
A hallmark characteristic of forest bio-hubs is that some amount of intermediary pro-
cessing occurs. This could be as simple as delimbing and/or air-drying, but could include
further processing such as pelletizing or torrefaction. Often transportation economics are
improved due to the pre-processing step which results in denser biomass having higher
energy densities. This has been widely researched for agricultural residues (including corn
stover), where pre-processing can include drying, size reduction, chemical processing, and
blending [4]. Longer transportation distances can also allow feedstock supplies to remain
uniform at the central processing facility, even when there is greater spatial and temporal
variation for individual supply points.
The degree of in-woods processing also inﬂuences bio-hub performance. For example,
the southeast region may have relatively simple in-woods operations since supply chains
are well deﬁned as are markets, including overseas pellet consumers in Europe. However,
producing too many products may create operational inefﬁciencies due to greater sorting
and handling requirements. Well-deﬁned markets for pellets, lumber, and other products
are present in the southeast, with a pulp and paper industry helping to drive supply
chain infrastructure.

Energies 2022, 15, 931
11 of 15
By contrast, western forest bio-hubs may be driven more by a need to remove ﬁre-
prone biomass from widely distributed areas. Pellet production, biochar, torreﬁed wood
and pyrolysis oil have been investigated using mobile production facilities that can help im-
prove economic feasibility versus ﬁxed facility locations, especially when grid connections
are available [38]. A torreﬁed wood facility under construction in John Day, Oregon will
use ﬁre-prone feedstocks from eastern Oregon. The growth of the cross-laminated timber
industry in the west could help drive markets for its residues.
Land ownership also plays a role in feedstock availability. For example, in the South-
east, large areas of private ownership can supply wood pellet feedstocks for use in European
markets, often as a coﬁring fuel. In the western U.S., Federal ownership management goals
favor lower harvest levels for conventional products. In some cases, in-woods biomass
must be removed after timber harvest operations on Federal lands, or in the absence of
conventional harvests.
Each region discussed in this paper has unique conditions, forest types, levels of ﬁre
risk, biomass supply, accessibility, wood products infrastructure, woody biomass feed-
stocks, and access to markets, among other factors. All directly inﬂuence the trajectory of
bio-hub development as well as commercialization to support the emerging bioeconomy.
Thus, there is no “one size ﬁts all” to the design of forest bio-hubs, and they must be
evaluated case by case. Since the expected beneﬁts of establishing a bio-hub must justify
the additional costs, techno-economic analyses can help identify viable scenarios, espe-
cially when multiple feedstocks, processing technologies, and products are involved [9].
Ultimately, new markets for higher-value cellulose products could help accelerate biomass
supply development. In general, conditions conducive to forest industries development
also bode well for bio-hub potential. These can include a large private and public land base,
low electricity rates, barge and rail access, and a developed forestry infrastructure.
4.2. The Emerging Bio-Economy and Replacement of Fossil Fuels
Bioreﬁneries producing products such as specialty chemicals, plastics, power, and
heat, could reduce dependence on our largely fossil fuel-based economy. However, few if
any wood-based bioreﬁneries are currently in operation, although planned facilities could
produce liquid transportation fuels in the near future. Additional bio-based feedstocks,
including agricultural residues, municipal wastes, and other organic wastes could be co-
processed with woody feedstocks. Bals and Dale (2012) [9] investigated fast pyrolysis
of woody biomass in the Midwest, ﬁnding that it generated low positive returns, and
was less proﬁtable than corn stover processes. Using a mix of agricultural and woody
feedstocks would increase complexity since all have different supply chain structures,
feedstock variability, “shelf lives”, and feedstock values.
A key advantage of bioreﬁneries is the potential for using current infrastructure from
fossil fuel reﬁneries, thus reducing the need to build new infrastructures for biomass feed-
stocks [39]. The “circular” economy would include integrated bioreﬁneries using various
biomass feedstocks and conversion pathways to produce biofuels and biochemicals [40].
Brandt et al. (2018) [41] evaluated the mechanical processes to produce cellulosic sugars as
well as fuel pellets as a co-product. Economic feasibility could be enhanced if Renewable
Identiﬁcation Number (RIN) credits were available, and the biofuel facility and sugar
production facility were co-located. Thus, in addition to broad macroeconomic factors,
successful forest bio-hubs will depend on an array of technical, economic, and social factors,
which need to be evaluated based on site-speciﬁc conditions.
4.3. Forest Bio-Hubs to Support Forest Health and Reduce Fire Risk
Forest bio-hubs could beneﬁt ﬁre risk reductions, particularly on western landscapes.
Restoration contracts in the Southwest often require that biomass be removed from the
forest, increasing the need for forest bio-hubs to receive and process material. Thus, optimal
biomass use could depend on both market factors and ecosystem service that are either
required by policy or are demanded by consumers. Properly constructed forest depots

Energies 2022, 15, 931
12 of 15
can buffer supply chain disruptions, allowing more predictable material ﬂow from forest
to manufacturing center. The feedstocks available could include ﬁre salvage and beetle
salvage timber in addition to biomass from mechanically treated stands.
Fire risk reduction is likely to gain importance as climate change can contribute to
wildﬁre severity especially near population centers. Societal values seem to be changing
in this regard, and biomass supply chain optimization now includes economic, social
and environmental considerations [42]. For example, the International Union for Con-
servation of Nature’s red list provides information about range, population size, habitat,
threats, and conservation actions of threatened plant species. At the same time, wildﬁre
events are no longer just an issue for remote communities, as larger cities (Napa Valley,
California; Portland, Oregon) have become affected by smoke, watershed degradation,
and potential threats of evacuation. New wildﬁre suppression strategies may be needed,
including optimal timing of small ﬁre suppression to prevent further growth (especially
with unpredictable weather events). Greater attention to ﬁre risk reduction activities, par-
ticularly in western states, would not only improve forest health but also build resilience in
forest-dependent communities.
Western states vary greatly in the extent and utilization of forest resources, the pro-
portion of land under federal ownership, and community and stakeholder structure and
dynamics. Thus, forest bio-hubs will require site-speciﬁc evaluations that are needed to
justify their implementation when accommodating small-diameter materials and primary
residues [43]. However, when forest restoration treatments are used as a source of biomass
to forest bio-hubs, a range of socioeconomic and ecosystem service beneﬁts can also be
realized. For example, water quality values can be preserved when forest treatments reduce
wildﬁre risk, improving forest health in municipal watersheds. Sustainable economic
development can be enhanced when considering the employment needs of all stages of the
biomass supply chain. Finally, innovation can spur new markets and technologies, such as
biofuels, for use in the aviation industry, torreﬁed wood, and/or mobile pyrolysis, all of
which could beneﬁt from successful bio-hub implementation.
Properly designed and implemented forest bio-hubs support forest health in the
following ways:
•
Sustainable forest management does not lead to deforestation since net harvests and
net growth should be in balance
•
In many forest ecosystems, including those addressed in this paper, forests that are
left alone (i.e., unmanaged) are likely to experience drought, ﬁre, or insect infestations,
in part brought upon by climate change
•
Forests managed for climate adaptation and mitigation often result in the generation
biomass materials having little or no economic value. Forest biohubs are one avenue
for marketing these otherwise unmerchantable materials, and this is especially the
case for privately owned forests.
Due to the myriad social and environmental beneﬁts of wildﬁre risk reduction in
the Southwest, there has been an increase in alternative funding sources to get this work
done. Since the timber often has negative net value, other sources of funding are used
including federal, state, private, and conservation ﬁnance [44]. An innovative new approach
for funding is the Forest Resilience Bond, which is an example where public-private
partnerships and private capital are leveraged to fund forest restoration projects [45].
Traditionally, the economic beneﬁts of forest restoration have been difﬁcult to quantify,
only materializing far in the future as “avoided costs” of a wildﬁre that may not have
actually occurred. The Forest Resilience Bond relies on contracts with beneﬁciaries (e.g.,
landowners, water utilities) and investors (e.g., pension funds, foundations) to provide
more immediate payoffs [45]. Thus, projects can move forward even if the timber has a net
negative value by the time it is delivered to the mill. The bio-hub concept can expand the
feasible distance that harvested biomass may travel, and possibly increase value.

Energies 2022, 15, 931
13 of 15
5. Conclusions
This research has considered bio-hub potential in three U.S. regions. Forest bio-hubs
could become a new supply chain paradigm for biomass feedstocks to reach processing
centers economically, supporting an emerging bioeconomy. Innovation and adaptability
will play key roles in forest bio-hub development. Several factors, including forest type,
land ownership, scale of operation, forest products infrastructure, and current markets will
require careful attention in bio-hub design. Biomass transportation chains that minimize
supply risks will be needed before large investment decisions can be made. Effective
forest bio-hubs will not only provide local economic beneﬁts but also provide important
ecosystem services while supporting forest health and reducing ﬁre risk, especially in
western forests.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.N.; methodology, D.N. and D.V.; investigation, H.-S.H.,
J.S., D.V., D.M. and M.S.; writing —original draft preparation, H.-S.H., J.S., D.V., D.M., M.S. and D.N.;
writing—review and editing, D.V.; project administration, D.N. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: No external funding was utilized in this work.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We want to thank Thomas Schuler, USDA Forest Service, for his insights, valu-
able comments, and helpful guidance throughout this work.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manu-script, or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1.
US EPA. Final Renewable Fuel Standards for 2020, and the Biomass-Based Diesel Volume for 2021.
Available online:
https://www.epa.gov/renewable-fuel-standard-program/ﬁnal-renewable-fuel-standards-2020-and-biomass-based-diesel-
volume#rule-summary (accessed on 29 October 2021).
2.
Nicholls, D.L.; Halbrook, J.M.; Benedum, M.E.; Han, H.S.; Lowell, E.C.; Becker, D.R.; Barbour, R.J. Socioeconomic constraints to
biomass removal from forest lands for ﬁre risk reduction in the Western U.S. Forests 2018, 9, 264. [CrossRef]
3.
Lamers, P.; Tan, E.C.D.; Searcy, E.M.; Scarlata, C.J.; Cafferty, K.G.; Jacobson, J.J. Strategic Supply System Design—A Holistic
Evaluation of Operational and Production Cost for a Bioreﬁnery Supply Chain. Biofuel. Bioprod. Bioreﬁn. 2015, 9, 648–660.
[CrossRef]
4.
Argo, A.; Tan, E.; Inman, D.; Langholtz, M.; Eaton, L.; Jacobson, J.; Wright, C.; Muth, D.J.; Wu, M.M.; Chiu, Y.; et al. Investigation
of biochemical bioreﬁnery sizing and environmental sustainability impacts for conventional bale system and advanced uniform
biomass logistics designs. Biofuel. Bioprod. Bioreﬁn. 2013, 7, 282–302. [CrossRef]
5.
Lamers, P.; Roni, M.S.; Tumuluru, J.S.; Jacobson, J.J.; Cafferty, K.G.; Hansen, J.K.; Kenney, K.; Teymouri, F.; Bals, B. Techno-
economic analysis of decentralized biomass processing depots. Bioresour. Technol. 2015, 194, 205–213. [CrossRef]
6.
Muth, D.J.; Langholtz, M.H.; Tan, E.C.D.; Jacobson, J.J.; Schwab, A.; Wu, M.M.; Argo, A.; Brandt, C.C.; Cafferty, K.G.;
Chiu, Y.-W.; et al. Investigation of thermochemical bioreﬁnery sizing and environmental sustainability impacts for conventional
supply system and distributed pre-processing supply system designs. Biofuel. Bioprod. Bioreﬁn. 2014, 8, 545–567. [CrossRef]
7.
Martinkus, N.; Latta, G.; Brandt, K.; Wolcott, M. A multi-criteria decision analysis approach to facility siting in a wood-based
depot-and-bioreﬁnery supply chain model. Front. Energy Res. 2018, 6, 124. [CrossRef]
8.
International Energy Agency. 2020. Task 43- Biomass Supply. Available online: https://task43.ieabioenergy.com/ (accessed on 29
October 2021).
9.
Bals, B.D.; Dale, B.E. Developing a Model for Assessing Biomass Processing Technologies within a Local Biomass Processing
Depot. Bioresour. Technol. 2012, 106, 161–169. [CrossRef]
10.
Sterbova, M.; Loucanova, E.; Palus, H.; Ivan, L.; Salka, J. Innovation Strategy in Slovak Forest Contractor Firms—A SWOT
Analysis. Forests 2016, 7, 118. [CrossRef]
11.
Eranki, P.L.; Manowitz, D.H.; Bals, B.D.; Izaurralde, C.; Kim, S.; Dale, B.E. The watershed-scale optimized and rearranged
landscape design (WORLD) model and local biomass processing depots for sustainable biofuel production: Integrated life cycle
assessments. Biofuel. Bioprod. Bioreﬁn. 2013, 7, 537–550. [CrossRef]
12.
Kline, K.L.; Dale, V.H.; Rose, E.; Tonn, B. Effects of Production of Woody Pellets in the Southeastern United States on the
Sustainable Development Goals. Sustainability 2021, 13, 821. [CrossRef]
13.
Halbrook, J.; Han, H.-S. Chip & Ship: Testing the Logistics of Supplying Wood Chips over Long Distance Using Intermodal Railroad
Transportation; Northern Arizona University Ecological Restoration Institute: Flagstaff, AZ, USA, 2019; 28p.

Energies 2022, 15, 931
14 of 15
14.
Brodbeck, A. Timber Industry Consolidation and the Need for Scale Appropriate Harvesting Mechanisms in Alabama’s Black
Belt. Master’s Thesis, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA, 2005; 170p.
15.
USDA Forest Service. Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program, Washington, DC, USA. 2019. Available online:
https://www.fs.fed.us/restoration/CFLRP/ (accessed on 29 October 2021).
16.
Schultz, C.A.; Jedd, T.; Beam, R.D. The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program: A History and Overview of the First
Projects. J. For. 2012, 110, 381–391. [CrossRef]
17.
Chan, C. Supporting Local Rural Economies while Improving Forest Health, Washington, DC, USA. 2017. Available online:
https://www.usda.gov/media/blog/2015/06/22/supporting-local-rural-economies-while-improving-forest-health (accessed
on 25 January 2022).
18.
Anderson, N.; Mitchell, D. Forest operations and woody biomass logistics to improve efﬁciency, value, and sustainability.
Bioenergy Res. 2016, 9, 518–533. [CrossRef]
19.
Rummer, B.; Klepac, J.; Thompson, J. Technology for biomass feedstock production in southern forests and GHG implications.
In Proceedings of the 16th Biennial Southern Silvicultural Research Conference; Butnor, J.R., Ed.; e-Gen. Tech. Rep. SRS-156;
US Department of Agriculture Forest Service, Southern Research Station: Asheville, NC, USA, 2012; Volume 156, pp. 278–282.
20.
Iversen, K.; Van Demark, R. Integrating fuel reduction management with local bioenergy operations and businesses—A commu-
nity responsibility. Biomass Bioenergy 2006, 30, 304–307. [CrossRef]
21.
City of Flagstaff, Arizona, Flagstaff Ranger District, Coconino National Forest. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project Executive
Summary & Implementation Plan. 2012; 16p. Available online: https://www.ﬂagstaff.az.gov/DocumentCenter/View/41236/
Ex-Summ-Impl-Plan_Dec12?bidId= (accessed on 29 October 2021).
22.
Huang, C.H.; Finkral, A.; Sorensen, C.; Kolb, T. Toward full economic valuation of forest fuels-reduction treatments. J. Environ.
Manag. 2013, 130, 221–231. [CrossRef]
23.
Lynch, D.L. What do forest ﬁres really cost? J. For. 2004, 102, 42–49.
24.
Nicholls, D. Forest Products Cluster Development in Central Arizona—Implications for Landscape-Scale Forest Restoration; Gen. Tech.
Rep. PNW-GTR-898; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station: Portland, OR, USA,
2014; 18p.
25.
Vaughan, D.R.; Edgeley, C.; Han, H.-S. Forest contracting businesses in the US Southwest: Current proﬁle and workforce training
needs. J. For. 2021, in press.
26.
Butler, B.J.; Wear, D.N. Forest ownership dynamics of southern forests. In The Southern Forest Futures Project: Technical Report;
Wear, D.N., Greis, J.G., Eds.; Gen. Tech. Rep. SRS-GTR-178; USDA-Forest Service, Southern Research Station: Asheville, NC,
USA, 2013; pp. 103–121.
27.
Conrad, J.L., IV; Greene, W.D.; Hiesl, P. A review of changes in US logging businesses 1980s–Present. J. For. 2018, 116, 291–303.
[CrossRef]
28.
Steele, P.H.; Risbrudt, C.D. Efﬁciency of softwood sawmills in the southern United States in relation to capacity. Prod. J. 1985, 35,
51–56.
29.
Cesafsky, K.D.; (Chief Sustainability Ofﬁcer, Enviva Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Personal communication, 2019.
30.
Barrett, S.M.; Bolding, M.C.; Aust, W.M.; Munsell, J.F. Characteristics of logging businesses that harvest biomass for energy
production. For. Prod. J. 2014, 64, 265–272. [CrossRef]
31.
Baker, S.A.; Westbrook, M.D., Jr.; Greene, W.D. Evaluation of integrated harvesting systems in pine stands of the southern United
States. Biomass Bioenergy 2010, 34, 720–727. [CrossRef]
32.
Shresthra, S.P.; Lanford, B.L. Comparison of timber utilization between a tree-length and an in-wood chipping harvesting
operations. In Forest Engineering Challenges: A Global Perspective, Proceedings of the 25th Annual Council on Forest Engineering Meeting,
Auburn, AL, USA, 16–20 June 2002; Council on Forest Engineering: Corvallis, OR, USA, 2002; 5p.
33.
Cass, R.D.; Baker, S.A.; Greene, W.D. Cost and productivity impacts of product sorting on conventional ground-based timber
harvesting operations. Prod. J. 2009, 59, 108–114. [CrossRef]
34.
Grushecky, S.T.; Wang, J.; Mcgill, D.W. Inﬂuence of site characteristics and costs of extraction and trucking on logging residue
utilization in southern West Virginia. Prod. J. 2007, 57, 63–67.
35.
Conrad, J.L., IV; Bolding, M.C.; Smith, R.L.; Aust, W.M. Wood-energy market impact on competition, procurement practices, and
proﬁtability of landowners and forest products industry in the US south. Biomass Bioenergy 2011, 35, 280–287. [CrossRef]
36.
Ng, R.T.L.; Kurniawan, D.; Wang, H.; Mariska, B.; Wu, W.; Maravelias, C.T. Integrated framework for designing spatially explicit
biofuel supply chains. Appl. Energy 2018, 216, 116–131. [CrossRef]
37.
Han, H.-S.; Bilek, E.M.; Dramm, J.; Loefﬂer, D.; Calkin, D. Financial Feasibility of a Log Sort Yard Handling Small-Diameter Logs:
A Preliminary Study. West. J. Appl. For. 2011, 26, 174–182. [CrossRef]
38.
Berry, M.; Sessions, J. The Economics of Biomass Logistics and Conversion Facility Mobility: An Oregon Case Study. Appl. Eng.
Agric. 2018, 34, 57–72. [CrossRef]
39.
Kumar, B.; Verma, P. Biomass-based bioreﬁneries: An important architype towards a circular economy. Fuel 2021, 288, 119622.
[CrossRef]
40.
Kohli, K.; Prajapati, R.; Sharma, B.K. Review Bio-Based Chemicals from Renewable Biomass for Integrated Bioreﬁneries. Energies
2019, 12, 233. [CrossRef]

Energies 2022, 15, 931
15 of 15
41.
Brandt, K.L.; Gao, J.; Wang, J.; Wooley, R.J.; Wolcott, M. Techno-Economic Analysis of Forest Residue Conversion to Sugar Using
Three-Stage Milling as Pretreatment. Front. Energy Res. 2018, 6, 77. [CrossRef]
42.
Cambero, C.; Sowlati, T. Assessment and optimization of forest biomass supply chains from economic, social and environmental
perspectives—A review of literature. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014, 36, 62–73. [CrossRef]
43.
Mirkouei, A.; Haapala, K.R.; Sessions, J.; Murthy, G.S. A review and future directions in techno-economic modeling and
optimization of upstream forest biomass to bio-oil supply chains. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 67, 15–35. [CrossRef]
44.
Blackmer, E.D.; Christian, L.J.; Conway, R.T. Building a Stewardship Economy: Insights from Community Innovation in the
Rural American West. Master’s Thesis., University of Michigan School for Environment and Sustainability, Ann Arbor, MI, USA,
2020; 186p.
45.
Madeira, L.; Gartner, T. Forest Resilience Bond Sparks Innovative Collaborations Between Water Utilities and Wide-Ranging
Stakeholders. J. -Am. Water Work. Assoc. 2018, 110, 42–49. [CrossRef]
