Cultivating Collaborative Resilience among Collaborative Forest Restoration Groups
Collaboration is increasingly used to meet 
national-level policy goals in public lands 
management. While there is increasing 
evidence of the benefits of collaboration 
(e.g., increased planning efficiency, trust, 
and capacity to do work), less is known 
about how collaboratives adapt and remain 
resilient (i.e., the capacity to adapt to socio-
environmental change without losing 
desired structure, function, and feedbacks) 
to internal and external disruptions. In 
a recent paper published in the Journal 
of Forestry, Beeton et al. (2022) asked: 
1) how did Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program (CFLRP) projects and 
other collaboratives adapt to disruptions (e.g., 
personnel turnover, biophysical disturbance, legal or policy change); and 2) what barriers inhibited adaptation? They 
paired a systematic literature review with focus groups and a national survey to address these questions.  
Adaptations to disturbance
Collaboratives adapted to disruptions by undertaking boundary spanning activities, co-developing boundary 
objects, engaging boundary-spanning individuals and organizations, and demonstrating flexibility. 
Boundary-spanning activities like field trips, onboarding workshops, joint fact-finding, and multi-party 
monitoring helped collaboratives build trust and relationships across networks and individuals (both old 
and new) to reach consensus about the purpose and need for restoration, evaluate the impacts of biophysical 
disturbance (e.g., beetle kill, wildfire) and treatment alternatives, and temper conflict between differing 
objectives. Strong relationships and trust with forest leadership helped maintain support and commitment 
to collaboration amid biophysical disturbance and turnover. The co-development of boundary objects 
(e.g., charters, MOUs, maps, models) helped translate shared learning and understanding into codified 
expectations, agreements, and strategies to maintain accountability and commitment towards common, 
shared goals despite disruptions. Boundary-spanning individuals and organizations (e.g., Southwest 
Ecological Restoration Institutes, American Forest Foundation) provided critical resources and support 
functions, such as facilitating onboarding activities for new personnel, legal support, and technical capacity 
for monitoring disturbance impacts. Collaboratives demonstrated flexibility by altering treatment 
plans, developing cross-boundary agreements to continue working towards restoration objectives despite 
forest-wide injunctions, and changing their structure to accommodate new policy requirements and legal 
challenges. 
Barriers
Notable barriers to collaborative resilience were related to the cultural and business practices of the USDA 
Forest Service, namely the confluence of capacity, authority, and accountability. The culture of frequently 
rotating personnel and vacancies undermined trust, institutional knowledge, and capacity to engage. 
Collaboration on a field trip in Northern Colorado. Photo credit: Karina Puikkonen

Uncertainty in the amount and timing of federally-appropriated funds, restrictions on its use, and a lack of 
time among all collaborative participants, many of which were volunteers, to meaningfully engage were 
significant capacity challenges. The USDA Forest Service retains sole decision-making authority on Forest 
Service-managed lands, and local unit leadership have substantial discretion in decision-making. USFS staff 
are formally accountable to overlapping laws, regulations, priorities, and performance measure which may 
conflict with collaborative priorities and recommendations. We found that commitment and accountability 
to collaborative engagement was variable across cases and contingent upon individuals in leadership roles 
who prioritized the collaborative process. This signals that collaboration is not yet institutionalized, which is 
exacerbated by frequent turnover.
Recommendations 
Expand Funding for Collaborative Planning and Capacity Building: CFLRP funding is limited to the USDA 
Forest Service and can only be used for implementation and monitoring. Our findings indicated activities 
supporting social learning, conflict management, and relationship-building were critical, but depended on 
leveraged funds from collaboratives. Financial investment in these activities and the leaders, facilitators, and 
researchers to coordinate them is necessary to cultivate collaborative resilience. 
Change in Agency Culture and Commitment to Collaboration: Ensuring that staff are dedicated to 
collaborative projects until completion, facilitating promote-in-place opportunities, and hiring dedicated 
partnership liaisons could help address turnover and incentivize commitment to collaboration. Including 
expectations for collaboration in job duties and requiring collaboration training could provide the skills, 
interests, and requirements for collaboration. Developing agency performance measures for collaboration 
and external evaluation could incentivize personnel to invest resources in collaboration.
Co-develop and Periodically Revisit Boundary Objects: The co-development of, and engagement 
with, boundary objects is important for restoration practitioners to build trust, absorb learning, and 
institutionalize knowledge. Boundary objects should be situated within agency decision-making procedures 
when applicable. Doing so may reduce reliance on individuals and encourage accountability. With new 
personnel, partners re-negotiate responsibilities, accountabilities, and capacities. Thus, boundary objects 
should be periodically reviewed to maintain legitimacy, saliency, and creditability.
Conduct Frequent Self-Assessments of Collaborative Resilience: Collaboratives may experience external and 
internal disruptions at any time. Therefore, routine self-assessments (e.g., surveys, focus groups) can identify 
how disruptions impact collaborative performance, which in turn can inform dialogue around the feasible 
and desirable adaptation strategies needed to cultivate collaborative resilience.
March 2022
cfri.colostate.edu
Contact: Tyler.Beeton@colostate.edu
Funding for this project comes from the USDA Forest 
Service.
