The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of 
communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic 
issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Long-Term Plant Community Responses to Resource Objective Wildfires  
in Montane Coniferous Forests of Grand Canyon National Park, USA 
 
By Judy Springer, Research Associate 
Introduction 
Managing naturally ignited wildland fires for multiple objectives (also known as “resource objective fires”) 
may serve as a low-cost alternative to mechanical treatments for restoring structure and function on fire-
excluded landscapes. Resource objective wildfire can provide an array of ecological benefits including 
restoring and maintaining ecological function and structure and increasing species diversity and soil 
moisture. Although numerous studies have examined the effects of these fires on forests and tree species, 
our knowledge of the impacts to the understory plant community is lacking. Better understanding of 
understory plant community responses to resource objective wildfire, particularly in terms of diversity, 
abundance, and composition, is useful for ecological restoration and conservation planning. 
 
Our goal for this study was to capitalize on a natural experiment by analyzing understory plant community 
changes twelve years after resource objective wildfires burned over previously established long-term 
monitoring plots. The fires occurred in three contrasting forests, which allowed us to evaluate the effects of 
the fires on species composition and frequency over time. We expected that early successional species 
would decline in abundance and cover over time while perennial forbs, shrubs, and grasses would increase, 
which is in line with other studies of community succession following fire in southwestern ponderosa pine 
and dry mixed-conifer forests. 
 
Methods 
Our study sites were located in three major forest types at Powell Plateau, Swamp Ridge, and Big Springs/
Little Park on the North Rim of the Grand Canyon within Grand Canyon National Park (Table 1). The sites 
were arrayed across an elevation gradient with differing fire regimes and land uses. Several lightning-
ignited resource objective wildfires were allowed to burn on the North Rim in 2003, burning through 
permanent monitoring plots previously installed between 1998 and 2001 and designed to monitor ecosystem 
changes and natural disturbance patterns. We remeasured a subset of these plots in late spring and summer 
of 2005 and in 2015. Plant community data were collected using the point line-intercept method and species 
lists recorded on each plot. 
 
June 2022 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1. Changes in plant cover over time from pre- to post-fire measurements within each forest type, indicating variable 
responses in the three different forest types following the fires, including a significant decrease in cover at the pine-oak site 
in both 2005 and 2015.  
Findings 
Results of species composition analysis twelve years post-fire suggested these forests were still in a recovery 
or reorganization phase. Fire severity (i.e., direct plant mortality) followed by long-term drought may have 
favored early successional species and disfavored species requiring shady and mesic conditions. Ungulate 
browsing, particularly from bison, and limited seed production from existing plants also may have 
contributed to these patterns. Other than Bromus tectorum (cheatgrass), we found no other non-native species 
with high frequencies across the study area, although continued monitoring is warranted to detect changes.  
Conclusions 
The Kaibab Plateau is a high elevation sky island 
surrounded by deserts and grasslands with few 
opportunities for seed introductions and gene flow 
between plant populations once species disappear 
from the area. Efforts to conserve species that are 
shade tolerant and adapted to colder and higher 
elevation (Figure 2) sites through on-site and off-site 
means, such as seed banking, will ensure their 
presence in future forests of the park. Continued 
monitoring could lead to better understanding of long
-term changes in these forests after resource objective 
fire, and enhance our understanding of important 
drivers of variation including interactions of climate, 
burn severity, and herbivory by large ungulates. 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication 
Springer, J.D., M.T. Stoddard, D.W. Huffman, D.C. Laughlin, P.Z. Fulé, and M.L. Daniels. 2022. Long-term plant community responses 
to resource objective wildfires in montane coniferous forests of Grand Canyon National Park, USA. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 515: 120224. 
Contact: Judy Springer, Judith.Springer@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Pine-oak 
• There was a significant decrease in plant cover 
at this site in both 2005 and 2015 (Figure 1). 
• While maintaining diversity and species 
richness, the understory plant community had 
not recovered to pre-fire abundance. 
Mixed-conifer and Spruce-fir 
• Twelve years post-fire, mean understory 
cover was at roughly pre-fire levels in warm 
mixed-conifer and spruce-fir forest types 
(Figure 1). 
Figure 2. Lupines growing on Powell Plateau in 2015. 
Photo by John Paul Roccaforte, ERI 
