Restoration and adaptation of fire-prone forest landscapes 
provide ecological, cultural, and social benefits:  
Facts, Myths, and Fallacies 
T
oday’s fire-prone forest and non-forest ecosystems are vulnerable to drought and wildfire, 
especially as the climate warms. Unfortunately, proactive management to restore resistance 		 		
to these natural disturbance processes is hampered by confusion about the strength of the 
scientific evidence. Unfounded objections to ecologically based timber harvesting and managed 
fires perpetuate this confusion.i
Drawing on recent syntheses of the scientific evidence, we examine “myths” commonly used to 
oppose climate- and wildfire-adaptation of fire-prone forests. We use an established framework 
designed to counter science denial,ii by recognizing the fallacy for each myth. Fallacies are false 
arguments; there are several kinds of fallacies, including cherry picking (selecting only a portion of 
facts to support a conclusion), false dichotomies or oversimplification (claiming only two possible 
outcomes), circular arguments, or straw man (misdirection) arguments. Learning to recognize 
logical fallacies and other characteristics of science denial is an essential component of any 
assessment of arguments for and against proposed actions.iii
The three papers we examined synthesized over 1,000 papers to assess effective wildfire 
management. For thousands of years, fires from human and other natural sources of ignitions 
(e.g., lightning strikes and smoldering embers) burned frequently across many parts of western 
North America. These fires maintained patchy landscapes of forest and non-forest ecosystems 
that limited competition for water and high-intensity wildfire. Since at least the early 20th century, 
land management policies supported the exclusion of fire from forest landscapes. As a result, live 
and dead vegetation (i.e., fuel) accumulated; forests got denser and expanded into meadows and 
other non-forest ecosystems.
Our understanding of historical conditions and changes associated with fire exclusion is strong 
and supported by multiple, independent lines of evidence developed over more than a century 
of research and observation.iv Forest and fire management that reduces surface fuels and 
selectively removes some trees has proven effective at mitigating drought and fire severity, while 
providing ecological, cultural, and social benefits.v Ongoing research, effectiveness monitoring, 
and collaborative, multi-party engagement are essential for meeting the goals and objectives of 
restoration and adaptation management. The paper review supported several facts, which have 
been countered by myth statements.
i 
Hessburg, P.F., S.J. Prichard, R.K. Hagmann, N.A. Povak, and F.K. Lake. 2021. Wildfire and climate change adaptation of western North American forests: a case for intentional 
management. Ecological Applications: e02432.
ii  Cook, J. 2017. “Inoculation theory: Using misinformation to fight misinformation.” The Conversation.
iii Cook, J. 2020. Deconstructing Climate Science Denial. In Holmes, D., and L.M. Richardson (Eds.) Edward Elgar Research Handbook in Communicating Climate Change. 
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
iv Hagmann, R. K., P. F. Hessburg, S. J. Prichard, N. A. Povak, P. M. Brown, P. Z. Fulé, R. E. Keane, E. E. Knapp, J. M. Lydersen, K. L. Metlen, M. J. Reilly, A. J. Sánchez Meador,  
S. L. Stephens, J. T. Stevens, A. H. Taylor, L. L. Yocom, M. A. Battaglia, D. J. Churchill, L. D. Daniels, D. A. Falk, P. Henson, J. D. Johnston, M. A. Krawchuk, C. R. Levine, G. W. 
Meigs, A. G. Merschel, M. P. North, H. D. Safford, T. W. Swetnam, and A. E. M. Waltz. 2021. Evidence for widespread changes in the structure, composition, and fire regimes 
of western North American forests. Ecological Applications: e02431.	
v Prichard, S.J., Hessburg, P.F., Hagmann, R.K., Povak, N.A., Dobrowski, S.Z., Hurteau, M.D., Kane, V.R., Keane, R.E., Kobziar, L.N., Kolden, C.A., North, M.P., Parks, S.A., Safford, 
H.D., Stevens, J.T., Yocom, L.L., Churchill, D.J., Gray, R.W., Huffman, D.W., Lake, F.K., Khatri-Chhetri, P. 2021. Adapting western North American forests to wildfires and climate 
change: ten common questions. Ecological Applications: e02433.

Oversimplification: Carbon storage in fire-
prone forests is only possible when large, 
old trees are protected from catastrophic 
fire. Carbon consequences of forest and fire 
management options must additionally include 
greenhouse gas sources like emissions from 
fire suppression efforts, burning buildings,  
and re-building communities.
False dichotomy: Focusing exclusively 
on community protection increases risk to 
long-term sustainability of the ecological 
resilience, air and water quality, wildlife 
habitat, recreational opportunities, 
and beneficial cultural burning that our 
communities depend upon.
Impossible expectation: Fuel reductions 
help control wildfires, not stop them. Fire 
in western landscapes is inevitable, and it’s 
essential for the maintenance of western 
North American ecosystems. 
Oversimplification: Warming is only part 
of the reason for today’s fires, which are 
burning fuels that built up over more than a 
century of fire exclusion policies. 
Cherry picking: Not all of today’s fires 
improve habitat. Some of today’s fires occur 
in forest types that didn’t evolve with fire, 
kill trees over exceptionally large areas, and 
produce spatial patterns that not only reduce 
habitat quality but also the likelihood that 
forests will regenerate. 
Jumping to conclusions (hasty 
generalization): Today’s fires are burning 
100+ years of accumulated live and dead 
vegetation (fuels). That’s not “natural” for 
these forests.
“Carbon released during fuel 
treatments contributes more to 
climate warming than wildfires.”
“Fuel reductions should be 
limited to just around homes and 
communities.”
“Fuel reductions don’t work because 
they don’t stop wildfires.”
“Today’s large, high-intensity fires 
(megafires) are the result of climate 
warming.” 
“Today’s severe fires create essential 
habitat for woodpeckers and other 
early seral creatures.”
 “Wildfires are ‘natural’; therefore, 
efforts to reduce fire intensity and 
severity are unwarranted.”
Fuel reductions stabilize 
carbon stores in long-lived, 
fire and drought-tolerant trees, 
especially where conservation 
and restoration of large, old tree 
populations is emphasized.
Scientifically credible, 
ecologically based fuel 
reductions provide ecological, 
social, and cultural benefits, 
including restoration of the 
once widespread advantages of 
Indigenous fire stewardship.
Fuel reductions work to mitigate 
the severity and intensity of 
droughts and fires when, not if, 
they occur.
Fuel reductions work successfully 
to reduce the number of trees 
killed by fire and drought, even 
during recent extreme droughts 
and heat waves.
Fire-killed trees and forests can 
provide critical wildlife habitat. 
However, today’s fires contain 
uncharacteristically large burn 
patches with no surviving trees, 
which degrades habitat quality.
Today’s fires are influenced 
by more than a century of 
fire exclusion policies as 
well as climate warming.
FACT	
MYTH	
FALLACY
