ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Working Paper 45
Evidence for Widespread 
Changes in the Structure, 
Composition, and Fire 
Regimes of Western North 
American Forest Landscapes
June 2022

Author: Keala Hagmann, School of Environmental and Forest Sciences, University of Washington, and 
Applegate Forestry, LLC; and Amy Waltz, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University 
Reviewers: Marin Chambers, Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University; Melanie 
Colavito, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University; Patrick Moore, silviculturist, USDA 
Forest Service 
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Cover photo: View from atop Leecher Mountain in northeastern Washington, looking southwest. In the black-and-white photo (top, 
1930, National Archives at Seattle), dry mixed-conifer forests are apparent. These open-canopy forests were regularly burned by frequent 
fires until the start of the 20th century which also maintained extensive areas of grassland cover. Note how densely forested the same area 
has become (bottom photo, 2011, John Marshall Photography), and that many grassland areas now support dense forest cover. These 
forests burned with uncharacteristic high severity in the 2014 Carlton Complex wildfires.
Please use the following citation when referencing this working paper:
Hagmann, R.K., and A.E.M Waltz. 2022. Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western 
North American Forest Landscapes. ERI Working Paper No. 45. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 13 pp.
This working paper is derived from the following journal article: 
Hagmann, R.K., P.F. Hessburg, S.J. Prichard, N.A. Povak, P.M. Brown, P.Z. Fulé, R.E. Keane, E.E. Knapp, J.M. Lydersen, K.L. Metlen, 
M.J. Reilly, A.J.S. Meador, S.L. Stephens, J.T. Stevens, A.H. Taylor, L.L. Yocom, M.A. Battaglia, D.J. Churchill, L.D. Daniels, D.A. Falk, 
P. Henson, J.D. Johnston, M.A. Krawchuk, C.R. Levine, G.W. Meigs, A.G. Merschel, M.P. North, H.D. Safford, T.W. Swetnam, A.E.M. 
Waltz. 2021. Evidence for widespread changes in the structure, composition, and fire regimes of western North American forests. Ecological 
Applications. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2431
Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, 
structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International 
defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an 
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an 
ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy 
Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last 150 
years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and lack 
their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible 
to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests 
centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of the Intermountain West. 
By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to 
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and practitioners 
in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide guidance on management decisions 
surrounding ecological restoration topics. This publication would not have been possible without funding 
from the USDA Forest Service. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the 
author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States 
Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by 
the United States Government or the ERI.

Table of Contents
Executive Summary.............................................................................. 1
Introduction......................................................................................... 1
Evaluating Changes Associated with Fire Exclusion........................... 3
Changes in Fire Regimes..................................................................... 3
Changes in Forest Landscapes............................................................. 5
Changes in High-Severity Fire............................................................ 7
Conclusion........................................................................................... 8 
Literature Cited.................................................................................. 10

Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45
1
Executive Summary
For more than a century, federal land management policies 
favored fire exclusion. As a result, live and dead fuels became 
profoundly more abundant in the fire-dependent forest 
landscapes of western North America. Trees and shrubs filled in 
gaps in the forest and expanded into neighboring meadows. Dead 
trees, needles, cones, and branches piled up on the forest floor. 
Combined with a rapidly warming climate, this 
accumulation of fuel contributes to today’s increasingly 
challenging wildfire seasons. Climate- and wildfire-adaptation 
strategies for fire-dependent forests promote the use of fuel 
reduction techniques, including mechanical thinning, prescribed 
fire, and managed wildfire. These techniques have repeatedly 
proven effective at mitigating fire intensity, even during 
extreme fire weather. 
Ecologically based fuel reductions go beyond simple 
uniform fuel load reduction to incorporate a vast range of 
spatial patterns in forest structure and composition that 
historically or currently demonstrate resistance and resilience to 
fire and drought. These fuel reductions increase the likelihood 
of conserving and restoring ecological, social, and cultural 
values imperiled by more than a century of fire exclusion. As 
with any credible management strategy, ongoing evaluation and 
refinement of implementation and effectiveness are essential. 
This is particularly true given the dynamic nature of today’s 
rapidly warming climate. 
Recent literature reviews and syntheses provide valuable 
references for land management practitioners and stakeholders 
engaged in designing, evaluating, and implementing 
scientifically credible wildfire- and climate-adaptation 
strategies. These syntheses are supported by thousands of peer-
reviewed articles that evaluated the benefits and constraints of 
restoring fire to fire-dependent forest landscapes. This working 
paper summarizes key insights from the review of studies, 
described in detail below, that documented unprecedented, 
human-caused fire exclusion and its impacts on fire-dependent 
forest landscapes in western North America.
Introduction
Wildfire seasons are growing longer and more challenging 
as the climate continues to warm and droughts lengthen and 
intensify. Whether those fires encroach on our doorsteps or 
smoke from thousands of miles away reduces our air quality, 
more and more of us are experiencing first-hand the benefits 
and limitations of forest and fire management. To aid the 
ongoing development of policy and management intended 
to mitigate wildfire intensity, a team of forest and fire 
ecologists from leading research universities, conservation 
organizations, and government laboratories collaborated 
to review and synthesize the scientific literature about 
fuel treatments in fire-dependent forests of western North 
America (Figure 1). 
In three peer-reviewed syntheses (Hagmann et al. 2021; 
Hessburg et al. 2021; Prichard et al. 2021), this team addressed 
key questions about the advisability of ecologically based fuel 
reductions to better adapt forest landscapes and communities to 
wildfire and a warming climate. Ecologically based management 
of fire-dependent forest landscapes seeks to conserve and restore 
ecosystem functions by restoring and maintaining fuel loads 
at levels that have demonstrated resistance to fire and drought. 
Management implications and recommendations from these 
syntheses have been summarized in a fact sheet,1 story map,2  and 
policy brief.3
This working paper reviews the impacts of more than 
a century of unprecedented, human-caused fire exclusion 
on the structure and composition of fire-dependent forest 
landscapes. By the late 19th century, the decimation of 
Indigenous populations, intensive livestock grazing, road 
building, and the suppression of fires and Indigenous burning 
practices had all contributed to a notable reduction in fire 
frequency and extent (Figure 2). The science supporting this 
summary is based on more than a century of observation and 
documentation and is reviewed in greater detail by Hagmann 
et al. (2021).
Before the current era of fire exclusion, fire regimes 
maintained multi-scale resistance to fire and drought as well as 
other functions of fire-dependent forest ecosystems. Fire kills 
trees and consumes forest fuels. Thus, the presence or absence 
of fire influences the abundance, distribution, structure, and 
composition of forests and forest fuels. When fire is excluded 
from frequent-fire ecosystems, tree density increases; the 
proportion of fire-intolerant species increases; and surface, 
ladder, and canopy fuels accumulate. These widespread 
changes associated with fire exclusion provide the ecological 
basis for fuel reductions designed to restore greater resistance 
and resilience (Box 1) to fire and drought. 
Combined with a rapidly warming climate, 
uncharacteristically dense and extensive forest cover contributes 
to today’s uncontrollable, peak-season wildfires. Prior to 
European colonization, abundant low- to moderate-severity fire 
(Box 1) limited the extent and density of forest cover and the 
abundance of forest fuels. High-severity fires are also essential 
elements of fire-dependent forest landscapes, and some high-
severity fire effects occur in essentially all fires, even those that 
are predominantly low severity. However, prior to the current era 
of fire exclusion, abundant low- to moderate-severity fire limited 
the extent, patch size, and location of high-severity fire effects. 
For more than a century, modern wildfire management 
sought to extinguish essentially all fire starts. The absence 
of fire provided opportunities for abundant tree recruitment, 
particularly on more productive sites and during wet periods. 
Over time, forests filled in with trees and expanded into openings 
and meadows (Figure 3 and cover photo). This increase in 
forest density and extent contributed to the degradation of fire-
dependent forest and nonforest ecosystems and increased the 
homogeneity of landscape conditions (Figure 4). The loss of 
1	 Fact Sheet: Adapting western North American forests to climate change 
and wildfires: Ten common questions. Sponsored and hosted by Northern 
Arizona University: Ecological Restoration Institute. https://cdm17192.
contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/1102/rec/6
2	 Adapting western US forests to climate change & wildfires: Ten common 
questions. Sponsored and hosted by Sustainable Northwest. https://
storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/64f55848f690452da6c58e5a888ff283
3	 Climate Change and Western Wildfires: The Science Supports Restoration 
with Climate Adaptation. Sponsored and hosted by Northern Arizona 
University: Ecological Restoration Institute. https://cdm17192.contentdm.
oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/1103/rec/2

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45   
Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes 2
Figure 1. Forest landscapes of western North America span broad climate gradients as reflected in the amount of moisture available to trees in summer 
months (a). We used existing ecoregional classifications to roughly indicate the area of fire-dependent forest landscapes; nonforest and other forest types 
are masked out (a). We classified forest types across this gradient as either cold, moist, or dry (b). Cold, moist, and dry forests may share the same fire 
regime group (FRG) class (c). FRG I: fire return interval ≤ 35 years, low and mixed severity; FRG III: fire return interval 35–200 years, low and mixed severity; 
FRG IV: fire return interval 35–200 years, replacement or high-severity; FRG V: fire return interval >200 years, any severity. Portions of the study area that 
extend into Mexico and Canada are not shown in b and c because Landfire data are not available for these regions. Data sources are: a) Hogg’s Climate 
Moisture Index (Hogg 1997) from ClimateWNA (Hamann et al. 2013, climatewna.com), The Nature Conservancy Terrestrial Ecoregions (geospatial.tnc.org) 
for parts of Washington and southern BC, [K1] and EPA Ecoregions of North America (epa.gov/eco-research/ecoregions-north-america; and b,c) Landfire 
(Rollins 2009, landfire.gov).
Figure 2. By the late 19th century, area 
burned had decreased substantially across 
western North America. This regionwide 
decrease in fire was recorded by trees on 
more than 800 forest and woodland sites, 
the largest network of tree-ring-based fire-
scar chronologies in the world. Following 
expansion of colonization by Europeans, 
intensive livestock grazing, decimation of 
Indigenous populations, and suppression 
of Indigenous burning and other fires, the 
influence of fire was essentially absent 
from landscapes where it had historically 
been abundant. Reprinted from Swetnam 
et al. (2016) with the author’s permission.

Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45
3
patchiness and multi-aged forest cover historically maintained 
by recurring and overlapping fires increases the likelihood of 
extensive high-severity fire- and drought-related mortality which 
would reinforce this homogeneity. Increased evapotranspiration 
caused by denser and predominantly younger forests can divert 
water from downslope terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and 
increase vulnerability to drought stress or conversion from 
wetter to drier ecosystem types. Thus, nonforest ecosystems (i.e., 
herbland/grassland, shrubland, woodland, and, often, open-
canopy forest) may also be directly or indirectly impacted by fire 
exclusion. 
Numerous regional syntheses have summarized and 
interpreted more than a century of research and observation 
documenting these and other changes to fire regimes, forests, 
and landscapes caused by a deficit of low- to moderate-severity 
fire (Table 1; page 9). As reviewed by Prichard et al. (2021), 
where pre-fire exclusion conditions existed or were restored, the 
preponderance of evidence documented greater resilience and 
resistance to contemporary drought and fire. Research published 
even more recently continues to document these benefits as 
management approaches are refined, the climate continues to 
warm, and fires and droughts intensify.4 Thus, understanding 
the types and extent of change that occurred in dry, moist, and 
cold fire-dependent forests (Figure 1, Box 1) during more than a 
century of fire exclusion helps us adapt forests and communities 
to current climate conditions as well as to drought and fire.
Evaluating Changes Associated with 
Fire Exclusion
In regional syntheses, researchers have integrated mounting 
evidence of fire exclusion as a driver of change to ecosystems 
and their functions (Table 1). These syntheses draw on more 
than a century of evaluation and observation of fires; fire 
regimes; and forest and landscape structure, composition, and 
function — including response to disturbance. Hagmann et 
al. (2021) focused on key elements of this vast body of work 
to illustrate the magnitude of change in fire-excluded forest 
landscapes and contemporary fire regimes. 
As summarized in this working paper, Hagmann et al. 
(2021) discussed differences between today’s fires and those that 
influenced forest landscapes before more than a century of fire 
exclusion. The authors also reviewed key changes in landscape 
structure and composition associated with the absence of abundant 
low- to moderate-severity fire effects and fires across a wide range 
of sizes, severities, and frequencies. The departures and changes 
described are derived from a multitude of studies that compared 
contemporary fires and forest landscape conditions to “reference 
conditions” (Box 1), i.e., those that existed, or in rare cases still 
exist, in the absence of human-caused fire exclusion. 
Hagmann et al. (2021) highlighted the value of 
incorporating a diversity of methods that span spatial and 
temporal scales — from trees to regions and from a single fire 
event to thousands of years (Box 2). By integrating across 
multiple methods and scales, we gain greater insight into 
4 	Studies published since Prichard et al. 2021: Furniss et al. 2022; Knapp et 
al. 2021; Murphy et al. 2021; Restaino et al. 2019; Stoddard et al. 2021
variation in fire and forest conditions over space and time. We 
also gain greater confidence in our interpretations when they 
are re-affirmed by repeated studies based on records as diverse 
as Indigenous knowledge, oral accounts, tree rings, aerial 
imagery, pack rat middens, pollen and charcoal in sediment 
cores, and early surveys and inventories.
Throughout their review, Hagmann et al. (2021) also 
referenced the ways that computer models have been used to 
integrate a vast array of empirical, i.e., field based, studies to 
provide insights into fire and forest landscape conditions in 
places or at times where physical data is lacking or not yet 
available, e.g., the future. Landscape models combine fire 
histories with knowledge about the geophysical drivers (e.g., 
climate, topography, soils) of fires and vegetation growth 
and decay to inform simulations of past, present, and future 
landscape-wildfire dynamics. Perhaps most importantly, these 
models can inform and evaluate management scenarios. They 
can be used to simulate multiple climate, management, and 
species scenarios that can then be compared with simulated 
historical conditions under a consistent framework to evaluate 
risks, tradeoffs, synergies, and uncertainties.
Changes in Fire Regimes
As physical evidence of a fire event, tree-ring fire scar records 
remain a primary means of exploring historical fire ecology 
within the lifespan of long-lived trees. Over time, the methods 
for evaluating tree-ring fire scar records have been repeatedly 
tested and refined to yield greater confidence and insights into 
historical fire regimes. Today, networks of fire-scar studies 
emerging from a century of tree-ring studies enable insights 
into landscape and climate controls on fire. Because tree-ring 
fire scar records are quite simply more abundant in areas 
where subsequent disturbance, e.g., high-severity fire, has 
not obliterated them, other records and methods supplement 
tree-ring fire scar records to evaluate evidence of moderate- to 
high-severity disturbances. 
One of the key findings to emerge from nearly every 
tree-ring reconstruction of fire history in western North 
America was a widespread reduction of fire in the 20th century 
compared to preceding centuries (Figure 2). In some studies, 
sedimentary charcoal records from the same locations were 
used to extend the time span of tree-ring records. These 
studies showed that 20th-century decreases in fire events were 
unprecedented for thousands of years.
When fire is excluded from fire-dependent ecosystems, 
tree density increases; the proportion of fire-intolerant species 
increases; surface, ladder, and canopy (i.e., the fuels from 
forest floor to treetops) fuels accumulate; and resources 
available for forest growth decline. These conditions can 
foster large and intense fires with effects that have not been 
observed in historical ranges. Indeed, numerous studies 
of recent fires have documented more abundant and larger 
patches of high-severity fire than historically occurred in 
forest that once supported predominantly low- to moderate-
severity fires. Even in forest types that were historically 
dominated by infrequent high-severity fire, the suppression 
of most fire starts and the absence of fires spreading in 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45   
Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes 4
Figure 3. Repeat photography shows change 
in forest cover during the current era of fire 
exclusion and suppression in hills west of 
Boulder, Colorado (Veblen and Lorenz 1991). In 
less than a century (1910-1985), once sparsely 
forested hills became densely forested as trees 
established and forest cover expanded into 
grasslands. Photo credits: 1900-1910: Louis C. 
McClure Courtesy Denver Public Library, Western 
History Collection, MCC-306, 1985: TT Veblen and 
DC Lorenz, 2016: TT Veblen.
Figure 4. Top photo: View from atop Slate Peak in northeastern Washington, looking southwest, 1934, George Clisby 
photograph, National Archives at Seattle. The 1934 panoramic view shows extensive evidence of prior wildfires, varied 
age classes of cold forest, and recently burned and recovering areas. In the same view nearly eight decades later (bottom 
photo, 2013, John Marshall Photography), note the complete absence of recent fire evidence, widespread ingrowth creating 
denser forests, loss of nonforest, and lack of forest successional heterogeneity.

Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45
5
Forests and fire regimes are highly variable, 
complex, dynamic systems. To communicate about 
them in general terms to broad audiences, we rely 
on commonly used terms, like those listed below. 
These terms enable conversations because they 
reduce enormous variability into broad categories. 
However, for the same reason, they can also inhibit 
conversations (and potentially agreement) when 
more nuance could add clarity.
Fire severity
Severity, only one aspect of a fire regime (Hessburg 
et al. 2021: Table 1), commonly refers to the 
percentage of tree biomass killed by fire. However, 
these same categories (low-, moderate-, and high-
severity) are also used to quantify other fire effects, 
e.g., the impact of fire on soil conditions. Thus, it is 
essential to ensure that the same metrics are used in 
comparisons of fire severity.
Percentage of basal area (area occupied by trees) or 
canopy cover killed by fire:
•	
Low: <20% 
•	
Moderate: 20-70%
•	
High: >70%
Dry, moist and cold forest types
Fire-dependent forests across a region as large and 
diverse as western North America (Figure 1) support 
a wide range of forest types composed of broadleaf 
and coniferous species. 
•	
Dry Forests: Dominant species include ponderosa 
and Jeffrey pine (Pinus ponderosa and P. jeffreyi) 
and some oak species (Quercus spp). 
•	
Moist Forests: As moisture increases or fire 
frequency decreases, species with higher shade 
tolerance and lower drought and fire tolerance 
increasingly dominate. These include Douglas-
fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii); western larch 
(Larix occidentalis); sugar, western white, and 
southwestern white pine (Pinus lambertiana, P. 
monticola, and P. strobiformis); incense-cedar 
(Calocedrus decurrens); and grand and white fir 
(Abies grandis and A. concolor). 
•	
Cold Forests: As mean annual temperatures 
decrease with elevation or cold air drainage, 
cold forests are increasingly dominated by 
lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta); aspen (Populus 
tremuloides); red, silver, and subalpine fir (Abies 
magnifica, A. amabilis, and A. lasiocarpa); 
mountain hemlock (Tsuga mertensiana); 
Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii); or 
whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis). 
Reference conditions
The conditions that existed prior to (or, in rare cases, 
in the absence of) fire exclusion provide a baseline 
for evaluating the magnitude, rate, and direction of 
change associated with fire exclusion. 
•	
Timing of fire exclusion varied widely, but 
was commonly associated with disruption 
of Indigenous burning and expansion of 
unregulated grazing of livestock by European 
settlers.
•	
Often many decades after these early forms 
of fire exclusion, the onset of mechanized fire 
suppression, logging, and land development 
perpetuated the exclusion of fire. 
•	
Current conditions on sites with restored or less 
disrupted fire regimes also inform contemporary 
management focused on restoring resilience to 
drought and fire.
Resilience and resistance
•	
Resilience is the capacity of an ecosystem to 
return to prior conditions following a disturbance 
(including taxonomic composition, structure, 
ecosystem function, and process rates). 
•	
Resistance is a key component of resilience and 
reflects the capacity of an ecosystem to remain 
essentially unchanged when disturbed.
Box 1. Terms and Concepts
from adjacent forest and nonforest areas is likely changing 
contemporary fire-severity patterns.
Although relatively rare, landscapes not impacted by 
fire exclusion show us how fire-maintained forests operate 
under today’s climate conditions. These forests experienced 
the climate variations of the 19th and 20th centuries, but they 
did not exhibit the changes in structure and composition that 
occurred in fire-excluded forests. Similarly, these forests have 
not experienced the increased severity of disturbance events 
that occurred in comparable areas where fires have long 
been excluded. Lessons learned from these forests inform 
climate- and wildfire-adaptation strategies that incorporate 
fuel reduction techniques, including mechanical thinning, 
prescribed fire, and managed wildfire, to mitigate the 
deleterious impacts of human-caused fire exclusion.  
Changes in Forest Landscapes 
Numerous regional studies have synthesized and summarized 
more than a century of documentation of the impacts of fire 
exclusion (Table 1). Early studies generally focused on the 
influence of frequent fire in maintaining open-canopy forests 
and woodlands where fire-scarred trees, e.g., ponderosa or 
Jeffrey pine, were abundant. Increasingly, however, studies of 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45   
Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes 6
diverse landscapes that include colder and wetter forest and 
nonforest types show the influence of fires that historically 
burned some part of these fire-dependent landscapes with high 
frequency. The preponderance of evidence demonstrates that 
even if a particular area appears unchanged, fire exclusion 
has very likely changed the landscape surrounding it. In other 
words, both the abundance and continuity of fuels may be 
higher than historical levels across a landscape, although not 
necessarily for all areas within that landscape.
To illustrate the influence frequent fire can have across 
a range of forest and nonforest systems from dry to moist 
to cold, Hagmann et al. (2021) highlighted the Interior 
Columbia Basin Ecosystem Management Project (ICBEMP). 
The ICBEMP provided a landscape evaluation of change 
in vegetation spatial patterns and fire regimes across a 
uniquely large spatial extent (150 million acres). Landscape 
assessments that evaluate a broad range of attributes of 
forest and landscape conditions can reduce the risk of 
oversimplifying or misrepresenting historical variability 
in those conditions. This assessment encompasses the 
highest concentration of cold and moist forest in the interior 
western US (Figure 1). Nonetheless, the substantial changes 
documented in this assessment are consistent with those 
documented in numerous other studies both within this region 
and in predominantly warmer, drier ecoregions (Table 1). 
The ICBEMP documented widespread forest expansion and 
densification between the middle (primarily 1930s–1950s) and 
end (primarily 1990s) of the 20th century. Comparison of aerial 
photos from both time periods and simulation modeling based on 
those images were used to quantify change and identify drivers 
of change in forest and landscape structure and composition. 
Before fire exclusion, a combination of infrequent high-severity 
and frequent low- to moderate-severity disturbances kept total 
forested area lower than what could exist (and what does exist 
today) in the absence of disturbance. Further, the widespread 
distribution of forest and nonforest types with relatively low fuel 
Integrating multiple ways of knowing and a broad range of scientific methods increases our understanding 
of ecosystems and their functions. Additionally, consistent results from multiple independent evaluations 
using diverse methodologies and data sources strengthens our confidence in the inferences supported by 
those studies.
Every method used for reconstructing historical forest and fire conditions has strengths and weaknesses 
(ERI Working Paper No. 32: An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods). 
These attributes influence the capacity of each method to provide detailed insights at specific spatial (tree, 
stand, landscape, or region) and temporal scales (one point in time, centuries, or millennia). 
Tree rings, for example, can provide highly detailed information about fire events for the recent past, 
typically 200–300 years. Charcoal and sediment records can provide insight into forest composition and 
variation in fire regimes further back in time, but at much coarser spatial and temporal scales. Neither of 
these records document detailed spatial patterns, e.g., the shape and size of unique forest and nonforest 
types. Aerial imagery can reveal patterns in forest structure and composition at multiple spatial scales, 
however, the earliest images only date back to the 1930s. 
Evaluations that fail to consider variation over multiple spatial and temporal scales and multiple aspects of 
forest conditions and fire regimes may mislead interpretation of historical conditions and resilience to fire 
and drought. 
Studies conducted at plot or patch-scales may fail to capture change in vegetation conditions and fire 
severity across larger landscapes. For example, changes in one or more aspects of a fire regime, e.g., 
percent land affected by high-severity fire, may not be evident in all locations in a larger landscape. The 
inverse is also true. Changes at fine spatial scales may be masked when only average values at larger scales 
are considered. 
Similarly, while one aspect of a fire regime may not have changed, e.g., percentage of the land area affected 
by high-severity fire, changes in patch size and shape, which strongly influence ecosystem functions, may 
have occurred. 
Thus, it is essential to integrate multiple scientific methods and scales with other sources of knowledge to 
generate a comprehensive and robust understanding of the role of fire over time.
Box 2. Multiple Methods Strengthen Confidence and Provide Insights

Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45
7
loads tended to support lower intensity fire across the landscape 
under most weather conditions (Figure 5). 
By the late 20th century, forest cover had become denser 
and more extensive than it was in the mid-20th century. These 
changes were apparent despite extensive logging in the mid to 
late 20th century and the impacts of fire exclusion before the 
mid-20th century. By the late 20th century, the area likely to 
support fire regimes of low-severity had been reduced by 53%, 
mixed-severity remained roughly the same (although it shifted 
to sites that had supported low-severity fire regimes prior to fire 
exclusion), and high-severity nearly doubled (Figure 5).
Other studies in cold forests that documented changes 
associated with fire exclusion include: lodgepole pine in the 
foothills of the Rocky Mountains in Alberta and in cold-air 
drainages in the central Oregon Pumice Plateau ecoregion; 
mixed-conifer and subalpine forests in the Canadian Cordillera 
and southwestern US; and red fir forests in California’s Sierra 
Nevada ecoregion. Additionally, today’s increased surface fuel 
loads and canopy connectivity in mid-elevation forests likely 
influence the frequency of crown fire spread into more mesic 
and colder high-elevation forests.
Repeat photography from other regions across western 
North America also show the expansion and densification of 
forest area and the consequent reduction in open-canopy forest 
and nonforest areas associated with fire exclusion. Examples 
include high-elevation ecosystems in the Pecos Wilderness, New 
Mexico; pine and mixed-conifer forest over 250,000 acres in 
northern Sierra Nevada, California; ponderosa pine in the Black 
Hills, South Dakota and Colorado Front Range; and widespread 
change across elevations in the Canadian Rocky Mountains. 
Oblique and aerial imagery from the early to mid-20th 
century documented abundant nonforest cover in dry, moist, and 
cold forest landscapes. The William Osborne survey of Oregon 
and Washington in the 1930s–1940s (Figure 4) encompasses 
nearly 1,000 panoramas (120°) taken on ridgetops and at fire 
lookouts, and the Geological Survey of Canada systematically 
collected approximately 120,000 high-resolution oblique images 
from 1880–1950 across the mountains of western Canada. 
The nonforest areas influence the delivery of fire to 
adjacent forested areas. For example, fine fuels like grasses and 
long pine needles combust readily (i.e., flashy fuels) and can 
carry fire into adjacent, less combustible cover types. These 
flashy fuels may also impede fire spread as they are typically 
the first to recover moisture content in the hours after sunset. 
In addition to influencing the delivery of fire to adjacent areas, 
these fine-scale treeless openings (Figures 3 and 4), provided 
numerous functions, including nutrient cycling and fostering 
biodiversity. Increased forest cover and the loss of the once 
widespread nonforest and open-canopy conditions (Figures 
3 and 4) can substantially reduce the accumulation and 
persistence of snow packs and the amount of water available to 
downstream ecosystems.
Changes in High-Severity Fire
High-severity fire is an essential component of many forested 
landscapes. These fires contribute to the provision of unique 
habitat types, like areas with abundant snags (dead trees) and 
nutrient-rich shrub and herbaceous plant cover (flowers, seeds, 
and tender leaves). They also influence numerous other ecosystem 
functions, including nutrient and hydrological cycles and the rate 
and abundance of debris flow and sediment deposition. Landscape 
diversity maintained by characteristic disturbance regimes 
is critical to maintaining the diverse and unique ecosystem 
characteristics of seasonally dry forested landscapes.
Some of today’s conversion of forest to nonforest may aid 
climate and wildfire adaptation. This may be particularly true 
where forest expansion and densification in the 20th century 
degraded nonforest ecosystems, e.g., meadows and woodlands, 
or where conversions to more drought-tolerant cover types are 
inevitable as landscapes adjust to a warming climate. However, 
today’s fires burn in fire-excluded landscapes that lack the 
constraints historically imposed by abundant low- to moderate-
severity fire. As a result, abundance and patch sizes of high-
severity fire have been higher than historical values. These 
fires are contributing to type conversions on sites that would 
otherwise have been likely to maintain or regenerate forest 
cover even under a rapidly warming climate.
Figure 5. Broadscale (1-km2 pixel) map of transitions from historical 
(ca. 1800) to late 20th century fire-severity classes in the Interior 
Columbia Basin. Adapted from Hessburg et al. (2005).

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45   
Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes 8
Increases in high-severity fire are further reducing the 
number and distribution of large and old (>150 years) fire- 
and drought-tolerant trees. These oldest of these trees thrived 
through seasonal and episodic increases in fire and drought 
for decades to centuries before fire exclusion. Large and old 
fire- and drought-tolerant trees were heavily logged in the 20th 
century. Their populations have continued to decline due to 
drought stress, bark beetle outbreaks, and wildfire. High forest 
densities exacerbate drought stress and facilitate bark beetle 
outbreaks, and in ponderosa and Jeffrey pine forests, bark 
beetles preferentially target larger individuals. Where old and 
large trees were once widespread in fire-dependent landscapes, 
today they are less abundant or absent and highly vulnerable to 
both fire and drought in fire-excluded forests.
Constraints on tree regeneration are an inevitable 
consequence of a warming climate. However, high-severity fire 
also limits forest regeneration. Reduced seed dispersal capacity 
and hotter, drier site conditions in large severely burned areas 
impedes conifer regeneration on sites where low- to moderate-
severity fire does not. Additionally, high-severity fires can 
have long lasting negative impacts on soil organic carbon and 
nutrient cycling.
Conclusion 
Excluding fire from fire-dependent forest landscapes for more 
than 100 years has radically altered fire regimes, structure 
and composition, and ecosystem functions. Long-term fire 
exclusion has compromised the capacity of fire-dependent 
forest landscapes to resist or recover after disturbance, 
especially in a rapidly warming climate. Fire exclusion has 
likely also impacted cold and wet forest and nonforest types 
either directly through forest densification and expansion or 
indirectly by influencing ecosystem functions, such as the 
delivery of fire and water. 
During recent droughts, increases in forest density and 
forested area have contributed to uncharacteristically high 
mortality of fire-resistant, drought-tolerant trees. Additionally, 
ignitions in forests with high fuel loads can overwhelm fire 
suppression capacity, especially during extreme fire weather 
(hot, dry, and often windy conditions). At those times, only 
a change in the weather will reduce fire intensity enough to 
allow fire fighters and the tools at their disposal to effectively 
manage wildland fires. 
Warmer, drier climates reduce the moisture content of both 
live and dead fuels, making them more flammable. As a result, 
area burned increases. Thus, despite increasing expense and effort 
focused on fire suppression, area burned has increased in the late 
20th and early 21st century as the climate warmed. This trend is 
expected to continue as the climate continues to warm. Currently, 
the area burned in most forested ecosystems is much lower than 
would be expected given the warmth of the current climate. This 
is due to ongoing policies that continue to favor fire suppression 
even when the weather conditions are conducive to managing fires 
to provide ecological, social, and cultural benefit.
Recapturing the once extensive influence of the low- and 
moderate-severity fires that shaped and maintained these 
ecosystems for millennia requires a paradigm shift from 
strategies favoring fire suppression to those that facilitate the 
use of fire when circumstances allow. As the climate continues 
to warm and burned area increases, high-severity burn area and 
early seral habitat will likely proliferate. However, maintaining 
and fostering a diverse mix of forest structures and ages 
may best be served through climate- and wildfire-adaptation 
strategies that incorporate ecologically based fuel reductions 
through the use of thinning, prescribed fire, and managing 
wildfires to further resource objectives. 
The cautious reintroduction of frequent low- to moderate-
severity fires can and has reduced the intensity and severity 
of subsequent fires by maintaining tree densities and live 
and dead fuel loads that are in synch with the prevailing 
climate. Enormous effort and expense have been invested 
in evaluating the advisability of restoring abundant low- to 
moderate-severity fire in the fire-dependent forest landscapes 
of western North America. Ongoing evaluation and refinement 
of implementation and effectiveness of these approaches is 
essential for any credible management strategy. Additionally, 
objective evaluation can aid us in differentiating warranted 
from unwarranted uncertainties and enable timely paradigm 
shifts to policies and management actions that favor fire- and 
climate-adapted forests and human communities.

Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45
9
Table 1. A sample of the regional syntheses and meta-analyses that integrate insights from assessments of historical and contemporary forest and fire ecology.
These reviews reflect the use of multiple complementary methods across spatial scales, from individual trees to regions.
Region
Description
Citations
Western North 
America
More than 800 fire-scar studies documented abrupt decline in fire frequency in the late 19th 
century and provide ecological insights into variation in top-down and bottom-up drivers of 
historical fire regimes
Falk et al. 2011  
Swetnam et al. 2016  
Daniels et al. 2017
Substantial departures in contemporary fire regimes and live and dead vegetation patterns 
across dry, moist, and cold forested landscapes increase vulnerability of forest ecosystems 
to drought and fire
Hessburg et al. 2019
Evaluation of key aspects of the scientific evidence of the impacts of fire exclusion using a 
framework for objectively assessing change in the structure, composition, and fire regimes 
of seasonally dry, fire-excluded forest landscapes.
Hagmann et al. 2021
Canada
Development and paradigm shift in wildland fire research over past 50 years
Coogan et al. 2020
Climate change impacts on fire regimes and impacts of contemporary fire regimes on social 
and ecological systems
Coogan et al. 2019
Western United 
States (US)
Variation in fire activity over the past 3,000 years 
Marlon et al. 2012
Fire deficit relative to area expected to burn without fire suppression given contemporary 
climate 1984-2012; area burned and fire severity increased 1985-2017
Parks et al. 2015  
Parks and Abatzoglou 2020
Influence of traditional tribal perspectives on ecosystem restoration
Long et al. 2020 
Roos et al. 2021
Correspondence between conifer species traits conferring fire resistance and independent 
assessments of historical fire regimes
Stevens et al. 2020
Human influence on contemporary fire regimes
Balch et al. 2017
Evaluation of conifer regeneration up to 69 years post fire
Stevens-Rumann and Morgan 2019
Colorado and 
Wyoming Front 
Ranges
Historical and contemporary ecology of ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer forests
Addington et al. 2018
Fire regimes in ponderosa pine forests
McKinney 2019
Historical and contemporary ecology of selected national forests
Dillon et al. 2005 
Meyer et al. 2005a, 2005b 
Veblen and Donnegan 2005
Southwestern US
Historical and contemporary ecology of ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer forests and 
forest-grassland landscape complexes
Reynolds et al. 2013 
Dewar et al. 2021
Sierra Nevada 
bioregion of 
California
Historical and contemporary ecology of ponderosa and Jeffrey pine and mixed-conifer 
forests
SNEP 1996 
North et al. 2009, 2016 
Safford and Stevens 2017 
van Wagtendonk et al. 2018
Historical and contemporary ecology of red fir and subalpine forest types
Meyer and North 2019 
Coppoletta et al. 2021
Northeastern 
California plateaus
Historical and contemporary ecology of dry conifer forests
Riegel et al. 2018 
Dumroese and Moser 2020
Northern California
Historical and contemporary ecology of forested landscapes
Skinner et al. 2018 
Spies et al. 2018, 2019 
Stephens et al. 2018b, 2019 
Bohlman et al. 2021
Pacific Northwest
Departures in contemporary fire regimes
Reilly et al. 2017 
Metlen et al. 2018 
Haugo et al. 2019
Historical and contemporary ecology of ponderosa pine forests in Oregon and Washington; 
vulnerability of contemporary forests and expanding wildland urban interface to increasing 
drought and fire severity
Merschel et al. 2021
Historical and contemporary ecology of moist mixed conifer forests in seasonally dry 
landscapes in Oregon, Washington, and Northern California
Perry et al. 2011 
Stine et al. 2014 
Hessburg et al. 2016
Columbia 
River Basin in 
northwestern US
The Interior Columbia Basin Ecosystem Management Project (ICBEMP) used standard aerial 
photogrammetric methods, repeat photo-interpretation, and a quantitatively representative 
sampling scheme to build a dataset of wall-to-wall, meso-scale landscape reconstructions for 
337 watersheds, mean area 9500 ha. ICBEMP also incorporated broad-scale succession and 
disturbance simulation modeling calibrated with the meso-scale results
Lehmkuhl et al. 1994 
Huff et al. 1995 
Hann et al. 1997 
Hessburg et al. 1999, 2000, 2005 
Wisdom 2000 
Raphael et al. 2001 
Hessburg and Agee 2003 

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45   
Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes 10
Literature Cited
Addington, R.N., Aplet, G.H., Battaglia, M.A., Briggs, J.S., 
Brown, P.M., Cheng, A.S., Dickinson, Y., Feinstein, J.A., 
Pelz, K.A., Regan, C.M., Thinnes, J., Truex, R., Fornwalt, 
P.J., Gannon, B., Julian, C.W., Underhill, J.L., Wolk, 
B., 2018. Principles and practices for the restoration of 
ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer forests of the 
Colorado Front Range. RMRS-GTR-373. Fort Collins, 
CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 121 p.
Balch, J.K., Bradley, B.A., Abatzoglou, J.T., Nagy, R.C., 
Fusco, E.J., Mahood, A.L., 2017. Human-started 
wildfires expand the fire niche across the United States. 
PNAS 114, 2946–2951. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1617394114
Bohlman, G.N., Skinner, C.N., Safford, H.D., 2021. 
Natural range of variation (NRV) for yellow pine and 
mixed conifer forests in northwestern California and 
southwestern Oregon. General Technical Report PSW-
GTR-273. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest 
Research Station, Albany, CA.
Coogan, S.C.P., Daniels, L.D., Boychuk, D., Burton, P.J., 
Flannigan, M.D., Gauthier, S., Kafka, V., Park, J.S., 
Wotton, B.M., 2020. Fifty years of wildland fire science 
in Canada. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 51, 
283–302.
Coogan, S.C.P., Robinne, F., Piyush, J., Flannigan, M.D., 
2019. Scientists’ warning on wildfire — a Canadian 
perspective. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 49.
Coppoletta, M., Meyer, M.D., North, M.P., 2021. Natural 
range of variation for red fir and subalpine forests in 
northwestern California and southwestern Oregon. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-269. US Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research 
Station, Albany, CA.
Daniels, L.D., Yocom Kent, L.L., Sherriff, R.L., Heyerdahl, 
E.K., 2017. Deciphering the complexity of historical 
fire regimes: diversity among forests of western North 
America, in: Amoroso, M.M., Daniels, L.D., Baker, 
P.J., Camarero, J.J. (Eds.), Dendroecology: Tree-Ring 
Analyses Applied to Ecological Studies, Ecological 
Studies. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
Switzerland, pp. 185–210. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-61669-8_8
Dewar, J.J., Falk, D.A., Swetnam, T.W., Baisan, C.H., Allen, 
C.D., Parmenter, R.R., Margolis, E.Q., Taylor, E.J., 
2021. Valleys of fire: historical fire regimes of forest-
grassland ecotones across the montane landscape of the 
Valles Caldera National Preserve, New Mexico, USA. 
Landscape Ecol 36, 331–352. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10980-020-01101-w
Dillon, G.K., Knight, D.H., Meyer, C.B., 2005. Historic range 
of variability for upland vegetation in the Medicine Bow 
National Forest, Wyoming. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-
GTR-139. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. 85 p. 139. https://doi.org/10.2737/RMRS-
GTR-139
Falk, D.A., Heyerdahl, E.K., Brown, P.M., Farris, C., Fulé, 
P.Z., McKenzie, D., Swetnam, T.W., Taylor, A.H., 
Horne, M.L.V., 2011. Multi-scale controls of historical 
forest-fire regimes: new insights from fire-scar networks. 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 9, 446–454. 
https://doi.org/10.1890/100052
Furniss, T.J., Das, A.J., van Mantgem, P.J., Stephenson, N.L., 
Lutz, J.A., 2022. Crowding, climate, and the case for 
social distancing among trees. Ecological Applications 
n/a, e2507. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2507
Hagmann, R.K., Hessburg, P.F., Prichard, S.J., Povak, N.A., 
Brown, P.M., Fulé, P.Z., Keane, R.E., Knapp, E.E., 
Lydersen, J.M., Metlen, K.L., Reilly, M.J., Meador, 
A.J.S., Stephens, S.L., Stevens, J.T., Taylor, A.H., 
Yocom, L.L., Battaglia, M.A., Churchill, D.J., Daniels, 
L.D., Falk, D.A., Henson, P., Johnston, J.D., Krawchuk, 
M.A., Levine, C.R., Meigs, G.W., Merschel, A.G., 
North, M.P., Safford, H.D., Swetnam, T.W., Waltz, 
A.E.M., 2021. Evidence for widespread changes in 
the structure, composition, and fire regimes of western 
North American forests. Ecological Applications 31, 
e02431. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2431
Hann, W.J., Jones, J.L., Karl, M.G., Hessburg, P.F., Keane, 
R.E., Long, D.G., Menakis, J.P., McNicoll, C.H., 
Leonard, S.G., Gravenmier, R.A., Smith, B.G., 1997. 
Chapter 3: Landscape dynamics of the basin, in: 
Quigley, T.M., Arbelbide, S.J. (Eds.), An Assessment of 
Ecosystem Components in the Interior Columbia Basin 
and Portions of the Klamath and Great Basins: Volume 
II. PNW-GTR-405. Portland, OR: USDA Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station.
Haugo, R.D., Kellogg, B.S., Cansler, C.A., Kolden, C.A., 
Kemp, K.B., Robertson, J.C., Metlen, K.L., Vaillant, 
N.M., Restaino, C.M., 2019. The missing fire: 
quantifying human exclusion of wildfire in Pacific 
Northwest forests, USA. Ecosphere 10, e02702. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.2702
Hessburg, P.F., Agee, J.K., 2003. An environmental narrative 
of Inland Northwest United States forests, 1800–2000. 
Forest Ecology and Management, The Effect of 
Wildland Fire on Aquatic Ecosystems in the Western 
USA. 178, 23–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-
1127(03)00052-5
Hessburg, P.F., Agee, J.K., Franklin, J.F., 2005. Dry forests and 
wildland fires of the inland Northwest USA: contrasting 
the landscape ecology of the pre-settlement and 
modern eras. Forest Ecology and Management, Relative 
Risk Assessments for Decision–Making Related to 
Uncharacteristic Wildfire 211, 117–139. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2005.02.016
Hessburg, P.F., Miller, C.L., Povak, N.A., Taylor, A.H., 
Higuera, P.E., Prichard, S.J., North, M.P., Collins, B.M., 
Hurteau, M.D., Larson, A.J., Allen, C.D., Stephens, 
S.L., Huerta, H.R., Rumann, C.S., Daniels, L.D., 
Gedalof, Z., Gray, R.W., Kane, V.R., Churchill, D.J., 
Hagmann, R.K., Spies, T.A., Parks, S.A., Cansler, C.A., 
Belote, R.T., Veblen, T.T., Battaglia, M.A., Hoffman, 

Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45
11
C., Skinner, C.N., Safford, H.D., 2019. Climate, 
environment, and disturbance history govern resilience 
of western North American forests. Front. Ecol. Evol. 7, 
239. https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2019.00239
Hessburg, P.F., Prichard, S.J., Hagmann, R.K., Povak, 
N.A., Lake, F.K., 2021. Wildfire and climate change 
adaptation of western North American forests: a case for 
intentional management. Ecological Applications 31, 
e02432. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2432
Hessburg, P.F., Smith, B.G., Kreiter, S.D., Miller, C.A., Salter, 
R.B., McNicoll, C.H., Hessburg, P.F., 1999. Historical 
and current forest and range landscapes in the interior 
Columbia River basin and portions of the Klamath and 
Great Basins. Part 1: Linking vegetation patterns and 
landscape vulnerability to potential insect and pathogen 
disturbances. PNW-GTR-458. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station, Portland, OR.
Hessburg, P.F., Smith, B.G., Salter, R.B., Ottmar, R.D., 
Alvarado, E., 2000. Recent changes (1930s–1990s) 
in spatial patterns of interior northwest forests, USA. 
Forest Ecology and Management 136, 53–83.
Hessburg, P.F., Spies, T.A., Perry, D.A., Skinner, C.N., Taylor, 
A.H., Brown, P.M., Stephens, S.L., Larson, A.J., 
Churchill, D.J., Povak, N.A., Singleton, P.H., McComb, 
B., Zielinski, W.J., Collins, B.M., Salter, R.B., Keane, 
J.J., Franklin, J.F., Riegel, G., 2016. Tamm Review: 
Management of mixed-severity fire regime forests in 
Oregon, Washington, and Northern California. Forest 
Ecology and Management 366, 221–250. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2016.01.034
Huff, M.H., Ottmar, R.D., Alvarado, E., Vihnanek, R.E., 
Lehmkuhl, J.F., Hessburg, P.F., Everett, R.L., 1995. 
Historical and current forest landscapes of eastern 
Oregon and Washington: Part II: linking vegetation 
characteristics to potential fire behavior and related 
smoke production. PNW-GTR-355. U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station, Portland, OR.
Knapp, E.E., Bernal, A.A., Kane, J.M., Fettig, C.J., North, 
M.P., 2021. Variable thinning and prescribed fire 
influence tree mortality and growth during and after a 
severe drought. Forest Ecology and Management 479, 
118595. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2020.118595
Lehmkuhl, J.F., Hessburg, P.F., Everett, R.L., Huff, M.H., 
Ottmar, R.D., 1994. Historical and current forest 
landscapes of eastern Oregon and Washington: Part I: 
vegetation pattern and insect and eisease hazards. PNW-
GTR-328. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, 
OR.
Long, J.W., Lake, F.K., Goode, R.W., Burnette, B.M., 2020. 
How traditional tribal perspectives influence ecosystem 
restoration. Ecopsychology 12, 71–82. https://doi.
org/10.1089/eco.2019.0055
Marlon, J.R., Bartlein, P.J., Gavin, D.G., Long, C.J., Anderson, 
R.S., Briles, C.E., Brown, K.J., Colombaroli, D., Hallett, 
D.J., Power, M.J., Scharf, E.A., Walsh, M.K., 2012. 
Long-term perspective on wildfires in the western USA. 
PNAS 109, E535–E543. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1112839109
McKinney, S.T., 2019. Systematic review and meta-analysis of 
fire regime research in ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) 
ecosystems, Colorado, USA. fire ecol 15, 38. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s42408-019-0056-6
Merschel, A.G., Beedlow, P.A., Shaw, D.C., Woodruff, D.R., 
Lee, H.E., Cline, S.P., Comeleo, R.L., Hagmann, 
R.K., Reilly, M.J., 2021. An ecological perspective on 
living with fire in ponderosa pine forests of Oregon and 
Washington: resistance, gone but not forgotten. Trees, 
Forests and People 100074.
Metlen, K.L., Skinner, C.N., Olson, D.R., Nichols, C., 
Borgias, D., 2018. Regional and local controls on 
historical fire regimes of dry forests and woodlands in 
the Rogue River Basin, Oregon, USA. Forest Ecology 
and Management 430, 43–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2018.07.010
Meyer, C.B., Knight, D.H., Dillon, G.K., 2005a. Historic 
range of variability for upland vegetation in the Bighorn 
National Forest, Wyoming. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-
GTR-140. Fort Collins, CO: Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 94 p. 
140. https://doi.org/10.2737/RMRS-GTR-140
Meyer, C.B., Knight, D.H., Dillon, G.K., 2005b. Historic 
variability for the upland vegetation of the Shoshone 
National Forest, Wyoming. Report submitted to the 
Shoshone National Forest, supervisor’s office, Cody, 
Wyoming and the division of renewable resources, Rocky 
Mountain region, US forest service, Lakewood, Colorado.
Meyer, M., North, M., 2019. Natural range of variation of red 
fir and subalpine forests in the Sierra Nevada Bioregion. 
Gen Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-263. Albany, CA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Southwest Research Station 263.
Murphy, J.S., York, R., Rivera Huerta, H., Stephens, S.L., 
2021. Characteristics and metrics of resilient forests 
in the Sierra de San Pedro Martír, Mexico. For. Ecol. 
Manag. 482, 118864. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2020.118864
North, M., Stine, P., O’Hara, K., Zielinski, W., Stephens, S., 
2009. An ecosystem management strategy for Sierran 
mixed-conifer forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-220 
(Second printing, with addendum). Albany, CA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Southwest Research Station. 49 p 220. https://doi.
org/10.2737/PSW-GTR-220
North, M.P., Collins, B.M., Safford, H.D., Stephenson, 
N.L., 2016. Montane forests, in: H.A. Mooney and E. 
Zavaleta (Eds) Ecosystems of California. University of 
California Press, Berkeley, CA, pp. 553–577.
Parks, S.A., Abatzoglou, J.T., 2020. Warmer and drier fire 
seasons contribute to increases in area burned at 
high severity in western US forests from 1985-2017. 
Geophysical Research Letters n/a, e2020GL089858. 
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL089858
Parks, S.A., Miller, C., Parisien, M.-A., Holsinger, L.M., 
Dobrowski, S.Z., Abatzoglou, J., 2015. Wildland fire 
deficit and surplus in the western United States, 1984-

Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45   
Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes 12
2012. Ecosphere. 6(12): Article 275. 6, 1–13. https://
doi.org/10.1890/ES15-00294.1
Perry, D.A., Hessburg, P.F., Skinner, C.N., Spies, T.A., 
Stephens, S.L., Taylor, A.H., Franklin, J.F., McComb, 
B., Riegel, G., 2011. The ecology of mixed severity 
fire regimes in Washington, Oregon, and Northern 
California. Forest Ecology and Management 262, 703–
717. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2011.05.004
Prichard, S.J., Hessburg, P.F., Hagmann, R.K., Povak, N.A., 
Dobrowski, S.Z., Hurteau, M.D., Kane, V.R., Keane, 
R.E., Kobziar, L.N., Kolden, C.A., North, M.P., 
Parks, S.A., Safford, H.D., Stevens, J.T., Yocom, L.L., 
Churchill, D.J., Gray, R.W., Huffman, D.W., Lake, 
F.K., Khatri-Chhetri, P., 2021. Adapting western North 
American forests to climate change and wildfires: 10 
common questions. Ecological Applications 31, e02433. 
https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1002/eap.2433
Raphael, M.G., Wisdom, M.J., Rowland, M.M., Holthausen, 
R.S., Wales, B.C., Marcot, B.G., Rich, T.D., 2001. 
Status and trends of habitats of terrestrial vertebrates in 
relation to land management in the interior Columbia 
River basin. Forest Ecology and Management, The 
Science Basis for Ecosystem Management in the 
Interior Columbia River Basin 153, 63–87. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0378-1127(01)00454-6
Reilly, M.J., Dunn, C.J., Meigs, G.W., Spies, T.A., Kennedy, 
R.E., Bailey, J.D., Briggs, K., 2017. Contemporary 
patterns of fire extent and severity in forests of the 
Pacific Northwest, USA (1985–2010). Ecosphere 8, 
e01695. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.1695
Restaino, C., Young, D.J.N., Estes, B., Gross, S., Wuenschel, 
A., Meyer, M., Safford, H., 2019. Forest structure 
and climate mediate drought-induced tree mortality 
in forests of the Sierra Nevada, USA. Ecol Appl 29, 
e01902. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.1902
Reynolds, R.T., Meador, A.J.S., Youtz, J.A., Nicolet, T., 
Matonis, M.S., Jackson, P.L., DeLorenzo, D.G., 
Graves, A.D., 2013. Restoring composition and 
structure in Southwestern frequent-fire forests: A 
science-based framework for improving ecosystem 
resiliency. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-310. Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 76 p. 
https://doi.org/10.2737/RMRS-GTR-310
Roos, C.I., Swetnam, T.W., Ferguson, T.J., Liebmann, 
M.J., Loehman, R.A., Welch, J.R., Margolis, E.Q., 
Guiterman, C.H., Hockaday, W.C., Aiuvalasit, M.J., 
Battillo, J., Farella, J., Kiahtipes, C.A., 2021. Native 
American fire management at an ancient wildland–
urban interface in the Southwest United States. PNAS 
118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2018733118
Safford, H.D., Stevens, J.T., 2017. Natural range of variation for 
yellow pine and mixed-conifer forests in the Sierra Nevada, 
southern Cascades, and Modoc and Inyo National Forests, 
California, USA. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-256. 
Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. 229 p.
Skinner, C.N., Taylor, A.H., Agee, J.K., Briles, C.E., Whitlock, 
C.L., 2018. Klamath mountains bioregion, in: van 
Wagtendonk, J.W., Sugihara, N.G., Stephens, S.L., 
Thode, A.E., Shaffer, K.E., Fites-Kaufman, J. (Eds.), 
Fire in California’s Ecosystems. University of California 
Press, Berkeley, CA, pp. 171–194.
SNEP, 1996. Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project final report to 
Congress: Status of the Sierra Nevada. Davis, Centers 
for Water and Wildland Resources, University of 
California.
Spies, T.A., Long, J.W., Charnley, S., Hessburg, P.F., Marcot, 
B.G., Reeves, G.H., Lesmeister, D.B., Reilly, M.J., 
Cerveny, L.K., Stine, P.A., Raphael, M.G., 2019. 
Twenty-five years of the Northwest Forest Plan: 
what have we learned? Frontiers in Ecology and the 
Environment 17, 511–520. https://doi.org/10.1002/
fee.2101
Spies, T.A., Stine, P.A., Gravenmier, R.A., Long, J.W., Reilly, 
M.J., 2018. Volume 1—Synthesis of science to inform 
land management within the Northwest Forest Plan 
area. PNW-GTR-966. Portland, OR: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station. 370 p.
Stephens, S. L., Kanem, J.W., Stuart, J.D., van Wagtendonk, 
J.W., Sugihara, N.G., Stephens, Scott L., Thode, A.E., 
Shaffer, K.E., Fites-Kaufman, J., 2018. North coast 
bioregion, in: Fire in California’s Ecosystems. University 
of California Press, Berkeley, CA, pp. 149–170.
Stephens, S.L., Kobziar, L.N., Collins, B.M., Davis, R., Fulé, 
P.Z., Gaines, W., Ganey, J., Guldin, J.M., Hessburg, 
P.F., Hiers, K., Hoagland, S., Keane, J.J., Masters, R.E., 
McKellar, A.E., Montague, W., North, M., Spies, 
T.A., 2019. Is fire “for the birds”? How two rare species 
influence fire management across the US. Frontiers in 
Ecology and the Environment 17, 391–399. https://doi.
org/10.1002/fee.2076
Stevens, J.T., Kling, M.M., Schwilk, D.W., Varner, J.M., Kane, 
J.M., 2020. Biogeography of fire regimes in western 
U.S. conifer forests: A trait-based approach. Global 
Ecology and Biogeography 29, 944–955. https://doi.
org/10.1111/geb.13079
Stevens-Rumann, C.S., Morgan, P., 2019. Tree regeneration 
following wildfires in the western US: a review. fire ecol 
15, 15. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42408-019-0032-1
Stine, P., Hessburg, P., Spies, T., Kramer, M., Fettig, C.J., 
Hansen, A., Lehmkuhl, J., O’Hara, K., Polivka, 
K., Singleton, P., others, 2014. The ecology and 
management of moist mixed-conifer forests in eastern 
Oregon and Washington: a synthesis of the relevant 
biophysical science and implications for future land 
management.
Stoddard, M.T., Roccaforte, J.P., Meador, A.J.S., Huffman, 
D.W., Fulé, P.Z., Waltz, A.E.M., Covington, W.W., 
2021. Ecological restoration guided by historical 
reference conditions can increase resilience to climate 
change of southwestern U.S. Ponderosa pine forests. 
Forest Ecology and Management 493, 119256. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2021.119256
Swetnam, T.W., Farella, J., Roos, C.I., Liebmann, M.J., Falk, 
D.A., Allen, C.D., 2016. Multiscale perspectives of fire, 
climate and humans in western North America and the 

Evidence for Widespread Changes in the Structure, Composition, and Fire Regimes of Western North American Forest Landscapes
Ecological Restoration Institute  •  WORKING PAPER 45
13
Jemez Mountains, USA. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 371, 20150168. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0168
van Wagtendonk, J.W., Fites-Kaufman, J.A., Safford, H.D., 
North, M.P., Collins, B.M., 2018. Sierra Nevada 
bioregion, in: van Wagtendonk, J.W., Sugihara, N.G., 
Stephens, S.L., Thode, A.E., Shaffer, K.E., Fites-
Kaufman, J. (Eds.), Fire in California’s Ecosystems. 
University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, pp. 
249–278.
Veblen, T.T., Donnegan, J.A., 2005. Historical range of 
variability for forest vegetation of the national forests of 
the Colorado Front Range. Final report. Boulder, CO: 
University of Colorado.
Wisdom, M.J., 2000. Source habitats for terrestrial vertebrates 
of focus in the Interior Columbia Basin: Broad-scale 
trends and management implications. PNW-GTR-485. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR.

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1. 	 Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2. 	 Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3. 	 Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4. 	 Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5. 	 Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6. 	 Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7. 	 Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8. 	 Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9. 	 Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10. The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11. Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12. Restoring Forest Roads
13. Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14. Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15. Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16. Snags and Forest Restoration
17. Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18. Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter?
19. Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20. Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
21. Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-Fire Southwestern Forests
22. Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23. Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
25. Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and 	
	
	
Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26. Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27. Fuel Treatment Longevity
28. Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration 	
	
	
Treatments
29. Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/		
	
Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests
30. Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
31. Climate Change Impact on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
32. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods
33. The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
34. Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest
35. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management
36. Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildfire Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in Southwestern Coniferous Forests
37. The Influence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
38. Reference Conditions and Restoration of Transitional Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Southwest
39. Restoration as a Mechanism to Manage Southwestern Dwarf Mistletoe in Ponderosa Pine Forests
40. Resources for Predicting and Mitigating Smoke Impacts of Wildland Fires
41. Restoration Prescriptions for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Adapted Forests
42. A Summary of the Natural Range of Variability for Southwestern Frequent-Fire Forests
43. Fires and Soils in Frequent-Fire Landscapes of the Southwest
44. Mitigating Postfire Runoff and Erosion in the Southwest using Hillslope and Channel Treatments
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182 or nau.edu/eri.

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
