2021 Wildfire Season: An Overview
Southwestern US
JULY 2022

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
Authors: Michael Lynch, Lara Wood Miller, and Alexander Evans
Reviewers: Mary Lata, Tonto National Forest, USDA Forest Service; Jose ‘Pepe’ Iniguez, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
USDA Forest Service; and Tayloe Dubay, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University
 
Cover photo: Aerial view of the Doagy Fire, looking northwest, on May 19, 2021. The Doagy Fire was ignited by lightning on 
May 14 near Doagy Well in Doagy Canyon of the Gila National Forest. The fire burned nearly 13,000 acres. Photo courtesy of 
InciWeb
Please use the following citation when referring to this report: 
Lynch, M., L. Wood Miller, and A. Evans. 2022. 2021 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern US. Special Report. 
Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 22 p.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution.
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.	
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the 
basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.
Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by 
reestablishing native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. 
The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines ecological restoration 
as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem 
with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to 
return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration 
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally 
dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, 
and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing 
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on 
reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and 
reestablishing productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests 
of the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, 
to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and 
policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available 
science used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions 
managers need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop 
scientific information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through 
an inclusive and open process.

Table of Contents
Introduction................................................ 1
Wildfire Management................................ 1
The 2021 Fire Season................................. 1
Regional Context........................................ 2 
Data Sources............................................... 3
Individual Fire Summaries......................... 4
Telegraph Fire, Arizona.............................. 5
Johnson Fire, New Mexico........................ 7
Rafael Fire, Arizona.................................... 8
Mescal Fire, Arizona................................... 9
Backbone Fire, Arizona.............................10
Pinnacle Fire, Arizona................................11
Bear Fire, Arizona......................................12
Tiger Fire, Arizona.....................................13
Doagy Fire, New Mexico...........................14
Horton Fire, Arizona..................................15
Slate Fire, Arizona.....................................16
Walnut Fire, Arizona..................................17
Conclusion..................................................18
Appendix I. Fire Statistics........................ 22

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
1
Introduction
Wildfire is part of the landscape in the Southwest. It can 
be a threat to lives and property, but it is also crucial to 
maintaining healthy ecosystems. Plant communities in the 
Southwest are adapted to fire. For example, ponderosa pine 
forests need regular, low-severity fires to remain healthy. Over 
decades without fire on the landscape, fuel loads accumulated 
and facilitated more intense, high-severity fire. Each fire is 
different, and while some burn in ways that increase ecosystem 
resilience, others burn with greater severity than forests are 
adapted to, killing even the toughest trees and threatening lives 
and homes. Weather, climate, vegetation type, fuel conditions, 
and topography all influence how an individual wildfire burns 
on the landscape and whether it has beneficial effects. Some 
fires will leave many unburned patches, creating a mosaic burn 
pattern, whereas others will burn more contiguously.
This report is the nineth in a series of annual overviews 
available from the Southwest Fire Science Consortium and 
the Ecological Restoration Institute. The goal of this overview 
is to provide a concise summary of the fire season and to 
facilitate comparison with past fires and fire seasons. It follows 
the format of past years’ overviews1 and describes the impacts 
of twelve wildfires, each more than 10,000 acres, in Arizona 
and New Mexico in 2021. As in previous overviews, this 
report covers when each fire burned, fire management costs, 
vegetation types, previous burn footprints, and burn severity, 
where available. The conclusion section summarizes these same 
measures for the large wildfires in the region and touches on 
how these fires burned in proximity to human communities. 
These fire season overview reports provide a unique opportunity 
to compare fires and fire seasons, which highlight trends and 
changes as managers and communities adapt to climate change.
Wildfire Management
Managers can approach each wildfire with multiple objectives 
that range from managing the wildfire for public safety to 
managing the fire to benefit natural resources. Federal wildland 
fire management policy states:
“Response to wildland fires is based on 
ecological, social and legal consequences of the 
fire. The circumstances under which a fire occurs, 
and the likely consequences on firefighter and 
public safety and welfare, natural and cultural 
resources, and, values to be protected, dictate the 
appropriate response to the fire.”2
A full range of wildland fire response strategies may be 
employed to meet these objectives, including containing, 
confining, or suppressing the wildfire. The national Incident 
Management Situation Report identifies the percentage of each 
fire managed with a monitor, confine, point zone protection, or 
suppression strategy. This report compiles these figures to better 
explain how fires were managed in 2021.
Wildland fire management strategies are based on a thoughtful 
and systematic risk-based approach that considers firefighter 
and public safety, cause of the wildfire, location, existing land 
management plans, availability of resources, values at risk, 
and social and economic factors. Federal policy dictates that 
“initial action on human-caused wildfire will be to suppress 
the fire.”2 The same federal policy allows naturally ignited 
wildfires (or parts of wildfires) to be managed for resource 
benefits (also called managed wildfires), such as mitigating 
fuel loads to reduce the risk of high-severity fire, enhancing 
wildlife habitat, improving watershed health, and reducing risk 
to neighboring communities. These fires are often referred to 
as “managed wildfires.” Though multiple strategies are used to 
manage wildfires, it is important to note that federal agencies 
only recognize two types of fires: prescribed fire (planned) and 
wildfire (unplanned).
The 2021 Fire Season 
In 2021, wildfire burned 648,220 acres in the Southwest 
(Arizona and New Mexico), which is a little lower than the 
average number of acres burned annually in these two states 
over the previous ten-year period (681,296 acres). As has been 
the case in recent years, Arizona had significantly more wildfire 
(524,428 acres) than New Mexico. Arizona had more wildfire 
acres than its ten-year average (390,944 acres) while New 
Mexico had fewer acres of wildfire than its ten-year averages 
(290,352 acres). Unplanned human ignitions made up 36 
percent and 10 percent of wildfire acres in Arizona and New 
Mexico respectively (though these estimates excluded wildfires 
with an unknown cause). Managers were able to use prescribed 
fire on three times more acres in 2021 than in 2020. Prescribed 
fire covered 174,210 acres across the Southwest (Figure 1). 
Data on management strategy was difficult to acquire for 2021, 
however the US Forest Service Budget Justification for fiscal 
year 2023 reports 642,867 acres of managed wildfire in 2021 (in 
other words, acres of accomplishments resulting from naturally 
occurring wildfires).3 This lack of transparency prevents some 
comparisons with previous years, but since the Southwest 
has a long history of managing wildfire for ecological and 
community benefit, it is likely that a significant portion of the 
acres occurred in the Southwest. It is also worth noting that 
in August, the chief of the US Forest Service sent direction 
that “managing fires for resource benefit is a strategy we will 
not use. In addition, until further notice, ignited prescribed 
fire operations will be considered only in geographic areas 
at or below PL 2.” This direction likely significantly reduced 
managed wildfire and prescribed fire in the autumn.
This overview focuses on the 12 largest fires by acreage in the 
region, which include ten Arizona fires: Telegraph, Rafael, 
Mescal, Backbone, Pinnacle, Bear, Tiger, Horton, Slate, and 
Walnut; and two New Mexico fires: Johnson and Doagy. The 
twelve large fires in this report represent 90 percent of the acres 
burned by wildfire in 2021 (Figure 2). 
1	  2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, 2016, 2015, 2014, and 2013 Wildfire Season: An 
Overview, Southwestern U.S. 
https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/877/rec/3
2	  Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management 
Policy, 2009 https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/uploads/2009-wfm-
guidance-for-implementation.pdf
3	  USDA Forest Service. 2022. Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Justification. 
https://www.fs.usda.gov/about-agency/budget-performance

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
2
Figure 2. Map indicating the location of the 12 large fires in 2021 analyzed in this report. 
Figure 1. Wildfire and prescribed fire acres burned in Arizona and New Mexico, 2002 to 2021.4 Wildfire burned 
648,220 acres in the Southwest (Arizona and New Mexico), which is a little lower than the average number of acres 
burned annually in these two states over the previous ten-year period (681,296 acres).
4	 National Interagency Coordination Center Wildland Fire Annual Reports 
www.predictiveservices.nifc.gov/intelligence/intelligence.htm
5	 Williams et al., 2022. Rapid intensification of the emerging southwestern 
North American megadrought in 2020–2021. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41558-022-01290-z
Regional Context
Snowpack in the Southwest was well below normal leading 
into the 2021 season because of the La Niña system. The weak 
winter precipitation resulted in below normal carry-over of fine 
fuels. This was compounded by drought conditions continuing 
into 2021. In fact, the period from 2000 to 2021 was the 
driest 22-year period since at least 800.5 More than 90 percent 
of the western US was in drought by July and the national 
preparedness level increased to five on July 14. 
Monsoon precipitation was at or above normal for most of the 
Southwest, which helped end the large fire season. Though the 
monsoon season started favorably with a wet late June through 
July, it came to a dry halt for many areas during August and 
September. Many areas reached or surpassed their climatological 
averages for rainfall during the summer. However, abnormally 
high temperatures meant no real relief from drought.
The Energy Release Component (ERC) is an index that 
estimates potential available energy released per unit area in 
the flaming front of a fire based on the fuel model and live and 
dead fuel moistures. The ERC is often used to track seasonal fire 
danger focused on fuel loading, woody fuel moistures, and larger 
fuel moistures. A graph of ERC from Arizona shows the 2021 
fire season (blue line) in comparison to the ten-year average (gray 
line) and ten-year maximums (red line) (Figure 3).6  Note ERCs 
in Arizona approached the historical maximum in April, May, 
and June. ERCs in New Mexico were closer to the average for 
this period, which may explain why fewer acres burned in New 
Mexico than in Arizona during 2021.
6	 http://gacc.nifc.gov/swcc//predictive/fuels_fire-danger/nfdrs_charts/Areawide.
htm

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
3
Data Sources
Management, Objectives, and Cost
The InciWeb website (inciweb.nwcg.gov) provides background 
information on most large fires such as location and start date. 
InciWeb is an interagency information management system 
designed to provide the public with a single source of incident-
related information. Because InciWeb only sporadically reports 
costs, Incident Status Summary (ICS-209) reports were 
collected to document suppression or management costs. These 
costs do not reflect any post-fire costs such as rehabilitation 
or soil stabilization. The cost data from each fire is collected 
in a final table at the end of the document. Incident Status 
Summaries also provide “strategic objectives,” which briefly 
describe the desired outcome for the incident, high-level 
objectives, and in some cases, strategic benefits. Strategic 
objectives often change during a fire, and a review of the most 
common or persistent strategic objectives for each fire provides 
insight into the overarching management goals. 
Perimeters
Boundaries for each fire were taken from the National 
Interagency Fire Center Open Data Site archive of fire 
perimeter maps (https://data-nifc.opendata.arcgis.com/). NIFC 
Open Data Site also provides historical perimeters of wildfires, 
which provided a historical context for 2021 fires. 
Vegetation 
Basic information about vegetation and topography of burned 
areas was available from LANDFIRE (www.landfire.gov). 
LANDFIRE provides nationally consistent, scientifically based 
maps of existing vegetation as well as Vegetation Condition 
Class (VCC). Vegetation Condition Class displays how existing 
Figure 3. Energy release component (ERC) index for 2021 in Arizona. Note ERCs approached the historical maximum in 
April, May, and June.
vegetation has departed from estimated natural or historical 
condition. In the Southwest, this departure is generally due 
to fire exclusion, past logging and grazing and results in 
greater density of trees and less healthy conditions. Vegetation 
Condition Class is a useful metric because it integrates 
information on existing vegetation, historical vegetation, 
and fire regimes into one variable and has been used to help 
determine where to focus restoration efforts. The most current 
VCC maps (2016) were used in this report.
Soil Burn Severity
Soil burn severity maps provide Burned Area Emergency 
Response (BAER) teams a tool to quantify soil impacts and 
assess potential for post-fire erosion (https://burnseverity.
cr.usgs.gov). In the immediate aftermath of fire on federal 
lands, BAER teams perform an emergency assessment of post-
fire soil conditions based on a combination of field observations 
and remote sensing change detection products derived from 
the differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR). The dNBR 
measures change in the ratio of near infrared reflected by 
healthy green vegetation to the shortwave infrared reflected 
by bare soil and rock. Most soil burn severity maps have four 
classes: high, moderate, low, and unburned; however, some 
maps combine the last two categories into a “low/unchanged” 
category. The distribution of soil burn severity is included in 
the individual fire discussions (where available) as well as in the 
final summary table.
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
(RAVG) maps estimate canopy mortality (https://burnseverity.
cr.usgs.gov/ravg/). The USDA Forest Service Remote 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
4
Sensing Applications Center provides RAVG analysis as a 
first approximation of areas that may require reforestation 
treatments because of canopy killed by high-severity fire. 
RAVG maps are created for wildfires that burn greater than 
1,000 acres of wooded Forest Service land or fires for which 
it is requested. The maps are produced by measuring the 
change between a satellite image before and immediately 
after a wildfire using an algorithm called relative differenced 
Normalized Burn Ratio (RdNBR), which is sensitive to 
vegetation mortality resulting from the wildfire event. The 
RdNBR is derived directly from the dNBR but is more 
sensitive to vegetation mortality than the dNBR. 
While soil burn severity maps and RAVG canopy mortality 
maps use similar satellite change detection methods, they 
measure fundamentally different forest attributes. In many 
areas, canopy mortality and soil burn severity patterns are 
similar. However, in some vegetation types, such as chaparral or 
grass, it is possible for a fire to cause complete canopy mortality 
with little effect on soils. 
Caveats
There are important caveats for all data used in this summary. 
First, the fire information presented here was taken from 
official sources between November 2021 and January 2022 and 
may not include updates or revisions. Second, the geospatial 
data used to generate the maps and tables are also based on 
the best available information, however these data contain 
errors and uncertainties. For example, the remote sensing data 
used in all these datasets can include errors introduced during 
collection, processing, and interpretation. As noted for specific 
fires in this report, soil burn severity and RAVG maps are not 
available for every wildfire.
Individual Fire Summaries
This section describes the impacts of the twelve wildfires over 
10,000 acres in Arizona (ten fires) and New Mexico (two 
fires) in 2021. This report covers when each fire burned, fire 
management costs, vegetation types, previous burn footprints, 
and burn severity, where available. The fires are ordered based 
on the total acres burned and represent 90 percent of the acres 
burned by wildfire in 2021.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
5
Telegraph Fire, Arizona
The Telegraph Fire was a human-caused wildfire that started 
in the Tonto National Forest near Superior, Arizona. The fire 
started on June 4, 2021 and burned more than 180,000 acres 
before it was fully contained on July 3, 2021. This was the 
largest fire in Arizona or New Mexico during the 2021 season 
and the sixth-largest wildfire in Arizona history. The area had 
experienced sustained and extreme drought conditions which 
resulted in very low fuel moistures. The low fuel moisture 
coupled with high heat and strong winds facilitated the rapid 
expansion of the Telegraph Fire. 
Fire managers applied a full suppression approach, according 
to the 209 reports, using a values-driven strategy, incorporating 
a mix of tactics (direct and indirect) when and where the 
probability of success was high, and the risk was acceptable 
in relationship to the values. The fire burned in steep, rugged 
terrain with flashy fuels, which often made direct attack 
challenging and/or not viable. The Telegraph Fire was 
eventually stopped from moving farther east when it came 
upon the area recently burned in the Mescal Fire (reviewed 
later in this report). The roughly 8,000 acres that burned after 
June 23 were interior burnouts near Government Ranch that 
had nowhere to go as they were surrounded by burned area. 
Monsoonal rains also helped extinguish the Telegraph Fire, but 
also created erosion issues that caused some roads to be washed 
out and/or experience post-fire debris flows. 
The Telegraph Fire quickly expanded northeast from its 
starting point and threatened 4,900 residences, leading to the 
evacuation of 4,230 civilians and shelter-in-place orders for an 
additional 4,181 citizens. The fire destroyed 13 homes and 28 
non-residential structures and damaged several others. Arizona 
State Highways 77 and 177 along with U.S. Highway 60 were 
closed during the fire in addition to several smaller roads. U.S. 
60 was used as a fire break for 11 miles on the northern fire 
boundary. Twenty-one injuries or illnesses to responders were 
reported during on the Telegraph Fire. Wildfire management 
costs associated with the Telegraph Fire were estimated at $40 
million, or about $220 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The primary vegetation types included piñon-juniper (44 
percent), scrub (23 percent), chaparral (15 percent), and 
conifer-oak (14 percent). Although LANDFIRE only classified 
one percent of the burned area as grass, the Incident Status 
Summary and several other resources indicated that Sonoran 
Desert grass, cacti, scattered short brush were present in many 
of these communities and these fully cured grasses helped carry 
the fire quickly across the large burn area. 
Most of the area affected by the Telegraph Fire had not burned 
in the past ten fire seasons, however, there were several fires that 
had burned portions of the Telegraph burn area. These included 
Figure 4. RAVG canopy mortality in the Telegraph Fire burn area.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
6
zero (30 percent) or 0-25 percent (21 percent) canopy 
mortality, yet 25 percent of the burn area showed more than 90 
percent mortality (Figure 4). Areas of high canopy mortality 
were scattered throughout the burn area with the highest 
density in the piñon-juniper and conifer-oak communities on 
the eastern half of the burn area. It is important to note in this 
and other fires that the RAVG analysis shows canopy mortality 
across all vegetation types, yet the impact of this mortality 
differs from vegetation type to vegetation type. For example, 
there were about 42,000 acres of semi-desert grassland within 
the perimeter of Telegraph; 13 percent burned with high 
severity; 29 percent burned with moderate severity, according to 
the RAVG data. High-severity fire is a necessary component of 
healthy grasslands and—if the patch size is right—shrublands, 
as well. Careful interpretation needs to be taken to not equate 
all canopy mortality with negative ecological effects. 
Soil Burn Severity analysis was not available for the Telegraph 
Fire, however, the Sonoran Desert and semi-desert ecosystem 
types in the Telegraph Fire footprint exhibited poor soil 
conditions before the fire.
the 2011 Frio (3,900 acres), 2012 257 (2,860 acres), 2017 Pinal 
(7,100 acres) and 2020 Habanero (3,200 acres) fires. 
Portions of three 2020 fires served as burn perimeters for the 
Telegraph Fire. These included the Elder, Teapot, and White 
Canyon fires. The largest shared fire perimeter was with the 
2021 Mescal Fire. These fires shared a 16-mile fire perimeter. 
If these fires had been combined into one large fire, they would 
have covered more than 253,000 acres, potentially making it 
the third largest fire in Arizona history.
Most of the area within the Telegraph Fire perimeter was 
classified as low (66 percent) or moderate (28 percent) 
departure from historical vegetation conditions according to 
the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. This 
metric does not capture all changes from historical conditions 
and land managers indicated that changes in patch size was 
one of the primary reasons the Telegraph Fire got so big once it 
moved up into the chaparral.
Fire Severity
The RAVG analysis indicated a range of canopy mortality 
across the Telegraph Fire. Over half of the burn area showed 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
7
conditions in the Johnson Fire burn area was split relatively 
evenly between low (38 percent), medium (26 percent), and 
high (33 percent) departure, according to LANDFIRE 
Vegetation Condition Class analysis. Only about 5,750 acres 
of the 94,730-acre Johnson Fire (6 percent) had not burned 
in the previous ten years. This overlap includes nearly 50,000 
acres of the 2012 Whitewater Fire and more than 41,000 acres 
of the 2011 Miller Fire. Other overlapping fires include the 
2012 Baldy (8,600 acres), 2016 McKenna (10,200 acres), and 
the 2017 Straw (8,300 acres) fires. The burn area of the 2020 
Cub Fire served as a 10-mile perimeter on the northern edge 
of the Johnson Fire while the 2020 Good Fire served as a 
7-mile break on the eastern edge. A review of the Cub Fire was 
provided in the 2020 Fire Season Overview.
Fire Severity 
Canopy mortality, as depicted in the RAVG analysis, varied 
across the fire but was primarily (87 percent) under 25 percent 
mortality (Figure 5). Nearly 46,000 acres (49 percent) of the 
burn area experienced zero percent mortality. Scattered pockets 
of near-complete canopy mortality were found throughout 
the burn area but only accounted for 1,100 acres (1 percent) 
of the fire. These high mortality areas were split evenly across 
the vegetation community types. The soil burn severity analysis 
showed a similar spatial distribution of severity levels (Figure 
6). Sixty-five percent of the Johnson Fire was identified as 
low severity. The one percent (780 acres) of the burn area 
that showed high soil burn severity was primarily in the 
northwestern portion of the burn area.
Johnson Fire, New Mexico
Lightning started the Johnson Fire on May 20 in the Gila 
National Forest near Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument 
north of the town of Silver City, New Mexico. The Johnson 
Fire burned for the next 63 days, eventually encompassing 
nearly 89,000 acres, making it the largest New Mexico wildfire 
of the 2021 season. 
The fire suppression strategy described in the 209 reports 
focused on a full suppression approach with confine/contain 
strategies used on the northern flank to let fire play its natural 
role and limit overall firefighter exposure in remote country. 
Operational challenges on the Johnson Fire included medical 
response time, wilderness intrusions, remote, rugged country, 
and aviation dependence. Fire managers were also considering 
smoke impacts to human communities, protecting the Gila 
Cliff Dwellings, Mexican spotted owl habitat, Threatened and 
Endangered aquatic species, and the mixed-conifer ecosystem. 
The Incident Status Summary indicated one responder lost 
time due to injuries/illnesses on the Johnson Fire and that 
no evacuations were issued, or structures lost. The cost for 
managing the Johnson Fire was estimated at $10.5 million, or 
about $111 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Johnson Fire burned through a mix of ponderosa pine (46 
percent), piñon-juniper (25 percent), conifer-oak (16 percent), 
and small areas of scrub, mixed conifer, chaparral, grass, and 
non-vegetated areas. Vegetation departure from historical 
Figure 5. Canopy mortality map for the Johnson Fire.
Figure 6. Soil burn severity in the Johnson Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
8
three responders lost time to injuries/illnesses on the fire. The 
cost for managing the Rafael Fire was estimated at $15 million, 
or $192 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Rafael Fire burned primarily through ponderosa pine 
(42 percent), piñon-juniper (26 percent), and conifer-oak (18 
percent) with several other vegetation types representing less 
than three percent of the area. Thirty-nine percent of the Rafael 
Fire was classified as high departure from historical vegetation 
conditions based on the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition 
Class analysis. Most of the area affected by the Rafael Fire had 
not burned in any of the previous ten fire seasons. The Rafael 
Fire did share a 3.5-mile perimeter with the 2019 Whiskey 
and Saber fires. These fires were adjacent to one another on the 
eastern flank of the Rafael Fire. 
Fire Severity
More than 16,000 acres (21 percent) of the Rafael Fire 
were classified as greater than 90 percent canopy mortality. 
The ecological impact of canopy mortality differs between 
vegetation communities. For instance, the impact of canopy 
mortality on a grassland is relatively limited compared to a 
ponderosa pine or mixed-conifer forest. The Rafael Fire burned 
through large areas of ponderosa pine but the canopy mortality 
in this vegetation type was less severe than it was in piñon-
juniper (31 percent in highest mortality class), conifer-oak 
(35 percent), and chapparal (32 percent). Despite this lower 
severity in ponderosa pine, there were still nearly 6,300 acres of 
ponderosa pine with greater than 90 percent canopy mortality.  
Rafael Fire, Arizona
The Rafael Fire was reported on June 18 in a remote area 
approximately 4 miles north of Perkinsville on the Prescott 
National Forest. Strong winds, dry fuels, and uphill topography 
led to an 9.5-mile expansion to the northeast (18,000 
additional acres) on June 20 and moved the fire into the 
Sycamore Canyon Wilderness Area and Kaibab National 
Forest. The fire continued to move east over the next couple 
days and crossed into the Coconino National Forest adding 
several thousand acres per day. The fire burned for 27 days and 
covered more than 78,000 acres. 
Fire managers used a full suppression approach on the Rafael 
Fire. This approach allowed for some point protection of 
infrastructure (buildings, transport routes, and power utility 
lines). Gusty winds, warm temperatures, low humidity, and 
rugged topography led to challenges controlling the Rafael Fire, 
however, burnout operations along planned holding lines were 
successfully implemented backing slowly through pine litter. 
Fire managers estimated a population of 70,025 may be 
affected by the Rafael Fire. Only 50 were evacuated but another 
4,907 structures were placed in the “Ready” to evacuate and 
6,075 in the “Set” to evacuate level of Arizona’s “Ready, Set, 
Go!” evacuation planning zones. The Rafael Fire did not 
destroy any permeant residences but did destroy two historic 
cabins and damaged several other cultural heritage sites in 
Sycamore Canyon, despite efforts by fire fighters to dig fire 
lines and apply protective wrap to the structures. In addition 
to destroying the Buck Ridge cabins, a several-centuries-
old Sinagua cliff dwelling, and a 1930s-era stone cabin were 
damaged by the fire. The Incident Status Summary indicated 
Figure 7. Canopy mortality in the Rafael Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
9
Vegetation and Past Fires
The area affected by the Mescal Fire was predominantly scrub 
(52 percent) and grass (19 percent) with lesser components of 
piñon-juniper (8 percent), chapparal (7 percent), non-vegetated 
(7 percent) and several other vegetation types that each 
represented less than three percent of the area. Other than six 
small fires (< 50 acres) from 2019, most of the area affected by 
the Mescal Fire had not burned in any of the previous ten fire 
seasons. The Mescal Fire shared a 16-mile fire perimeter with 
the 2021 Telegraph Fire (covered earlier in this report) as the 
result of a successful burnout operation on June 15. Combined, 
these fires covered more than 253,000 acres.
Seventy-five percent of the Mescal Fire had a low departure 
from historical vegetation conditions based on the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis (Figure 8). 
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Mescal Fire.
Mescal Fire, Arizona
The Mescal Fire began on June 1 as a human-caused wildfire 
twelve miles northeast of Hayden in Gila County, Arizona. 
The fire spread through the Mescal Mountains and into the 
Needles Eyes Wilderness located on BLM-administered lands, 
as well as BIA-administered lands, and lands within the San 
Carlos Apache Reservation. High temperatures, strong winds, 
dry fuel, and single digit relative humidity supported extreme 
fire behavior, leading to daily advances from four to six miles. 
The Mescal Fire reached 72,250 acres by the time it was 
considered contained on June 17.
The Mescal Fire was approached by fire managers with a 
full suppression, values-driven strategy that used a mix of 
tactics (direct, indirect, and point protection). Crews took 
direct suppression approaches where feasible and conducted 
firing operations when needed while continually scouting and 
preparing control lines for indirect suppression tactics. Point 
protection was provided for specific values at risk.
Evacuation orders were issued for 556 structures, but no 
structures were reported as damaged or destroyed. There were 
several area and road closures, including shutting down Arizona 
Highway 77. Six injuries were reported for responders during 
the fire. Management of the Mescal Fire was estimated at $15 
million, or $192 per acre. 
Figure 8. Vegetation departure from historical conditions based on the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis in the 
Mescal Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
10
Backbone Fire, Arizona
The nearly 41,000-acre Backbone Fire was ignited by lightning 
on June 17 eleven miles west of Pine, Arizona in the Fossil 
Creek Wilderness. Hot, dry, windy weather combined with 
drought and low moisture in vegetation led to rapid expansion 
of the fire north and then northeast and northwest from its 
starting point and caused the evacuation of 3,500 civilians 
in the communities of Strawberry and Pine, Arizona. Fire 
managers used a full suppression approach utilizing a values-
driven strategy, incorporating a mix of tactics (direct and 
indirect) when and where the probability of success was high, 
and the risk was acceptable in relationship to the values. Several 
firing operations were initiated to protect the communities 
of Strawberry and Pine. Fire managers also initiated a firing 
operation along Arizona Highway 87 to make this route 
available if evacuation became necessary for the community of 
Payson. This firing operation never merged with the wildfire, 
leading to the isolated portion of the burn area (Figure 9).
Arizona State Highways 260 and 87 were closed during the 
fire in addition to several smaller roads. The Coconino, Tonto, 
and Prescott national forests were all under a closure order 
that included the Fossil Creek Recreation Area, the Childs 
Dispersed Camping Area, and the Verde River. Four injuries or 
illnesses to responders were reported. No damaged structures 
were reported. The wildfire cost an estimated $13.2 million to 
manage, or $323 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Backbone Fire burned primarily in piñon-juniper (70 
percent), with lesser amounts of chaparral (7 percent), conifer-
oak (6 percent), scrub (6 percent), non-vegetated (6 percent), 
and ponderosa pine (3 percent). The Backbone burn area had 
one of the lowest departures from historical conditions (81 
percent low departure) of the fires reviewed in this report, 
according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class 
analysis. The primary block of the Backbone Fire had not 
burned in any of the previous ten fire seasons. The only area 
included in the Backbone Fire perimeter that had burned in 
the past ten fire seasons was the area burned during firing 
operations along Arizona Highway 87. This isolated area of 
Backbone Fire was burned in the 2011 Sand Rock Fire. The 
western boundary of the fire perimeter runs along the Verde 
River for approximately 12 miles.
Fire Severity
The Backbone Fire was relatively evenly split between the 
canopy mortality classes, according to the RAVG analysis 
(Figure 9). More than 14,000 acres (33 percent) of the 
Backbone Fire experienced no canopy mortality, while there 
were areas of canopy mortality greater than 90 percent in the 
central and eastern part of the burn area, totaling nearly 5,200 
acres (12 percent). The soil burn severity analysis indicated a 
lower severity level than the RAVG analysis (Figure 10). Sixty-
four percent of the burn area was documented as low (22,750 
acres) or unburned/undetected (4,100 acres) and only 790 acres 
(2 percent) indicated high soil burn severity.
Figure 9. Canopy mortality in the Backbone Fire.
Figure 10. Soil burn severity in the Backbone Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 11
Pinnacle Fire, Arizona
The Pinnacle Fire was a human-caused wildfire in the 
Coronado National Forest south of Bylas, Arizona. The fire 
started on June 10 and burned nearly 34,500 acres before it was 
fully contained on July 16. 
Fire managers chose a full suppression approach, using both 
direct and indirect strategies. Challenges included limited water 
access, remote and rugged terrain, extreme temperatures and 
low humidity, and coordination between multiple agencies. 
The high temperatures and low humidity made fuels at all 
elevations readily available to burn. Fuels were described as 
ranging from ponderosa pine and dry, mixed conifer with heavy 
dead and down fuels in the upper elevations, to decadent brush 
in the mid-elevations, and cured grass in the lower elevations.
Values at risk included Mexican spotted owl habitat, bald 
eagle nests, archaeological sites, wilderness characteristics and 
watershed integrity in the Santa Teresa and North Santa Teresa 
Wilderness areas, range improvements, and private lands, and 
infrastructure. 
Evacuation orders were issued for 14 residences, but no 
structures were reported as damaged or destroyed. Seven 
injuries were reported for responders during the fire. 
Management of the Pinnacle Fire was estimated at $15 million, 
or about $436 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Pinnacle Fire burned through chaparral (26 percent), 
scrub (20 percent), conifer-oak (20 percent), and piñon-
juniper (16 percent), along with several other vegetation types 
representing less than five percent of the area. Eighty percent 
of the vegetation within the Pinnacle Fire was classified as 
low departure from historical conditions, according to the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. Only a 
small portion of the area within the Pinnacle Fire perimeter 
had burned in the past ten fire seasons. The northeast perimeter 
of the Pinnacle Fire shared a 2.8-mile boundary with the 2020 
Jacks Fire. 
Fire Severity
Over 5,200 acres (15 percent) of the Pinnacle Fire displayed 
canopy mortality greater than 90 percent in the RAVG analysis. 
This highest level of canopy mortality was primarily in the 
conifer-oak and piñon-juniper communities spread through 
the center of the burn area (Figure 11). The areas of low or 
undetected canopy mortality were primarily on the northern 
and southern edges of the fire. The soil burn severity analysis 
did not indicate as much high severity area (7 percent) as 
RAVG but had most of the fire (61 percent) in the moderate 
severity category and only 538 acres in the lowest unburned or 
undetected categories (Figure 12). 
 
Figure 11. Canopy mortality in the Pinnacle Fire.
Figure 12. Soil burn severity in the Pinnacle Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
12
Bear Fire, Arizona
Lightning ignited the Bear Fire on June 16 about 10 miles 
south of Hannigan Meadow, Arizona. Given the location and 
values at risk, fire managers chose a monitor and point zone 
protection approach to the Bear Fire, which eventually reached 
24,000 acres before it was fully contained. The Bear Fire was 
described in the 209 reports as having periods of active fire 
behavior with uphill runs, single tree torching, and flanking.
Evacuations were issued for a handful of individuals near the 
fire while the community of Hannigan Meadow and ranches 
along Eagle Creek were placed on a pre-evacuation notice but 
did not need to evacuate. U.S. Highway 191 was closed along 
with other area and road closures in response to the Bear Fire. 
Management of the Bear Fire was estimated at $200,000, or 
about $8 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Bear Fire burned through an area of predominantly 
ponderosa pine (64 percent) with smaller components of conifer-
oak (22 percent) and piñon-juniper (11 percent). Thirty-six 
percent (8,500 acres) of the vegetation within the Bear Fire 
had high departure from historical conditions, according to the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis.
The Bear Fire perimeter included approximately 2,200 acres 
that had burned in the 2017 SH Creek Fire. The area that 
burned in 2017 and again in 2021 was likely of low severity, as 
the RAVG assessment shows zero percent canopy mortality 
through nearly all of this overlap area. The rest of the area 
affected by the Bear Fire had not burned in the previous ten 
fire seasons. In addition to the overlapping area, the Bear Fire 
shared a 2.4-mile boundary with U.S. Highway 191 and the 
2011 Wallow Fire along the northeast perimeter and a 2.5-mile 
perimeter with U.S. Highway 191 and the 2020 Bingham fire 
along the southeast perimeter.
Fire Severity
Canopy mortality, as depicted in the RAVG analysis, varied 
across the fire but tended to be lower than other fires covered 
in this report, with only one percent (333 acres) in the over 90 
percent mortality class (Figure 13). More than 15,500 acres (64 
percent) of the burn area experienced zero percent mortality. The 
scattered pockets of near-complete canopy mortality were most 
common on the valley slopes in the eastern part of the fire.
Figure 13. Canopy mortality in the Bear Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 13
Tiger Fire, Arizona
The Tiger Fire burned more than 16,000 acres after starting 
from a lightning strike on June 30 in the Prescott National 
Forest Castle Creek Wilderness southeast of Crown King. 
Fire managers chose a full suppression approach that utilized a 
variety of land and aircraft-based strategies to slow expansion 
out of the Castle Creek Wilderness toward Black Canyon 
City and Interstate 17. The overall strategy outlined in the 209 
report involved point protection around values at risk, including 
communities and major infrastructure, and making tactical 
decisions that take advantage of the suppression strategies 
of confine, contain, and control based on fuels, weather, 
topography, and seasonality. 
Operational challenges on the Tiger Fire included remote 
access and steep terrain, gusty and erratic outflow winds, 
and public interest in the fire along the I-17 corridor. 
Environmental concerns included tortoise habitat, threatened 
and endangered species habitat, grazing allotments, wilderness 
and inventoried roadless areas, and riparian avoidance areas. 
Several communities surrounding the Tiger Fire including 
Crown King, Cleator, and Black Canyon City placed in 
“Ready” or “Set” status of Arizona’s “Ready-Set-Go!” program. 
The Incident Status Summary indicated that no structures 
were lost to the Tiger Fire and that two responders lost time 
to injuries/illnesses while working the fire. Management of the 
Tiger Fire was estimated at $5.64 million, or $347 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Tiger Fire burned through an area of piñon-juniper (34 
percent), scrub (23 percent), conifer-oak (17 percent), chaparral 
(10 percent), and grass (8 percent). Ninety percent (14,700 
acres) of the vegetation within the Tiger Fire had low departure 
from historical conditions, according to the LANDFIRE 
Vegetation Condition Class analysis; this was the highest 
percentage of low departure of any of the fires covered in this 
report. The Tiger Fire perimeter contained nearly all 4,910 
acres of the Rattlesnake Fire (2015) and the 2014 Twin Peaks 
Fire. The Tiger Fire shared a 2.7-mile perimeter with the 2020 
Bumblebee Fire along the Tiger Fire’s eastern edge.
Fire Severity
The Tiger Fire had areas of high and low canopy mortality in 
the RAVG analysis (Figure 14). Nearly 2,000 acres (12 percent) 
of the area experienced over 90 percent canopy mortality. This 
high mortality class was most common in the conifer-oak 
communities on the western and northern sides of the fire. The 
Tiger Fire also featured 8,200 acres (51 percent) that had no 
recorded canopy mortality. Most of this was within the fire scar 
of the 2015 Rattlesnake Fire. 
Figure 14. Canopy mortality in the Tiger Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
14
Doagy Fire, New Mexico
The Doagy Fire was ignited by lightning on May 14 near 
Doagy Well in Doagy Canyon of the Gila National Forest. 
The fire burned nearly 13,000 acres before it was deemed 100 
percent contained. 
Fire managers chose a confine and point zone protection approach 
to the Doagy Fire, with a focus on protecting infrastructure and 
cultural features within fire area and minimizing smoke impacts 
to area communities and travel corridors as well as minimizing 
impacts on Mexican gray wolf sensitive areas. Fire managers noted 
an intention to maintain fire and its natural role on the landscape 
where it aligns with suppression objectives on federal lands. The 
fire management team was able to utilize an Unmanned Aerial 
System (UAS) to achieve these objectives while mitigating risk by 
reducing fire fighter interaction with hazardous environments. The 
UAS used on the Doagy Fire was able to provide real-time camera 
images, aerial ignition capabilities, and provide infrared data to 
find potential spot fires. 
This portion of the Black Range Ranger District served as an 
excellent example of how returning fire to the landscape either 
through prescribed fire or natural ignitions sets up managers 
for success in managing large, landscape fires. The project area 
surrounding the Doagy Fire was treated by prescribed fires in 
the years prior to the wildfire and greatly aided the wildfire 
control efforts. Reports also noted the effectiveness of fire 
adaptation efforts by the surrounding private landowners in the 
management of this fire. 
New Mexico State Highway 59 served as a 5.5-mile perimeter 
along the southern edge of the Doagy Fire. Two injuries or 
illnesses were reported to responders. No damaged structures 
were reported. Management of the Doagy Fire was estimated 
at $1.4 million, or $110 per acre. 
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Doagy Fire burned primarily in piñon-juniper (72 percent) 
with lesser components of grass (9 percent), scrub (8 percent), 
and ponderosa pine (8 percent). None of the area affected by 
the Doagy Fire had burned in a wildfire over the past ten fire 
seasons but the area around the Doagy Fire had been treated 
by prescribed fires in 2016 and 2019 (Figure 16). Seventy 
percent of the vegetation within the Doagy Fire perimeter had 
medium (6,100 acres) or high (2,900 acres) departure from 
historical conditions, according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation 
Condition Class analysis. 
Fire Severity
Seventy-seven percent of the Doagy Fire was identified as no 
canopy mortality (5,576 acers) or less than 25 percent (4,255 
acres) mortality in the RAVG analysis (Figure 15). Areas of 
high canopy mortality were scattered throughout the burn area 
and appear to be more influenced by slope and aspect than 
vegetation community type. Soil burn severity data were not 
available for this fire.  
Figure 15. Canopy mortality in the Doagy Fire.
Figure 16. Image available on the Inciweb website shows the date and location 
of prescribed burns surrounding the Doagy Fire. These prescribed burns aided 
in the management of this wildfire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 15
Horton Fire, Arizona
The Horton Fire was reported on June 16 and burned 12,300 
acres over the next 27 days. The fire was located approximately 
five miles north of Hannigan Meadow, Arizona and was one 
of several lightning fires burning within the 2011 Wallow Fire 
scar. Fire managers met high variation in ground and canopy 
fuels based on Wallow burn severity, with some areas having 
dense overstory and others a mix of brush and grass with 
patches of heavy down fuel. Dead fuel moistures were critically 
low, with heavy fuels contributing to fire spread. Fire managers 
chose a full suppression approach that used aviation resources 
to check fire growth in critical areas and implemented burnout 
activities as necessary. 
Fire managers were able to keep the fire from approaching or 
crossing U.S. Highway 191 and no structures were reported as 
damaged or destroyed. Three injuries or illnesses were reported 
on the fire. The Horton Fire cost $3.5 million to manage, or 
about $285 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Horton Fire burned primarily in conifer-oak (40 percent) 
and ponderosa pine (31 percent) with lesser components of 
scrub (11 percent), grass (9 percent), spruce-fir (5 percent) 
and mixed conifer (4 percent). Seventy-seven percent of the 
vegetation within the Horton Fire perimeter had medium 
(4,900 acres) or high (4,500 acres) departure from historical 
conditions, according to the LANDFIRE Vegetation 
Condition Class analysis. The Horton Fire lies entirely within 
the perimeter of the 538,000-acre Wallow Fire (2011). The 
only other fire in the area in the past ten fire seasons was the 
2016 Blake Fire, which shared a short fire perimeter with the 
Horton Fire.
Fire Severity
The Horton Fire experienced a mix of fire intensities, as 
measured by the RAVG canopy mortality analysis (Figure 17). 
Over 1,000 acres (8 percent) experienced canopy mortality 
greater than 90 percent. The high canopy mortality was found 
throughout the fire but most concentrated in certain areas. 
Most of this high canopy mortality was in the conifer-oak 
vegetation communities. Eighty-four percent of the ponderosa 
pine community was identified as having no canopy mortality 
(1,600 acers) or less than 25 percent (1,600 acres) mortality. 
Soil burn severity data were not available for this fire.  
Figure 17. Canopy mortality in the Horton Fire. Note that the entire area displayed in this figure was burned in the 2011 Wallow Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
16
Slate Fire, Arizona
The 11,500-acre Slate Fire started on June 8 near the summit 
of Slate Mountain in the Flagstaff Ranger District of the 
Coconino National Forest, approximately 23 miles northwest 
of Flagstaff. Fire managers chose a full suppression approach 
that utilized technical firing operations in rugged terrain along 
with aerial ignition, which allowed them to bring the fire to 
existing and natural holding features and reduced exposure 
to personnel. Fire managers initially reported mostly low-to-
moderate fire behavior but anticipated intensity to pick up as 
the persistent drought along with record-setting temperatures 
and very low fuel moistures created readily available fuels. 
They also noted increased fire activity as the fire moved out of 
the ponderosa pine fuel sources into the piñon-juniper, which 
burned a lot hotter and faster. 
There were no reports of structural damage or mandated 
evacuations, however, U.S. Highway 180 and other area and 
road closures were instituted in response to the Slate Fire. 
One injury or illness was reported on this fire. There was also a 
report of damage to an unmanned aerial system but no human 
injuries were reported along with it. Management of the Slate 
Fire was estimated at $3.5 million, or $306 per acre.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Slate Fire burned almost exclusively in piñon-juniper (63 
percent) and ponderosa pine (34 percent) plant communities. 
Eighty-seven percent of the vegetation within the Slate 
Fire perimeter had medium (7,400 acres) or high (2,500 
acres) departure from historical conditions, according to the 
LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis. The area 
affected by the Slate Fire had not burned in the previous ten 
fire seasons.
Fire Severity
The RAVG canopy mortality analysis of the Slate Fire showed 
concentrated areas of almost complete canopy mortality (2,900 
acres with greater than 90 percent mortality) and areas of no 
(4,100 acres) or limited (1,900 acres 0–25 percent mortality) 
canopy mortality without many acres in between (Figure 18). 
The distribution of canopy mortality classes across vegetation 
communities was comparable, indicating that canopy mortality 
in the Slate Fire was more likely influenced by slope, aspect, 
and local fire behavior than plant community type. Soil burn 
severity data were not available for this fire.  
Figure 18. Canopy mortality in the Slate Fire.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 17
Walnut Fire, Arizona
Lightning ignited the 10,700-acre Walnut Fire on June 20 in 
the Little Dragoon Mountains between Benson and Willcox in 
Cochise County, Arizona. Fire managers initially chose a mix 
of full suppression and point protection but switched to a full 
suppression approach as the fire moved down the mountain 
toward, and eventually crossing, Interstate 10. The extreme heat 
and wind hampered ground forces and fire mangers relied on 
aircraft to create opportunities to establish anchor points.
Fire managers issued several area closures, including stretches 
of Interstate 10, but no structures were reported as damaged or 
destroyed. Three injuries were reported for responders during 
the fire. Management of the Walnut Fire was estimated at $1.5 
million, or about $141 per acre.
Figure 19. Vegetation departure from historical conditions based on the LANDFIRE Vegetation Condition Class analysis in the Walnut Fire.
Vegetation and Past Fires
The Walnut Fire burned through an area of sparce vegetation 
and is the first fire covered in this report where non- or sparsely 
vegetated communities are the predominant community type 
(41 percent of the area classified as non-vegetated). Other 
vegetation communities included scrub (35 percent) and grass 
(21 percent). Fifty percent of the vegetation within the Walnut 
Fire had high (28 percent) or moderate (22 percent) departure 
from historical conditions, according to the LANDFIRE 
Vegetation Condition Class analysis (Figure 19). None of the 
area affected by the Walnut Fire had burned in the previous ten 
fire seasons. 
Fire Severity
No fire severity data were available for the Walnut Fire.  

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
18
 Figure 20. Summary of acres burned in the largest fires of the 2021 fire season by vegetation type.
Conclusion
This report covers the twelve largest wildfires in Arizona 
and New Mexico of the 2021 fire season. These 12 wildfires 
represented 90 percent of all acres in the Southwest burned by 
wildfire in 2021. The most widespread vegetation types affected 
by these fires were piñon-juniper, ponderosa pine, and scrub, 
with more than 100,000 acres of each type burned (Figure 
20). The fires reviewed in this report and those covered in the 
2020 Fire Season Report each covered approximately 600,000 
acres, but the distribution of acres across vegetation community 
types varied between year. Most notably is the nearly 90,000-
acre increase from 2020 to 2021 in piñon-juniper and large 
decreases in grassland (down 61,000 acres) and chaparral 
(down 53,000 acres). The largest fires in each of these fire 
seasons influence this distribution of plant communities, as 
more than 82,000 acres of the 2021 piñon-juniper acres burned 
were in the Telegraph Fire, whereas the largest fire of the 2020 
fire season (Bush Fire) burned in primarily scrub, grassland, 
non-vegetated, and chaparral communities. The large fires in 
2021 burned more than 21,000 more acres of ponderosa pine 
than the largest fires in 2020 and 60,000 more acres than the 
fires reviewed in the 2019 analysis. 
Full soil burn severity data were only available for three of the 
12 fires analzyed in this report, covering 164,000 acres (28 
percent of acres in report). Eighty-seven percent of the area 
covered by these three fires was classified as low or moderate 
soil burn severity (Figure 21). Only two percent of the acres for 
which soil burn severity data were available displayed high soil 
burn severity. Sixty percent of these high-severity acres were in 
the Pinnacle Fire. 

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 19
Rapid Assessment of Vegetation Condition after Wildfire 
(RAVG) data were available for ten of the twelve fires covered 
in this report (Figure 22). Of these 515,000 acres, 37 percent 
(191,000 acres) showed no detectable canopy mortality, while 
nearly 82,000 acres (16 percent) showed greater than 90 
percent mortality. The Telegraph and Rafael fires account for 
more than 77 percent of the highest canopy mortality areas. 
In the Telegraph Fire, this highest canopy mortality class was 
primarily in piñon-juniper, scrub, chaparral, and conifer-oak, 
whereas much of the high canopy mortality in the Rafael Fire 
was ponderosa pine. Canopy mortality in these ponderosa pine 
communities can be more ecologically significant than fires that 
mainly burn in vegetation such as grass, scrub, and chaparral. 
Only 16 percent of the area covered in this analysis was highly 
departed from historical conditions based on the LANDFIRE 
Vegetation Condition Class analysis (Figure 23). It is reasonable 
to assume that the high proportions of wildfire burning with 
low severity and the high portion of area that burned close to 
the historical condition are related. Most of the 91,000 high-
departure acres were in the Rafael (30,000 acres) and Johnson 
(29,000 acres) fires, with no other fire accounting for more than 
8,500 acres. These fires also had two of the three highest portions 
of their burn areas in the top canopy mortality category.
Several of the fires reviewed in this report led to evacuations 
and smoke-related impacts, but despite the large numbers 
of acres burned, human communities were only significantly 
affected by the Telegraph Fire in 2021. The Telegraph Fire 
burned more than 180,000 acres and led to the destruction 
of 13 homes and 28 non-residential structures in addition 
to damaging several others and prompting the evacuation 
of several thousand civilians. There certainly were localized 
impacts of the other eleven fires that should not be minimized, 
but no structures were reported lost in these other fires and 
there were relatively few reported evacuations for these fires. 
Past reports noted that the majority of the large fires in the 
Southwest are caused by lightning (naturally ignited), but we 
noted in the 2020 report that most of the fires during that fire 
season were listed as human caused or undetermined at the 
time of writing. The 2021 fire season returned to the historical 
trend, with most of the fires reported as lighting caused. 
The role of past fires was highly variable in the fires summarized 
in this report. Past fires played a role in many fires in this 
analysis, and in some cases, the edges of these past burn areas 
may have served as fire breaks with only limited overlap. There 
were also several fires in areas that had not burned in many years. 
Figure 21. Summary of acres burned by soil burn severity class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
20
Figure 22. Summary of acres burned by canopy mortality class.
Other fires, such as the Horton Fire, fell completely within a 
past fire perimeter. The Doagy Fire was bound by areas that 
were burned as part of a prescribed fire program as recently as 
the 2019 fire season. It should be noted that fire regimes vary 
significantly across vegetation types and time since fire may be 
less or more meaningful depending on type.
The twelve fires in this analysis were managed at an estimated 
cost of nearly $123 million dollars, for an average of $210 per 
acre. This average cost was similar to the costs reported in the 
2018, 2019, and 2020 fire season analyses, but roughly half of 
the cost in the 2017 report. As noted above, managers identify 
the most appropriate strategy for each wildfire to minimize 
threats and maximize positive outcomes. In 2021, managers 
classified their strategy as full suppression on nine of the 
twelve fires. While this is a high percentage of the fires, it is a 
marked decrease from the 2020 fires (all fires classified as full 
suppression) and more in line with our findings in past fire 
season overviews, which had approximately 50 percent of the 
acres approached with full suppression. The human or unknown 
ignitions of the 2020 fires likely factored into these approaches 
in addition to the variety of challenges that COVID-19 
presented, which may have been reduced as fire managers were 
in the second year of the pandemic. It should also be noted 
that while the overall strategy is often listed as full suppression, 
the implementation of specific wildland fire strategies includes 
a variety of factors that often leads to a variety of approaches. 
While there was a wide variety of vegetation types and burn 
severity across these fires, it is likely that a significant portion 
of the nearly 600,000 acres burned in 2021 provided some 
ecological benefit. 
     

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US 21
Figure 23. Summary of acres burned by vegetation condition class.

Ecological Restoration Institute
2022 WILDFIRE SEASON: AN OVERVIEW / SOUTHWESTERN US
22
Appendix I. Fire Statistics

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
