View this email in your browser
View from atop Leecher Mountain in northeastern Washington, looking southwest. In
the black-and-white photo (top, 1930, National Archives at Seattle), dry mixed-conifer
forests are apparent. Note how densely forested the same area has become (bottom
photo, 2011, John Marshall Photography). These forests burned with uncharacteristic
high severity in the 2014 Carlton Complex wildﬁres.
New Working Paper and Fact Sheet
 
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

Communicating Evidence for Widespread Changes in Western
North American Forest Landscapes
Many western North American forested landscapes are vulnerable to increases
in drought and wildﬁre, especially in a changing climate, due to profound
structural and compositional changes as a result of ﬁre exclusion. There is
strong agreement that the pace and scale of implementing scientiﬁcally credible
wildﬁre- and climate-adaptation strategies is insufﬁcient to address today’s
increasingly challenging wildﬁre seasons. However, confusion persists
regarding the need for proactive management. 
 
In partnership with Keala Hagmann, research ecologist and professor of
environmental and forest sciences at the University of Washington, the ERI
published a working paper and fact sheet to demonstrate the strength of
scientiﬁc evidence regarding changing forest conditions and ﬁre regimes and
provide science-based strategies for adapting western forests to climate
change and future wildﬁres.
Working Paper: 
Evidence for Widespread Changes
in the Structure, Composition, and
Fire Regimes of Western North
American Forest Landscapes
This working paper summarizes key
insights from the Climate change
and western wildﬁres series in the
scientiﬁc journal Ecological
Applications and reviews the impacts
of more than a century of
unprecedented, human-caused ﬁre
exclusion on the structure and
composition of ﬁre-dependent forest
landscapes.
Fact Sheet: 
Restoration and adaptation of ﬁre-

prone forest landscapes provide
ecological, cultural, and social
beneﬁts: Facts, Myths, and Fallacies
This fact sheet was developed as a
science communication tool to
address myths commonly used to
oppose proactive management that
facilitates climate- and wildﬁre-
adaptation of ﬁre-prone forests.
Using an established framework
designed to counter science denial,
the fact sheet features a series of
facts supported by strong scientiﬁc
evidence, their associated myths,
and the logical fallacies behind each
myth.
Upcoming Workshop
 
Cross-Boundary
Landscape Restoration
Workshop: “Adapting to a
Climate-Altered West”
May 2–4, 2023 / Ft. Collins, CO,
Colorado State University campus
 
SAVE THE DATE 
for the May 2023 workshop, where
partners will convene to share
successes and lessons learned on
cross-boundary, collaborative efforts
to restore and reimagine ﬁre-
adapted forest landscapes. More
info here.

What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2022 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
FIND OUT MORE
