Rocky Mountain Research Station
RMRS–RN–95
JUNE 2022
Southern Rockies Reforestation Tool
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Forest Service
Kyle Rodman, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona
Paula Fornwalt, Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Fort Collins, Colorado
Teresa Chapman, Chief Conservation Office, The Nature Conservancy, Arlington, Virginia
Jonathan Coop, School of Environment and Sustainability, Western Colorado University, Gunnison, 
Colorado
Gloria Edwards, Southern Rockies Fire Science Network, JFSP Fire Science Exchange Network, Fort 
Collins, Colorado
Jens Stevens, Wildland Fire and Fuels Research, USDA Forest Service, Washington DC
Thomas Veblen, Department of Geography, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado
Kyle Rodman developed the web tool and cowrote this guide. Paula Fornwalt provided input into 
web tool development and cowrote this guide. Teresa Chapman, Jonathan Coop, Gloria Edwards, Jens 
Stevens, and Thomas Veblen provided input into development of the web tool and this guide.
Authors
A Decision Support Tool to Inform Postfire Reforestation of 
Ponderosa Pine and Douglas-fir in the Southern Rocky Mountains

2
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
Rodman, Kyle; Fornwalt, Paula; Chapman, Teresa; Coop, Jonathan; Edwards, Gloria; Stevens, Jens; 
Veblen, Thomas. 2022. SRRT: A Decision Support Tool to Inform Postfire Reforestation of Ponderosa 
Pine and Douglas-fir in the Southern Rocky Mountains. Res. Note RMRS-RN-95. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 12 p. https://doi.
org/10.2737/RMRS-RN-95. 
Abstract: Recent increases in area burned, combined with poor natural regeneration in some 
areas, have promoted concerns about widespread forest losses throughout the western U.S.  
Postfire reforestation is one strategy commonly employed by land managers and land owners 
to facilitate forest recovery, but the area in need of planting only becomes larger each year. The 
Southern Rockies Reforestation Tool (SRRT) is a simple web-mapping tool that was developed 
to help prioritize sites for postfire reforestation. This tool can be used to develop maps of fire 
severity and seedling suitability for ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga 
menziesii), two abundant conifer species in the Southern Rocky Mountains. The seedling suitability 
map identifies areas that are (1) distant from live seed sources, but (2) have high topoclimatic 
suitability for the species of interest. In combination, these factors may help to locate sites where 
natural regeneration is unlikely to occur quickly, but relatively cool and wet conditions may 
enhance planting success. Finally, these maps can be restricted based on operational constraints 
such as slope angle or distance to road, and exported for use in external GIS software.
Keywords: climate adaptation, climate suitability, decision support tool, fire severity, post-fire 
reforestation, USFS Region 2, USFS Region 3, wildfire
Acknowledgements: This web tool and the study from which it was derived were funded by 
Joint Fire Science Program Graduate Research Innovation award 17-2-01-4. Funding for field data 
collection was provided by the Australian Research Council (award DP170101288), the National 
Science Foundation (awards 1232997 and 0966472, and the Graduate Research Fellowship 
Program), the John Marr Ecology Fund, the Colorado Mountain Club Foundation, the University 
of Colorado Boulder, the National Needs Fellowship Program at Northern Arizona University 
(supported by award 2011-38420-30989 from the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture), 
the Ecological Restoration Institute and its funding from the USDA Forest Service, and the Rocky 
Mountain Research Station National Fire Plan (award NFP-13-16-FWE-43). The authors would 
like to thank Mike Battaglia, Laura Marshall, Sharon Parkes, and Catherine Schloegel for helpful 
reviews.
Cover photo: 2016 photo of an area near Wetmore, CO affected by the 2005 Mason Gulch Fire. 
Photo courtesy of Kyle Rodman, Northern Arizona University. 
Contents
Inspiration for This Decision Support Tool............................................3
How SRRT Works....................................................................................4
How to Use the Tool...............................................................................5
Conclusion............................................................................................10
References............................................................................................11

3
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
Inspiration for This Decision Support Tool
High-severity wildfire activity in ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga 
menziesii) forests of the Southern Rocky Mountains has increased since the 1980s, and future 
projections suggest additional increases in area burned over upcoming decades (Coop et al. 2022; 
Kitzberger et al. 2017; Parks and Abatzoglou 2020; Singleton et al. 2019). In the interior of large, 
treeless, high-severity wildfire patches, where seed sources are distant, natural tree regeneration is 
often insufficient to reestablish forests on management-relevant timescales (Chambers et al. 2016; 
Rodman et al. 2020a,b; Rother and Veblen 2016). Wildfire-driven forest loss can threaten important 
ecosystem services such as carbon storage, wildlife habitat, recreational and employment 
opportunities, and water supply, making it an important management issue (Coop et al. 2020).
Tree planting is a common postfire management activity that may help to offset forest loss due to 
high-severity wildfire (Stevens et al. 2021). However, the backlog of areas in the Southern Rocky 
Mountains that require planting is formidable, and only gets larger each year (Cook-Patton et al. 2020; 
Fargione et al. 2021; Kolb et al. 2019). Figure 1 provides a rough illustration of this point. According 
to the USDA Forest Service Activity Tracking System (FACTS) database, annual postfire reforestation 
rates in burned forests have been relatively constant over the last 37 years, with approximately 
24,000 hectares (60,000 acres) planted in total on National Forest System lands in the Southern Rocky 
Mountains. In comparison, about 390,000 hectares (960,000 acres) burned at high severity on national 
forest lands during this same time period. While some of this high-severity area may naturally 
reforest (for example, because ponderosa pine or Douglas-fir seed sources are in close proximity), for 
much of it, forest reestablishment will likely require tree planting. Because tree planting requires a 
considerable investment of time and money—seeds must be collected and grown into 1- or 2-year-old 
seedlings, planting sites must be identified and prepared, and finally, seedlings must be planted—
efficiently tackling the backlog will require a detailed understanding of how to best allocate resources 
(Fargione et al. 2021; Kolb et al. 2019).
Figure 1—Trends in high-severity burned area and reforestation area on lands in the National Forest System in the southern 
Rocky Mountains, USA (Colorado, New Mexico, and Wyoming), 1985–2020. High-severity burned area is within fire perimeters in 
the region larger than 1,000 acres (405 hectares), and defined as 30-meter Landsat pixels with relative differenced Normalized 
Burn Ratio values >544 (Chapman et al. 2020) using the composite image methodology of Parks et al. (2018). Postfire reforestation 
(artificial regeneration) area was calculated from reforestation projects listed in the Forest Service’s FACTS database for this region 
within known fire perimeters, including tree planting and seeding. Reforestation area was limited to national forest lands, so high-
severity area was also restricted to these lands for a proper comparison. Figure from Stevens et al. (2021).

4
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
Climate and topography are two key constraints on natural postfire regeneration of ponderosa pine 
and Douglas-fir in the Southern Rocky Mountains, so these factors are also likely to influence the 
survival of planted seedlings and the success of postfire planting projects. A simple tool that uses 
best available science to identify topoclimatically suitable sites could help managers optimize the 
success of planting efforts. To that end, we have developed the Southern Rockies Reforestation Tool 
(SRRT), which can be accessed at https://treesarethebeesknees.users.earthengine.app/view/srme-
reforestation-tool. This document describes how SRRT works and how to use it. We hope that this 
tool will help managers plan for large-scale, climate-suitable reforestation of ponderosa pine and 
Douglas-fir.
How SRRT Works
The Southern Rockies Reforestation Tool uses fire severity, tree establishment, and gridded climatic 
and topographic data to classify locations from most to least favorable for post-fire reforestation.  
By using climate and terrain as proxies for soil moisture, this broad-scale planning tool may 
increase seedling survival post-planting by identifying locations with lower drought stress. SRRT 
was developed using Google Earth Engine, a cloud-based computing platform that is designed to 
efficiently perform calculations using spatial datasets across large areas. The tool requires only a 
small number of simple user-specified inputs, such as the area of interest, the species to be planted, 
and the year the area was burned. In the background, the tool obtains and processes prefire and 
postfire satellite images for the area of interest, and uses these images to identify severely burned 
areas more than 200 feet (60 meters) from seed trees. Based on statistical models developed 
in Rodman et al. (2020a), a synthesis of natural postfire regeneration in more than 1,300 plots 
throughout the Southern Rocky Mountains, climate and topography data are used to predict the 
locations that are most suitable for planted ponderosa pine or Douglas-fir seedlings following fire. 
As the user, you have the option to restrict the fire severity and seedling suitability layers to places 
adjacent to roads and flatter slopes, where postfire planting may be most cost-effective and feasible. 
After fire severity and seedling suitability layers have been developed, you can explore them using 
the Map Window by zooming and panning. There are also options to download the layers for use 
in geographic information systems (GIS) software such as ArcGIS and QGIS. Currently, all suitability 
maps are restricted to historical species ranges, but maps that include upslope areas (to help in 
planning assisted migration activities) will be developed in the future.

5
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
How to Use the Tool
When you are using SRRT, we suggest that you use Google Chrome as an internet browser. This 
allows for full functionality. When the tool is first opened, you will see a screen that looks similar to 
figure 2. The left side of the screen shows the Map Window, which has several options embedded 
in it that allow you to adjust the visibility of individual layers, alter basemap types, and zoom in or 
out. The right side of the screen shows the Tool Window, which has six simple steps that you must 
complete to create layers of fire severity and seedling suitability.
Figure 2—An overview of the web application user interface with names and purposes of different things on the screen. When 
the user follows the URL for the first time, the window will look like this.
Figure 3—An example of selecting the fire year for an area 
that burned in 2002, in Step 1 in the Tool Window.
In Step 1, select the year of fire occurrence using the slider (fig. 3). Using Landsat imagery from 
the growing seasons before and after the fire year, a fire severity layer is calculated based on the 
relative differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (RdNBR; Miller and Thode 2007). This method is an 
improvement upon traditional fire severity mapping efforts – by using multiple Landsat scenes from 
years immediately before and after the fire, clouds, shadows, and irregularities in individual scenes 
can be easily corrected (Parks et al. 2018). 

6
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
The seedling suitability layers will be visible only in areas with RdNBR values exceeding 582, a value 
we developed by comparing Google Earth Engine-based fire severity maps with the data layers of 
Chapman et al. (2020) in a Classification and Regression Tree (CART) model. It is important to note 
that this RdNBR threshold assumes that the prefire condition was unburned. Therefore, this tool 
may not be appropriate to use in reburned areas, particularly if the initial fire burned with high 
severity. Seedling suitability maps will also be restricted to locations more than 200 feet (60 meters) 
from low-severity burned and unburned areas, a distance threshold beyond which early natural 
regeneration of these species is less likely (Chambers et al. 2016), and where planting may be more 
valuable.
In Step 2, select a target planting species from the drop-down list (fig. 4). Currently, ponderosa 
pine and Douglas-fir are the only species supported, but additional species may be added as field 
data become available to support map development. 
In Step 3, select a climate period to be used in developing maps of suitability for the target 
species. Suitability under the current climate is based on climate averages from 1981–2010, while 
the two projected future options are based on moderate or extreme carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions 
scenarios for the 2031–2060 period, corresponding to moderate or extreme increases in air 
temperature. These future emissions scenarios allow you to explore whether a given planting site 
is likely to remain suitable for the target species under changing climate conditions in upcoming 
decades. Topography is held constant in projections of suitability across the three different climate 
scenarios.
Figure 4—An example of selecting a target species and 
climate period when developing maps of species habitat 
suitability in Steps 2 and 3 in the Tool Window. Here, 
ponderosa pine is selected, and the habitat map will be 
based on average climate conditions from 1981–2010, 
rather than projected future climate conditions.

7
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
In Step 4, you may adjust sliders to limit potential planting sites based on the slope angle and 
distance to established roads (fig. 5). If you want to create maps for the entire area of interest, 
you can leave “Mask Sites?” unchecked and ignore the sliders. If you check the “Mask Sites?” box, 
the slope angle is calculated for all locations within the area of interest, and areas steeper than the 
selected slope are excluded. Similarly, the distance to roads is calculated using all road locations in 
the U.S. Census Bureau’s TIGER database, and areas farther than the selected distance are excluded. 
Note that many smaller roads on public land (e.g., USDA Forest Service secondary roads) are not in 
this database.
In Step 5, identify the area of interest and run the tool (figs. 6–8). The area of interest can be 
identified by clicking on either the “Rectangle” or “Polygon” buttons (fig. 6) and delineating an area 
in the Map Window that surrounds the entire fire perimeter (fig. 7). The entirety of a fire perimeter 
must be selected for accurate fire severity estimates. Changing the basemap in the Map Window to 
the “Satellite” option can be helpful for this as the burn area is likely to contrast with the surrounding 
area. Once the shape has been drawn, the tool will initialize and run within the selected area. This can 
take a couple of minutes in a large selection area. If the gray progress bars do not appear as in figure 8 
(i.e., the “Layers” box is a single white rectangle without any gray progress bars), then the tool has 
failed to run. Make sure that all settings in Steps 1–3 have been selected in the tool window (the tool 
will fail to run if they have not been), and redraw the shape over the area of interest in Step 5.
Figure 5—An example of selecting filters to limit potential 
planting sites to be considered when developing maps of 
species habitat suitability in Step 4 in the Tool Window. In 
this example, the user has checked the box next to “Mask 
Sites?”, set the maximum road distance slider to 1500 
feet and the maximum slope angle slider to 20 degrees, 
meaning that the map will remove any places farther 
than 1500 feet from a road and with a slope steeper than 
20 degrees.
Figure 6—Choose the “Rectangle” or ”Polygon” button to 
trace the fire perimeter.

8
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
After the tool has finished running, the created layers will appear in the Map Window. These maps 
should look similar to those in figure 9. After the layers have been loaded into the Map Window, you 
can zoom in and out using the Zoom Tool (+/- buttons) in the Map Window, alter layer visibility and 
transparency in the Layers Settings box (fig. 10), alter the basemap by clicking “Map” or “Satellite”, 
and pan to different locations in the map using the cursor. Note that the layers recalculate each time 
the map is panned or zoomed, which can occasionally lead to lags, particularly with slower internet 
connections. High/low suitability is relative to all locations within a species’ existing range under 
1981–2010 climate conditions, assuming that these are indicative of a species’ climatic tolerance. The 
values of habitat suitability are simplified into categories of 1–5 by splitting climate suitability values 
for each species into five, equal-width (i.e., 20%) bins. Thus, low suitability (i.e., 1) sites are within a 
species’ historical range but are comparable to the warmest, driest sites that a species could tolerate, 
while high suitability (i.e., 5) sites are relatively cool and wet in comparison to the species’ historical 
distribution. When re-running the tool, it can sometimes be useful to remove the past layers from 
the Map Window. This can be achieved by hovering the cursor over the “Layers” area (shown in 
figure 10), and unchecking specific layers, thereby making them invisible.
Figure 9—After the tool has finished 
running, layers that look similar to 
these will appear within the selected 
area. The grayscale map shows fire 
severity within the selected area, where 
dark areas represent unburned or low-
severity burned areas, and lighter areas 
represent stand-replacing fire.
Figure 7—An example of selecting a burned 
area in the Map Window using the “Rectangle” 
option in Step 5.
Figure 8—After the user creates a shape that overlies the fire 
perimeter, the tool is run within the selected area. The gray bars next 
to “Layers” show the progress of the tool; they will move to the right as 
the tool nears completion.

Figure 11—To download these files for use in external GIS 
software, the tool must first have been run and layers must 
be visible in the Map Window. After this is completed, the 
user can click on buttons in Step 6 that correspond to the 
layer which the user wishes to download.
Figure 12—After one of the boxes is clicked (fig. 11), blue text 
will appear below these boxes; this text provides a download 
link.
Figure 13—After the download link is clicked, a new browser tab will appear. This means that the data export has 
initialized, and it can take a couple of minutes to download (depending on the size of the selected area).
9
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
If you would like to download the data for use outside of the web application, you can do so 
using the options in Step 6 in the Tool Window (fig. 11). This can allow for quicker rendering and 
visualization of the maps, and close-in viewing of particular areas of interest. In addition, you may 
want to compare these maps with the locations of known planting areas, local road maps, or other 
ancillary data to identify places that have high suitability, have yet to be planted, and are easily 
accessible from a known road or trail. 
To download the layers, you must first run the tool and have the data layers visible in the Map 
Window. After doing this, click either the “Get Climate Suitability Map” or “Get Fire Severity 
Map” button, depending on the layer of interest (fig. 11). After you click the button, blue text 
with a download link (“Click This Link to Download”; fig. 12) should appear below the download 
buttons. Once you click this link, a new tab will appear in the browser, indicating the download 
has initialized (fig. 13). It can take a couple of minutes for Google Earth Engine to perform the 
calculations and organize the data for export. 
Figure 10—After the layers are visible in the Map Window, the user can click on the Layers Settings 
tool to toggle layer visibility on and off (checkboxes) and adjust the transparency (sliders).

Figure 14—After the layers calculated by the web application are downloaded, these layers can be opened using standard GIS 
software (e.g., ArcGIS, QGIS) for additional use in project planning and comparisons with local road maps and prior planting 
locations.
10
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
Conclusion
Postfire activities, including reforestation, are an important component of forest management in 
Southern Rocky Mountains ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir forests and will become increasingly 
important in upcoming years. Simple decision support tools that use best available science, such as 
SRRT, will be key to ensuring that these activities are conducted in a manner that optimizes success. 
We encourage users to reach out to us with any questions or any input about how this tool can be 
improved or incorporated into local management plans. 
Once the download has completed, an output “.zip” file will appear in your default download 
folder. This can be extracted to any location on the computer (it will be a GeoTiff file in EPSG:4326, 
also called WGS84/Lat-Long). The extracted raster layer can then be opened in any standard GIS 
software (fig. 14).

11
USDA Forest Service Research Note RMRS–RN–95. June 2022
Chambers, M.E.; Fornwalt, P.J.; Malone, S.L.; Battaglia, M.A. 2016. Patterns of conifer regeneration 
following high severity wildfire in ponderosa pine-dominated forests of the Colorado Front Range. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 378: 57–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2016.07.001
Chapman, T.B.; Schoennagel, T.; Veblen, T.T.; Rodman, K.C. 2020. Still standing: Recent patterns of 
post-fire conifer refugia in ponderosa pine-dominated forests of the Colorado Front Range. PLoS 
ONE. 15: e0226926. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226926
Cook-Patton, S.C.; Gopalakrishna, T.; Daigneault, A.; [et al.]. 2020. Lower cost and more feasible 
options to restore forest cover in the contiguous United States for climate mitigation. One Earth. 3: 
739–752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.11.013
Coop, J.D.; Parks, S.A.; Stevens-Rumann, C.S.; [et al.]. 2020. Wildfire-driven forest conversion in 
western North American landscapes. BioScience. 70: 659–673. https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biaa061
Coop, J.D.; Parks S.A.; Stevens-Rumann C.S.; [et al.]. 2022. Extreme fire spread events and area 
burned under recent and future climate in the western USA. Global Ecology and Biogeography. 00: 
1–11. https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.13496
Fargione, J.; Haase, D.L.; Burney, O.T.; [et al.]. 2021. Challenges to the reforestation pipeline in the 
United States. Frontiers in Forests and Global Change. 4: 1–18. https://doi.org/10.3389/ffgc.2021.629198 
Kitzberger, T.; Falk, D.A.; Westerling, A.L.; Swetnam, T.W. 2017. Direct and indirect climate controls 
predict heterogeneous early-mid 21st century wildfire burned area across western and boreal 
North America. PLoS ONE. 12: 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0188486  
Kolb, T.; Dixit, A.; Burney, O. 2019. Challenges and opportunities for maintaining ponderosa pine 
forests in the southwestern United States. Tree Planter’s Notes. 62: 104–112. Online: https://rngr.net/
publications/tpn/62-1-2/challenges-and-opportunities-for-maintaining-ponderosa-pine-forests-in-
the-southwestern-united-states.
Miller, J.D.; Thode, A.E. 2007. Quantifying burn severity in a heterogeneous landscape with a 
relative version of the delta Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR). Remote Sensing of Environment. 109: 
66–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2006.12.006
Parks, S.A.; Abatzoglou, J.T. 2020. Warmer and drier fire seasons contribute to increases in area 
burned at high severity in western US forests from 1985 to 2017. Geophysical Research Letters. 47: 
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL089858 
Parks, S.A.; Holsinger, L.M.; Voss, M.A.; [et al.]. 2018. Mean composite fire severity metrics computed 
with Google Earth Engine offer improved accuracy and expanded mapping potential. Remote 
Sensing. 10: 1–15. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10060879 
Rodman, K.C.; Veblen, T.T.; Battaglia, M.A.; [et al.]. 2020a. A changing climate is snuffing out post-
fire recovery in montane forests. Global Ecology and Biogeography. 29: 2039–2051. https://doi.
org/10.1111/geb.13174
References

USDA Forest Service RMRS–RN–95
12
Rodman, K.C.; Veblen, T.T.; Chapman, T.B.; [et al.]. 2020b. Limitations to recovery following wildfire 
in dry forests of southern Colorado and northern New Mexico, USA. Ecological Applications. 30: 
e02001. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2001 
Rother, M.T.; Veblen, T.T. 2016. Limited conifer regeneration following wildfires in dry ponderosa 
pine forests of the Colorado Front Range. Ecosphere. 7: e01594. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.1594  
Singleton, M.P.; Thode, A.E.; Sanchez Meador, A.J.; Iniguez, J.M. 2019. Increasing trends in high-
severity fire in the southwestern USA from 1984-2015. Forest Ecology and Management. 433: 709–
719. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2018.11.039
Stevens, J.T.; Haffey, C.M.; Coop, J.D.; [et al.]. 2021. Tamm Review: Postfire landscape management 
in frequent-fire conifer forests of the southwestern United States. Forest Ecology and Management. 
502: 119678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2021.119678 
References (continued)
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.
2021 photo of an area near Woodland Park, CO, 
that was burned by the Hayman Fire in 2002 and 
planted a few years later. USDA Forest Service 
photo by Paula Fornwalt. 
