View this email in your browser
 
New Southern Rockies Reforestation Tool aids managers in post-
ﬁre planting efforts
ERI researcher Kyle Rodman worked with USDA Forest Service Rocky
Mountain Research Station scientists to help develop the Southern Rockies
Reforestation Tool (SRRT), which identiﬁes suitable sites to plant ponderosa
pine and Douglas-ﬁr seedlings after wildﬁre in the Southern Rocky Mountains
(southern Wyoming, Colorado, and northern New Mexico).
 
The Southern Rockies Reforestation Tool (SRRT) is a simple web-mapping tool
developed to help prioritize sites for postﬁre reforestation. This tool can be used
to develop maps of ﬁre severity and seedling suitability for two abundant conifer
species in the Southern Rocky Mountains, ponderosa pine and Douglas-ﬁr. The
seedling suitability map identiﬁes areas that are 1) distant from live seed
sources, but 2) have high suitability for the species of interest based on climate
NORTHERN
NAUARIZONA
UNIVERSITY
EcologicalRestorationInstitute
Science
Volume5
Flash
Issue
Actionablescience,meetingtheneedsoflandmanagers
SouthernRockiesReforestationTool
SRRT
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

conditions and topography. In combination, these factors may help locate sites
where natural regeneration is unlikely to occur quickly, but relatively cool and
wet conditions may enhance planting success. Finally, these maps can be
restricted based on operational constraints such as slope angle or distance to
road, and exported for use in external GIS software.
 
SRRT User Guide
 
Download the SRRT user guide
at: https://www.fs.usda.gov/rm/pubs_series/rmrs/r
n/rmrs_rn095.pdf
 
Demo Videos
Learn more from the SRRT scientists on how SRRT works, the motivation for
its development, and the different kinds of planning efforts it might beneﬁt:
How the Tool Works
FIND OUT MORE

https://vimeo.com/734083044
 
Example of running SRRT in 1996 Buffalo Creek Fire
https://vimeo.com/734083414
 
FAQs

https://vimeo.com/734083929
 
What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2022 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.

Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
