The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of 
communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic 
issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Patterns and Drivers of Recent Land Cover Change on  
Two Trailing-Edge Forest Landscapes 
 
By Kyle Rodman, Research Scientist 
Background 
Trees are sensitive to the effects of a warming climate, particularly in dry regions such as the 
southwestern United States. In fact, over the past few decades, climate change has driven increases 
in wildfire, bark beetle outbreaks, and drought-caused tree mortality throughout the Southwest. 
These impacts influence a wide range of forest ecosystems and the services they provide to humans 
and other species. Analyses of the patterns and drivers of recent changes in trailing-edge forests — 
those at the warm, dry edge of where forests currently exist — can help us to better understand the 
effects of a warming climate and guide forest 
management activities aimed at resisting, 
accepting, or directing ecosystem transitions. 
 
On two, large (> 250,000 ac) landscapes within the 
Prescott and Tonto national forests of central 
Arizona, we used data from field plots, aerial 
photo interpretation, and satellite image time series 
to map changes in forest communities from 1985 
to 2020 (Figure 1). These landscapes were selected 
because they are critical hotspots of plant 
biodiversity at risk of rapid change and also 
coincide with the warm, dry edge of the distribution 
of ponderosa pine, a widely important tree species 
in the Southwest. 
 
Key Findings 
• Overall forest cover declined marginally by 0.8% on the Prescott landscape and 0.3% on the 
Tonto landscape between 1985 and 2020, a much lower amount of decline than expected in these 
dry areas. 
• Transitions among forest types were common, with mixed-conifer and ponderosa pine forests 
shifting toward pine-oak communities. 
• Pinyon-juniper cover expanded from 1985 to the early 2000s, followed by recent declines that 
occurred in a period of drought and widespread bark beetle outbreaks. 
• Wildfire and drought were major drivers of forest loss and transitions among forest types in the 
study area since the 1980s.  
 
October 2022 
Locations of the two study landscapes, 
aerial photo points, and field plots used with satellite 
imagery to map land cover types from 1985 to 2020. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions 
Though the Prescott and Tonto national forests are dry relative to many forests in the western United 
States, total forest cover has remained relatively stable on these large landscapes since the 1980s, 
despite warming conditions during that time. However, changes among forest types are occurring 
across large portions of each landscape (Figure 2). Shifts in forest composition, particularly an 
increase in oak (Quercus spp.) species, likely reflect the adaptations these species have to drought and 
increased wildfire activity. With further increases in drought and wildfire likely to occur over 
upcoming decades, trailing-edge forests such as those in the Prescott and Tonto landscapes will 
experience rapid changes, with shifts in species dominance since the early 2000s serving as an initial 
warning sign. Anticipating such changes will be an important goal for effective forest management 
throughout the Southwest. 
 
Further Reading 
Fleischner, T., D. Hanna, and L. Floyd-Hanna. 2017. A Preliminary Description of the Mogollon 
Highlands Ecoregion. The Plant Press, 3–6. 
Huffman, D.W., M.L. Floyd, D.P. Hanna, J.E. Crouse, P.Z. Fulé, A.J. Sánchez Meador, and J.D. 
Springer. 2020. Fire regimes and structural changes in oak-pine forests of the Mogollon 
Highlands ecoregion: Implications for ecological restoration. Forest Ecology and Management, 
465:118087.  
Parks, S.A., S.Z. Dobrowski, J.D. Shaw, and C. Miller. 2019. Living on the Edge: Trailing Edge Forests 
at Risk of Fire-Facilitated Conversion to Non-Forest. Ecosphere, 10:e02651.  
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Rodman, K.C., J.E. Crouse, J.J. Donager, D.W. Huffman, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2022. Patterns and 
drivers of recent land cover change on two trailing-edge forest landscapes. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 521:120449.  
Contact: Kyle Rodman, Kyle.Rodman@nau.edu  
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2. Land cover types included in this study, which we tracked annually from 1985 to 2020 in two study 
landscapes on the Prescott and Tonto national forests. 
