View this email in your browser
Science for Managers Webinar 
The Right Seedling for Reforestation: Success, Partners, and Policy 
Forest regeneration in a changing climate, Part 2
Co-hosted by Rocky Mountain Research Station and Southwest Ecological
Restoration Institutes
November 9, 2022 | 11am–12:30pm MST 
Join us for an upcoming land-manager-focused series of LIGHTNING
TALKS during this webinar dedicated to forest regeneration, climate change,
Subscribe
Past Issues
Translate

and Indigenous knowledge exchange in the West. Short science presentations
will highlight how climate impacts different genotypes and planting methods for
regeneration following ﬁre and forest treatments plus considerations and tools
for reforestation. Discussion and Q&A during this session will facilitate
information exchange between scientists and managers. 
 
Climate Impacts on Regeneration 
Hear from three subject-matter experts on seedling success across elevational
ranges and with varying genotypes: 
Justin Crotteau, Research Forester, Rocky Mountain Research Station 
Aalap Dixit, Assistant Professor, NM Highlands University 
Bryce Richardson, Research Geneticist, Rocky Mountain Research
Station 
Indigenous Knowledge Exchange and Work on the Ground 
Hear from two case study experts on using Indigenous knowledge for cultural
values on pre- and post-burned landscapes: 
James Calabaza, Indigenous Lands Program Director, Trees Water
People
Nona (Nanebah) Lyndon, Tribal Relations Staff Ofﬁcer, Tonto and
Kaibab National Forests and Sara Souther, Assoc. Professor, Northern
Arizona University 
Policy in the Works 
An update on the REPLANT Act and its implications for land managers. 
Kas Dumroese, National Nursery Specialist & Research Plant
Physiologist, Rocky Mountain Research Station 
*SAF credits available / RSVP here for calendar invite and follow-up
information.
 
Connection information: https://usfs.zoomgov.com/j/16104530612
Meeting ID: 161 0453 0612 | Password: USFS1905! 
Co-hosted by...

What are your thoughts? Please share them with us...
Twitter
Facebook
Email
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
 ERI research is funded by a variety of sources including the USDA Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Interior, the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF), as well
as competitive grants and private funding.
Copyright © 2022 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
Our mailing address is:
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.
