Journal of Ecology. 2022;00:1–21.	
﻿
 | 1
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jec
Received: 17 March 2022 | Accepted: 20 September 2022
DOI: 10.1111/1365-2745.13999  
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
Rocky Mountain forests are poised to recover following bark 
beetle outbreaks but with altered composition
Kyle C. Rodman1,2
 |   Robert A. Andrus3
 |   Amanda R. Carlson1
 |    
Trevor A. Carter4
 |   Teresa B. Chapman5
 |   Jonathan D. Coop6
 |   Paula J. Fornwalt7
 |   
Nathan S. Gill8
 |   Brian J. Harvey9
 |   Ashley E. Hoffman10 |   Katharine C. Kelsey11
 |   
Dominik Kulakowski10
 |   Daniel C. Laughlin12
 |   Jenna E. Morris9
 |   José F. Negrón7
 |   
Katherine M. Nigro13,14
 |   Gregory S. Pappas12
 |   Miranda D. Redmond13,15
 |    
Charles C. Rhoades7
 |   Monique E. Rocca14,16
 |   Zoe H. Schapira13
 |    
Jason S. Sibold14,17
 |   Camille S. Stevens-­Rumann13
 |   Thomas T. Veblen18
 |    
Jianmin Wang19
 |   Xiaoyang Zhang19
 |   Sarah J. Hart13
1Department of Forest and Wildlife Ecology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA; 2Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, Arizona, USA; 3School of the Environment, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, USA; 4Department of Integrative Biology, University 
of Colorado Denver, Denver, Colorado, USA; 5Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Program, Chief Conservation Office, The Nature Conservancy, Arlington, 
Virginia, USA; 6Clark School of Environment and Sustainability, Western Colorado University, Gunnison, Colorado, USA; 7US Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA; 8Department of Natural Resources Management, Texas Tech University, 
Lubbock, Texas, USA; 9School of Environmental and Forest Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA; 10Graduate School of Geography, 
Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA; 11Department of Geography and Environmental Science, University of Colorado Denver, Colorado, USA; 
12Department of Botany, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, USA; 13Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA; 14Graduate Degree Program in Ecology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA; 15Department of Environmental 
Science, Policy, and Management, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA; 16Department of Ecosystem Science and Sustainability, 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA; 17Department of Anthropology and Geography, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA; 
18Department of Geography, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA and 19Geospatial Sciences Center of Excellence, Department of Geography and 
Geospatial Sciences, South Dakota State University, Brookings, South Dakota, USA
© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Ecology © 2022 British Ecological Society.
Correspondence
Kyle C. Rodman
Email: kyle.rodman@nau.edu
Funding information
National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, Grant/Award Number: 
NNX16AH58G; National Science 
Foundation, Grant/Award Number: 
1853520
Handling Editor: Anna K. Schweiger
Abstract
1.	 Amplified by warming temperatures and drought, recent outbreaks of native 
bark beetles (Curculionidae: Scolytinae) have caused extensive tree mortality 
throughout Europe and North America. Despite their ubiquitous nature and im-
portant effects on ecosystems, forest recovery following such disturbances is 
poorly understood, particularly across regions with varying abiotic conditions 
and outbreak effects.
2.	 To better understand post-­outbreak recovery across a topographically complex 
region, we synthesized data from 16 field studies spanning subalpine forests in 
the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA. From 1997 to 2019, these forests were 
heavily affected by outbreaks of three native bark beetle species (Dendroctonus 
ponderosae, Dendroctonus rufipennis and Dryocoetes confusus). We compared 
pre-­ and post-­outbreak forest conditions and developed region-­wide predictive 
maps of post-­outbreak (1) live basal areas, (2) juvenile densities and (3) height 

2 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
1  |  INTRODUCTION
Anthropogenic climate change is altering patterns of disturbance 
and stand development in forested ecosystems worldwide, with 
likely consequences for longer-­term ecosystem persistence 
(McDowell et al.,  2020; Turner,  2010). Linked to drought, cli-
mate warming and host availability, outbreaks of native bark 
beetles (Curculionidae: Scolytinae) have caused extensive tree 
mortality throughout forests of the Northern Hemisphere since 
c. 2000 (Bentz et al., 2009; Raffa et al., 2008; Seidl et al., 2014; 
Sommerfeld et al.,  2018). For example, in the western United 
States, recent beetle-­caused tree mortality spanned 5% of the 
total forest area (Hicke et al.,  2020) and killed more trees than 
wildfire (Berner et al., 2017). Patterns of stand development fol-
lowing these outbreaks have crucial implications for forest dynam-
ics, associated ecosystem services such as nutrient cycling and 
wildlife habitat and susceptibility to future disturbances (Edburg 
et al.,  2012; Harvey et al.,  2014; Morris et al.,  2017; Negrón & 
Huckaby, 2020; Saab et al., 2014; Thom & Seidl, 2016). There is a 
pressing need to understand forest recovery dynamics following 
bark beetle outbreaks because such disturbances are likely to in-
crease in frequency and extent in response to a warming climate 
(Bentz et al., 2010; Kolb et al., 2016; Weed et al., 2013).
In the western United States, bark beetles –­ specialist herbivores 
that feed and reproduce within the subcortical tissue of particular 
host trees –­ are among the few biotic disturbance agents that can 
cause severe and widespread tree mortality (Bentz et al.,  2009). 
Many bark beetle species persist at low population levels and tar-
get weakened trees, but when populations increase due to cross-­
scale interactions with biotic and abiotic drivers (i.e. ‘outbreaks’), 
beetles can successfully colonize most hosts within a stand (Aukema 
et al., 2016; Boone et al., 2011). Outbreak development is complex 
but requires an abundance of suitable host trees, which often reflects 
disturbance history (Kulakowski et al., 2012; Veblen et al., 1994) and 
abiotic factors (Jaime et al., 2022). Given available hosts, large-­scale 
outbreaks can occur when above-­average temperatures increase 
overwinter insect survival and drought conditions limit host tree 
defences (Anderegg, Hicke, et al., 2015; Howe et al., 2022; Raffa 
et al., 2008). The mountain pine beetle (MPB; Dendroctonus ponder-
osae Hopkins), spruce beetle (SB; Dendroctonus rufipennis Kirby) and 
western balsam bark beetle (WBBB; Dryocoetes confusus Swaine) 
caused over 70% of the recent tree mortality attributed to bark 
beetles in the western United States, with comparatively greater 
impacts in the Rocky Mountains (Hicke et al., 2020). Lodgepole pine 
(Pinus contorta Dougl. ex. Loud.) is the primary tree host for MPB, 
Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii Parry ex Engelm.) is the primary 
growth rates for the most abundant tree species –­ aspen (Populus tremuloides), 
Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii), lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) and subal-
pine fir (Abies lasiocarpa).
3.	 Beetle-­caused tree mortality reduced the average diameter of live trees by 
28.4% (5.6 cm), and species dominance was altered on 27.8% of field plots with 
shifts away from pine and spruce. However, most plots (82.1%) were likely to 
recover towards pre-­outbreak tree densities without additional regeneration. 
Region-­wide maps indicated that fir and aspen, non-­host species for bark beetle 
species with the most severe effects (i.e. Dendroctonus spp.), will benefit from 
outbreaks through increased compositional dominance. After accounting for in-
dividual size, height growth for all conifer species was more rapid in sites with 
low winter precipitation, high winter temperatures and severe outbreaks.
4.	 Synthesis. In subalpine forests of the US Rocky Mountains, recent bark bee-
tle outbreaks have reduced tree size and altered species composition. While 
eventual recovery of the pre-­outbreak forest structure is likely in most places, 
changes in species composition may persist for decades. Still, forest communi-
ties following bark beetle outbreaks are widely variable due to differences in 
pre-­outbreak conditions, outbreak severity and abiotic gradients. This regional 
variability has critical implications for ecosystem services and susceptibility to 
future disturbances.
K E Y W O R D S
biotic disturbances, Compositional shifts, Dendroctonus spp., Dryocoetes confusus, structural 
recovery, subalpine forests

    |  3
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
host for SB, and subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa [Hook.] Nutt.) is the 
primary host for WBBB (Bentz et al., 2009). MPB, SB and WBBB 
are also size-­selective, preferentially targeting large, resource-­rich 
trees during outbreaks (Johnson et al., 2014). While MPB and SB 
can cause rapid and severe tree mortality (e.g. rates of 20% year−1 
within a stand; Meddens & Hicke, 2014), WBBB outbreaks are typ-
ically more gradual and occur at lower severities (e.g. < 5% year−1; 
McMillin et al., 2017); however, all three species can be present in 
the same forest stand.
Despite the widespread extent of recent outbreaks of MPB, SB 
and WBBB, their combined influence on forest stand conditions 
across regional extents has been largely unexplored. To address this 
uncertainty, we used two complementary approaches. First, we syn-
thesized data from 16 field studies across forests of the Southern 
Rocky Mountains (SRM), USA (Figure 1). Surveys conducted for in-
dividual field studies provide detailed information about pre-­ and 
post-­outbreak forest stand conditions but are limited in spatial ex-
tent and are unable to capture regional-­scale variations in anteced-
ent conditions, outbreak effects and topoclimate. Therefore, we 
combined local field surveys and broad-­scale spatial data products 
to characterize region-­wide spatial patterns of post-­outbreak forest 
structure, composition and growth. Our specific research questions 
were (1) How do initial post-­outbreak stand structure and composition 
(one to two decades following outbreak) compare to pre-­outbreak con-
ditions? (2) How do post-­outbreak live basal area, juvenile density and 
height growth rates for the most common tree species vary across bark 
beetle-­affected subalpine forests in the SRM? Answering these ques-
tions will shed light on the broad ecological consequences of unprec-
edented beetle impacts, with effects on biota and critical ecosystem 
services.
2  |  MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1  |  Study area
Our study area was located in the SRM, a c. 145,000 km2 region 
composed of mountainous terrain (ranging from 1450 to 4400 m el-
evation) in Colorado, southern Wyoming and northern New Mexico, 
USA (Figure 1). Specifically, we focused on subalpine forests (2700–­
3600 m; Peet,  1981; Romme et al.,  2009), which comprise 28% of 
the total land area and 51% of the forest area in the SRM (Homer 
et al., 2020; Rollins, 2009). Subalpine forests in the SRM are domi-
nated by Engelmann spruce, lodgepole pine, subalpine fir and/or aspen 
(Populus tremuloides Michx.), although five-­needle pines (e.g. bristle-
cone pine –­ Pinus aristata Engelm., limber pine –­ Pinus flexilis James) are 
also important in some areas. Following widespread industrialization in 
the 1800s, Euro-­Americans have had profound effects on SRM forests 
due to the forced displacement and genocide of Indigenous Peoples, 
high-­grade logging, livestock grazing, fire exclusion in some areas and 
additional wildfire in others (Romme et al., 2009; Roos et al., 2021; 
Veblen & Donnegan, 2005; Zier & Baker, 2006). In subalpine forests, 
bark beetle outbreaks and severe wildfires are the most important 
natural disturbances, often triggered by warm temperatures and dry 
conditions (Baker & Veblen, 1990; Hart, Veblen, Eisenhart, et al., 2014; 
Sibold et al.,  2006). Coinciding with a period of severe drought, at 
least 10,000 km2 of subalpine forest area in the SRM experienced sub-
stantial tree mortality due to MPB, SB and WBBB from 1997 to 2019 
(Rodman, Andrus, et al., 2021).
To restrict analyses to subalpine forests that were most likely to 
have experienced recent outbreaks of MPB, SB or WBBB, we defined 
the study area according to criteria developed by Rodman, Andrus, 
et al. (2021) (Figure 1). Specifically, we excluded areas >500 m from 
patches of tree mortality attributed to MPB, SB and WBBB, visually 
identified during US Forest Service Aerial Detection Surveys (ADS) 
from 1997 to 2019 (USFS, 2020), as a 500-­m buffer captures most 
areas potentially affected by at least one of the three insects (Coleman 
FI G U R E 1 Map of the study area and sampled field plots (white 
circles) in the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA (EPA Level III 
Ecoregion #21; grey polygon). Colours (orange to purple) indicate 
the remotely sensed severity of bark beetle outbreaks from 1997 to 
2019 (Rodman, Andrus, et al., 2021). Grey areas within the regional 
boundary were not analysed because they were unforested, 
recently logged, recently burned, outside the subalpine zone or 
unaffected by the most abundant bark beetle species (USFS, 2020).

4 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
et al.,  2018). We also excluded areas without pre-­outbreak forest 
cover using the 1992 National Land Cover Dataset (NLCD; Wickham 
et al., 2004) and excluded recent urban or exurban development using 
the 2016 NLCD (Homer et al., 2020). We further limited the study area 
to subalpine forests as those with ≥1 m2 ha−1 total pre-­outbreak basal 
area for the dominant subalpine conifer species (Wilson et al., 2013). 
Finally, we ensured that observed changes in forest conditions were 
related to bark beetles rather than other disturbances (e.g. fire and har-
vest) by excluding areas with recorded fires (Eidenshink et al., 2007; 
GeoMAC, 2020) or timber harvests (Caggiano, 2017; USFS, 2020) that 
occurred from 1996 to 2019. The extent of our final study area was 
33,273 km2 at a 30-­m grain size (23.0% of the total SRM).
2.2  |  Field data collection
We compiled field datasets that were collected for 16 studies of bark 
beetle effects on subalpine forests throughout the SRM (Andrus, 
Chai, et al., 2021; Andrus, Hart, & Veblen, 2020; Audley et al., 2020; 
Carlson et al., 2020; Carter et al., 2022; Chapman, Unpublished Data; 
Coop et al., Unpublished Data; Fornwalt et al., 2018; Gill et al., 2017; 
Harvey et al., 2021; Morris et al., 2022; Nigro et al., 2022; Pappas 
et al., 2020; Redmond & Kelsey, 2018; Rhoades et al., 2020; Schapira, 
Stevens-­Rumann, Shorrock, Hoffman, & Chambers, 2021). This com-
bined dataset includes 969 field plots with nearly 40,000 records of 
trees (≥3 m in height) and saplings (≥1.4 m and <3 m), tallies of over 
40,000 juveniles (<1.4 m) and height growth rates for nearly 2000 
saplings and juveniles (Figure  1; Appendix  S1). In the field, crews 
identified the species and status [i.e. live, recently dead (1990s to 
2010s) or older dead (pre-­1990s)] of all trees and saplings. We ex-
cluded older dead from all analyses as these trees were assumed 
to have died before our study period, and our focus was on recent 
beetle-­caused tree mortality (following Harvey et al., 2021). Field 
protocols, including plot sizes and sampling schemes, varied slightly 
among studies (Tables  S1.1–­S1.3); thus, we standardized datasets 
such that tree, sapling and juvenile data were directly comparable 
(Appendix S1).
2.3  |  Data processing and analysis
2.3.1  |  Question 1 –­ Comparing pre-­ and post-­
outbreak conditions in field plots
To better understand outbreak-­driven changes in forest conditions, 
we assessed structure, species composition and expected forest tra-
jectories on a subset of field plots (n = 747) that contained species-­
level information for each of the most abundant tree species. To 
compare pre-­ and post-­outbreak size structures, we developed 
composite diameter distributions of live and dead trees/saplings at 
the time of field surveys and calculated the quadratic mean diam-
eter (QMD; Curtis & Marshall, 2000) for live trees in pre-­ and post-­
outbreak stands. To quantify shifts in species dominance across field 
plots, we identified the pre-­ and post-­outbreak dominant species on 
each plot, defined here as the tree species with the greatest live 
basal area. Relative dominance within a stand can change over time 
due to interspecific differences in growth, recruitment and mortal-
ity. Thus, we modelled forest dynamics over a 30-­year simulation 
period to assess the stability of post-­outbreak species composition 
using the Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS), a widely applied stand-­
scale simulation model of forest growth and mortality (Dixon, 2002; 
Appendix S2). In FVS simulations, we based initial forest conditions 
on post-­outbreak tree lists that included all surveyed trees ≥5 cm in 
height; we assumed constant climatic conditions, no subsequent dis-
turbances and no additional regeneration beyond existing juveniles 
in each stand. Finally, to characterize structural recovery potential in 
each field plot, we calculated a ratio of the measured post-­outbreak 
density (stems ha−1) of all trees ≥5 cm in height (i.e. trees, saplings 
and juveniles) to the pre-­outbreak density of trees ≥1.4 m in height 
(i.e. trees and saplings only; hereafter ‘density ratio’), similar to the 
recruit/adult ratio of Carnicer et al. (2021). We inferred that plots 
with density ratios <1 would require additional tree establishment 
to recover to pre-­outbreak densities, while plots with values ≥1 were 
better positioned for structural recovery through the recruitment of 
existing juveniles.
2.3.2  |  Question 2 –­ Predicting post-­outbreak 
conditions across the Southern Rocky Mountains
To develop predictive models of post-­outbreak conditions, we 
used field data (n = 969 plots) to create species-­specific response 
variables of (1) live basal areas for all trees and saplings, (2) juve-
nile densities and (3) individual height growth rates for saplings and 
juveniles. To do so, we summarized plot-­level data describing post-­
outbreak live basal area (m2 ha−1) and juvenile density (stems ha−1) 
for each of the most common tree species in subalpine forests of 
the SRM (i.e. aspen, Engelmann spruce, lodgepole pine and subalpine 
fir; Peet, 1981; Romme et al., 2009). At the individual-­tree level, we 
summarized height growth rates (average cm yr−1) for the three dom-
inant coniferous species based on methods used in individual studies 
–­ that is, internode measurements of annual growth (Andrus, Hart, & 
Veblen, 2020; Harvey et al., 2021; Rhoades et al., 2020) or repeated 
surveys (Pappas et al., 2020) –­ across a subset of field plots (n = 254) 
that spanned the SRM. Height growth rates of aspen were excluded 
from our analyses due to insufficient sample size and a growth form 
that precludes the use of internode measurements. Because individ-
ual traits and species identity can affect tree response to environ-
mental conditions (Clark et al., 2021), we obtained the post-­outbreak 
stem height and species of measured juveniles and saplings from 
field data as potential covariates in the growth model.
We used spatially explicit datasets to derive potential predictors 
of each species-­specific response variable (Table 1, Appendix S3). 
We expected that post-­disturbance conditions would be strongly 
influenced by the pre-­disturbance state (Johnstone et al.,  2016). 
Thus, we obtained pre-­outbreak species basal areas from US Forest 

    |  5
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
TA B LE 1 Variables used to predict forest conditions following recent bark beetle outbreaks in the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA. The 
data sources or references for methods of calculation are included in the description of each variable
Categorya
Predictor
Description
Response Variable
Live 
BAb
Juv. Densityb
Ht. Growthb
Climate
AET
Annual actual evapotranspiration from water 
balance models in the 1981–­2010 period 
(Rodman et al., 2020). 250-­m
x
x
CWD
Annual climatic water deficit from water 
balance models in the 1981–­2010 period 
(Rodman et al., 2020). 250-­m
x
x
Jan TMin
Average minimum daily temperature from 
January 1981–­2010 (Oyler et al., 2015). 
250-­m
x
x
July TMax
Average maximum daily temperature from July 
1981–­2010 (Oyler et al., 2015). 250-­m
x
x
Summer
Ppt
Average total precipitation May 1–­October 31, 
1981–­2010 (PRISM Climate Group, 2022). 
250-­m
x
x
Winter
Ppt
Average total precipitation November 1–­April 
30, 1981–­2010 (PRISM Climate Group, 
2022). 250-­m
x
x
Pre-­outbreak conspecific basal area
Species
BA -­ Pre
Pre-­outbreak species basal area in 2002, 
before the onset of most outbreaks. 
Derived from an existing spatial dataset 
(USFS, 2021). 30-­m
x
x
Focal BA 
-­ Pre
Pre-­outbreak species basal area from 2002 
in the surrounding area, using a focal sum 
with inverse distance squared weighting 
(Coop et al., 2019). Calculated in 300, 600, 
and 900 m window sizes to summarize 
short, intermediate and long-­range 
propagule pressure. 30-­m
x
Pre-­outbreak
forest cover
Forest
cover 
-­ Pre
Percent forest cover 2000–­2001, before the 
onset of most outbreaks. Calculated as 
the mean of two existing Landsat-­derived 
products (Hansen et al., 2013; Homer 
et al., 2007). 30-­m
x
x
x
Remotely sensed greenness
EVI2 Amp
The difference between maximum and 
minimum values of the two-­band enhanced 
vegetation index (EVI2) during the 2019 
growing season. Calculated using modelled 
time series of the Harmonized Landsat-­
Sentinel (HLS) and Visible Infrared Imaging 
Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) products (Zhang 
et al., 2020). 30-­m
x
x
x
EVI2 Max
The maximum EVI2 throughout the 2019 
growing season, calculated from modelled 
HLS/VIIRS time series (Zhang et al., 2020). 
30-­m
x
x
x
EVI2 SD
The standard deviation of EVI2 during the 
2019 growing season, calculated from 
modelled HLS/VIIRS time series (Zhang 
et al., 2020). 30-­m
x
x
x
(Continues)

6 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
Service Individual Tree Species Parameter Maps (ITSPM), which 
were modelled from Forest Inventory and Analysis plots, Landsat 
imagery, climate, terrain and soil data (USFS,  2021) and included 
them as predictors in our models. As a predictor of juvenile densities, 
we also calculated the species-­specific densities of seed trees from 
ITSPM maps using a distance-­weighted focal sum (Coop et al., 2019) 
to account for dispersal from the surrounding area. Because climate, 
terrain and soil data were already used to make ITSPM maps, we did 
not include these variables as predictors of post-­outbreak live basal 
area. However, juveniles can have a different environmental niche 
than conspecific adults (Bell et al., 2014; Dobrowski et al., 2015). 
Therefore, we used several existing climate, terrain and soil data-
sets as predictors of juvenile densities and height growth rates. 
These predictors included annual water balance metrics (actual 
Categorya
Predictor
Description
Response Variable
Live 
BAb
Juv. Densityb
Ht. Growthb
Remotely sensed phenology
SOS
Start date of the 2019 growing season, 
calculated using a hybrid piecewise logistic 
model of HLS/VIIRS time series of EVI2 
(Zhang et al., 2020). 30-­m
x
x
x
POS
Peak date of the 2019 growing season, 
calculated using a hybrid piecewise logistic 
model of HLS/VIIRS time series of EVI2 
(Zhang et al., 2020). 30-­m
x
x
x
EOS
End date of the 2019 growing season, 
calculated using a hybrid piecewise logistic 
model of HLS/VIIRS time series of EVI2 
(Zhang et al., 2020). 30-­m
x
x
x
LOS
Length of the 2019 growing season, calculated 
as EOS minus SOS (Zhang et al., 2020). 
30-­m
x
x
x
Remotely sensed outbreak
severity
Outbreak
Severity
Cumulative basal area mortality (% of pre-­
outbreak total for all species) attributed to 
bark beetle attack 1997–­2019, based on 
Landsat time series with field validation 
(Rodman, Andrus, et al., 2021). 30-­m
x
x
x
Soil
Soil AWC
Available water capacity in the top 200 cm of 
the soil. The product of depth to bedrock 
and fractional water capacity (Chaney 
et al., 2016). 30-­m
x
x
Terrain
HLI
Continuous heat load index. An estimate of 
the intensity of terrain-­driven solar heating 
that combines slope angle, latitude and 
aspect (McCune & Keon, 2002; Theobald 
et al., 2015). 10-­m
x
x
TPI
Topographic position index. The elevation 
of a site relative to the surrounding 
area. Calculated as separate variables 
in 150, 450 and 1350-­m window sizes 
(Weiss, 2001). 10-­m
x
x
TWI
Topographic wetness index. An estimate 
of topographic moisture, calculated as 
log(upstream catchment area/slope; Beven 
& Kirkby, 1979). 30-­m
x
x
Individual
factorsc
Height
The vertical distance from the root collar to 
the tip of the terminal bud. Tree-­level
x
Species
Species identity of the measured individual. 
Tree-­level
x
aCategories are related groups of variables that were used to limit multicollinearity in model selection.
bAn ‘x’ in this column indicates that a predictor was tested for potential inclusion in corresponding models.
c‘Individual factors’ were predictors obtained from field data, while predictors in all other categories were spatially continuous datasets used to make 
region-­wide predictions.
TA B LE 1 (Continued)

    |  7
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
evapotranspiration and climatic water deficit), seasonal precipita-
tion totals (summer and winter precipitation), extreme temperatures 
from the warmest and coldest months (July maximum and January 
minimum), terrain proxies for moisture availability (topographic po-
sition index, topographic wetness index, heat load index) and soil 
available water capacity (Appendix S3) –­ variables known to influ-
ence tree regeneration in SRM forests (Andrus et al., 2018; Rodman 
et al., 2020; Schapira, Stevens-­Rumann, & Shorrock, 2021).
We expected that total forest cover would be related to post-­
outbreak tree basal area, juvenile abundance and growth (Andrus, 
Hart, & Veblen, 2020; Pettit et al., 2019); therefore, we developed 
maps of pre-­outbreak canopy cover for potential inclusion in all 
models. Similarly, because post-­outbreak live basal area is a function 
of outbreak severity and mature trees influence conditions experi-
enced by juveniles (Pelz et al., 2018; Veblen et al., 1991), we used 
existing maps of the severity of 1997–­2019 outbreaks, derived from 
Landsat time series and field data (Rodman, Andrus, et al., 2021) as 
a potential predictor of each response. To describe patterns of spec-
tral reflectance indicative of post-­outbreak vegetation on a site, we 
also developed remotely sensed estimates of post-­outbreak green-
ness and phenology to improve predictions of each species-­specific 
response. Such variables have been effectively used to predict for-
est structure and composition (e.g. differentiating evergreen vs. 
deciduous) because of their associations with total vegetation bio-
mass, primary productivity and seasonal growth patterns (Potapov 
et al., 2021; Wilson et al., 2012). Specifically, we followed the meth-
ods of Zhang et al. (2020) to develop high-­resolution maps of post-­
outbreak greenness (maximum, amplitude and standard deviation of 
greenness) and the timing of important phenological events (start 
of season, peak of season, end of season, length of season) using 
time series of the two-­band enhanced vegetation index (EVI2; Jiang 
et al., 2008). Because spatial predictors were created at a range of 
grain sizes (10 to 250 m), we aligned and reprojected each dataset to 
a standard 30-­m reference grid. Finally, we extracted values of each 
spatial predictor at the locations of field plots for use in subsequent 
analyses.
Using field-­derived responses and predictors derived from spa-
tial data products (Table 1), we developed statistical models to pre-
dict post-­outbreak live basal area, juvenile density and height growth 
rates of the most common tree species and used these models to 
make 30-­m maps of each response throughout the study area. For 
each response, we used GLMMs (Bolker et al., 2009) with a random 
intercept term of ‘contributor’ to account for study design differ-
ences. Live basal areas and juvenile densities of each species were 
zero-­inflated, so we used two-­stage GLMMs (i.e. ‘hurdle models’; 
Zuur et al., 2009). We used binomial error structures for all presence 
models and gamma (live basal area) or zero-­truncated negative bi-
nomial (juvenile density) error structures for conditional abundance 
models. For juvenile densities, we predicted the count of juveniles 
on a plot and included an offset term of ‘log(plot size)’ to control for 
variation in sampling effort. To model height growth rates, we devel-
oped a single hierarchical GLMM (gamma error structure) with the 
average annual growth of each individual as the response. In addition 
to plot-­level predictors considered for inclusion in models of juve-
nile density and post-­outbreak live basal area, we included species 
identity and individual height as potential predictors in models of 
individual height growth (Table 1). To account for the dependence of 
height growth rates among multiple individuals within each plot, we 
included a random intercept term of plot nested within contributor.
To limit overfitting and improve predictive performance in 
unsampled areas, we used a spatially stratified cross-­validation pro-
cedure for model selection (Meyer et al., 2019). First, we performed 
a spatial cluster analysis with the K-­medoids algorithm (Kaufman & 
Rousseeuw, 2005) to partition field plots into 10 clusters based on 
their spatial locations. Using these clusters, we performed 10-­fold 
cross-­validation to assess model performance with different sets of 
predictors. To limit issues of multicollinearity in model selection, we 
combined predictors into nine groups that were expected to relate 
to response variables in unique ways (Table  1). From each group, 
we added up to two uncorrelated predictors [i.e. −0.5 < Spearman's 
rho (ρ) < 0.5] that led to the highest predictive accuracy in cross-­
validation (i.e. ‘initial models’). Where appropriate, we included non-
linear relationships or two-­way interaction terms based on a priori 
expectations (Appendices  S3 and S4). To ensure realistic model 
predictions, we used post hoc variable removal to exclude terms 
that did not match ecologically informed expectations of relation-
ships between predictors and responses (Table S3.1). We fit GLMMs 
using the spaMM package (Rousset & Ferdy,  2014), assessed the 
distribution of model residuals using the ‘ncf’ (Bjornstad, 2019) and 
DHARMa packages (Hartig,  2018) and tested for multicollinearity 
using the performance package (Lüdecke et al., 2021) in R (R Core 
Team, 2021). When necessary to account for spatial dependence of 
model residuals (i.e. Moran's I > 0.05 and notable issues in spline cor-
relograms of model residuals), we included a spatial random effect 
term based on plot coordinates (Rousset & Ferdy, 2014). We calcu-
lated variable importance by permuting each predictor 100 times 
and assessing the mean decrease in accuracy relative to intact data 
(Breiman, 2001).
Using final GLMMs and the raster package (Hijmans, 2015) in R, 
we made predictions of each response throughout the study area. 
For height growth, we developed separate predictions for each 
tree species, assuming a 1-­m stem height, thereby mapping regional 
variation in growth attributed to species identity, forest structure 
and abiotic factors. To limit spatial predictions to areas with the 
likely occurrence of each tree species, basal area predictions were 
restricted to 30-­m cells with ≥0.1 m2 of pre-­outbreak conspecific 
basal area ha−1 based on ITSPM maps, while juvenile density and 
growth predictions were restricted to cells within 500 m of these 
areas. This 500-­m threshold retained >95% of juvenile presences of 
each species in field plots while removing errant predictions outside 
of each species' range. We used the resultant maps from these spa-
tial predictions to calculate the percentage of the study area where 
each species had the greatest basal area, juvenile density or height 
growth rates. To assess region-­wide shifts in species dominance, we 
also compared our post-­outbreak basal area maps with pre-­outbreak 
maps from ITSPM.

8 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
3  |  RESULTS
3.1  |  Question 1 –­ Comparing pre-­ and post-­
outbreak conditions in field plots
Recent bark beetle outbreaks drove changes in tree size distribu-
tions across field plots, reducing the average diameter of live trees 
and saplings (i.e. QMD; Figure  2). Due to selective mortality of 
large trees, plot-­level QMDs declined by 28.4% [mean (SE) = 5.6 cm 
(0.2)] following outbreaks, although changes differed among spe-
cies. Driven by SB-­ and MPB-­caused tree mortality, QMDs of live 
Engelmann spruce [22.4 (pre-­) vs. 14.6  cm (post-­outbreak)] and 
lodgepole pine [18.5 (pre-­) vs. 13.6 cm (post-­outbreak)] substan-
tially declined following outbreaks. In contrast, QMDs of live aspen 
[10.1 (pre-­) vs. 9.6 cm (post-­outbreak)] and subalpine fir [14.3 (pre-­) 
vs. 13.3 cm (post-­outbreak)] showed comparatively little change 
(Figure 2a). Interspecific differences in mortality rates drove shifts in 
the dominant tree species on 27.8% of field plots following outbreaks 
(Figure 2b). For example, Engelmann spruce declined in dominance 
from 46.6% to 30.3% of field plots, and lodgepole pine declined from 
39.2% to 33.2%. In contrast, aspen increased in dominance from 
2.1% to 5.5% of field plots, and subalpine fir increased from 10.4% 
to 28.5%. Using FVS model simulations, we predicted that these 
outbreak-­driven shifts in species dominance would persist through 
upcoming decades after accounting for interspecific differences in 
juvenile recruitment, growth and density-­dependent mortality; pine 
(24.2% of plots) demonstrated further declines, spruce showed little 
change (32.2%), and aspen (10.2%) and fir (32.0%) showed additional 
increases (Appendix  S2; Figure  2b). Within field plots, outbreak-­
driven mortality of all trees and saplings was exceedingly rare (0.8% 
of plots; Figure 2b). While the density ratio varied widely (Figure 3a), 
82.1% of plots had a ratio greater than one (Figure 3b), suggestive of 
recovery to pre-­outbreak forest densities in most areas.
3.2  |  Question 2 –­ Predicting post-­outbreak 
conditions across the Southern Rocky Mountains
Post-­outbreak basal areas of aspen, Engelmann spruce, lodgepole 
pine and subalpine fir varied widely across the SRM (Figure  4). 
Overall, aspen basal area was most abundant at low elevations in the 
western SRM (Figure 4b), Engelmann spruce basal area was abun-
dant at high elevations throughout the SRM (Figure 4c), lodgepole 
pine was abundant at low elevations in the northern SRM (Figure 4d) 
and subalpine fir was abundant at intermediate to high elevations 
in the northern and western SRM (Figure 4e). All four species were 
positively associated with pre-­outbreak species basal area and nega-
tively associated with remotely sensed outbreak severity (Figure 4a; 
Figures S4.1–­S4.4). Aspen had high basal areas in sites with a start 
of the growing season (SOS) around May 30 and a length of the 
growing season (LOS) of c. 150 days, with high variation in greenness 
(EVI2 Amp; Figure S4.1). Engelmann spruce, on the other hand, was 
associated with a later SOS (i.e. after July 1; Figure S4.2). Lodgepole 
pine was prevalent in areas with an early SOS (i.e. before May 15), 
lower EVI2 Amp and higher pre-­outbreak forest cover (Figure S4.3). 
Subalpine fir was positively associated with a later SOS (i.e. after July 
1), a shorter LOS (c. 130 days), intermediate greenness (EVI2 Max 
of ca. 0.3) and high pre-­outbreak forest cover (Figure S4.4). Models 
of species presence [area under the curve (AUC) range 0.76–­0.89] 
and conditional abundance [Spearman's rho (ρ) range 0.31–­0.46] 
were strongly related to each response based on spatially stratified 
cross-­validation (Table S4.1). Based on region-­wide predictive maps, 
Engelmann spruce declined in dominance from 34.0% to 25.8% of 
the study area following outbreaks, while lodgepole pine declined 
from 25.3% to 20.8% (Tables  S4.2 and S4.3). In contrast, aspen 
dominance increased from 22.8% to 23.0% of the study area, while 
subalpine fir increased from 17.9% to 28.4%.
We predicted high juvenile densities of aspen (dominant in 44.9% 
of the study area) and subalpine fir (39.1%) across much of the study 
area, and these species were particularly common in the western and 
northwestern SRM, respectively (Figure 5b,e; Table S4.4). In contrast, 
Engelmann spruce (10.8% of the study area) and lodgepole pine (5.3%) 
had generally low juvenile densities, although they were locally abun-
dant throughout high elevations of the SRM (spruce) or in the north-
ern SRM (pine; Figure 5c,d). Overall juvenile densities were greatest at 
mid-­ to high-­elevation sites in the subalpine zone of SRM. As expected, 
juveniles of each species were associated with high pre-­outbreak spe-
cies basal areas in the surrounding area (Focal BA; Figure 5a). Juvenile 
aspen were abundant at sites with low or intermediate climatic water 
deficit (CWD; c. 300 mm), low actual evapotranspiration (AET), low 
July maximum temperature (July TMax) and high heat load index (HLI; 
i.e. southwesterly aspects), together indicative of mid-­elevation areas 
with high insolation (Figure S4.5). Aspen was also associated with high 
EVI2 Amp and moderate pre-­outbreak forest cover (i.e. 50%). Juvenile 
Engelmann spruce were prevalent in sites with high AET, low January 
minimum temperature (Jan TMin), intermediate July TMax (c. 21°C), 
low HLI and low topographic position index (TPI; i.e. valley bottoms), 
suggestive of cold, wet areas and protected topography (Figure S4.6). 
Engelmann spruce was also associated with intermediate EVI2 Max 
(c. 0.3) and low pre-­outbreak forest cover. Juvenile lodgepole pine 
were abundant at high CWD, low AET, high July TMax, low Jan TMin 
and low pre-­outbreak forest cover, indicative of harsh, dry, open sites 
(Figure S4.7). Juvenile subalpine fir were prevalent in sites with in-
termediate CWD (c. 300 mm), Jan TMin (c. −12°C) and July TMax (c. 
22°C), as well as low HLI, indicative of wet, mid-­ to high-­elevation sites 
(Figure S4.8). Subalpine fir was also associated with low EVI2 Amp, in-
termediate EVI2 Max (c. 0.3) and earlier EOS (around September 15th). 
Models of juvenile presence (AUC range 0.82–­0.91) and abundance (ρ 
range 0.30–­0.55) performed well for each species (Table S4.1).
Post-­outbreak conifer height growth rates varied throughout 
the SRM, with lodgepole pine being the fastest-­growing species 
in 46.3% of the study area, followed by subalpine fir (46.1%) and 
Engelmann spruce (7.6%; Figure 6; Table S4.5). Overall, lodgepole 
pine growth was most rapid at lower elevations in the northern 
SRM, while subalpine fir was most rapid at high elevations in the 
western and southern SRM (Figure 6c,d). Unsurprisingly, stem height 

    |  9
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
was the strongest predictor of individual height growth rates (i.e. 
>75% relative importance), with tall individuals showing the great-
est post-­outbreak growth (Figure 6a; Figure S4.9). However, after 
accounting for individual stem height, growth rates for all species 
were influenced by climate and site factors. Overall, height growth 
was greatest on sites with low winter precipitation (Winter Ppt) and 
high Jan TMin. Relationships between Winter Ppt and growth were 
consistent across species, although there was an interaction be-
tween species and Jan TMin, indicating that lodgepole pine growth 
had a stronger response to Jan TMin than did spruce or fir. Remotely 
sensed outbreak severity had a strong positive association with 
growth rates, while soil available water capacity (Soil AWC) and EVI2 
Amp had weak positive associations. The height growth model was 
highly accurate based on cross-­validation (ρ = 0.79; Table S4.1).
4  |  DISCUSSION
By comparing pre-­ and post-­outbreak forest communities using 
field surveys and developing region-­wide predictive maps of post-­
outbreak forest conditions, we demonstrated that structural recov-
ery is likely throughout most beetle-­affected subalpine forests in the 
SRM, but shifts in tree species composition may endure, particularly 
in the absence of subsequent disturbances. We found that MPB and 
SB caused disproportionate mortality of larger lodgepole pine and 
Engelmann spruce, which is consistent with findings from more lo-
calized studies (Bakaj et al., 2016; Bleiker et al., 2003; Hart, Veblen, 
& Kulakowski, 2014; Johnson et al., 2014; Perovich & Sibold, 2016; 
Rhoades et al., 2017) and with our general understanding of bark beetle 
ecology (Fettig et al., 2014; Jenkins et al., 2014; McMillin et al., 2017). 
However, our study advances the understanding of outbreak-­driven 
forest change by leveraging extensive field data and cutting-­edge spa-
tial data products to illustrate the effects of three co-­occurring bark 
beetle species on stand structure and composition across a region 
with substantial variation in pre-­outbreak forest conditions, outbreak 
severities and abiotic settings. Region-­wide variation in these factors 
has led to a broad range of forest conditions throughout the SRM.
4.1  |  Bark beetle caused changes in forest 
structure and composition
Following outbreaks, we observed a 28.4% reduction in live QMD 
in field plots, with the greatest declines for Engelmann spruce and 
FI G U R E 2 Shifts in live (a) size structure and (b) species composition in field plots affected by bark beetle outbreaks throughout 
subalpine forests in the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA. In (a), circles give the quadratic mean diameter (QMD) for each species before 
(1990s) and after (2010s) major outbreaks, including all trees (≥3 m in height) and saplings (≥1.4 m and <3 m). In (b), stacked bars show the 
percentage of field plots in which a species was dominant (i.e. greatest live basal area) pre-­outbreak, post-­outbreak and in the future (based 
on 30-­year runs of the Forest Vegetation Simulator); ribbon widths show the portion of plots following each trajectory. ‘No Trees/Saplings’ 
plots had no individuals ≥1.4 m in a given period.

10 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
lodgepole pine (Figure 2a). Recent bark beetle outbreaks throughout 
the SRM have led to broad-­scale declines in forest basal area (Figure 1; 
Rodman, Andrus, et al., 2021), primarily through beetle-­caused tree 
mortality of larger trees (i.e. ≥20 cm DBH; Audley et al., 2020; Hart, 
Veblen, & Kulakowski, 2014; Harvey et al., 2021). Despite strong de-
fences against colonization (Boone et al., 2011), large trees are the 
preferred hosts for MPB and SB because they provide an abundant 
food source (i.e. high thickness and volume of phloem), which en-
hances insect reproductive potential and survival (reviewed in Fettig 
et al.,  2014; Schmid & Frye,  1977). Disproportionate mortality of 
large trees, which produce more abundant seeds (Andrus, Harvey, 
et al., 2020; Qiu et al., 2021), may influence forage resources for 
wildlife species (Ivan et al., 2018) or leave forests vulnerable to future 
disturbances. For example, forests dominated by Engelmann spruce 
and subalpine fir, species that rely on seed dispersal from live trees 
to recolonize disturbed sites, often shift to non-­forest vegetation 
or alternative compositions following beetle outbreaks and severe 
secondary disturbances such as wildfire (Andrus, Hart, et al., 2021; 
Carlson et al., 2017; Nigro et al., 2022). Lodgepole pine, on the other 
hand, might be less sensitive to short-­interval beetle outbreaks and 
wildfire (Harvey et al.,  2014; Talucci & Krawchuk,  2019) because 
seeds from serotinous cones can remain viable for 20–­30 years 
after tree death (Aoki et al., 2011; Teste et al., 2011). Large trees 
also comprise the majority of live forest biomass and play a critical 
role in nutrient cycling (Lutz et al., 2018); however, carbon and nitro-
gen cycling typically stabilize within a few years of outbreak occur-
rence due to compensatory vegetation responses (Frank et al., 2014; 
Rhoades et al., 2013; Romme et al., 1986).
Despite widespread mortality of large trees, we found that most 
field plots (82.1%) were likely to recover to pre-­outbreak densities 
without any new tree establishment, illustrating that most subalpine 
forests in the SRM have a high potential for structural recovery fol-
lowing recent bark beetle outbreaks (Figure 3b). Several field-­based 
and model-­based studies have also illustrated the potential for 
structural recovery in subalpine forests of the SRM following out-
breaks through the release of non-­host species and advance regen-
eration (Andrus, Hart, & Veblen, 2020; Collins et al., 2011; Veblen 
et al., 1991). Furthermore, while the remaining 17.9% of our plots 
were on a trajectory towards reduced tree densities following recent 
outbreaks, these areas may still recover to pre-­outbreak densities 
over time. Other studies have noted substantial new seedling es-
tablishment following recent MPB and SB outbreaks in the western 
US (Pelz et al., 2018; Pettit et al., 2019; Talucci & Krawchuk, 2019), 
which could also support structural recovery in low-­density areas. 
Although rare in our study, other research has demonstrated that 
outbreak-­driven declines in tree density or conversions to non-­forest 
communities are most likely in monospecific stands composed of 
larger trees (Andrus, Hart, & Veblen, 2020), which are most suscep-
tible to severe outbreaks (Hart et al., 2015; Windmuller-­Campione 
et al., 2021). Indeed, species diversity, structural variability and spa-
tial heterogeneity have long been theorized to promote stability and 
adaptive capacity in ecological systems (Koontz et al., 2020; Tilman 
& Downing, 1994; Turner, 2010).
Using field surveys and predictive maps, we identified region-­
wide outbreak-­driven shifts in species composition towards aspen 
and subalpine fir (Figure 2b; Tables S4.2 and S4.3). These findings 
are consistent with past research identifying stand-­scale shifts in 
tree species composition following bark beetle outbreaks (DeRose 
& Long, 2007; Diskin et al., 2011; Kayes & Tinker, 2012; Perovich 
& Sibold,  2016). Although we found outbreak-­driven increases in 
aspen dominance (Figure  2b), and an ability of aspen to tolerate 
warmer sites (e.g. increased juvenile abundances at high HLI and rel-
atively high CWD; Figure S4.5), we expect that such relationships 
may be counteracted by other important pressures on the species. 
For example, aspen recruitment into the forest canopy is reduced by 
FI G U R E 3 Variability in post-­outbreak recovery potential across 
field plots in subalpine forests in the Southern Rocky Mountains, 
USA. Recovery potential is summarized using the density ratio 
–­ the post-­outbreak density of all trees (≥3 m in height), saplings 
(≥1.4 m and <3 m) and juveniles (<1.4 m) divided by the pre-­
outbreak density of trees and saplings. In (a), photos are examples 
of field plots with low (0.1; left) and high (13.2; right) density ratios 
following bark beetle outbreaks. In (b), the cumulative distribution 
of the density ratio is given across all field plots, where the vertical 
dashed line is centered on 1; values greater than 1 are suggestive 
of potential self-­replacement for any dead trees or saplings. Note 
that the x-­axis breaks in (b) are on a nonlinear scale to facilitate 
interpretation.

    |  11
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
herbivory in areas with high ungulate populations (Andrus, Hart, & 
Veblen, 2020; DeRose & Long, 2010) and ungulates can be partic-
ularly abundant following bark beetle outbreaks (Ivan et al., 2018). 
In addition, recent aspen mortality has been widespread due to se-
vere drought, the spread of the invasive scale insect Lepidosaphes 
ulmi (oystershell scale) and a range of fungal pathogens (Anderegg, 
Flint, et al., 2015; Crouch et al., 2021; Hanna & Kulakowski, 2012; 
Worrall et al., 2010). These impacts are likely to increase with cli-
mate warming and expanding urbanization (Crouch et al., 2021; Kolb 
et al., 2016; Lukas et al., 2014).
In contrast, we expect that shifts towards subalpine fir dom-
inance will be enhanced by the abundant seedling densities and 
rapid growth rates of this species that we identified in predictive 
maps (Figures 5e and 6d). Indeed, persistent increases in the dom-
inance of subalpine fir and other shade-­tolerant coniferous species 
have been noted following drought, blowdown and bark beetle 
outbreaks throughout the western US (Perovich & Sibold,  2016; 
Sibold et al., 2007; Veblen et al., 1989; Veblen et al., 1991; Young 
et al., 2020). These longer-­term shifts towards subalpine fir domi-
nance may have critical implications for future ecosystem dynam-
ics. Although recent WBBB outbreaks were of lower severity than 
outbreaks of MPB and SB in our study area, compositional shifts 
towards subalpine fir could lead to more severe outbreaks of WBBB 
in the future because host tree abundance is a key predictor of 
susceptibility (Harvey et al., 2021). Similarly, increases in subalpine 
fir dominance may be maladaptive to future warming because this 
species is more sensitive to drought than other subalpine conifers 
(Bigler et al., 2007).
4.2  |  Region-­wide variation in post-­outbreak 
forest conditions
Pre-­outbreak forest conditions broadly influenced forest structure 
and composition following recent bark beetle outbreaks. For ex-
ample, pre-­outbreak species basal area maps were consistently im-
portant predictors of post-­outbreak live basal areas in our analyses 
(Figure 4a). Given the relatively slow growth of subalpine conifers in 
the SRM (Aplet et al., 1988; Chai et al., 2019) and our comparatively 
short study period (i.e. 23 years), we infer that maps of post-­outbreak 
basal area primarily reflect the survival of large trees that pre-­dated 
recent outbreaks. Other studies demonstrate that variability in 
FI G U R E 4 Results from generalized linear mixed models of post-­outbreak live basal area of four common tree species in subalpine forests 
of the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA. Panel (a) gives the relative importance of predictor variables and panels (b–­e) display predicted 
maps and histograms of species-­specific live basal areas, restricted by pre-­outbreak distributions of each species (USFS, 2021). In (a), greater 
relative importance indicates the percent contribution of a given variable to overall model accuracy. The modelled relationships between 
each predictor and response variable are indicated as positive (+), negative (−) or nonlinear (⁀). Note that in (b–­e) histograms, bin widths are 
uneven and y-­axes are transformed to facilitate comparisons among species. LOS: length of 2019 growing season; SOS: start date of 2019 
growing season; EVI2 Amp: 2019 seasonal variation in the enhanced vegetation index (EVI); EVI2 Max: 2019 maximum EVI. Other predictor 
variable definitions are provided in Table 1.

12 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
pre-­outbreak forest conditions relates to past disturbance history 
(Kulakowski et al., 2012; Rodman et al., 2019; Veblen et al., 1994) 
and species-­specific climatic effects on tree establishment, growth 
and survival (Andrus et al., 2018; Buechling et al., 2017; Martin & 
Canham,  2020). Likewise, our models of juvenile density were 
strongly influenced by pre-­outbreak species basal area in the sur-
rounding landscape (Figure 5a). Indeed, tree establishment is often 
limited by dispersal from adjacent trees of the same species (typically 
<200 m; McCaughey et al., 1986; Stevens-­Rumann & Morgan, 2019) 
or the location of existing root structures (e.g. aspen re-­sprouting). 
We also found that juvenile densities of aspen, Engelmann spruce 
and lodgepole pine were highest in areas with low to moderate pre-­
outbreak forest cover, indicating that localized canopy gaps play 
a critical role in tree establishment and forest recovery. Such pat-
terns align with known species traits; aspen and lodgepole pine have 
low shade tolerance and spruce can regenerate well in canopy gaps 
with bare mineral soil, whereas fir establishes well in closed-­canopy 
forests with thick litter (Burns & Honkala, 1990a, 1990b; Noble & 
Alexander, 1977). Prior research has also shown that pre-­outbreak 
species basal area and total forest cover influence post-­outbreak 
forest conditions (e.g. Carlson et al., 2020; Pappas et al., 2020; Pettit 
et al., 2019; Redmond & Kelsey, 2018; Schapira, Stevens-­Rumann, 
Shorrock, Hoffman, & Chambers, 2021). Taken together, our results 
and those of prior studies indicate that biological legacies and pre-­
outbreak conditions play a central role in forest trajectories follow-
ing bark beetle outbreaks.
Outbreak severity has also shaped forest conditions and pro-
cesses following recent outbreaks in the SRM, with remotely 
sensed outbreak severity improving our predictions of post-­
outbreak basal area and height growth rates (Figures 5a and 6a). 
The severity of recent bark beetle outbreaks has been widely 
variable throughout the SRM, with stands ranging from low-­level 
mortality (<5% basal area), to a near-­total loss of overstory can-
opy (>90%; Rodman, Andrus, et al.,  2021). Indeed, severity had 
very limited autocorrelation at spatial scales >5 km and patches 
of near-­total canopy loss were small (<0.24 km2) and isolated 
(Rodman, Andrus, et al., 2021). Such variability has created het-
erogeneous forest overstory conditions throughout subalpine 
FI G U R E 5 Results from generalized linear mixed models of post-­outbreak juvenile (<1.4 m in height) densities of four common tree 
species in subalpine forests of the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA. Panel (a) gives the relative importance of predictor variables and panels 
(b–­e) display predicted maps and histograms of species-­specific juvenile densities, restricted to areas within 500 m of the pre-­outbreak 
distributions of each species (USFS, 2021). In (a), greater relative importance indicates the percent contribution of a given variable to overall 
model accuracy. The modelled relationships between each predictor and response variable are indicated as positive (+), negative (−) or 
nonlinear (⁀). Note that in (b–­e) histograms, bin widths are uneven and y-­axes are transformed to facilitate comparisons among species. AET: 
actual evapotranspiration; CWD: climatic water deficit; EOS: end date of 2019 growing season; EVI2 Amp: 2019 seasonal variation in the 
enhanced vegetation index; EVI2 Max: 2019 maximum enhanced vegetation index; HLI: continuous heat load index. Other predictor variable 
definitions are provided in Table 1.

    |  13
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
forests of the SRM, a pattern which is further elucidated by our 
species-­specific maps of live basal area. We also found that height 
growth rates of conifer juveniles were highest in areas with se-
vere outbreaks, a potential compensatory response that is likely 
to shape future forest dynamics (Figure 6a). Following bark beetle 
outbreaks, enhanced growth of surviving trees has been identified 
through tree ring studies of post-­outbreak forest dynamics (Jarvis 
& Kulakowski, 2015; Romme et al., 1986; Veblen et al., 1991) and 
field sampling across gradients of outbreak severity (Andrus, Hart, 
& Veblen, 2020; Pelz et al., 2018; Rhoades et al., 2017). However, 
our region-­wide predictive maps of height growth (Figure 6b–­d) 
provide new insight into how such effects on individual organisms 
can scale up to create heterogeneous processes at the ecosystem 
level.
Remotely sensed phenology, terrain and climate were import-
ant predictors in our models of forest conditions and growth rates, 
illustrating that species' niches play an instrumental role in post-­
outbreak forest ecosystem dynamics in our study area. Tree spe-
cies in the SRM are arranged along such gradients, with lodgepole 
pine and aspen typically occupying low-­ to mid-­elevation sites in 
subalpine forests and Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir occupy-
ing mid-­ to high-­elevation sites (Peet, 1981; Romme et al., 2009). 
Our models of live basal area and juvenile density reflect these 
patterns (Figures 4a and 5a), with aspen and lodgepole pine being 
most abundant in sites with long growing seasons (c. 150 days), early 
growing season start dates (late May) and high climatic water defi-
cits (>300 mm). In contrast, spruce and fir typically occupied sites 
with short growing seasons (c. 100 days), late growing season start 
dates (early July), moderate water deficits (200–­400 mm) and pro-
tected topographic settings. Climatic gradients and their influences 
on species distributions have been widely studied throughout for-
ests of North America (e.g. Bell et al., 2014; Dobrowski et al., 2015; 
Rehfeldt et al., 2006). However, the effects of climate and terrain 
on population vital rates and individual performance are poorly un-
derstood. Individual performance is often related to size or other 
individual-­level factors (Bolnick et al., 2011; Clark et al., 2021). Thus, 
it was not surprising that stem height was the strongest single pre-
dictor of height growth rates in our study (Figure  6a). However, 
after accounting for individual factors, we found that growth was 
most rapid at subalpine sites with low average winter precipitation 
FI G U R E 6 Results from the generalized linear mixed model of post-­outbreak height growth rates of juveniles (<1.4 m in height) and 
saplings (≥1.4 and <3 m in height) of three common coniferous tree species in subalpine forests of the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA. 
Panel (a) gives the relative importance of predictor variables and panels (b-­d) display predicted maps and histograms of species-­specific 
height growth rates, restricted to areas within 500 m of the pre-­outbreak distributions of each species (USFS, 2021). In (a), greater 
relative importance indicates the percent contribution of a given variable to overall model accuracy. The modelled relationships between 
the predictors and response variable are indicated as positive (+), negative (−) or nonlinear (⁀). Note that in (b-­d) histograms, y-­axes are 
transformed and bin widths are uneven for interpretability. EVI2 Amp: 2019 seasonal variation in the enhanced vegetation index; Soil AWC: 
soil available water capacity in the top 2 m of the soil column. Other predictor variable definitions are provided in Table 1.

14 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
(<500 mm) and high January minimum temperatures (>−13°C), typ-
ical of low elevations and warmer areas. These findings were rela-
tively consistent among species, despite interspecific differences in 
their environmental tolerances. One experimental study with a sub-
set of our study species shows similar results, wherein juveniles had 
more rapid height growth on warmer, drier sites (Carroll et al., 2021). 
Primary productivity (e.g. height and radial growth rates) in subal-
pine forests is often limited by the length of the growing season, 
which, in turn, is influenced by winter precipitation and temperature 
(Knowles et al., 2020).
In contrast with our findings concerning juvenile growth, we 
found that overall juvenile densities were generally greatest at 
moderate to high elevations (Figure 5). For example, juvenile den-
sities of spruce and pine were highest at sites with low January 
minimum temperature, and aspen, spruce and fir were most abun-
dant at sites with moderate values of July maximum temperature 
or annual climatic water deficit (Figure  5a; Figures  S4.5–­S4.8). 
Broader ecological theory suggests that vital rates such as growth, 
reproduction and survival can be negatively correlated at the pop-
ulation level (Laughlin et al., 2020; Sheth & Angert, 2018; Villellas 
et al., 2015). Indeed, there are inherent trade-­offs between traits 
that confer competitive ability and those that confer tolerance to 
low-­resource environments (McGill et al., 2006), as evidenced by 
negative relationships between height growth rates and water use 
efficiency in some conifers (e.g. Dixit et al., 2022). While additional 
research is needed to understand subalpine tree species perfor-
mance across abiotic gradients, we infer that low juvenile densities 
in warm, dry sites could be partially driven by high mortality in such 
areas (e.g. high fir mortality on dry sites; Carroll et al., 2021). Our 
finding that climate may have opposing effects on juvenile height 
growth rates and juvenile densities aligns with broader ecological 
theory, indicating that individual vital rates (e.g. growth, survival) 
do not respond consistently to abiotic factors. Thus, increasing 
temperatures and aridity associated with climate change (Lukas 
et al., 2014; Pederson et al., 2011) will have important influences 
on future subalpine forest dynamics that may unfold in complex 
and unpredictable ways.
4.3  |  Study limitations
The field data included in this study were collected opportunisti-
cally and were not stratified across the wide range of conditions 
present throughout the SRM. While we found that these data 
were representative of conditions across the broader region in 
most cases, field sampling preferentially targeted forests affected 
by MPB and SB with >50% basal area mortality. However, areas 
with low-­ and moderate-­severity outbreaks were still represented; 
23.6% of our field plots were in areas with less than 50% basal 
area mortality and 4.6% of our plots were in areas with less than 
10% basal area mortality. In addition, we used spatial data layers 
to infer post-­outbreak forest conditions across unsampled areas 
throughout the SRM, which span a wide range of outbreak severi-
ties (Figure 1). The various field studies included here also had a 
range of plot sizes and sampling protocols, and this variability may 
have influenced our results. However, we standardized datasets 
and used mixed-­effects models to help account for these dif-
ferences. We obtained maps of pre-­outbreak species basal area 
and canopy cover from available sources, and these data did not 
perfectly align with the beginning of the study period (i.e. 2000–­
2002 vs. 1997). Because the vast majority of bark beetle-­caused 
tree mortality in the study period occurred after 2002 (Chapman 
et al., 2012; Hart et al., 2017; Harvey et al., 2021; USFS, 2020), 
we assumed that these spatial datasets effectively captured pre-­
outbreak forest conditions despite missing the first 3 to 5 years 
of the study period. Lastly, we did not assess the effects of man-
agement, wildfire or climate change on forest dynamics through-
out beetle-­affected forests of the SRM. Although these questions 
were beyond the scope of this study, they represent a fruitful area 
for future research.
5  |  CONCLUSIONS
Here we show that beetle-­affected subalpine forests of the SRM 
are likely to remain forested through the survival of mature non-­
host trees, high densities of advance regeneration and the rapid 
post-­outbreak growth of saplings and juveniles. Our analyses 
using field data and regional geospatial modelling suggest that 
most stands will eventually recover to pre-­outbreak densities 
in the absence of other disturbances. In contrast, shifts in forest 
composition, particularly towards subalpine fir, are likely to en-
dure for decades. This research highlights the value of integrat-
ing (1) widespread field surveys, (2) satellite-­based remote sensing 
data, (3) ancillary GIS data and (4) aerial detection survey data to 
make broader inferences than can be gained from any single data 
source. By using these disparate datasets in complementary ana-
lytical approaches, we demonstrated the variable effects of bark 
beetle outbreaks on forest conditions throughout a complex re-
gion. The capacity of systems to cope with disturbance may be 
enhanced through structural, compositional and spatial heteroge-
neity (Angeler & Allen, 2016; Elmqvist et al., 2003; Turner, 2010); 
thus, the variable responses to beetle outbreaks across the SRM 
region –­ driven by patterns of pre-­outbreak conditions, outbreak 
severity and species-­specific environmental tolerances –­ are likely 
to contribute to persistent ecosystem functioning despite future 
disturbance. While recent outbreaks of native bark beetles have 
been widespread, causing tree mortality across millions of hec-
tares throughout western North America (Bentz et al., 2009; Raffa 
et al.,  2008), these outbreaks are not catastrophic disturbances 
driving forest loss (Rocca & Romme, 2009). However, shifts in size 
structure and species composition have the potential to influence 
ecosystem services, susceptibility to subsequent disturbances 
and future forest dynamics. Region-­wide analyses such as those 

    |  15
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
presented here provide critical insight into the ecological effects 
of recent disturbances, as well as the way that these effects vary 
across broad forested landscapes.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, Kyle C. Rodman and Sarah J. Hart; Methodology, 
Kyle C. Rodman and Sarah J. Hart; Software, Kyle C. Rodman; 
Validation, Kyle C. Rodman; Formal Analysis, Kyle C. Rodman; 
Investigation, Kyle C. Rodman, Robert A. Andrus, Amanda R. 
Carlson, Trevor A. Carter, Teresa B. Chapman, Jonathan D. Coop, 
Paula J. Fornwalt, Nathan S. Gill, Brian J. Harvey, Katharine C. Kelsey, 
Jenna E. Morris, José F. Negrón, Katherine M. Nigro, Gregory S. 
Pappas, Miranda D. Redmond, Charles C. Rhoades, Zoe H. Schapira, 
Thomas T. Veblen and Jianmin Wang; Resources, Sarah J. Hart; Data 
Curation, Kyle C. Rodman, Robert A. Andrus, Amanda R. Carlson, 
Trevor A. Carter, Teresa B. Chapman, Jonathan D. Coop, Paula J. 
Fornwalt, Nathan S. Gill, Brian J. Harvey, Katharine C. Kelsey, Daniel 
C. Laughlin, Jenna E. Morris, José F. Negrón, Katherine M. Nigro, 
Gregory S. Pappas, Miranda D. Redmond, Charles C. Rhoades, Zoe 
H. Schapira, Thomas T. Veblen and Jianmin Wang; Writing—­Original 
Draft Preparation, Kyle C. Rodman; Writing—­Review & Editing, All 
authors; Visualization, Kyle C. Rodman; Supervision, Kyle C. Rodman 
and Sarah J. Hart; Project Administration, Kyle C. Rodman and Sarah 
J. Hart; Funding Acquisition, Brian J. Harvey, Thomas T. Veblen, 
Sarah J. Hart All authors have read and agreed to the submitted ver-
sion of the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The SRM are the traditional homeland of at least a dozen 
Indigenous Nations, many of whom still reside in the area and 
will forever call this place home. This study was supported 
by National Science Foundation award 1853520, National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration award NNX16AH58G, 
and the University of Wisconsin–­Madison, Office of the Vice-­
Chancellor for Research and Graduate Education with funding 
from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation. The authors 
would like to thank the many field assistants that helped to col-
lect and process field data, without whom this project would not 
have been possible. Lastly, we appreciate comments from Dr. 
Anna Schweiger and two anonymous reviewers that led to im-
provements in this manuscript.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
PEER REVIEW
The peer review history for this article is available at https://publo​
ns.com/publo​n/10.1111/1365-­2745.13999.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Processed data, statistical models, regional maps and R code used in 
this project are available through Dryad Digital Repository https://
doi.org/10.5061/dryad.7sqv9​s4sh (Rodman et al., 2022).
ORCID
Kyle C. Rodman 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9538-8412 
Robert A. Andrus 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0968-8377 
Amanda R. Carlson 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0450-2636 
Trevor A. Carter 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8727-5327 
Teresa B. Chapman 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3021-1231 
Jonathan D. Coop 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3930-340X 
Paula J. Fornwalt 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5252-408X 
Nathan S. Gill 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1496-8197 
Brian J. Harvey 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5902-4862 
Katharine C. Kelsey 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4631-8538 
Dominik Kulakowski 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7576-3569 
Daniel C. Laughlin 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9651-5732 
Jenna E. Morris 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3848-5915 
José F. Negrón 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5757-7594 
Katherine M. Nigro 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5852-3814 
Gregory S. Pappas 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9294-5217 
Miranda D. Redmond 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4657-7943 
Charles C. Rhoades 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3336-2257 
Monique E. Rocca 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5298-1643 
Zoe H. Schapira 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6753-5486 
Jason S. Sibold 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4716-0821 
Camille S. Stevens-­Rumann 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7923-0487 
Thomas T. Veblen 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3037-640X 
Jianmin Wang 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6739-9499 
Xiaoyang Zhang 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8456-0547 
Sarah J. Hart 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8371-8568 
REFERENCES
Anderegg, W. R. L., Flint, A. L., Huang, C., Flint, L. E., Berry, J. A., Davis, 
F. W., Sperry, J. S., & Field, C. B. (2015). Tree mortality predicted 
from drought-­induced vascular damage. Nature Geoscience, 8(5), 
367–­371. https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2400
Anderegg, W. R. L., Hicke, J. A., Fisher, R. A., Allen, C. D., Aukema, J., 
Bentz, B., Hood, S., Lichstein, J. W., Macalady, A. K., McDowell, N., 
Pan, Y., Raffa, K., Sala, A., Shaw, J. D., Stephenson, N. L., Tague, C., 
& Zeppel, M. (2015). Tree mortality from drought, insects, and their 
interactions in a changing climate. New Phytologist, 208(3), 674–­
683. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.13477
Andrus, R. A., Chai, R. K., Harvey, B. J., Rodman, K. C., & Veblen, T. T. 
(2021). Increasing rates of subalpine tree mortality linked to 
warmer and drier summers. Journal of Ecology, 109(5), 2203–­2218. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2745.13634
Andrus, R. A., Hart, S. J., Tutland, N. J., & Veblen, T. T. (2021). Future 
dominance by quaking aspen expected following short-­interval, 
compounded disturbance interaction. Ecosphere, 12(1), e03345. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.3345
Andrus, R. A., Hart, S. J., & Veblen, T. T. (2020). Forest recovery following 
synchronous outbreaks of spruce and western balsam bark beetle 
is slowed by ungulate browsing. Ecology, 101(5), e02998. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ecy.2998
Andrus, R. A., Harvey, B. J., Hoffman, A., & Veblen, T. T. (2020). 
Reproductive maturity and cone abundance explained by tree size 
and stand basal area for two widely distributed conifers. Ecosphere, 
11(5), e03092.
Andrus, R. A., Harvey, B. J., Rodman, K. C., Hart, S. J., & Veblen, T. T. 
(2018). Moisture availability limits subalpine tree establishment. 
Ecology, 99(3), 567–­575. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecy.2134

16 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
Angeler, D. G., & Allen, C. R. (2016). Quantifying resilience. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Ecology, 
53(3), 
617–­624. 
https://doi.
org/10.1111/1365-2664.12649
Aoki, C. F., Romme, W. H., & Rocca, M. E. (2011). Lodgepole pine seed 
germination following tree death from mountain pine beetle attack 
in Colorado, USA. American Midland Naturalist, 165(2), 446–­451. 
https://doi.org/10.1674/0003-0031-165.2.446
Aplet, G. H., Laven, R. D., & Smith, F. W. (1988). Patterns of commu-
nity dynamics in Colorado Engelmann spruce-­subalpine fir forests. 
Ecology, 69(2), 312–­319. https://doi.org/10.2307/1940429
Audley, J. P., Fettig, C. J., Steven Munson, A., Runyon, J. B., Mortenson, 
L. A., Steed, B. E., Gibson, K. E., Jørgensen, C. L., McKelvey, S. R., 
McMillin, J. D., & Negrón, J. F. (2020). Impacts of mountain pine 
beetle outbreaks on lodgepole pine forests in the Intermountain 
West, U.S. 2004–­2019. Forest Ecology and Management, 475, 
118403. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2020.118403
Aukema, B. H., McKee, F. R., Wytrykush, D. L., & Carroll, A. L. (2016). 
Population dynamics and epidemiology of four species of Dendroctonus 
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae): 100 years since J.M. Swaine. Canadian 
Entomologist, 148(S1), S82–­S110. https://doi.org/10.4039/tce.2016.5
Bakaj, F., Mietkiewicz, N., Veblen, T. T., & Kulakowski, D. (2016). The rel-
ative importance of tree and stand properties in susceptibility to 
spruce beetle outbreak in the mid-­20th century. Ecosphere, 7(10), 
e01485. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.1485
Baker, W. L., & Veblen, T. T. (1990). Spruce beetles and fires in the 
nineteenth-­century subalpine forests of western Colorado, 
USA. Arctic & Alpine Research, 22(1), 65–­80. https://doi.
org/10.2307/1551721
Bell, D. M., Bradford, J., & Lauenroth, W. K. (2014). Early indicators of 
change: Divergent climate envelopes between tree life stages 
imply range shifts in the western United States. Global Ecology and 
Biogeography, 23(2), 168–­180. https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12109
Bentz, B. J., Logan, J., MacMahon, J., Allen, C. D., Ayres, M., Berg, E., 
Carroll, A. L., Hansen, M. C., Hicke, J. A., Joyce, L., Macfarlane, W., 
Munson, S., Negrón, J. F., Paine, T., Powell, J., Raffa, K. F., Régnière, 
J., Reid, M. S., Romme, W. H., … Wood, D. (2009). Bark beetle out-
breaks in western North America: Causes and consequences. Bark 
Beetle Symposium, Snowbird, UT. University of Utah Press. https://
www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_other/​rmrs_2009_bentz_b001.pdf
Bentz, B. J., Régnière, J., Fettig, C. J., Hansen, E. M., Hayes, J. L., Hicke, 
J. A., Kelsey, R. G., Negrón, J. F., & Seybold, S. J. (2010). Climate 
change and bark beetles of the Western United States and Canada: 
Direct and indirect effects. Bioscience, 60(8), 602–­613. https://doi.
org/10.1525/bio.2010.60.8.6
Berner, L. T., Law, B. E., Meddens, A. J. H., & Hicke, J. A. (2017). Tree 
mortality from fires, bark beetles, and timber harvest during a 
hot and dry decade in the western United States (2003–­2012). 
Environmental Research Letters, 
12(6), 
065005. 
https://doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa6f94
Beven, K. J., & Kirkby, M. J. (1979). A physically based, variable contribut-
ing area model of basin hydrology. Hydrological Sciences Bulletin, 24, 
43–­69. https://doi.org/10.1080/02626​66790​9491834
Bigler, C., Gavin, D. G., Gunning, C., & Veblen, T. T. (2007). Drought 
induces lagged tree mortality in a subalpine forest in the 
Rocky 
Mountains. 
Oikos, 
116(12), 
1983–­1994. 
https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.2007.0030-1299.16034.x
Bjornstad, O. N. (2019). ncf: Spatial covariance functions. R package (1.2-­8). 
https://cran.r-proje​ct.org/packa​ge=ncf
Bleiker, K. P., Lindgren, B. S., & Maclauchlan, L. E. (2003). Characteristics 
of subalpine fir susceptible to attack by western balsam bark beetle 
(Coleoptera: Scolytidae). Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 33(8), 
1538–­1543. https://doi.org/10.1139/x03-071
Bolker, B. M., Brooks, M. E., Clark, C. J., Geange, S. W., Poulsen, J. R., 
Stevens, M. H. H., & White, J.-­S. S. (2009). Generalized linear 
mixed models: A practical guide for ecology and evolution. Trends 
in Ecology & Evolution, 24(3), 127–­135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tree.2008.10.008
Bolnick, D. I., Amarasekare, P., Araújo, M. S., Bürger, R., Levine, J. M., 
Novak, M., Rudolf, V. H. W., Schreiber, S. J., Urban, M. C., & Vasseur, 
D. A. (2011). Why intraspecific trait variation matters in community 
ecology. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 26(4), 183–­192. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tree.2011.01.009
Boone, C. K., Aukema, B. H., Bohlmann, J., Carroll, A. L., & Raffa, K. F. 
(2011). Efficacy of tree defense physiology varies with bark beetle 
population density: A basis for positive feedback in eruptive spe-
cies. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 41(6), 1174–­1188. https://
doi.org/10.1139/x11-041
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–­32. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:10109​33404324
Buechling, A., Martin, P. H., & Canham, C. D. (2017). Climate and 
competition effects on tree growth in Rocky Mountain for-
ests. 
Journal 
of 
Ecology, 
105(6), 
1636–­1647. 
https://doi.
org/10.1111/1365-2745.12782
Burns, R. M., & Honkala, B. H. (1990a). Silvics of North America: Vol 1, 
Conifers. Agricultural Handbook 654. http://www.na.fs.fed.us/
spfo/pubs/silvi​cs_manual
Burns, R. M., & Honkala, B. H. (1990b). Silvics of North America: Vol 2, 
Hardwoods. Agricultural Handbook 654. http://www.na.fs.fed.us/
spfo/pubs/silvi​cs_manual
Caggiano, M. D. (2017). Front range round table 2016 interagency fuel 
treatment database. https://cfri.colos​tate.edu/wp-conte​nt/uploa​
ds/sites/​22/2017/10/FRRT-Fuel-Treat​ment-Datab​ase_Techn​
ical-Report_1701_03202​017.pdf
Carlson, A. R., Sibold, J. S., Assal, T. J., & Negrón, J. F. (2017). Evidence of 
compounded disturbance effects on vegetation recovery following 
high-­severity wildfire and spruce beetle outbreak. PLoS ONE, 12(8), 
1–­24. https://doi.org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.0181778
Carlson, A. R., Sibold, J. S., & Negrón, J. F. (2020). Canopy structure 
and below-­canopy temperatures interact to shape seedling re-
sponse to disturbance in a Rocky Mountain subalpine forest. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 472, 118234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2020.118234
Carnicer, J., Vives-­Ingla, M., Blanquer, L., Méndez-­Camps, X., Rosell, 
C., Sabaté, S., Gutiérrez, E., Sauras, T., Peñuelas, J., & Barbeta, 
A. (2021). Forest resilience to global warming is strongly mod-
ulated by local-­scale topographic, microclimatic and biotic 
conditions. Journal of Ecology, 109(9), 3322–­3339. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1365-2745.13752
Carroll, C. J. W., Knapp, A. K., & Martin, P. H. (2021). Higher tempera-
tures increase growth rates of Rocky Mountain montane tree 
seedlings. Ecosphere, 12(3), e03414. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ecs2.3414
Carter, T. A., Fornwalt, P. J., Dwire, K. A., & Laughlin, D. C. (2022). 
Understory plant community responses to widespread spruce 
mortality in a subalpine forest. Journal of Vegetation Science, 33(1), 
e13109. https://doi.org/10.1111/jvs.13109
Chai, R. K., Andrus, R. A., Harvey, B. J., Rodman, K. C., & Veblen, T. T. 
(2019). Stand dynamics and topographic setting influence changes 
in live tree biomass over a 34-­year permanent plot record in a subal-
pine forest in the Colorado Front Range. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research, 49, 1256–­1264. https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2019-0023
Chaney, N. W., Wood, E. F., McBratney, A. B., Hempel, J. W., Nauman, 
T. W., Brungard, C. W., & Odgers, N. P. (2016). POLARIS: A 30-­
meter probabilistic soil series map of the contiguous United 
States. Geoderma, 274, 54–­67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geode​
rma.2016.03.025
Chapman, T. B., Veblen, T. T., & Schoennagel, T. (2012). Spatiotemporal 
patterns of mountain pine beetle sctivity in the Southern 
Rocky Mountains. Ecology, 93(10), 2175–­2185. https://doi.
org/10.1890/11-1055.1

    |  17
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
Clark, J. S., Andrus, R., Aubry-­Kientz, M., Bergeron, Y., Bogdziewicz, M., 
Bragg, D. C., Brockway, D., Cleavitt, N. L., Cohen, S., Courbaud, 
B., Daley, R., Das, A. J., Dietze, M., Fahey, T. J., Fer, I., Pearson, 
S., Pease, S., Poulton-­kamakura, R., Ready, E., … Zlotin, R. (2021). 
Continent-­wide tree fecundity driven by indirect climate ef-
fects. Nature Communications, 12, 1242. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-20836-3
Coleman, T. W., Graves, A. D., Heath, Z., Flowers, R. W., Hanavan, R. 
P., Cluck, D. R., & Ryerson, D. (2018). Accuracy of aerial detection 
surveys for mapping insect and disease disturbances in the United 
States. Forest Ecology and Management, 430(June), 321–­336. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2018.08.020
Collins, B. J., Rhoades, C. C., Hubbard, R. M., & Battaglia, M. A. (2011). 
Tree regeneration and future stand development after bark bee-
tle infestation and harvesting in Colorado lodgepole pine stands. 
Forest Ecology and Management, 261, 2168–­2175. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2011.03.016
Coop, J. D., DeLory, T. J., Downing, W. M., Haire, S. L., Krawchuk, M. 
A., Miller, C., Parisien, M., & Walker, R. B. (2019). Contributions of 
fire refugia to resilient ponderosa pine and dry mixed-­conifer for-
est landscapes. Ecosphere, 10(7), e02809. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ecs2.2809
Crouch, C. D., Grady, A. M., Wilhelmi, N. P., Hofstetter, R. W., DePinte, D. 
E., & Waring, K. M. (2021). Oystershell scale: An emerging invasive 
threat to aspen in the southwestern US. Biological Invasions, 23(9), 
2893–­2912. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10530-021-02545-0
Curtis, R. O., & Marshall, D. D. (2000). Why quadratic mean diameter? 
Western Journal of Applied Forestry, 15(3), 137–­139. https://doi.
org/10.1093/wjaf/15.3.137
DeRose, R. J., & Long, J. N. (2007). Disturbance, structure, and com-
position: Spruce beetle and Engelmann spruce forests on the 
Markagunt Plateau, Utah. Forest Ecology and Management, 244(1–­
3), 16–­23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2007.03.065
DeRose, R. J., & Long, J. N. (2010). Regeneration response and seedling 
bank dynamics on a Dendroctonus rufipennis-­killed Picea engelman-
nii landscape. Journal of Vegetation Science, 21(2), 377–­387. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1654-1103.2009.01150.x
DeRose, R. J., & Long, J. N. (2014). Resistance and resilience: A concep-
tual framework for silviculture. Forest Science, 60(6), 1205–­1212. 
https://doi.org/10.5849/forsci.13-507
Diskin, M., Rocca, M. E., Nelson, K. N., Aoki, C. F., & Romme, W. H. 
(2011). Forest developmental trajectories in mountain pine bee-
tle disturbed forests of Rocky Mountain National Park, Colorado. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 41(4), 782–­792. https://doi.
org/10.1139/x10-247
Dixit, A., Kolb, T., & Burney, O. (2022). Trade-­off between growth rate 
and water use efficiency in southwestern ponderosa pine prove-
nances. Forest Ecology and Management, 515(April), 120239. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2022.120239
Dixon, G. E. (2002). Essential FVS: A user's guide to the Forest Vegetation 
Simulator. US Forest Service, Forest Management Service Center. 
https://www.fs.fed.us/fmsc/ftp/fvs/docs/gtr/Essen​tialF​VS.pdf
Dobrowski, S. Z., Swanson, A. K., Abatzoglou, J. T., Holden, Z. A., Safford, 
H. D., Schwartz, M. K., & Gavin, D. G. (2015). Forest structure and 
species traits mediate projected recruitment declines in Western 
US tree species. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 24(8), 917–­927. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12302
Edburg, S. L., Hicke, J. A., Brooks, P. D., Pendall, E. G., Ewers, B. E., Norton, 
U., Gochis, D., Gutmann, E. D., & Meddens, A. J. H. (2012). Cascading 
impacts of bark beetle-­caused tree mortality on coupled biogeo-
physical and biogeochemical processes. Frontiers in Ecology and the 
Environment, 10(8), 416–­424. https://doi.org/10.1890/110173
Eidenshink, J., Schwind, B., Brewer, K., Zhu, Z., Quayle, B., Howard, S., 
Falls, S., & Falls, S. (2007). A project for monitoring trends in burn 
severity. Fire Ecology, 3(1), 3–­21. https://doi.org/10.4996/firee​
cology.0301003
Elmqvist, T., Folke, C., Nyström, M., Peterson, G., Bengtsson, J., Walker, 
B., & Norberg, J. (2003). Response diversity, ecosystem change, 
and resilience. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 1(9), 488–­
494. https://doi.org/10.1890/1540-9295(2003)001[0488:RDECA​
R]2.0.CO;2
Fettig, C. J., Gibson, K. E., Munson, A. S., & Negrón, J. F. (2014). Cultural 
practices for prevention and mitigation of mountain pine beetle in-
festations. Forest Science, 60(3), 450–­463. https://doi.org/10.5849/
forsci.13-032
Fornwalt, P. J., Rhoades, C. C., Hubbard, R. M., Harris, R. L., Faist, A. 
M., & Bowman, W. D. (2018). Short-­term understory plant commu-
nity responses to salvage logging in beetle-­affected lodgepole pine 
forests. Forest Ecology and Management, 409, 84–­93. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2017.10.056
Frank, J. M., Massman, W. J., Ewers, B. E., Huckaby, L. S., & Negrón, J. F. 
(2014). Ecosystem CO2/H2O fluxes are explained by hydraulically 
limited gas exchange during tree mortality from spruce bark bee-
tles. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 119(6), 1195–­
1215. https://doi.org/10.1002/2013J​G002597
Franklin, J. F., Lindenmayer, D., MacMahon, J. A., McKee, A., Magnuson, 
J., Perry, D. A., Waide, R., & Foster, D. (2000). Threads of conti-
nuity. Conservation Biology in Practice, 1(1), 9–­16. https://www.
conse​rvati​onmag​azine.org/2000/07/threa​ds-of-conti​nuity/
Geospatial Multi-­Agency Coordinating Group (GeoMAC). (2020). 
Historic fire data. https://rmgsc.cr.usgs.gov/outgo​ing/GeoMA​C/
Gill, N. S., Jarvis, D., Veblen, T. T., Pickett, S. T. A., & Kulakowski, D. 
(2017). Is initial post-­disturbance regeneration indicative of longer-­
term trajectories? Ecosphere, 8(8), 1–­13. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ecs2.1924
Hanna, P., & Kulakowski, D. (2012). The influences of climate on aspen 
dieback. Forest Ecology and Management, 274, 91–­98. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2012.02.009
Hansen, M. C., Potapov, P. V., Moore, R., Hancher, M., Turubanova, S. 
A., Tyukavina, A., Thau, D., Stehman, S. V., Goetz, S. J., Loveland, 
T. R., Kommareddy, A., Egorov, A., Chini, L., Justice, C. O., & 
Townshend, J. R. G. (2013). High-­resolution global maps of 21st-­
century forest cover change. Science, 342(6160), 850–­853. https://
doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.1244693
Hart, S. J., Veblen, T. T., Eisenhart, K. S., Jarvis, D., & Kulakowski, D. 
(2014). Drought induces spruce beetle (Dendroctonus rufipennis) 
outbreaks across northwestern Colorado. Ecology, 95(4), 930–­939. 
https://doi.org/10.1890/13-0230.1
Hart, S. J., Veblen, T. T., & Kulakowski, D. (2014). Do tree and stand-­
level attributes determine susceptibility of spruce-­fir forests 
to spruce beetle outbreaks in the early 21st century? Forest 
Ecology and Management, 318, 44–­53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2013.12.035
Hart, S. J., Veblen, T. T., Mietkiewicz, N., & Kulakowski, D. (2015). 
Negative feedbacks on bark beetle outbreaks: Widespread and 
severe spruce beetle infestation restricts subsequent infesta-
tion. PLoS ONE, 10(5), e0127975. https://doi.org/10.1371/journ​
al.pone.0127975
Hart, S. J., Veblen, T. T., Schneider, D., & Molotch, N. P. (2017). Summer 
and winter drought drive the initiation and spread of spruce bee-
tle outbreak. Ecology, 98(10), 2698–­2707. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ijlh.12426
Hartig, F. (2018). ‘DHARMa’: Residual diagnostics for hierarchical (multi-­
level/mixed) regression models. R package (0.4.5). https://cran.r-
proje​ct.org/web/packa​ges/DHARM​a/vigne​ttes/DHARMa.html
Harvey, B. J., Andrus, R. A., Battaglia, M. A., Negrón, J. F., Orrego, A., & 
Veblen, T. T. (2021). Droughty times in mesic places: Factors associ-
ated with forest mortality vary by scale in a temperate subalpine re-
gion. Ecosphere, 12(1), e03318. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.3318
Harvey, B. J., Donato, D. C., & Turner, M. G. (2014). Recent mountain pine 
beetle outbreaks, wildfire severity, and postfire tree regeneration 
in the US Northern Rockies. Proceedings of the National Academy 

18 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(42), 15120–­15125. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.14113​46111
Hicke, J. A., Xu, B., Meddens, A. J. H., & Egan, J. M. (2020). Characterizing 
recent bark beetle-­caused tree mortality in the western United 
States from aerial surveys. Forest Ecology and Management, 475, 
118402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2020.118402
Hijmans, R. J. (2015). ‘raster’: Geographic data analysis and modeling. 
R package (2.5-­2). https://cran.r-proje​ct.org/web/packa​ges/raste​r/
index.html
Hodgson, D., McDonald, J. L., & Hosken, D. J. (2015). What do you mean, 
‘resilient’? Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 30(9), 503–­506. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tree.2015.06.010
Homer, C., Dewitz, J., Fry, J., Coan, M., Hossain, N., Larson, C., Herold, N., 
McKerrow, A., VanDriel, J. N., & Wickham, J. (2007). Completion of 
the 2001 national land cover database for the coterminous United 
States. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 73(4), 
337–­341.
Homer, C., Dewitz, J., Jin, S., Xian, G., Costello, C., Danielson, P., Gass, L., 
Funk, M., Wickham, J., Stehman, S., Auch, R., & Riitters, K. (2020). 
Conterminous United States land cover change patterns 2001–­
2016 from the 2016 National Land Cover Database. ISPRS Journal 
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 162, 184–­199. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isprs​jprs.2020.02.019
Howe, M., Peng, L., & Carroll, A. (2022). Landscape predictions of west-
ern balsam bark beetle activity implicate warm temperatures, a lon-
ger growing season, and drought in widespread irruptions across 
British Columbia. Forest Ecology and Management, 508, 120047. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2022.120047
Ivan, J. S., Seglund, A. E., Truex, R. L., & Newkirk, E. S. (2018). Mammalian 
responses to changed forest conditions resulting from bark bee-
tle outbreaks in the southern Rocky Mountains. Ecosphere, 9(8), 
e02369. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.2369
Jaime, L., Hart, S. J., Lloret, F., Veblen, T. T., Andrus, R. A., Rodman, K. 
C., & Batllori, E. (2022). Species climatic suitability explains insect–­
host dynamics in the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA. Ecosystems, 
25, 91–­104. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10021-021-00643-7
Jarvis, D. S., & Kulakowski, D. (2015). Long-­term history and synchrony 
of mountain pine beetle outbreaks in lodgepole pine forests. 
Journal of Biogeography, 42(6), 1029–­1039. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jbi.12489
Jenkins, M. J., Hebertson, E. G., & Munson, A. S. (2014). Spruce bee-
tle biology, ecology and management in the Rocky Mountains: An 
addendum to Spruce Beetle in the Rockies. Forests, 5(1), 21–­71. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/f5010021
Jiang, Z., Huete, A. R., Didan, K., & Miura, T. (2008). Development of a 
two-­band enhanced vegetation index without a blue band. Remote 
Sensing of Environment, 112, 3833–­3845. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rse.2008.06.006
Johnson, T. N., Buskirk, S. W., Hayward, G. D., & Raphael, M. G. 
(2014). Tree mortality after synchronized forest insect outbreaks: 
Effects of tree species, bole diameter, and cutting history. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 319, 10–­17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2014.01.047
Johnstone, J. F., Allen, C. D., Franklin, J. F., Frelich, L. E., Harvey, B. 
J., Higuera, P. E., Mack, M. C., Meentemeyer, R. K., Metz, M. R., 
Perry, G. L., Schoennagel, T. L., & Turner, M. G. (2016). Changing 
disturbance regimes, ecological memory, and forest resilience. 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 14(7), 369–­378. https://
doi.org/10.1002/fee.1311
Kaufman, L., & Rousseeuw, P. J. (2005). Finding groups in data: An intro-
duction to cluster analysis (2nd ed.). Wiley-Interscience.
Kayes, L. J., & Tinker, D. B. (2012). Forest structure and regenera-
tion following a mountain pine beetle epidemic in southeastern 
Wyoming. Forest Ecology and Management, 263, 57–­66. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2011.09.035
Knowles, J. F., Scott, R. L., Biederman, J. A., Blanken, P. D., Burns, S. P., 
Dore, S., Kolb, T. E., Litvak, M. E., & Barron-­Gafford, G. A. (2020). 
Montane forest productivity across a semiarid climatic gradient. 
Global Change Biology, 26(12), 6945–­6958. https://doi.org/10.1111/
gcb.15335
Kolb, T. E., Ayres, M. P., & Stewart, J. E. (2016). Observed and anticipated 
impacts of drought on forest insects and diseases in the United 
States. Forest Ecology and Management, 380, 321–­334. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2016.04.051
Koontz, M. J., North, M. P., Werner, C. M., Fick, S. E., & Latimer, A. M. 
(2020). Local forest structure variability increases resilience to 
wildfire in dry western U.S. coniferous forests. Ecology Letters, 
23(3), 483–­494. https://doi.org/10.1111/ele.13447
Kulakowski, D., Jarvis, D., Veblen, T. T., & Smith, J. (2012). Stand-­
replacing fires reduce susceptibility of lodgepole pine to mountain 
pine beetle outbreaks in Colorado. Journal of Biogeography, 39(11), 
2052–­2060. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2012.02748.x
Laughlin, D. C., Gremer, J. R., Adler, P. B., Mitchell, R. M., & Moore, M. 
M. (2020). The net effect of functional traits on fitness. Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution, 35(11), 1037–­1047. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tree.2020.07.010
Lüdecke, D., Ben-­Shachar, M. S., Patil, I., Waggoner, P., & Makowski, D. 
(2021). performance: An R package for assessment, comparison 
and testing of statistical models. Journal of Open Source Software, 
6(60), 3139. https://doi.org/10.21105/​joss.03139
Lukas, J., Barsugli, J., Doesken, N., Rangwala, I., & Wolter, K. (2014). 
Climate change in Colorado: A synthesis to support water resources 
management and adaptation. University of Colorado Boulder, 
Western Water Assessment. http://cwcb.state.co.us/public-infor​
matio​n/publi​catio​ns/docum​ents/repor​tsstu​dies/clima​techa​ngere​
portf​ull.pdf
Lutz, J. A., Furniss, T. J., Johnson, D. J., Davies, S. J., Allen, D., Alonso, 
A., Anderson-­Teixeira, K. J., Andrade, A., Baltzer, J., Becker, K. M. 
L., Blomdahl, E. M., Bourg, N. A., Bunyavejchewin, S., Burslem, D. 
F. R. P., Cansler, C. A., Cao, K., Cao, M., Cárdenas, D., Chang, L. W., 
… Zimmerman, J. K. (2018). Global importance of large-­diameter 
trees. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 27(7), 849–­864. https://doi.
org/10.1111/geb.12747
Martin, P. H., & Canham, C. D. (2020). Peaks in frequency, but not relative 
abundance, occur in the center of tree species distributions on cli-
mate gradients. Ecosphere, 11(6), e03149. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ecs2.3149
McCaughey, W. W., Schmidt, W. C., & Shearer, R. C. (1986). Seed-­
dispersal characteristics of conifers in the Inland Mountain West. 
In R. C. Shearer (Ed.), Conifer Tree Seed in the Inland Mountain West 
Symposium. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-­GTR-­203 (pp. 50–­62). USDA Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station.
McCune, B., & Keon, D. (2002). Equations for potential annual direct inci-
dent radiation and heat load. Journal of Vegetation Science, 13, 603–­
606. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1654-1103.2002.tb020​87.x
McDowell, N. G., Allen, C. D., Anderson-­Teixeira, K., Aukema, B. H., 
Bond-­Lamberty, B., Chini, L., Clark, J. S., Dietze, M., Grossiord, 
C., Hanbury-­brown, A., Hurtt, G. C., Jackson, R. B., Johnson, D. 
J., Kueppers, L., Lichstein, J. W., Ogle, K., Poulter, B., Pugh, T. A. 
M., Seidl, R., … Xu, C. (2020). Pervasive shifts in forest dynamics 
in a changing world. Science, 368(6494), eaaz9463. https://doi.
org/10.1126/scien​ce.aaz9463
McGill, B. J., Enquist, B. J., Weiher, E., & Westoby, M. (2006). 
Rebuilding community ecology from functional traits. Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution, 21(4), 178–­185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tree.2006.02.002
McMillin, J. D., Malesky, D., Kegley, S., & Munson, A. S. (2017). Western 
balsam bark beetle. US Forest Service, Forest Insect & Disease 
Leaflet 184. https://www.fs.fed.us/fores​theal​th/docs/fidls/​FIDL-
184-Weste​rnBal​samBa​rkBee​tle.pdf

    |  19
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
Meddens, A. J. H., & Hicke, J. A. (2014). Spatial and temporal pat-
terns of Landsat-­based detection of tree mortality caused 
by a mountain pine beetle outbreak in Colorado, USA. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 322, 78–­88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2014.02.037
Meyer, H., Reudenbach, C., Wöllauer, S., & Nauss, T. (2019). Importance 
of spatial predictor variable selection in machine learning appli-
cations –­ Moving from data reproduction to spatial prediction. 
Ecological Modelling, 411, 108815. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolm​
odel.2019.108815
Morris, J. E., Buonanduci, M. S., Agne, M. C., Battaglia, M. A., & Harvey, 
B. J. (2022). Does the legacy of historical thinning treatments foster 
resilience to bark beetle outbreaks in subalpine forests? Ecological 
Applications, 32(1), e02474. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2474
Morris, J. L., Cottrell, S., Fettig, C. J., Hansen, W. D., Sherriff, R. L., Carter, 
V. A., Clear, J. L., Clement, J., DeRose, R. J., Hicke, J. A., Higuera, 
P. E., Mattor, K. M., Seddon, A. W. R., Seppä, H. T., Stednick, J. 
D., & Seybold, S. J. (2017). Managing bark beetle impacts on eco-
systems and society: Priority questions to motivate future re-
search. Journal of Applied Ecology, 54(3), 750–­760. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1365-2664.12782
Negrón, J. F., & Huckaby, L. (2020). Reconstructing historical outbreaks 
of mountain pine beetle in lodgepole pine forests in the Colorado 
Front Range. Forest Ecology and Management, 473, 118270. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2020.118270
Nigro, K. M., Rocca, M. E., Battaglia, M. A., Coop, J. D., & Redmond, M. 
D. (2022). Wildfire catalyzes upward range expansion of trembling 
aspen in beetle-­killed forests of the southern Rocky Mountains. 
Journal of Biogeography, 49(1), 201–­214. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jbi.14302
Noble, D. L., & Alexander, R. R. (1977). Environmental factors affect-
ing natural regeneration of Engelmann Spruce in the Central 
Rocky Mountains. Forest Science, 23(4), 420–­429. https://doi.
org/10.1093/fores​tscie​nce/23.4.420
Oyler, J. W., Dobrowski, S. Z., Ballantyne, A. P., Klene, A. E., & Running, 
S. W. (2015). Artificial amplification of warming trends across the 
mountains of the western United States. Geophysical Research 
Letters, 42(1), 153–­161. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014G​L062803
Pappas, G. S., Tinker, D. B., & Rocca, M. E. (2020). Understory vegetation 
response to mountain pine beetle disturbance in northern Colorado 
lodgepole pine forests. Plant Ecology, 221(12), 1293–­1308. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11258-020-01082-5
Pederson, G. T., Gray, S. T., Woodhouse, C. A., Betancourt, J. L., Fagre, 
D. B., Littell, J. S., Watson, E., Luckman, B. H., & Graumlich, L. J. 
(2011). The unusual nature of recent snowpack declines in the 
North American Cordillera. Science, 333, 332–­336. https://doi.
org/10.1126/scien​ce.1201570
Peet, R. (1981). Forest vegetation of the Colorado Front Range. Vegetatio, 
45, 3–­75. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF001​26830
Pelz, K. A., Rhoades, C. C., Hubbard, R. M., & Smith, F. W. (2018). Severity 
of overstory mortality influences conifer recruitment and growth 
in mountain pine beetle-­affected forests. Forests, 9(9), 536. https://
doi.org/10.3390/f9090536
Perovich, C., & Sibold, J. S. (2016). Forest composition change after a 
mountain pine beetle outbreak, Rocky Mountain National Park, 
CO, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 366, 184–­192. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2016.02.010
Pettit, J. M., Burton, J. I., DeRose, R. J., Long, J. N., & Voelker, S. L. (2019). 
Epidemic spruce beetle outbreak changes drivers of Engelmann 
spruce regeneration. Ecosphere, 10(11), e02912. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ecs2.2912
Potapov, P., Li, X., Hernandez-­Serna, A., Tyukavina, A., Hansen, M. C., 
Kommareddy, A., Pickens, A., Turubanova, S., Tang, H., Silva, C. E., 
Armston, J., Dubayah, R., Blair, J. B., & Hofton, M. (2021). Mapping 
global forest canopy height through integration of GEDI and 
Landsat data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 253(2020), 112165. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2020.112165
PRISM Climate Group, Oregon State University. (2022). 30-­year climate 
normals (1981–­2010). http://prism.orego​nstate.edu
Qiu, T., Aravena, M., Andrus, R., Ascoli, D., Bergeron, Y., Berretti, R., 
Poulton-­kamakura, R., Redmond, M. D., Reid, C. D., Rodman, K. C., 
Scher, C. L., Schmidt, H., Marle, V., Seget, B., Sharma, S., Silman, 
M., Swenson, J. J., Swift, M., Clark, J. S., … Zywiec, M. (2021). Is 
there tree senescence? The fecundity evidence. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
118(34), e2106130118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.21061​30118
R Core Team. (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical com-
puting (4.0.5). R Foundation for Statistical Computing. https://ww-
w.r-proje​ct.org/
Raffa, K. F., Aukema, B. H., Bentz, B. J., Carroll, A. L., Hicke, J. A., Turner, 
M. G., & Romme, W. H. (2008). Cross-­scale drivers of natural dis-
turbances prone to anthropogenic amplification: The dynamics 
of bark beetle eruptions. Bioscience, 58(6), 501–­517. https://doi.
org/10.1641/B580607
Redmond, M. D., & Kelsey, K. C. (2018). Topography and overstory mor-
tality interact to control tree regeneration in spruce-­fir forests of 
the southern Rocky Mountains. Forest Ecology and Management, 
427, 106–­113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2018.05.057
Rehfeldt, G. E., Crookston, N. L., Warwell, M. V., & Evans, J. S. (2006). 
Empirical analyses of plant-­climate relationships for the western 
United States. International Journal of Plant Sciences, 167(6), 1123–­
1150. https://doi.org/10.1086/507711
Rhoades, C. C., Hubbard, R. M., & Elder, K. (2017). A decade of stream-
water nitrogen and forest dynamics after a mountain pine beetle 
outbreak at the Fraser Experimental Forest, Colorado. Ecosystems, 
20(2), 380–­392. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10021-016-0027-6
Rhoades, C. C., Hubbard, R. M., Elder, K., Fornwalt, P. J., Schnackenberg, 
E., Hood, P. R., & Tinker, D. B. (2020). Tree regeneration and soil 
responses to management alternatives in beetle-­infested lodgepole 
pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management, 468, 118182. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2020.118182
Rhoades, C. C., McCutchan, J. H., Cooper, L. A., Clow, D., Detmer, T. M., 
Briggs, J. S., Stednick, J. D., Veblen, T. T., Ertz, R. M., Likensh, G. 
E., & Lewis, W. M. (2013). Biogeochemistry of beetle-­killed forests: 
Explaining a weak nitrate response. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110(5), 1756–­
1760. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.12210​29110
Rocca, M. E., & Romme, W. H. (2009). Beetle-­infested forests are not 
‘destroyed’. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 7(2), 71–­72. 
https://doi.org/10.1890/09.WB.003
Rodman, K. C., Andrus, R. A., Butkiewicz, C. L., Chapman, T. B., Gill, N. S., 
Harvey, B. J., Kulakowski, D., Tutland, N. J., Veblen, T. T., & Hart, S. 
J. (2021). Effects of bark beetle outbreaks on forest landscape pat-
tern in the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA. Remote Sensing, 13(6), 
1089. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs130​61089
Rodman, K. C., Andrus, R. A., Carlson, A. R., Carter, T. A., Chapman, T. B., 
Coop, J. D., Fornwalt, P. J., Gill, N. S., Harvey, B. J., Hoffman, A. E., 
Kelsey, K. C., Kulakowski, D., Laughlin, D. C., Morris, J. E., Negrón, J. 
F., Nigro, K. M., Pappas, G. S., Redmond, M. D., Rhoades, C. C., … Hart, 
S. J. (2022). Data from: Rocky Mountain forests are poised to recover 
following bark beetle outbreaks, but with altered composition. Dryad 
Digital Repository, https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.7sqv9​s4sh
Rodman, K. C., Veblen, T. T., Andrus, R. A., Enright, N. J., Fontaine, J. B., 
Gonzalez, A. D., Redmond, M. D., & Wion, A. P. (2021). A trait-­based 
approach to assessing resistance and resilience to wildfire in two 
iconic North American conifers. Journal of Ecology, 109(1), 313–­326. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2745.13480
Rodman, K. C., Veblen, T. T., Battaglia, M. A., Chambers, M. E., 
Fornwalt, P. J., Holden, Z. A., Kolb, T. E., Ouzts, J. R., & Rother, M. 
T. (2020). A changing climate is snuffing out post-­fire recovery in 

20 |   
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
montane forests. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 29(11), 2039–­
2051. https://doi.org/10.1111/GEB.13174
Rodman, K. C., Veblen, T. T., Saraceni, S., & Chapman, T. B. (2019). 
Wildfire activity and land use drove 20th century changes in for-
est cover in the Colorado Front Range. Ecosphere, 10(2), e02594. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.2594
Rollins, M. G. (2009). LANDFIRE: A nationally consistent vegetation, 
wildland fire, and fuel assessment. International Journal of Wildland 
Fire, 18(3), 235–­249. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF08088
Romme, W. H., Floyd, M. L., Hanna, D., Bartlett, E. J., Crist, M., 
Green, D., Grissino-­Mayer, H. D., Lindsey, J. P., McGarigal, K., 
& Redders, J. S. (2009). Historical range of variability and current 
landscape condition analysis: South central highlands section, south-
western Colorado & northwestern New Mexico. Colorado Forest 
Restoration Institute. https://sites.warne​rcnr.colos​tate.edu/wp-
conte​nt/uploa​ds/sites/​32/2016/05/2009_HRVSo​uthCe​ntral-
Highl​ands1.pdf
Romme, W. H., Knight, D. H., & Yavitt, J. B. (1986). Mountain pine bee-
tle outbreaks in the Rocky Mountains: Regulators of primary pro-
ductivity? The American Naturalist, 127(4), 484–­494. https://doi.
org/10.1086/284497
Roos, C. I., Swetnam, T. W., Ferguson, T. J., Liebmann, M. J., Loehman, 
R. A., Welch, J. R., Margolis, E. Q., Guiterman, C. H., Hockaday, 
W. C., Aiuvalasit, M. J., Battillo, J., Farella, J., & Kiahtipes, C. A. 
(2021). Native American fire management at an ancient wildland–­
urban interface in the Southwest United States. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 118(4), 
e2018733118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.20187​33118
Rousset, F., & Ferdy, J.-­B. (2014). Testing environmental and genetic ef-
fects in the presence of spatial autocorrelation. Ecography, 37(8), 
781–­790. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.00566
Saab, V. A., Latif, Q. S., Rowland, M. M., Johnson, T. N., Chalfoun, A. D., 
Buskirk, S. W., Heyward, J. E., & Dresser, M. A. (2014). Ecological 
consequences of mountain pine beetle outbreaks for wildlife in 
Western North American forests. Forest Science, 60(3), 539–­559. 
https://doi.org/10.5849/forsci.13-022
Schapira, Z. H., Stevens-­Rumann, C. S., & Shorrock, D. (2021). Subalpine 
tree seedlings: Assessing aging methodology and drivers of estab-
lishment. Forest Ecology and Management, 497, 119516. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2021.119516
Schapira, Z. H., Stevens-­Rumann, C. S., Shorrock, D., Hoffman, C. M., & 
Chambers, A. (2021). Beetlemania: Is the bark worse than the bite? 
Rocky Mountain subalpine forests recover differently after spruce 
beetle outbreaks and wildfires. Forest Ecology and Management, 
482, 118879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2020.118879
Schmid, J. M., & Frye, R. H. (1977). Spruce beetle in the rockies. General 
Technical Report RM-­49. US Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_rm/rm_gtr049.pdf
Seidl, R., Schelhaas, M. J., Rammer, W., & Verkerk, P. J. (2014). Increasing 
forest disturbances in Europe and their impact on carbon storage. 
Nature Climate Change, 4(9), 806–­810. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclim​ate2318
Sheth, S. N., & Angert, A. L. (2018). Demographic compensation does 
not rescue populations at a trailing range edge. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 115(10), 
2413–­2418. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.17158​99115
Sibold, J. S., Veblen, T. T., Chipko, K., Lawson, L., Mathis, E., & Scott, J. 
(2007). Influences of secondary disturbances on lodgepole pine 
stand development in Rocky Mountain National Park. Ecological 
Applications, 17(6), 1638–­1655. https://doi.org/10.1890/06-0907.1
Sibold, J. S., Veblen, T. T., & González, M. E. (2006). Spatial and tem-
poral variation in historic fire regimes in subalpine forests across 
the Colorado Front Range in Rocky Mountain National Park, 
Colorado, USA. Journal of Biogeography, 33(4), 631–­647. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2005.01404.x
Sommerfeld, A., Senf, C., Buma, B., D'Amato, A. W., Després, T., Díaz-­
Hormazábal, I., Fraver, S., Frelich, L. E., Gutiérrez, Á. G., Hart, 
S. J., Harvey, B. J., He, H. S., Hlásny, T., Holz, A., Kitzberger, T., 
Kulakowski, D., Lindenmayer, D., Mori, A. S., Müller, J., … Seidl, R. 
(2018). Patterns and drivers of recent disturbances across the tem-
perate forest biome. Nature Communications, 9, 4355. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-018-06788-9
Stevens-­Rumann, C. S., & Morgan, P. (2019). Tree regeneration following 
wildfires in the western US: A review. Fire Ecology, 15(1), 15. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s42408-019-0032-1
Talucci, A. C., & Krawchuk, M. A. (2019). Dead forests burning: the 
influence of beetle outbreaks on fire severity and legacy struc-
ture in sub-­boreal forests. Ecosphere, 10(5), e02744. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ecs2.2744
Teste, F. P., Lieffers, V. J., & Landhäusser, S. M. (2011). Viability of forest 
floor and canopy seed banks in Pinus contorta var. latifolia (pinaceae) 
forests after a mountain pine beetle outbreak. American Journal of 
Botany, 98(4), 630–­637. https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1000252
Theobald, D. M., Harrison-­Atlas, D., & Monahan, W. B. (2015). 
Ecologically-­relevant maps of landforms and physiographic di-
versity for climate adaptation planning. PLoS ONE, 10(12), 1–­17. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.0143619
Thom, D., & Seidl, R. (2016). Natural disturbance impacts on ecosystem 
services and biodiversity in temperate and boreal forests. Biological 
Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 91(3), 760–­781. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12193
Tilman, D., & Downing, J. A. (1994). Biodiversity and stability in grasslands. 
Nature, 367(6461), 363–­365. https://doi.org/10.1038/367363a0
Turner, M. G. (2010). Disturbance and landscape dynamics in a 
changing 
world. 
Ecology, 
91(10), 
2833–­2849. 
https://doi.
org/10.1890/10-0097.1
US Forest Service Geodata -­ Downloadable National Datasets. (2020). 
https://data.fs.usda.gov/geoda​ta/edw/datas​ets.php
US Forest Service, Individual Tree Species Parameter Maps. (2021). 
https://www.fs.fed.us/fores​theal​th/appli​ed-scien​ces/mappi​ng-re-
por​ting/indiv-tree-param​eter-maps.shtml
US Forest Service, Insect and Disease Detection Surveys. (2020). https://
www.fs.fed.us/fores​theal​th/appli​ed-scien​ces/mappi​ng-repor​ting/
detec​tion-surve​ys.shtml​#idsdo​wnloads
Veblen, T. T., & Donnegan, J. A. (2005). Historical range of variability for 
forest vegetation of the national forests of the Colorado Front Range. 
US Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. https://www.fs.usda.
gov/Inter​net/FSE_DOCUM​ENTS/stelp​rdb53​86430.pdf
Veblen, T. T., Hadley, K. S., Nel, E. M., Kitzberger, T., Reid, M., & Villalba, 
R. (1994). Disturbance regime and disturbance interactions in a 
Rocky Mountain subalpine forest. Journal of Ecology, 82(1), 125. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2261392
Veblen, T. T., Hadley, K. S., Reid, M. S., & Rebertus, A. J. (1989). Blowdown 
and stand development in a Colorado subalpine forest. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research, 19, 1218–­1225. https://doi.org/10.1139/
x89-186
Veblen, T. T., Hadley, K. S., Reid, M. S., & Rebertus, A. J. (1991). The re-
sponse of subalpine forests to spruce beetle outbreak in Colorado. 
Ecology, 72(1), 213–­231. https://doi.org/10.2307/1938916
Villellas, J., Doak, D. F., García, M. B., & Morris, W. F. (2015). Demographic 
compensation among populations: What is it, how does it arise 
and what are its implications? Ecology Letters, 18(11), 1139–­1152. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/ele.12505
Weed, A. S., Ayres, M. P., & Hicke, J. A. (2013). Consequences of climate 
change for biotic disturbances in North American forests. Ecological 
Monographs, 83(4), 441–­470. https://doi.org/10.1890/13-0160.1
Weiss, A. D. (2001). Topographic position and landforms analysis. ESRI 
User Conference.
Wickham, J. D., Stehman, S. V., Smith, J. H., & Yang, L. (2004). Thematic 
accuracy of the 1992 National land-­cover data for the western 

    |  21
Journal of Ecology
RODMAN et al.
United States. Remote Sensing of Environment, 91(3–­4), 452–­468. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2004.04.002
Wilson, B. T., Lister, A. J., & Riemann, R. I. (2012). A nearest-­neighbor 
imputation approach to mapping tree species over large areas using 
forest inventory plots and moderate resolution raster data. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 271, 182–­198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2012.02.002
Wilson, B. T., Lister, A. J., Riemann, R. I., & Griffith, D. M. (2013). Live tree 
species basal area of the contiguous United States (2000–­2009). 
https://doi.org/10.2737/RDS-2013-0013
Windmuller-­Campione, M. A., DeRose, J., & Long, J. N. (2021). 
Landscape-­scale drivers of resistance and resilience to bark bee-
tles: A conceptual susceptibility model. Forests, 12, 798. https://doi.
org/10.3390/f1206​0798
Worrall, J. J., Marchetti, S. B., Egeland, L., Mask, R. A., Eager, T., & Howell, 
B. (2010). Effects and etiology of sudden aspen decline in south-
western Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 260, 638–­
648. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2010.05.020
Young, D. J. N., Meyer, M., Estes, B., Gross, S., Wuenschel, A., Restaino, 
C., & Safford, H. D. (2020). Forest recovery following extreme 
drought in California, USA: Natural patterns and effects of pre-­
drought management. Ecological Applications, 30(1), 1–­18. https://
doi.org/10.1002/eap.2002
Zhang, X., Wang, J., Henebry, G. M., & Gao, F. (2020). Development 
and evaluation of a new algorithm for detecting 30 m land sur-
face phenology from VIIRS and HLS time series. ISPRS Journal 
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 161, 37–­51. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isprs​jprs.2020.01.012
Zier, J. L., & Baker, W. L. (2006). A century of vegetation change in the 
San Juan Mountains, Colorado: An analysis using repeat photog-
raphy. Forest Ecology and Management, 228, 251–­262. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2006.02.049
Zuur, A. F., Ieno, E. N., Walker, N. J., Saveliev, A. A., & Smith, G. M. (2009). 
Mixed effects models and extensions in ecology and R. Springer.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information can be found online in the 
Supporting Information section at the end of this article.
How to cite this article: Rodman, K. C., Andrus, R. A., 
Carlson, A. R., Carter, T. A., Chapman, T. B., Coop, J. D., 
Fornwalt, P. J., Gill, N. S., Harvey, B. J., Hoffman, A. E., 
Kelsey, K. C., Kulakowski, D., Laughlin, D. C., Morris, J. E., 
Negrón, J. F., Nigro, K. M., Pappas, G. S., Redmond, M. D., 
Rhoades, C. C. … Hart, S. J. (2022). Rocky Mountain forests 
are poised to recover following bark beetle outbreaks but 
with altered composition. Journal of Ecology, 00, 1–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2745.13999
