Use of Risk Management  
Assistance During the 2021  
Wildfire Season
Overview
The USDA Forest Service developed Risk Management Assistance (RMA) in 2016 to enhance the use of risk-informed 
management principles and decision-support tools during wildfire response that improve decision quality and accountability 
and minimize unnecessary risk to firefighters. To evaluate and improve RMA, the USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation 
Management (FAM) requested assistance from the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERIs) to assess RMA use 
among line officers and Incident Management Teams (IMTs) during the 2021 wildfire season. The SWERIs developed and 
deployed an online questionnaire (n=94 usable responses) to assess: 1) what tools were used; 2) how they were used to inform 
decision-making; 3) factors that facilitated and frustrated use; and 4) practitioner recommendations to improve use of RMA. 
Figure 1 depicts the incidents represented in the questionnaire along with other pertinent incident, IMT, and management 
strategy information. Here, we outline high-level findings 
and document recommendations to improve RMA use.   
What RMA tools were used and how were 
they used to inform decision-making
Tools used: The Suppression Difficulty Index (SDI) 
and Potential Control Location (PCL) analysis were 
the most frequently used RMA tools, followed by the  
Season-ending Analysis, Estimated Ground Evacuation 
Time, 
Snag 
Hazard, 
and 
Potential 
Operational 
Delineations (PODs).
Facilitated dialogue: RMA facilitated dialogue between 
local units, agency administrators, IMTs, and cooperators. 
RMA helped: 1) clearly frame objectives; 2) articulate 
biophysical, social, and fire management considerations, 
as well as operational opportunities and challenges; 
and 3) support and explain strategic and tactical 
decision-making rationale. RMA also holds potential to  
improve information sharing between teams during  
team transitions.
Informed incident decision-making: RMA was used 
to inform decision-making throughout the fire life 
cycle (Figure 2). RMA was most frequently used to 
inform incident operations and long-term assessment,  
evaluate alternative courses of action, and frame or 
reinforce Wildland Fire Decision Support System 
(WFDSS) decisions. 
a. RMA informed development of Management Action 
Points and identification of Primary, Alternate, 
Contingency, and Emergency lines. 
b. RMA was used to develop situational awareness on 
emerging incidents and support operational decision-
making on complex incidents. 
c. RMA informed direct and indirect line placement by 
modeling suppression difficulty and potential for 
control for primary and alternative course of action.
Utah
Montana
California
Idaho
Nevada
Arizona
Oregon
Colorado
Wyoming
New Mexico
Washington
Wildfire Incident Information
69 incidents
11 states
27 Incident Management Teams
53% Type 1; 38% Type 2; 9% Type 3
6 million acres burned
20 incidents greater than  
100,000 acres
69% of incidents used full  
suppression as management strategy
24% of incidents used multiple 
management strategies
Figure 1. Locations of wildfires represented in RMA questionnaire. Bulleted list 
includes pertinent incident, team, and management strategy information.
S O U T H W E S T 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Supported regional prioritization: RMA was used by 
regions and geographic area coordination centers (GACCs) 
to prioritize incidents and inform resource allocation. 
Factors facilitating or frustrating use: Familiarity with 
RMA, trust in the accuracy of analytics, receptiveness to 
new tools and processes, internal capacity and expertise, 
and the presence of leaders who advocated for using RMA 
to support fire and land management decision-making 
affected RMA use.
Recommendations to improve RMA  
adoption on wildfire incidents
Recommendations to improve RMA use on wildfires 
included the need for increasing education and outreach, 
setting leadership intent, making additional investments 
in analytical capacity, updating the models and analytics,  
and continuing long-term evaluation and assessment of 
RMA use.
Education and outreach: There is a need for additional 
education, training, and outreach on RMA in the 
classroom, among units and teams, and on incidents. 
Suggestions included webinars, integrating RMA into the 
National Wildfire Coordinating Group course work for 
both firefighters and agency administrators, introducing 
RMA processes and analytics during PODs workshops, and  
peer learning during or after incidents. National peer 
learning groups, like the PODs user group, are key to 
education and outreach. More frequent, regionally-
focused user groups would be beneficial to further 
socialize RMA and document innovations in the field. 
Learning modules and help links for tools on the RMA 
dashboard was also recommended. 
Leadership intent: There is a need for improved leadership 
direction on expectations regarding how RMA should 
be used during incidents and integrated within existing 
decision-support tools, including WFDSS. This could be 
achieved through setting leadership intent in the IMT, 
during the preseason at annual coordination meetings, 
and/or documented through the delegation of authority.  
Analytical capacity: Additional investments in analytical 
capacity to develop and use risk-informed spatial 
analytics are needed. Funding for analysts and support 
staff could help develop and interpret RMA analytics and 
provide additional services under the RMA program of 
work. Regional analysts are becoming more common and  
could be funded in all GACCs to support multiple incidents 
and regional prioritization. IMTs could incorporate 
strategic operations positions in planning and operations 
sections who are trained in risk management principles 
and analytics. 
Tool updates: Increasing the frequency at which tools  
are updated to reflect dynamic conditions on the ground 
was recommended. 
Long-term evaluation: The use of RMA analytics continues 
to evolve as practitioners innovate to situate these 
analytics and processes within their decision-making 
context. There is a need to document uses and innovations 
through long-term evaluation. Importantly, innovative 
applications should be documented and communicated to 
practitioners effectively and in a timely manner to support 
safe and effective wildfire response.
Conclusion
SWERI assessed RMA use during the 2021 wildfire season. 
Here, we outlined high-level findings and recommendations 
to improve RMA use. A detailed technical report is 
forthcoming. SWERI is working to develop a longitudinal 
evaluation of RMA use and innovation that is grounded in 
the needs and priorities of RMA users and leadership.
Authors: Tyler Beeton, Michael Caggiano, 
Melanie Colavito, Ch’aska Huayhuaca,  
Ty Aldworth 
Contact: michael.caggiano@colostate.edu
August 2022 • CFRI-2220 
cfri.colostate.edu
This work is funded by the Colorado Forest Restoration 
Institute and the Arizona Board of Regents through the 
Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).
This work is approved by the Institutional Review Board  
at CSU (#2652).
For further reading – See our presentation on the RMA  
evaluation. A detailed technical report is forthcoming.
Acknowledgements: We thank Angela Hollingsworth for 
assistance in editing and formatting this brief. 
Figure 2. Fire management life cycle. Numbers in parentheses refer to the percentage of respondents who used RMA to inform each phase of the life cycle.
S O U T H W E S T 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
Ignition 
Initial 
Framing 
(52%)
Operations & 
long-term 
assessment 
(87%) 
Reevaluation 
or change of 
the course of 
action (67%)
Framing or 
reinforcing 
WFDSS 
decision 
(55%)
After Action 
Review (10%) 
Out 
