CFLRP Collaboration 
Assessment Report
FOR THE NORTHERN BLUES CFLRP
AUTHORS: Tyler A. Beeton, Adam Snitker,  
Melanie M. Colavito, and Antony S. Cheng
November 2022
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Publication date: November 2022
Cover photo credit: NBFC 2021 Fall Tour (Source: 
Alyssa Cudmore).
Authors: Tyler A. Beeton1, Adam Snitker1,  
Melanie M. Colavito2, and Antony S. Cheng1
1. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Department of Forest 
and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State University, Fort 
Collins, CO
2. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, AZ.
Suggested Citation: Beeton, T., Snitker, 
A., Colavito, M., Cheng, A.S., 2022. CFLRP 
Collaboration Assessment Report
for the Northern Blues CFLRP.
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI) was established 
in 2005 as an application-oriented, science-based outreach and 
engagement organization hosted at Colorado State University. 
Along with institutes at Northern Arizona University (Ecological 
Restoration Institute) and New Mexico Highlands University (New 
Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute), CFRI is one of 
three institutes that make up the Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes, which were authorized by Congress through the 
Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act of 2004. 
We develop, synthesize, and apply locally relevant, actionable 
knowledge to inform forest management strategies and achieve 
wildfire hazard reduction goals in Colorado and the Interior West. 
We strive to earn trust by being rigorous and objective in 
integrating currently available scientific information into decision-
making through collaborative partnerships involving researchers, 
land managers, policy makers, interested and affected 
stakeholders, and communities. CFRI holds itself to high standards 
of scientific accuracy and aims to promote transparency in the 
production and communication of science-based information. 
Always carefully evaluate sources for rigor and appropriateness 
before applying them in your own work.
CSU Land Acknowledgment: Colorado State University 
acknowledges, with respect, that the land we are on today is the 
traditional and ancestral homelands of the Arapaho, Cheyenne, 
and Ute Nations and peoples. This was also a site of trade, 
gathering, and healing for numerous other Native tribes. We 
recognize the Indigenous peoples as original stewards of this land 
and all the relatives within it. As these words of acknowledgment 
are spoken and heard, the ties Nations have to their traditional 
homelands are renewed and reaffirmed. CSU is founded as 
a land-grant institution, and we accept that our mission must 
encompass access to education and inclusion. And, significantly, 
that our founding came at a dire cost to Native Nations and 
peoples whose land this University was built upon. This 
acknowledgment is the education and inclusion we must practice 
in recognizing our institutional history, responsibility,  
and commitment.
Preface and Acknowledgements: In FY21, the USDA Forest 
Service led a collaborative process to develop a CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy that will be required for all newly 
authorized and reauthorized projects under the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). The USDA 
Forest Service Washington Office requested assistance from 
the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERIs) 
in developing and deploying an assessment tool to track 
collaborative governance within and across CFLRP projects and 
through time. The collaboration assessment is intended to assess 
whether CFLRP is encouraging an effective and meaningful 
collaborative approach. We developed and deployed a short, 
online confidential questionnaire to the Northern Blues CFLRP 
and Northern Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership in FY2021. 
The report herein summarizes findings from this pilot assessment. 
The assessment will be re-administered every two to three years. 
Our objectives are to: 
•	 Develop a rigorous, systematic, and longitudinal assessment of 
collaborative governance that is grounded in the science and 
practice of landscape-scale collaborative forest restoration; 
•	 Support program-wide evaluation of collaborative progress 
and performance and report on findings to USDA Forest 
Service staff and Congress; 
•	 Facilitate project-level engagement, reporting, and peer-
learning to inform local collaborative work and adaptive 
management; and  
•	 Contribute to the theory and practice of collaborative 
governance through the synthesis of findings and lessons 
learned. 
This white paper was made possible with a grant from the 
Forest Service, an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
specifically an agreement (#21-DG-11030000-018) between the 
Southwestern Region and Colorado State University/CFRI. The 
white paper is published in partial fulfillment of deliverable #3 
under Project 2 in CFRI’s fiscal year 2021 work plan.
The authors would like to acknowledge Hannah Brown for her 
insightful feedback on an earlier draft and Angela Hollingsworth 
for designing the layout of this report. We would also like to thank 
all the participants for taking the time to fill out the questionnaire, 
as well as the Northern Blues Operations and Leadership teams 
for their support in recruitment and administration.
 
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute at Colorado State 
University receives financial support under the Southwest Forest 
Health and Wildfire Prevention Act provided through the United 
States Forest Service. In accordance with Federal law and 
United States Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is 
prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, sex, age, or disability. To file a complaint of discrimination, 
write: USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights Room 326-A, Whitten 
Building 1400 Independence Avenue,  
SW Washington, DC, 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice  
& TDD). The survey portion of this project and survey 
administration is supported by funding from the Arizona Board of 
Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund 
(TRIF).
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Table of Contents
Executive Summary...................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction.................................................................................................................................... 5
Approach .................................................................................................................................................. 6
Framework .................................................................................................................................................6
Data Collection and Analysis ................................................................................................................7
Findings..................................................................................................................................................... 7
Demographics............................................................................................................................................7
Principled engagement...........................................................................................................................8
Shared Motivation.....................................................................................................................................8
Capacity for Joint Action........................................................................................................................9
Outcomes....................................................................................................................................................10
Disruptions..................................................................................................................................................11
Short-term Needs and Recommendations to Improve the Collaborative Process ..............11
Discussion and Conclusions....................................................................................................... 13
Appendix 1: Report brief for Northern Blues CFLRP and All-Lands  
Restoration Partnership.............................................................................................................. 16
Appendix 2: SWERI presentation to Northern Blues CFLRP and All-Lands  
Restoration Partnership.............................................................................................................. 19

4                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Executive Summary
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
developed a collaboration assessment as part of the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
(CFLRP) Common Monitoring Strategy. The collaboration 
assessment was designed to assess the following 
questions:
1.	What are the structural and functional dynamics 
of the collaborative? Does the collaborative exhibit 
characteristics generally associated with healthy, 
well-functioning, and resilient collaboratives?
2.	What do participants need or recommend 
to improve the process?
3.	To what extent do participants feel 
the project is meeting process, socio-
economic, and ecological goals? 
4.	What challenges or disruptions affect 
collaborative performance and durability?
The SWERI administered an online survey to members 
of the Northern Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership 
(henceforth the Partnership) in Fall 2021, the first year of 
the Partnership. 
The majority of respondents indicated that they agreed 
about key problems impacting their landscape, strategies 
to solve problems, and the purpose of their collaborative 
restoration project. Respondents felt that the process 
has helped build trust, relationships, and mutual respect 
of others’ positions and interests, and they felt that 
participants were committed to the process. Survey 
respondents emphasized that there were strong leaders 
who worked well across organizations and entities, 
communicated 
a 
collaborative 
vision, 
and motivated others to work together. A 
majority agreed that participants worked 
together to co-generate knowledge and solve 
problems. Knowledge and information were 
reportedly shared equally among participants. 
Respondents felt that the Partnership had 
adequate funding, knowledge, facilitation 
skills, and buy-in to carry out tasks and 
accomplish work. Respondents also generally 
agreed that the USDA Forest Service was 
responsive to collaborative input. However, 
respondents 
noted 
several 
areas 
for 
improvement. Some respondents wanted to 
see more collaborative engagement between 
the Partnership and USDA Forest Service in 
planning and implementation of treatments 
and more opportunities to engage in adaptive 
management based on monitoring results 
and feedback. Respondents felt that the 
Partnership could be more inclusive of some interests and 
groups. Respondents agreed that they lacked people and 
time to accomplish work. Respondents also noted that 
decision-making processes were not well understood, 
mechanisms for accountability were lacking, and the 
USDA Forest Service was not clear about the decisions 
they made. 
Many of these challenges were reiterated in open-ended 
responses focused on recommendations to improve 
the collaborative process, which included the need to: 
1) increase stakeholder participation, engagement, and 
outreach to participants that have not been historically 
involved; 2) increase resource capacity, especially time 
and personnel dedicated to the collaborative process; 
3) establish structures and processes for multi-party 
monitoring and collaborative adaptive management; 
and 4) enhance collaborative engagement in planning, 
prioritization, and implementation within and across 
boundaries. 
Survey results suggested that the Partnership has started 
to make progress on a number of social, economic, and 
ecological goals of the CFLRP during the first year of 
CFLRP funding. However, frequent turnover and limited 
agency capacity for collaborative engagement challenged 
collaborative progress and performance. 
This assessment will be readministered by the SWERI 
every 2-3 years to track collaboration on multiple projects 
over time, with the goal of gauging capacities and 
identifying areas for improvement.
NBFC 2021 Fall field tour.

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    5
Introduction
The Forest Landscape Restoration Act (FLRA) was 
passed in 2009 and established the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). The purpose 
of the CFLRP was to “encourage the collaborative, 
science-based ecosystem restoration of priority forest 
landscapes”1  through a competitive funding program 
administered by the USDA Forest Service. In 2021, 
CFLRP coordinators, USDA Forest Service personnel, and 
partners led a collaborative process to develop a CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy consisting of ecological 
and socio-economic monitoring questions and indicators 
that will supplement local project multi-party monitoring 
plans and will be required for all newly authorized and 
reauthorized projects.2  
One core component of the CFLRP Common Monitoring 
Strategy relates to monitoring collaborative governance.3 
While the CFLRP requires projects to collaborate 
throughout planning, implementation, and monitoring, 
‘collaboration’ was not defined in the FLRA or CFLRP 
requirements, nor did the CFLRP provide specific 
guidelines by which collaborative groups convened and 
engaged in collaborative restoration throughout the life 
of the CFLRP project. This has resulted in a multitude 
of collaborative structures, processes, and practices 
implemented in diverse social and ecological contexts 
across the country. Also, collaborative groups are nested 
within and impacted by changes that occur within 
their group, external changes in social and ecological 
conditions, and a fluid institutional environment, all of 
which require groups to adjust and evolve their structures, 
practices, and processes (Beeton et al., 2022; Ulibarri 
et al., 2020). Yet, a systematic approach to monitoring 
and evaluating attributes of collaborative governance 
and resilience is lacking. Systemic evaluation could 
lead to better understanding of what factors promote or 
challenge collaboration across different contexts, help 
target what kinds of investments are needed, and where 
to maintain and enhance collaborative capacity. 
To address this need, the USDA Forest Service Washington 
Office 
requested 
assistance 
from 
the 
Southwest 
Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) in developing 
and deploying an assessment tool to track collaborative 
governance.3 During the development of the CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy, CFLRP coordinators from 
the Washington Office elicited feedback from CFLRP 
practitioners, CFLRP coordinators, and subject matter 
experts to identify monitoring questions, indicators, 
and available data sources. With respect to collaborative 
governance, partners wanted to address the question, 
how well is the CFLRP encouraging an effective and 
meaningful collaborative approach? CFLRP practitioners 
and coordinators expressed interest in documenting 
collaborative health, function, and resilience, as well as 
performance (perceived outcomes). CFLRP practitioners 
and coordinators also emphasized the need for a tool 
that is straightforward, not time-consuming, easy to 
administer, and longitudinal. 
We incorporated stakeholder feedback and questions 
of interest developed during the drafting of the CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy to directly inform the 
components of the collaboration assessment. Our 
objectives are as follows:
1.	Develop a rigorous, systematic, and longitudinal 
assessment of collaborative governance that 
is grounded in the science and practice of 
landscape-scale collaborative forest restoration. 
2.	Support program-wide evaluation of collaborative 
progress and performance, and report on findings 
to USDA Forest Service staff and Congress. 
3.	Facilitate project-level engagement, reporting, 
and peer-learning to inform local collaborative 
work and adaptive management. 
4.	Contribute to the theory and practice of 
collaborative governance through the 
synthesis of findings and lessons learned.
The SWERI developed, administered, and analyzed a pilot 
collaboration assessment—an online questionnaire—to 
the Northern Blues CFLRP and members of the Northern 
Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership (henceforth 
the Partnership) in the fall of 2021, the first year of the 
Partnership operating with CFLRP funding.
The report herein summarizes findings from the 
collaboration assessment with the Partnership. We have 
also integrated, where appropriate, feedback during 
our final presentation and open discussion with the 
Partnership on these findings and their reactions to the 
findings. See Appendix 1 for a report brief summarizing 
our findings, and Appendix 2 for a presentation we led 
with the Partnership in May 2022. We briefly highlight the 
approach, followed by a baseline assessment of findings 
and document recommendations from respondents to 
improve the collaborative process. 
  1 PL 111-11 CFLRP Authorizing legislation - https://www.congress.gov/congressional-report/110th-congress/senate-report/370/1
  2 CFLRP National Core Monitoring Strategy - https://www.fs.fed.us/restoration/documents/cflrp/CFLRP_monitoring_strategy_20201214.pdf
  3 Here, we define governance as “the system of institutions, including rules, laws, regulations, policies, and social norms, and 
organizations involved in governing environmental resource use and/or protection” (Chaffin et al. 2014). 

6                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Approach 	
We developed an online questionnaire to assess: 
1.	What are the structural and functional dynamics 
of the collaborative? Does the collaborative exhibit 
characteristics generally associated with healthy, 
well-functioning, and resilient collaboratives?
2.	To what extent do participants feel 
the project is meeting process, socio-
economic, and ecological goals? 
3.	What challenges or disruptions affect 
collaborative performance and durability? 
4.	What do participants need or recommend 
to improve the process?
Framework 
The questionnaire was structured using concepts from 
an integrative collaborative governance framework 
(Emerson et al., 2012), resilience and adaptability literature 
(Emerson and Gerlak, 2014; Folke et al., 2005; Gupta et al., 
2010), and empirical findings from the first 10 years of 
the CFLRP (Beeton et al., 2022; Butler and Schultz, 2019; 
McIntyre and Schultz, 2020; Schultz et al., 2018).
Collaboration dynamics – To assess collaboration 
dynamics, we operationalized the Integrative Framework 
for Collaborative Governance (Emerson et al., 2012). 
The framework incorporates multiple components 
of collaborative governance that are grounded in 
collaborative practice, link collaboration dynamics to 
socio-economic and ecological outcomes, and promote 
assessment of collaboratives across settings and time. 
The components include principled engagement, shared 
motivation, and capacity for joint action (Emerson et al., 
2012). 
Principled engagement refers to ensuring the right 
people are involved, i.e., a representative cross-section 
of people and entities who have a stake in the issue 
participate. Principled engagement also emphasizes the 
principles of open and inclusive communication and 
negotiation, where individuals with diverse perspectives 
and knowledge work together to identify shared 
problems, agree on strategies to solve those problems, and 
agree on the purpose or scope of the collaborative. 
Shared motivation refers to the interpersonal and 
relational elements of collaborative dynamics. Shared 
motivation includes the sub-components mutual trust, 
understanding, and commitment. It is often referred to 
as social capital, or the “glue” that holds groups together 
through networks, norms, rules, and trust that promote 
collective action (Pelling and High, 2005). This glue is 
crucial for effective collaboration; social capital is built 
through investments in social relationships and can be 
expressed through mutual commitment of individuals 
and groups to common collaborative goals.
Capacity for joint action comprises four sub-
components: 
leadership, 
knowledge 
and 
learning, 
resources, and institutional arrangements (Emerson 
and Gerlak, 2014). Leadership is essential for managing 
collaboratives, and leaders can fill many roles including 
convener, sponsor, public advocate, facilitator, and others. 
They are important for: building trust, sensemaking, 
bringing 
people 
together, 
initiating 
partnerships, 
motivating 
people 
to 
work 
together, 
compiling, 
generating, and disseminating knowledge, developing 
visions of and support for change, and managing conflict 
(Folke et al., 2005). 
In 
a 
collaborative 
setting, 
participants 
should 
work together to co-create and co-develop shared 
understanding and knowledge through social learning; 
knowledge and information should be equally accessible 
to all members of the collaborative; and learning 
and knowledge should be used to inform adaptive 
management (Emerson and Gerlak, 2014). Social 
learning occurs through repeated interactions and joint 
problem solving among participants. It emphasizes 
testing, monitoring, and reevaluating participants’ 
assumptions and understanding of ecosystem responses 
and feedbacks to learn and adapt management  
actions (Folke et al., 2005; Lebel et al., 2010; Sharma-
Wallace et al., 2018). 
Collaboratives often pool and share resources to 
accomplish tasks and get work done. These can include 
funding, personnel, science and technical expertise, 
facilitation, and coordination.
Institutional arrangements are the processes, protocols, 
and structures needed to manage collaboration over 
time, i.e., the rules of the game. Collaborative structures, 
processes, and protocols should be clearly understood, 
transparent, perceived as fair and equitable, and include 
mechanisms of accountability (Emerson et al., 2012; 
Gupta et al., 2010; Stern and Coleman, 2015). 
Capacity needs change through time, and the relative 
required amount of these four capacity types is contingent 
upon the local context – e.g., history of conflict, people 
involved, purpose and objectives of the group, among 
others (Imperial et al., 2016).
Perceived outcomes – Our assessment focuses both on 
perceived “process” outcomes (e.g., did the collaborative 
process reduce conflict, or increase the ability to plan at a 
landscape scale?) and socio-economic and environmental 
  4 Northern Blues CFLRP Proposal - https://www.fs.usda.gov/restoration/documents/cflrp/2019Proposals/R6_NorthernBlues_CompleteProposal_NewProject.pdf

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    7
outcomes. The outcome metrics chosen for evaluation 
were derived from several sources: the intent of the 
FLRA of 2009 and the CFLRP, the Northern Blues CFLRP 
proposal4, and conversations with local, regional, and 
national CFLRP coordinators while developing the 
Common Monitoring Strategy.
Challenges or disruptions that affect collaborative 
performance 
and 
durability 
– 
Disruptions—i.e., 
personnel turnover, legal or policy changes, and 
biophysical 
disturbances 
like 
wildfires 
or 
insect 
outbreaks—can happen at any time. These disruptions 
may impact collaborative progress and performance, and/
or force groups to adapt. We developed a list of common 
challenges that CFLRP projects and other landscape 
scale forest collaboratives reported in: 1) breakout group 
discussions and focus group sessions at the 2020 SWERI 
Cross-boundary landscape restoration workshop (SWERI, 
2020) and the 2020 Idaho forest collaborative shared 
stewardship workshops; 2) the 2020 CFLRP Collaboration 
Indicator Survey administered by the National Forest 
Foundation; and 3) a survey administered to USDA Forest 
Service staff engaged in 2010 and 2012 CFLRP projects 
(Schultz et al., 2018). Identifying current challenges or 
disruptions that CFLRP projects are grappling with 
can support strategic investment towards solutions to 
maintain collaborative performance and durability.  
Needs or recommendations to improve the process 
– We captured respondents’ perspectives on needs and 
recommendations to improve the collaborative process by 
including an open-ended survey question.
Data Collection and Analysis 
We developed a questionnaire in the online survey tool 
Qualtrics that consisted of 33, mostly closed-ended 
statements using a Likert scale. The Northern Blues 
All-Lands Restoration Partnership’s Operations and 
Leadership teams previewed the assessment, and we 
also piloted the questionnaire and elicited feedback from 
participants of the Colorado Front Range CFLRP and the 
Partnership (n=5). The Northern Blues CFLRP coordinator 
and facilitator provided support in recruiting participants 
and administering the questionnaire through the 
Partnership listserv in November 2021. The questionnaire 
was open for 6 weeks. We received 37 usable responses, 
representing more than 30% of the population. We used 
the statistical software program Statistical Software for 
Social Sciences (SPSS) to document mean responses 
and variation in responses. Open-ended questions were 
analyzed using a thematic analysis (Ryan and Bernard, 
2003). Small sample sizes prohibited further statistical 
analyses, though this will be possible when more data has 
been collected. 
Findings
Our results are organized as follows. First, we include 
demographic 
information 
of 
the 
survey 
sample. 
We then provide a description of findings related to 
collaboration dynamics (i.e., principled engagement, 
shared motivation, and capacity for joint action). We 
provide a short description of each collaboration dynamic 
construct in italics to orient the reader. We follow with 
findings on perceived outcomes, disruptions that are 
challenging collaborative progress and performance, and 
recommendations to improve the process. For scale items 
(e.g., strongly disagree to strongly agree, progress scales), 
figures depict the percentage of survey participants that 
somewhat agree to strongly agree. This was done for 
consistency in visualization and ease of interpretation. 
For clarity, we describe majority or strong majority results 
as greater than or equal to 60% agreement and slight 
majority as greater than 50% agreement.
Demographics
Participation in the survey well represented affiliated 
organizations. The majority of participants represented 
state agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGO), 
tribes, and the USDA Forest Service (USFS) (Figure 
1). In addition, survey participants spanned all of the 
Partnership’s sub-groups (Figure 2).-
1
2
3
4
5
5
5
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Industry
Research
Local Agency
Citizen
USFS
Federal Agency
Tribe
NGO
State Agency
In this collaborative project, I represent 
Figure 1 – Respondents self-identified representation 
of associated organizations.
1
4
4
4
5
5
6
9
13
17
0
5
10
15
20
Blue Mountain Prescribed Fire Council
Leadership Team
Workforce Training & Forest Product Utilization Team
Other
Northern Blues Communications Team
My Blue Mountains Woodland Partnership
Operations Team
Northern Blues Monitoring Team
Project Team
Northern Blues Forest Collaborative
Northern Blues All Lands Partnership - Aﬃliate Groups
Figure 2 - Respondents’ self-identified team membership within 
the Northern Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership.

8                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Principled engagement
Principled engagement refers to having the right people involved in iterative and inclusive dialogue to determine shared problems, 
identify shared strategies to solve problems, and agree to the shared purpose of the project. 
A majority of respondents (62%) agreed to strongly agreed that a representative cross-section of stakeholders is involved 
in the project (Figure 3). Open-ended responses to the question indicated that there is a need to be more inclusive of 
tribes and tribal interests, conservation and environmental groups, representatives from county governments, and 
USFS District Rangers. Others suggested that participation was skewed towards forest products interests. 
A majority of respondents indicated that participants had a shared understanding of the problems they face, the 
strategies to solve those problems, and the “why” of the project (Figure 4).
A large proportion of respondents felt that the level of 
collaboration between the Partnership and the USFS 
did not meet their expectations during planning (Figure 
5). A slight majority indicated that collaboration met 
their expectations during implementation. A majority 
indicated that the level of collaboration between  
the Partnership and the USFS met their expectations 
during monitoring. 
Shared Motivation
Shared motivation includes trust, understanding, relationship-
building, and commitment to the collaborative process. 
As illustrated in Figure 6, 
improving relationships and 
trust was one of the primary 
motivators 
for 
engaging 
in 
the 
CFLRP 
project. 
Likewise, a strong majority 
of participants agreed the 
collaborative process helped 
build trust, relationships, and 
mutual understanding among 
participants. 
Respondents 
indicated 
that 
they 
were 
committed to the collaborative 
6
9
10
10
15
18
21
23
24
24
28
29
36
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Avoid litigation
Improve recreational opportunities
Harvest timber from public lands
Maintain Access to public lands
More say in management of public lands
Create more local jobs
Protect or restore water resources
Restore habitat
Increase communication
Increase pace and scale
Improve relationships and trust
Reduce community wildﬁre risk
Restore forest resiliency
My motivation for being involved in this collaborative project is:
Figure 6 - Total number of times respondents identified the associated motive as reason for their 
participation in the collaborative. Note - respondents were able to select multiple motives.
14%
8%
16%
35%
27%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Strongly 
Disagree
Somewhat
Disagree
Neither Agree
nor Disagree
Somewhat 
Agree
Strongly 
Agree
A representative cross- section of stakeholders are 
involved in this collaborative project.
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure 3 - Respondents’ level of agreement that a representative cross-
section of stakeholders is involved in the collaborative project.
72%
64%
66%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Key problems that
impact our landscape
Strategies to solve
problems
The "why" of the
CFLRP project
Participants agree about:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure 4 - Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” on the key problems that impact the landscape, strategies 
to solve problems, and the “why” of the collaborative.
43%
51%
65%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Planning
Implementation
Monitoring
Collaborative participants and the US Forest Service 
collaborate as much as I would like in:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure 5 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the US Forest Service collaborates during planning, 
implementation, and monitoring stages.

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    9
process, and they agreed that USFS unit level staff was 
committed to the process (Figure 7). 
Capacity for Joint Action
Capacity for joint action includes four components: collaborative 
leadership, knowledge and learning, resources, and institutional 
arrangements that support fair governance.
Leadership
Leadership is a critical component for collaborative governance. 
Leaders are needed to convene partners, communicate a shared 
vision, and motivate people to work together.
A strong majority of respondents agreed that the 
Partnership had leaders who work well with other people, 
communicate a common vision and direction, and 
motivate others to work together (Figure 8). 
Knowledge and Learning
Collaboratives should engage in a knowledge generation and 
social learning process for joint action. Knowledge should be 
co-produced, equally available to all partners, and be used to 
implement adaptive management. 
For the Partnership, a strong majority of respondents 
somewhat agreed to strongly agreed that the CFLRP 
process provided opportunities to co-generate knowledge 
and solve problems, and that knowledge and information 
was shared equally among participants. Yet, only a slight 
majority agreed that the collaborative process facilitated 
adaptive management (Figure 9). 
Resources
To accomplish tasks and get work done, collaboratives often 
pool and share resources, including funding, personnel, technical 
expertise, and facilitation, which, in turn, can support buy-in.
The majority of participants somewhat agreed or 
strongly agreed that the project had adequate access to 
funds, knowledge and expertise, facilitation skills, and 
participant “buy-in” to get work done. Meanwhile, only 
33% somewhat agreed or strongly agreed that the group 
had adequate access to people and time to accomplish 
their work (Figure 10). 
Figure 7 - Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat 
Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that the collaborative process has 
helped build trust, relationships, and mutual respect, as well as 
the extent to which participants are committed to the process. 
67%
69%
69%
74%
77%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Trust
Personal 
and/or working 
relationships
Mutual respect of 
others’ positions 
and interests  
Myself 
(my organization)
US Forest Service 
unit-level staﬀ
The collaborative process has helped participants build:
Are committed to the collaborative process:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents
88%
81%
70%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Work well with other
people and organizations
Communicates a common
collaborative vision and
direction
Motivates others 
to work together
Collaborative project leaders:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure 8 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the leaders work well with others, communicate a 
common vision and direction, and motivate others to work together.
Figure 9 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat 
Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that knowledge and information 
is co-generated by participants, shared equally, and used 
by participants to adjust management practices.
73%
76%
52%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Participants co-generate
knowledge to solve problems
Knowledge is shared equally
among participants
Participants adjust
management practices based
on learning and feedback
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure 10 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat 
Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that the collaborative has adequate: 
funds; people and time; knowledge and technical expertise; 
facilitation skills; and “buy-in” to accomplish work.
64%
33%
67%
73%
61%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Funds to carry out
tasks and
accomplish our
work
People and time
to accomplish
our work
Local/traditional
knowledge, science
and/or technical
expertise to
accomplish our
work
Skills to facilitate
collaborative
engagement
activities
“Buy-in” to 
accomplish 
our work
Our collaborative project has adequate:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents

10                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Institutional Arrangements
Institutional arrangements are the rules of the game. They include processes, protocols, and structures needed to manage collaboration 
over time. They should be clearly understood, perceived as fair and equitable, and include accountability mechanisms within and 
between entities. 
Less than half of the survey respondents somewhat agreed or strongly agreed that decision making  
processes were understood by participants, while a slight majority felt that such processes were fair and  
equitable (Figure 11). A majority of respondents felt these decision-making processes were transparent among CFLRP 
project participants. 
A majority of participants felt the USFS was responsive 
to collaborative input. A slight majority agreed that  
the agency provided open feedback, and was clear about 
the decisions they make and why they make them (Figure 
12). Further, agreed there were protocols in place to 
promote accountability among collaborative participants 
and between collaborative participants and the USFS 
(Figure 13). 
Outcomes
We assessed perceived progress on process, socio-
economic, and ecological outcomes for the Partnership. 
Notably, the assessment was administered during the 
first year of the Partnership, and thus several socio-
economic and ecological outcomes 
may not be realized for several years 
after implementation. Also, several 
participants did not respond to these 
questions or chose the option “don’t 
know/not 
applicable,” 
and 
were 
subsequently 
removed 
from 
this 
analysis.
A majority of respondents indicated 
that 
the 
collaborative 
process 
enhanced 
communication 
among 
participants, enabled landscape-scale 
planning, and enhanced planning 
across boundaries (Figure 14). A slight 
majority agreed that the process has 
67%
58%
52%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Is responsive to 
collaborative input
Provides open feedback to
CFLRP project participants
Is clear about the decisions
they make and why 
they make them
The US Forest Service:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure - 12 Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” 
or “Strongly Agree” that the US Forest Service is responsive, 
provides feedback, and clear about the decisions they make.
Figure 13 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat 
Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that there are protocols in place to 
promote accountability among collaborative participants and 
between the US Forest Service and the collaborative.
58%
56%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Among CFLRP participants
Between the US Forest Service 
and CFLRP project participants
There are protocols in place that promote accountability:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents
73%
42%
56%
57%
18%
88%
77%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Enhanced
communication
among
participants
Reduced conﬂict
among
stakeholders
Enhanced
decision-making
Included diverse
interests,
perspectives
and/or
knowledges
Reduced or
improved
outcomes of
litigation
Enabled
landscape scale
planning
Enhanced
planning across
boundaries
The collaborative process has:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure 14 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that 
the collaborative process has impacted the function and capacity of the collaborative.
Figure 11 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat 
Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that decision-making processes 
are understood, fair and equitable, and transparent.
49%
55%
61%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Understood by the participants
Fair and equitable
Transparent among CFLRP
project participants
The decision-making processes are:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Percentage (%) of Respondents

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    11
led to enhanced decision making and included diverse 
interests, perspectives, and knowledges. Less than half 
agreed that the process has minimized conflict among 
stakeholders or reduced (or improved outcomes of) 
litigation. A majority reported moderate to substantial 
progress in meeting the ecological goals of reducing fuel 
hazards and improving habitat for focal species (Figure 
15). Less than half of the respondents reported the project 
had made moderate to substantial progress on socio-
economic goals (Figure 16).
Disruptions
We developed a list of common challenges CFLRP 
project participants and other landscape-scale forest 
collaboratives 
reported 
in 
landscape-scale 
forest 
collaborative meeting breakout groups and in the 
literature. Based on that list, frequent turnover and 
limited agency capacity for collaborative engagement 
were the most substantial challenges the Partnership 
faced at the time of this survey (Figure 17). 
Short-term Needs and Recommendations to 
Improve the Collaborative Process 
We asked participants to identify pressing needs, and 
make recommendations to improve collaborative process, 
durability, and performance. Based on open-ended 
responses and the quantitative data reported herein, 
we identified four key themes for improvement. These 
included: 1) stakeholder participation, engagement, 
and outreach; 2) resource capacity; 3) multi-party 
monitoring and collaborative adaptive management; and 
4) collaborative engagement in planning, prioritization, 
and implementation within and across boundaries. 
We expand on these themes by drawing on survey  
responses and follow-up discussions with the Partnership 
in May 2022. 
Stakeholder Participation, Engagement,  
and Outreach
Several survey respondents recommended that the 
Partnership be more inclusive of tribal members and 
conservation groups. Others recommended engagement 
with county representatives, USFS District Rangers and 
staff, and environmental groups. Recreation, tourism, 
fish and wildlife, and water interests and concerns were 
also identified as needing more representation within 
the Partnership. In this vein, some participants wanted 
to see a more balanced membership composition, and 
perceived membership interests were skewed towards 
timber interests. Respondents further suggested that 
incorporating other interests may 
necessitate shifting focus towards 
prescribed 
fire, 
non-commercial 
treatments, 
carbon 
sequestration, 
and protecting old growth forests. 
Meanwhile, a number of participants 
suggested the need to maintain or 
even enhance timber management 
capacity and implementation (e.g., 
focusing on small-diameter trees, 
ramping up NEPA shelf stock, and/
or 
identifying 
alternative 
forest 
products markets). 
44%
36%
67%
43%
63%
40%
17%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pace and scale
of restoration
Restoration of
old-growth
stands
Reduced fuel
hazard through
treatments
Use of planned
or unplanned
wildﬁre
Improved
habitat for
species of
concern
Watershed
function
Treatment of
invasive
aquatic or
terrestrial
species
The collaborative project has made progress on the 
following ecological goals:
Moderate Progress
Substantial Progress
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure 15 - Percent of respondents who reported “moderate progress” 
or “substantial progress” towards ecological goals. Note - several 
participants did not respond to these questions or chose the option 
“don’t’ know/not applicable,” and thus were removed from this analysis.
26%
19%
45%
36%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Reduced wildﬁre
risk to communities
Oﬀset treatment costs
with restoration
by products
Supported local
employment or
training opportunities
Accomplished more
work on adjacent lands
The collaborative project has made progress on the 
following socio -economic goals: 
Moderate Progress
Substantial Progress
Percentage (%) of Respondents
Figure 16 - Percent of respondents who reported “moderate progress” 
or “substantial progress” towards socio-economic goals. Note - several 
participants did not respond to these questions or chose the option 
“don’t’ know/not applicable,” and thus were removed from this analysis. 
Figure 17 – Percent of respondents who reported disruptions posed “moderate 
challenges” or “substantial challenges” to collaborative performance and durability.
39%
6%
85%
46%
63%
44%
44%
29%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Fewer or
untimely
dispersement
funds
Legal
challenges
Frequent
turnover in
USFS and/or
partner staﬀ
Biophysical
disturbances
Limited agency
capacity for
collaborative
engagement
Disruptive
participants
Limited
capacity of local
wood products
industry
Moving from
direction-setting
to
implementation
Moderate Progress
Substantial Progress
Percentage (%) of Respondents

12                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
The topic of participation and inclusion came up again 
during our presentation of results to the Partnership in 
May 2022. Some participants reiterated their frustration 
with perceived exclusive collaborative processes and the 
need to be more inclusive of the groups, interests, and 
sectors mentioned above. Members of the Partnership also 
characterized the complexities they faced in promoting 
stakeholder participation. On one hand, leaders strived 
to be inclusive and sought out representation of under-
represented groups and perspectives. On the other hand, 
they acknowledged the need to balance participation 
among a set group of individuals who, while they may 
not agree on all strategies, were willing to come to the 
table and work towards shared priorities and outcomes. 
Otherwise, progress can stall and participation may wane 
among groups who perceive no clear path to collective 
action. While the members of the Leadership and 
Operations team may sincerely seek to include under-
represented groups and perspectives, it can be difficult for 
those representatives to enter a collaborative environment 
in progress when norms, expectations, procedures, goals 
and group values have been previously codified into 
group governance. A respondent conveyed such difficulty 
when stating, “the process seems like an echo-chamber of 
the same ‘good old boys network.’” Meanwhile, another 
respondent lamented that they felt the collaborative 
had been an “intentionally exclusive process.” These 
survey respondents articulate the frustration over the 
collaborative environment expressed by individuals at 
the May 2022. Further, some participants emphasized 
the need to increase transparency about the goals and 
objectives of the CFLRP and Partnership to help bound 
participation in ways that may facilitate progress towards 
feasible and desirable collaborative outcomes. Members 
should continue to have dialogue around this topic as the 
Partnership continues to change, evolve, and adapt. 
With regards to broader communication and outreach, 
participants suggested increased public and internal 
engagement through documentation of success stories, 
including Story Maps, landowner testimonials, videos, 
a collective reporting dashboard, and a dedicated  
website 
presence 
for 
sharing 
information 
and 
institutionalizing knowledge. 
Resources, Collaborative Capacity
Several participants emphasized the need to increase 
collaborative capacity, including funding for planning, 
implementation, and monitoring across the region. 
Participants also emphasized the need for increased 
capacity among workforce/contractors and the USFS to 
engage meaningfully and develop robust, collaborative 
processes for planning and implementation, as indicated 
by one respondent:
Regardless of agreement between stakeholders, projects 
are dependent on the planning. The Wallowa-Whitman 
currently has two fish biologists, two botanists, two 
archaeologists, two hydrologists and two wildlife 
biologists to plan projects on a forest of over 3 million 
acres. Planned projects need to be thorough and mindful 
in order to maintain any trust the Forest Service has 
earned and that takes time. Greater capacity within 
the districts will result in larger, solid projects sooner 
(ex: Malheur National Forest). Less capacity, with 
the expectation of increased pace and scale, results in 
poorly designed projects and an erosion of trust among  
the stakeholders.
Meanwhile, some participants recommended funding to 
pay salaries of under-represented groups to allow them to 
meaningfully engage. Others identified funding needs to 
fill facilitation, coordination, and technical capacity roles:
There is a lot of organizing to make this all work, and 
we could really use some funding for about 3 FTEs: 1 to 
manage the public lands collaborative, 1 to manage the 
cross-boundary work, and 1 to manage the monitoring.
Multi-party Monitoring and Adaptive Management 
Many participants emphasized the need to work 
towards developing a multi-party monitoring plan and 
adaptive management process for the Partnership and 
CFLRP. They suggested the need to co-determine desired 
conditions, identify thresholds that would constitute 
a change in adaptive management, and establish a 
collaborative process for adaptive management. In 
this vein, participants wanted to co-develop processes 
for sharing monitoring results to encourage shared 
learning (e.g., Story Maps, field trips, dashboards for 
outcomes and accomplishments). One participant 
encouraged the Partnership to consider developing a 
plan to monitor unplanned disturbances (e.g., treatment 
impacts to wildfire), stating that the collaborative 
should “be prepared for opportunistic monitoring of 
unplanned disturbances.”
Collaborative Engagement in Planning,  
Prioritization, and Implementation
A large proportion of respondents recommended increased 
collaboration 
throughout 
planning 
and 
treatment 
implementation, which was corroborated by fixed 
response questions in the survey (Figure 5). Respondents 
recommended a number of activities to better align 
expectations for engagement. They acknowledged the 
need to develop agreement on the purpose, need, and 
vision for restoration, identify how implementation can 
be reasonably achieved, and understand how and when to 
engage on CFLRP implementation and outyear planning 

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    13
with the USFS. Similarly, participants recommended 
the Partnership develop a regionwide collaborative 
prioritization process and associated products (i.e., map 
delineating treatment priority areas) for multi-year 
treatment planning on federal and non-federal lands, as 
illustrated by one respondent:
[We need a] truly collaborative approach to prioritizing 
projects/implementation areas, with [a] multiyear 
timeline allowing coordination of public and private 
land efforts.
As previously mentioned, survey results indicated that 
a large proportion of respondents felt decision-making 
processes were not understood by participants (Figure 11). 
They also felt that the USFS were not clear in the decisions 
they made (Figure 12). Further, some respondents felt that 
protocols for accountability were lacking (Figure 13). In 
other words, participants reported a desire for increased 
USFS transparency in the decision-making process for 
the CFLRP, and between the Leadership Team and the  
broader Partnership.
Discussion and Conclusions
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
deployed an online survey to the Northern Blues CFLRP 
and Northern Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership 
(the Partnership) in the fall of 2021 to assess collaborative 
health, function, and resilience, as well as perceived 
outcomes of collaborative work. Specifically, we assessed: 
whether 
the 
Partnership 
exhibited 
characteristics 
generally associated with healthy, well-functioning, and 
resilient collaboratives; the extent to which the project 
has made progress on meeting process, socio-economic, 
and ecological outcomes; what challenges or disruptions 
affected collaborative performance and durability; and 
actionable recommendations to improve the collaborative 
process from respondents’ perspectives. The assessment 
serves as the collaboration assessment for the CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy.
The majority of respondents indicated that they agreed 
about key problems that have impacted their landscape, 
strategies to solve problems, and the purpose of their 
collaborative restoration project. Also, respondents 
overwhelmingly agreed that the process has helped 
build trust, relationships, and mutual respect of others’ 
positions and interests even when they are different 
from their own. A majority agreed that they themselves, 
other organizations, and the USDA Forest Service (USFS) 
were all committed to the process. Mutual commitment, 
especially among those with decision-making authority, 
is critical for collaborative durability. The USFS retains 
decision-making authority in treatment planning and 
implementation on USFS-managed land. The agency also 
gives substantial discretion in decision-making to local 
units; thus, it is often up to USFS unit-level line officers 
to make collaboration a priority by providing staff, 
resources, etc., or not (Beeton et al., 2022). 
Survey respondents emphasized there were strong leaders 
who worked well across organizations and entities, 
communicated a collaborative vision, and motivated 
others to work together. Often, groups benefit from 
multiple collaborative leaders who represent a diversity 
of interests across organizational and institutional levels, 
and provide a variety of functions (e.g., coordination, 
expertise/experience) (Emerson and Gerlak, 2014; Ryan 
and Urgenson, 2019). Having diversity and redundancy 
in leadership roles is critical for continuity through 
personnel turnover. 
Respondents felt the Partnership had adequate funding, 
knowledge, facilitation skills, and buy-in to carry out tasks 
and accomplish their work, and they generally agreed 
that the USFS was responsive to collaborative input. A 
majority of respondents also agreed that participants 
worked together to co-generate knowledge and solve 
problems. Knowledge and information were reportedly 
shared equally among participants. A number of activities 
can be used by collaboratives to support social learning 
and co-development of knowledge, including field trips, 
multi-party monitoring, and joint fact-finding missions. 
Field trips are a critical component of social learning 
because they provide opportunities for groups to let 
their guard down and come to common understandings. 
Field trips can help illustrate how restoration principles 
translate to operations on the ground and allow 
collaborative groups to provide feedback on restoration 
treatments. Joint fact-finding—where stakeholders work 
together to co-generate local knowledge and translate it 
into decision-making—provides opportunities to develop 
contextual understanding of local landscapes to support 
decisions. Documenting this learning and knowledge 
exchange is critical to maintaining transparency, equity, 
and institutional knowledge (Beeton et al., 2022; Cheng et 
al., 2015). 
However, there were several areas for improvement. 
Respondents felt some groups and interests were missing 
from the Partnership and CFLRP. Some respondents 
wanted to see more collaborative engagement between the 
Partnership and USFS in planning and implementation 
of treatments, and opportunities to engage in adaptive 
management based on monitoring results and feedback. 
Respondents agreed that they lacked people and time. 
Respondents also noted that decision-making processes 
were not well understood, mechanisms for accountability 

14                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
were lacking, and the USFS was not clear about the 
decisions they made. 
Many of these issues were reiterated in open-ended 
responses on the needs and recommendations to improve 
the collaborative process. Four themes emerged from 
these responses, including the need for: 1) increased 
stakeholder participation, engagement, and outreach 
to participants that have not been historically involved; 
2) additional resource capacity, especially time and 
personnel dedicated to the collaborative; 3) establishing 
processes and structures for multi-party monitoring and 
collaborative adaptive management; and 4) increased 
collaborative engagement in planning, prioritization, and 
implementation within and across boundaries. 
Survey results also indicated that the Partnership has 
started to make progress on a number of process, socio-
economic, and ecological goals of the CFLRP, despite 
this being the first year of CFLRP funding. Respondents 
reported enhanced communication, increased landscape-
scale planning, and enhanced planning across boundaries. 
A majority of respondents also reported progress on 
reducing fuel hazards and improving habitat for focal 
species. Many of the desired outcomes of the CFLRP may 
take years to realize. 
Frequent turnover and limited agency capacity for 
collaborative engagement were the most substantial 
challenges the Partnership faced at the time of the 
survey. Turnover can undermine relationships and trust, 
slow progress, and lead to lost institutional knowledge 
(Beeton et al., 2022; Coleman et al., 2020). Collaborative 
engagement is often not part of primary job duties for 
agency staff; when combined with vacant positions and 
multiple, sometimes conflicting mandates and priorities, 
agency staff may not have the capacity to engage to the 
extent that stakeholders expect or desire (Beeton et al. 
2022). The Partnership might want to consider whether 
partners have the capacity to deal with turnover and 
limited agency capacity, what they have done to address 
these challenges, and/or what other support is needed to 
overcome these challenges. 
This 
report 
provided 
a 
baseline 
assessment 
of 
collaborative health and performance among the 
Partnership. Collaboratives are dynamic - they continue 
to adapt and evolve as needs or priorities change, and in 
response to internal and external disruptions (Imperial et 
al., 2016). Thus, it is important to continue to self-assess 
collaborative progress, durability, and resilience, so that 
groups can identify what is working well, what may 
need some work, and what support and/or guidance is 
needed to address challenges to maintain performance. 
The SWERI will readminister this questionnaire every 2-3 
years to track progress and performance through time. 
There will be multiple opportunities locally, regionally, 
and nationally for peer-networking and learning 
events to share successes and challenges and learn 
together about how to encourage healthy, durable, and  
resilient collaboration. 
References
Beeton, T.A., Cheng, A.S., Colavito, M.M., 2022. Cultivating 
Collaborative Resilience to Social and Ecological 
Change: An Assessment of Adaptive Capacity, Actions, 
and Barriers Among Collaborative Forest Restoration 
Groups in the United States. Journal of Forestry 
fvab064. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvab064
Butler, W.H., Schultz, C.A., 2019. A New Era for 
Collaborative Forest Management: Policy and Practice 
insights from the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program. Routledge.
Cheng, A.S., Gerlak, A.K., Dale, L., Mattor, K., 2015. 
Examining the adaptability of collaborative governance 
associated with publicly managed ecosystems over 
time: insights from the Front Range Roundtable, 
Colorado, USA. E&S 20, art35. https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-07187-200135 
Coleman, K.J., Butler, W.H., Stern, M.J., Beck, S.L., 2020. 
“They’re Constantly Cycling Through”: Lessons about 
Turnover and Collaborative Forest Planning. Journal of 
Forestry fvaa041. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvaa041
Emerson, 
K., 
Gerlak, 
A.K., 
2014. 
Adaptation 
in 
Collaborative Governance Regimes. Environmental 
Management 
54, 
768–781. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00267-014-0334-7
Emerson, K., Nabatchi, T., Balogh, S., 2012. An integrative 
framework for collaborative governance. Journal of 
public administration research and theory 22, 1–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/mur011
Folke, C., Hahn, T., Olsson, P., Norberg, J., 2005. Adaptive 
governance of social-ecological systems. Annu. Rev. 
Environ. Resour. 30, 441–473. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.energy.30.050504.144511
Gupta, J., Termeer, C., Klostermann, J., Meijerink, S., 
van den Brink, M., Jong, P., Nooteboom, S., Bergsma, 
E., 2010. The Adaptive Capacity Wheel: a method to 
assess the inherent characteristics of institutions to 
enable the adaptive capacity of society. Environmental 
Science & Policy 13, 459–471. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2010.05.006
Imperial, M.T., Johnston, E., Pruett-Jones, M., Leong, K., 
Thomsen, J., 2016. Sustaining the useful life of network 
governance: life cycles and developmental challenges. 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 14, 135–144. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1249

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    15
Lebel, L., Grothmann, T., Siebenhüner, B., 2010. The role 
of social learning in adaptiveness: insights from water 
management. Int Environ Agreements 10, 333–353. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10784-010-9142-6
McIntyre, 
K.B., 
Schultz, 
C.A., 
2020. 
Facilitating 
collaboration 
in 
forest 
management: 
Assessing 
the benefits of collaborative policy innovations. 
Land Use Policy 96, 104683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landusepol.2020.104683
Pelling, M., High, C., 2005. Understanding adaptation: 
what can social capital offer assessments of adaptive 
capacity? Global Environmental Change 15, 308–319. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.02.001
Ryan, C.M., Urgenson, L.S., 2019. Creating and sustaining 
collaborative capacity for forest landscape restoration, 
in: A New Era for Collaborative Forest Management. 
Routledge, pp. 78–95.
Ryan, G.W., Bernard, H.R., 2003. Techniques to Identify 
Themes. 
Field 
Methods 
15, 
85–109. 
https://doi.
org/10.1177/1525822X02239569
Schultz, C., Mclntyre, K., Cyphers, L., Kooistra, C., Ellison, 
A., Moseley, C., 2018. Policy Design to Support Forest 
Restoration: The Value of Focused Investment and 
Collaboration. Forests 9, 512. https://doi.org/10.3390/
f9090512
Sharma-Wallace, L., Velarde, S.J., Wreford, A., 2018. 
Adaptive governance good practice: Show me the 
evidence! Journal of Environmental Management 222, 
174–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.05.067
Stern, M.J., Coleman, K.J., 2015. The Multidimensionality 
of Trust: Applications in Collaborative Natural Resource 
Management. Society & Natural Resources 28, 117–132. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2014.945062
SWERI, 
2020. 
2020 
Cross-Boundary 
Restoration 
Workshop Summary: Advancing all-lands restoration 
in New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, and surrounding 
states. ERI Workshop Report, Ecological Restoration 
Institute, 
Northern 
Arizona 
University. 
https://
cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/
p17192coll1/id/1066/rec/4
Ulibarri, N., Emerson, K., Imperial, M.T., Jager, N.W., 
Newig, J., Weber, E., 2020. How does collaborative 
governance evolve? Insights from a medium-n case 
comparison. Policy and Society 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1
080/14494035.2020.1769288
 

16                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Appendix 1: Report brief for Northern Blues CFLRP and All-Lands Restoration Partnership
The document can be found online at https://cfri.box.com/s/5uok60e2nvsujkewgrnkchkxxzw6mv8n
Collaboration Indicator: Summary of findings for the  
Northern Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
developed a collaboration indicator as part of the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) Common 
Monitoring Strategy. The collaboration indicator was designed to 
evaluate collaborative health, function, resilience, and perceived 
outcomes of collaborative work. The SWERI administered an 
online questionnaire to members of the Northern Blues All-Lands 
Restoration Partnership (henceforth the Partnership) in Fall 2021, 
the first year of the Partnership. We received 37 usable responses 
(30% response rate). Figure 1 illustrates what groups were 
represented in the questionnaire. The purpose of this brief is to:
• summarize high-level findings from the collaboration indicator 
assessment; and
• document 
participants’ 
recommendations 
to 
improve 
collaborative performance and progress.
Findings
Engaging the right people 
Most respondents agreed that a 
representative 
cross-section 
of 
stakeholders was involved in the 
project. A minority indicated that 
some groups and interests were 
underrepresented. 
Participants 
suggested the Partnership could 
be more inclusive of tribes, 
conservation and environmental 
groups, county governments, and 
district staff. Moving forward, the 
Partnership will clarify who they 
are and the goals and objectives 
of 
the 
Partnership 
in 
their 
communications.
Align expectations and clarify capacity for engagement throughout the process
All participants have their own expectations and capacities for collaborative engagement; collaborative engagement 
opportunities must be tailored accordingly. Respondents expected more collaboration between the US Forest Service, 
other state, local, private, and tribal partners, and the Partnership during planning and implementation.  Specifically, they 
suggested the need to: 
• develop a cross-boundary collaborative prioritization process and products (e.g., priority maps) for treatment planning; 
• co-develop zones of agreement and a vision for restoration; 
• develop a clear decision-making process between the Partnership and the Leadership Team; 
• clarify expectations from partners on how implementation will be accomplished across boundaries and within the 
CFLRP; and
• periodically reassess expectations and progress of the Partnership.
NBFC 2021 Fall field tour.
1
4
4
4
5
5
6
9
13
17
0
5
10
15
20
Blue Mountain Prescribed Fire Council
Leadership Team
Workforce Training & Forest Product Utilization Team
Other
Northern Blues Communications Team
My Blue Mountains Woodland Partnership
Operations Team
Northern Blues Monitoring Team
Project Team
Northern Blues Forest Collaborative
Northern Blues All Lands Partnership - Aﬃliate Groups
Figure 2 - Respondents’ self-identified team membership within the Northern Blues All Lands Partnership.

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    17
Trust, relationships,  
and commitment
Respondents indicated that building trust 
and relationships was a primary motivator 
for their engagement in the Partnership, and 
a majority indicated the collaborative process 
has fostered trust- and relationship-building, 
as well as mutual respect of others’ positions 
(Figure 2).
Social learning and  
adaptive management
Social learning can reduce conflict, increase 
understanding, 
and 
build 
trust. 
Most 
respondents indicated the Partnership has 
supported co-generation of knowledge to 
solve problems and provided equal access 
to knowledge and information. Less agreed 
the current collaborative process supported 
adaptive 
management. 
Participants 
recommended the Partnership work to:
• co-identify desired conditions and 
thresholds for adaptive management;
• develop a collaborative adaptive  
management process;
• continue opportunities for 
sharing monitoring results (e.g., 
field trips, story maps); and
• consider monitoring protocols 
for (e.g., to learn from wildfire) 
unplanned disturbances.
Resources
A majority of respondents agreed the 
Partnership had adequate access to funds, 
knowledge and expertise, and facilitation 
skills (Figure 3). Less agreed that the group 
had adequate access to people and time to 
accomplish their work. This finding aligns 
with other forest collaboratives. Often a core group of doers, many of whom are volunteers, are asked to carry out 
multiple tasks. While some groups function better with a small group of doers, relying on a few individuals may leave 
groups vulnerable to turnover, which can erode trust and diminish institutional knowledge.  
Perceived outcomes
Respondents reported progress on collaborative process, socio-economic, and ecological outcomes, including: 
• improved communication, enhanced landscape planning, and improved cross boundary planning (Figure 4); and 
• reduced fuel hazards and improved habitat.
Figure 2 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly 
Agree” that the collaborative process has help build trust, relationships, 
and respect among members and commitment to the collaborative process 
among oneself (and their organization) and USFS unit-level staff. 
67%
69%
69%
74%
77%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Trust
Personal 
and/or working 
relationships
Mutual respect of 
others’ positions 
and interests  
Myself 
(my organization)
US Forest Service 
unit-level staﬀ
The collaborative process has helped participants build:
Are committed to the collaborative process:
Trust, Relationships, and Committment
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Figure 3 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the collaborative has adequate: funds; people and 
time; knowledge and technical expertise; skills; and “Buy-in.”
64%
33%
67%
73%
61%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Funds to carry out
tasks and
accomplish our
work
People and time
to accomplish
our work
Local/traditional
knowledge, science
and/or technical
expertise to
accomplish our
work
Skills to facilitate
collaborative
engagement
activities
“Buy-in” to 
accomplish 
our work
Our collaborative project has adequate:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree

18                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Authors: Tyler A. Beeton1, Adam Snitker1, and  
Melanie M. Colavito2
1. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Department of Forest and Rangeland 
Stewardship, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
2. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ.
Next steps
This assessment will be readministered every 2-3 years to track collaboration across projects and over time, with the 
goal of identifying where capacities lie and areas for improvement to target investments and activities accordingly.
73%
42%
56%
57%
18%
88%
77%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Enhanced
communication
among
participants
Reduced conﬂict
among
stakeholders
Enhanced
decision-making
Included diverse
interests,
perspectives
and/or
knowledges
Reduced or
improved
outcomes of
litigation
Enabled
landscape scale
planning
Enhanced
planning across
boundaries
The collaborative process has:
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Figure 4 - Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that the 
collaborative process has impacted the function and capacity of the collaborative.
S O U T H W E S T 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    19
Appendix 2: SWERI presentation to Northern Blues CFLRP and All-Lands  
Restoration Partnership
The document can be found online at https://cfri.box.com/s/9gw9kdemxm9y19ejdx1pb6qqbu5skb1f
Tyler Beeton1, Melanie Colavito2, Tony Cheng1, Adam Snitker1
1Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University, tyler.Beeton@colostate.edu; 
2Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, melanie.colavito@nau.edu
May, 4, 2022 – N. Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership
CFLRP Collaboration Indicator Questionnaire: 
Summary of findings for the Northern Blues 
All-Lands Restoration Partnership
Objectives for Today
1. Document primary successes and 
challenges reported in collaboration 
indicator questionnaire
2.
Discuss if/how results resonate with 
webinar participants
3.
Identify needs to improve collaborative 
progress and performance
4.
Feedback on pilot process
5.
Next steps and deliverables

20                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Engage and participate in discussion!
Will pause for facilitated discussion around 
4 key themes
1.
Getting the right people engaged
2.
Aligning expectations for collaborative 
engagement throughout the process
3.
Social learning - collaborative monitoring 
and adaptive management
4.
Feedback on pilot process, roll out, and 
findings
Goals and Expectations
Background and Context
CFLRP Common Monitoring Strategy
• 2021 – USFS led a collaborative 
process to develop national 
common monitoring strategy
• Core set of social, ecological, and 
economic indicators 
• Required of all newly authorized 
and extension projects
• Meant to:
• supplement but not replace 
local multi-party monitoring 
plans
• Provide standardization 
across projects

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    21
Question
How well is CFLRP encouraging an effective and meaningful collaborative 
approach?
Indicator
Indicator questions to include collaborative health, function, and resilience as well 
as perceived outcomes of collaborative work.
Capacity Needed
Instrument will be developed nationally. Results will be provided at project-level.
Regional support for providing the “so what?” of the instrument responses 
encouraged
Reporting Mechanism/Tool
Instrument administered to CFLRP collaboratives to complete.
Frequency of reporting
Every 2-3 years
Background and Context
National Monitoring Strategy - Collaboration
Framework for Collaborative Governance
1) Collaboration dynamics – i.e., health, function, and 
resilience
o Principled engagement – getting the right people 
involved, shared understanding
o Shared motivation – trust, relationships, 
commitment
o Capacity for joint action – leadership, resources, 
decision-making processes
2) Perceived impacts/outcomes
o
Process
o
Socio-economic
o
Ecological
3) Disruptions that affect  collaborative performance and 
durability
o Turnover
o Disruptive members – conflict
o Industry capacity
o Legal or policy changes

22                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Discussion Time: 1. Getting the right people engaged
• Do these results resonate with you? 
What might we be missing?
• What strategies might be employed to 
increase engagement with the groups 
identified?
• What are barriers to increasing this 
engagement?
N. Blues Pilot - Approach
Online Anonymous Questionnaire
• Grounded in findings from first 10 years of 
CFLRP lessons learned and related 
questionnaires (Beeton et al. 2020)
• 30 *mostly* close ended statements
• Pilot tested with N. Blues participants and 
Colorado Front Range CFLRP
• Distribution – To All-Lands Restoration 
Partnership Listserv in Fall 2021
• 30% of All-Lands Restoration Partnership 
completed survey - 37 usable responses

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    23
Collaboration Dynamics
1) Collaboration dynamics – i.e., health, function, and 
resilience
o Principled engagement – getting the right people 
involved, shared understanding
o Shared motivation – trust, relationships, 
commitment
o Capacity for joint action – leadership, resources, 
decision-making processes
1. Getting the right people engaged
•
Majority agreed that a representative 
cross-section of stakeholders involved
•
Increase engagement with:
•
Tribes and tribal interests
•
Conservation and environmental groups
•
County representatives
•
District Rangers and staff
•
Some suggested participation skewed 
towards timber interests – Needs to be 
more inclusive of:
•
Recreation and tourism
•
Fish and wildlife
•
Water interests and concerns
•
Increase internal and public communication

24                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
2. Aligning expectations for engagement throughout the process
•
Collaboration required in planning, 
implementation, and monitoring
•
YET, not defined in CFLRP/FLRA
•
Results in different expectations for 
collaboration
•
Some work needed to align expectations 
for collaboration in:
•
Planning
•
Implementation
Recommendations
•
Develop a regionwide collaborative prioritization 
process and products (i.e., maps) for for multi-year 
treatment planning 
•
Align partner expectations on:
•
Zones of agreement on restoration vision
•
How to accomplish implementation
•
How and where to engage on CFLRP 
implementation and outyear planning with the 
USFS
•
Transparency in decision-making processes throughout 
planning, implementation, and monitoring
•
Among CFLRP and USFS
•
Between NBALP and Leadership Team
•
Periodically reassess goals, expectations, and progress 
of collaborative
2. Aligning expectations for engagement throughout the process

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    25
Discussion Time: 2. Aligning expectations for engagement throughout the process
• Do these results resonate with you? 
What might we be missing?
• Do these recommendations seem feasible 
and desirable?
• Where might you need help implementing 
these recommendations?
Trust, Relationships, Respect, and Commitment
•
Social capital – the “glue” that holds groups 
together
•
Commitment among USFS especially 
important as decision-making authority
•
Survey respondents
•
Building trust and relationships was 
primary motivators for engagement
•
Process has built trust, relationships, and 
respect
•
Participants are committed

26                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
3. Social learning: Collaborative monitoring and adaptive management
•
Social learning occurs through repeated 
interactions among participants
•
Can reduce conflict, increase understanding, 
action, and trust
•
3 Criteria
•
Participants work together to co-
develop shared understanding and 
knowledge
•
Knowledge and information is accessible 
to all members
•
Learning used to inform adaptive 
management
Recommendations
•
Clearly identified desired conditions
•
Identify thresholds for adaptive management
•
Process, or framework, for collaborative adaptive 
management
•
Sharing monitoring results for effective learning 
(e.g., field trips, summary reports, story maps), 
shared understanding, and informing AM
•
Monitoring of unplanned disturbances
•
Dashboard for outcomes/accomplishments
3. Social learning: Collaborative monitoring and adaptive management

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    27
Discussion Time: 3. Collaborative monitoring and adaptive management
• Do these results resonate with you? What 
might we be missing?
• Do these recommendations seem feasible 
and desirable?
• Where might you need help implementing 
these recommendations?
Collaborative capacity - Resources
•
Majority agreed adequate:
•
Funding
•
Local, traditional, and/or scientific 
knowledge and technical capacity
•
Facilitation skills
•
Buy-in from a core group
•
Need people and time to accomplish work!
•
Struggled with
•
Turnover among agency and 
partnership staff; and 
•
Limited agency capacity to engage

28                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
Collaborative Governance
Perceived Outcomes to date
2) Perceived impacts/outcomes
o
Process
o
Socio-economic
o
Ecological
Outcomes
Collaborative process outcomes

CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues                    29
Outcomes
Socio-economic and ecological outcomes
Discussion Time: 4. Feedback on pilot process, roll out, and findings
• What worked well with this pilot 
assessment?
• What could we improve?
• Is there anything we did not ask that we 
should have?

30                    CFLRP Collaboration Assessment Report for the Northern Blues
What should you expect next
Short-term
• Presentation slide deck
• Larger report with links, examples from literature
• 1-2 page brief on questionnaire findings and 
discussion today
Longer-term
• Peer-learning sessions with new CFLRP cohort!
Happy to engage in follow-up conversations and/or 
provide support if/when needed!
Iterative process – needs, capacities will change –
periodically take stock and we will reassess in 2023!
References
• Beeton, T. A., A. S. Cheng, and M. M. Colavito. 2020. Developing and sustaining collaborative 
resilience in the face of change: A review of the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program projects. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
CO. https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2020/08/CFLRP-Developing-and-
sustaining-collaborative-resilience.pdf
• Beeton, T. A., A. S. Cheng, and M. M. Colavito. 2022. Cultivating Collaborative Resilience to Social 
and Ecological Change: An Assessment of Adaptive Capacity, Actions, and Barriers Among 
Collaborative Forest Restoration Groups in the United States. Journal of Forestry. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvab064
• Emerson, K., T. Nabatchi, and S. Balogh. 2012. An integrative framework for collaborative 
governance. Journal of public administration research and theory 22(1):1–29.
