Journal of Forestry, 2022, 1–16
https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvac018
Research Article - social sciences
Received August 19, 2021; Accepted June 1, 2022
Advance Access publication June 23, 2022
1
© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of American Foresters. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.
Research Article - social sciences
Characterizing Divergent Experiences with 
the Same Wildfire: Insights from a Survey 
of Households in Evacuation, Postfire Flood 
Risk, and Unaffected Areas After the 2019 
Museum Fire
Catrin M. Edgeley1,*,  and Melanie M. Colavito2
1School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-15017.  2Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-15018.
*Corresponding author email: catrin.edgeley@nau.edu
Abstract
Households can experience the same wildfire event differently depending on the kinds of risks 
posed to them, among other factors. These experiences can influence support or opposition for 
local forest management. We administered a mixed-mode survey to households across three 
distinct groups with different sources of risk associated with the 2019 Museum Fire in Flagstaff, 
Arizona: houses in the wildfire evacuation areas, houses in the postfire flood-risk area, and un-
affected houses within the city limits. Survey responses from 787 respondents confirmed that 
households experienced the Museum Fire and its associated risks differently and revealed con-
tinued support for active forest management in the Flagstaff area. Experiences, trustworthiness 
of information, and support for specific forest management outcomes varied across our sample 
populations, indicating that tailored communication may be needed for households who experi-
ence different risk associated with the same event. We conclude with considerations for communi-
cating with the public in postfire environments.
Study Implications:  There are significant differences in perspectives and attitudes between dir-
ectly and indirectly affected households that experienced the same wildfire, including varied trust 
in information sources and engagement in communication about wildfire and flood risk. Therefore, 
more targeted communication about wildfire and postfire risk and forest management that tailors 
outreach based on different household experiences is needed. Future efforts to investigate popu-
lations affected by wildfire should account for potentially diverse household experiences and 
consider how that may affect communication about forest management during windows of op-
portunity after wildfire events. Differentiating approaches to risk communication is particularly 
important during compound disasters (e.g., a flood that occurs within a wildfire-affected area) to 
ensure information is shared by the right outlet for a given population as risk sources begin to 
layer temporally.
Keywords:  Survey, forest management, wildfire, public support, risk communication
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

2
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
Introduction
Forest management has expanded in the western United 
States as calls for collaboration across large landscapes 
focus on reducing catastrophic wildfire risk and asso-
ciated postfire risks such as postfire flooding1. With 
increasingly frequent catastrophic wildfires that dir-
ectly affect human communities, it is important to ex-
pand our understanding of household experiences with 
wildfire and postfire risks such as flooding, including 
how experiences with wildfire might affect postfire 
responses, how communities and local jurisdictions 
adapt to postfire risks, and how experience with wild-
fire might affect support or opposition towards future 
forest management actions. A greater understanding of 
household experiences with wildfire and postfire risks 
can enhance the ability of local communities to develop 
wildfire adaptation and mitigation measures, as well as 
public outreach tailored to the local context (Meldrum 
et al. 2018). Although there is a growing body of litera-
ture surrounding postfire social dynamics and recovery 
experiences (e.g., Schumann et al. 2020, Christianson 
et al. 2019, Paveglio and Edgeley 2017), much of this 
work focuses on singular kinds of experiences such as 
evacuation rather than contrasting the potential range 
of household experiences associated with risks from 
the same wildfire event. Furthermore, there is evidence 
to suggest that public attitudes towards forest manage-
ment may change after wildfire events in affected com-
munities, yet the extent to which this varies remains 
unclear (Ryan and Hamin 2008, Carroll et al. 2011).
Understanding the driving factors and conditions 
under which members of the public will support forest 
management to reduce wildfire risk on public lands is 
often pivotal; public attitudes and opinions can deter-
mine conflict or cohesion during the planning process, 
access to or availability of resources, and the scale and 
scope of forest management efforts (Burns and Cheng 
2007, Diaz et al. 2016, Mockrin et al. 2018, Shindler 
et al. 2009, Steelman and McCaffrey 2011). Public at-
titudes toward forest management can change over 
time as social and ecological contexts evolve (Shindler 
and Toman 2003, Paveglio et al. 2009). Public perspec-
tives can depend on a variety of local characteristics, 
such as wildfire or flood history, detail associated with 
proposed treatments, relationships between residents 
and land managers, changing social conditions, and 
shifting levels of wildfire risk (Brenkert-Smith et  al. 
2020, Brunson and Shindler 2004). Public perspectives 
of risk and acceptance and support of management ap-
proaches is a continual process rather than an end goal 
that, once reached, no longer requires consideration; 
understanding and support must be established and 
maintained through the strengthening of citizen–
agency relationships and trust, transparent commu-
nication, public involvement, messaging and outreach 
(Byerly et al. 2020), and community knowledge and 
understanding (Colavito et al. 2020, Diaz et al. 2016), 
among other factors (Cortner et al. 1998).
The shifting nature of public perspectives of wild-
fire risk and attitudes toward forest management at 
this interactional nexus highlights the importance of 
documenting and considering the social and temporal 
context(s) in which social science data about forest 
management and wildfire is collected. Identifying 
whether diverse experiences with a wildfire influence 
attitudes toward forest management has valuable im-
plications for (1) understanding citizen support for 
forest policy at a range of scales, (2) anticipating local 
variations in citizen–agency conflict or cohesion, and 
(3) improving postfire resource allocations, particu-
larly communication and education about ecological 
processes in developed environments.
This study presents a survey analysis of 787 house-
holds after the 2019 Museum Fire near Flagstaff, 
Arizona. We compared attitudes toward forest man-
agement across respondents with three distinct experi-
ences with the wildfire based on household proximity 
to the wildfire and postfire flooding zones and see 
significant differences in  perspectives and attitudes 
between directly and indirectly affected households. 
Findings presented here can inform more targeted 
communication about wildfire and postfire risk and 
forest management that tailors outreach based on dif-
ferent household experiences.
Literature Review
Influences on Public Attitudes toward Forest 
Management
Attitudes toward active forest management—broadly, 
any land management approach that seeks to im-
prove the health of forested areas—are highly variable 
across social and temporal gradients at the local level 
and can vary substantially depending on the manage-
ment activity or outcome (Brenkert-Smith et al. 2020, 
Steelman and McCaffrey 2011). Over the past two dec-
ades, efforts to characterize this diversity have often 
harnessed survey methodologies to gauge differences 
and identify patterns. The majority of these studies 
focus on characterizing resident attitudes towards spe-
cific management activities or on a specific landscape 
or ecosystem before, during, or after a fuel treatment 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

3
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
or other management effort has been executed (e.g., 
Winter et al. 2002, 2004, McCaffrey 2009).
Numerous studies have documented broad levels 
of public support for forest management activities 
(Brunson and Shindler 2004, Shindler et  al. 2009, 
Shindler and Toman 2003, Weible et al. 2005); how-
ever, there are nuances to this acceptance that vary 
based on a range of factors. Early efforts to identify 
influences on attitudes toward forest management 
determined that acceptance varies depending on the 
management technique being proposed or applied. For 
example, prescribed fire is often identified as a concern 
due to smoke impacts in comparison to other common 
techniques like fuel mastication (Shindler and Toman 
2003, Olsen et al. 2017, Hamilton and Salerno 2020). 
Where management activities take place also mat-
ters; Blanchard and Ryan (2007) found greater sup-
port for management on public land than on private 
lands. Other studies expanded on this, discovering 
that support also varies depending on resident trust 
in agencies conducting that work, and respondents’ 
perceived risk and benefits associated with a specific 
management strategy (Winter et al. 2004, Vogt et al. 
2002, Ascher et  al. 2013). Improving trust between 
citizens and agencies remains a central focus of efforts 
to garner support for forest management (McCaffrey 
2006, Olsen and Sharp 2013). However, trust is a com-
plicated and multifaceted concept that can enable or 
constrain management based on contextual factors 
(Stern and Coleman 2019). Stern and Coleman (2019) 
note that effort should be made to develop multiple 
forms of trust, which requires an investment of time 
and commitment but is critical to enhance collabora-
tive processes with diverse groups.
Emergent across early studies of public support for 
forest management was a recognition that how man-
agement efforts are framed can be critical for fostering 
support. Federal policies and management practices 
that advance urgent, active forest management and 
restoration may not be issue frames that are shared by 
all stakeholders, especially if the need for such forms 
of management has not already been framed for the 
public (Burns and Cheng 2007). McCaffrey et  al. 
(2008) found that perceptions were diverse not only 
among residents, but across different forestry-related 
stakeholder groups too, indicating that a one-size-
fits-all framing for specific management techniques is 
unlikely to be effective. Opposition to forest manage-
ment may run counter to framings about how humans 
should manage forests, especially when management 
activities are taking place in meaningful landscapes 
where residents have high place attachment (Brenkert-
Smith et  al. 2020). Other studies expand on this by 
indicating that identifying a relevant social scale is a 
key factor in framing the need for forest management 
and wildfire risk–reduction activities (Brenkert-Smith 
et al. 2017).
Education related to ecological processes and man-
agement activities is a critical factor in efforts to char-
acterize attitudes toward forest management. Higher 
levels of education about specific forest management 
strategies have been found to correlate with greater 
support for those activities (Blanchard and Ryan 
2007). Higher levels of education may also relate to 
a greater understanding of ecological conditions, such 
as wildfire or postfire flood risk, which in turn can be 
associated with a better understanding of management 
actions designed to mitigate those risks (Diaz et  al. 
2016). Given the beneficial influences of education on 
support for forest management, a subset of the litera-
ture has focused on incorporating interventions such as 
field tours or educational materials into study designs. 
These efforts typically identify increased support for 
forest management strategies in postsurveys or other 
follow-up data collection efforts (Loomis et al. 2001, 
Shindler and Toman 2003, Toman et al. 2004, Ryan 
and Hamin 2008). Fewer efforts incorporate wildfire 
events into data collection (Brunson and Evans 2005, 
Ryan and Hamin 2008).
Household Experiences with Wildfire
Diverse experiences with the same event can have 
varying social impacts. These can include effects on 
well-being, place attachment, mental health, and 
changes to daily routine, regardless of wildfire size 
and loss of infrastructure or life (Eisenman et al. 2015, 
Paveglio et al. 2015, 2015, Kooistra et al. 2018). These 
experiences can inform attitudes toward land manage-
ment, government intervention or presence, and com-
munity involvement tied to forest health and wildfire 
risk mitigation (Edgeley and Paveglio 2017, Olsen and 
Sharp 2013). Although existing research documents 
how experiences with the same wildfire event may vary 
(Paveglio and Edgeley 2017) and how different evacu-
ation experiences affect households (Strahan et  al. 
2018), few research efforts compare varied experiences 
and their effects across different sources of wildfire-
related risk. Notably, evacuation due to direct risk 
from a wildfire and forecasted risk of postfire flooding 
have not been compared, and little social research 
exists on the latter. Understanding whether there are 
differences between households that experience these 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

4
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
two risks compared to households that are unaffected 
by the same wildfire event offers an opportunity to 
identify meaningful nuance in communication with di-
verse populations about forest management.
Perceptions of risk and attitudes towards forest 
management can shift over time as local social and 
ecological contexts evolve (Shindler and Toman 2003, 
Paveglio et al. 2015, Meldrum et al. 2018, Steelman 
and McCaffrey 2011). Existing research documents 
how prior conditions affect community and household 
responses during and after wildfires (McCool et  al. 
2006, Paveglio and Edgeley 2017). Experience with a 
wildfire event can lead communities to become more 
vocal about the use, or increased pace and scope, of 
forest management efforts (Carroll et al. 2006). Prior 
experiences with wildfire can also influence risk per-
ceptions, which may leverage greater support for ac-
tive forest management (Blanchard and Ryan 2007). 
Because of this variation, noting the timing and con-
text in which data on public perspectives of risk and 
attitudes toward forest management is collected is crit-
ical in documenting changes over time. Understanding 
what role wildfire events can play in attitudinal shifts 
may identify policy windows, which are distinct 
periods of opportunity for accelerated forest manage-
ment or support (Mockrin et al. 2018).
Social interactions in postfire environments often 
are shaped by trust. Existing studies demonstrate how 
positive or negative interaction between citizens and 
agencies before a wildfire can be exacerbated after fire 
(Olsen and Sharp 2013, Olsen and Shindler 2010). 
Trust or distrust in these environments tends to be 
multifaceted, emerging and evolving as the result of a 
diverse number of influences and interactions. These 
include agreement or disagreement about whether the 
fire was managed appropriately (Paveglio et al. 2015), 
whether the fire’s cause was preventable (Brunson and 
Evans 2005, Edgeley and Paveglio 2017), agency ex-
perience with fire and forest management (Rasch and 
McCaffrey 2019), perceived responsibility for prefire 
forest health (Fleming et al. 2015, Lidskog et al. 2019), 
expectations of government assistance with recovery 
(Carroll et al. 2006, Edgeley 2022), perceived effective-
ness of communication (Stidham et al. 2011; Steelman 
et al. 2015), and the extent to which local knowledge 
was integrated into fire operations to support effective 
suppression (Sharp et al. 2013). Trust or distrust re-
lated to these sources has frequently been identified 
as pervasive, coloring experiences with, and percep-
tions of, future wildfires (Paveglio and Edgeley 2017). 
Those contexts can shape public support for public 
land management, including specific forest manage-
ment techniques (Brunson and Evans 2005, Ryan and 
Hamin 2008).
Diversity in responses and experiences at the house-
hold level can drive broader community trends. This 
has been documented in wildfire evacuation studies, 
where actions taken during wildfire often reflect levels 
of preparation, social connectivity, and interpretation 
of wildfire behavior, among other factors (Strahan 
et  al. 2019, McCaffrey et  al. 2018, Edgeley and 
Paveglio 2019). How those household contexts trans-
late to larger community-level characteristics is under-
studied; however, this information can provide insights 
on how wildfires do or do not become focusing events, 
and the extent to which household support while a 
policy window is open varies within a community after 
wildfire. Studies that document changes in support or 
opposition for land management, including specific 
strategies and techniques, demonstrate the value of 
data collection immediately after a wildfire (Carroll 
et al. 2006, Ryan and Hamin 2008).
In sum, there is a need to better characterize the 
varying impacts of divergent household experiences 
with the same wildfire and associated events like 
postfire flooding. Differences in perspectives and atti-
tudes driven by experience can inform tailored public 
outreach, resource allocation, and collaborative ap-
proaches ahead of potential management or policy 
changes. In response to gaps in the literature reviewed 
thus far and a growing recognition of diverse social 
contexts and conditions that may exist within a geo-
graphic area, we ask the following research questions: 
(1) How do household experiences with a wildfire and 
postfire flooding vary shortly after a wildfire event, and 
(2) does this variation influence attitudes toward forest 
management?
Approach
Flagstaff, Arizona, and the 2019 Museum Fire
Flagstaff, Arizona, is home to approximately 75,000 
permanent residents living at the base of the San 
Francisco Peaks, adjacent to the Coconino National 
Forest (US Census Bureau 2019). Flagstaff has experi-
enced direct and indirect impacts from several wildfires 
in the past decade (Colavito et al. 2020, Steelman et al. 
2015) The 2010 Schultz Fire northeast of Flagstaff re-
sulted in extensive postfire flooding, becoming a cata-
lyst for widespread local discussion and collaboration 
to address forest and watershed health (Mottek-Lucas 
2015). Approximately 74.3% of city residents voted 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

5
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
in support of a 2012 bond to accelerate forest restor-
ation work in the greater Flagstaff area, creating what 
is now known as the Flagstaff Watershed Protection 
Project (FWPP) (Mottek-Lucas 2015). FWPP alongside 
other restoration efforts, including the Four Forests 
Restoration Initiative and an active local prescribed 
burning program, have collectively led to the treatment 
of thousands of acres in and around Flagstaff over the 
past decade. Simultaneously, there have been commu-
nity outreach efforts in the Flagstaff area to provide 
information about forest conditions and management. 
This may have facilitated what is anecdotally con-
sidered a high level of understanding of and support 
for forest management activities within the commu-
nity of Flagstaff. Diaz et al. (2016) also documented 
a high level of local ecological knowledge in Flagstaff 
following the Schultz Fire.
The Museum Fire began adjacent to the Schultz 
Fire burn scar on July 21, 2019, spreading to 1,961 
acres across both National Forest and city lands be-
fore being fully contained 2 weeks later. As the wildfire 
grew, it became the highest suppression priority in the 
United States as it seemed poised to burn into devel-
oped areas of Flagstaff. Brief evacuations occurred in 
numerous areas, focused predominantly around the 
city limits, although no damage was documented in 
developed areas. Subsequent investigations concluded 
that the wildfire was ignited by an isolated spark from 
contractor equipment working on an FWPP thinning 
project to support forest restoration in the Dry Lake 
Hills area (USDA Forest Service 2019).
As direct threat to the city decreased, conversations 
turned rapidly to postfire flood risk because July is typ-
ically the height of the monsoon season in the area, 
with concerns centered on multiple neighborhoods 
in northeastern Flagstaff adjacent to a key watershed 
down-channel from the burned area but unaffected by 
the fire itself. Notably, the 2019 monsoon season was 
the lowest on record at the time. The monsoon season 
of 2020 soon surpassed the 2019 monsoon season as 
the lowest on record, and there was no postfire flooding 
associated with monsoons until 2021. In 2021, com-
pounding flood events occurred in Flagstaff, some as-
sociated with the Museum Fire burn scar and some due 
to extreme precipitation, which resulted in confusion 
around the term flooding, but as this survey occurred 
before the events of 2021, those issues are not ad-
dressed herein. Thus, we use the term “flooding” here 
to refer to all postfire, precipitation-driven events that 
interact with the Museum Fire burn scar. This includes 
debris flows, mud slides, and flood events. Although 
we recognize that there are important distinctions be-
tween these risks, public communication around the 
Museum Fire centered on the term “flooding,” and to 
avoid confusion or create additional concern, we de-
signed our survey in consultation with local officials to 
use the same language.
The Museum Fire provided an opportunity to inves-
tigate differential perspectives of wildfire risk and atti-
tudes toward forest management efforts and whether 
Flagstaff’s reputation for high public support towards 
forest management activities could be tested by such an 
event. Additionally, there is minimal overlap between 
the geographic extent of households placed under 
evacuation during the Museum Fire and households at 
risk of postfire flooding following the wildfire (Figure 
1). The distinct geographic separation of these two 
risks uniquely positions this study as an opportunity to 
examine these two experiences separately, as in many 
instances there is substantial overlap in the presence of 
wildfire and flood risk from the same event.
Survey Design and Administration
We developed and administered a mixed-mode survey 
during November 2019, less than 4 months after the 
Museum Fire was contained, to ensure high respondent 
recall of associated actions, events, and experiences. 
The survey instrument was developed following con-
versations with six local key informants from the City 
of Flagstaff, Coconino County, and the USDA Forest 
Service (Forest Service) who were regularly interfacing 
with affected populations and sought survey data 
to inform decision-making related to potential risk 
mitigation planning and communication. Following 
these conversations, we drafted the survey instru-
ment and shared it with these key informants, where 
it underwent an iterative process of collecting and 
incorporating feedback until both the research team 
and key informants were satisfied with its content and 
design. The survey instrument contained several sets 
of Likert-scale, categorical, and binary/multiple choice 
questions. These included: (1) household experiences 
with the Museum Fire, to characterize whether experi-
ences significantly enough to conduct this study; (2) 
the Museum Fire’s ecological and landscape-level im-
pacts; (3) attitudes toward forest management, both 
in terms of management approaches and outcomes; 
and (4) basic demographic information. Questions re-
lated to household experiences were expanded from 
Paveglio et al. (2016) and Kooistra et al. (2018).
The first author developed a sample frame using 
county-level parcel data and flood-risk models in 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

6
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
Figure 1  Study area map, including the Museum Fire burn scar perimeter and geographic delineation of our three sample 
groups. Areas placed under any level of evacuation notice using the Ready, Set, Go system (“evacuation area group” in our 
sample frame) are shown in crosshatched areas. Areas identified as at risk of postfire flooding (“flood risk area group” in 
our sample frame) are shown using stripes. There is some minor geographic overlap between these two groups; however, 
no respondents resided in the overlapping area. Our “unaffected area group” resided within the City of Flagstaff boundary, 
shown here using a solid black outline.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

7
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
ArcGIS. Three core sampling groups were determined 
using additional shapefiles: (1) the wildfire evacuation 
area: all properties in areas placed under evacuation or 
pre-evacuation using the Ready, Set, Go! system; (2) 
the flood-risk area: all properties in areas modeled as 
having between a 1- and 3-inch possibility of flooding; 
and (3) the unaffected area: a random sample of prop-
erties within the Flagstaff city limits that do not fall 
into either of the first two categories, acting as a con-
trol group (Figure 1). Only properties that had been 
developed with a residential structure were included in 
the final sample frame. Each property was assigned a 
unique identifying code to coordinate survey adminis-
tration and track responses (Edgeley 2017). We identi-
fied a total of 2,758 properties eligible to participate in 
this study through this process.
A mixed-mode survey administration approach 
was developed following the tailored design method 
(Dillman et al. 2014). Properties in our sample frame 
received a survey packet in the mail that contained an 
introductory letter, survey booklet, and business reply 
envelope. A reminder postcard was delivered 2 weeks 
later. Both mailings provided the option to complete 
an identical version of the survey online instead via 
Qualtrics. This approach yielded 618 responses for a 
response rate of 22.41%. Nonresponse bias was not 
deemed an issue with this dataset based on two ap-
proaches: (1) cross referencing respondents’ demo-
graphics with local census data, which showed close 
alignment, and (2) comparison of the first fifty and last 
fifty survey respondents’ responses to questions that 
were focal to this study, as some studies indicate that 
late respondents often behave like nonrespondents, 
allowing late respondent data to become a proxy for 
nonrespondents (Armstrong and Overton 1977).
A week after the final mail-out, an online version 
of the survey was also made available through the 
Flagstaff Community Forum (FCF), an online public 
involvement tool overseen by the City of Flagstaff. The 
City shared a link to the FCF survey on social media 
and via their mailing list twice over the course of a 
month, resulting in 169 additional responses. We ran 
basic tests (Chi-square, ANOVA, and t-tests) on the 
questions that form the focus of this study to identify 
whether responses varied significantly between admin-
istration modes (FCF versus mail and online responses 
received via the original sample frame). We found 
no significant differences in response but note that 
the FCF was most frequently completed by residents 
in unaffected areas rather than flood risk and evacu-
ation areas. Table 1 provides an overview of survey re-
sponses by administration mode and sample group. We 
received three completed surveys for which respond-
ents had removed a unique identifying code that al-
lowed us to identify which sample area the respondent 
resided in; as a result, these responses were excluded 
from all analyses in this study. We received a total of 
787 completed surveys across modes.
Analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted using quantitative 
social data analysis program SPSS 26. All Likert scale 
data were recoded from −2 (strongly disagree or very 
unacceptable) to 2 (strongly agree or very acceptable) 
and binary data were dummy coded where appro-
priate. Descriptive statistics were compiled to iden-
tify whether there were any demographic differences 
across the three sample groups. One-way ANOVA and 
Chi-square tests were used to determine whether any 
of these differences were statistically significant prior 
to beginning an in-depth analysis. Post hoc z-tests with 
a Bonferroni correction provided comparative ana-
lysis across responses. Additionally, Cronbach’s alpha 
scores were calculated for several sets of questions to 
Table 1.  Survey responses organized by sample group and administration method.
 
Mail survey
Flagstaff Community Forum 
Total  
responses
Delivered 
Responses 
Response rate 
Responses
N 
% responses 
Evacuation area
1,144
267
23.34%
24
291
36.98%
Flood risk area
359
85
23.68%
10
95
12.07%
Unaffected area
1,255
266
21.20%
132
398
50.57%
Unknown*
—
—
—
3
3
0.38%
Total
2,758
618
22.41%
169
787
100%
* “Unknown” indicates that respondents declined to answer questions about their location or removed their identification code 
from the front page of the survey booklet prior to return. These responses were dropped from the analysis.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

8
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
identify scales for comparison across groups, some of 
which followed existing research using similar ques-
tions (Paveglio et al. 2016, 2018, Kooistra et al. 2018).
To compare the three sample groups across a range 
of Likert-scale variables, we used one-way ANOVA 
tests. This included a Bonferroni post hoc test that as-
sumed equal variance across sample groups, as Levene 
tests for homogeneity indicated that sample groups 
did not vary significantly on basic demographic data. 
Tests focused on differences between the three groups 
across several sets of measures, including (1) accept-
ability of various forest management outcomes, such 
as reduced air quality or temporary road closures; (2) 
agreement or disagreement about potential benefits of 
forest management; and (3) support for future forest 
management efforts.
Results
Characterizing Survey Respondents
Respondent demographics are relatively consistent with 
estimated 2019 census data for the Flagstaff area (US 
Census Bureau 2019). The average survey respondent 
was 61  years old. Approximately 50.5% identified 
as male, 49% as female, and 0.5% as nonbinary or 
other. Respondent ethnicity was predominantly white/
Caucasian (89.2%). Respondents generally had a high 
level of education, with 82.2% of respondents holding 
a 4-year degree or higher, aligning with Flagstaff’s col-
lege town identity; 4.6% also identified themselves as 
currently enrolled in higher education. Approximately 
92.8% of respondents owned the property at which 
they received the survey.
There were no statistically significant differences 
in ethnicity, age, gender, and rental versus home 
ownership across our three sample groups shown in 
Table 1. However, income was statistically significant 
(p < 0.001); those in the evacuation area tended to re-
port average annual income in a higher bracket than 
the other two groups. We suggest this may be due to 
the fact that evacuation areas during the Museum Fire 
were largely on the outskirts of the city, where proper-
ties typically have higher acreage and may be second 
homes. This is supported by the finding that those in 
the evacuation group also reported a shorter tenure 
in Flagstaff (p = 0.008). Respondents in the flood-
risk group had lived in Flagstaff for an average of 
28.5 years, while those in the unaffected area reported 
23.2 and those in the evacuation area 22.7. The highest 
level of education respondents reported was also sig-
nificant (p = 0.005), with those in the unaffected area 
typically reporting the highest and those in the flood-
risk group the lowest.
Experiences with the Museum Fire
To begin, we sought to determine whether respond-
ents from each of the three sample groups outlined in 
Table 1—wildfire evacuation areas, flood-risk areas, 
and unaffected areas—had different experiences with 
the Museum Fire. We used a set of five questions with 
high scale reliability (α = 0.776) to measure significant 
variations using ANOVA. Table 2 presents responses 
to Likert scale questions about respondent experi-
ences during and after the Museum Fire. Statistically 
significant variation emerged across all three groups, 
although those in the evacuation and flood-risk groups 
generally presented more similarities in contrast to the 
unaffected area respondents. Those in the evacuation 
area during the Museum Fire were more likely to re-
port losing sleep and missing work because of the wild-
fire (p < 0.001), whereas those in the flood-risk area 
were most concerned about the safety of their prop-
erty (p < 0.001). The only variable that was not sig-
nificant was concern for future wildfire and flood-risk 
events; all sample groups expressed high agreement for 
this statement. Respondents who identified as female 
were more likely to agree with these questions than 
those who identified as male (p = 0.027). Self-reported 
evacuation due to wildfire risk also varied across 
zones: 13.8% of respondents in the evacuation area 
(n = 40), 19.4% of respondents in the flood-risk area 
(n = 18), and 0.8% of respondents (n = 3) in the un-
affected area confirmed their household had evacuated 
for some period of time. The latter two groups were 
not formally placed under evacuation at any time prior 
to collection of this data. These findings confirm that 
households across the three sample groups experienced 
the wildfire and its associated risks differently.
Communication About the Museum Fire
Approximately 39.7% of survey respondents attended 
meetings focused on disseminating information related 
to the Museum Fire, whereas 25.8% reported attended 
meetings about postfire flood risk. Most meeting at-
tendees opted to join virtually via Facebook Live or the 
City of Flagstaff website—only 28.1% of respondents 
attended a meeting in person. Engagement with public 
meetings varied across sample groups. Respondents in 
the evacuation area made up the majority of attendees 
for Museum Fire meetings (45.5%), whereas respond-
ents in unaffected areas made up the largest portion of 
postfire meeting attendees (37.5%).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

9
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
Information about the Museum Fire was dissemin-
ated by a broad range of organizations and outlets. We 
asked respondents about the trustworthiness of these 
different sources for information about the Museum 
Fire specifically; findings are presented in Table 3 and 
one sample t-tests revealed that each source listed was 
conceptually distinct. Respondents in the evacuation 
and flood-risk areas were more likely to trust unoffi-
cial information sources, including their neighbors 
( < 0.001), family and friends (0.011), and neighbor-
hood groups (0.001). Trust in the City of Flagstaff 
was lowest among respondents in the flood-risk area. 
Respondents in the unaffected sample group exhibited 
higher trust towards the Forest Service (0.008), media 
outlets (0.027), and the City of Flagstaff ( < 0.001).
Respondents most frequently sought information 
from media outlets, the Forest Service, and Coconino 
County. Less commonly used sources included Inciweb 
and informal connections like social or neighborhood 
groups. Additionally, 53.9% of respondents reported 
that they had used at least one social media platform to 
access information related to the Museum Fire, most 
Table 2.  Divergent experiences with the Museum Fire across sample populations, presented using mean 
Likert responses. Higher mean values are associated with stronger agreement, based on a five-point scale 
where 2 = strongly agree and −2 = strongly disagree. Collectively, measures had a Chronbach’s alpha of 
α = 0.776. Subscripts with the same letter mean there is no significant difference, but different subscripts 
mean that responses differ at the 0.05 error level. The sample area group with the highest agreement 
for each statement is indicated in bold. Probabilities are significant at: * = p < 0.05; ** = p < 0.01; and 
*** = p < 0.001.
 
Unaffected 
area 
Evacu-
ation area 
Flood 
risk area 
p-value 
n 
I lost sleep as a result of the Museum Fire or flood risk
−0.27b
0.37a
0.24a
0.000***
769
I was worried about the safety of my property because 
of the Museum Fire or flood risk
−0.27b
0.98a
1.02a
0.000***
770
I could not attend work because of the Museum Fire 
or subsequent flood risk
−1.32b
−0.59a
−0.90a
0.000***
761
My health suffered as a result of the Museum Fire or 
flood risk
−0.98b
−0.72a
−0.72a
0.022*
767
I often worry about the impacts that future fires or 
floods in this area could cause
0.74
0.72
0.67
0.89
775
Table 3.  Average response to the prompt “How trustworthy or untrustworthy were the following sources 
of information for making decisions about risk posed to your household related to the Museum Fire?” 
across sample groups. Mean responses presented here are calculated from responses on a scale from −2 
to + 2, where −2 = very untrustworthy and + 2 = very trustworthy. Probabilities are significant at: * = p < 0.05; 
** = p < 0.01; and *** = p < 0.001.
Source 
Unaffected 
area 
Evacuation 
area 
Flood risk 
area 
p-value 
Percent of respondents who used 
this source 
N 
Media (e.g., newspapers, TV 
news, radio
0.82
0.63
0.63
0.027*
95.2
760
Law enforcement
1.37
1.32
1.39
0.043*
94.6
756
USDA Forest Service
1.53
1.30
1.32
0.008*
92.4
756
Coconino County
1.34
1.20
1.29
0.232
90.2
756
The City of Flagstaff
1.23
0.84
1.13
0.000***
88.9
756
Internet searches
0.47
0.50
0.46
0.137
88.4
752
My neighbors
0.31
0.63
0.69
0.000***
86.8
741
My local fire department
1.54
1.42
1.60
0.027*
81.1
762
Inciweb
1.15
1.21
1.08
0.330
72.6
742
Neighborhood groups (e.g., 
HOAs)
0.18
0.46
0.65
0.001**
65.1
757
Social groups
-0.01
0.11
0.17
0.441
61.2
750
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

10
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
commonly Facebook (44.3%), followed by Nextdoor 
(18.2%), and Twitter (13.3%).
A majority of respondents agreed with the state-
ment: “Enough information was available for me to 
make decisions about the safety of my home” (strongly 
agree = 35.2%; moderately agree = 42.5%). Those 
surveyed within the unaffected sample area were most 
likely to agree with that statement, whereas those in the 
flood-risk area were most likely to disagree (p = 0.007).
The majority (84.4%) of respondents reported that 
they had signed up for the Coconino County emer-
gency alert system to receive notifications about events 
like the Museum Fire via text, email, or call; 91% of re-
spondents in the evacuation area were signed up com-
pared to 84% and 83.3% in the flood and unaffected 
areas respectively (0.022).
Management of the Museum Fire
Attitudes towards the Museum Fire’s management 
and impacts also varied between sample groups. 
Respondents in the flood-risk area were most likely 
to indicate strong or moderate agreement that “the 
Museum Fire was preventable” (p = 0.034). Flood-risk 
area respondents were also least likely to agree that 
“efforts to address flood risk after the Museum Fire 
were adequate” (p = 0.003). Respondents in the evacu-
ation area were more likely to report that “the Museum 
Fire negatively impacted recreation opportunities” 
(p = 0.050). Respondents across all three sampling 
groups indicated high awareness of the reported cause 
of the Museum Fire (85.2% of all survey respondents 
self-reported knowing the cause); however, those in the 
evacuation area were slightly more likely to state this 
(88.9%) than those in the flood risk (81.5%) and un-
affected area (83.2%).
Risk Perceptions
Respondents were also asked about the likelihood of 
a wildfire or a postfire flood event affecting different 
areas over the next 10 years. Although there was con-
sistent agreement that both a wildfire event and a 
postfire flood event were highly likely to occur in the 
next 10 years, at smaller scales, estimated likelihoods 
began to diverge across sample groups. Those in the 
flood-risk area estimated that their homes were twice 
as likely to be damaged by flooding than those in the 
unaffected area (p < 0.001); however, all sample groups 
were more closely grouped in estimating that their 
homes would be damaged by a wildfire (p = 0.042). 
Respondents in the unaffected area had higher risk 
perceptions associated with both wildfire and postfire 
flooding within Flagstaff city limits, which warrants 
further examination to understand what is driving 
these higher risk perceptions in the unaffected groups. 
Perceived risk to those outside the flood-risk area was 
relatively high; 18.8% and 23.7% or respondents in 
the evacuation and flood-risk areas, respectively, es-
timated that a postfire flood would damage their 
Coconino County home in the next 10 years.
Attitudes Towards Forest Management
Respondents generally exhibited a high level of under-
standing about local ecological processes; the majority 
moderately (33.2%) or strongly (53.2%) agreed that 
“fire is a natural part of the landscape around Flagstaff” 
with little variation across sample groups. The same 
was true of other statements such as “the landscape 
will recover from the impacts of the Museum Fire” 
(moderately agree = 39.7%; strongly agree = 34.5%). 
Fewer respondents moderately (27.1%) or strongly 
(11.6%) agreed that “the Museum Fire had a benefi-
cial impact on the health of this landscape.”
Several questions asked respondents about their 
thoughts on current forest management in the Flagstaff 
area. There was consistently high agreement that forest 
management efforts had reduced the likelihood of a 
wildfire affecting the respondent’s home; however, 
when asked whether it had reduced likelihood of a 
flood, those in the flood-risk area reported significantly 
lower levels of agreement (p < 0.001). Those in the un-
affected area were also most likely to agree that wildfire 
risk in the area is driven predominantly by activities on 
private land (p = 0.018) rather than public land. Those 
in the flood-risk area were also most likely to agree 
that recent forest management efforts had negatively 
affected recreation in the Flagstaff area (p = 0.006).
Survey questions also asked about the acceptability 
of various forest management outcomes (Table 4) to 
examine whether some sample groups were willing to 
tolerate certain outcomes more than others. Statistically 
significant differences emerged across sample groups; 
those in the unaffected area were most supportive of 
more open forests (p = 0.003) but least accepting of 
burned areas (p = 0.022). Those in the flood-risk area 
were least accepting of temporary road construction 
(p = 0.014) and the presence of residual materials (e.g., 
slash piles) created by forest management (p = 0.019). 
There was wide-ranging support for prescribed fire 
but consistently low acceptability of smoke or reduced 
air quality. Those with a 4-year degree or a more ad-
vanced qualification also indicated higher support 
for prescribed fire (p = 0.007). ANOVA tests revealed 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

11
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
no other statistically significant differences in sup-
port for forest management across household income, 
highest level of education, age, ethnicity, or tenure as a 
Flagstaff resident.
The majority of respondents wanted to see forest 
management accelerated in the Flagstaff area (mod-
erately 
agree = 32.2%; 
strongly 
agree = 37.5%). 
Respondents also indicated overwhelming support 
for the statement “partnerships between the City of 
Flagstaff, USDA Forest Service, and other organizations 
are the best way to address wildfire risk to Flagstaff” 
(moderately agree = 29.2%; strongly agree = 63.2%), 
a statement that focused on understanding whether 
residents prioritized collaborative approaches to fire 
management. Some significant differences emerged re-
lated to the statement “forest management should be 
a priority for Flagstaff officials.” Although agreement 
was high, those in the flood-risk area were slightly less 
likely to agree (p = 0.030). If given the opportunity 
to support another taxpayer-funded project like the 
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project, the majority of 
respondents indicated they would be in favor (mod-
erately agree = 38.7%; strongly agree = 34.7%). Many 
also strongly (24.6%) or moderately (31.8%) agreed 
that they would like to see more money invested in 
FWPP as it stands.
Discussion
Our survey sought to expand the existing literature 
by (1) examining the effects of divergent experiences 
with a wildfire event across groups experiencing risk 
from different sources, and (2) surveying residents just 
under 4 months after that wildfire event to understand 
how those divergent experiences affect support for 
forest management. This study expands the existing 
literature by incorporating residents in postfire flood-
risk areas, providing additional comparisons that may 
inform public safety and communication—particularly 
as monsoon seasons become more unpredictable and 
intense in the US Southwest. We found that respond-
ents from evacuated homes, homes in the flood-risk 
area, and homes in areas unaffected by wildfires had 
different experiences with the Museum Fire, including 
varied trust in information sources and engagement in 
communication about wildfire and flood risk. However, 
when it came to support for future efforts to reduce 
wildfire risk, variation declined significantly to reveal 
widespread support for acceleration of forest manage-
ment and a preference for partnerships to accomplish 
local wildfire risk reduction efforts. These findings 
have numerous implications for public involvement in, 
and communication about, forest management to ad-
dress wildfire risk that we discuss below.
The Museum Fire could be considered a “near 
miss” event by some definitions, given that it did not 
cause property damage or destruction or loss of life, 
highlighting the vulnerability of local social and eco-
logical systems (Dillon et al. 2014, Larsen et al. 2021). 
More strategically connecting or highlighting resources 
available to different populations during the response 
phase of a hazard event may ensure more efficient re-
source allocation and support shorter recovery times 
when households are connected to resources more rap-
idly. That could include separate meetings or outreach 
efforts focused on singular hazards (e.g., flood risk), 
neighborhood-specific meetings that allow deeper 
contextualization of emergency communication, and 
property visits to discuss specific concerns with resi-
dents where resources allow. Varied experiences with 
Table 4.  Mean Likert responses and ANOVA outputs for acceptability of forest management outcomes 
(α = 0.785) across groups and scales. Mean responses presented here are calculated from responses on a 
scale from −2 to + 2, where −2 = strongly disagree and + 2 = strongly agree. The sample area group with the 
highest agreement for each statement is indicated in bold. Subscripts indicate which sample groups differ at 
the 0.05 error level. Probabilities are significant at: * = p < 0.05; ** = p < 0.01; and *** = p < 0.001.
 
Evacuation area 
Flood risk area 
Unaffected area 
p-value 
n 
Smoke or reduced air quality
−0.07
−0.03
-0.16
0.506
763
More open forests
0.92a
0.64a
1.08b
0.003**
754
Temporarily reduced recreation access to 
manage forests
1.03
0.79
1.01
0.182
758
Prescribed fire
1.11
1.13
1.01
0.412
762
Presence of residual materials removed during 
forest management
0.98a
0.62b
0.80a
0.019*
752
Temporary roads
0.67a
0.33b
0.48a
0.014*
761
Burned areas
0.81a
0.69a
0.57b
0.022*
754
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

12
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
the same wildfire event recorded here highlight the im-
portance of tailoring resources to meet the needs of 
specific subpopulations (Meldrum et al. 2018, Paveglio 
and Edgeley 2017, Steelman and McCaffrey 2011). For 
example, loss of sleep among evacuation area respond-
ents may indicate a greater need for targeted mental 
health support for households directly threatened by 
wildfire, whereas guidance regarding mitigation and 
insurance coverage may be a greater concern for in-
dividuals in areas with projected flood risk who are 
concerned about the safety of their property. Those in 
the evacuation group were also most likely to report 
missing work because of the wildfire, indicating that 
fire can drive short-term financial inequities, even if 
the wildfire does not end up directly affecting a given 
property.
Our survey findings also indicate that respondents 
threatened by different sources of risk seek informa-
tion in different ways and vary in their assessment 
regarding the trustworthiness of information sources 
(Olsen and Sharp 2013, Shindler et al. 2009, Winter 
et al. 2004). This suggests that using the same communi-
cation strategies for both wildfire and postfire flooding 
may not gain traction across different subpopulations. 
Specifically, respondents in the flood-risk group were 
most likely to state that they did not have sufficient in-
formation to make decisions, indicating a need for add-
itional research to understand whether this is related 
to accessibility, detail, model uncertainty, or another 
factor, such as how much effort a given information 
source’s representatives have put into building trust 
with different subpopulations (Stern and Coleman 
2019). Differentiating approaches to risk communi-
cation is particularly important during compound 
disasters (e.g., a flood that occurs within a wildfire-
affected area) to ensure information is shared by the 
right outlet for a given population as risk sources begin 
to layer temporally. We note that high engagement in 
online platforms to access public information meetings 
indicates a growing shift away from in-person meet-
ings. These data were collected ahead of the COVID-
19 pandemic, which spurred widespread adoption of 
online platforms for communication, indicating that 
members of the public in Flagstaff were already en-
gaged in this shift towards accessibility months before. 
We encourage continued use of simultaneous mixed-
mode meeting access for public meetings about wild-
fire and postfire risk beyond the pandemic to maximize 
dissemination of information (e.g., use of social media 
as live broadcasting platforms in addition to in-person 
attendance options).
Survey respondents in unaffected areas presented 
higher perceptions of risk at several scales related to 
wildfire and flooding than those in other sample groups 
who were directly affected. This finding indicates that 
over the course of several months after a wildfire event 
with reported flood risk, households may be more en-
gaged in communication and materials shared to en-
courage mitigation activities and support of those who 
are at greater risk. Additionally, high engagement in 
postfire flood meetings by survey respondents in un-
affected areas may indicate uncertainty about the lo-
cation or extent of postfire flood risk, which may 
become problematic during emergency flood warnings 
for activities like evacuation. More research is needed 
to explore reasons why unaffected populations attend 
public meetings that are not directly relevant to them.
Survey findings also identify areas where improved 
communication is needed for forest management. 
High support for prescribed fire across sample groups 
contrasted with low support for smoke indicates that 
residents in the Flagstaff area understand the benefits 
of low intensity fire but do not necessarily connect it 
to the consequences of its use. That disconnect could 
challenge support for prescribed fire over time if not 
addressed. Our findings also suggest that those in the 
flood-risk area are least likely to support future forest 
management efforts. That sample group also indicated 
lower understandings of current forest management. 
More targeted education and outreach efforts dir-
ected towards those in flood-risk areas may be bene-
ficial after wildfire to address unequal knowledge and 
support across affected populations. Future research 
might also focus on understanding how respondents 
experiencing different risks associated with fire events 
interpret the same communication, to better under-
stand the extent to which communications should be 
geographically tailored across a given population.
Participant awareness of the cause of the Museum 
Fire did not affect support for future forest manage-
ment. This is of particular interest because the re-
ported cause of the Museum Fire was associated with 
ongoing local forest management efforts. This, paired 
with overwhelming support for partnership-focused 
approaches to forest management, indicates that trust 
in local agencies and government is high—a factor that 
existing studies find increases support for management 
efforts (Winter et al. 2004). Flagstaff is recognized as 
being somewhat anomalous for having high levels of 
public support for forest management (Edgeley and 
Colavito 2020, Diaz et al. 2016). This study suggests 
that support is resilient enough to remain high over 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

13
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
the course of socially impactful, human-caused wild-
fires and postfire flooding in the Flagstaff area. We 
note that care is needed when exploring attitudes to-
wards future management in postfire environments, 
as existing studies show that the perceived cause of 
a wildfire ignition and/or spread is a central driver 
of support or opposition for future forest manage-
ment efforts in other instances (Edgeley and Paveglio 
2017, Paveglio et  al. 2016, Kumagai et  al. 2004). 
Furthermore, higher perceptions of future risk among 
respondents in unaffected areas align with existing re-
search related to windows of opportunity after wild-
fires (Mockrin et  al. 2018), suggesting that at least 
a subset of the public are primed to receive and act 
on mitigation and adaptation information. However, 
lower risk perceptions among those in the evacuation 
and flood-risk areas should also be addressed; given 
that the Museum Fire did not burn right up to private 
property lines, fire risk is still present. Communication 
after this fire should focus on emphasizing continued 
risk and detailing strategies to continue to engage in 
property-level mitigation.
Respondents indicated widespread concern about 
future wildfire and postfire flood risk regardless of ex-
perience with the Museum Fire. This was most preva-
lent for respondents who perceived high risk to their 
property; even those outside the flood-risk area often 
estimated that there was some likelihood of postfire 
flooding, and all sample groups were concerned about 
future wildfires. In combination with a substantial por-
tion of respondents who indicated that they could do 
more on their property to address wildfire risk, these 
data indicate that populations across Flagstaff share 
concern about risks to their property. This finding 
aligns with an abundance of literature describing “win-
dows of opportunity” after hazard events, particularly 
given high respondent interest in investing more in 
FWPP (Birkland 1997, Mockrin et al. 2018). Survey 
responses indicate that the Museum Fire did have 
some characteristics of a “focusing event” 4  months 
after containment that could rally public support and 
interest within that policy window; however, it may 
not last long because of the relatively low human im-
pacts that have occurred to date. For example, there 
was no postfire flooding or structure loss at the time 
of our survey, although in 2021, after this research 
was conducted, there was flooding associated with the 
Museum Fire burn scar, as well as flooding in a nearby 
area due to extreme weather.
This study was conducted in a somewhat unique 
social context, which is important when considering 
transferability of our findings. The population of 
Flagstaff and the surrounding area tend to be highly 
supportive of active forest management and display 
a high level of understanding regarding the benefits 
that wildfire can have in local ecosystems. We suggest 
that data presented here represent a best case scenario 
for public engagement and experiences surrounding a 
wildland-urban interface fire. However, it is possible 
that survey findings could have been different if the 
Museum Fire had caused structural damage or destruc-
tion and/or loss of life, or a postfire flood event had 
occurred between the fire’s containment and adminis-
tration of this survey. Responses to questions regarding 
the possible prevention of the Museum Fire indicate 
that for some, there are concerns related to the ignition 
of the wildfire. This should be a core consideration in 
communication with the public regarding future wild-
fires; if additional wildfires are also perceived as pre-
ventable or cause more substantial loss, there may be 
a greater likelihood of conflict or opposition related to 
wildfire management in the future.
This study highlights the effects that timing and 
context of social data collection may have on our 
understanding of public support for forest manage-
ment. Significant differences between sample groups 
reinforce existing research that suggests nuance is 
lost in research that assumes residents in a geographic 
community have homogeneous experiences with wild-
fire and associated postfire hazards, reinforcing ex-
isting studies that document diverse experiences with 
the same wildfire event (Paveglio et al. 2016, Paveglio 
and Edgeley 2017). Our study extends these efforts 
by demonstrating that this diversity is not restricted 
to large or destructive wildfires; the Museum Fire’s 
small scale still resulted in different experiences across 
the Flagstaff area. We suggest that longitudinal data 
after wildfire is one useful way to explore these vari-
ances in greater depth and can hold further value if 
conducted in a variety of social contexts following a 
variety of wildfire conditions such as different sizes, 
social impacts, ignition sources, and postfire hazards. 
More longitudinal or repeat data collection in a given 
population also can provide insights into how support 
may fluctuate over time, or how long a window of op-
portunity may last under different conditions if one is 
created.
Conclusion
Active forest management to reduce catastrophic 
wildfire risk, improve watershed health, and advance 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

14
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
ecological restoration continues to be of great import-
ance as populations in the WUI renegotiate their rela-
tionships with wildfire-prone landscapes. Our survey of 
residents just under 4 months after the 2019 Museum 
Fire in Flagstaff, Arizona, confirms that households 
have divergent experiences with the same wildfire 
event in part due to the source of risk. Although this 
study was limited to data collected at a single point 
in time, we see that public support is high for future 
forest management, but varies to some degree based 
on the approach or techniques with which forest man-
agement is conducted. Future efforts to investigate 
populations affected by wildfire should account for 
potentially diverse household experiences and consider 
how that may affect communication about forest man-
agement during windows of opportunity after wildfire 
events. Differentiating approaches to risk commu-
nication is particularly important during compound 
disasters (e.g., a flood that occurs within a wildfire 
affected area) to ensure information is shared by the 
right outlet for a given population as risk sources begin 
to layer temporally.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the survey participants 
and local partners in the greater Flagstaff area for their 
time participating in or supporting this research. The au-
thors would also like to thank the anonymous reviews 
and the editor for their helpful feedback in improving this 
manuscript.
Funding
This research was supported by funding provided by the 
Arizona Board of Regents through the Technology, Research 
and Innovation Fund (TRIF).
Endnote
1	
Postfire flooding in this manuscript is defined broadly. Postfire 
flooding refers to events where a large amount of water flows 
over dry land that has experienced a wildfire and can result 
in debris flows, erosion, landslides, and other downslope im-
pacts (Neary and Leonard 2019).
Literature Cited
Armstrong,  J.S., and T.S.  Overton. 1977. Estimating 
nonresponse bias in mail surveys. J. Marketing Res. 
14(3):396–402.
Ascher,  T.J., R.S.  Wilson, and E.  Toman. 2013. The im-
portance of affect, perceived risk and perceived benefit 
in understanding support for fuels management among 
wildland–urban interface residents. Int. J. Wildland Fire 
22(3):267–276.
Birkland, T.A. 1997. After disaster: Agenda setting, public 
policy, and focusing events. Georgetown University Press: 
Washington D.C. 192pp.
Blanchard, B., and R.L. Ryan. 2007. Managing the wildland–
urban interface in the Northeast: perceptions of fire risk 
and hazard reduction strategies. North. J.  Appl. For. 
24(3):203–208.
Brenkert-Smith, H., J.L.S. Jahn, E.A. Vance, and J. Ahumada. 
2020. Resistance and representation in a wildland–urban 
interface fuels treatment conflict: the case of the Forsythe 
II Project in the Arapaho-Roosevelt National Forest. Fire 
3(1):2. doi: 10.3390/fire3010002.
Brenkert-Smith,  H., J.  Meldrum, P.  Champ, and C.  Barth. 
2017. Where you stand depends on where you sit: 
Qualitative inquiry into notions of fire adaptation. Ecol. 
Soc. 22(3):7. doi:10.5751/ES-09471-220307.
Brunson, M.W., and J. Evans. 2005. Badly burned? Effects 
of an escaped prescribed burn on social acceptability of 
wildland fuels treatments. J. For. 103(3):134–138.
Brunson, M.W., and B.A. Shindler. 2004. Geographic vari-
ation in social acceptability of wildland fuels manage-
ment in the western United States. Soc. Nat. Resour. 
17(8):661–678.
Burns, M., and A. Cheng. 2007. Framing the need for ac-
tive management for wildfire mitigation and forest restor-
ation. Soc. Nat. Resour. 20(3):245–259.
Byerly,  H., J.R.  Meldrum, H.  Brenkert-Smith, P.  Champ, 
J. Gomez, L. Falk, and C. Barth. 2020. Developing behav-
ioral and evidence-based programs for wildfire risk miti-
gation. Fire 3(4):66. doi: 10.3390/fire3040066.
Carroll,  M.S., L.L.  Higgins, P.J.  Cohn, and J.  Burchfield. 
2006. Community wildfire events as a source of social 
conflict. Rural Sociol. 71(2):261–280.
Carroll,  M.S., T.  Paveglio, P.J.  Jakes, and L.L.  Higgins. 
2011. Nontribal community recovery from wildfire five 
years later: the case of the Rodeo–Chediski fire. Soc. Nat. 
Resour. 24(7):672–687.
Christianson, A.C., and T.K. McGee. 2019. Wildfire evacu-
ation experiences of band members of Whitefish Lake First 
Nation 459, Alberta, Canada. Nat. Hazards 98(1):9–29.
Colavito,  M., B.S.  Wolfson, A.E.  Thode, C.  Haffey, and 
C. Kimball. 2020. Integrating art and science to commu-
nicate the social and ecological complexities of wildfire 
and climate change in Arizona, USA. Fire Ecol. 16(1):19.
Cortner,  H.J., M.G.  Wallace, S.  Burke, and M.A.  Moote. 
1998. Institutions matter: the need to address the insti-
tutional challenges of ecosystem management. Landsc. 
Urban 
Plann. 
40(1–3):159–166. 
doi: 
https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0169-2046(97)00108-4.
Diaz,  J.M., T.  Steelman, and B.  Nowell. 2016. Local eco-
logical knowledge and fire management: what does the 
public understand? J. For. 114(1):58–65. doi: 10.5849/
jof.14-026.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

15
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
Dillman,  D.A., J.D.  Smyth, and L.M.  Christian. 2014. 
Internet, phone, mail, and mixed-mode surveys: The 
tailored design method. John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, 
NJ. 528pp.
Dillon,  R.L., C.H.  Tinsley, and W.J.  Burns. 2014. Near-
misses and future disaster preparedness. Risk Anal. 
34(10):1907–1922.
Edgeley, C.M. 2022. Exploring the social legacy of frequent 
wildfires: organizational responses for community re-
covery following the 2018 Camp Fire. Int. J.  Disaster 
Risk Reduct. 70:102772.
Edgeley, C.M., and M.M. Colavito. 2020. Local experiences 
with the 2019 Museum Fire and associated flood risk: 
A survey of Flagstaff-area residents. ERI White Paper—
Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 40 p.
Edgeley,  C.M., and T.B.  Paveglio. 2017. Community re-
covery and assistance following large wildfires: the case 
of the Carlton Complex Fire Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 
25:137–146.
Edgeley,  C.M., and T.B.  Paveglio. 2019. Exploring influ-
ences on intended evacuation behaviors during wildfire: 
what roles for pre-fire actions and event-based cues. Int. 
J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 37:e101182.
Eisenman, D., S. McCaffrey, I. Donatello, and G. Marshal. 
2015. An ecosystems and vulnerable populations perspec-
tive on solastalgia and psychological distress after a wild-
fire. EcoHealth 12(4):602–610.
Fleming,  C.J., E.B.  McCartha, and T.A.  Steelman. 2015. 
Conflict and collaboration in wildfire management: the role 
of mission alignment. Public Admin. Rev. 75(3):445–454.
Hamilton, M., and J. Salerno. 2020. Cognitive maps reveal 
diverse perceptions of how prescribed fire affects forests 
and communities. Front. For. Glob. Change 3:75.
Kooistra, C., T.E. Hall, T. Paveglio, and M. Pickering. 2018. 
Understanding the factors that influence perceptions 
of post-wildfire landscape recovery across 25 wildfires 
in the northwestern United States. Environ. Manage. 
61(1):85–102.
Kumagai, Y., M.S. Carroll, and P. Cohn. 2004. Coping with 
interface wildfire as a human event: lessons from the dis-
aster/hazards literature. J. For. 102(6):28–32.
Larsen,  L.N.D., P.D.  Howe, M.  Brunson, L.  Yocom, 
D. McAvoy, E.H. Berry, and J.W. Smith. 2021. Risk per-
ceptions and mitigation behaviors of residents following 
a near-miss wildfire. Landsc. Urban Plann. 207:104005.
Lidskog, R., J. Johansson, and D. Sjödin. 2019. Wildfires, re-
sponsibility and trust: public understanding of Sweden’s 
largest wildfire. Scand. J. For. Res. 34(4):319–328.
Loomis,  J.B., L.S.  Bair, and A.  González-Cabán. 2001. 
Prescribed fire and public support: knowledge gained, at-
titudes changed in Florida. J. For. 99(11):18–22.
McCaffrey,  S.M. 2006. Prescribed fire: what influences 
public approval?. P. 192–196 in: Dickinson, Matthew B., 
eds. 2006. Fire in eastern oak forests: delivering science to 
land managers, proceedings of a conference; November 
15–17, 2005, Columbus, OH. Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-
P-1. USDA Forest Service, Northern Research Station, 
Newtown Square, PA.
McCaffrey, S.M. 2009. Crucial factors influencing public ac-
ceptance of fuels treatments. Fire Manag. Today. Winter 
69(1):9–12.
McCaffrey, S.M., J.J. Moghaddas, and S.L. Stephens. 2008. 
Different interest group views of fuels treatments: survey 
results from fire and fire surrogate treatments in a Sierran 
mixed conifer forest, California, USA. Int. J.  Wildland 
Fire 17(2):224–233.
McCaffrey,  S.M., R.  Wilson, and A.  Konar. 2018. Should 
I  stay or should I  go now? Or should I  wait and see? 
Influences on wildfire evacuation decisions. Risk Anal. 
38(7):1390–1404.
McCool, 
S.F., 
J.A. 
Burchfield, 
D.R. 
Williams, 
and 
M.S. Carroll. 2006. An event-based approach for exam-
ining the effects of wildland fire decisions on communi-
ties. Environ. Manage. 37(4):437–450.
Meldrum,  J.R., H.  Brenkert-Smith, P.A.  Champ, L.  Falk, 
P. Wilson, and C.M. Barth. 2018. Wildland–urban inter-
face residents’ relationships with wildfire: variation within 
and across communities. Soc. Nat. Resour. 31(10):1132–
1148. doi: 10.1080/08941920.2018.1456592.
Mockrin, M.H., H.K. Fishler, and S.I. Stewart. 2018. Does 
wildfire open a policy window? Local government and 
community adaptation after fire in the United States. 
Environ. Manage. 62(2):210–228.
Mottek-Lucas,  A.M. 2015. Flagstaff Watershed Protection 
Project: Creating solutions through community partner-
ships. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University. 28 p.
Neary, D.C., and J.M. Leonard. 2019. Physical vulnerabil-
ities from wildfires: flames, floods, and debris flows.  
P. 59–76 in Human impact on the environment, Rhodes 
E.R. and H. Naser (eds.). IntechOpen, London, UK.
Olsen, C.S., J.D. Kline, A.A. Ager, K.A. Olsen, and K.C. Short. 
2017. Examining the influence of biophysical conditions 
on wildland–urban interface homeowners’ wildfire risk 
mitigation activities in fire-prone landscapes. Ecol. Soc. 
22(1):21.
Olsen, C.S., and E. Sharp. 2013. Building community–agency 
trust in fire-affected communities in Australia and the 
United States. Int. J. Wildland Fire 22(6):822–831.
Olsen, C.S., and B.A. Shindler. 2010. Trust, acceptance, and 
citizen–agency interactions after large fires: influences on 
planning processes. Int. J. Wildland Fire 19(1):137–147.
Paveglio, T.B., H. Brenkert-Smith, T. Hall, and A.M. Smith. 
2015. Understanding social impact from wildfires: 
advancing means for assessment. Int. J.  Wildland Fire 
24(2):212–224.
Paveglio,  T.B., M.S.  Carroll, T.E.  Hall, and H.  Brenkert-
Smith. 2015. “Put the wet stuff on the hot stuff”: the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022

16
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
legacy and drivers of conflict surrounding wildfire sup-
pression. J. Rural Stud. 41:72–81.
Paveglio, T.B., and C.M. Edgeley. 2017. Community diversity 
and hazard events: understanding the evolution of local 
approaches to wildfire. Nat. Hazards 87(2):1083–1108.
Paveglio,  T.B., C.M.  Edgeley, and A.M.  Stasiewicz. 2018. 
Assessing influences on social vulnerability to wildfire 
using surveys, spatial data and wildfire simulations. J. 
Environ. Manage. 213:425–439.
Paveglio, T.B., P.J. Jakes, M.S. Carroll, and D.R. Williams. 
2009. Understanding social complexity within the 
wildland–urban interface: a new species of human habita-
tion? Environ. Manage. 43(6):1085–1095.
Paveglio, T.B., C. Kooistra, T. Hall, and M. Pickering. 2016. 
Understanding the effect of large wildfires on residents’ 
well-being: what factors influence wildfire impact? Forest 
Sci. 62(1):59–69.
Paveglio,  T.B., C.  Moseley, M.S.  Carroll, D.R.  Williams, 
E.J. Davis, and A.P. Fischer. 2015. Categorizing the social 
context of the wildland urban interface: adaptive capacity 
for wildfire and community “archetypes”. Forest Sci. 
61(2):298–310.
Paveglio,  T.B., T.  Prato, C.  Edgeley, and D.  Nalle. 2016. 
Evaluating the characteristics of social vulnerability to 
wildfire: demographics, perceptions, and parcel charac-
teristics. Environ. Manage. 58(3):534–548.
Rasch, R., and S. McCaffrey. 2019. Exploring wildfire-prone 
community trust in wildfire management agencies. Forest 
Sci. 65(5):652–663.
Ryan, R.L., and E. Hamin. 2008. Wildfires, communities, 
and agencies: stakeholders’ perceptions of postfire 
forest restoration and rehabilitation. J. For. 106(7): 
370–379.
Schumann, R.L. III, M. Mockrin, A.D. Syphard, J. Whittaker, 
O.  Price, C.  Johnson  Gaither, C.T.  Emrich, et  al. 2020. 
Wildfire recovery as a “hot moment” for creating fire-
adapted communities. Int. J.  Disaster Risk Reduct. 
42:101354.
Sharp, E.A., R. Thwaites, A. Curtis, and J. Millar. 2013. Trust 
and trustworthiness: conceptual distinctions and their im-
plications for natural resources management. J. Environ. 
Planning Manage. 56(8):1246–1265.
Shindler, B.A., and E. Toman. 2003. Fuel reduction strategies 
in forest communities: a longitudinal analysis of public 
support. J. For. 101(6):8–15. doi: 10.1093/jof/101.6.8.
Shindler, B.A., E. Toman, and S.M. McCaffrey. 2009. Public 
perspectives of fire, fuels and the Forest Service in the 
Great Lakes Region: a survey of citizen–agency commu-
nication and trust. Int. J. Wildland Fire 18(2):157–164. 
doi: 10.1071/WF07135.
Steelman, T.A., and S.M. McCaffrey. 2011. What is limiting 
more flexible fire management—Public or agency pres-
sure?”. J. For. 109(8):454–461.
Steelman,  T.A., S.M.  McCaffrey, A.  Knox  Velez, and 
J.A. Briefel. 2015. What information do people use, trust, 
and find useful during a disaster? Evidence from five large 
wildfires. Nat. Hazards 76(1):615–634.
Stern, M.J., and K.J. Coleman. 2019. Trust ecology and col-
laborative natural resource management. P. 45–58 in A 
new era for collaborative forest management: Policy and 
practice insights from the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program, Butler, W.H. and C.A. Schultz (eds.) 
Routledge, Oxon, UK.
Stidham, M., E. Toman, S.M. McCaffrey, and B. Schinder. 
2011. Improving an inherently stressful situation: the role 
of communication during wildfire evacuations. P. 96–103 
in McCaffrey,  Sarah  M.; Fisher,  Cherie  LeBlanc, eds. 
Proceedings of the Second Conference on the Human 
Dimensions of Wildland Fire. Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-P-84. 
vol. 84. USDA Forest Service, Northern Research Station, 
Newtown Square, PA.
Strahan,  K.W., J.  Whittaker, and J.  Handmer. 2018. Self-
evacuation archetypes in Australian bushfire. Int. 
J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 27:307–316.
Strahan, K.W., J. Whittaker, and J. Handmer. 2019. Predicting 
self-evacuation in Australian bushfire. Environ. Hazards 
18(2):146–172.
Toman, E., B. Shindler, and M. Reed. 2004. Prescribed fire: 
the influence of site visits on citizen attitudes. J. Environ. 
Educ. 35(3):13–33.
US Census Bureau. 2019. QuickFacts: Flagstaff city, Arizona. 
https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/flagstaffcityarizona; 
last accessed July 3, 2020.
USDA Forest Service. 2019. Forest Service announces 
cause of Museum Fire. Press release. Available on-
line: 
https://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/coconino/news-
events/?cid=FSEPRD662372; last accessed Apr. 28, 2022.
Vogt, C., G. Winter, and J. Fried. 2002. Antecedents to at-
titudes toward prescribed burning, mechanical thinning, 
and defensible space fuel reduction techniques. USDA 
Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep., NC, St. Paul, MN, 74–83.
Weible, C., P. Sabatier, and M. Nechodom. 2005. No sparks 
fly: policy participants agree on thinning trees in the Lake 
Tahoe Basin. J. For. 103(1):5–9.
Winter, G.J., C. Vogt, and J.S. Fried. 2002. Fuel treatments 
at the wildland-urban interface: common concerns in di-
verse regions. J. For. 100(1):15–21.
Winter,  G., C.A.  Vogt, and S.M.  McCaffrey. 2004. 
Examining social trust in fuels management strategies. J. 
For. 102(6):8–15.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac018/6615340 by guest on 05 July 2022
