The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of 
communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic 
issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
 
Rocky Mountain Forests Poised to Recover Following Bark  
Beetle Outbreaks, But with Altered Composition 
 
By Kyle Rodman, Research Scientist 
Background 
Outbreaks of native bark beetles have caused tree mortality in conifer forests for millions of years, but 
the dramatic extent and severity of recent outbreaks have commanded the attention of land managers, 
scientists, and the general public. Since the late 1990s, climate-driven outbreaks of species such as 
mountain pine beetle (MPB), spruce beetle (SB), and western balsam bark beetle (WBBB) have killed 
billions of trees throughout the western US, raising concerns about the ability of these forests to recover 
to their pre-outbreak conditions. Ongoing recovery following recent bark beetle outbreaks is likely to 
influence management strategies (e.g., reforestation, fuel reduction) and long-term planning for these 
landscapes. 
 
High-elevation (i.e., subalpine) forests in the southern Rocky 
Mountains are among those most heavily influenced by recent 
bark beetle outbreaks, with at least 2.5 million acres affected 
since 1997 (Figure 1). Because these forests include the 
headwaters of several major rivers including the Colorado, San 
Juan, Arkansas, Rio Grande, and South Platte, post-outbreak 
forest dynamics are of broad importance to people throughout 
the Southwest. To better describe post-outbreak forest recovery 
trends throughout bark beetle-affected forests of the southern 
Rocky Mountains, we combined data from 16 individual field 
studies and nearly 1,000 field plots. We used field data to 
compare pre- and post-outbreak forest conditions and used 
available spatial data to map post-outbreak forest structure, 
composition, and growth throughout the region. 
 
Key Findings 
• MPB, SB, and WBBB tend to target larger trees; 
preferential colonization of large trees has decreased the 
average diameter of live trees by 28.4% across field plots 
(quadratic mean diameter [QMD] declined from 7.2 to 5.3 
inches). 
• Most tree-killing bark beetle species feed upon trees within 
a single genus or single species; consequently, outbreaks 
have shifted species composition towards subalpine fir and 
aspen, and away from lodgepole pine and Engelmann 
spruce. 
November 2022 
Figure 1. Study area in the southern Rocky 
Mountains, USA (grey polygon), field plots 
included in the study, and the percentage of 
total pre-outbreak tree basal area killed 
from 1997 to 2019 by bark beetles. 

 
• 
Recovery to pre-outbreak tree densities is expected in forests even in the absence of any 
additional tree regeneration through accelerated growth of surviving trees (Figure 2).  
• 
Though forest cover is likely to recover to prior levels in most bark beetle affected forests, shifts 
in species composition (towards subalpine fir and aspen) may endure for many decades.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions 
While visitors of southern Rocky Mountain forests may view recent bark beetle outbreaks as 
catastrophic events with detrimental effects, most forests are recovering on their own. Enhanced 
growth of surviving trees will return forest cover to pre-outbreak levels on most bark beetle-affected 
landscapes within the next few decades, but with a likely shift in tree species composition. Many 
managers and members of the public desire continued forest cover on these bark beetle-affected 
landscapes. Where continued forest cover is a desired condition and a change in tree species 
composition is acceptable, management actions such as reforestation may not be necessary.  
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Rodman, K.C., R.A. Andrus, A.R. Carlson, T.A. Carter, T.B. Chapman, J.D. Coop, P.J. Fornwalt, N.S. Gill, B.J. Harvey, 
A.E. Hoffman, K.C. Kelsey, D. Kulakowski, D.C. Laughlin, J.E. Morris, J.F. Negrón, K.M. Nigro, G.S. Pappas, 
M.D. Redmond, C.C. Rhoades, … S.J. Hart. 2022. Rocky Mountain forests are poised to recover following bark 
beetle outbreaks, but with altered composition. Journal of Ecology, 00:1–21. 
 
Additional suggested reading: 
Bentz, B.J., J. Logan, J. MacMahon, C.D. Allen, M. Ayres, E. Berg, A.L. Carroll, M.C. Hansen, J.A. Hicke, L. Joyce, W. 
Macfarlane, S. Munson, J.F. Negrón, T. Paine, J. Powell, K.F. Raffa, J. Régnière, M.S. Reid, W.H. Romme … D. 
Wood. 2009. Bark Beetle Outbreaks in Western North America: Causes and Consequences. Bark Beetle 
Symposium; Snowbird, Utah; November 2005. Salt Lake City, UT: University of Utah Press.  
 
Raffa, K.F., B.H. Aukema, B.J. Bentz, A.L. Carroll, J.A. Hicke, M.G. Turner, and W.H. Romme. 2008. Cross-scale Drivers 
of Natural Disturbances Prone to Anthropogenic Amplification: The Dynamics of Bark Beetle Eruptions. 
BioScience, 58(6), 501–517.  
 
Rodman, K.C., R.A. Andrus, C.L. Butkiewicz, T.B. Chapman, N.S. Gill, B.J. Harvey, D. Kulakowski, N.J. Tutland, T.T. 
Veblen, and S.J. Hart. 2021. Effects of Bark Beetle Outbreaks on Forest Landscape Pattern in the Southern Rocky 
Mountains, USA. Remote Sensing, 13(6), 1089.  
Contact: Kyle Rodman, Kyle.Rodman@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Figure 2. Examples of field plots with low 
(a) and high (b) post-outbreak recovery. 
On each plot, most large trees were killed 
by recent bark beetle outbreaks, so the 
number of smaller trees and non-host 
species is critical to forest recovery. Most 
field plots are expected to recover to pre-
outbreak tree densities without additional 
tree regeneration. 
