Use of Risk Management 
Assistance During the  
2021 Fire Season
A technical report
AUTHORS: Tyler A. Beeton, Michael D. Caggiano,  
Melanie M. Colavito, and Ch’aska Huayhuaca
November 2022
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Publication date: November 2022
Cover photo: Dixie Fire. Source: Ty O’Neil, This 
is Reno.
Authors: Tyler A. Beeton1, Michael D. Caggiano1,  
Melanie M. Colavito2, and Ch’aska Huayhuaca1
1. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Department of Forest 
and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State University, Fort 
Collins, CO
2. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, AZ.
Suggested Citation: Beeton, T.A., Caggiano, 
M.D., Colavito, M.M., Huayhuaca, C. 2022. Use of 
Risk Management Assistance During the 2021  
Fire Season: A technical report.
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI) was established 
in 2005 as an application-oriented, science-based outreach and 
engagement organization hosted at Colorado State University. 
Along with institutes at Northern Arizona University (Ecological 
Restoration Institute) and New Mexico Highlands University (New 
Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute), CFRI is one of 
three institutes that make up the Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes, which were authorized by Congress through the 
Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act of 2004. 
We develop, synthesize, and apply locally relevant, actionable 
knowledge to inform forest management strategies and achieve 
wildfire hazard reduction goals in Colorado and the Interior West. 
We strive to earn trust by being rigorous and objective in 
integrating currently available scientific information into decision-
making through collaborative partnerships involving researchers, 
land managers, policy makers, interested and affected 
stakeholders, and communities. CFRI holds itself to high standards 
of scientific accuracy and aims to promote transparency in the 
production and communication of science-based information. 
Always carefully evaluate sources for rigor and appropriateness 
before applying them in your own work.
CSU Land Acknowledgment: Colorado State University 
acknowledges, with respect, that the land we are on today is the 
traditional and ancestral homelands of the Arapaho, Cheyenne, 
and Ute Nations and peoples. This was also a site of trade, 
gathering, and healing for numerous other Native tribes. We 
recognize the Indigenous peoples as original stewards of this land 
and all the relatives within it. As these words of acknowledgment 
are spoken and heard, the ties Nations have to their traditional 
homelands are renewed and reaffirmed. CSU is founded as 
a land-grant institution, and we accept that our mission must 
encompass access to education and inclusion. And, significantly, 
that our founding came at a dire cost to Native Nations and 
peoples whose land this University was built upon. This 
acknowledgment is the education and inclusion we must practice 
in recognizing our institutional history, responsibility,  
and commitment.
Preface and Acknowledgements: In FY21, the USDA Forest 
Service Fire and Aviation Management (FAM) requested 
assistance from the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes 
(SWERI) to assess Risk Management Assistance (RMA) use among 
line officers and Incident Management Teams (IMTs) during the 
2021 fire season. The SWERI developed and deployed an online 
questionnaire to assess: 1) what RMA tools were used; 2) how they 
were used to inform decision-making; 3) factors that facilitated 
and frustrated use; and 4) practitioner recommendations to 
improve RMA use. The report herein summarizes findings from 
the RMA use assessment. The assessment provides a baseline 
understanding of RMA use during fire incidents. Results from 
this assessment will inform best practices for developing, 
disseminating, and using RMA tools. This assessment provides a 
baseline for longitudinal evaluation of the RMA through time and 
as RMA products and processes evolve.
This white paper was made possible with a grant from the 
Forest Service, an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
specifically an agreement (#21-DG-11030000-018) between the 
Southwestern Region and Colorado State University/CFRI. The 
white paper is published in partial fulfillment of deliverable #8 
under Project 1 in CFRI’s fiscal year 2021 work plan.
The authors would like to acknowledge Hannah Brown for her 
insightful feedback on an earlier draft and Angela Hollingsworth 
for designing the layout of this report. We would also like to thank 
all the participants for taking the time to fill out the questionnaire. 
Also, many thanks to Rick Stratton, Dave Calkin, and members 
of the USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station 
Wildfire Risk Management Science team for reviewing and piloting 
the assessment.
 
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute at Colorado State 
University receives financial support under the Southwest Forest 
Health and Wildfire Prevention Act provided through the United 
States Forest Service. In accordance with Federal law and 
United States Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is 
prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, sex, age, or disability. To file a complaint of discrimination, 
write: USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights Room 326-A, Whitten 
Building 1400 Independence Avenue,  SW Washington, DC, 
20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice  & TDD). The survey 
portion of this project and survey administration is supported 
by funding from the Arizona Board of Regents through the 
Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Table of contents
Executive summary......................................................................................................................4
Introduction and background.....................................................................................................5
Methods...........................................................................................................................................6
Results.............................................................................................................................................6
A. Fire incident information..................................................................................................................6
B. What RMA dashboard tools and products were used?............................................................7
C. How were RMA tools used to support incident management?..............................................7
D. Did tool use help meet core principles of RMA?.........................................................................10
E. Facilitating and frustrating factors................................................................................................10
F. Recommendations..............................................................................................................................14
G. How was RMA used in non-incident management contexts?................................................16
Conclusion and next steps..........................................................................................................18
References......................................................................................................................................19
Appendix 1: Frequency distribution of number of respondents by incident..................21
Appendix 2: Frequency distribution of Incident Management Team  
representation in the survey......................................................................................................22

4                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
Executive summary
The USDA Forest Service developed Risk Management 
Assistance (RMA) in 2016 to enhance the use of risk-
informed management principles and decision-support 
tools that improve decision quality and accountability and 
minimize unnecessary risk to firefighters during wildfire 
response. To evaluate and improve RMA, the USDA Forest 
Service Fire and Aviation Management (FAM) requested 
assistance from the Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes (SWERI) to assess RMA use among line officers 
and Incident Management Teams (IMTs) during the 2021 
fire season. The SWERI developed and deployed an online 
questionnaire (n=94 usable responses) to assess: 1) what 
RMA tools were used; 2) how they were used to inform 
decision-making; 3) factors that facilitated and frustrated 
use; and 4) practitioner recommendations to improve 
RMA use. 
Incident information: The questionnaire captured 
RMA use on 69 incidents across 11 states. Twenty of 
the incidents were over 100,000 acres, and more than 6 
million acres were burned in the 69 incidents. 27 IMTs 
from 9 Geographic Area Coordination Centers were 
represented in the questionnaire. Type 1 teams were 
most represented, followed by Type 2 and Type 3 teams. 
The majority of respondents indicated a full suppression 
fire management strategy, though one-third indicated a 
management strategy other than full suppression (e.g., 
confine and contain, point protection). About one quarter 
of respondents indicated that multiple fire management 
strategies were used on the same incident.
RMA tools used: The Suppression Difficulty Index (SDI) 
and Potential Control Location (PCL) analysis were the 
most frequently used RMA tools, followed by the Season-
ending Analysis, Estimated Ground Evacuation Time, 
Snag Hazard, and Potential Operational Delineations 
(PODs). The suite of products used for RMA continues 
to evolve as developers innovate to meet practitioners’ 
needs. The new Fire Comparison Spreadsheet (and 
associated prioritization and radar plot tabs), for 
example, was used by the national and Geographic Area 
Coordination Centers to prioritize resources across 
incidents. 
How RMA was used: RMA was most frequently used to 
support incident operations and long-term assessment; 
inform incident objectives, requirements, and strategy; 
and evaluate, or re-evaluate, courses of action. RMA was 
also used to inform dialogue with stakeholders, provide 
situational awareness on emerging incidents and for 
incoming teams, support incident level and operational 
decision-making (e.g., direct and indirect line placement, 
validate existing or justify new decision), and to prioritize 
resource allocation across incidents. 
Facilitating and frustrating factors: Familiarity with 
RMA, trust in the accuracy of analytics, receptiveness to 
new tools and processes, internal capacity and expertise, 
and the presence of leaders who advocated for RMA use 
to support fire and land management decision-making 
facilitated RMA use. The absence of these characteristics 
frustrated use. A majority of respondents felt that the 
tools on the RMA dashboard were easy to interpret, 
relevant to decision making, provided at the appropriate 
scale, and accurately depicted conditions on the ground. 
The RMA dashboard was reportedly easy to access and 
use by practitioners, and provided products that helped 
develop strategies quickly. 
Recommendations: Respondents recommended: 1) 
more education and outreach before, during, and after 
incidents (e.g., risk management and RMA training 
in National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) 
coursework; integration into PODs workshops; training 
for Operations section chiefs and line officers); 2) clear 
leadership direction and intent (e.g., intended use of RMA; 
use with the Wildland Fire Decision Support System 
(WFDSS); support investments in analytical capacity, for 
example regional analysts, strategic operations positions); 
3) enhance tool delivery and more frequent updates (e.g., 
integrate with other platforms, such as WFDSS and the 
Interagency Fuel Treatment Decision Support System 
(IFTDSS); 4) more frequent tool updates to capture 
changing conditions; and 5) expand products and usage 
(e.g., integrate with fuels and prescribed fire planning and 
implementation). 
RMA use in non-incident management: Several 
respondents indicated that they are already using RMA 
to support non-incident management. Specifically, 
respondents are using RMA for: 1) pre-season wildfire 
planning (e.g., PODs workshops, strategic response 
planning); 2) fuels treatment design and prioritization; 
3) environmental analysis and decision-making; and 4) 
developing shared understanding, communication, and 
learning with communities and partners. 
Conclusions and next steps: This assessment provided 
baseline information on the use of RMA during fire 
incidents, contributed to our understanding of what 
facilitates and frustrates RMA use, and identified 
actionable recommendations to improve RMA products 
and processes. Our hope is that this is the first in what 
will become a long-term evaluation of RMA products and 
processes. This questionnaire could be readministered 
longitudinally to track trends in RMA use and determine 

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    5
the extent to which RMA is useful and used. Additionally, 
case studies can add local context and nuance to 
questionnaire findings. Future evaluations should be 
grounded in the needs and priorities of practitioners and 
FAM leadership. Next steps for our research team include 
case studies that: 1) assess RMA use during 2022 wildfire 
incidents; and 2) document how leadership direction 
and intent on RMA is conceptualized, defined, and 
disseminated to lower levels of authority and cooperators. 
Future work will maintain our focus on co-developing 
actionable knowledge with practitioners to inform 
improved decision-making before, during, and after fires.
Introduction and background
Wildland fire management in the western U.S. is 
increasingly complex. Climate change-driven increases 
in fire activity and fire season length, continued 
development in the wildland-urban interface, and 
interactions between fire and other large disturbances 
(e.g., pest and pathogen disturbances) combine to increase 
suppression difficulty and exacerbate risks to human 
lives and property (Holden et al., 2018; Jolly et al., 2015; 
Radeloff et al., 2018). These challenges have increased 
emphasis on—and the need for—risk management 
principles and decision support tools that provide a 
framework and structure for collaborative, proactive 
spatial fire planning and wildfire incident management. 
The USDA Forest Service developed Risk Management 
Assistance (RMA)1 to integrate a structured risk 
management processes into fire management. The 
overarching goal of RMA is to support improved, safer 
outcomes with structured decision-making and analytics 
(R. Stratton, Personal Comm.). RMA uses the best 
available science and spatial analytical tools to evaluate 
alternate management strategies, consider the likelihood 
that objectives can be achieved, and analyze trade-offs 
between multiple incident objectives (Calkin et al., 2021). 
RMA focuses on pre- and post-fire season training, 
education, and outreach, fire season support, and line 
officer development to meet the following core principles:  
1) improve decision quality; 2) improve accountability;  
and 3) minimize unnecessary risks to firefighters  
(Calkin et al., 2021). 
RMA is still relatively new in the suite of tools and 
processes already available for wildfire management, but 
its usage has increased rapidly. For instance, in 2016 RMA 
personnel responded to 8 fire inquires. RMA personnel 
then responded to 11 incidents in 2017, 35 in 2018 (16 on 
site and 19 virtual), 29 in 2019, 66 in 2020, and 113 in the 
2021 fire season. It is clear from this progression that 
RMA is increasingly being used to support incident 
management decision-making. RMA transitioned to 
completely virtual support mode in 2019. In 2020 the 
RMA dashboard was developed, at which point users 
could pull pre-loaded data for individual use.2 
A small but growing body of research has provided initial 
understanding of how Potential Operational Delineations 
(PODs), RMA, and other wildfire decision support tools 
are used and the factors that support or inhibit their use 
(Caggiano et al., 2021; Calkin et al., 2021; Colavito, 2021; 
Greiner et al., 2020; Noble and Paveglio, 2020; Rapp et 
al., 2020; Schultz et al., 2021; Vásquez et al., 2021). Still, 
the rate at which RMA has been used on the ground 
has outpaced the capacity to assess how it has been 
deployed in different contexts and, more importantly, 
its impact on decision making and outcomes. RMA 
products and modes of delivery are routinely revised, 
enhanced, and adapted to meet different land and fire 
management objectives. Therefore, it is crucial to build 
on previous assessments to document how and under 
what conditions RMA products are used, facilitating and 
frustrating factors, and needs to enhance the use and 
usability of such tools. 
The USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation Management 
(FAM) department requested assistance from the 
Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI)3 
to develop an online questionnaire to assess RMA use 
during the 2021 wildfire season. The assessment is 
framed by the following research questions:
1.	 Which RMA products are used on wildfires?
2.	 How is RMA used to inform decision-making? 
3.	 What factors facilitate or frustrate use? 
4.	 How can RMA be improved to enhance its use and 
legitimacy in wildland fire management? 
The questionnaire was administered to fire managers 
and personnel (e.g., Incident Management Teams 
[IMTs], Agency Administrators [AAs]) who engaged with 
RMA products and assistance during the 2021 wildfire 
season. The report herein summarizes findings from 
the assessment and describes the state of RMA use in 
incident management contexts. The audience for this 
report includes USDA Forest Service FAM personnel and 
fire management practitioners (e.g., AAs, IMTs, and fire 
managers). Results from this assessment will inform 
best practices for developing, disseminating, and using 
RMA tools. This assessment provides a baseline for 
longitudinal evaluation of the RMA and as RMA products 
and processes evolve. 
  1 RMA Website - https://wfmrda.nwcg.gov/rma
  2 RMA dashboard - https://nifc.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=c5bc811ee22e4da0bde8abec7c20b8b4
  23SWERI website - https://sweri.eri.nau.edu/

6                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
Utah
Montana
California
Idaho
Nevada
Arizona
Oregon
Colorado
Wyoming
New Mexico
Washington
Methods
We developed an online questionnaire in Qualtrics 
to address our research questions. The questionnaire 
consisted of 27 fixed response and open-ended 
statements and questions. These statements were based 
on the objectives and research questions of the study, and 
grounded in a review of the literature on RMA (Caggiano 
et al., 2021; Calkin et al., 2021; Schultz et al., 2021), other 
decision-support tools (Colavito, 2021; Noble and Paveglio, 
2020; Rapp et al., 2020), and the theory and practice of 
usable science (e.g., Dilling and Lemos, 2011; Lemos, 
2008). Prior to administration, we piloted the assessment 
with, and received feedback from, 5 fire managers. The 
questionnaire was also reviewed by the USDA Forest 
Service Wildfire Risk Management Science team and 
FAM staff. Feedback was used to revise the questionnaire.
Our sample consisted of fire managers, AAs, and 
IMTs who were assigned to a wildfire in 2021 where 
RMA was used. We worked with FAM staff to identify 
listservs and contact lists for recruitment. The Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University 
administered the questionnaire to fire analysts, fire 
directors, IMTs, and line officers on March 14, 2022. 
The questionnaire remained open for 4 weeks and was 
closed on April 11, 2022. Two reminders were sent to 
each of the email listservs. We used Qualtrics and Excel 
to analyze quantitative and qualitative response data. 
We utilized a thematic analysis approach to document 
themes (repeated examples of concepts described by 
respondents) in the qualitative portions of responses 
(Ryan and Bernard, 2003). 
Out of a total of 94 useable responses, we received 58 
complete responses and 36 partial responses (delineated 
as questionnaires that were at least 30% complete). All of 
the questions were voluntary, and several respondents 
chose not to answer some of the questions. Of the 
respondents who provided their affiliation information 
(n=47), the majority were USDA Forest Service employees. 
A few respondents represented State, Department of the 
Interior (DOI), county, or university affiliations (Figure 1). 
Results
A. Fire incident information
Respondents reported the use of RMA on 69 incidents 
across 11 states in 2021 (Figure 2; Appendix 1). This sample 
represents more than 50% of the incidents that used RMA 
in 2021 (R. Stratton, Personal Comm.). Twenty fires were 
greater than 100,000 acres and more than 6 million acres 
were burned in those 69 incidents (Figure 2). Respondents 
represented 27 Incident Management Teams (IMTs) from 
9 Geographic Area Coordination Centers (GACCs). Rocky 
Mountain Type 1 Team and Northwest Interagency Team 
6 (Type 2) were the most represented in the questionnaire 
(Appendix 2). Respondents were most frequently 
associated with the Rocky Mountain GACC, followed by 
the Northwest and Northern Rockies GACCs. 
Wildfire Incident Information
69 incidents
11 states
20 incidents greater than 100,000 acres
6 million acres burned
27 Incident Management Teams
53% Type 1; 38% Type 2; 9% Type 3
69% of incidents used full suppression as management strategy
24% of incidents used multiple management strategies
Figure 2: Locations of wildfires and incident information represented in RMA questionnaire. 
Figure 1: Respondent affiliation. Note: 47 of 94 respondents provided 
their affiliation information. USDA = United States Forest Service; DOI = 
Department of the Interior.
2%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
USDA
State
DOI
University
County
Respondent Aﬃliations
2%
6%
6%
83%
90%

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    7
Type 1 teams represented 53% of the sample, Type 2 
represented 38%, and Type 3 represented 9%. Of the 
respondents who reported which incident management 
strategies were used on a given fire, 69% indicated 
the incident was managed for full suppression, while 
31% indicated the incident was managed for a strategy 
other than full suppression (e.g., confine, monitor, 
point protection, managed for resource benefit). 24% of 
respondents indicated multiple management strategies 
were used for a single incident (Figure 2).
B. What RMA dashboard tools and products 
were used?
The RMA dashboard hosts 15 primary products and 
several other associated products.4 The primary products 
most used included the Suppression Difficulty Index 
(SDI) (79%), Potential Control Locations (PCLs) (78%), 
Season Ending Analysis (70%), Ground Evacuation 
(55%), PODs (54%), and the Snag Hazard (54%) (Figure 
3). It is important to note that the suite of products 
available through the RMA Dashboard continues to 
evolve as developers improve the tools. For example, the 
Fire Comparison Spreadsheet—new in 2021— was used 
to prioritize where to invest resources based on fire 
modeling, the risk large fires posed to firefighter safety 
(through evaluating SDI), and critical values and assets 
of concern (e.g., housing unit density, population, critical 
infrastructure, drinking water). One respondent noted a 
customized RMA product that they developed and used:
I used SDI, PCL, and merged SDI/PCL rasters in a tool I 
developed that analyzes and identifies the lowest “cost” 
lines between likely control points around a fire.5 
The RMA dashboard hosts an assortment of other 
products that are relevant to incident management. 
The most frequently used among respondents were fire 
behavior and fire weather tools, including fire danger 
by Predictive Service Areas (PSAs; 59%), the National 
Weather Service Fire Weather products (e.g., fire weather 
matrix; 57%), and the Wildland Fire Assessment System 
Severe Fire Danger Mapping System (53%), followed 
by regional quantitative wildfire risk assessments, and 
wildland-urban interface data products (Figure 4).
C. How were RMA tools used to support  
incident management?
We asked respondents to select from a list of 
predetermined 
response 
categories 
that 
generally 
represent the fire lifecycle to indicate how they used 
4 2022 RMA product list and explanation. Note: The list continues to be updated.  
5 In other words, the respondent developed a customized product that integrates SDI and PCL to 
delineate the location of containment opportunities around a fire with the highest potential for control. 
SDI
PCLs
Season ending analysis
Ground evacuation
Snag hazard
PODs
Perimeter/proposed line
Incident timeline
Trade-oﬀ/Risk assessment
Resource timeoine
Fires comparison spreadsheet
Aviation use summary
Exceedance probability curves
Personnel timeline
Other
Mngmt direction alignment table
79%
78%
70%
55%
54%
54%
36%
36%
33%
27%
25%
25%
15%
15%
  12%
6%
Figure 3: Frequency of RMA products used by respondents. List of products 
derived from RMA dashboard and personal communication with USDA 
Forest Service FAM personnel. For an updated product list, see here. 
Statement: Select the RMA products that were used during the incident(s) 
(Select all that apply).
Fire danger
Fire weather
Severe ﬁre weather
Quantitative Risk 
Assessment (QRA)
Wildland Urban Interface (WUI)
Fire library
Fire and smoke map
Housing unit density
Landﬁre
Incident stats
59%
57%
53%
45%
41%
37%
37%
35%
35%
33%
Figure 4: Additional products used from the RMA dashboard. Statement: 
What, if any, additional tools from the RMA dashboard were utilized in 
conjunction with RMA products? (Select all that apply).

8                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
RMA products (R. Stratton, Personal Comm.). RMA 
was used most frequently for: 1) operations and long-
term assessment; 2) incident objectives, requirements, 
and/or strategy; and 3) evaluating different courses of 
action. Just over half used RMA to frame Wildland Fire 
Decision Support System (WFDSS) decisions, to delineate 
management action points (MAPs), and for initial 
framing of the incident (Figure 5). 
We also asked respondents to provide a more detailed 
open-ended response about how they used RMA products 
to support incident management. Five themes emerged 
from the responses, which included the use of RMA 
to: 1) generate situational awareness for individuals 
responding to the fire; 2) facilitate dialogue between 
stakeholders; 3) inform WFDSS; 4) support incident and 
operational decision making; and 5) facilitate regional 
prioritization of multiple incidents. 
Generate situational awareness
RMA helped respondents generate initial situational 
awareness for both emerging incidents and existing 
incidents. RMA was used to quickly help firefighters, 
agency staff, and other individuals on IMTs better 
understand the unique fire management considerations, 
challenges, and opportunities associated with particular 
landscapes. It also provided situational awareness to 
support communication internally, with cooperators, and 
with affected publics, as indicated here: 
RMA products provide the science needed to efficiently 
utilize minimal resources to provide the highest level of 
success. We always get PCL and SDI maps while enroute 
to the fire to gain situational awareness. We can quickly 
ground truth this and build more effective plans [with] 
the safety and OPS [operations section] work[ing] 
directly hand in hand utilizing several of these products 
to develop strategic alternatives.
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
87%
68%
67%
55%
52%
47%
45%
42%
17%
  10%
52%
Operations and
long-term assessment
Incident objectives,
requirements, strategy
Evaluating/re-evaluating
courses of action
Framing of reinforcing
WFDSS decision
Delineating MAPs
Initial framing
Evaluate resource use,
needs, eﬀectiveness
Delineating PACE
Incident rationale
Other
After Action Review
Figure 5: How RMA tools were used to inform fire management. Statement: 
Please indicate how RMA products were used on the incident(s) (Select all 
that apply). Lifecycle stages derived from R. Stratton. 
Communicate decision rationale
clearly to colleagues/ partners
Educate the public about fire
management responses
Validate an existing decision(s) or
action(s)
Inform a new decision(s) or
action(s)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
7%
22%
41%
37%
63%
69%
44%
13%
28%
19%
Figure 6: Agreement scale (strongly disagree to strongly agree) on whether respondents felt RMA helped communicate decision rational to partners, educate 
the public about decisions, validate an existing decision, and/or inform a new decision. Statement: In general, the use of RMA products on wildfire incidents 
has helped… (if you don’t know, select don’t know). Responses that selected “Don’t know” are not depicted in the figure.

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    9
Facilitate dialogue between stakeholders
RMA helped inform discussions between agency 
administrators, IMTs, cooperators and adjacent units, 
impacted communities, and the public regarding 
fire management concerns, operational strategies, 
challenges, and opportunities; the information created 
transparency in the decision-making process. RMA 
helped staff develop a common operating picture from 
which to explain the logic and rationale behind decisions 
and articulate incident strategies in relation to resources 
and values at risk (Figure 6). In the exemplar below, an 
AA described how RMA tools helped maintain a coherent 
vision and strategy on long-term events as IMTs cycle 
through incidents:
As an active and engaged AA, I appreciate having 
multiple sources of information available to me as I 
work with the multiple IMTs that cycle through long 
term events. Having RMA products directly available to 
me allows me to do some exploration on my own, match 
it up to where we have been and what our current plans 
are indicating, and then have some rich dialogue with 
my IMTs. 
IMT members also noted RMA’s utility in helping 
articulate their decision-making process to AAs. RMA was 
used to develop alignment between IMT sections (e.g., 
planning and operations). One respondent noted that 
while functional areas of the IMT use different products, 
together they help tell a holistic, risk-informed narrative 
to gain alignment between the IMT and AAs. Similarly, 
RMA tools were used to develop alignment between 
federal and non-federal partners, as indicated here:
Local cultural differences between the USFS [USDA  
Forest Service] and our State partners causes 
occasionally [sic] differences in opinion regarding long-
term management of incidents. The [RMA] tools provide 
a way to model outcomes and display information in 
order to gain alignment.
Inform Wildland Fire Decision Support System 
(WFDSS)
WFDSS is commonly used to document incident strategy 
and decision-making processes on large wildfires. 
WFDSS is also closely aligned with RMA, as RMA 
provides information to help develop incident strategy. 
Both are spatial decision support systems that rely on fire 
modeling products and identify highly valued resources 
and assets to inform planning. One respondent indicated 
that RMA was used in most of the analyses produced for, 
and referenced in, WFDSS decisions: 
RMA products were incorporated in almost all 
documents and analyses produced, and referenced in 
multiple WFDSS decisions that I assisted with. 
RMA was used to identify initial planning areas, justify 
and document decisions, identify management action 
points (MAPs), and identify primary, alternative, 
contingency, and emergency (PACE) lines used to contain 
a wildfire. 
Support incident level and operational  
decision-making
RMA also supported operational strategies and tactics, 
including the identification of direct and indirect 
line placement. Staff used RMA to identify potential 
containment lines, identify areas where there was 
high or low potential for fire control, and estimate 
probability of success for different tactics. This proved 
especially useful when fire behavior necessitated 
indirect response strategies. RMA tools helped staff 
understand where landscape and fuel characteristics 
suggested the fire would likely slow or stop, and where 
resources would have high probability of success, as 
indicated by one respondent:
We used the SDI, PCL, and Snag Hazard maps to help 
the team determine probability of success with the 
actions that they were taking or were planning to take 
on the incident.
RMA tools also helped identify the real challenges 
associated with proposed suppression actions: 
Overlaying specific RMA products over possible 
suppression actions provided a strong depiction of 
the realistic challenges inherent in a proposed course  
of action.
RMA was useful on incidents where fire behavior was 
outside the bounds of what was historically experienced 
on the forest. This was described by a respondent 
assigned to the Leland Complex:
On the Leland Complex, the area the fire was burning 
had a limited large fire history. Since the fires in the 
complex already exceeded the size of the largest fires any 
of the current locals had experience on the forest, they 
were burned well outside of “normal.” The traditional 
local strategy of direct attack was not successful and 
indirect actions needed to be implemented. The RMA 
products were useful in identifying potential line 
locations. Additionally, using the RMA products to 
compare where the fire paused or slowed to SDI and 
PCL data helped identify what fuel changes were needed 
to stop the fires in the complex.

10                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
RMA was also used to validate decisions. RMA was used 
to validate potential lines with Operations section staff, 
inform new decisions, and justify existing decisions 
(Figure 6), as evidenced here:
The SDI and PCL did not drive decisions, but confirmed 
what Ops [the operations section] and the local unit 
already knew. They were a good gut-check to reevaluate 
actions and whether or not they were worth the risk 
based on the low probability of success. 
Facilitate regional prioritization
Respondents speaking from a regional perspective noted 
that RMA helped them make data-driven decisions 
about where to commit resources and IMTs based on 
values at risk and probability of success, especially when 
resources were limited and needed to be prioritized. RMA 
helped respondents standardize, visualize, and assess 
information provided by IMTs assigned to individual 
incidents, compare incidents, and then prioritize 
scarce resources based on need. Specifically, the Fire 
Comparison Spreadsheet (and prioritization and radar 
plot tabs) was a notable asset for evaluating incident 
priorities. One respondent explained:
RMA tools are very effective in helping frame up the 
initial decision of where to commit resources, to the 
extreme when we ran out of IMT’s, where to put the 
next IMT. [RMA] tools help measure probability of 
success when making resource allocations. 	
D. Did tool use help meet core principles  
of RMA?
A series of statements assessed whether RMA use 
supported the core principles of RMA (Calkin et al., 2021). 
Over 80% of respondents somewhat to strongly agreed 
that RMA tools improved decision quality. A majority 
of respondents agreed to strongly agreed that RMA 
minimized unnecessary risk to firefighters (69%), and 
a slight majority agreed RMA improved accountability 
(58%) (Figure 7). 
E. Facilitating and frustrating factors
Respondents 
were 
asked 
to 
provide 
open-ended 
responses about what key factors facilitated or frustrated 
their (or their team’s/local unit’s) use of RMA products on 
incidents. We focus first on facilitating factors followed 
by frustrating factors, and organize results around: 1) 
Figure 7: Agreement scale (strongly disagree to strongly agree) on whether participants felt RMA supported core principles of RMA. Core principles include 
improved decision quality, improved accountability, and reduced risks to firefighters. Core principles were derived from Calkin et al. (2021). Statement: In 
general, the use of RMA products on wildfire incidents has helped...(if you don’t know, select don’t know).
Strongly disagree
Somewhat disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat agree
Strongly agree
Improve decision quality
Improve accountability
Minimize unnecessary risks to
firefighters
Consider trade-offs of alt. incident
objectives and strategic options
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
6%
6%
6%
20%
13%
7%
43%
43%
52%
50%
41%
15%
17%
33%

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    11
characteristics of the RMA tools), 2) characteristics of 
respondents, teams, and/or their organization, and 3) 
external factors that facilitate or frustrate the use of RMA 
tools on incidents (Table 1). 
Facilitating factors
Several characteristics of the RMA tools facilitated their 
use. Specifically, respondents mentioned that the tools 
were user friendly, easy to access through the RMA 
dashboard, provided quick, timely information, had high 
agreement with conditions on the ground, and/or were 
relevant to their decision context. The RMA dashboard 
was reportedly easy for practitioners to access and use, 
and provided products that helped develop strategies 
quickly. The usability of the suite of tools offered on the 
RMA dashboard was also reflected in a fixed-response 
statement (Figure 8). A strong majority of respondents 
somewhat to strongly agreed tools were provided at 
the appropriate scale to inform planning and decision-
making (94%), were relevant to decision-making processes 
(87%), accurately depicted conditions on the ground (81%), 
and were easy to interpret (78%; Figure 8). Respondents 
witnessed how the products (especially PCL and SDI) 
aligned with final fire perimeters, which helped them to 
gain trust in the analytics, which, in turn, supported use. 
Characteristics of the individual, team, or organization 
also facilitated the use of RMA on incidents. The most 
frequently cited characteristic was previous experience 
with RMA, followed by having leaders or champions 
Theme or 
category
Frequency
Example 
Characteristics 
of individuals, 
teams, and/or 
organizations
64
•  Previous experience 
with RMA
•  Technical expertise/
capacity
•  Leadership/
champions
•  Agency or team 
culture
•  Receptiveness to 
innovations
•  Trust in RMA – related 
to accuracy
Characteristics of 
RMA tools
15
•  Easy to use or 
interpret
•  Accuracy of products 
or relevance to 
decision context
•  Easy to access
•  Timely
External factors
6
•  Uncharacteristic fire 
weather, conditions 
and scale
•  Team transitions
•  Litigation concerns
•  Strategic risk and 
operational planning
Table 1: Factors that facilitated RMA use in wildfire incident management. 
Question: What key factors supported your (or your team’s/local unit’s) use 
of RMA products?
Figure 8: Agreement scale (strongly disagree to strongly agree) on usability of RMA tools. Statement: In general, RMA products were... (if you don’t know, 
select don’t know).
Strongly disagree
Somewhat disagree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat agree
Easy to interpret
Relevant to planning/
decision-making process
Appropriate scale to inform
planning/ decision-making
Accurate (e.g., depicted conditions
on ground)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
11%
7%
11%
7%
13%
11%
48%
41%
54%
59%
30%
46%
30%
22%

12                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
provide help in interpreting RMA tools, local agency or 
team culture, and receptiveness to innovative ways of 
doing business. Previous experience with the tools and 
the accuracy of those tools relative to past fire footprints 
helped built trust in their utility: 
[Seeing an] assessment of the final foot print of the fires 
I was on in 2020 compared to where the RMA products 
showed potential line locations helped me determine 
the usefulness of the products.
Leaders are key to integrating new tools and processes 
into 
organizational 
routines. 
Local 
and 
regional 
leadership encouragement to utilize RMA tools was 
a key factor supporting their use. Some respondents 
themselves were key leaders working to integrate the 
tools with teams, while others worked with leaders that 
helped train teams and individuals on RMA. For example, 
one respondent was an AA coach and encouraged AA 
trainees to familiarize themselves with RMA tools. 
Further, one respondent described how they are trying to 
champion RMA use during incidents and in their day job:
As the SITL [Situation Unit Leader), I am aware of the 
products and try to sell them to the team. Ops (the 
operations section) is not fully convinced of the SDI, PCL, 
and PODs yet, but [I am] working to get them used to 
the products and view them early on in the assignment. 
[I am] also trying to sell them to my local unit (during 
my day job), including AAs, and progress is being  
made slowly.
Others reported team and agency culture and their 
receptiveness to innovative tools played a large role 
in facilitating the use of RMA tools on incidents, as 
indicated by one respondent:
Receptiveness of new tools was key. We have a strategic 
planning unit within our planning section that  
actively seeks data and analytics to understand 
the fire’s tendencies and how best to inform the  
operational organization and communicate with 
Agency Administrators.
One respondent suggested the openness of the 
operations section to RMA and fire analytics during their 
time on the incident was helpful for integrating across 
the planning and operations sections. Some respondents 
indicated that turnover of staff provided a window of 
opportunity to consider new ways of doing business, 
particularly in the context of using the suite of RMA 
tools. Turnover often has negative impacts, as it can 
erode trust and relationships, and diminish institutional 
knowledge, but it also provides opportunities to take 
new approaches.
External conditions also facilitated the use of RMA. 
According to respondents, the uncharacteristic fire 
weather, conditions, and scale force them to consider 
other ways of managing and planning for fire. Future fire 
realities further underscored the need to be receptive to 
new tools:
In the fire behavior business, we are using a 50-year-
old approach that has been repackaged various ways. 
The wildfires we are experiencing are not the same 
character of fires that occurred 50 years ago. I am 
looking for new approaches to this issue - so I’m open 
to seeing new tools.
Theme or 
category
Frequency
Example 
Characteristics 
of individuals, 
teams, and/or 
organizations
31
•  Resistance or 
hesitance to use
•	 Team/Agency culture
•	 Familiarity/knowledge 
of RMA
•	 Lack of leadership, 
champions
•	 Expertise/technical 
capacity to use and 
interpret
External factors
17
•  Resource capacity
•	 WIFI and 
telecommunications 
availability
•	 External support/
guidance (e.g., 
training on products)
•	 Tool overload, or 
competes with 
required products 
Characteristics of 
RMA tools
7
•  Complex terminology 
makes difficult to 
integrate
•	 Coarse resolution 
limits applicability
•	 Tools perceived as 
static, generalized 
representations of 
conditions
•	 Fire conditions or 
fire history limits use, 
applicability of tools
Table 2: Factors that frustrated RMA use in wildfire incident management. 
Question: What, if any, challenges inhibited your (or your team’s/local unit’s) 
ability to use RMA products?

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    13
Others reported RMA tools were used because they were 
already in use on an incident by the previous IMT, as a 
tool to address litigation concerns, and in response to the 
recent focus on strategic risk assessment and strategic 
operations planning processes. 
Frustrating factors
On the other hand, several frustrating factors impeded 
RMA use. As above, in many cases whether tools were 
used (or not) depended on individual respondents, their 
experience on the incident, and incident context. Again, 
these challenges reflected factors associated with the 
individuals, teams, or organizations, external factors, and/
or characteristics of the RMA tools (Table 2). 
The most frequently cited barriers to RMA use among 
individuals, organizations, or teams was lack of 
familiarity or knowledge of RMA and hesitance to use 
RMA tools. According to respondents, some operations 
and planning section staff and AAs still have limited 
knowledge of the products, how to use them, and how to 
interpret them. This was, at least partly, because the RMA 
dashboard and suite of tools are still relatively new; teams 
still wanted to validate how tools reflected conditions on 
the ground, which—while important—takes time and can 
slow the decision-making process. Respondents indicated 
that unfamiliar tools will be used less frequently in 
stressful situations:
Folks are unfamiliar with products and default to what 
they are comfortable with. When stressed we default to 
what/who we know.
At times, it was difficult to convince teams and leadership, 
interagency partners and cooperators of RMA’s utility. For 
instance, some teams who cycle onto an incident may 
elect to develop their own strategy and not use existing 
long-term strategies or plans developed with RMA. One 
respondent suggested that since most fires were caught 
at initial attack, some fire managers didn’t see a need for 
long-term analyses or large fire prioritization. The same 
respondent emphasized the need for more leadership 
awareness and exposure to RMA tools to mitigate this 
issue. Relatedly, local leaders who fail to share existing 
products (e.g., local PODs networks) with incoming IMTs 
also limit the use of those tools:
I have also been on fires where the local unit never 
mentions that they have PODs. If they do not push 
them, then our Ops [Operations section] will be much 
less likely to look at them.
Some managers are reluctant to use RMA tools because 
they don’t trust them yet:
Having people to believe in what is being shown is the 
biggest challenge I see. When the analytics (PCL/SDI, 
etc.) are showing a big box…they tend to get thrown out 
and replaced with “local knowledge or experience” and 
then we end up with yet another indirect line that will 
either get burned over or never used.
External factors also limited RMA use. The most 
frequently cited external factor was resource capacity 
(e.g., time, competing demands). Fire behavior or rate 
of spread often dictated whether RMA tools were used 
or not. In some instances, respondents wanted to use 
an assortment of RMA and non-RMA tools to inform 
decision-making, but were afraid that doing so would 
slow down their decision-making process. Further, 
GIS specialists are required to produce certain maps to 
support fire management, which often resulted in no 
capacity to produce alternative maps that incorporate 
RMA tools. Some respondents expressed feeling 
overwhelmed with the existing requirements of their 
job (e.g., WFDSS, in-briefings, managing multiple 
incidents) and felt there was limited time to incorporate 
RMA. A couple of respondents indicated that competing 
demands locally and at the regional level limited the use 
of RMA tools:
Due to competing demands on my time from  
supporting multiple incidents, I didn’t have enough 
time to fully explore and utilize new RMA products to 
their fullest potential.
Respondents also noted the challenge of utilizing web-
based decision support tools in locations with limited 
WIFI or telecommunications services. Others indicated 
external support, guidance, or training was lacking. For 
example, one respondent mentioned they didn’t know 
what tools were available, how to get them, or who to 
ask for help; another suggested lack of training on the 
RMA dashboard in the pre-season limited RMA use 
during incidents. 
While the majority of respondents noted RMA tools were 
provided at the appropriate scale, were relevant to the 
decision-making process, accurately depicted conditions 
on the ground, and were easy to interpret (Figure 
8), a small number of respondents suggested some 
characteristics of the tools impeded use. Specifically, 
the resolution, update frequency, complex terminology, 
spatial variability in the accuracy of RMA products, and 
limitations on who can generate some of the RMA tools 
and data frustrated tool use. One respondent considered 
RMA sufficient for coarse-scale overviews but suggested 
they were less useful for understanding fine-scale fire 
behavior and movement:

14                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
It is usually the case that we can access information 
and data from sources like RMA products that are a 
good overview and somewhat coarse in nature. As we 
have to take a deeper dive into the nuances and unique 
characteristics of what is making a particular fire move 
- the tools like RMA products become less useable.
Others felt tools would be used more if the products were 
updated more frequently or varied dynamically with 
changing conditions. Some respondents noted RMA tools 
used complex terminology and concepts, which led to 
them not being readily understood or adopted. Finally, 
some respondents noted limitations of specific RMA tools 
and products. For instance, one respondent indicated that 
the accuracy of the SDI and PCL was spatially variable:
RMA products are pretty good out west; RMA products 
in the lake states need to be improved; risk data/SDI/
PCL all needs to be updated.
Another respondent felt the Aviation Use Summaries in 
particular were difficult to access “due to the limitation 
of the number of people allowed to generate that data.” 
Finally, the PCL analysis relies on past fire history to train 
and parametrize the model. On a particular landscape 
with limited large fire history, it was difficult for fire 
managers to use the SDI and PCL to locate control line 
opportunities:
The lack of large fire history in the area did not allow  
me to exam[ine] where past fires had stopped and 
compare these with the PCL/SDI data to determine 
what fuel/terrain changes are typically successful places 
to locate line.
F. Recommendations
Little research has been published on the use of RMA 
(Calkin et al., 2021; Schultz et al., 2021). From what 
has been published, we identified recommendations 
for improving the use of RMA for incident decision-
making and polled respondents on whether those 
recommendations are important to consider. Each of the 
six recommendations listed in Figure 9 were considered 
very important to extremely important. The three top 
recommendations were: 1) integrate RMA products and 
processes with next generation WFDSS (88% indicated 
this was very to extremely important); 2) invest in local 
analytical capacity to use and interpret RMA tools (82%); 
and 3) increase RMA outreach in the preseason, for 
example during PODs workshops (75%).
Figure 9: Importance scale (not at all important - extremely important) on the importance of documented recommendations for enhancing RMA tool use. 
Recommendations derived from Schultz et al. (2021) and Calkin et al. (2021). Statement: Several recommendations have been suggested to enhance the 
integration of RMA products on incidents. Please indicate the importance of each suggested recommendation.
Not at all important
Slightly important
Moderately important
Very important
Extremely important
Leadership direction on intended
RMA use
Leadership direction on RMA
integration w/ wildfire DSSs
Increase risk management training
opportunities
More RMA outreach in pre-season
(e.g., PODs workshops)
Invest in local analytical capacity
to use, interpret RMA products
Integrate RMA products and
processes with next gen. WFDSS
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
5% 5%
7%
29%
20%
27%
23%
18%
11%
30%
44%
36%
41%
41%
34%
30%
25%
34%
34%
41%
54%

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    15
Respondents were prompted to provide additional 
recommendations to enhance the delivery and use of 
RMA on wildfire incidents. Many comments elaborated 
on the recommendations in Figure 9 and those 
articulated in the facilitating and frustrating factors 
section (See Tables 1 and 2, respectively), but additional 
recommendations 
were 
also 
provided. 
Responses 
have been grouped into four broad themes: 1) increase 
awareness and familiarity through training and outreach; 
2) increase RMA use through socialization of tools and 
processes; 3) improve delivery and experience of existing 
products; and 4) grow and expand the products available 
and their uses (Table 3).
Many respondents elaborated on how increased 
opportunities for training and pre-season outreach could 
help expand use and overcome barriers to use, such 
as lack of awareness, familiarity, and trust in the RMA 
tools. Respondents recommended training for several 
audiences, including Operations Section Chiefs:
The most ‘typical’ of Operations Section Chiefs need to 
be trained on and comprehend these products. 
Other audiences mentioned were AAs, Administratively 
Determined staff (ADs), analysts (e.g., Long Term Fire 
Analysts, Fire Behavior Analysts), leadership, IMTs, 
and interagency partners (especially states and local 
government). One respondent recommended more 
training for AAs and leadership direction to encourage 
AA participation in training:
The FS [Forest Service] has not been able to bring about  
a 
complete 
package 
of 
training 
for 
Agency 
Administrators. We have very little attendance in 
fire training with line officers and little leadership  
direction for them to participate.
In terms of information delivery, respondents suggested 
short webinars, while others suggested longer-term 
integration of risk management principles and RMA 
tools into coursework, such as National Wildfire 
Coordinating Group (NWCG) RT130 and 200-, 300-, 
and 400-level courses, to increase RMA familiarity. 
Respondents suggested ‘road show’ style in-person 
presentations to help familiarize audiences and build 
trust in the products in the pre-season:
Advertise a few folks who are experts in this stuff 
and available to attend pre-season meetings or  
trainings anywhere to give more people exposure to this 
valuable resource. 
PODs workshops where fire managers, cooperators, 
and relevant stakeholders co-develop potential control 
locations and PODs networks may be an appropriate 
venue for this. Subsequent engagement with entities and 
organizations as they integrate PODs into land and fire 
management objectives could also provide opportunities 
for RMA education and outreach.
The second theme involves integrating RMA use into 
typical practice through norming and socialization. 
Some recommended more exposure to the tools during 
incidents to build trust in the accuracy of the tools:
Theme or 
category
Frequency
Example 
Increase 
awareness/ 
familiarity through 
training and 
outreach
17
•  Training audiences 
- AAs, ADs, IMTs, 
Operations Sections 
Chiefs, interagency 
partners)
•	 Methods of delivery 
– short webinars, 
traveling training 
teams, incorporate 
into fire class and 
coursework at all 
levels
Integrate RMA 
use through 
norming/
socialization
10
•  Delineate 
expectations for use
•	 Change 
organizational 
structures
•	 Build/lean on local 
champions
•	 Increase local 
exposure to tools 
Improve existing 
tool delivery/ 
experience
8
•  Integrate with other 
platforms
•	 Improve availability 
of tools (e.g., Aviation 
Use Summaries)
•	 Make it simpler/more 
user-friendly
•	 Consider more 
frequent updates
•	 Mitigate spatial 
variability in tool 
accuracy/quality
Expand products 
and uses
7
•	 Integrate with 
fuels/prescribed 
fire planning and 
implementation
•	 Increase tools 
available on RMA 
dashboard
Table 3: Recommendations to improve the use and usability of RMA tools for 
wildfire management. Question: What other recommendations do you have 
to enhance the delivery and use of RMA products on wildfire incidents?

16                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
For some groups of people, it is going to take them 
actually seeing the products work on the ground before 
they will fully believe what the science is telling them. 
“Seeing the products work” was noted as a strong 
facilitating 
factor 
by 
respondents. 
Respondents 
highlighted 
the 
importance 
of 
local 
or 
peer 
demonstrations of the tools’ value to IMTs and AAs, 
and they emphasized utilizing the tools early (i.e., initial 
attack), often, and throughout extended fire events. In 
this vein, respondents suggested the need for leaders, or 
champions, on local units and IMTs to demonstrate the 
use and utility of RMA. One respondent recommended 
outreach to Incident Commanders (ICs) on incidents 
to identify what needs they may have, which could 
provide valuable on-incident support and help develop 
future RMA champions. In order for RMA to be used, 
respondents recommended agency leadership set clear 
expectations for how to use the RMA tools throughout 
the fire lifecycle. Further, respondents recommended 
the need for 1) funding additional analysts and other 
personnel dedicated to RMA; and 2) changing IMT 
organizational configurations to ensure teams have the 
appropriate skillsets and experience in risk management 
principles and RMA:
All IMTs should be required to have a SOPL 
[Strategic Operational Planner] in their “short team” 
configuration. There should not always be ‘strike teams 
of Ops [Operations section] chiefs’ with exactly the same 
qualifications rolling out with IMTs. Any IMT that 
carries more than two Ops Chiefs needs to ensure they 
carry a SOPL.
The third theme included recommendations for technical 
improvements to the existing set of RMA products. 
For example, respondents recommended integrating 
these tools into existing platforms and systems in 
use, including next-gen WFDSS, the Interagency Fuel 
Treatment Decision Support System (IFTDSS), and the 
Enterprise Geospatial Portal (EGP). Some respondents 
suggested expanding the ways in which tools were made 
available during incidents particularly where internet 
connectivity is uncertain: 
It would be good to figure out a way to get it into 
a format that is better used while on an incident. 
Sometimes there is limited WIFI capacity or access to 
printers/plotters… maybe a written handbook or guides 
when connectivity is lacking.
Respondents also emphasized the importance of 
generating RMA maps to support incident response 
as soon as the first team is ordered and assigned to  
an incident:
RMA maps will be more widely used if maps are created 
as soon as the leadership knows [the] fire will extend 
into extended response.
Respondents requested tools be updated more frequently 
to represent dynamic and changing conditions on 
the ground, and to mitigate spatial variability in the 
accuracy of products. They also suggested increasing 
the availability of, or access to, Aviation Use Summaries. 
Tools that would support line identification in areas 
with limited large fire history was recommended. Where 
possible, making the RMA dashboard and tools more 
user-friendly for a variety of audiences by adding features 
like help links may enhance adoption of RMA products. 
As one respondent noted:
It would be great if the products provided were simple 
enough for most to understand while providing 
options for those users with more skills to extrapolate 
if necessary.
Some respondents suggested improving RMA use 
by making the dashboard a “one stop shop” for 
integrated wildfire mitigation, pre-fire planning, and 
incident management. One respondent suggested that 
incorporating more information about how critical values 
and assets of concern may respond to fire (and the extent 
to which they may be positively or negatively affected by 
fire under various conditions) into the RMA dashboard 
could improve decision making: 
When line officers are faced with suppress fire small 
[sic] and commit few resources versus big box and lots 
of time/resources......then our history shows what way 
line officers will go despite what the analytics show. 
Decisions based on risk alone are very subjective (in 
spite of analytics) where effect on the resource is more 
science based and provable.
Respondents saw opportunities to apply RMA tools to 
wildfire mitigation (i.e., fuels reduction and prescribed 
fire planning and implementation). They considered 
RMA tools well-suited to validate the purpose and 
need for treatments, and where to put them. When 
managers are able to use the same systems and tools for 
both wildfire mitigation and response, it increases the 
exposure and familiarity of the tools to local units, and 
the lines between mitigation and response begin to blur. 
G. How was RMA used in non-incident manage-
ment contexts?
Respondents indicated that they are using RMA tools in 
non-incident management contexts, including pre-season 
wildfire planning, fuels planning, and environmental 
analysis and decision-making (Figure 10).

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    17
We asked respondents to describe how they were using 
RMA in non-incident management contexts in an 
open-ended question. Three common themes emerged 
from those responses, two of which expanded on the 
fixed-response statement (Figure 10). They included: 
1) pre-season fire planning; 2) fuel treatment planning 
and proposed actions requiring environmental review 
pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA); and 3) communication, learning, and shared 
understanding (Table 4). 
The distinction between pre-season fire planning 
and fuel treatment planning refers primarily to the 
temporal scale in which the planning occurs. In this 
context, pre-season fire planning refers to shorter- to 
mid-term tactical planning for the fire season, whereas 
fuel treatment planning refers to longer-term, strategic 
planning to implement treatments to reduce wildfire 
risk or improve opportunities for safe and effective fire 
management. At the same time, the distinctions between 
how these were discussed by respondents was somewhat 
blurry. For example, one respondent described how RMA 
use can support a range of applications: 
POD development that uses RMA is being used as 
a collaborative planning framework, supporting 
interagency coordination, evacuation planning, CWPP 
[Community Wildfire Protection Plan] development, etc.
The most prominent example in the responses was using 
RMA in the development and use of PODs in pre-season 
fire planning. One respondent described using these 
applications to inform potential fire season strategy:
[We] use PODs and PCLs to conduct pre-season fire 
management planning (assess opportunities to manage 
fire for resource benefit). 
Others used RMA to brief line officers on expected 
high-problem areas in the event of an ignition. Many 
respondents also described using RMA products to 
inform risk assessments:
I encourage my Rangers to use this tool [RMA]  
in development of risk assessments for any activity in 
the woods. 
Meanwhile, others noted RMA tools were used to 
support grant applications. One respondent in particular 
used risk assessments and fire danger products on 
the RMA dashboard to write Federal Emergency 
Management 
Agency 
(FEMA) 
Fire 
Management 
Assistance Grant applications. 
With respect to fuel treatment planning, numerous 
respondents provided examples of RMA use to support 
prioritization, NEPA processes, and strategy development. 
For example, one respondent explained the use of RMA in 
prioritizing treatments:
I have successfully incorporated RMA products (SDI/
PCL primarily) in prioritizing fuels treatments in 
areas with multiple values at risk (VARs) and recently 
as supporting documentation in an Environmental 
Assessment (EA).
Another respondent used RMA for effects analysis on a 
proposed action, which helped justify where treatments 
should occur and why:
Figure 10: Frequency of respondents that used RMA for non-incident 
management activities. Statement: I am using RMA products for non-incident 
management purposes, including... (select all that apply).
Pre-season wildﬁre 
planning
Fuels planning (e.g., 
prioritization, treatment design)
Enviromental analysis 
and decision-making
(e.g., NEPA, Forest
Plan Revision)
Other
63%
7%
46%
29%
Theme or 
category
Frequency
Example 
Pre-season fire 
planning
33
•  Inform quantitative 
risk assessments
•	 Use RMA to draft 
PODs
•	 Use for pre-season 
training
•	 Bolster grant 
proposals
Fuel treatment 
planning
24
•  NEPA
•	 Prioritization of 
treatment type and 
location
•	 Firesheds 
•	 Inform CWPPs 
Shared 
understanding, 
communication 
and learning
5
• 	Situational awareness
•	 Outreach with 
partners
•	 Coordination of 
fuels treatments with 
partners
Table 4: RMA use in non-incident management contexts. Statement: Please 
explain how you have used/are using RMA products to support non-incident 
management (e.g., fuels planning, NEPA, prioritization).

18                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
[We] used PODs and PCL in fuels planning as well as 
NEPA effects analysis. Certainly, [these tools] help[ed] in 
[developing the] rational[e] for why here, why now. 
One respondent aligned RMA products with the USDA 
Forest Service Firesheds and 5-year plans to identify new 
priority treatment areas. Respondents noted that RMA 
was also used for communication with communities 
and partners for planning fuel reduction treatments, 
learning or training purposes, and generating general 
understanding or situational awareness. Finally, one 
respondent highlighted how the RMA dashboard helped 
provide information to increase situational awareness 
during and leading into the fire season:
[We] use the [RMA] dashboard to look at drought/
weather/fuels, past fires on the district, etc. to 
prepare exercises ahead of the season with my fire 
staff and crews. 
Conclusion and next steps
The USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation Management 
(FAM) department requested assistance from the 
Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
to develop an online questionnaire to assess Risk 
Management Assistance (RMA) use during the 2021 fire 
season. We framed the assessment around four research 
questions: 1) Which RMA products are used on wildfires; 
2) How is RMA used to inform decision-making; 3) 
What factors facilitate or frustrate use; and 4) How can 
RMA be improved to enhance its use and legitimacy 
in wildland fire management? The questionnaire 
was administered to fire managers and personnel 
(e.g., Incident Management Teams [IMTs], Agency 
Administrators) who engaged with RMA products and 
assistance during the 2021 fire season. We received 
94 usable responses that captured 69 incidents across 
11 states and over 6 million acres burned. 27 IMTs, 9 
regional Geographic Area Coordination Centers (GAACs), 
and multiple type 1, 2, and 3 teams were represented  
in the sample. 
Our findings indicated that RMA was overwhelmingly 
seen as a useful set of tools and processes which helped 
inform incident decision making. RMA tools were used 
to facilitate dialogue with cooperators and stakeholders, 
inform strategic, operational, and tactical decision-
making, and support regional prioritization of incidents. 
Regional coordination and prioritization are especially 
important given the increased complexity of the fire 
environment, limited resources, increased reliance on 
out-of-region teams during high preparedness levels, and 
increased frequency of multiple, long duration events 
where numerous teams cycle through an incident. 
A majority of respondents felt that RMA met the core 
principles of the program – improve decision quality, 
improve accountability, and minimize unnecessary risk 
to firefighters (Calkin et al., 2021). Most respondents 
felt that the tools on the RMA dashboard were easy to 
interpret, relevant to decision making, provided at the 
appropriate scale, and accurately depicted conditions on 
the ground. The RMA dashboard was reportedly easy to 
access and use by practitioners, and respondents agreed 
that the dashboard provided products that helped develop 
strategies quickly. A number of factors facilitated use, 
including familiarity with RMA, trust in the accuracy 
of analytics, receptiveness to new tools and processes, 
internal capacity and expertise, and the presence of 
leaders who advocated for RMA use to support fire and 
land management decision-making.
Still, practitioners provided several recommendations that 
could improve RMA use and legitimacy. These included: 
1) increased education and outreach; 2) clear leadership 
direction and intent; 3) more support for regional analysts 
and incident personnel trained in risk management 
principles and RMA; and 4) more frequent tool updates 
and tool enhancements. More education, training, and 
outreach on RMA was recommended. Suggestions  
included targeted webinars, integrating RMA and risk 
management principles into the National Wildfire 
Coordinating Group course curriculum for firefighters 
and agency administrators, introducing RMA products 
and processes during Potential Operational Delineations 
(PODs) workshops, and additional opportunities for peer 
learning and knowledge exchange. Peer-to-peer learning 
and training during incidents (e.g. Strategic Risk Analysis 
and Strategic Operations) and extending training to 
local fire managers and Type 3 teams could help bolster 
the use of RMA on extended and emerging incidents. 
National-level peer learning networks, such as the PODs 
user group, are key to supporting education, outreach, 
and social learning around PODs and RMA. In addition, 
more frequent, and regionally-focused communities of 
practice would be beneficial to further the socialization of 
RMA, its applications, and innovations in the field. Many 
respondents indicated the use of RMA for non-incident 
environmental analysis and decision making for fuels 
and other land management objectives. When managers 
are able to use the same systems and tools for wildfire 
mitigation and response, it increases the exposure 
and familiarity of the tools to local units, and the lines 
between mitigation and response begin to blur. 
Respondents recommended clear leadership direction on 

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    19
how RMA should be used on incidents and incorporated 
within existing decision-support tools, including the 
Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS). 
Opportunities to distill leadership intent and direction 
could be achieved in the IMT, at annual coordination 
meetings, or through the delegation of authority on 
incidents. There is a need to invest in analytical capacity 
on units, teams, and at the regional and national level 
to use and interpret risk-informed spatial analytics and 
RMA tools in particular. Regional analysts are becoming 
more common and could be integrated in all GACCs to 
support multiple incidents and regional prioritization. 
IMTs could incorporate strategic operations positions in 
planning and operations sections who are trained in risk 
management principles and analytics. Learning modules 
and help links for tools in the RMA dashboard was 
recommended. Also, adapting delivery systems so that 
tools are updated more frequently as conditions change 
may support usage. 
This assessment provided baseline information on 
the use of RMA during fire incidents, contributed to 
our understanding of what facilitates and frustrates 
RMA use, and identified actionable recommendations 
to improve RMA products and processes. Our hope 
is that this is the first in what will become a long-
term evaluation of RMA products and processes. This 
structured and systematic questionnaire could be 
readministered longitudinally to track trends in RMA 
use and determine the extent to which RMA is useful 
and used. Additionally, case studies can add local context 
and nuance to questionnaire findings. These should be 
grounded in the needs and priorities of forest and fire 
practitioners and FAM leadership. 
Next steps for our research team include case studies 
that: assess RMA use during 2022 wildfire incidents 
that will help further explain questionnaire findings; 
document how leadership direction and intent on RMA is 
conceptualized, defined, and disseminated to lower levels 
of authority and cooperators; and share recommendations 
for improving the suite of analytical tools and products 
available on the RMA dashboard. We are particularly 
interested in collaborative planning processes facilitated 
by RMA. Future work may evaluate the strategic 
risk assessment and strategic operations processes, 
particularly with regard to how RMA was integrated 
into these processes by coaches and IMTs. There are also 
opportunities to learn more about those who do not use 
RMA and why, as our survey focused specifically on fires 
where RMA was used. We will maintain our focus on co-
developing actionable knowledge with practitioners to 
improve decision-making before, during, and after fires. 
References
Caggiano, M.D., Beeton, T.A., Gannon, B.M., White, 
J., 2021. The Cameron Peak Fire: Use of Potential 
Operational Delineations and Risk Management 
Assistance Products (No. CFRI-2106). Colorado Forest 
Restoration Institute, Fort Collins, CO. https://cfri.
colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2021/06/
CameronPeakFirePODsReport.pdf
Calkin, D.E., O’Connor, C.D., Thompson, M.P., Stratton, R., 
2021. Strategic Wildfire Response Decision Support and 
the Risk Management Assistance Program. Forests 12, 
1407. https://doi.org/10.3390/f12101407
Colavito, M., 2021. The Human Dimensions of Spatial, 
Pre-Wildfire Planning Decision Support Systems: A 
Review of Barriers, Facilitators, and Recommendations. 
Forests 12, 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/f12040483
Dilling, L., Lemos, M.C., 2011. Creating usable science: 
Opportunities and constraints for climate knowledge 
use and their implications for science policy. Global 
environmental 
change 
21, 
680–689. 
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.11.006
Greiner, S.M., Schultz, C.A., Kooistra, C., 2020. Pre-
season fire management planning: the use of Potential 
Operational Delineations to prepare for wildland fire 
events. Int. J. Wildland Fire. https://doi.org/10.1071/
WF20124
Holden, Z.A., Swanson, A., Luce, C.H., Jolly, W.M., Maneta, 
M., Oyler, J.W., Warren, D.A., Parsons, R., Affleck, D., 
2018. Decreasing fire season precipitation increased 
recent western US forest wildfire activity. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 115, E8349–E8357. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1802316115
Jolly, W.M., Cochrane, M.A., Freeborn, P.H., Holden, Z.A., 
Brown, T.J., Williamson, G.J., Bowman, D.M.J.S., 2015. 
Climate-induced variations in global wildfire danger 
from 1979 to 2013. Nature Communications 6, 7537. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms8537
Lemos, M.C., 2008. What Influences Innovation Adoption 
by Water Managers? Climate Information Use in Brazil 
and the United States1. JAWRA Journal of the American 
Water Resources Association 44, 1388–1396. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.2008.00231.x
Noble, P., Paveglio, T.B., 2020. Exploring Adoption of the 
Wildland Fire Decision Support System: End User 
Perspectives. Journal of Forestry 118, 154–171. https://doi.
org/10.1093/jofore/fvz070
Radeloff, V.C., Helmers, D.P., Kramer, H.A., Mockrin, M.H., 
Alexandre, P.M., Bar-Massada, A., Butsic, V., Hawbaker, 

20                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
T.J., Martinuzzi, S., Syphard, A.D., Stewart, S.I., 2018. 
Rapid growth of the US wildland-urban interface raises 
wildfire risk. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115, 3314–3319. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1718850115
Rapp, C., Rabung, E., Wilson, R., Toman, E., 2020. Wildfire 
decision support tools: an exploratory study of use in 
the United States. International journal of wildland fire 
29, 581–594. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF19131
Ryan, G.W., Bernard, H.R., 2003. Techniques to Identify 
Themes. 
Field 
Methods 
15, 
85–109. 
https://doi.
org/10.1177/1525822X02239569
Schultz, C., Miller, L.F., Greiner, S., Kooistra, C., 2021. 
A Qualitative Study on the US Forest Service’s 
Risk Management Assistance Efforts to Improve 
Wildfire Decision-Making. Forests 12, 344. https://doi.
org/10.3390/f12030344
Vásquez, F., Cravero, A., Castro, M., Acevedo, P., 2021. 
Decision Support System Development of Wildland 
Fire: A Systematic Mapping. Forests 12, 943. https://doi.
org/10.3390/f12070943
 

Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report                    21
Appendix 1: Frequency distribution of number of respondents by incident.
Incident Name
Frequency
Alder Creek 
7
Devils Knob Complex
7
Trail Creek 
7
Dixie 
5
KNP Complex
5
Rough Patch Complex
5
Balsinger 
4
Bootleg
4
Bull Complex
4
Cub Creek 2
4
Jack 
4
Tamarack 
4
Green Ridge
3
Greenwood 
3
Middle Fork Complex
3
River Complex
3
Sylvan lake 
3
Telegraph
3
Antelope 
2
Backbone
2
Black Mountain 
2
Cedar Creek
2
Haystack
2
Lick Creek
2
McCash 
2
Monument 
2
Ptarmigan 
2
Twenty-five Mile
2
12 mile
1
American Fork
1
Beckwourth
1
Black Butte
1
Boulder 2700
1
Burnt  Peak
1
Caldor
1
Chickadee
1
Christensen
1
Cornville
1
Cougar Peak
1
Cougar Rock Complex
1
Crater Ridge
1
Darlene
1
Delta Lake
1
Gales
1
Goose 
1
Granite Mtn
1
Greenside Butte 
1
Haystack (AK)
1
Johnson
1
Johnson Creek
1
Lava
1
Leland Complex
1
McFarland
1
Pack Creek
1
Pinnacle
1
Rafael
1
Red Apple
1
Rincon
1
Robertson Draw
1
Robinson 
1
Rush Creek
1
Snake River Complex
1
Storm Theatre Complex
1
Thorne Creek
1
Too Kush 2
1
Vinegar
1
West Lolo
1
Windy 
1
Woods Creek
1

22                    Use of Risk Management Assistance during the 2021 fire season: A technical report
IMT
Frequency
Rocky Mountain Type 1
6
Northwest Interagency Incident Management Team 6
4
Eastern Area Gold
3
Northern Rockies Team 5
3
Alaska Team 1
2
Boise NIMO Team 2
2
California Interagency IMT Team 1
2
Great Basin Team 1
2
Great Basin Team 4
2
Northwest Interagency Incident Management Team 3
2
Southern Area Blue Team
2
Southwest Area Team 2
2
Alaska Black Team
1
Atlanta NIMO Team 1
1
California Interagency IMT Team 13
1
California Interagency IMT Team 4
1
California Interagency IMT Team 5
1
Great Basin Team 5
1
Northern Rockies Team 3
1
Northern Rockies Team 4
1
Northern Rockies Team 6
1
Northwest Interagency Incident Management Team 2
1
Rocky Mountain Black Team
1
Rocky Mountain Blue Team
1
Southern Area Red Team
1
Southwest Area Team 1
1
Southwest Area Team 3
1
Appendix 2: Frequency distribution of Incident Management Team representation in the 
survey 
Respondents who were on the same team for multiple incidents (respondents could include up to three incidents) were 
only counted once. 

Southwest
Southern
Rocky Mountain
Northwest
Northern Rockies
Great Basin
Eastern
Southern California
NIMO
Alaska
GACC                                                       IMT                                                                                                          FREQUENCY
