Journal of Forestry, 2022, 1–18
https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvac037
Review Article - harvesting & utilization
 Received: June 16, 2022; Accepted: October 18, 2022
Advance Access publication 14 December, 2022
1
© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of American Foresters. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.
Review Article - harvesting & utilization
The Cost of Forest Thinning Operations in the 
Western United States: A Systematic Literature 
Review and New Thinning Cost Model
Heesol Chang,1 Han-Sup Han,2,*,  Nathaniel Anderson,3 Yeon-Su Kim,4 and 
Sang-Kyun Han5
1Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University (NAU), Flagstaff, AZ, USA (Heesol.Chang@nau.edu).  
2Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University (NAU), Flagstaff, AZ, USA (Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu).  
3Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Missoula, MT, USA (nathaniel.m.anderson@usda.gov).  
4School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University (NAU), Flagstaff, AZ, USA (Yeon-Su.Kim@nau.edu).  5Division of 
Forest Science, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea (hsk@kangwon.ac.kr). 
*Corresponding author: Email: Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu 
Abstract 
Mechanical forest thinning treatments are implemented across the western United States (US) to im-
prove forest health and reduce hazardous fuels. However, the main challenge in thinning operations 
is low financial feasibility. This study synthesized the stump-to-truck cost of forest thinning operations 
in the western US based on operations research articles published over the last 40 years (1980–2020). 
We systematically selected and reviewed 20 thinning studies to analyze key variables affecting machine 
productivity and harvesting costs. The average cost of forest thinning was lowest for a mechanized whole-
tree thinning operation at $21.34/ton or $2,075/ha. Feller-bunchers and skidders showed the highest 
productivity in felling and extraction machines, respectively. We found that extraction cost accounted 
for the largest proportion of the stump-to-truck cost of forest thinning (33%, 43%, and 34% in whole-tree, 
tree-length, and cut-to-length thinning, respectively). Tree diameter and machine travel distance are 
common variables affecting thinning productivity and thus cost, regardless of the harvesting methods 
used. With thinning productivity and cost data from the selected studies, we developed a spreadsheet-
based model to estimate thinning costs for various harvesting systems. This literature synthesis and 
new thinning cost model can help foresters develop a cost-effective plan for thinning operations.
Study Implications:   Forestland managers often have a keen understanding of the cost of operations 
based on personal experience and rules of thumb and try to increase productivity and reduce costs 
whenever possible. Unfortunately, it can be difficult to integrate high-resolution operations research 
into their planning because these studies can be very site specific and tend to use statistical designs 
that are not always easy to interpret or apply in practice. This review provides a comprehensive syn-
thesis of research on mechanical thinning operations in the western US with two main implications 
for managers: (1) broader knowledge of thinning operations with an understanding of key variables 
and their effects on productivity and cost and (2) better information, data, and tools that can be used 
to calculate and compare the productivity and cost of thinning for various methods and systems to 
quickly evaluate alternatives in planning. This literature synthesis, along with a new thinning cost 
model, can help managers develop more efficient treatments and ultimately reduce treatment costs.
Keywords: forest harvesting, logging machine, economic feasibility, machine productivity, machine rate
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

2
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
The increase in frequency and size of landscape-scale 
wildfires is a challenge for forest managers across the 
western United States (US). From 2002 to 2013, 55% 
of forest fires and 95% of the total area burned were 
concentrated in this region (Brusentsev and Vroman 
2016). The number of wildfires is increasing by seven 
fires per year on average, and the area burned is 
increasing by 355 km² per year (Dennison et al. 2014). 
To reduce the risk of catastrophic fire and restore forest 
health, landscape-scale forest restoration projects are 
being implemented across the western US to reduce 
stand density and remove hazardous fuels (Waltz et al. 
2014; Kalies and Yocom Kent 2016).
Prescribed fires can reduce fuel loads and wildfire 
intensity because they can effectively consume fuels at 
a low cost (Chalmers and Hartsough 2001). They also 
provide ecological benefits (Fulé et al. 2012; Brose et al. 
2013). However, prescribed burning has several limita-
tions to its application, such as widespread smoke, es-
caped wildfire risk, and operational constraints related 
to forest structure and density, weather conditions, 
seasonal factors, and higher risk in overstocked forests 
that have high crown fire potential.
Mechanical forest thinning treatments do not have 
the same limitations as prescribed fire and are em-
ployed to reduce stand density and achieve similar ob-
jectives. Thinning treatments positively affect wildfire 
behavior in western US forests by reducing fuel loads 
and increasing the distance between remaining trees 
(Fulé et al. 2012). Additionally, forest thinning treat-
ments can have ecological benefits, including decreased 
tree mortality, reduced fire severity, and improved 
forest structure (Stephens and Moghaddas 2005). 
Treatments can also facilitate prescribed burning in 
dense stands, which is frequently conducted following 
mechanical treatments.
In forest thinning operations, three harvesting 
methods are commonly used: whole-tree (WT), tree-
length (TL), and cut-to-length (CTL) (Figure 1). The 
choice of harvesting method determines the equipment 
and systems used (Han et al. 2004), where each system 
typically includes a combination of felling, extraction, 
and processing machines to complete a stump-to-truck 
harvesting operation. Each harvesting method is named 
based on the type of woody materials moved during 
the extraction process. In a WT harvesting operation, 
no tree processing activities occur at the stump where 
felling occurs. Entire trees are extracted to the landing 
area or roadsides where they are processed. In the TL 
method, branches and tops are removed at the stump 
after felling, and the remaining length, often including 
multiple merchantable logs, is moved to the landing 
or roadside. In the CTL method, the length of the tree 
is further processed at the stump into individual mer-
chantable logs, which are then moved to the landing 
or roadside.
Under a single harvesting method, there could be 
different combinations of harvesting machines that 
complete a stump-to-truck operation. Here, we refer 
to the specific configuration of machines as a system. 
Mechanized felling using feller-bunchers and har-
vesters is common on gentle ground slopes (<35%), 
whereas manual felling with chainsaws is typically used 
for felling on steep slopes (>35%). Typical machines 
used for extraction are skidders (WT and TL) and for-
warders (CTL) on gentle slopes and yarders (typically 
WT or TL) on steep slopes. Processing typically takes 
place at the stump or landing using a manual chainsaw, 
harvester, or processor. In some areas, delimbers are 
also used in processing. The final operation in all these 
systems is to load logs from the landing or roadside 
onto a truck, typically using a grapple on an inde-
pendent loader or a self-loading truck. Because various 
machines and configurations have different capabil-
ities, productivities, fixed costs, and variable operating 
costs, the use of different systems and methods for 
felling, processing, and extracting trees directly af-
fects the overall cost of thinning operations (Han et al. 
2004; Vitorelo et al. 2011; Han and Han 2020).
Commercial thinning generates revenue from mer-
chantable products at least equal to the value of the 
direct costs of treatment (Helms 1998). Often, the 
main financial challenge of thinning treatments is 
their high operating cost measured against the low 
value of the trees being removed, which can result 
in noncommercial thinnings with high net treatment 
cost (Bolding and Lanford 2001; Hjerpe et al. 2009; 
Nicholls et al. 2018). Trees slated for removal are typ-
ically small in diameter, resulting in low harvesting 
productivity (Han et al. 2004; Vitorelo et al. 2011; 
Han and Han 2020). Sometimes they have poor form 
and lower quality due to insects, disease, and other 
factors. Another reason for high net costs is the lack 
of markets for the small-diameter wood and biomass 
materials produced from thinning treatments. Even if 
removals generally meet commercial specifications, a 
lack of nearby markets can make utilization impos-
sible. The value of small-diameter logs and biomass 
is often not high enough to offset operating costs, 
including harvesting and transportation (Lynch 2001; 
Nicholls et al. 2018). As a result, the unfavorable eco-
nomic feasibility of thinning operations is one of the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

3
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
key barriers to large-scale forest restoration and fuel 
treatment efforts (Larson and Mirth 2004; Huffman 
et al. 2020). The lack of logging and trucking contrac-
tors adds another layer of challenges because available 
contractors from distant locations need to move their 
equipment long distances to job sites and work far 
from home.
Because of these challenges, the financial feasibility 
of thinning is closely tied to marginal operating costs. 
This study focused on near-term financial costs incurred 
during forest operations associated with silvicultural 
prescription implementation and merchantable round-
wood removal, including sawlogs, pulpwood, and 
other roundwood. Operational costs of forest thinning 
treatments, which can be measured and expressed on 
an area, mass, or volume basis (e.g., dollars per hectare, 
dollars per tonne, and dollars per cubic meter), are de-
termined by many different factors, including silvicul-
tural prescriptions, stand conditions, and operational 
variables (Puttock 1995; Pan et al. 2008; Rummer 
2008; Holzleitner et al. 2011). Silvicultural prescrip-
tions (e.g., single-tree selection, group selection, and 
variable retention) identify which trees will be retained 
or removed and what products will be produced if 
harvesting is required. Stand conditions influence 
the thinning intensity and tree selection criteria and 
often determine the amount of tree volume removed. 
Numerous operational variables, such as ground slope 
and extraction distance, affect machine productivity 
and logging costs. Furthermore, logging machine 
type, size, and technological advances directly affect 
machine performance (Nordfjell et al. 2010; Conrad 
et al. 2018; MacDonaugh et al. 2019). High variability 
in stump-to-truck thinning costs makes it difficult to 
develop accurate cost estimates and implementation 
plans for thinning treatments under tight budget con-
straints. More broadly, there is a need for statistical 
models that span different conditions, systems, and 
Figure 1.  Three forest harvesting methods that are commonly used in forest thinning operations. Biomass: wood chips, 
wood slash, and residues from the harvesting process.
Roundwood: sawlogs and small-diameter logs produced from thinning operations. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

4
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
configurations relevant to modern fuel treatment im-
plementation for forestland managers.
Although logging cost studies exist, there are no 
systematic reviews or syntheses that focus on thinning 
treatment costs across the western US. The lack of 
systematic assessment of thinning costs makes it dif-
ficult to understand how different key variables affect 
cost variability and prevent foresters from accurately 
estimating the costs of planned activities at the project 
scale. By analyzing previous studies of forest thinning 
costs, we present a framework to assess how different 
variables affect cost, thus enabling land managers and 
planners to make better-informed decisions on thin-
ning treatment methods or harvesting systems and to 
better predict and reduce their costs.
Three forest-thinning cost prediction models have 
been developed since 2000: ST Harvest (Hartsough 
et al. 2001), HCR Estimator 2.0 (Becker et al. 2008), 
and ThinTool (Han et al. 2017). However, these three 
models have common limitations. For example, their 
use is restricted to the specific areas and species where 
they were developed. Also, it is necessary to update the 
factors applied to the models over time because using 
outdated information may cause errors in estimating 
the current cost. To address these limitations, it is 
necessary to develop a model that can be applied 
throughout western US forests based on current stand 
conditions and operational information and adjust to 
current currency value using inflation for appropriate 
estimates.
The goal of this study was to systematically assess 
operational stump-to-truck costs of forest thinning 
across the western US. We reviewed and synthesized 
case studies to address the four study objectives: (1) 
summarize the costs of forest thinning treatment 
by weight ( dollars per tonne), volume (dollars per 
cubic meter), and area (dollars per hectare) across 
the western US; (2) identify key variables that predict 
forest-thinning treatment costs; (3) compare the cost 
and productivity of the machines used for forest thin-
ning; and (4) develop a spreadsheet-based model to es-
timate forest-thinning treatment costs that can be used 
to help guide decision making.
Study Methods
Literature Search and Selection
The literature search and data collection process in-
volved setting up literature search keywords and se-
lection criteria (Pullin and Stewart 2006), evaluating 
published articles for their fit within the context of 
this study, collecting data from selected articles, and 
finally, summarizing and analyzing the data (Figure 2). 
Research papers published from 1980 to 2020 were 
searched, and our initial search on thinning prod-
uctivity and cost studies suggested there was lack of 
research articles investigating the productivity and 
cost of thinning operations that took place on public 
forestlands. We specifically looked for research studies 
examining forest restoration or fuel reduction thinning 
treatments.
Forest machines commonly used in today’s thinning 
operations in this region, such as harvesters and for-
warders, were first introduced in the US in the 1980s 
(Kellogg and Bettinger 1994). In aggregating data on 
machines of different vintages, the basic technologies 
Figure 2.  Systematic literature search process in this study.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

5
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
used in harvesting remained relatively consistent 
during the study period. For example, data quantifying 
forwarder productivity in 1994 was combined with 
data from more recent forwarder studies. Recently, 
tethered and winch-assisted machines for steep slope 
operations are becoming more common in the study 
region, but are still rare compared to traditional equip-
ment, especially on thinning operations, and are not 
yet well represented in the operations literature on 
thinning (Petitmermet et al. 2019). Even so, there were 
improvements in technology and productivity over the 
study period. The relationships between technological 
advances in machines, their productivity, and the cost 
of operations are discussed in more detail in the Results 
and Discussion section.
Five databases were used for the literature search, 
including Web of Science, BIOSIS, CAB Abstract, 
GreenFile, and Agricultural & Environmental Science 
Database, which include almost all relevant English 
language forestry publications. The search was limited 
to three main categories of terms describing forest thin-
ning, cost, and region to find research articles suitable 
for this study. Literature search keywords were selected 
for each term and applied to each database. To refer to 
forest thinning, “forest thinning,” “thinning treatment,” 
“thinning treatments,” “fuel reduction,” “fuels reduc-
tion,” “reducing fuels,” “forest operation,” and “forest 
operations” were used as keywords. For the term cost, 
“cost,” “costs,” “feasibility,” “merchantable,” “prod-
uctivity,” “economics,” and “economic” were used. The 
study region was limited to the continental western 
US using the following keywords: “western states of 
USA,” “pacific states of USA,” “southwestern states 
of USA,” “north central states of USA,” “western US,” 
“southwestern US,” “northwestern US,” “California,” 
“Arizona,” “Montana,” “Washington,” “Oregon,” 
“New Mexico,” “Nevada,” “Utah,” “Colorado,” 
“Wyoming,” “Idaho,” “Kansas,” “Nebraska,” “South 
Dakota,” “North Dakota,” and “rocky mountains.” 
Though western in geography, Alaska and Hawaii 
were not included in this study.
To select research articles meeting the study criteria 
(Table 1), two screening steps were applied to assess 
suitability for this study. The first screening was to se-
lect papers by reading the title and abstract of each 
paper. In this step, the relevance to three categories 
(forest thinning, cost, and region) was evaluated. Once 
the papers passed the first screening process, the full 
texts of the papers were reviewed to evaluate the study 
subject (e.g., thinning) and data presented (e.g., site de-
scription and cost). Additional papers were manually 
selected and added to the final list of papers that were 
used for this study through citation checking and ref-
erence tracking. Finally, data were extracted from the 
selected papers and organized for data analysis. The 
literature search focused on papers published in peer-
reviewed journals, but conference proceeding papers 
that were not peer-reviewed were also used for this 
study. Requirements for selection were that the studies 
observed and empirically evaluated forest-thinning op-
erations and included associated data such as machine 
productivity, thinning cost, machine cycle time regres-
sion models, and site information. Studies modeling 
exercises without primary field data collection were 
not selected.
From the literature search process, 20 articles were 
selected (Table 2), with 47 independent thinning case 
studies reported. Of the 20 articles, 12 were identified in 
the database search, and eight were identified through 
citation checking and reference tracking. The data col-
lected from the final set of selected studies included 
forest stand conditions, operational variables, machine 
productivity, and thinning costs. Stand condition data 
includes overstory species, stand density, and average 
diameter at breast height (DBH). The operational vari-
ables included harvesting system, harvesting method, 
thinning intensity, ground slope, and travel distance of 
machines. To evaluate thinning productivity of each 
machine, the harvest volume and weight of wood pro-
duced were summarized based on productive machine 
hour (PMH). Also, the hourly costs of each harvesting 
machine and the operational stump-to-truck costs 
(felling, extraction, processing, and loading) were ini-
tially summarized for further analysis. The cost of 
on-road transportation was excluded from the data 
collection in this study because it largely depends on 
the distance to the mill. Distance ranges vary greatly 
by site and region. Therefore, the cost calculations in-
cluded in this study represent stump-to-truck costs.
Table 1.  Criteria used to select references.
Category 
Research paper selection criteria 
Harvesting 
method
Mechanical thinning operations 
(commercial, fuel reduction, restoration)
Study 
period
Papers published from 1980 to 2020
Region/
species
Conifer forests in the western United 
States
Data 
collection
Harvesting and stand variables, machine 
productivity, or thinning costs
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

6
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
Standardizing Data and Performing Data 
Analysis
The data units reported in the selected studies were 
diverse, so they had to be standardized before being 
combined for analysis and modeling. The thinning 
productivity of each machine was calculated and sum-
marized in metric green tonnes per PMH. PMH re-
fers to machine’s working hours without delay time. 
Scheduled machine hour (SMH) refers to machine’s 
working hours including any form of delay time such 
as operational delays (e.g., system imbalance), mechan-
ical delays (e.g., times used for machine repair and gas 
filling), and personal delays (e.g., personal break time). 
Machine utilization rate, a ratio between PMH and 
SMH, can fluctuate greatly, depending on harvesting 
machines used, harvesting variables, operational lo-
gistics, and other factors. To avoid productivity vari-
ability caused by delays in this study, PMH was used 
in productivity calculations, and we assumed foresters 
selected the most appropriate and efficient harvesting 
system available in each case study. Thinning prod-
uctivity (tonnes per PMH) was calculated with an as-
sumption of 50% moisture content (wet basis). In cases 
where the study reported moisture content, reported 
data were recalculated by applying a 50% moisture 
content. When only harvest volume was reported 
without wood weight, thinning productivity in terms 
of weight was calculated using the specific gravity of 
the species to standardize productivity to uniform 
units (Kretschmann 2010). The volume unit of MBF 
(1,000 board feet) was converted to CCF (100 cubic 
feet) based on the average DBH to convert units on 
a cubic-meter basis (Oester and Bowers 2003). When 
calculating mean values, points considered outliers 
were excluded if they were greater than 1.5 times the 
value of the difference between the third and the first 
quartile (Wan et al. 2014). Relatively few points were 
excluded on this basis, with the justification that un-
usual conditions in a handful of particular cases drove 
extreme values that were not representative of the cen-
tral tendency of thinning cost and productivity under 
most conditions. In studies using SMH as the basic 
unit without reporting utilization rate, the utilization 
rate of each machine that was reported by Brinker et 
al. (2002) was used as they are based on an accumula-
tion of long-term data on machine utilization.
Reported variables affecting thinning productivity 
and cost varied by study. Because different machines 
have different operational activities, the regres-
sion equations were classified according to machine 
Table 2.  A summary of thinning productivity and cost papers published over the last 40 years (1980–2020) 
that were used for this study.
No 
Author (year)  
Species 
Harvesting method 
Forest ownership 
Thinning objectives 
1
Han and Han (2020)
MC
WT/CTL
Plc
FR
2
Townsend et al. (2019)
PP
WT/CTL
Plc
R
3
Petitmermet et al. (2019)
MC
CTL
Plc
FR
4
Vitorelo et al. (2011)
MC
WT
Plc
FR
5
Bolding et al. (2009)
MC
WT
Plc
FR
6
Pan et al. (2008)
PP
WT
Plc
FR
7
Halbrook and Han, (2005)
MC
WT
Plc
FR
8
Largo and Han (2004)
MC
WT
Prv
FR
9
Spinelli and Hartsough (2001)
MC
WT
Prv
Unreported
10
Drews et al. (2001)
MC
CTL
Plc
FR
11
Brown and Kellogg (1996)
MC
CTL
Plc
FR
12
Kellogg et al. (1996)
MC
TL
Prv
C
13
Hartsough and McNeel (1994)
MC/PP
WT/CTL
Plc
FR
14
McNeel and Rutherford (1994)
MC
CTL
Prv
C
15
Kellogg and Bettinger (1994)
MC
CTL
Unreported
C
16
Hochrein and Kellogg (1988)
MC
Unreported
Plc
Unreported
17
Tesch and Lysne (1986)
MC
WT
Unreported
C
18
Kellogg et al. (1986)
MC
TL
Plc
R
19
Kellogg and Olsen (1984)
MC
TL
Plc
R
20
Host and Lowery (1983)
PP
WT/TL
Prv
C
MC, mixed conifer species growing in the western U.S. including ponderosa pine; PP, ponderosa pine only; Plc, public land; 
Prv: private land; FR, fuel reduction; R, restoration; C, commercial thinning; WT, whole-tree; CTL, cut-to-length.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

7
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
types, and harvesting variables corresponding to each 
machine were organized. The values of the variables 
used in each study were equally weighted, and the fre-
quency of each variable was counted to identify key 
variables. In this article, cycle time describes the time 
required to complete a harvesting activity that is re-
peated to complete each phase of thinning operations. 
Key variables collected along with each cycle time are 
used to explain the amount of time required to com-
plete each cycle. Because the variables were reported 
independently under the machine type, independent 
models were developed for each machine type and 
then combined to summarize thinning costs for each 
harvesting method.
For comparative analysis, the reported thinning costs 
were adjusted to 2021 US dollars using the Producer 
Price Index (PPI). Although commonly used for in-
flation adjustment, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
covers many industries and does not clearly explain 
the variability in the cost (machine costs, wages, etc.) 
of logging operations as much as PPI (Rummer 2008). 
Although CPI reflects general cost trends, logging is in-
cluded as a producer industry and monitored for pro-
ducing prices over time in the PPI program. This study 
used PPI values in the logging industry to calculate the 
average conversion factor for five-year increments to 
avoid a discrepancy between thinning operation year 
and publication year in case the operation year is 
not reported (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2021). 
Adjusting to 2021 US dollars using PPI accounts for 
inflation allows the costs reported in studies from pre-
vious years to be compared and aggregated but does 
not account for cost changes due to other factors, such 
as technological innovation.
Production costs of machines used for forest thin-
ning were collected from each study, and data were 
organized by stand conditions and operational vari-
ables. Data from studies that reported costs for all four 
stages of thinning (felling, extraction, processing, and 
loading) were collected separately and used to show 
the range of forest thinning costs over the study period. 
The production cost of each machine was summarized 
in dollars per tonne and dollars per cubic meter, and if 
possible, dollars per hectare was also calculated.
New Forest Thinning Cost Estimation 
Model: ThinCost_1.0
Using the data collected in the systematic literature re-
view, a new model (referred to as ThinCost_1.0) was 
created for application throughout the western US The 
model estimates the general productivity and cost of 
machines in forest-thinning operations and provides 
a framework and benchmarks to calculate these met-
rics based on stand conditions. ThinCost_1.0 estimates 
production costs for roundwood removal in a thinning 
operation and does not include biomass harvesting 
(i.e., chipping or grinding and loading biomass). The 
ThinCost_1.0 model consists of five spreadsheets of 
input, machine productivity, machine rates, thinning 
cost, and tree volume. For cost estimation, this model 
calculates production rate (tonnes per cycle), cycle 
time, and machine rate (dollars per PMH) based on 
user input, with default values drawn from analysis 
included in this review. The input step allows a user 
to enter thinning prescription data. Allometric equa-
tions were used for five species (Pinus ponderosa, 
Pseudotsuga menziesii, Calocedrus decurrens, Abies 
concolor, and Pinus lambertiana). Prescription data on 
tree removal is used for the tree volume calculation, 
and the average DBH of trees is used to estimate the 
average log volume per tree, which is for estimating 
production rates per cycle of each machine. Thinning 
productivity of each machine is calculated based on 
the calculated log weights per cycle. The cycle time 
was calculated with 42 independent regression equa-
tions collected from the literature review and averaged. 
With the produced weight per cycle (tonnes per cycle) 
and cycle time (minutes), the machine productivity 
(tonnes per PMH) was calculated. The machine rate in 
2021 US dollars (dollars per PMH) is calculated using 
the standard machine rate calculation method with 
the machine type data collected from selected studies 
(Brinker et al. 2002). The current purchasing price of 
each harvesting machine was obtained from a dealer. 
The production cost of each phase was calculated 
with the machine productivity (tonnes per PMH) and 
machine rate (dollars per PMH) for the stump-to-truck 
cost calculation. Finally, the model estimates final thin-
ning costs for three harvesting methods (WT, TL, and 
CTL).
Based on this model, machine productivity and 
production cost were simulated under different 
harvesting conditions. Commonly used machines were 
selected according to the harvesting method (Figure 
1), and the results were compared by changing the 
key variables. The average DBH was changed to ana-
lyze the felling machines, and the extraction machines 
were analyzed by changing the moving distance. For 
the simulation, the commonly used input value was 
set to a slope of 15°, species of Ponderosa pine, and 
thinning intensity of 1,236 trees/ha to be removed. 
When comparing extraction machines, the average 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

8
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
DBH was set to 15 cm, with a lateral distance of 30 
m for cable yarders.
Results and Discussion
Key Harvesting Variables Reported in 
Regression Models Estimating Thinning 
Productivity
In operations research, independent variables are used 
in regression models to predict machine cycle time 
and productivity based on material characteristics 
(e.g., diameter, mass, piece count), site conditions (e.g., 
slope, ground operability), machine movement (e.g., 
distance, swing arc) and other measurable variables 
(e.g., operator experience). Not all regression models 
used the same variables, but we sought to identify and 
use the most important key variables across these di-
verse case studies. For felling machines (Table 3), there 
were five chainsaw cycle time regression models, eight 
feller-buncher models, and six harvester models rep-
resented in the literature we reviewed. The moving 
distance and DBH were identified as key variables, 
but DBH was not a key variable for the feller-buncher 
because feller-bunchers were often used to cut small-
diameter trees (4–35  cm). Also, the number of trees 
felled increased with decreasing tree diameter. In the 
case studies, the feller-buncher felled five trees per cycle 
on average, whereas the harvester and chainsaw cut 
one tree per cycle. Because harvesters conduct add-
itional processing activity at the stump, the number of 
cuts per log was the key variable in harvester models. 
Many variables that were significant predictors of thin-
ning productivity in specific models—such as species, 
slope, height, and worker experience—were dropped 
from the aggregate model because they were used only 
in one or a small number of studies.
For the cycle time regression models for extraction 
machines, there were nine skidder models, and five and 
six models for forwarder and cable yarder, respect-
ively (Table 4). Each machine moves logs in different 
ways, but the activity of moving wood to a landing 
is the same. Since the travel time is the longest part 
of a cycle compared to other machines (Drews et al. 
2001; Spinelli and Hartsough 2001; Pan et al. 2008; 
Han and Han 2020), the travel distance is the most im-
portant variable explaining extraction productivity, so 
the travel distance was used as a predictor in every ex-
traction model. The number of trees or logs per cycle is 
also an important variable, but it was selected as a key 
variable only for the skidder. In the reviewed studies, 
the forwarder and cable yarder harvested relatively 
large trees in log form compared to skidders, so the 
count measurement is often replaced by the volume or 
weight of the timber in each cycle for these machines.
For the processor and loader, seven and eight models 
were analyzed, respectively. The number of cuts per tree 
and the number of trees were the key variables (Table 
5), with all seven processor models using the number 
of cuts per tree and six of the eight loader models using 
the number of trees. The DBH was selected as an add-
itional key variable for the processor.
The key variables that affect thinning productivity 
and cost for each machine varied greatly from study to 
study. Cycle time estimation models ranged from simple 
to multiple regression models including up to six vari-
ables. In previous studies, the reported variables were 
Table 3.  Variables used in the delay-free cycle time regression models for felling machine productivity. Bold 
indicates variables determined to be key variables.
Chainsaw 
n = 5 
Feller buncher 
n = 8 
Harvester 
n = 6 
DBH
4
Travel distance
7
DBH
5
Distance to tree
3
The number of trees per cycle
7
Travel distance
5
Slope
2
DBH
3
The number of cuts/logs per cycle
4
Number of bucking
2
Slope
1
The number of trees per cycle
1
Wedge
2
Forest type
1
Weight
1
Tree volume
2
Non-Merchantable pieces
1
Height
1
Species
1
Merchantable Pieces
1
Slope
1
Cutter experience
1
Plots
1
Forest type
1
Site
1
Draws
1
Wide treatment
1
Strip treatment
1
n is the number of papers that included each variable in cycle time regression models. Travel distance includes distance vari-
ables such as the move distance to tree or intermediate travel distance. The number of logs per cycle includes the number of 
cuts per cycle.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

9
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
selected based on statistical tests and estimates of pre-
diction error (e.g., F-test, adjusted R-squared value, or 
Akaike Information Criterion) or to meet different re-
search objectives to facilitate cost estimation from gen-
eralizable variables that can be easily measured in the 
field. For example, Petitmermet et al. (2019) compared 
regression models, using different variables, with stat-
istical tests and explained that the results could be dif-
ferent depending on the data they collected and used. 
Therefore, many variables not identified as key vari-
ables in this study significantly affect thinning prod-
uctivity in the original models used in the studies. Their 
exclusion here should not be interpreted as a judgment 
on their statistical significance. Additionally, the vari-
ables that affect harvested wood volume or weight per 
cycle were not applied. DBH, height, and species might 
affect the amount of wood handled per cycle, but it is 
difficult to estimate the volume or weight based on the 
data as they were provided in these studies. These vari-
ables should be explored in future research.
Productivity and Cost for Machines Used in 
Thinning Operations
Because feller-bunchers can cut several trees in one 
cycle in a relatively short time, the productivity was 
significantly higher (33.31 tonnes/PMH), on average, 
than the other felling machines. Also, the feller-buncher 
has $4.58/tonne of felling cost, which resulted in the 
most efficient machine among the felling machines 
(Table 6). Conversely, the chainsaw was less pro-
ductive, but the production cost ($/tonne) was lower 
than the harvester. The chainsaw has a longer cycle 
time than other machines, so productivity was rela-
tively low (10.65 tonnes/PMH on average) at $6.49/
tonne. The most expensive felling machine was the 
harvester at $14.21/ tonne with 14.57 tonnes/PMH. 
When calculating the machine cost according to the 
volume (dollars per cubic meter), the harvester showed 
the highest cost among the felling machines at $10.92/
m3, followed by the chainsaw and the feller-buncher 
at $5.47/m3 and $3.30/m3, respectively (Table 7). In 
WT systems, feller-bunchers and chainsaws do not 
Table 4.  Variables used in the delay-free cycle time regression models for extraction machine productivity. 
Bold indicates variables determined to be key variables.
Skidder 
n = 9 
Forwarder 
n = 5 
Cable Yarder 
n = 6 
Travel distance
9
Travel distance
5
Lateral distance
6
# of trees per cycle
6
Slope
3
Yarding distance
6
Slope
3
Product type
3
The number of logs per cycle
2
# of bunches per cycle
2
Log weight/volume
3
Volume per cycle
2
Machine type
2
# of logs per cycle
2
preset
2
type of material
1
The number of choker setter
1
Weight
1
Slope
1
Yarding direction
1
The number of chokers
1
Crew size
1
Damage
1
Log angle
1
Grapple
1
n is the number of papers that used the variable when developing regression models. Log weight includes log volume. Travel 
distance includes distance variables such as the move to bunch or intermediate travel distance.
Table 5.  Variables used in the delay-free cycle time 
regression models to estimate productivity for 
processors and loaders. Bold indicates variables 
determined to be key variables.
Processor 
n = 7 
Loader 
n = 8 
The number of 
cuts per tree
7
The number of 
logs per cycle
6
DBH
4
Log volume
2
Material
2
Branding
1
Forest type
2
The number of 
swings per truck
1
species
1
Log sort
1
Pieces per 
grapple
1
DBH
1
Weight
1
# of bunches per 
cycle
1
Travel distance
1
n is the number of papers that used the variable. The number 
of cuts per tree includes the number of logs per tree.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

10
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
process the trees they fell, so a fair cost comparison 
to harvesters would include processing in addition to 
felling. Also, the average DBH felled by each machine 
was different. The feller-buncher was used to cut rela-
tively smaller trees (average [avg.] 16 cm in DBH), and 
the DBH of the removed trees tended to be larger for 
harvesters (avg. ) and chainsaws (avg. 32 cm). These 
result suggests that feller-bunchers would be the ideal 
machine for fuel reduction or forest restoration thin-
ning on appropriate slopes because the small-diameter 
tree is the main harvest target, and the productivity 
of the machine tends to increase as the DBH increases 
(Kellogg and Bettinger 1994; Nakagawa et al. 2007). 
Also, due to lower production costs, feller-bunchers 
may be preferred over harvesters for financial reasons. 
However, a harvester would be preferred if a thinning 
prescription requires leaving limbs and branches on 
site for reasons such as nutrient recycling or lack of 
local markets for biomass. Therefore, the criteria for 
machine selection in thinning operations is based not 
only on financial outcomes but also on harvesting 
objectives.
Among the extraction machines, the cable yarder 
showed the lowest productivity at 14.52 tonnes/PMH 
with the highest extraction cost at $30.41/tonne. 
A cable yarding system requires workers (typically 
3–5) on the ground, so the hourly cost of operation 
is higher than the other extraction machines. The low 
productivity of cable yarders can be explained by the 
timber volume produced in one cycle, which is rela-
tively smaller than the other extraction machines, and 
the extra time required to change skyline corridors. 
However, cable systems can be applied to forests on 
steep slopes (>35%), so they are often used in areas 
where skidders or forwarders may be impractical to use 
or prohibited by policy or best management practices. 
Recent applications of tethered and winch-assisted ma-
chines on steep slopes are changing this calculation for 
operators. For example, Petitmermet et al. (2019) com-
pared tethered and untethered machine productivity, 
but adequate data were unavailable to include tethered 
Table 6.  Productivity and cost of each machine for forest thinning operations, converted into 2021 costs 
(dollars per tonne).
Machine 
Production rate (tonnes/PMH)
Thinning cost ($/tonne)
Mean 
n 
Median 
n 
Mean 
n 
Median 
n 
Chainsaw
10.65
14
10.04
14
6.49
13
6.76
14
Feller-Buncher
33.31
16
28.98
16
4.58
15
4.52
16
Harvester
14.57
16
11.57
16
14.21
15
13.85
13
Skidder
21.29
26
19.38
27
6.56
24
5.90
25
Cable Yarder
14.52
22
16.09
22
30.41
22
28.99
22
Forwarder
14.80
9
13.68
10
10.54
8
9.53
9
Processor (WT)
24.18
10
25.74
10
6.80
10
6.98
10
Processor (TL)
22.40
2
22.40
2
6.84
2
6.84
2
Loader (CTL)
25.25
8
21.41
8
5.33
8
5.91
8
Loader (TL)
41.75
2
41.75
2
3.77
2
3.77
2
Loader (WT)
44.04
16
43.89
16
3.40
14
3.25
15
Thinning productivity and cost on whole-tree (WT) harvesting equipment (i.e., chainsaw, feller-buncher, and skidder) includes 
handling both sawlog trees and biomass trees, while other machines handle sawlog trees or roundwood only. Productivity and 
costs in this table were a summary of the data reported in the past studies. CTL, cut-to-length; PMH, production machine 
hour; TL, tree-length. 
Table 7.  Thinning costs of machines (dollars per 
cubic meter) in the stump-to-truck process (i.e., 
felling, extraction, processing, and loading) for 
forest thinning operations converted into standard 
units.
Machine 
Thinning cost ($/m3)
Mean 
n 
Median 
n 
Chainsaw
 5.47
13
4.69
13
Feller-buncher
 3.30
12
3.44
13
Harvester
10.92
14
10.27
16
Skidder
 4.67
19
4.43
19
Cable yarder
23.94
15
17.17
15
Forwarder
8.07
8
7.69
8
Processor (WT)
5.16
6
5.24
6
Loader (CTL)
3.49
7
3.79
7
Loader (WT)
 2.43
10
2.17
11
CTL, cut-to-length; WT, whole-tree.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

11
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
machine systems in this study. Skidders and forwarders 
were highly productive and showed lower costs than 
cable yarders. The skidder showed the highest effi-
ciency among the extraction machines at 21.29 tonnes/
PMH and the lowest cost at $6.56/tonne. Among the 
extraction machines, the cable yarder showed approxi-
mately five times higher extraction cost ($23.94/m3) 
than the skidder ($4.67/m3) and three times higher 
than the forwarder ($8.07/m3). Although cable yarders 
are similar to the forwarder in average productivity, 
their production costs are approximately three times as 
much. The reason is that the machine rate (dollars per 
hour) of cable yarders is much higher than forwarders 
due to machine price and labor costs associated with a 
higher number of workers.
Processors and loaders were sorted by harvesting 
methods. The processor showed high productivity 
at 24.18 and 22.40 tonnes/PMH, on average, in WT 
and TL harvesting methods, respectively. The average 
cost was $6.80/tonne and $6.84/tonne, respectively. 
However, considering there are only two cases of 
TL harvesting, it is not appropriate to compare this 
result on a statistical basis. Similar to the processor, 
the productivity and costs of the loader showed high 
productivity and low cost. The loader had the lowest 
productivity, with an average of 25.25 tonnes/PMH in 
CTL, 41.75 tonnes/PMH, and 44.04 tonnes/PMH in 
TL and WT, respectively, which is consistent with past 
studies (Brown and Kellogg 1996; Hartsough 2003; 
Townsend et al. 2019).
Stump-to-Truck Thinning Costs
Based on the production cost of each machine in Table 
6, the stump-to-truck cost of the most commonly 
used harvesting systems was calculated (Table 8). 
The cheapest scenario for forest thinning is the feller-
buncher-skidder-processor-loader, with an average cost 
of $21.34/tonne and a median value of $20.65/tonne. 
The harvesting system with the highest cost was the 
chainsaw-yarder-processor-loader ($47.10/tonne). The 
cost of the harvesting system involving a cable yarder 
exceeded $40 per tonne. The stump-to-truck cost of 
CTL was higher than WT except for the cable yarding 
system because the operating cost of the harvester was 
more expensive than the sum of the feller-buncher 
and processor, and the forwarder also had a higher 
production cost ($10.54/tonne) than the skidder 
($6.54/tonne). This result shows a simple cost differ-
ence in harvesting systems, and it does not propose 
the machine selection for operators; these results are 
simply the sum of the costs of each machine, and the 
operator’s machine selection has already been applied 
in each result. Site conditions and treatment objectives 
may favor selection of a higher-cost system.
In the 20 cases reported, all phases (felling, extrac-
tion, processing, and loading) were considered and the 
cost ratio of each phase in stump-to-truck cost was 
compared. There were only two cases of TL (Townsend 
et al. 2019, Han and Han 2020), as compared to ten 
and eight cases for WT and CTL harvesting, respect-
ively (Figure 3). As a result, extraction cost occupied 
the highest ratio in WT and TL at 33% and 43%, re-
spectively. This result has been shown in other studies 
that present each phase of a stump-to-truck operation 
(Hartsough 2003; McIver et al. 2003; Han et al. 2004). 
For CTL harvesting, the extraction cost was 37% of 
the stump-to-truck cost, and combined felling and 
processing is the highest cost component at 47%. The 
reason for this high cost is that harvesters were used in 
CTL, and processing and felling was conducted at the 
Table 8.  Stump-to-truck costs depending on harvesting methods and systems based on information in 
Tables 6 and 7, excluding biomass handling activities (i.e., chipping, grinding, and loading).
Harvesting phase 
Harvesting method
Whole-tree
Tree-length 
Cut-to-length 
Felling
Extraction
Processing
Loading
Chainsaw
Skidder
Processor
Loader 
Chainsaw
Yarder
Processor
Loader 
Feller-Buncher
Skidder
Processor
Loader 
Chainsaw
Yarder
Loader
Harvester
Forwarder
Loader
$/tonne (mean)
23.25
47.10
21.34
40.30
30.08
$/tonne (median)
22.89
45.98
20.65
39.52
29.29
$/m³ (mean)
17.73
37.00
15.56
N/A
22.48
$/m³ (median)
16.53
29.27
15.28
N/A
21.75
$/tonne represents the sum of the thinning costs of each harvesting system.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

12
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
stump in one cycle. Comparing the combined ratio of 
felling and processing, all three methods had similar 
values. Loading accounted for the lowest percentage of 
the total cost for all three harvesting methods.
Comparing the stump-to-truck costs for the 20 
case studies, the WT harvesting method had lower 
costs than CTL or TL, ranging from $16.44 to $40.08 
per tonne (Figure 4). TL harvesting cases ranged from 
$33.42 to $41.87 per tonne, and CTL thinning cases 
ranged from $22.87 to $41.78 per tonne. The stump-
to-truck cost of CTL was slightly higher than that of 
WT, which was highlighted in some studies (Hartsough 
2003; Townsend et al. 2019). Those studies explain 
that the feller-bunchers are mainly used in WT thin-
ning operations, whereas the harvester is commonly 
used in CTL operations. Also, high-cost cable yarding 
was sometimes used when large trees were removed 
in CTL operations. TL thinning costs were often used 
for cable yarding as a strategy to minimize costs by 
leaving limbs and tops on site (Townsend et al. 2019; 
Han and Han 2020). Distributing and leaving the 
limbs and tops throughout the treatment unit is less 
costly. However, this is not always possible because 
contracts sometimes specify removing limbs and tops 
from the unit to reduce wildfire risk. Often, this re-
sidual biomass is collected and burned for disposal to 
meet this objective.
When comparing thinning cost per area, WT shows 
a slightly lower pattern in harvest cost (Figure 5). The 
cost of WT was in the range of $785/ha to $2,890/ha 
(Figure 5). In the cases of CTL, the cost ranged from 
$1,197/ha to $4,291/ha. Considering the harvested 
volume, WT methods harvested a relatively large 
volume compared to CTL methods, but the stump-to-
truck cost was lower in the WT method on average. 
This result suggests machines in the WT method per-
formed more efficiently or productively in the stump-
to-truck harvesting process.
Development of a Spreadsheet-Based 
Thinning Cost Model
The ThinCost_1.0 model focused on estimating stump-
to-truck thinning costs in the western US and was de-
signed to estimate thinning productivities of logging 
machines based on regression equations reported in 
past studies. The STHarvest (Hartsough et al. 2001) 
model uses several productivity equations developed 
under clear-cut operations and in different regions of 
the US. Harvest Cost-Revenue (HCR) thinning cost 
model was developed in the southwest US based on a 
limited number of case studies and may not be applic-
able in other places where forest conditions and oper-
ations differ from the Southwest (Becker et al. 2008). 
Because the model is based on empirical studies of di-
verse cases in many locations across the western US, 
ThinCost_1.0 is applicable across the entire region in 
various stand conditions.
In the ThinCost simulations for felling machines 
(Figure 6), the chainsaw in the TL harvesting system 
had lower productivity than the harvester under 20 cm 
DBH conditions, and this trend is reversed after 20 cm 
DBH. The feller-buncher has much higher product-
ivity than the other two machines. The cost (dollars 
per tonne) difference between chainsaw and feller-
buncher was <1$/tonne except in 15 cm DBH condi-
tions, whereas the chainsaw is more expensive than the 
feller-buncher for trees less than 30 cm DBH. However, 
Figure 3.  The ratio of each phase (felling, extraction, 
processing and loading) of thinning operation to total 
stump-to-truck harvesting cost.CTL (n=8), TL (n=2), WT 
(n=10), Felling in CTL includes felling and processing.
Processing activity in the CTL harvesting system is included 
in the felling activities.
Figure 4.  Average costs ($/ton; roundwood only) of 
thinning operations that were reported in the selected 
studies.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

13
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
the feller-buncher is more expensive than the chainsaw 
in >30 cm DBH conditions.
In extraction machines, the skidder showed high 
productivity at low extraction distances and the for-
warder was more productive at distances >240 m 
(Figure 7). The skidder is more cost-efficient than the 
forwarder in <270 m of extraction distance, and the 
opposite is true at >270 meters of extraction distance. 
The cable yarder was more expensive than the other 
two machines. The processor showed 40 tonnes/PMH 
of productivity at 15  cm DBH, and the higher the 
DBH, the higher the productivity (Figure 8). The pro-
duction costs, on the other hand, started at $5/tonne 
and went down as DBH went up. The productivity and 
production cost of the loader is most efficient in 25 cm 
DBH conditions.
This model allows for comparing machine prod-
uctivity and costs in different stand conditions, and 
the user can effectively perform a sensitivity analysis 
to evaluate thinning cost and financial feasibility for a 
wide range of operational scenarios. The model can be 
used to develop practical operational plans and min-
imize overall thinning costs. Because the model was 
developed using many thinning productivity equations 
developed in field-based empirical studies, it provides 
cost estimates of thinning treatments reflecting average 
operational work conditions and stand variables.
Limitations of the Study and Areas for 
Future Research
In this study, we were limited to a fairly narrow slice 
of forest operations research because of the subject 
and our requirements for study design, location, and 
data reporting. As a result, this study does not cover 
many existing machines that could potentially be used 
in thinning operations. For example, among feller-
bunchers, there are different sizes (large versus small 
horsepower), wheel types (rubber-tired versus tracked), 
Figure 5.  Average costs ($/ha) of thinning operations and harvested volume (tons/ha) from the reviewed papers. Harvested 
volumes include both roundwood and biomass in whole-tree and roundwood only in cut-to-length thinning operations.
Figure 6.  Productivity and cost of felling machine over different size of trees from ThinCost_1.0 model for harvesting round-
wood only.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

14
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
and felling mechanisms (disc saw versus shear) that are 
not differentiated here. Each type of machine could 
perform at a different production rate or hourly cost 
on thinning operations, so future studies may quantify 
and summarize thinning productivity and cost data for 
a wide range of machines at higher resolution.
As previously mentioned, although no major para-
digm shifts have occurred in this region regarding log-
ging systems, there were some important advances in 
technology over the study period (1980 to 2020) that 
are not explicitly evaluated or quantified. In general, 
technological advances in logging machines have in-
creased machine productivity over time (Nordfjell 
et al. 2010; Conrad et al. 2018; MacDonaugh et al. 
2019). For example, skidder payloads have increased 
significantly since the 1980s. More recently, technolo-
gies for self-leveling cabs and tethered systems have 
improved productivity for felling and forwarding on 
steep slopes. As power transmission, hydraulic pres-
sure, and boom lifting torque have improved, logging 
capacity and machine speed have increased (Nordfjell 
et al. 2010). As a result, the productivity of machines 
has increased in both CTL (Nordfjell et al. 2010) and 
WT (Conrad et al. 2018) harvesting operations.
However, there is some evidence that, despite in-
creases in productivity, the inflation-adjusted cost of 
harvesting has not decreased significantly since the 
early 1990s due to high prices of machines and the rela-
tive escalation of other operational costs. In Sweden, 
this appears to apply to both thinning and final felling 
in even-aged stands between 1985 and 2010 (Nordfjell 
et al. 2010). Along with technological advances in log-
ging machines, the hourly cost of machines, including 
machine purchase price, repair and maintenance, and 
fuel also increased, offsetting the improvement in 
harvesting productivity and keeping costs flat in many 
situations. Furthermore, for new technologies to drive 
down unit costs with higher productivity, they must 
be adopted. In the US, logging companies are typically 
small contracting businesses with capital investments 
Figure 7.  Productivity and production cost of three different extraction machines depending on average skidding distance 
from the ThinCost_1.0 for round-wood only.
Figure 8.  Productivity and production cost of processor (left) and loader (right) depending on DBH from the ThinCost_1.0 
for round-wood only.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

15
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
of less than a million dollars (Allen et al. 2008, 
Vaughan et al. 2021). In this context, the high cost of 
new machines using the latest technologies can be a 
barrier to innovation in timber harvesting (Conrad et 
al. 2018), and many contractors still use older models 
and machine styles in the western US.
As technology and productivity are related to this 
study, we believe that the aggregate data and associ-
ated models, which are adjusted for inflation to 2021 
USD using the PPI, can be used effectively to estimate 
productivity and costs on thinning operations with the 
understanding that they do not account explicitly for 
any technological advances in this sector, except as 
captured by the studies included in the review, which 
represent the best available science in empirical forest 
operations research on thinning. The information pro-
vided can be used as a planning tool to compare the 
relative performance of different methods and systems 
under different thinning conditions. As new technolo-
gies evolve, they should be studied and incorporated 
into this work. As this article goes to press, the US 
and much of the world has experienced a period of 
sustained high inflation and supply chain disruptions, 
including in the forest sector, that should be accounted 
for in future estimation of real thinning costs.
The ThinCost_1.0 model was developed from pub-
lished research to estimate the stump-to-truck thinning 
cost for roundwood produced using three harvesting 
methods (WT, TL, and CTL). Although it was devel-
oped using empirical data and regression models from 
field research, it has not undergone an independent 
field validation process to evaluate its outputs for ac-
curacy. However, moving forward, new studies that 
conduct data collection using operations research 
methods similar to the studies used to develop the 
tool can easily be used for validation and then be in-
tegrated into the database of models driving the out-
puts. The transparent and open-source nature of the 
spreadsheet-based approach facilitates user validation 
and modification.
The current model also needs to be expanded to in-
clude on-road transportation and thinning treatments 
that harvest biomass (e.g., limbs, cull, and treetops) 
using different machine options. The ThinCost model 
will be further developed to include options for users to 
tailor operational conditions and machine rates to re-
flect their work conditions and financial realities closely.
More broadly, this work supports more innovative 
data collection for operations research and engineering 
in forestry, especially thinning treatments for haz-
ardous fuel reduction. Traditional operations research 
using time study techniques provides high-quality, 
high-resolution data, but is highly time-consuming, 
labor-intensive, and expensive. As a result, it is quite 
limited in quantity and has been heavily focused on 
commercial timber production. As federal land man-
agement agencies increase the scale and pace of 
forest thinning on public land, they should consider 
integrating operational data collection. Direct support 
for real-time data collection and analysis using the next 
generation of sensors, software, and in-woods commu-
nications systems is imperative in this industry and can 
be included in contracting. Better data collection and 
operations research would bring immediate benefits to 
operations planning and management. This approach 
would also help improve cost models like this one and 
bring agencies into the big data and machine-learning 
era of precision forestry and Industry 4.0, ultimately 
improving cost estimation and the efficiency of plan-
ning and implementation, which would allow more 
treatment at a lower cost.
Conclusion
This study summarized the productivity, variability, 
and costs of forest thinning studies conducted in 
the western US. We found that forest thinning costs 
ranged from $16.44 to $41.87/tonne and $758/ha 
to $4,291/ha. The prethinning forest conditions (e.g., 
stand density), volume removed (tonnes per hectare), 
harvesting methods, and system used all directly affect 
the final cost of forest thinning operations.
The system configuration with the most efficient 
results for the WT harvesting method included the 
feller-buncher, skidder, processor, and loader. The 
feller-buncher was the most efficient machine in the 
felling phase, outperforming the chainsaw and har-
vester. Among the extraction machines, the cable 
yarder had three to five times higher production costs 
than the other machines and had the lowest product-
ivity but can operate on steep slopes. The skidder ap-
peared to be the most efficient machine for extraction. 
Processors and loaders were found to have high prod-
uctivity and low cost, especially in the CTL and WT 
harvesting methods.
To illustrate how to use the detailed information 
synthesized in this literature review, we developed a thin-
ning cost estimation model called ThinCost_1.0. It can 
automatically calculate the cycle time, productivity, and 
cost of each machine in a system based on user input, 
with default values and appropriate regression models 
pulled directly from the reviewed studies. The model 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

16
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
needs to be further developed for functionality and field 
tested to validate the accuracy of its outputs, but it is the 
most up-to-date model available and is already being 
used to guide harvest system selection. The goal is to 
reduce thinning costs by providing useful productivity 
and cost information and by facilitating efficient forest 
operations for land managers, fuels planners, woodland 
owners, contractors, and others conducting critical thin-
ning operations in the forests of the western US.
Supplementary Materials
Supplementary data are available at Journal of Forestry 
online.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Tayloe Dubay at Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, for re-
viewing the manuscript and offering editorial comments 
and suggestions, which were very helpful in improving the 
readability of the paper. Our sincere thanks also go to Ola 
Lindroos and Raffaele Spinelli for providing references 
describing technological advances and harvesting product-
ivity in logging machines. 
Funding
This study was funded by the Technology and Research 
Initiative Fund (TRIF) of Arizona. Additional support was 
provided by the USDA Forest Service. The findings and con-
clusions in this study are those of the author(s) and do not 
necessarily represent any official USDA or US Government 
determination or policy.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Literature Cited
Allen, T., H.-S. Han, and S.R. Shook. 2008. A structural 
assessment of the contract logging sector in the Inland 
Northwest. Forest Products Journal 58(5):27–33.
Becker, D.R., D. Larson, E.C. Lowell, and R.B. Rummer. 2008. 
User guide for HCR Estimator 2.0: software to calculate 
cost and revenue thresholds for harvesting small-diameter 
ponderosa pine (Vol. 748). USDA, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station.
Bolding, M.C., L.D. Kellogg, and C.T. Davis. 2009. 
Productivity and costs of an integrated mechanical forest 
fuel reduction operation in southwest Oregon. Forest 
Products Journal 59(3):35–46.
Bolding, M.C., and B.L. Lanford. 2001. Forest fuel reduc-
tion through energy wood production using a small 
chipper and CTL harvesting systems. Proceedings of the 
24th Annual Council on Forest Engineering Meeting, 
Snowshoe, WV, July 15–19. 65–70p.
Brinker, R.W., J. Kinard, B. Rummer, and B. Lanford. 2002. 
Machine rates for selected forest harvesting machines. 
Alabama Agricultural Experimental Station at Auburn 
University Circular 296:32.
Brose, P.H., D.C. Dey, R.J. Phillips, and T.A. Waldrop. 2013. 
A meta-analysis of the fire-oak hypothesis: does pre-
scribed burning promote oak reproduction in Eastern 
North America? Forestry Science 59(3):322–334.
Brown, C.G. and L.D. Kellogg. 1996. Harvesting economics 
and wood fiber utilization in a fuels reduction project: 
a case study in eastern Oregon. Forest Products Journal 
46(9):45–52.
Brusentsev, V., and W. Vroman. 2016. Wildfires in the United 
States: A primer. https://www.urban.org/sites/default/
files/publication/77201/2000593-Wildfires-in-the-United-
States-A-Primer.pdf. 22p.
Chalmers, S.R., and B.R. Hartsough. 2001. Thinning and 
prescribed fire as methods to reduce fuel loading—a 
cost analysis. In: Thinnings, a valuable forest manage-
ment tool proceedings of an international conference. 
(CD-ROM). Pointe-Claire, Canada: Forest Engineering 
Research Institute of Canada.
Conrad, J.L. IV, W.D. Greene, and P. Hiesl. 2018. A review of 
changes in US logging businesses 1980s–present. Journal 
of Forestry 116(3):291–303.
Dennison, P.E., S.C. Brewer, J.D. Arnold, and M.A. Moritz. 
2014. Large wildfire trends in the western United States, 
1984–2011. Geophysical Prospecting 6413:6419p.
Drews, E.S., B.R. Hartsough, J.A. Doyal, and L.D. Kellogg. 
2001. Harvester-forwarder and harvester-yarder sys-
tems for fuel reduction treatments. Journal of Forest 
Engineering 12(1):81–91.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012. 
Do thinning and/or burning treatments in western USA pon-
derosa or Jeffrey pine-dominated forests help restore natural 
fire behavior? Forest Ecology and Management 269:68–81.
Halbrook, J.M. and H.-S. Han. 2005. Costs and constraints 
of fuel reduction treatments in a recreational area. Soil, 
Water & Timber Management: Forest Engineering 
Solutions in Response to Forest Regulation. pp. 11–14.
Han, S. and H.-S. Han. 2020. Productivity and cost of whole-
tree and tree-length harvesting in fuel reduction thinning 
treatments using cable yarding systems. Forest Science 
and Technology 16(1):41–48.
Han, S., H.-S. Han, W.J. Elliot, and E.M. Bilek. 2017. 
Thintool: a spreadsheet model to evaluate fuel reduction 
thinning cost, net energy output, and nutrient impacts. 
Forest Science 63(1):118–127.
Han, H.-S., H.W. Lee, and L.R. Johnson. 2004. Economic 
feasibility of an integrated harvesting system for small-
diameter trees in southwest Idaho. Forest Products 
Journal 54(2):21–27.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

17
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
Hartsough, B.R. 2003. Economics of harvesting to maintain 
high structural diversity and resulting damage to residual 
trees. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 18(2):133–142.
Hartsough, B.R. and J.F. McNeel. 1994. Comparison of 
mechanized systems for thinning ponderosa pine and 
mixed conifer stands. 1994 international winter meeting 
sponsored by the American Society of Agricultural 
Engineers. ASAE Pap. 94-7513. St. Joseph, MI; American 
Society of Agricultural Engineers. 20 p.
Hartsough, B.R., X. Zhang, and R.D. Fight. 2001. Harvesting 
cost model for small trees in natural stands in the Interior 
Northwest. Forest Products Journal 51(4):54–61.
Helms, J.A. 1998. The Dictionary of Forestry. Bethesda: 
Society of American Foresters.
Hjerpe, E., J. Abrams, and D.R. Becker. 2009. Socioeconomic 
barriers and the role of biomass utilization in southwestern 
ponderosa pine restoration. Ecological Restoration 
27(2):169–177.
Hochrein, P.H. and L.D. Kellogg. 1988. Production and cost 
comparison for three skyline thinning systems. Western 
Journal of Applied Forestry 3(4):120–123.
Holzleitner, F., K. Stampfer, and R. Visser. 2011. Utilization 
rates and cost factors in timber harvesting based 
on long-term machine. Croatian Journal of Forest 
Engineering 32(2):501–508.
Host, J.R., and D.P. Lowery. 1983. Salvage and thinning op-
erations in second-growth ponderosa pine stands. USDA 
Forest Service Research Paper (No. PB-83-238899). 
USDA Forest Service, Ogden, UT. Intermountain Forest 
and Range Experiment Station.
Huffman, D.W., J.P. Roccaforte, J.D. Springer, and J.E. 
Crouse. 2020. Restoration applications of resource ob-
jective wildfires in western US forests: a status of know-
ledge review. Fire Ecology 16(1):1–13.
Kalies, E.L. and L. Yocom. 2016. Tamm Review: are fuel 
treatments effective at achieving ecological and social 
objectives? A systematic review. Forest Ecology and 
Management 375:84–95.
Kellogg, L.D. and P. Bettinger. 1994. Thinning productivity 
and cost for a mechanized cut- to-length system in the 
northwest Pacific coast region of the USA. Journal of 
Forest Engineering 5(2):43–54.
Kellogg, L.D., G.V. Milota, and M. Miller. 1996. A com-
parison of skyline harvesting costs for alternative commer-
cial thinning prescriptions. Journal of Forest Engineering 
7(3):7–23.
Kellogg, L.D., and E.D. Olsen. 1984. Increasing the prod-
uctivity of a small yarder: crew size, skidder swinging, 
hot thinning. Oregon State University. Forest Research 
Laboratory, Research Bulletin 46:45.
Kellogg, L.D., E.D. Olsen, and M.A. Hargrave. 1986. Skyline 
thinning a western hemlock-Sitka spruce stand: harvesting 
costs and stand damage. Oregon State University. Forest 
Research Laboratory, Research Bulletin 53(24):21.
Kretschmann, D. 2010. Mechanical properties of wood, in 
Wood Handbook. Madison: USA Forest Service.
Largo, S., H-S. Han, and L.R. Johnson. 2004. Economics of 
an integrated whole-tree harvesting system in fuel reduc-
tion thinning in western Montana. Annual Council on 
Forest Engineering Meet Proceedings, Hot Springs, AR, 
April 27–30, 6p.
Larson, D.S. and R. Mirth. 2004. A case study on the eco-
nomics of thinning in the wildland urban interface 
Western Journal of Applied Forestry 19(1):60–65.
Lynch, D.L. 2001. Financial results of ponderosa pine forest 
restoration in southwestern Colorado. In: RMRS-P-22. 
Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. pp. 141–148.
Mac Donagh, P., J. Roll, G. Hahn, and F. Cubbage. 2019. 
Timber Harvesting Production, Costs, Innovation, and 
Capacity in the Southern Cone and the US South. In 
Timber Buildings and Sustainability. London: IntechOpen. 
doi:10.5772/intechopen.85412.
McIver, J.D., P.W. Adams, J.A. Doyal, E.S. Drews, B.R. 
Hartsough, L.D. Kellogg, C.G. Niwa, et al. 2003. 
Environmental effects and economics of mechanized log-
ging for fuel reduction in northeastern Oregon mixed-
conifer stands. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 
18(4):238–249.
McNeel, J.F. and D. Rutherford. 1994. Modelling harvester-
forwarder system performance in a selection harvest. 
Journal of Forest Engineering 6(1):7–14.
Nakagawa, M., J. Hamatsu, T. Saitou, and H. Ishida. 2007. 
Effect of tree size on productivity and time required 
for work elements in selective thinning by a harvester. 
International Journal of Forest Engineering18(2): 
24–28.
Nicholls, D.L., J.M. Halbrook, M.E. Benedum, H.-S. Han, 
E.C. Lowell, D.R. Becker, and R.J. Barbour. 2018. 
Socioeconomic constraints to biomass removal from 
forest lands for fire risk reduction in the western U.S. 
Forests 9(5):2641–2622.
Nordfjell, T., R. Björheden, M. Thor, and I. Wästerlund. 2010. 
Changes in technical performance, mechanical avail-
ability and prices of machines used in forest operations 
in Sweden from 1985 to 2010. Scandinavian Journal of 
Forest Research 25(4):382–389.
Oester, P.T. and S. Bowers. 2003. Measuring timber prod-
ucts harvested from your woodland. The Woodland 
Workbook. Oregon State University Extension Service. 
20p.
Pan, F., H.-S. Han, L.R. Johnson, and W.J. Elliot. 2008. 
Production and cost of harvesting, processing, and trans-
porting small-diameter (≤ 5 inches) trees for energy. Forest 
Products Journal 58(5):47–53.
Petitmermet, J., J. Sessions, J. Bailey, and R. Zamora-Cristales. 
2019. Cost and productivity of tethered cut-to-length 
systems in a dry-forest fuel-reduction treatment: A case 
study. Forestry Science 65(5):581–592.
Pullin, A.S. and G.B. Stewart. 2006. Guidelines for system-
atic review in conservation and environmental manage-
ment. Conservation Biology 20(6):1647–1656.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023

18
Journal of Forestry, 2022, Vol. XX, No. XX
Puttock, G.D. 1995. Estimating cost for integrated harvesting 
and related forest management activities. Biomass 
Bioenergy 8(2):73–79.
Rummer, B. 2008. Assessing the cost of fuel reduction treat-
ments: A critical review. Forest Policy and Economics 
10(6):355–362.
Spinelli, R. and B.R. Hartsough. 2001. Extracting whole 
short rotation trees with a skidder and a front-end loader. 
Biomass Bioenergy 21(6):425–431.
Stephens, S.L. and J.J. Moghaddas. 2005. Experimental 
fuel treatment impacts on forest structure, potential fire 
behavior, and predicted tree mortality in a California 
mixed conifer forest. Forest Ecology and Management 
215(1–3):21–36.
Tesch, S.D. and D.H. Lysne. 1986. Is treetop skidding ef-
fective in reducing fuel loading? Western Journal of 
Applied Forestry 1(1):13–15.
Townsend, L., E. Dodson, N. Anderson, G. Worley-Hood, 
and J. Goodburn. 2019. Harvesting forest biomass in 
the US southern Rocky Mountains: Cost and production 
rates of five ground-based forest operations. International 
Journal of Forest Management 30(2):163–172.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2021. PPI industry data for 
logging, not seasonally adjusted. Retrieved June 28 2021, 
from 
https://beta.bls.gov/dataViewer/view/timeseries/
PCU11331-11331-;jsessionid=E54FB27576842267B815
8E5C47F36E71.
Vaughan, D., C. Edgeley, and H.-S. Han. 2021. Forest con-
tracting businesses in the US Southwest: Current profile 
and workforce training needs. Journal of Forestry 
120(2):186–197. doi: 10.1093/jofore/fvab060.
Vitorelo, B., H.-S. Han, and W. Elliot. 2011. Productivity 
and cost of integrated harvesting for fuel reduction thin-
ning in mixed-conifer forest. Forest Products Journal 
61(8):664–674.
Waltz, A.E.M., M.T. Stoddard, E.L. Kalies, J.D. Springer, D.W. 
Huffman, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2014. Effectiveness 
of fuel reduction treatments: Assessing metrics of forest 
resiliency and wildfire severity after the Wallow Fire, AZ. 
Forest Ecology and Management 334:43–52.
Wan, X., W. Wang, J. Liu, and T. Tong. 2014. Estimating the 
sample mean and standard deviation from the sample size, 
median, range and/or interquartile range. BMC Medical 
Research Methodology 14(1):1–13.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvac037/6901967 by Northern Arizona University user on 03 January 2023
