The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of 
communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic 
issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
The Cost of Forest Thinning Operations in the Western United States:  
A Literature Review 
 
By Heesol Chang, Han-Sup Han, Nathaniel Anderson, Yeon-Su Kim, and Sang Kyun Han 
Introduction 
An increase in frequent, catastrophic wildfires is a challenge to forests and communities across the 
western United States. Forest thinning treatments can reduce the risk of catastrophic fires and improve 
forest health. However, the cost of treatments varies depending on factors such as slope gradients, 
small-diameter trees, silvicultural prescriptions, and harvesting systems and methods. Land managers 
often use thinning treatments as a management approach, 
and broader knowledge on the productivity and costs of 
harvesting machinery can assist in their planning efforts. 
Additionally, maximizing cost efficiencies can help 
managers achieve restoration objectives at a faster pace. To 
better understand these costs, a literature review study was 
conducted. This study summarized operational stump-to-
truck costs of forest thinning activities across the western 
US. We reviewed and synthesized case studies to address 
three objectives: 1) summarize the costs of forest thinning 
treatments; 2) identify important variables affecting machine 
productivity and costs; and 3) compare the cost and 
productivity of the machines commonly used for forest 
thinning operations. 
Study Method 
We searched forest thinning studies that reported machine productivity and thinning costs in the 
western US from 1980 to 2020 and collected 20 papers with 47 independent field-based case studies. 
The data were standardized with the same units ($/ton and $/ccf) and converted to the 2021 values 
using the Producer Price Index. Thinning productivity and cost data were summarized in each phase 
of stump-to-truck thinning operations (e.g., felling extraction, processing, and loading) for each 
harvesting method and system (Table 1). 
Key Findings 
To determine the cost of forest thinning operations, we analyzed machine productivity and costs closely 
linked to operational conditions and harvesting variables. The whole-tree (WT) thinning method was 
most studied in the literature (n=18), as it effectively reduces wildfire hazards by extracting whole 
felled trees. A typical WT operation includes a feller-buncher, skidders, a processor, and loader, 
resulting in slash piled at the landing — a cleared area where thinned materials are processed and 
loaded on trucks. The second most common harvesting method studied (n=17) was the cut-to-length  
(CTL) method, which uses two machines: a harvester for felling and processing and a forwarder for  
January 2023 
A skidder moves cut trees to a landing at a 
forest restoration site. Photo courtesy ERI 

 
extraction and loading. The tree-length (TL) thinning studies (n=12) were conducted on steep slopes 
using a chainsaw and a cable yarder. Slash materials or biomass, i.e., small limbs and needles, were 
typically left on site when CTL or TL harvesting method was used. Specific study findings include: 
• Stump-to-truck, or final, thinning costs are determined by several variables, including the 
silvicultural prescription, harvesting method and system, tree size, travel distance, number of 
trees per cycle, and ground slope. 
• In addition, technological advances (e.g., transmission power, hydraulic pressure, and boom 
lifting torque) in logging equipment and machine costs (e.g., purchase prices, operator wages, 
and fuel costs) directly affect thinning costs.  
• The WT thinning method appears more cost-competitive than the other mechanized harvesting 
methods. 
• Among the felling machines, the chainsaw (manual felling) was less productive than the feller-
buncher or harvester. 
• The cable yarder had the lowest productivity among the extraction machines, and the skidder 
was the most productive, but the forwarder could be efficient in longer extraction distances 
(>500 ft). 
• Forest thinning operations that used a cable yarder on steep ground (>35% ground slope) were 
found to be the most expensive due to high operational costs and low thinning productivity. 
• The extraction cost accounted for the largest proportion (33–43%) of the stump-to-truck 
thinning cost, but the cost of a harvester was higher than a forwarder because harvesters conduct 
felling and processing activities at the stump. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions 
Forest thinning operational costs in the western US fluctuate significantly depending on many 
variables, including machine productivity, silvicultural prescription, harvesting method and system, 
and non-operational variables. The harvesting method and the machines used are the main factors that 
determine the final cost of stump-to-truck thinning operations. Compared to CTL and TL thinning, a 
WT harvesting method offers a cost-competitive thinning option while effectively reducing wildfire 
hazards, but it requires additional costs to manage the biomass piled at the landing. Key variables that 
affect harvesting productivity should be carefully evaluated to determine the overall cost of forest 
thinning treatments. 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Chang, H., H.S. Han, N. Anderson, Y.S. Kim, and S.K. Han. 2022. The Cost of Forest Thinning Operations in the Western 
United States: A Systematic Literature Review and New Thinning Cost Model. Journal of Forestry, https://
doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvac037  
Contact: Han-Sup Han, Han-Sup.Han@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Harvesting 
Phase 
Harvesting Method 
Whole-Tree 
Tree-Length 
Cut-to-Length 
Felling 
Chainsaw 
Chainsaw 
Feller-buncher 
Chainsaw 
Harvester 
Extraction 
Skidder 
Yarder 
Skidder 
Yarder 
Forwarder 
Processing 
Processor 
Processor 
Processor 
  
  
Loading 
Loader 
Loader 
Loader 
Loader 
Loader 
$/ton (mean) 
21.09 
42.73 
19.36 
36.56 
27.29 
$/ccf* (mean) 
50.21 
104.77 
44.06 
N/A 
63.66 
Table 1. A summary of stump-to-truck round-wood harvesting costs for harvesting methods and systems that 
were used in thinning operations, excluding profit allowances and overhead costs. 
 *ccf: 100 ft3 
