The historic 2020 fire year 
in northern Colorado and 
southern Wyoming
A LANDSCAPE ASSESSMENT  
TO INFORM POST-FIRE  
FOREST MANAGEMENT
AUTHORS: Kyle C. Rodman, Kimberley T. Davis,  
Marin E. Chambers, Teresa B. Chapman, Paula J. Fornwalt,  
Sarah J. Hart, Laura A.E. Marshall, Charles C. Rhoades,  
Catherine A. Schloegel, Camille S. Stevens-Rumann,  
and Thomas T. Veblen
November 2022
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Publication date: November 2022
Cover photo credit: A high severity burn area in 
the 2020 Cameron Peak Fire. (Photo credit: Kate 
Weimer, Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, 
Colorado State University)
Authors: Kyle C. Rodmana, Kimberley T. Davisb, 
Marin E. Chambersc, Teresa B. Chapmand, Paula 
J. Fornwalte, Sarah J. Hartf, Laura A.E. Marshallf, 
Charles C. Rhoadese, Catherine A. Schloegelg, 
Camille S. Stevens-Rumannc,f, and Thomas T. 
Veblenh
a Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, AZ, USA.
b Department of Ecosystem and Conservation Sciences, 
University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
c Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, CO, USA.
d Chief Conservation Office, The Nature Conservancy, Arlington, 
VA, USA.
e Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Fort 
Collins, CO, USA.
f Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado 
State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
g Colorado Field Office, The Nature Conservancy, Boulder, CO, 
USA.
h Department of Geography, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
CO, USA.
Suggested Citation: Rodman, K.C., et al., 2022. 
The historic 2020 fire year in northern 
Colorado and southern Wyoming: A 
landscape assessment to inform post-fire 
forest management.
Document Development: This development of this technical 
document was motivated by discussions with employees of the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and non-government 
organizations (NGOs), as well as knowledge gained from 
two management workshops focused on post-fire landscape 
management (April 2022 “Wildfire Resilience Roundtable” 
in Boulder, CO, and June 2022 “Reforestation Summit” in 
Washington, D.C.). In the wake of the 2020 wildfires in northern 
Colorado and southern Wyoming, we identified an urgent need 
for new tools and knowledge focusing on the management of 
these newly burned landscapes. This report is a collaboration of 
researchers from academic institutions, NGOs, and government 
entities. The development and publication of this report are a 
joint effort of two of the three Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes, including the Ecological Restoration Institute and 
the Colorado Forest Restoration Institute. Together with other 
collaborators on this report, staff at the Ecological Restoration 
Institute led analyses and developed spatial datasets, while 
staff at the Colorado Forest Restoration Institute led information 
exchange efforts with managers as well as document production 
and outreach activities. 
Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI)
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes include three 
university-based restoration institutes: the New Mexico Forest 
and Watershed Restoration Institute (NMFWRI), the Colorado 
Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI), and the Ecological Restoration 
Institute (ERI) in Arizona. These institutes were congressionally 
appointed in 2004 by the Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire 
Prevention Act (H.R.2696), and the Institutes work together to 
develop a program of applied research and service to help create 
healthy forests, prevent wildfires, sustain the resiliency of water 
supplies to wildfires, and create jobs.
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI), Northern Arizona University
The Ecological Restoration Institute is nationally recognized for 
mobilizing the unique assets of a university to help solve the 
problem of unnaturally severe wildfire and degraded forest health 
throughout the American West. ERI serves diverse audiences with 
objective science and implementation strategies that support 
ecological restoration and climate adaptation on Western forest 
landscapes.
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute is a science-based 
outreach and engagement organization hosted by the Department 
of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship and the Warner College 
of Natural Resources at Colorado State University. Colorado 
State University (CSU) is a land-grant university with a mission 
to provide teaching, research, public service, and engagement 
that CFRI strives to uphold. CFRI was established by Congress 
as part of the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes 
to serve as a bridge between researchers, managers, and 
stakeholders working to restore and enhance the resilience of 
forest ecosystems to wildfires in Colorado, the Southern Rocky 
Mountains, and the Intermountain West. CFRI leads collaborations 
between researchers, managers, and stakeholders to generate 
and apply locally relevant, actionable knowledge to inform forest 
management strategies. CFRI’s work informs forest conditions 
assessments, management goals and objectives, monitoring 
plans, and adaptive management processes.
Acknowledgements:  The authors would like to thank Hannah 
Brown, Angela Hollingsworth, and Brooke Simmons for editing 
and production assistance, and Jeff Hicke for sharing spatial data 
describing bark beetle outbreak severity. Wade Tinkham provided 
helpful comments on an earlier draft of this document. This work 
was funded by USDA Forest Service grant #22-DG-11030000-012 
and is published in partial fulfillment of deliverable #1aiii under 
Project 5 in ERI’s fiscal year 2022 work plan. Northern Arizona 
University is an equal opportunity provider. This research was 
supported by the USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. The findings and conclusions in this publication are those 
of the authors and should not be construed to represent any 
official USDA or U.S. Government determination or policy. 
CSU Land Acknowledgment
Colorado State University acknowledges, with respect, that the 
land that the university is on today is the traditional and ancestral 
homelands of the Arapaho, Cheyenne, and Ute Nations and 
peoples. This was also a site of trade, gathering, and healing 
for numerous other Native tribes. We recognize the Indigenous 
peoples as original stewards of this land and all the relatives 
within it. As these words of acknowledgment are spoken and 
heard, the ties Nations have to their traditional homelands are 
renewed and reaffirmed.
CSU is founded as a land-grant institution, and we accept that 
our mission must encompass access to education and inclusion. 
And, significantly, that our founding came at a dire cost to Native 
Nations and peoples whose land this University was built upon. 
This acknowledgment is the education and inclusion we must 
practice in recognizing our institutional history, responsibility, and 
commitment.
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Table of Contents
Executive Summary.................................................................................................................................4
1. Introduction and Background..........................................................................................................................4
2. Study Area...........................................................................................................................................................7
3. Methods...............................................................................................................................................................8
3a.  Mapping Fire Severity and Distance to Live Trees.....................................................................................................8
3b.  Mapping Recruitment Probabilities Throughout Each Fire....................................................................................8
3c.  Mapping Climate Suitability in High-Severity Areas..................................................................................................10
4. Results..................................................................................................................................................................10
4a.  Calwood Fire............................................................................................................................................................................10
4b. Cameron Peak Fire.................................................................................................................................................................12
4c.  East Troublesome Fire.........................................................................................................................................................14
4d.  Mullen Fire...............................................................................................................................................................................15
4e.  Williams Fork Fire..................................................................................................................................................................17
5. Discussion and Management Implications.................................................................................................19
6. References............................................................................................................................................21
7. Supplementary Information..............................................................................................................26

4        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
Executive Summary
Wildfire activity is increasing throughout forests of the 
western United States, in large part due to the effects of a 
warming climate. The 2020 fire year in northern Colorado 
and southern Wyoming is a particularly striking example 
– several of the largest fires on record in this region (i.e., 
since the early 1900s) occurred in 2020. Many of these 
fires burned in high-elevation forests, an uncommon 
occurrence over the past century, and several burned 
well into the fall and winter due to atypically warm, dry 
conditions. Like the 2002 Hayman Fire and other recent 
events in the region, the 2020 fires may drive conversions 
from forests to grasslands or shrublands, and cause 
associated changes to ecosystem services. Such changes 
in ecosystems may not be desirable for landowners, land 
managers, or other stakeholders, motivating potential 
management intervention. After fire, reforestation is 
a key management strategy that can help to accelerate 
forest recovery. However, reforestation is expensive and 
time-consuming, and may not be feasible, successful, or 
desirable everywhere. Assessments of post-fire landscape 
conditions may help to plan management efforts and 
allocate reforestation resources following the 2020 
wildfires. To address this need, we used spatial data, 
together with statistical models developed from west-
wide surveys of post-fire tree regeneration, to conduct 
a post-fire landscape assessment for areas affected 
by five 2020 wildfires – the Calwood, Cameron Peak, 
East Troublesome, Mullen, and Williams Fork. This 
assessment was guided by the Resist-Accept-Direct (RAD) 
framework, an emerging paradigm that helps to navigate 
uncertainties and potential management approaches 
across diverse landscapes. 
For each fire, we quantified spatial patterns of live trees, 
the effects of pre-fire bark beetle outbreaks, the potential 
for natural post-fire recruitment of the dominant conifer 
species, and climate suitability (a proxy for reforestation 
suitability). Post-fire conditions and predicted post-fire 
trajectories varied widely within and across the five 
burned landscapes. Overall, 604,550 ac burned with 55% 
of the total area burning at high severity. Approximately 
28% of this high-severity area (15% of the total area) was 
> 650 ft from live trees, suggesting that limited recovery 
may occur for species that require live trees for post-
fire seed dispersal. However, these landscapes also 
contained tree species such as aspen (Populus tremuloides) 
and lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta var. latifolia) which are 
capable of resprouting from established root systems 
or regenerating from canopy-stored seeds following 
fire, respectively. Aspen (> 50%) and lodgepole pine 
(> 90%) were present prior to fire occurrence across 
most high-severity areas that were > 650 ft from live 
trees, suggesting that continued monitoring of natural 
recovery processes will be critical in many areas prior 
to management intervention. Indeed, predictions of 
post-fire recruitment indicated that lodgepole pine 
would regenerate well across many intermediate to 
high-elevation sites, while species dependent on seed 
dispersal from the unburned edge would be limited to 
sites near live trees and in wetter areas. Where planting 
is considered necessary to meet management goals, 
our newly developed maps of climate suitability for the 
dominant conifers help to identify where such actions 
might be most successful. The 2020 wildfires are likely 
to present social and ecological challenges that will last 
decades. This report presents new information to aid in 
prioritizing post-fire management activities following 
these wildfires but is intended to be used as a part of 
a broader decision framework incorporating expert 
knowledge, policy mandates, and local site assessments. 
1. Introduction and Background
The 2020 fire year brought extreme wildfire activity to 
nearly every continent on the planet. Over 9.5 million 
acres burned in the western continental US alone 
(National Interagency Coordination Center 2020), with 
wildfires primarily driven by dry weather patterns over 
the preceding months, high winds, and above-average 
temperatures (Higuera and Abatzoglou 2021). In northern 
Colorado and southern Wyoming, the 2020 wildfire 
season included many of the largest fire events since 
the early 1900s. For example, three wildfires in northern 
Colorado and southern Wyoming – the Cameron 
Peak (208,663 ac), East Troublesome (193,812 ac), and 
Mullen (176,878 ac) – eclipsed Colorado’s previously 
largest recorded wildfire (2002 Hayman Fire [138,114 
ac]) (National Interagency Fire Center 2022). The wind-
driven nature of these fires led to dramatic fire behavior, 
which tested both containment and structure protection 
efforts. For example, the East Troublesome Fire burned 
nearly 100,000 ac in a single day and crossed over the 
Continental Divide in Rocky Mountain National Park, 
spotting over alpine tundra (Coop et al. 2022, National 
Interagency Coordination Center 2020). Overall, the 2020 
wildfires in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming 
(hereafter, the 2020 wildfires) cost nearly $300 million to 
suppress, destroyed over 1,000 structures, killed countless 
trees, and spurred massive debris flows (National 
Interagency Coordination Center 2020). These wildfires are 
likely to reshape the social and ecological landscape of 
the northern Colorado and southern Wyoming region for 
decades to come.
Patterns of post-fire tree regeneration will influence the 
longer-term ecosystem structure and function of areas 

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        5
burned by the 2020 wildfires, with implications for land 
management planning. Most coniferous tree species in 
the western United States require seed dispersal from live 
trees to successfully regenerate in severely burned areas 
(Burns and Honkala 1990). For these species, the majority 
of seed dispersal, and therefore post-fire regeneration, 
is limited to <300-650 feet from live trees that survived 
fire (McCaughey et al. 1986, Kemp et al. 2016). Therefore, 
areas in the center of large, high-severity patches can 
take long periods to recover as conifer forests or may 
remain as persistent treeless meadows for decades to 
centuries (Kaufmann et al. 2000, Chambers et al. 2016, 
Stevens-Rumann and Morgan 2019). However, the pre-
fire composition of the forest plays an important role in 
ecosystem response; some Rocky Mountain species such 
as lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta var. latifolia) and aspen 
(Populus tremuloides) have fire-adaptive traits like serotiny 
(cones that open following heating) or resprouting (the 
ability to reproduce from belowground root tissues 
after burning), respectively, that can facilitate rapid 
post-fire recovery of large high-severity burn patches 
(Tinker et al. 1994, Turner et al. 2007, Kreider and Yocom 
2021). Temperature, precipitation, and topography also 
influence patterns of post-fire tree regeneration for most 
species, with cooler, wetter sites often having more rapid 
or abundant tree establishment in comparison to warm, 
dry areas (Harvey et al. 2016, Davis et al. 2019, Rodman et 
al. 2020a). 
Notably, many forests that burned in the 2020 wildfires 
experienced pre-fire tree mortality as a result of 
mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae), spruce 
beetle (Dendroctonus rufipennis), or western balsam bark 
beetle (Dryocoetes confusus) outbreaks since the early 
2000s (Hicke et al. 2020), leading to altered structure and 
composition (Andrus et al. 2020a, Rodman et al. 2022a). 
Because bark beetle outbreaks often kill large, seed-
bearing trees (Hart et al. 2014, Johnson et al. 2014) and 
the viability of even serotinous cones can decline with 
time since tree mortality (Teste et al. 2011, Rhoades et al. 
2022), prior bark beetle outbreaks have the potential to 
hinder forest recovery following wildfire. Still, studies 
of such effects report mixed results. Prior bark beetle 
outbreaks can limit forest recovery potential following 
some wildfires (Carlson et al. 2017, Andrus et al. 2021), 
whereas post-fire recovery following other wildfires may 
be relatively unaffected (Harvey et al. 2014, Schapira et 
al. 2021). In general, species that rely on post-fire seed 
dispersal from live trees are likely to be most vulnerable 
to the combined effects of bark beetle outbreaks and 
wildfire. The complex nature of the 2020 wildfires – with 
a mosaic of fire severities, pre-fire forest communities, 
pre-fire management, environmental conditions, and 
severity of pre-fire insect outbreaks – suggests that post-
fire forest trajectories will vary substantially across each 
landscape, requiring site-specific management planning.
In complex post-fire landscapes such as those of the 
2020 wildfires, managers may benefit from partitioning 
the landscape into operational units defined by different 
expected states, conditions, or likely trajectories, which 
can then be addressed using a range of management 
strategies (Aplet and Mckinley 2017). The Resist-
Accept-Direct (RAD) framework provides a powerful 
tool to navigate uncertainties and apply a diversity of 
management approaches across such landscapes (Lynch 
et al. 2021, Magness et al. 2022). ‘Resist’ strategies seek to 
maintain ecosystem function over time within a range of 
acceptable variation based on historic patterns. However, 
not all historic patterns are likely to be adaptive under 
future climate conditions (Millar et al. 2007, Dudney et al. 
2018). In such cases, ‘Accept’ strategies seek to acknowledge 
change in ecosystem function both within and beyond 
historical patterns, allowing landscapes to transform into 
a new state without intervention. Acceptance may be 
most appropriate when active management is infeasible, 
or where the expected trajectory of a site is well-aligned 
with desired conditions. Finally, ‘Direct’ strategies rely 
on active management to target a specific desired state 
or condition which may not be met under the expected 
trajectory of a site. Applying RAD in the management of 
post-fire landscapes begins with a detailed assessment of 
likely ecosystem trajectories, their overlap with desired 
conditions, and the feasibility of adaptive management. 
Based on these criteria, strategies can then be developed 
to resist, accept, and/or direct change following wildfire 
depending on social values and local context, such as the 
size and severity of the area affected, and environmental 
conditions such as climate and topography (Fig. 1; 
Stevens-Rumann and Morgan 2019, Stevens et al. 2021).

6        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
 
Figure 1: Flowchart with landscape-scale considerations for post-fire 
reforestation activities. Adapted from Stevens-Rumann and Morgan (2019).
Currently, post-fire landscape management occurs 
at different intervals following fire, depending on 
the resource being managed and the condition of 
the landscape. Immediately after fire, landowners or 
managers typically perform an initial site evaluation 
and implement treatments focused on soil stability, 
flood risk, and water retention (Robichaud et al. 2009). 
Over intermediate time scales (e.g., 1-10 years following 
fire), vegetation conditions (e.g., forest and non-forest 
cover) are typically compared to desired conditions 
for a landscape to determine the need for subsequent 
intervention (Guiterman et al. 2022). If early post-fire 
regeneration is deemed insufficient to return forest 
cover to desired levels and active management is feasible, 
reforestation (e.g., planting tree seedlings) is a common 
post-fire management strategy aimed at increasing the 
rate of forest recovery (North et al. 2019). Reforestation 
may be particularly valuable in large treeless patches 
where severe fire has eliminated seed sources, where 
resprouting and serotinous species are absent, and there 
is a low probability of natural establishment (Kemp et 
al. 2016, Stevens et al. 2021). Such plantings may help 
to accelerate forest recovery while maintaining key 
ecosystem services (e.g., nutrient retention and water 
quality; Rhoades et al. 2019).
However, reforestation is both costly and time-
consuming, and success can vary widely (Ouzts et al. 
2015, Kolb et al. 2019). In addition, operational bottlenecks 
of seed collection, nursery infrastructure for production, 
and the availability of skilled labor currently limit the 
ability to keep pace with the total burned acreage in 
need of intervention (Dumroese et al. 2019, Fargione 
et al. 2021). These barriers to implementation are 
reflected in the 2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs 
Act, which provides $200 million in funding for seed 
collection, planning, and reforestation on federal lands 
(H.R.3684). Notwithstanding increases in funding for 
reforestation, assessments of post-fire landscapes may 
help to effectively target management resources by 
identifying where active intervention is feasible, where 
forests are least likely to recover naturally, and where 
planting success is likely to be highest. Because natural 
tree regeneration is typically more rapid and abundant 
at wetter, more productive sites, it follows that planting 
success may be higher in relatively wet sites where 
recovery is solely limited by distance to live trees or seed 
availability (Fig. 1; Stevens-Rumann and Morgan 2019). 
Although assisted migration (moving species beyond 
current ranges) and assisted gene flow (moving genotypes 
within species ranges) hold promise in promoting forest 
adaptation to a warming climate (i.e., “Direct” strategies; 
Millar et al. 2007, Aitken and Bemmels 2016), they are not 
widely applied strategies in reforestation on public lands. 
This reflects both policy limitations and the need for 
research to reduce uncertainties about the effectiveness 
of such strategies in the context of uncertain future rates 
of change (Williams and Dumroese 2013, North et al. 2019, 
Young et al. 2020). Thus, most reforestation activities are 
currently applied as ‘Resist’ strategies, which are most 
appropriate when historical forest communities are 
well-aligned with the current and future environmental 
conditions of a site. An understanding of where natural 
forest recovery is unlikely and where environmental 
conditions are suitable for the pre-fire forest community 
will help to prioritize reforestation activities in the 
landscapes burned by the 2020 wildfires.
Our primary objective in this report is to describe 
landscape conditions following five major fire events that 
occurred in the fall of 2020 throughout northern Colorado 
and southern Wyoming – the Calwood, Cameron Peak, 
East Troublesome, Mullen, and Williams Fork Fires (Fig. 

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        7
2, Table 1). These fires are notable because of their large 
extents (i.e., some of the largest in this area since the 
early 1900s), their proximity to development, and the 
dominant forest types burned (i.e., many high-elevation 
forests), which present difficult challenges to managers. 
For each wildfire, we assess the post-fire distances to 
live trees, the effects of pre-fire bark beetle outbreaks, 
and the potential for the dominant conifer species to 
naturally recover post-fire. We also assess spatial patterns 
of climate suitability for the dominant conifer species to 
help inform broad-scale reforestation planning, which is 
ongoing and will continue for many years. We make the 
findings and spatial data described in this report publicly 
available but recognize that such information is only 
one small piece of the decision-making framework that 
necessarily incorporates policy mandates, local site visits, 
and expert knowledge.
Table 1: Incident name, fire size, and percentage high-severity fire within 
five major fires in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming that occurred 
during the 2020 fire season.
Fire Name
Size (ac)
High Severity (%)
Calwood
10,113.9
42.8
Cameron Peak
208,913.0
54.3
East Troublesome
193,811.9
57.4
Mullen
176,877.5
48.7
Williams Fork
14,833.4
58.5
Figure 2: The locations of five major fires in northern Colorado and southern 
Wyoming that occurred during the 2020 fire season. Landscape conditions 
following these five fires are the focus of this report.
2. Study Area
To define the study area, we used Calwood, Cameron 
Peak, East Troublesome, Mullen, and Williams Fork Fire 
perimeter data from the National Interagency Fire Center 
(National Interagency Fire Center 2022). Together, these 
five wildfires (Fig. 2, Table 1) burned 604,550 ac between 
August and November 2020. On days of greatest fire 
spread, the Severe Fire Danger Index, a derived weather 
variable that represents the combined effects of wind 
speed, humidity, temperature, and fuel moisture (Jolly et 
al. 2019), typically exceeded the 95th percentile relative to 
longer-term (i.e., 1979-2020) daily weather conditions. In 
other words, fuel preconditioning from a year of severe 
drought, combined with dry, windy weather during 
burning, played a key role in the extreme fire behavior of 
these fires. 
The area burned spanned a wide range of elevations 
(ca, 5,300 to 12,000 ft) which drives variation in 
typical climatic conditions. For example, mean annual 
temperatures range from 29.7 to 42.5°F, and total annual 
precipitation ranges from 13.8 to 43.0 inches across the 
five fires (1991-2020 climate normal; PRISM Climate Group 
2022). This climatic variation leads to a broad range of 
forest communities across the study area (Peet 1981), 
which are adapted to a wide range of typical disturbance 
regimes and have a range of regeneration strategies. 
Thus, while the fire behavior in the 2020 wildfires was 
extreme relative to recorded conditions in the region, 
it may or may not align with the natural disturbance 
regimes (Veblen and Donnegan 2005, Addington et al. 
2018) and fire-adaptive traits (Davis et al. 2018, Rodman 
et al. 2021) of a given forest community. For example, 
forests with traits such as resprouting or serotiny, which 
facilitate recovery following high-severity fire, may be 
less vulnerable to fire-driven forest loss.
Common forest types in the study area include both lower 
montane (roughly 5,500 to  8,000 ft) and upper montane 
(centered on 8,000 to 9,000 ft but variable with latitude 
and topography) forests (Kaufmann et al. 2006). Lower 
montane forests, typically dominated by ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa var. scopulorum), experienced historical 
(prior to 20th-century fire suppression) fires that were 
typically frequent and of low-moderate severity; their 
extent was fuel-limited so that years of most widespread 
fire followed years of cool-moist conditions favorable 
to the understory growth and increased surface fuels 
connectivity (Veblen et al. 2000, Gartner et al. 2012). 
Frequent fires were lethal to tree seedlings and saplings 
but rarely killed mature ponderosa pine due to its thick 
bark and self-pruning habit (Sherriff et al. 2014, Brown et 
al. 2015). 

8        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
In contrast, upper montane forests were characterized 
by a much more complex fire regime, including low-
, moderate-, and high-severity patches which created 
a heterogeneous mosaic of tree ages, species, and 
densities across the landscape reflecting the interplay 
of topography, fuels, and climate (Kaufmann et al. 2000, 
Huckaby et al. 2001, Sherriff et al. 2014). In upper montane 
forests, thick-barked ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii var. glauca) often survived fire, and 
the post-fire seedbed conditions were favorable to the 
rapid and abundant establishment of these two species 
(Sherriff and Veblen 2006, Schoennagel et al. 2011). 
Infrequent occurrences of large and severe fires in the 
upper montane zone, associated with extreme drought, 
also contributed to landscape heterogeneity by creating 
large, long-lasting non-forest openings (Kaufmann et al. 
2000). Tree-ring reconstructions of fire history across the 
montane zone show a marked reduction in fire frequency 
during the 20th century compared to the 19th century 
and earlier (but varying in timing by site) reflecting both 
modern fire suppression and land use changes (Veblen et 
al. 2000, Schoennagel et al. 2011). Recent (since ca. 2000) 
increases in fire activity, in combination with limited 
post-fire recovery, raise concerns about fire-driven forest 
losses across the montane zone (Chambers et al. 2016, 
Rother and Veblen 2016, Rodman et al. 2020b, 2020a).
At the highest elevations of our study area, subalpine 
forests (c. 9,000–11,500 ft) are primarily composed of 
Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii var. engelmannii), 
subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa var. lasiocarpa), and 
lodgepole pine, with the latter often forming even-aged 
postfire stands at the transition to the upper montane 
zone (Sibold et al. 2006). All three subalpine conifer 
species are thin-barked and easily killed by fire (Baker 
2009). Fire in the subalpine zone is limited primarily by 
climate and fire weather rather than the availability of 
fuels. Historically, fires in the subalpine zone were often 
large (i.e., > 2,500 ac), severe, and burned at intervals of 
200-500 years or more during exceptionally dry years 
(Sibold and Veblen 2006). Following past subalpine fires, 
lodgepole pine typically recovered quickly whereas 
recovery of Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir was 
sometimes protracted for 100 years or more depending 
on seed availability and site conditions (Coop et al. 2010, 
Rodman et al. 2019). Rates of burning in Rocky Mountain 
subalpine forests are now greater than any seen in the last 
2,000 years (Higuera et al. 2021). Following recent fires in 
the subalpine zone of Colorado and Wyoming, a limited 
availability of live trees and observations of low initial 
post-fire tree regeneration densities raise concerns about 
the efficacy of natural regeneration on management-
relevant timescales (Guz et al. 2021, Schapira et al. 2021).
3. Methods
3a.  Mapping Fire Severity and Distance to Live Trees
To quantify distances to live trees throughout each fire 
perimeter, a proxy for post-fire seed availability in non-
serotinous conifers, we calculated the Relativized Burn 
Ratio (RBR) following Parks et al. (2018) and overlaid 
these data with a tree canopy height model (CHM) from 
2019 (Potapov et al. 2021), the year immediately before 
fire occurrence. We assumed that all 100-ft pixels with 
RBR ≥ 283 burned at high severity and were devoid of 
live trees (based on Parks et al. 2018). To account for 
areas that had previously burned, were harvested, or 
were persistent treeless meadows but may have had RBR 
values < 283, we also required that pixels with live trees 
had canopy height values ≥ 16.4 ft (5 m) in 2019. This is a 
height above which the CHM is more reliable in detecting 
tree cover (Potapov et al. 2021), and the approximate 
size at which the non-serotinous conifer species in our 
study area reach reproductive maturity (Andrus et al. 
2020b, Rodman et al. 2021). Finally, we overlaid the RBR 
and CHM data to map the distances from each 100-
ft pixel within a fire perimeter to the closest live tree. 
Because high-severity areas are the most likely targets 
for reforestation activities, we visualized the overall 
distribution of distances to live trees within the high-
severity portion of each fire (i.e., where RBR ≥ 283), and 
calculated the proportion of the high-severity area that 
was < 300 ft from a live tree, 300-650 ft from a tree, and 
> 650 ft from a tree, based on numbers in the decision 
support framework of Stevens-Rumann and Morgan 
(2019) and Fig. 1.
3b.  Mapping Recruitment Probabilities Throughout 
Each Fire
To better understand the potential for natural forest 
recovery in each fire event, we mapped the probability of 
post-fire recruitment for each of the dominant coniferous 
tree species – Douglas-fir, Engelmann spruce, lodgepole 
pine, ponderosa pine, and subalpine fir – using statistical 
models from Davis et al. (In Review). Briefly, these 
models were developed through a broad-scale synthesis 
of post-fire conifer regeneration data throughout the 
western United States, which included 10,230 field plots 
and 334 sampled fire events across the West. Many of 
these plots and fire events were within the southern 
Rocky Mountains, which gives additional confidence 
to our predictions (Table 2). Statistical models were fit 
for each species using spatial data related to climate, 
topography, fire severity, distance to live trees, post-fire 
canopy cover, and pre-fire disturbance (e.g., bark beetle 
outbreaks) to predict the presence of post-fire seedlings 
in sampled field plots. We used the statistical models 

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        9
from Davis et al. (In Review) to predict the probability of 
natural recruitment for each conifer species throughout 
each fire at a 100-foot resolution. Climate data, obtained 
from GridMET (Abatzoglou 2013), represent the average 
conditions from 2001-2020 at a 2.5-mile resolution. 
Topography was described at a 300-ft resolution using the 
continuous heat insolation load index, which combines 
slope angle, aspect, and latitude to estimate terrain-
driven solar heating (Theobald et al. 2015). Post-fire 
canopy cover (i.e., the mean tree cover within a 1,000-ft 
radius around each 100-ft pixel) was calculated using 2021 
canopy cover data from the Rangeland Analysis Platform 
(Jones et al. 2018). Fire severity (RBR) and distances to live 
trees, as described in subsection 3a, were also included as 
predictors of natural recruitment in these models. Prior 
to making predictive maps of post-fire recruitment, we 
resampled climatic and topographic layers to match the 
100-ft resolution of other data using methods that only 
minimally altered data values.   
For subalpine fir and Engelmann spruce, the tree species 
that are most likely to be influenced by the combined 
effects of bark beetle outbreaks and wildfire (Carlson et 
al. 2017, Andrus et al. 2021), we identified areas affected 
by species-specific insects and pathogens before the 2020 
fires. Specifically, we identified the presence of western 
balsam bark beetle (Dryocoetes confuses) and/or subalpine 
fir decline (a morality complex including western 
balsam bark beetle and fungal pathogens; Harvey et 
al. 2021) as inputs into fir recruitment predictions, and 
spruce beetle (Dendroctonus rufipennis) as an input into 
spruce recruitment predictions using US Forest Service 
Aerial Detection Survey (ADS) data from 1997 to 2019 
(Forest Health Protection 2021). We defined forest areas 
as “affected” by prior decline or bark beetle outbreaks if 
they were within 1,650 ft of moderate or high-severity 
mortality 
(i.e., 
moderate/high-severity 
codes 
and/
or ≥ 10 trees/ac) from 1997 to 2019. We used a 1,650-ft 
buffer around individual polygons to improve detection 
accuracy and account for locational error in ADS data 
(Coleman et al. 2018). We then included the presence or 
absence of prior bark beetle disturbances in models of 
Davis et al. (In Review) to predict post-fire recruitment for 
spruce and fir across each fire. 
We excluded bark beetle terms from lodgepole pine 
predictions as results of prior bark beetle outbreaks on 
post-fire regeneration and seed viability for this species 
are mixed in the literature (Teste et al. 2010, Harvey et 
al. 2014b) and because the recruitment models of Davis 
et al. (In Review) showed no major effects of prior bark 
beetle outbreaks on post-fire recruitment for this species. 
Still, seed viability is low in long dead serotinous trees 
in this area, and the effects of past mountain pine beetle 
outbreaks on lodgepole pine regeneration throughout 
these fires is a key area of future research and a source 
of uncertainty in these fires (Rhoades et al. 2022). Lastly, 
we excluded bark beetle terms in ponderosa pine and 
Douglas-fir predictions because bark beetle outbreaks 
affecting these species have been relatively limited in 
the region (Chapman et al. 2012, Hicke et al. 2020, USFS 
2020). To qualitatively describe the amount and timing 
of pre-fire tree mortality due to bark beetle outbreaks, 
we summarized tree mortality area data from Hicke 
et al. (2020) for important beetle agent and host tree 
combinations – i.e., Douglas-fir beetle (Dendroctonus 
pseudotsugae) 
and 
Douglas-fir, 
spruce 
beetle 
and 
Engelmann spruce, mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus 
ponderosae) and lodgepole pine, mountain pine beetle and 
ponderosa pine, western balsam bark beetle/subalpine 
fir decline and subalpine fir. These summaries were 
restricted to areas within each fire perimeter.
Species Name
Species Code
Plots
Fires
AUC
CV AUC
Thresholdss
Subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa)
ABLA
2,268 
(274)
139 (15)
0.81
0.78
0.16
Lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta)
PICO
3,232 
(264)
178 (15)
0.79
0.77
0.59
Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii)
PIEN
1,535 
(194)
138 (19)
0.73
0.71
0.49
Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa)
PIPO
7,719 
(1,707)
276 (36)
0.70
0.69
0.22
Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii)
PSME
6,018 
(1,213)
274 (40)
0.74
0.75
0.39
Table 2. Sample size and model performance metrics for each model of post-fire recruitment probability. “Plots” and “fires” refer to the sample sizes used 
to develop predictive models across the western United States, while numbers in parentheses give the sample sizes within the southern Rocky Mountains 
(i.e., Colorado, southern Wyoming, and northern New Mexico, USA). “AUC” refers to the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, a measure of 
predictive performance ranging 0 – 1, where 1 indicates perfect model predictions. “CV AUC” is the mean AUC from 10-fold cross validation (predictions made 
to data not used to build the model). “Thresholdss” refers to the species-specific probability threshold used to categorize regeneration as likely or unlikely 
which maximized the sum of sensitivity and specificity (i.e., the True Skill Statistic).

10        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
In our predictions of recruitment probability (i.e., ‘P(Recruit)’), P(Recruit) represents the probability that at least 40 trees 
ac-1 of the focal species will establish within 10 years of fire occurrence. Because the 2020 fires burned across a range 
of ownership designations, all of which may have different management goals, we did not test our predictions against 
national forest- and forest type-specific stocking levels; we used a single number of 40 trees ac-1 for simplicity and 
a more consistent comparison across species. We limited predictions of natural recovery to areas with ≥ 5 ft2 of pre-
fire live basal area acre-1 of the corresponding tree species based on species basal area maps from the 2000s (Wilson 
et al. 2013). We restricted recruitment maps to each fire perimeter, and reclassified them into four categories of ‘low’, 
‘low/moderate’, ‘moderate/high’, and ‘high’ using breaks centered around species-specific classification thresholds from 
Davis et al. (In Review) (Thresholdss; Table S1).
3c.  Mapping Climate Suitability in High-Severity Areas
We mapped climate suitability for each species using similar methods to those in subsection 3b, but with a few small 
changes. First, RBR was set to a constant value of 100 (i.e., low/moderate severity), tree cover was set to 30%, distance 
to live trees was set to 30 ft, and prior disturbance was set to “none” throughout each fire. In other words, we held 
the effects of fire severity, distance to live trees, and forest canopy cover constant to isolate the effects of climate and 
topography on recruitment potential for each species. Data for Engelmann spruce, lodgepole pine, and subalpine fir 
were derived from models of Davis et al. (In Review) using 2001-2020 climatic conditions. Because some land owners and 
managers are already using the Southern Rockies Reforestation Tool (SRRT; Rodman et al. 2022b) to aid in reforestation 
planning of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, climate suitability for these species was obtained using SRRT for the 1981-
2010 climate period. As in subsection 3b, we limited predictions to areas that had ≥ 5 ft2 of live basal area acre-1 for a given 
species in the early 2000s. However, climate suitability maps were further restricted to high-severity areas within each 
fire perimeter where reforestation is more likely to occur. For visualization, we classified climate suitability maps into 
five equal-interval categories, ranging from low to high.
4. Results
4a.  Calwood Fire
The Calwood Fire ignited on October 17th, 2020, near Jamestown, Colorado, and was contained on November 14th, 
2020. During this one-month period, the fire burned 10,114 ac of montane forest ranging from 5,545-8,580 ft (Fig. 3). 
Calwood primarily affected forests composed of ponderosa pine, with Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine present at higher 
elevations and on wetter sites. Of the total fire area, 42.8% burned at high severity. However, 40.7% of this high-severity 
area was within 300 ft of a live tree, as compared to 29.9% of the area within 300-650 ft, and 29.4% beyond 650 ft. Only 
a small amount of the pre-fire forest area was impacted by bark beetle outbreaks (3.2% cumulative tree mortality from 
1997 to 2018), with the majority of this mortality attributed to mountain pine beetle colonization of ponderosa pine 
between 2010 and 2012. 
Figure 3: Map of distances to live trees in the Calwood Fire (left), as well as the range of distances to live trees within high-severity areas (right). White areas in 
the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey).

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        11
Post-fire recruitment probabilities in the Calwood Fire varied by species and location (Fig. 4). Where present at higher 
elevations, lodgepole pine had the highest probabilities of natural recruitment within 10 years of fire occurrence. 
Ponderosa pine had low to moderate probabilities of natural recruitment in many portions of the fire, with the highest 
probabilities near live trees. Recruitment probabilities for Douglas-fir were relatively low in most areas but were high 
in locations with abundant surviving tree cover, near the edge of the fire, and on northeast-facing slopes. Across all 
species, 49.0% of the total fire area was predicted to have low to moderate recruitment potential.
 
Figure 4: Probabilities of natural recruitment for each dominant coniferous tree species in the Calwood Fire. White areas in each map are outside of the final 
fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 2000s. The map of pre-fire species (bottom) shows 
nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. PICO: lodgepole pine, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.
Within high-severity areas of the Calwood Fire, climate suitability was primarily moderate to high for each species 
(Fig. 5). For lodgepole pine, higher elevations were predicted to have high climate suitability irrespective of aspect or 
topographic setting. Likewise, areas with high suitability for ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir seedlings were at the 
highest elevations in the fire, though these species also had high-suitability sites in valley bottoms and on northeast-
facing slopes. Overall, planting of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, focusing on intermediate to high-elevations 
throughout the fire and protected topographic settings, may best align with the current and projected future climate of 
this area.
 
Figure 5: Climate suitability based on recent climate (ca., 1981-2020) and topography for each dominant coniferous tree species in the Calwood Fire. White 
areas in the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 2000s. The 
map of pre-fire species (bottom) shows nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. PICO: lodgepole pine, PIPO: 
ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir. 

12        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
4b. Cameron Peak Fire
The Cameron Peak Fire began on August 13th, 2020, near Cameron Pass, Colorado, and was declared contained on 
December 2nd, 2020. During several distinct phases of activity and spread, Cameron Peak burned 208,913 ac, becoming 
the largest fire in Colorado’s recorded (i.e., since the early 1900s) history (Fig. 6). The fire spanned a wide range of 
elevations (5,308-11,897 ft) and forest types, affecting lower montane forests dominated by ponderosa pine and Douglas-
fir on the eastern side, upper montane and subalpine forests with lodgepole pine in the center of the fire, and subalpine 
forests with Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir at the western end. Of the total fire area, 54.3% burned at high severity. 
Overall, 38.5% of this high-severity area was within 300 ft of a live tree, as compared to 28.8% of the area within 300-
650 ft, and 32.8% beyond 650 ft. Cameron Peak had substantial pre-fire bark beetle activity with 40.6% cumulative tree 
mortality from 1997 to 2018. Mountain pine beetle was active in ponderosa pine (1.4% tree mortality) from 2010 to 2013 
and lodgepole pine (28.9% tree mortality) from 2007 to 2013, while background levels of other beetles (e.g., 2.4% mortality 
from spruce beetle) were present throughout the 2000s and 2010s (Fig. S1)..
 
Figure 6: Map of distances to live trees in the Cameron Peak Fire (left), as well as the range of distances to live trees within high-severity areas (right). White 
areas in the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey).
Because the Cameron Peak Fire was large and spanned a broad range of elevations, 10-year post-fire recruitment was 
predicted to vary within and among species throughout the fire (Fig. 7). Lodgepole pine had high probabilities of 
recruitment throughout much of the fire, particularly at intermediate to high elevations. Subalpine fir and Engelmann 
spruce had relatively low recruitment probabilities overall, but had moderate (fir) or moderate to high (spruce) values at 
high elevations, in areas with abundant surviving canopy cover, and on northeast-facing slopes. Ponderosa pine 
recruitment probabilities were relatively low throughout the fire but were moderate in areas near live trees. Douglas-fir 
had high recruitment probabilities in areas with abundant surviving canopy cover and on northeast-facing slopes. Of 
the total fire area, 24.1% was predicted to have low to moderate recruitment potential of all species.

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        13
Figure 7: Probabilities of natural recruitment for each dominant coniferous tree species in the Cameron Peak Fire. White areas in the map are outside of the 
final fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 2000s. The map of pre-fire species (bottom-right) 
shows nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. ABLA: subalpine fir, PICO: lodgepole pine, PIEN: Engelmann 
spruce, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.
Climate suitability also varied substantially for each species throughout the Cameron Peak Fire (Fig. 8). Suitability 
for subalpine fir was relatively low in most areas but was moderate at the highest elevations and on northeast-facing 
slopes. Likewise, higher elevations and more sheltered topographic locations had high suitability for Engelmann spruce 
and lodgepole pine. In contrast, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir had high moisture availability at low to intermediate 
elevations in the fire, particularly in valley bottoms and northeast-facing slopes. Overall, plantings of ponderosa pine 
and Douglas-fir at intermediate elevations in the fire, and plantings of lodgepole pine and Engelmann spruce at higher 
elevations, would best align with current and future climate conditions. For all species and most parts of the Cameron 
Peak Fire, planting on northeast-facing slopes and valley bottoms may lead to greater success. 
 
Figure 8: Climate suitability based on recent climate (ca., 1981-2020) and topography for each dominant coniferous tree species in the Cameron Peak Fire. 
White areas in the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 
2000s. The map of pre-fire species (bottom-right) shows nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. ABLA: 
subalpine fir, PICO: lodgepole pine, PIEN: Engelmann spruce, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.

14        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
4c.  East Troublesome Fire
The East Troublesome Fire began on October 14th, 2020, near Kremmling, Colorado, and was declared contained on 
November 30th, 2020. In that time, East Troublesome burned 193,812 ac, becoming the second-largest fire in Colorado’s 
recorded history (Fig. 9). The fire affected elevations from 7,884 to 12,067 ft, primarily in upper montane and subalpine 
forests dominated by subalpine fir, Engelmann spruce, and lodgepole pine, with only limited components of ponderosa 
pine and Douglas-fir at the lowest elevations. Of the total fire area, 57.4% burned at high severity. However, 37.9% of 
this high-severity area was within 300 ft of a live tree, as compared to 32.2% of the area from 300-650 ft to a live tree, 
and 29.9% of the area > 650 ft. The East Troublesome landscape had moderate-severity bark beetle outbreaks (23.2% tree 
mortality across species) from 1997 to 2018, with the greatest effects due to spruce beetle in Engelmann spruce (4.7% tree 
mortality) from 2013 to 2018 and mountain pine beetle in lodgepole pine (16.6% tree mortality) from 2001 to 2009.
 
Figure 9: Map of distances to live trees in the East Troublesome Fire (left), as well as the range of distances to live trees within high-severity areas (right). White 
areas in the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey).
Post-fire recruitment probabilities were relatively low for many tree species in the East Troublesome Fire (Fig. 10). 
However, lodgepole pine had high recruitment probabilities throughout much of the fire, and Engelmann spruce 
had high probabilities in wet, high-elevation areas. Subalpine fir, ponderosa pine, and Douglas-fir had low predicted 
recruitment probabilities in most portions of the fire. Of the total fire area, 34.7% was predicted to have low to moderate 
recruitment potential across all species.
 
Figure 10: Probabilities of natural recruitment for each dominant coniferous tree species in the East Troublesome Fire. White areas in the map are outside 
of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 2000s. The map of pre-fire species 
(bottom-right) shows nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. ABLA: subalpine fir, PICO: lodgepole pine, PIEN: 
Engelmann spruce, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        15
While probabilities of natural recruitment were relatively low for most species in the East Troublesome Fire, climate 
suitability was relatively high (Fig. 11), suggesting that reforestation activities could help supplement natural 
regeneration as needed. For example, reforestation may be valuable in areas where initial site assessments indicate 
limited post-fire recruitment of lodgepole pine from serotinous cones. In particular, areas occupied by Engelmann 
spruce, ponderosa pine, and Douglas-fir before fire occurrence had high climate suitability for each respective species. 
At lower elevations in the fire (e.g., < 9,000 ft), we expect that limited planting of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir may be 
appropriate, whereas planting of lodgepole pine and Engelmann spruce may be more appropriate at higher elevations 
in the fire, with a particular focus on northeast-facing slopes.
 
Figure 11: Climate suitability based on recent climate (ca., 1981-2020) and topography for each dominant coniferous tree species in the East Troublesome 
Fire. White areas in the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 
2000s. The map of pre-fire species (bottom-right) shows nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. ABLA: 
subalpine fir, PICO: lodgepole pine, PIEN: Engelmann spruce, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.
4d.  Mullen Fire
The Mullen Fire began in Savage Run Wilderness, southwest of Centennial, Wyoming, on September 17th, 2020, and 
was contained on October 24th, 2020. During this time, the fire burned 176,878 ac at elevations from 7,395 to 10,407 
ft along the border of southern Wyoming and northern Colorado. Of the total fire area, 48.7% burned at high severity. 
However, this fire was heterogeneous and spatially complex, with most high-severity areas being near live trees. In 
fact, 50.4% of the high-severity area was within 300 ft of a live tree, as compared to 31.0% of the area from 300-650 ft 
to a live tree, and just 18.7% being > 650 ft (Fig. 12). The Mullen Fire had high amounts of pre-fire beetle kill (35.9% tree 
mortality across species) from 1997 to 2018, primarily driven by mountain pine beetle activity in lodgepole pine (34.2% 
tree mortality) from 2006 to 2011.
 
Figure 12: Map of distances to live trees in the Mullen Fire (left), as well as the range of distances to live trees within high-severity areas (right). White areas in 
the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey).

16        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
Predictions of post-fire recruitment by species in the Mullen Fire suggest that lodgepole pine and Engelmann spruce 
are likely to recover well throughout much of the fire (Fig. 13). In the low- to mid-elevation areas where ponderosa pine 
and Douglas-fir were present before the fire, these species have low to moderate recruitment probabilities. Across the 
fire, 34.2% of the total area was predicted to have low to moderate recruitment for all species..
 
Figure 13: Probabilities of natural recruitment for each dominant coniferous tree species in the Mullen Fire. White areas in the map are outside of the final fire 
perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 2000s. The map of pre-fire species (bottom-right) shows 
nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. ABLA: subalpine fir, PICO: lodgepole pine, PIEN: Engelmann spruce, 
PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.	
Overall, climate suitability was high for many of the coniferous tree species present in the Mullen Fire, which may 
increase the success of reforestation activities conducted in areas where seed availability is limiting natural recovery 
(Fig. 14). Lodgepole pine had moderate to high climate suitability in many areas, particularly at intermediate to high 
elevations. High-elevation areas throughout the fire had high climate suitability for Engelmann spruce, whereas 
ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir had some isolated areas with high climate suitability in protected topographic settings. 
Planting of of Engelmann spruce and lodgepole pine may be most appropriate at high elevations and on northeast-
facing slopes, and planting of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir is appropriate at some lower-elevation sites within  
the fire.

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        17
 
Figure 14: Climate suitability based on recent climate (ca., 1981-2020) and topography for each dominant coniferous tree species in the Mullen Fire. White 
areas in the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 2000s. The 
map of pre-fire species (bottom-right) shows nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. ABLA: subalpine fir, 
PICO: lodgepole pine, PIEN: Engelmann spruce, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.
4e.  Williams Fork Fire
The Williams Fork Fire began in Arapaho National Forest, southwest of Fraser, Colorado, on August 14th, 2020, and 
was contained on November 30th, 2020 (Fig. 15). The fire burned 14,833 ac from 8,636 to 11,851 ft, primarily in forests 
dominated by lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce, and subalpine fir, with minor components of ponderosa pine and 
Douglas-fir at lower elevations. In comparison to other fires, Williams Fork had the highest proportion of high-severity 
fire (58.5% of the total area). Still, 49.2% of the high-severity area was within 300 ft of live trees, 27.8% was between 
300 and 650 ft, and only 23.0% was beyond 650 ft. Williams Fork had moderate levels of pre-fire beetle kill (24.1% tree 
mortality across species) from 1997 to 2018, which was mainly driven by mountain pine beetle activity in lodgepole pine 
(22.4% tree mortality) from 2001 to 2009.

18        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
 
Figure 15: Map of distances to live trees in the Williams Fork Fire (left), as well as the range of distances to live trees within high-severity areas (right). White 
areas in the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey).
The dominant pre-fire species in much of the Williams Fork Fire was lodgepole pine, with spruce being dominant at 
higher elevations. Our models of post-fire recruitment suggest that abundant lodgepole pine recruitment is likely in the 
eastern half of the fire (Fig. 16). Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir had high recruitment probabilities in low-severity 
portions of the fire, particularly at high elevations. In contrast, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir are unlikely to recruit 
in many portions of the fire because of low pre-fire abundances. In the Williams Fork Fire, 38.1% of the total area was 
predicted to have low to moderate recruitment potential for all species.
 
Figure 16: Probabilities of natural recruitment for each dominant coniferous tree species in the Williams Fork Fire. White areas in the map are outside of the 
final fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 2000s. The map of pre-fire species (bottom-
right) shows nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. ABLA: subalpine fir, PICO: lodgepole pine, PIEN: 
Engelmann spruce, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        19
Localized areas of moderate or high climate suitability were present for each of the coniferous tree species present in 
the Williams Fork Fire (Fig. 17). Overall, high elevations and northeast-facing slopes were most suitable for subalpine 
fir, lodgepole pine, and Engelmann spruce, while low-elevation areas within the fire were considered suitable for 
ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir. Limited planting of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir would both be appropriate at the 
lowest elevations, while Engelmann spruce and lodgepole pine would be appropriate at the highest elevations.
 
Figure 17: Climate suitability based on recent climate (ca., 1981-2020) and topography for each dominant coniferous tree species in the Williams Fork Fire. 
White areas in the map are outside of the final fire perimeter (shown in grey) or are in areas with < 5 ft2 of basal area ac-1 of a given species in the early 
2000s. The map of pre-fire species (bottom-right) shows nonforest areas and the dominant tree species in forested areas prior to fire occurrence. ABLA: 
subalpine fir, PICO: lodgepole pine, PIEN: Engelmann spruce, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir.
5. Discussion and Management Implications
The 2020 wildfire year has accentuated the need for strategic post-fire planning across large, forested landscapes in the 
western US. As the number of severely burned acres at risk of converting to non-forest continues to expand, there is 
increased urgency to effectively direct limited funds and expertise to high-priority areas. This urgency is reflected in the 
2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which increases funding for seed collection, planning, and reforestation on 
federal lands (H.R.3684). This analysis provides an initial approach for prioritizing reforestation activities across a range 
of land ownerships and management designations – using spatially explicit data describing pre-fire beetle outbreaks, 
fire severity, patterns of live trees, and the potential for natural recovery of the dominant conifer species – to identify 
those areas most likely to naturally recover to forest in the near-term. Such information may prove useful in delineating 
operational units across the burned landscapes of the 2020 wildfires, with a range of management strategies aimed to 
resist, accept, or direct forest change toward desired conditions. 
The 2020 wildfire season in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming left behind five landscapes that varied markedly 
in their total percentage of high-severity fire effects, ranging from 42.8% (Calwood) to 58.5% (Williams Fork) of the total 
area burned. This variability, in combination with variation in elevations, forest types, land ownerships, and operational 
conditions (e.g., slope angle, distance to closest road, wilderness designation), suggests that these five landscapes will 
likely require a range of post-fire management approaches. However, the total percentage of high-severity area is 

20        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
just one facet of fire severity patterns that should be 
considered when formulating management plans. The 
contiguity of high-severity patches is also important, 
as this relates to the spatial patterning of live trees on 
the landscape. These live trees serve as the necessary 
seed sources for the recruitment of non-serotinous 
conifer species, with recruitment often limited to areas 
< 300-650 ft from live trees, depending on species and 
local site conditions (McCaughey et al. 1986, Kemp et 
al. 2016, Stevens-Rumann and Morgan 2019). Based 
on our maps of distances to live trees, some fires (e.g., 
Mullen Fire) are well positioned for the recruitment of 
non-serotinous conifers because a vast majority (i.e., 
> 80%) of the severely burned area is within 650 ft of 
surviving forests. In contrast, other fires had larger, 
more contiguous treeless patches, and a greater area 
that is distant from live trees (e.g., Cameron Peak with > 
30% of high-severity area far from live trees). Across the 
five fires, sites that burned at high severity and were at 
least 650 ft from live trees (which might be considered 
at greatest need of reforestation) are only 27.8% of the 
high-severity area and 15.3% of the total area burned. 
Many of these areas may also recover through vegetative 
reproduction or dispersal of serotinous seed. For example, 
aspen (54.0%) and lodgepole pine (92.5%) were present 
prior to fire occurrence in large percentages of the areas 
with potential reforestation need (Wilson et al. 2013), 
and are well-adapted to high-severity fire (Tinker et 
al. 1994, Turner et al. 2007, Kreider and Yocom 2021). 
Allowing for natural forest recovery processes in areas < 
650 ft from live trees and in locations with serotinous or 
sprouting species makes the seemingly insurmountable 
task of reforestation following the 2020 wildfires more 
achievable (Fig. 1). 
In addition to seed availability and pre-fire species 
composition, conifer tree recruitment is limited by 
climate and topography, which together influence 
site environmental conditions experienced by plants 
(Stephenson 1998, Dobrowski 2011). Our models of 
recruitment probability for each species indicate that 
while some areas are expected to recover poorly (e.g., low 
elevations within a species’ range and sites far from seed 
sources), many areas are also predicted to recover well, 
with variation among and within the five landscapes. 
Overall, we predicted that lodgepole pine will establish 
well across intermediate to high elevations in the five 
landscapes, with moderate to high predicted recruitment 
across nearly 60% of the total burned area. Likewise, 
we predicted that Engelmann spruce will establish 
well across higher elevations, with nearly 20% of the 
total burned area having moderate to high predicted 
recruitment. In contrast, subalpine fir, which is often a 
shade-tolerant and late-seral species in these ecosystems 
(Aplet et al. 1988, Andrus et al. 2018), was predicted to have 
more limited recruitment (only ca. 15% of the total fire 
area having moderate to high recruitment probabilities), 
primarily in higher elevations and in areas with surviving 
trees. At lower elevations, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir 
recruitment were highly dependent on distance to live 
trees, local canopy cover, and (in the case of Douglas-
fir) aspect. We predicted that these two species would 
have moderate to high recruitment probability in only 
10.5% (ponderosa pine) and 7.3% (Douglas-fir) of the total 
burned area. Overall, we predicted that 31.2% of the total 
fire area had low to moderate recruitment probability 
for all of the dominant conifers, suggestive of protracted 
conifer forest recovery. However, the remaining 68.2% 
was predicted to have recovery of at least one species. 
While maps of distances to live trees provide a rough 
first filter in defining potential reforestation areas, maps 
of recruitment probability provide additional insight 
into the expected ecosystem trajectories throughout 
each landscape. Knowing which areas are most likely 
to recover to forested conditions, and which species are 
likely to dominate initial post-fire communities informs 
future management decisions because it can help to 
predict if natural processes are likely to create forest 
communities that align with the desired conditions.
Should managers desire to use reforestation to help 
establish forests at a site, the extent to which seedlings 
match local site conditions will be critical to successful 
implementation (Dumroese et al. 2016). Climate and 
topography are two key components of local site 
conditions that can be incorporated into broad-scale 
reforestation planning through GIS data (Simeone 
et al. 2019, Rodman et al. 2022b). Here, we developed 
maps of climate suitability, which provide an estimate 
of how the climate and topography of a site compare to 
other portions of a species’ range. While these models 
were developed using data describing natural tree 
regeneration following fire (Davis et al. In Review), they 
may also provide an estimate of the potential success 
of planting for each species, for which existing data are 
highly limited. Like maps of recruitment probability, 
maps of climate suitability show broad variation among 
species and landscapes. However, climate suitability (and 
potential reforestation suitability) was generally highest 
at cooler, wetter sites within each species’ pre-fire extent. 
Throughout the five landscapes, areas with moderately 
high to high climate suitability were widespread for 
Engelmann spruce (35% of the total high-severity area) 
and lodgepole pine (44%). Roughly 17% of the high-
severity area had moderately high to high suitability for 
Douglas-fir, with just 9% for ponderosa pine, and < 1% 

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        21
for subalpine fir. Each conifer species had local areas for 
which topography and climate suggest high suitability 
for planting (e.g., upper Calwood and lower Cameron 
Peak Fires for ponderosa pine). However, the aggregate 
numbers across fires indicate that Engelmann spruce and 
lodgepole pine may be the species that are most suitable 
for reforestation in much of the high-severity area across 
these fires. Such information may help to prioritize future 
seed collection efforts and greenhouse use for seedling 
production of different species in the region.
Our goal in this report was to apply the best available 
science to assess initial landscape conditions following 
five large fire events in southern Wyoming and 
northern Colorado. As part of a broader decision-making 
framework, this information may prove valuable to 
land managers, stakeholders, and policymakers in 
planning future activities. However, we acknowledge 
that the statistical models and GIS data we used in 
this assessment are imperfect, and are no substitute 
for detailed site visits, local operational planning, and 
expert knowledge. Potential sources of uncertainty in 
this report include the inherent errors in spatial data 
(e.g., delayed tree mortality not captured in fire severity 
maps, a lack of accurate spatial data on lodgepole 
pine serotiny), unknown effects of pre-fire bark beetle 
outbreaks on post-fire seed availability and forest 
recovery, potential interactions with past management 
and wildfire (e.g., recent clear cuts of fires removing live 
trees), and weather conditions in initial years following 
fire. Thus, while our findings provide an initial estimate 
of landscape conditions, continued monitoring and 
adaptive management will be critical to successful forest 
management and planning over the upcoming years.
The scale of the 2020 wildfires throughout the western 
US demands that managers break with post-fire 
management approaches that are solely centered on 
restoring pre-fire forest structure and composition across 
large landscapes. In the face of multiple uncertainties, 
the RAD framework may assist managers in identifying 
the best use of finite resources to not only resist but 
also accept and direct change across a mixture of 
different patches within a given landscape (Aplet and 
Mckinley 2017, Stevens et al. 2021). The first step in 
applying RAD to post-fire landscapes is to conduct a 
thorough landscape assessment, which identifies current 
landscape conditions and potential future trajectories. 
Such information can then be used to develop a range of 
management plans, to be applied in different zones of the 
landscape, based on the feasibility of active management 
as well as how expected natural trajectories align with 
desired conditions. Here, we present an initial landscape 
assessment of five recent wildfires that burned at a 
range of severities, across broad elevational gradients, 
and in multiple forest types. A range of management 
approaches is needed in these landscapes based on social 
values, local site conditions, and expected trajectories. 
Reforestation of all areas affected by the 2020 wildfires 
studied here (or even high-severity areas within them) 
may be challenging over upcoming years due to the time 
and money required for active reforestation, so targeting 
areas for reforestation that are far from live trees, had few 
serotinous or resprouting species before fire, and have 
high moisture availability for the component species, 
may help in the initial prioritization of resources.
6. References
Abatzoglou, J. T. 2013. Development of gridded surface 
meteorological data for ecological applications and 
modelling. International Journal of Climatology 
33:121–131.
Addington, R. N., G. H. Aplet, M. A. Battaglia, J. S. Briggs, 
P. M. Brown, A. S. Cheng, Y. Dickinson, J. A. Feinstein, 
K. A. Pelz, C. M. Regan, J. Thinnes, R. Truex, J. Paula, 
B. Gannon, C. W. Julian, J. L. Underhill, and B. Wolk. 
2018. Principles and practices for the restoration of 
ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer forests of the 
Colorado Front Range. RMRS GTR-373. Fort Collins, CO.
Aitken, S. N., and J. B. Bemmels. 2016. Time to get moving: 
Assisted gene flow of forest trees. Evolutionary 
Applications 9:271–290.
Andrus, R. A., S. J. Hart, N. J. Tutland, and T. T. Veblen. 
2021. Future dominance by quaking aspen expected 
following short-interval, compounded disturbance 
interaction. Ecosphere 12:e03345.
Andrus, R. A., S. J. Hart, and T. T. Veblen. 2020a. Forest 
recovery following synchronous outbreaks of spruce 
and western balsam bark beetle is slowed by ungulate 
browsing. Ecology 101:1–13.
Andrus, R. A., B. J. Harvey, R. K. Chai, and T. T. Veblen. 
2018. Different vital rates of Engelmann spruce and 
subalpine fir explain discordance in understory and 
overstory dominance. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research 48:1554–1562.
Andrus, R. A., B. J. Harvey, A. Hoffman, and T. T. Veblen. 
2020b. Reproductive maturity and cone abundance 
explained by tree size and stand basal area for two 
widely distributed conifers. Ecosphere 11:e03092.
Aplet, G. H., R. D. Laven, and F. W. Smith. 1988. Patterns of 
community dynamics in Colorado Engelmann spruce-
subalpine fir Forests. Ecology 69:312–319.
Aplet, G. H., and P. S. Mckinley. 2017. A portfolio approach 
to managing ecological risks of global change. 
Ecosystem Health and Sustainability 3:e01261.
Baker, W. L. 2009. Fire Ecology in Rocky Mountain 
Landscapes. Island Press, Washington, D.C.

22        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
Brown, P. M., M. A. Battaglia, P. J. Fornwalt, B. Gannon, L. 
S. Huckaby, C. Julian, and A. S. Cheng. 2015. Historical 
(1860) forest structure in ponderosa pine forests of the 
northern Front Range, Colorado. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 1132:1121–1132.
Burns, R. M., and B. H. Honkala. 1990. Silvics of North 
America: Vol 1, Conifers. Agricultural Handbook 654. 
USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C.
Carlson, A. R., J. S. Sibold, T. J. Assal, and J. F. Negrón. 
2017. Evidence of compounded disturbance effects on 
vegetation recovery following high-severity wildfire 
and spruce beetle outbreak. PLoS ONE 12:1–24.
Chambers, M. E., P. J. Fornwalt, S. L. Malone, and M. 
A. Battaglia. 2016. Patterns of conifer regeneration 
following high severity wildfire in ponderosa pine-
dominated forests of the Colorado Front Range. Forest 
Ecology and Management 378:57–67.
Coleman, T. W., A. D. Graves, Z. Heath, R. W. Flowers, R. P. 
Hanavan, D. R. Cluck, and D. Ryerson. 2018. Accuracy of 
aerial detection surveys for mapping insect and disease 
disturbances in the United States. Forest Ecology and 
Management 430:321–336.
Coop, J. D., R. T. Massatti, and A. W. Schoettle. 2010. 
Subalpine vegetation pattern three decades after 
stand-replacing fire: Effects of landscape context and 
topography on plant community composition, tree 
regeneration, and diversity. Journal of Vegetation 
Science 21:472–487.
Coop, J. D., S. A. Parks, C. S. Stevens-Rumann, S. M. Ritter, 
and C. M. Hoffman. 2022. Extreme fire spread events 
and area burned under recent and future climate in 
the western USA. Global Ecology and Biogeography 
31:1949-1959.
Davis, K. T., S. Z. Dobrowski, P. E. Higuera, Z. A. Holden, 
T. T. Veblen, M. T. Rother, A. Sala, and M. P. Maneta. 
2019. Wildfires and climate change push low-elevation 
forests across a critical climate threshold for tree 
regeneration. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 116:6193–6198.
Davis, K. T., P. E. Higuera, and A. Sala. 2018. Anticipating 
fire-mediated impacts of climate change using 
a demographic framework. Functional Ecology 
32:1729–1745.
Davis, K. T., M. D. Robles, K. B. Kemp, P. E. Higuera, K. L. 
Metlen, J. L. Peeler, K. C. Rodman, T. Woolley, N. Robert, 
B. J. Buma, C. A. Cansler, M. J. Case, B. M. Collins, B. J. 
Harvey, R. D. Haugo, M. D. Hurteau, D. Kulakowski, 
C. E. Littlefield, L. McCauley, N. Povak, K. L. Shive, E. 
Smith, J. T. Stevens, C. S. Stevens-Rumann, A. H. Taylor, 
A. J. Tepley, D. J. N. Young, R. A. Andrus, M. A. Battaglia, 
J. K. Berkey, S. U. Busby, A. Carlson, M. Chambers, E. K. 
Dodson, D. C. Donato, W. M. Downing, P. J. Fornwalt, 
J. S. Halofsky, A. Hoffman, A. Holz, J. M. Iniguez, M. 
A. Krawcuk, M. R. Kreider, A. J. Larson, G. W. Meigs, 
J. P. Roccaforte, M. T. Rother, H. Safford, M. Schaedel, 
J. Sibold, M. P. Singleton, M. G. Turner, A. K. Urza, K. 
D. Wolf, L. Yocom, J. B. Fontaine, and J. Campbell. In 
Review. Reduced fire severity offers near-term buffer to 
climate-driven declines in conifer resilience across the 
western United States.
Dobrowski, S. Z. 2011. A climatic basis for microrefugia: 
The influence of terrain on climate. Global Change 
Biology 17:1022–1035.
Dudney, J., R. J. Hobbs, R. Heilmayr, J. J. Battles, and K. N. 
Suding. 2018. Navigating novelty and risk in resilience 
management. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 
33:863–873.
Dumroese, K., T. Landis, J. Pinto, D. Haase, K. Wilkinson, 
and A. Davis. 2016. Meeting forest restoration 
challenges: Using the Target Plant Concept. 
Reforesta:37–52.
Dumroese, R. K., N. Balloffet, J. W. Crockett, J. A. Stanturf, 
and L. E. Nave. 2019. A national approach to leverage the 
benefits of tree planting on public lands. New Forests 
50:1–9.
Fargione, J., D. L. Haase, O. T. Burney, O. A. Kildisheva, G. 
Edge, S. C. Cook-Patton, T. Chapman, A. Rempel, M. D. 
Hurteau, K. T. Davis, S. Dobrowski, S. Enebak, R. De La 
Torre, A. A. R. Bhuta, F. Cubbage, B. Kittler, D. Zhang, 
and R. W. Guldin. 2021. Challenges to the reforestation 
pipeline in the United States. Frontiers in Forests and 
Global Change 4:1–18.
Forest Health Protection. 2021. Aerial Detection 
Surveys. https://www.fs.fed.us/foresthealth/applied-
sciences/mapping-reporting/detection-surveys.
shtml#idsdownloads.
Gartner, M. H., T. T. Veblen, R. L. Sherriff, and T. L. 
Schoennagel. 2012. Proximity to grasslands influences 
fire frequency and sensitivity to climate variability in 
ponderosa pine forests of the Colorado Front Range. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 21:562–571.
Guiterman, C. H., R. M. Gregg, L. A. E. Marshall, J. J. 
Beckmann, P. J. van Mantgem, D. A. Falk, J. E. Keeley, 
A. C. Caprio, J. D. Coop, P. J. Fornwalt, C. Haffey, R. K. 
Hagmann, S. T. Jackson, A. M. Lynch, E. Q. Margolis, 
C. Marks, M. D. Meyer, H. Safford, A. D. Syphard, 
A. Taylor, C. Wilcox, D. Carril, C. A. F. Enquist, D. 
Huffman, J. Iniguez, N. A. Molinari, C. Restaino, and J. 
T. Stevens. 2022. Vegetation type conversion in the US 
Southwest: Frontline observations and management 
responses. Fire Ecology 18:6.
Guz, J., N. S. Gill, and D. Kulakowski. 2021. Long-term 
empirical evidence shows post-disturbance climate 
controls post-fire regeneration. Journal of Ecology 
109:4007–4024.
Hart, S. J., T. T. Veblen, and D. Kulakowski. 2014. Do tree 

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        23
and stand-level attributes determine susceptibility 
of spruce-fir forests to spruce beetle outbreaks in the 
early 21st century? Forest Ecology and Management 
318:44–53.
Harvey, B. J., R. A. Andrus, M. A. Battaglia, J. F. Negrón, A. 
Orrego, and T. T. Veblen. 2021. Droughty times in mesic 
places: factors associated with forest mortality vary 
by scale in a temperate subalpine region. Ecosphere 
12:3318.
Harvey, B. J., D. C. Donato, and M. G. Turner. 2014. Recent 
mountain pine beetle outbreaks, wildfire severity, and 
postfire tree regeneration in the US Northern Rockies. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 111:15120–5.
Harvey, B. J., D. C. Donato, and M. G. Turner. 2016. High 
and dry: Postfire drought and large stand-replacing 
burn patches reduce postfire tree regeneration in 
subalpine forests. Global Ecology and Biogeography 
25:655–669.
Hicke, J. A., B. Xu, A. J. H. Meddens, and J. M. Egan. 2020. 
Characterizing recent bark beetle-caused tree mortality 
in the western United States from aerial surveys. Forest 
Ecology and Management 475:118402.
Higuera, P. E., and J. T. Abatzoglou. 2021. Record-setting 
climate enabled the extraordinary 2020 fire season 
in the western United States. Global Change Biology 
27:1–2.
Higuera, P. E., B. N. Shuman, and K. D. Wolf. 2021. Rocky 
Mountain subalpine forests now burning more than 
any time in recent millennia. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 118:1–5.
Huckaby, L. S., M. R. Kaufmann, J. M. Stoker, and P. J. 
Fornwalt. 2001. Landscape patterns of montane forest 
age structure relative to fire history at Cheesman 
Lake in the Colorado Front Range. Pages 19–27 in R. 
K. Vance, C. B. Edminster, W. W. Covington, and J. A. 
Blake, editors. Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems Restoration 
and Conservation: Steps Toward Stewardship. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Flagstaff, AZ.
H.R.3684 - 117th Congress (2021-2022): Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act. (2021). https://www.congress.
gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/3684 
Johnson, T. N., S. W. Buskirk, G. D. Hayward, and M. G. 
Raphael. 2014. Tree mortality after synchronized forest 
insect outbreaks: Effects of tree species, bole diameter, 
and cutting history. Forest Ecology and Management 
319:10–17.
Jolly, W. M., P. H. Freeborn, W. G. Page, and B. W. Butler. 
2019. Severe Fire Danger Index: A forecastable metric 
to inform firefighter and community wildfire risk 
management. Fire 2:1–24.
Jones, M. O., B. W. Allred, D. E. Naugle, J. D. Maestas, P. 
Donnelly, L. J. Metz, J. Karl, R. Smith, B. Bestelmeyer, C. 
Boyd, J. D. Kerby, and J. D. McIver. 2018. Innovation in 
rangeland monitoring: Annual, 30 m, plant functional 
type percent cover maps for U.S. rangelands, 1984–2017. 
Ecosphere 9.
Kaufmann, M. R., C. M. Regan, and P. M. Brown. 
2000. Heterogeneity in Ponderosa Pine/Douglas-Fir 
Forests: Age and size structure in unlogged and logged 
landscapes of central Colorado. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 30:698–711.
Kaufmann, M. R., T. Veblen, and W. H. Romme. 2006. 
Historical fire regimes in ponderosa pine forests of 
the Colorado Front Range, and recommendations for 
ecological restoration and fuels management. Front 
Range Fuels Treatment Partnership Roundtable, 
Findings of the Ecology Workgroup. Fort Collins, CO.
Kemp, K. B., P. E. Higuera, and P. Morgan. 2016. 
Fire legacies impact conifer regeneration across 
environmental gradients in the U.S. Northern Rockies. 
Landscape Ecology 31:619–635.
Kolb, T., A. Dixit, and O. Burney. 2019. Challenges and 
opportunities for maintaining ponderosa pine forests 
in the southwestern United States. Tree Planter’s Notes 
62:104–112.
Kreider, M. R., and L. L. Yocom. 2021. Low density aspen 
seedling establishment is widespread following recent 
wildfires in the western US. Ecology 102:e03436.
Lynch, A. J., L. M. Thompson, E. A. Beever, D. N. Cole, 
A. C. Engman, C. Hawkins Hoffman, S. T. Jackson, 
T. J. Krabbenhoft, D. J. Lawrence, D. Limpinsel, R. T. 
Magill, T. A. Melvin, J. M. Morton, R. A. Newman, J. O. 
Peterson, M. T. Porath, F. J. Rahel, G. W. Schuurman, 
S. A. Sethi, and J. L. Wilkening. 2021. Managing for 
RADical ecosystem change: Applying the Resist, Accept, 
or Direct (RAD) framework. Frontiers in Ecology and 
the Environment 19:461–469.
Magness, D. R., L. Hoang, R. T. Belote, J. Brennan, W. 
Carr, F. Stuart Chapin, K. Clifford, W. Morrison, J. 
M. Morton, and H. R. Sofaer. 2022. Management 
foundations for navigating ecological transformation 
by resisting, accepting, or directing social–ecological 
change. BioScience 72:30–44.
McCaughey, W. W., W. C. Schmidt, and R. C. Shearer. 
1986. Seed-dispersal characteristics of conifers in the 
Inland Mountain West. Pages 50–62 in R. C. Shearer, 
editor. Conifer Tree Seed in the Inland Mountain 
West Symposium. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-203. 
USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, 
Missoula, MT.
Millar, C. I., N. L. Stephenson, and S. L. Stephens. 2007. 
Climate change and forests of the future: Managing 
in the face of uncertainty. Ecological Applications 

24        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
17:2145–2151.
National Interagency Coordination Center. Wildland fire 
summary and statistics annual report. 2020.
National Interagency Fire Center. 2022. Wildland fire 
open data. https://data-nifc.opendata.arcgis.com/.
North, M. P., J. T. Stevens, D. F. Greene, M. Coppoletta, 
E. E. Knapp, A. M. Latimer, C. M. Restaino, R. E. 
Tompkins, K. R. Welch, R. A. York, D. J. N. Young, J. N. 
Axelson, T. N. Buckley, B. L. Estes, R. N. Hager, J. W. 
Long, M. D. Meyer, S. M. Ostoja, H. D. Safford, K. L. 
Shive, C. L. Tubbesing, H. Vice, D. Walsh, C. M. Werner, 
and P. Wyrsch. 2019. Tamm review: Reforestation for 
resilience in dry western U.S. forests. Forest Ecology 
and Management 432:209–224.
Ouzts, J., T. Kolb, D. Huffman, and A. Sánchez Meador. 
2015. Post-fire ponderosa pine regeneration with and 
without planting in Arizona and New Mexico. Forest 
Ecology and Management 354:281–290.
Parks, S. A., L. M. Holsinger, M. A. Voss, R. A. Loehman, 
and N. P. Robinson. 2018. Mean composite fire severity 
metrics computed with Google Earth Engine offer 
improved accuracy and expanded mapping potential. 
Remote Sensing 10:879.
Peet, R. 1981. Forest vegetation of the Colorado Front 
Range. Vegetatio 45:3–75.
Potapov, P., X. Li, A. Hernandez-Serna, A. Tyukavina, M. 
C. Hansen, A. Kommareddy, A. Pickens, S. Turubanova, 
H. Tang, C. E. Silva, J. Armston, R. Dubayah, J. B. Blair, 
and M. Hofton. 2021. Mapping global forest canopy 
height through integration of GEDI and Landsat data. 
Remote Sensing of Environment 253:112165.
PRISM Climate Group, Oregon State University. 2022. 
1991-2020 climate normals. http://prism.oregonstate.
edu.
Rhoades, C. C., A. T. Chow, T. P. Covino, T. S. Fegel, D. N. 
Pierson, and A. E. Rhea. 2019. The legacy of a severe 
wildfire on stream nitrogen and carbon in headwater 
catchments. Ecosystems 22:643–657.
Rhoades, C. C., T. S. Fegel, R. M. Hubbard, and M. E. 
Chambers. 2022. Limited seed viability in long-dead 
serotinous lodgepole pine trees in the Southern 
Rockies, USA. Forest Ecology and Management.
Robichaud, P. R., S. A. Lewis, R. E. Brown, and L. E. 
Ashmun. 2009. Emergency post-fire rehabilitation 
treatment effects on burned area ecology and long-
term restoration. Fire Ecology 5:115–128.
Rodman, K. C., R. A. Andrus, A. R. Carlson, T. A. Carter, 
T. B. Chapman, J. D. Coop, P. J. Fornwalt, N. S. Gill, B. J. 
Harvey, A. E. Hoffman, K. C. Kelsey, D. Kulakowski, D. 
C. Laughlin, J. E. Morris, J. F. Negrón, K. M. Nigro, G. 
S. Pappas, M. D. Redmond, C. C. Rhoades, M. E. Rocca, 
Z. H. Schapira, J. S. Sibold, C. S. Stevens-Rumann, T. T. 
Veblen, J. Wang, X. Zhang, and S. J. Hart. 2022a. Rocky 
Mountain forests are poised to recover following bark 
beetle outbreaks, but with altered composition. Journal 
of Ecology.
Rodman, K. C., P. J. Fornwalt, T. B. Chapman, J. D. Coop, G. 
Edwards, J. T. Stevens, and T. T. Veblen. 2022b. SRRT: A 
decision support tool to inform postfire reforestation of 
ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir in the southern Rocky 
Mountains. RMRS-RN-95. Fort Collins, CO.
Rodman, K. C., T. T. Veblen, R. A. Andrus, N. J. Enright, 
J. B. Fontaine, A. D. Gonzalez, M. D. Redmond, and 
A. P. Wion. 2021. A trait-based approach to assessing 
resistance and resilience to wildfire in two iconic North 
American conifers. Journal of Ecology 109:313–326.
Rodman, K. C., T. T. Veblen, M. A. Battaglia, M. E. 
Chambers, P. J. Fornwalt, Z. A. Holden, T. E. Kolb, J. R. 
Ouzts, and M. T. Rother. 2020a. A changing climate 
is snuffing out post-fire recovery in montane forests. 
Global Ecology and Biogeography 29:2039–2051.
Rodman, K. C., T. T. Veblen, T. B. Chapman, M. T. Rother, 
A. P. Wion, and M. D. Redmond. 2020b. Limitations to 
recovery following wildfire in dry forests of southern 
Colorado and northern New Mexico, USA. Ecological 
Applications 30:e02001.
Rodman, K. C., T. T. Veblen, S. Saraceni, and T. B. 
Chapman. 2019. Wildfire activity and land use drove 
20th century changes in forest cover in the Colorado 
Front Range. Ecosphere 10:e02594.
Rother, M. T., and T. T. Veblen. 2016. Limited conifer 
regeneration following wildfires in dry ponderosa 
pine forests of the Colorado Front Range. Ecosphere 
7:e01594.
Schapira, Z., C. Stevens-Rumann, D. Shorrock, C. 
Hoffman, and A. Chambers. 2021. Beetlemania: Is the 
bark worse than the bite? Rocky Mountain subalpine 
forests recover differently after spruce beetle outbreaks 
and wildfires. Forest Ecology and Management 
482:118879.
Schoennagel, T., R. L. Sherriff, and T. T. Veblen. 2011. Fire 
history and tree recruitment in the Colorado Front 
Range upper montane zone: Implications for forest 
restoration. Ecological Applications 21:2210–2222.
Sherriff, R. L., R. V Platt, T. T. Veblen, T. L. Schoennagel, 
and M. H. Gartner. 2014. Historical, observed, and 
modeled wildfire severity in montane forests of the 
Colorado Front Range. PLoS ONE 9:1–17.
Sherriff, R. L., and T. T. Veblen. 2006. Ecological effects of 
changes in fire regimes in Pinus ponderosa ecosystems 
in the Colorado Front Range. Journal of Vegetation 
Science 17:705–718.
Sibold, J. S., and T. T. Veblen. 2006. Relationships of 
subalpine forest fires in the Colorado Front Range to 
interannual and multi-decadal scale climate variations. 
Journal of Biogeography 33:833–842.

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        25
Sibold, J. S., T. T. Veblen, and M. E. González. 2006. Spatial 
and temporal variation in historic fire regimes in 
subalpine forests across the Colorado Front Range in 
Rocky Mountain National Park, Colorado, USA. Journal 
of Biogeography 33:631–647.
Simeone, C., M. P. Maneta, Z. A. Holden, G. Sapes, A. 
Sala, and S. Z. Dobrowski. 2019. Coupled ecohydrology 
and plant hydraulics modeling predicts ponderosa 
pine seedling mortality and lower treeline in the 
US Northern Rocky Mountains. New Phytologist 
221:1814–1830.
Stephenson, N. L. 1998. Actual evapotranspiration 
and deficit: Biologically meaningful correlates of 
vegetation distribution across spatial scales. Journal of 
Biogeography 25:855–870.
Stevens-Rumann, C. S., and P. Morgan. 2019. Tree 
regeneration following wildfires in the western US: A 
review. Fire Ecology 15:15.
Stevens, J. T., C. M. Haffey, J. D. Coop, P. J. Fornwalt, L. 
Yocom, C. D. Allen, A. Bradley, O. T. Burney, D. Carril, 
M. E. Chambers, T. B. Chapman, S. L. Haire, M. D. 
Hurteau, J. M. Iniguez, E. Q. Margolis, C. Marks, L. A. 
E. Marshall, K. C. Rodman, C. S. Stevens-Rumann, A. 
E. Thode, and J. J. Walker. 2021. Tamm Review: Postfire 
landscape management in frequent-fire conifer forests 
of the southwestern United States. Forest Ecology and 
Management 502:119678.
Teste, F. P., V. J. Lieffers, and S. M. Landhäusser. 2011. 
Viability of forest floor and canopy seed banks in 
pinus contorta var. latifolia (pinaceae) forests after a 
mountain pine beetle outbreak. American Journal of 
Botany 98:630–637.
Theobald, D. M., D. Harrison-Atlas, and W. B. Monahan. 
2015. Ecologically-relevant maps of landforms and 
physiographic diversity for climate adaptation 
planning. PLoS ONE 10:1–17.
Tinker, D. B., W. H. Romme, W. W. Hargrove, R. H. 
Gardner, and M. G. Turner. 1994. Landscape-scale 
heterogeneity in lodgepole pine serotiny. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research 24:897–903.
Turner, M. G., D. M. Turner, W. H. Romme, and D. B. 
Tinker. 2007. Cone production in young post-fire Pinus 
contorta stands in Greater Yellowstone (USA). Forest 
Ecology and Management 242:119–126.
Veblen, T. T., and J. A. Donnegan. 2005. Historical Range 
of Variability for Forest Vegetation of the National 
Forests of the Colorado Front Range. USDA Forest 
Service, Golden, CO.
Veblen, T. T., T. Kitzberger, and J. Donnegan. 2000. 
Climatic and human influences on fire regimes in 
ponderosa pine forests in the Colorado Front Range. 
Ecological Applications 10:1178–1195.
Williams, M. I., and R. K. Dumroese. 2013. Preparing 
for climate change: Forestry and assisted migration. 
Journal of Forestry 111:287–297.
Wilson, B. T., A. J. Lister, R. I. Riemann, and D. M. Griffith. 
2013. Live tree species basal area of the contiguous 
United States (2000-2009). St. Paul, MN, USA.
Young, D. J. N., T. D. Blush, M. Landram, J. W. Wright, 
A. M. Latimer, and H. D. Safford. 2020. Assisted gene 
flow in the context of large-scale forest management in 
California, USA. Ecosphere 11:e03001.
 

26        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
7. Supplementary Information
 
Figure S1: The timing and severity of pre-fire (1997-2018) beetle-caused tree mortality throughout each of five large fires in northern Colorado and southern 
Wyoming. Data were obtained from Hicke et al. (2020) for each of five common host tree-bark beetle agent combinations. ABLA: subalpine fir, PICO: 
lodgepole pine, PIEN: Engelmann spruce, PIPO: ponderosa pine, PSME: Douglas-fir. DFB: Douglas-fir beetle, MPB: mountain pine beetle, SB: spruce beetle, 
WBBB: western balsam bark beetle or subalpine fir decline.

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        27
 
Figure S2: Post-fire recruitment probability across five major fires in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming. Values are summarized within each fire for five 
dominant coniferous tree species. Bar heights represent the area (thousands of acres) in a given category, with lighter-colored bars representing areas with a 
greater probability of natural regeneration following fire.

28        The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management
 
Figure S3: Climate suitability across high-severity areas within five major fires in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming. Values are summarized within 
each fire for five dominant coniferous tree species. Bar heights represent the area (thousands of acres) in a given category, with lighter-colored bars 
representing areas with greater climate suitability and a greater potential for reforestation following fire.

The historic 2020 fire year in northern Colorado and southern Wyoming: A landscape assessment to inform post-fire forest management        29
8. Additional resources
A summary of this work is represented in the companion ESRI Story Map by Mark Kohn, Kyle Rodman, and Marin 
Chambers.  https://cfri.colostate.edu/2022/11/21/nfr_2020fires_storymap/
Spatial data associated with this report can be found at the following link for planning purposes.  https://cfri.app.box.
com/folder/182650899411?s=oqqbtfetqpcg5tb5flrtmg8862kh4ahu
