H a n d b o o k FOUR
Monitoring ecological effects
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program
January 2006

The multiparty monitoring handbook series
This multiparty monitoring handbook is part of a series of guides to
monitoring collaborative forest restoration projects. The series was
written specifically for projects funded through the USDA Forest
Service’s Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP). The
Handbooks in the series are:
Handbook 1—What is multiparty monitoring?
Handbook 2—Developing a multiparty monitoring plan
Handbook 3—Budgeting for monitoring projects
Handbook 4—Monitoring ecological effects
Handbook 5—Monitoring social and economic effects
Handbook 6—Analyzing and interpreting monitoring data
Multiparty monitoring is required of all CFRP grantees; however, the
methods and approaches presented in these workbooks are to serve as
guides and references only. The specific methods are NOT required.
Because there is a wide diversity of projects funded through the CFRP,
many grantees will have different requirements for monitoring and/or
monitoring assistance.
The content of these handbooks was largely conceived at a series of
workshops held in 2003 that were sponsored by the following:
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI), Forest Trust, Four Corners
Institute, National Forest Foundation, Pinchot Institute for
Conservation, USDA Forest Service—Collaborative Forest
Restoration Program.
These handbooks are updated periodically and the latest versions will
be available on the Collaborative Forest Restoration Program Web site
at www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/monitoring. For more information on this
series, contact the Ecological Restoration Institute, Box 15017, Flagstaff
AZ 86011-5017.
CFRP grantees are also eligible for multiparty monitoring training
workshops and technical assistance from the CFRP monitoring team. This
free service will be provided through September 2006. Call 866.614.8424
for details.
Handbook 4 authors : Melissa Savage, Tori Derr, Martha Schumann,
 and Jesse Abrams. Handbook series authors/editors: Tori Derr, Ann
Moote, Melissa Savage, Martha Schumann, Jesse Abrams, Laura 
Design, copy-edit, and production Joel Viers, ERI; cover photo the
Forest Trust. 
12.30.06
This Handbook series is
largely funded by the
USDA Forest Service
and is published by the
Ecological Restoration
Institute at Northern
Arizona University
McCarthy, and Kimberly Lowe.

Table of contents
Part 1 — Ecological goals and principles
What is ecological restoration?
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
1
Ponderosa pine forests.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
1
Pinyon-juniper woodlands.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
2
Riparian communities .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
3
Choosing ecological monitoring goals and indicators.  .  .  .  .  .
4
An overview of ecological monitoring goals and indicators .  .
5
Reduce the threat of large, high-intensity wildfires,
create conditions conducive to low-intensity fires,
and re-establish low intensity surface fires.  .  .  .  .  .  .
5
Preserve old and large trees, both living and dead .  .  .  .
6
Enhance native plant populations and reduce
invasive, non-native plant populations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
6
Conserve wildlife habitat and populations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
7
Conserve soil resources .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
9
Conserve and protect riparian communities .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
10
Summary of suggested goals and indicators .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
11
Table 1 – Target values for ecological indicators .  .  .  .  .  .
12
Table 2 – Summary of goals and indicators for
ecological monitoring .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
13
Table 3 – Important restoration indicators .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
14
Part 2 — Ecological monitoring methods
General features of an ecological sampling design .  .  .  .  .  .  .
15
What indicators will be monitored .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
15
Methods to measure each indicator .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
16
Spacing and numbers of each measurement through-
out the project area .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
16
When and how often to take each measurement .  .  .  .  .
16
Who will take the measurements .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
18
When and how data will be analyzed .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
18
Where and how data will be stored .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
18
Field methods for measuring indicators .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
19
Table 4 – Summary of indicators and method(s) to
measure them .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
19
Some tips before heading into the field .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
20
1 — Permanent photo points .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
21
2 — Transect-based sampling .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
24
Table 5 – Indicators measured with transects .  .  .  .  .
25
2.1 – Landscape openings .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
26
2.2 – Bird species abundance and composition .  .  .  .  .  .  .
27

2.3 – Butterfly species abundance and composition .  .  .  .
28
2.4 – Seedling density .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
29
2.6 – Amount of surface fuel .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
30
2.7 – Extent of canopy cover.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
33
2.8 – Classification of riparian plant community structure
34
3 —  Plot-based sampling .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
37
Table 6 – Indicators sampled with plots .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
38
Large plot sampling .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
38
3.1 – Density and size of live trees .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
39
3.2 – Density and size of dead standing trees .  .  .  .  .  .  .
41
3.3 – Height from ground to tree crowns.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
42
Small plot sampling .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
43
3.4 – Understory plant species composition .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
44
3.5 – Understory cover .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
45
3.6 – Extent of bare soil .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
47
Appendix 1 – Glossary.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
49
Appendix 2 – Area conversion .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
53
Appendix 3 – Useful monitoring resources .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
54
Appendix 4 – Monitoring materials and equipment .  .  .  .  .  .
56
Appendix 5 – References .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
58
Appendix 6 – Ecological monitoring data sheets .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
61
Acknowledgments

1
Part 1
Monitoring ecological goals and indicators
What is ecological restoration?___________________________
The goal of restoration should be to create a self-sustaining eco-
system that functions well and needs little maintenance. Moni-
toring is essential in order to see if projects are achieving improved
ecological conditions. There are at least three ecosystems that pro-
jects of the Collaborative Forest Restoration Program are working
to restore:
w Ponderosa pine forests
w Pinyon-juniper woodlands
w Riparian communities
Part 1 of this handbook includes a description of common restora-
tion goals and indicators. Methods for measuring each indicator
are described in Part 2. Many of the goals, indicators, and methods
listed throughout this handbook will apply to all three ecosystems
listed above. Some methods are specific to only one or two ecosys-
tem types, and this is indicated in the description of these meth-
ods. Most goals and indicators are appropriate for and will apply to
all three ecosystems above.
Ponderosa pine forests
Ponderosa pine forests have changed dramatically in the South-
west since the late 1800s. Typical ecosystem changes include:
w Decreased cover of grasses and wildflowers
w Shifts in wildlife diversity
w Increased densities of small trees
w Decreased numbers of large old-growth trees

2
w Increased old-growth tree mortality rates due to competition
from thickets of small trees
w Increased threats of large-scale insect attacks on trees
w Change from low-intensity ground fires to increasingly large,
high-intensity “crown” fires
w Increasing threats to property and human lives
Most people agree that these changes are due to drastic changes in
land use and land management, particularly fire suppression.
Starting in the early 1900s, many small ponderosa pine trees ger-
minated and survived, partly because of the lack of surface fires to
thin excess seedlings and partly because of the removal of compe-
tition from grass due to overgrazing. As these trees have grown,
they have created dense thickets of small trees that typically have
little plant cover on the ground. These changes have in turn af-
fected wildlife and fire regimes. Instead of surface fires, most pon-
derosa pine forests now burn in intense crown fires, which can kill
many trees over thousands of acres. While there is no single pre-
scription for every site needing restoration, virtually all ponderosa
pine restoration projects involve some tree thinning and some
prescribed burning.
Pinyon-juniper woodlands
Pinyon pine and juniper woodlands appear to be changing rapidly
in the Southwest in recent decades. Scientists do not understand
to what extent this is due to natural causes, such as natural climate
change, or to human activities, such as the suppression of wildfire.
The history of fire in pinyon-juniper woodlands is also not well
understood. However, many people now live in areas of dense
pinyon-juniper woodlands that pose a serious fire hazard to
homes and villages. Restoration of pinyon-juniper ecosystems that
threaten human communities involves reducing densities by thin-
ning trees in order to reduce this risk of destructive fire.
Surface fires typically occur at the
ground level of a forest, burning
needles, fallen branches, and other
fuels on the forest floor.
—
They are especially important to
restoration because they help
reduce conditions such as dense
ground fuels and excess tree
seedlings that can eventually lead
to crown fires.

3
Riparian communities
Southwestern riparian communities have been changed by human
activities over a long period of time. Much of the Rio Grande val-
ley has been inhabited by indigenous people for more than 1000
years, and Hispanic uses, including livestock grazing, have been
important for centuries. In New Mexico, a riparian community is
often called a bosque, a Spanish word for woodlands. Some ecosys-
tem changes seen in riparian communities include:
w Lowered water table
w Soil erosion and unstable river banks
w Increased numbers of non-native plant species
w Decreased numbers of native plant species, especially
cottonwood trees
w Increased number of jacks, levies, and other flood-control
structures that straighten the river
w Reduced flooding over the banks of the river
w Increased fire hazard
w Reduced soil moisture
Traditional approaches to restoration are not useful for riparian
community restoration in New Mexico. Typical restoration in-
volves referring to sites that have been and continue to be rela-
tively free from recent human disturbances. Because all riparian
areas in New Mexico have been influenced by humans for many
centuries, there are no such relatively unchanged sites. However,
most lowland riparian communities were probably mosaics of the
following:
w Areas of young cottonwood, willow, and native olive trees
w Forests with mature cottonwood trees
w Wet meadows, open marshes, ponds, and grasslands
Because there are no relatively natural bosques to refer to, restora-
tion of these systems frequently involves efforts to restore natural
processes. For example, a natural cycle of flooding over river banks
allows cottonwood seeds to germinate. But restoring natural water
flows is very difficult. A more practical restoration approach is the
A riparian community, or bosque,
refers to ecosystems located along
streams and rivers, where trees such
as cottonwoods and willows grow.
Non-native plants are those that
come from a different region than
where they are currently growing.

4
removal of non-native trees, such as Russian olives. This reduces
the threat of fires, which can be devastating to native tree popula-
tions in the bosque.
Choosing ecological monitoring goals and indicators_________
What a group chooses to monitor will depend on the objectives of
its restoration project. Each restoration project is unique, reflect-
ing different localized characteristics of the forest, as well as the
particular values of the multiparty monitoring team. In addition to
this handbook, there are a number of publications that describe
how to choose ecological monitoring approaches and variables.
Some of these are listed in Appendix 2.
A monitoring goal is a general summary of the desired state that a
project is trying to achieve. As described in Handbook 2, your pro-
ject proposal and the legislation that created the Collaborative For-
est Restoration Program are useful starting points for thinking
about what goals your group may want to monitor. The following
goals stem from this legislation. Groups can choose from the fol-
lowing goals or create their own as they develop a monitoring
plan:
1 – Reduce the threat of high-intensity wildfire, create
conditions that will continue to support low-intensity
fires, and re-establish low-intensity fires
2 – Preserve old and large trees, both living and dead
3 – Enhance native plant populations and reduce invasive,
non-native plant populations
4 – Conserve wildlife populations and habitats
5 – Conserve soil resources
6 – Conserve and protect riparian communities
Once the group has identified the goals it wants to monitor, it
must select one or more indicators that can measure changes in
that goal. An indicator is a unit of information measured over time
that documents specific changes. For example, “extent of canopy
cover” is an indicator of the threat of high-intensity wildfire. If a

5
group measures “extent of canopy cover” over time, they can learn
if and how the canopy changed and if the risk of high-intensity
wildfire may have increased or decreased.
A good indicator is measurable, precise, consistent, and sensitive
to changing conditions. When selecting indicators, multiparty
monitoring groups will want to ask themselves whether a pro-
posed indicator is:
w Relevant for the site and treatment?
w Sensitive to change so that it can detect change within the
monitoring timeframe?
w Measurable with available methods that multiparty groups can
use?
w Not subject to individual or organizational bias?
w Able to be measured by methods that are professionally
accepted and understood?
The following section explains each of the suggested ecological
monitoring goals for forest restoration projects, and lists recom-
mended indicators for each goal. Part 2 describes methods for
measuring each of these indicators.
An overview of ecological monitoring and indicators__________
Reduce the threat of high-intensity wildfire, create conditions
that will continue to support low-intensity fires, and
re-establish low-intensity fires
A primary goal of restoration is to reduce the threat of crown fire.
There are several indicators that help determine the likelihood
that a forest would support a crown fire. These include:
w Density and size of live trees
w Seedling density
w Extent of canopy closure
w Height from the ground to tree crowns
w Amount of surface fuel
w Landscape openings
Crown fires are intensely hot fires
that move quickly through tree tops
and kill many trees, both large and
small.
An indicator is a feature that, when
measured over time, documents
specific changes.

6
An equally important goal of restoration is to re-establish low-in-
tensity surface fires that burn across the forest floor. These surface
fires are important because they help maintain a lower level of
ground fuels and fewer excess small diameter trees. Without rein-
troduction of these surface fires, many of the positive ecological
changes brought about by various treatments will be short-lived.
Low-intensity fire can be returned through prescribed burning or
natural ignitions. If fire is introduced as part of a CFRP project,
then the monitoring team may especially want to measure the fol-
lowing indicators before and after the burn:
w Seedling density
w Understory cover
w Amount of surface fuel
Preserve old and large trees, both living and dead
Old and large trees have significant ecological value for many rea-
sons. They are no longer common in southwestern forests, so it is
important to preserve those that do exist. Large trees, both living
and dead, are important for wildlife. This is discussed further un-
der the goal, “conserve wildlife populations and habitats” below. In
addition, tree rings of old ponderosa pine trees are important for
scientists to understand fire history, changes in climate, and other
aspects of ecosystems. Two indicators help show whether or not
old and large trees are preserved:
w Size of live trees
w Size of dead standing trees
Enhance native plant populations and reduce invasive,
non-native plant populations
Native grasses and forbs are an important part of Southwestern
ecosystems. These plants make up the understory and contribute to
much of the biological diversity in most forests. Understory plants
provide food and cover for microorganisms, insects, mammals
Surface fires typically occur at the
ground level of a forest, burning
needles, fallen branches, and other
fuels on the forest floor.
–
They are especially important to
restoration because they help reduce
conditions such as dense ground
fuels and excess tree seedlings that
can eventually lead to crown fires.

7
and other wildlife. They also help protect soil from erosion and
provide forage for grazing animals.
Another crucial function for understory plants is their role in fire
in ponderosa pine forests. When grasses and forbs are dry, they en-
able low-intensity fires to burn readily across the forest floor.
Without enough understory vegetation, fires will not spread and
will not perform their natural functions to kill overabundant small
trees.
On the other hand, there are some plants that are not native to an
area, and some become invasive, taking over large parts of the
understory and displacing natives. Invasive, non-native plants can
have negative effects on an ecosystem because they compete with
native plants for space, light, water, and nutrients. They also can
change the timing and role of fire in a system. The threat of fire
from non-native species is particularly significant in riparian com-
munities.
For example, non-native cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) may displace
native species because it uses soil moisture early in the spring be-
fore native plants are actively growing. If cheatgrass becomes
dense enough, it can change the timing of surface fires so that they
burn when native grasses and forbs are actively growing and are
more vulnerable. Cheatgrass is not preferred forage for grazers,
and may be less able to protect soil from erosion than native plants.
Indicators for monitoring native and non-native plants in the
understory include:
w Understory cover
w Understory plant species composition
Conserve wildlife habitat and populations
There are two kinds of goals for wildlife as part of ecosystem resto-
ration, depending on the type of project implemented. If a project
is specifically designed to restore habitat for wildlife, the goal is to
create conditions that support native animals. For projects that do
Understory refers to plants that
grow close to the ground. These
include grasses, other non-woody
plants (called forbs), and woody
shrubs.
Species composition refers to all
plant species, both native and
non-native, that can be found in an
area.
Native plants are those that
naturally occur in an area.
—
Non-native plants are those that
come from a different region of the
country or world than where they
are currently growing.
—
Invasive plants tend to be
non-native and can spread
aggressively.

8
not specifically set out to restore wildlife habitat, the goal is to
minimize negative impacts on wildlife.
Monitoring either of these goals is difficult because many animals
hide from humans or are difficult to identify. To monitor wildlife
it is often necessary to rely on more indirect indicators and mea-
sures. These can include “wildlife indicators” or habitat condi-
tions.
Wildlife indicators are animal species that can help show changes in
an ecosystem. The following are suggestions for monitoring wild-
life indicators:
w Bird abundance and species composition
w Butterfly abundance and species composition
Birds and butterflies are particularly useful indicators of changes
in forest conditions, such as amount of light or temperature. The
numbers of butterflies should also increase with greater numbers
of flowering plant species that could result from a restoration pro-
ject.
Habitat conditions help to show if an area is good for wildlife. For ex-
ample, large trees are important to many different kinds of ani-
mals, including Goshawks, songbirds, wild turkeys, woodpeckers
and bats. When large trees die, they are important to “cavity-nest-
ing birds,” such as northern flickers and mountain bluebirds,
which rely on these trees for nesting. The arrangement of trees
into clumps of three or four can provide important habitat for
squirrels, bear, turkey, deer, and elk. Other habitat conditions im-
portant to wildlife include understory plants, food and cover, and
woody plants, such as oaks and junipers, that provide large
amounts of food for many animals. In addition, some dead wood
on the ground provides habitat for small mammals, including
those that store seeds from trees in the ground.
Habitat refers to the place where an
animal is usually found. It
generally includes food, cover, and
nesting conditions that an animal
needs to survive.
Wildlife indicators are animals that
often respond quickly to restoration
efforts and help show if these efforts
have been successful.

9
Habitat conditions that can be monitored include:
w Density and size of live trees
w Density and size of dead standing trees
w Understory plant composition
w Understory cover
w Density of woody plants that produce seeds, fruits, and nuts,
such as oaks and junipers
w Landscape openings
Conserve soil resources
Soils are the foundation of any ecosystem and are an essential part
of ecosystem health. Soils can easily be damaged when they are ex-
posed to high-intensity fires or when heavy equipment moves
large amounts of soil or packs it down hard. Damaged soils can
take a very long time to recover. When soils are damaged, they are
more likely to be invaded by non-native plants. The soil also be-
comes less favorable for tree seedlings to establish, and water is less
likely to soak into the soil, which can lead to erosion.
The term “soil resources” actually refers to much more than
“bare” soil. There are many components and functions of soil. For
example, many organisms live in soil, including microbes, which
help to free up nutrients so that they are in a more useable form for
plants. Soil also stores seeds of many plants and provides homes
for many invertebrates and small mammals. Some indicators that
can measure soil resources include:
w Understory cover
w Extent of bare soil
For some restoration projects, you may be interested in monitor-
ing the amount of soil compaction that occurs because of restora-
tion treatments. This is especially true if one of your project goals
is to test different kinds of mechanical treatments in order to com-
pare which have the least impact on soils. Soil compaction is not
included as an indicator here because of measurement challenges.
A more extensive set of soil monitoring methods can be found in a
manual published by Herrick and others (2001; see Appendix 5).

10
Conserve and protect riparian communities
Riparian communities are shady areas of trees, shrubs and herba-
ceous plants that grow along streams and rivers. They occupy less
than one percent of the arid Southwest, but have the greatest di-
versity of plants, birds, and animals. The bosque provides habitat
for many threatened or endangered species. Yet riparian commu-
nities are among the most threatened ecosystem types in the
Southwest. Threats include higher risk of destructive fires; low-
ered water table; impacts from overgrazing; invasion by non-na-
tive plants including tamarisk, Russian olive and Siberian elm; and
clearing for development.
A key goal of restoration in riparian communities is the removal of
many of the non-native trees that live in riparian areas. These
non-native trees increase the risk of destructive fires and displace
native species. Riparian community restoration can also involve
trying to re-create a more natural mosaic of plants, including for-
ests of young cottonwood, willow, and native olive trees; forests
with mature cottonwood trees; and wet meadows, open marshes,
ponds, and grasslands. Two important indicators for riparian com-
munity health include:
w Understory plant species composition
w Classification of plant community structure
In addition, many other indicators also provide useful information
about riparian communities. These include:
w Density and size of live trees
w Density and size of dead standing trees
w Understory cover
w Extent of canopy closure
w Height from ground to tree crowns
w Amount of surface fuel
w Landscape openings

11
Setting target values for your indicators_____________________
Target values are measurable outcomes, chosen by your multiparty
monitoring team, which you hope to achieve with your project.
For each indicator that will be monitored, your multiparty moni-
toring team should come to agreement on a target value or desired
direction and level of change for that indicator. For example, you
may have decided that you want to decrease tree density to 60 trees
per acre on your project site, or that you want to increase
understory cover by at least 20%. These values can then be used as
benchmarks to help you decide whether or not you are achieving
your goal. You may need to collect baseline data before specifying
your target values.
It is difficult to prescribe target values for restoration project indi-
cators in a general way. For one thing, all forest stands and all com-
munities are different, and one prescription would not fit all sites.
Every restoration project will define success in a different way, but
many specific values for desired conditions will be similar to val-
ues in other projects. For example, most projects will want a de-
crease in the threat of high-intensity fires and an increase in the
groundcover of grasses and forbs in the forest.
An example of a set of target values for ecological indicators is pre-
sented in Table 1 (next page). These are examples only. Your target
values may vary, depending on the goals of your project. Some ver-
sion of this set of values might be suitable in ponderosa pine forest
restoration projects in the Southwest. (Note that Table 1 shows
sample target values for ecological indicators four years after treat-
ment. Target values for different time periods, such as one or five
years after treatment, may be different.)
Summary of suggested goals and indicators________________
Table 2 (page 13) provides sample indicators that are suggested for
each of the above six goals.

12
Many of the indicators are listed under more than one goal be-
cause they provide information that can help explain different as-
pects of forest restoration.
Monitoring teams may want to consider measuring some of the
indicators in Table 2 (facing page) that can provide information for
more than one goal. As an example, tree density and size provide
information about goals to change fire regimes, preserve old and
large trees, conserve wildlife and habitat, and conserve riparian
communities. Table 3 (page 14) shows indicators that are relatively
easy to measure or provide information about multiple goals.
Table 1 — Examples of target values for ecological indicators
Indicator
Sample targets (four years post-treatment)
Bird abundance and composition
At least 10% increase in average
abundance of native species
Butterly abundance and composition
At least 10% increase in average
abundance of native species
Seedling density
40–50% reduction in average density
Surface fuels
At least 70% reduction in average weight
Height from ground to tree crown
Average distance of 8 feet or more
Understory plant composition
No decrease, or an increase, in the
number of native species
Understory plant cover
At least 20% increase in percent cover
Extent of bare soil
No more than 30% bare soil
Permanent photo points
Increase in grasses and other understory
plants
Landscape openings
More small meadows between patches of
trees
Classification of riparian plant
commmunity structure
More mature cottonwood trees with native
understory (Type 1 and Type 2 stands)

13
Table 2 — Summary of goals and indicators for ecological monitoring
Goal
Indicator
Change fire regimes
Density and size of live trees
Seedling density
Extent of canopy closure
Height from ground to tree crowns
Amount of surface fuel
Understory cover
Landscape openings
Preserve old and large trees
Size of live trees
Size of dead standing trees
Enhance native plants/reduce
non-native plants
Understory cover
Understory plant species composition
Conserve wildlife populations and
habitats
Density and size of live trees
Density and size of dead standing trees
Extent of canopy closure
Understory cover
Understory plant composition
Bird abundance and species composition
Butterfly abundance and species composition
Density of woody plants that produce seeds, fruits,
and nuts (such as oaks and junipers)
Landscape openings
Conserve soil resources
Understory cover
Extent of bare soil
Conserve and protect riparian
communities
Density and size of live trees
Density and size of dead standing trees
Classification of plant community structure
Understory plant species composition
Understory cover
Extent of canopy closure
Height from ground to tree crown
Amount of surface fuel
Landscape openings
In addition, if all restoration projects in the region measure these
six indicators, it may be possible to develop a more complete un-
derstanding of what is happening in ecosystems across the region.
This would be an important benefit to the Collaborative Forest
Restoration Program as well as to overall restoration efforts.

14
Table 3 — Important restoration indicators
Indicators
Goal
Density and size of live trees
Change fire regimes
Preserve old and large trees
Conserve wildlife habitat
Conserve riparian communities
Density and size of standing dead trees
Change fire regimes
Preserve old and large trees
Conserve wildlife habitat
Conserve riparian communities
Height from ground to tree crowns
Change fire regimes
Conserve riparian communities
Understory cover
Change fire regimes
Enhance native plants
Conserve wildlife habitat
Conserve soil resources
Conserve riparian communities
Landscape openings
Change fire regimes
Conserve wildlife habitat
Conserve riparian communities
Amount of surface fuel
Change fire regimes
Conserve riparian communities

15
Part 2
Ecological monitoring methods
General features of an ecological sampling design__________
Once a multiparty monitoring team has selected the goals and in-
dicators it will monitor, it should create a “sampling design” that
can become part of the monitoring plan. Sampling designs provide
information about the number, location, and type of measure-
ments to be taken at any given time. When creating a sampling de-
sign, a group will need to determine:
1 – What indicators will be monitored
2 – Methods to measure each indicator
3 – Spacing and numbers of measurements throughout the
project area
4 – When and how often to take each measurement
5 – Who will take the measurements
6 – When and how data will be analyzed
7 – Where and how data will be stored
Explanations of each goal, and indicators that you can use to mea-
sure change toward or away from that goal, are provided on the
next few pages. You will note that some of the indicators can be
used to measure more than one goal. Methods used to measure
each indicator are discussed on pages 19-47.
1 – What indicators will be monitored______________________
When the multiparty team selects goals, they should also select in-
dicators to measure each goal. When selecting indicators, it may
also be useful to review the recommended methods for each indi-
cator, presented in this section.

16
2 – Methods to measure each indicator____________________
Methods are presented for each indicator in this section of this
handbook. Measurements for ecological indicators are usually
taken along a transect or in a set of plots.
3 – Spacing and numbers of measurements throughout the
project area________________________________________
Each project should create an overall plan for sampling strategy
before beginning monitoring. This plan should match the site fea-
tures (for example, topography, variation across the site in vegeta-
tion communities) with the sampling design.
Use a map or aerial photo of your site to distribute places for data col-
lection throughout the project area. If your project has different types
of ecosystems within it, you should locate transects in areas that are
similar to each other. For example, your project site may contain a
large aspen stand within a ponderosa pine forest. If project treatments
occur only within the ponderosa pine forest, then all transects should
also be located within the ponderosa pine areas.
In order to make repeated measurements, it is very helpful to cre-
ate permanent points within the forest. The spacing of transects
and plots will depend on the size of the project area and the
method being used. Specific sampling recommendations are
found in each method in the next section.
4 – When and how often to take each measurement_________
Exact dates or seasons for sampling may vary by the indicator to be
measured. For many indicators, it is important to gather data at the
same time each year, such as during bird breeding season or when
grasses are flowering. It is essential to gather “baseline data” before
a project starts as well as after the project is implemented to show
the direct influence of your project. For some ecological variables,
it is also a good idea to sample indicators in a control site. These
guidelines are explained below.
Baseline data provide
information about the conditions in
a project area before the project was
started.
A transect is a line across the
landscape, made with a tape
measure, so that measurements
may be taken at regular intervals.

17
Take measurements before a project starts
It is important to document the project site’s conditions before be-
ginning the project, in order to have some basis for comparison
later. Gathering baseline data means measuring indicators before
starting project activities.
Take the same measurements after a project is completed
It is equally important to measure your indicators the exact same
way before and after your project has been completed. Compari-
sons of data collected before and after a project can demonstrate
changes that result from the project or that happen at the same
time the project is implemented. Scientists recommend taking
measurements shortly after a project is completed and at intervals
for many years afterward. Some indicators take much longer to
show change and may need to be monitored for 5, 10, 20 or more
years after a project is completed.
Take measurements in nearby “control sites”
There are many factors other than project activities that could in-
fluence changes in a project area. For example, there could be a
long-term drought, or a wildfire could destroy a project site. It is
always possible that observed changes have little to do with the
project and a lot to do with outside forces.
Because it is impossible to control all the outside influences on a
project, monitoring can be greatly strengthened by creating a
“control site.” A control site is an area similar to the project site but
where no project activities occur. Control sites should be chosen
to reflect as closely as possible the sites that will be treated. The
same indicators are measured, in the same way, in the control area
as in the project area. Data from control sites help to show changes
that result from outside influences. Data in control areas should be
collected in the exact same way as data collected within the project
area, including taking measurements before and after treatment of
your project site.
A control site is an area that is
similar to the project area but
where no project activities take
place.
–
Measuring indicators in control
sites helps show which changes
occur from project activities and
which may be from outside factors.

18
5 – Who will take the measurements______________________
It is a good idea to have at least one person who is consistently in-
volved in collecting data and training others throughout the moni-
toring project. People have slightly different ways of taking
measurements, and keeping one person consistently involved
with the project helps to minimize the differences that can come
from a number of different people taking measurements. Ideally, a
project would have the same person or people take measurements
throughout the project.
6 – When and how data will be analyzed___________________
When a monitoring team has collected data before and after a pro-
ject, they will need to analyze the data in order to see what changes
the project actually produced. Some information, such as a series
of photographs taken over time in the project area, can be com-
pared fairly easily by visual comparison. Other information, such
as numerical data on changes in canopy cover or density of trees,
must be compared more carefully.
7 – Where and how data will be stored_________________
It is important to store monitoring data in a permanent place so
that it can be used for future forest management activities. Data
sheets should be carefully labeled and placed in notebooks. A sec-
ond, photocopied set of the data sheets should be stored in another
location. Electronic data should be backed up on computer disks
or CDs. Electronic data, including electronic spreadsheets and
photographs, can be stored with local resource management agen-
cies, such as the Forest Service or a local non-profit, if desired. It is
also useful to store records of plot and transect locations so that
others may find and re-measure them several years after initial
project activities take place.
See Handbook 6 for more information on how to interpret data collected for ecological indicators

19
Field methods for measuring indicators____________________
This section of the manual is arranged by sampling method for
ease of use in the field. Table 4 provides a summary of each indica-
tor and the sampling method(s) that can be used to measure it.
Some indicators may be measured with more than one method. In
these cases, the indicators are listed under each method. Your
monitoring team should decide which method it will use for each
indicator and use these methods consistently.
Table 4 — Summary of indicators and method(s) to measure them
Sampling method
Indicator
Handbook page #
Point-based sampling
1  Permanent photo points
21
Transect-based
sampling
2.1  Landscape openings
2.2 Bird species abundance and
composition
2.3 Butterfly species abundance and
composition
2.4 Seedling density
2.5 Amount of surface fuel
2.6 Extent of canopy cover
2.7 Classification of riparian plant
community structure
26
27
28
29
30
33
34
Plot-based sampling
3.1  Density and size of live trees
3.2 Density and size of dead
standing trees
3.3 Height from ground to tree crown
3.4 Understory plant species
composition
3.5 Understory cover
3.6 Extent of bare soil
39
41
42
44
45
47
To measure density of mast-producing tree species, use method for density and size of live trees

20
Some tips before heading into the field_____________________
w Make sure you know and understand the sampling design,
especially how many plots or transects there will be, how to
locate or establish them, and how to use each method.
w It may be helpful to do a “practice run” of your methods
before collecting real data. This will give you a sense of the
time commitment required as well as alerting you to any
equipment or information that must be obtained before
starting in earnest.
w Make lots of copies of each data sheet you will need. It is
always better to have too many than not enough. There are no
photocopiers in the forest!
w If the project area has been monitored before, bring copies of
the earlier data sheets into the field. Sometimes it is useful to
have them as a reference.
w Make sure that you have all the equipment you need and that
the equipment works.
w Make sure to check if your compass is using true north or
magnetic north (i.e., the compass has a declination of  zero
degrees). If you are using more than one compass, you should
write the declination used on every data sheet.
w Bring a map of the project site.
w Before moving from a plot or transect, make sure that every data
sheet is labeled with the date and transect or plot number.
Without this information on the data sheet, the data may be
impossible to track, and therefore useless.
...and when you return:
w Develop or download all photographs taken. Make at least two
copies of each picture.
w Copy all data sheets.
w Put photos and data sheets into two sets of 3-ring binders.
w Store the two copies of data in two separate places.
w As soon as possible, enter data into a spreadsheet for  later
analysis.

21
1 — Permanent photo points_____________________________
Photographs taken at permanent locations within a project area
over a period of years provide valuable information about how a
forest has changed over time. Photographs can be repeated yearly
or every few years and provide a relatively simple way to track
change.
Photo points can be used for a visual representation of the extent
of canopy cover, density and size of trees, understory species com-
position and cover, soil erosion, and sometimes amount of surface
fuel. This method can be used in ponderosa pine forests,
pinyon-juniper woodlands, and riparian communities.
Materials: A 35mm or digital camera, metal stakes to permanently
mark each point, PVC pipe (optional), hammer, permanent
marker (such as Sharpie brand) clinometer, compass, clipboard,
pencil, data sheets, and cards or paper and marker for each point
site name. A small dry-erase board is also useful for marking photo
points.
When and how often to sample: Photo points can be taken once
each year. Ideally, they should be taken during the peak growing
season each year. Photo points can be taken at the same time that
other data is collected. It is helpful to try taking the photograph at
the same time of day each year so that light conditions are similar
and allow easier comparison. The number of photo points taken
for a treatment will depend on the size of the project and how sim-
ilar it is over the landscape. For example, a small project of 50 acres
may want to document the site in 10 photo points, while a larger
project of 300 acres may want more, perhaps 25 or 30 photo points.
Method:
1 –
Identify the location of photo points
One of the simplest ways to decide where to locate a photo point is
to use the beginning of a transect line or the corners of plots that
are being used to measure other indicators. This helps provide
spacing between photo points and saves time.
Photo points:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before, after, and 3–5 years
after
—
Sample annually during peak
growing season
—
Take 10–30 photo points per site
Use Data Sheet A
Photo points refer to permanent
locations within a project area
where photographs are taken over
many years.
–
These points help document overall
changes in a forest.

22
Sometimes there is an interesting or significant feature in the land-
scape where there is no transect or plot. For example, there may be
an old growth tree or an area with a lot of seedlings that you will
want to track over time. You may want to create photo points at
some of these locations as well, to help document overall condi-
tions at a site.
If there are no transects or plots, then photo points should be cre-
ated at equal intervals throughout the project area as well as at in-
teresting landscape features.
2 –
Mark permanent photo points
Like transects or plots, photo points should be permanently
marked. A brightly painted metal stake or rebar is relatively stable
and easy to locate. White PVC pipe can also be used to cover the
metal. These pipes slide over the stake and are readily seen in the
field. Because stakes can sometimes be removed, it is also be a
good idea to write down significant landmarks that can help to re-
locate the photo point. These features should be written on the
data sheet for each point. Global Positioning Systems (GPS) can
also help to locate sites. If available, this information can be re-
corded on the data sheet for each photo point.
3 –
Taking photographs for the first time
Each photograph should be taken from ex-
actly the same position every time. The first
time a photograph is taken, it is important
to record the compass direction and slope
(using a clinometer) of the photograph.
This information becomes an important
reference for future pictures. Photo points
should also be labeled with the site name
and number. On a piece of cardboard, pa-
per, or a dry-erase board, write the name of
the site and the number of the photo point,
and position this so that it will be legible in
the photograph. The photograph to the
right shows an example of this.

23
When taking a picture, hold the camera at a standard height. Five
feet is a good height for most photographs. Take three or four pic-
tures at the same location.
When taking photographs in riparian areas, establish photo points
in the middle of shallow rivers and streams, or on the banks of
larger rivers, and take photographs looking upstream and down-
stream for each point.
Record the date, time, photo number, and compass direction on
data sheets for every photograph. Compass bearings are very help-
ful in relocating the position of the photo. The data sheet provides
space to record additional information about the photo point area.
For example, you may want to note the overall condition of the
overstory and understory, signs of livestock, signs of wildlife, re-
cent weather conditions, signs of storms or fires, and other im-
pressions of the site. This can take some practice, but these
observations can be important to the overall photo point.
If using a 35mm camera, make sure to label each roll of film with a
permanent marker so that you can keep track of them. If taking the
film to a local processing center, request that they keep these num-
bers attached to the negatives.
4 –
Archiving photographs
After each trip to the field, develop 35mm film or download digital
photos as soon as possible. If there were any problems with the
film, the light, or other conditions, return to the site and retake the
pictures before conditions change. If this happens, make sure to
record the new dates, times, and conditions at each site.
When photographs are printed, label the back of each photograph
with the site name and photo point number, as well as the date of
the photograph, and the compass bearing. We recommend putting
each photograph in protective plastic sleeves and storing in a
3-ring binder. All photo point data sheets can also be stored in this
same binder. For any data, it is also a good idea to keep two sets, in
two different locations for safe-keeping. Store all negatives in plas-
tic sleeves in the back of the three-ring binder. For digital cameras,

24
make a back-up disk or CD that stores all photographs and put this
in the back of the binder.
5 –
Repeating photographs
When you return to a photo point, it is helpful to have the 3-ring
binder and data sheets with you from previous site visits. Referring
to earlier photos will help you to take photographs in the exact
same position as before. When re-taking photographs, make sure
they are in the same compass bearings as the previous photos, with
the same landscape markers, and the same orientation (vertical or
horizontal) of the photograph.
Analysis: For most purposes, simple visual comparison of the pho-
tos before and after treatment is most useful. Detailed descriptions
of the conditions seen in the photographs should be made and
stored in a notebook along with each photo. Changes observed
from one date to another can include tree density, new seedling es-
tablishment, understory plant recovery, and exotic plant invasion.
In some cases, it is possible to obtain quantitative information
from repeat photography (see Elzinga and others 2001 for quanti-
tative analysis methods).
2 — Transect-based sampling____________________________
For transect-based sampling, data are collected in points at specific
distances along a transect line. There are many different measures
that can be taken along transects. For some indicators, plots are
also located along transects to collect data. These types of measures
are described in the section on plot-based sampling. Table 5 on the
next page lists indicators that can be measured using transects.
Materials: 300-foot tape measure, metal stakes or rebar (two for
each transect line), data sheets, clinometer, compass, clipboard,
pencils
Method: Refer to your sampling design to identify the site where
you want to place transects. When establishing transects at a site,
the first transect should be randomly placed within the site. To do
A transect is a line, made with a
tape measure, so that
measurements may be taken at
regular intervals.

25
this, pick an area to sample, and throw a stick over your shoulder.
Where the stick lands, mark the point by pounding a permanent
metal stake into the ground. This end will be the first point of the
line.
It is best if transects lie along relatively flat, consistent
ground. On slopes, run transects on a level line run-
ning across the slope, rather than up or down the slope
(see diagram to the left). Whenever possible, it is also
best to locate all sampling points at least 300 feet from
a road or project boundary.
From the first transect point, walk in a straight line.
Use the compass to know the exact direction (in de-
grees) you are walking and record this on the data
sheet for every indicator measured. Carry the tape
measure and walk until you reach the length of the
transect you want to establish, usually either 100 or
300 feet, depending on the method. Be sure to pull
tight on the tape to remove any slack. At this second
end, lie the tape measure on the ground, and place a
metal stake in the ground at this site. PVC pipes are
very helpful in marking the stake so that it is visible
and clearly labeled. You can also use metal tags to mark
the stake or the ground next to it. Later you can use a
metal detector to re-locate your stakes.
Table 5 — Indicators measured with transects
Sampling method
Indicator
Transect-based
sampling
2.1  Landscape openings
2.2 Bird abundance and species composition
2.3 Butterfly abundance and species composition
2.4 Seedling density
2.5 Amount of surface fuel
2.6 Extent of canopy cover
2.7 Classification of plant community structure

26
For riparian areas, you should run transects perpendicular
to the stream, so that the transect starts at one side of the
riparian community, crosses the stream, and goes to the
outside edge of the riparian plants on the other side of the
stream bank. If the width of the riparian plant community
is very wide, then a 300 foot transect can be used. These
transects can be spaced about 500 feet apart.
Once the transect is in place, you can take measurements
for each indicator. The transects should be parallel to each
other; choose the distance between them based on the site
and your sampling needs. In general, transects should be
spaced no closer than 50 feet apart and no more than 1500
feet apart. These transect lines can also be used for many
of the plot-based sampling methods.
2.1 — Landscape openings
Landscape openings describe the size of openings or meadows
within a forest. Openings in the forest canopy can be sampled us-
ing transects.
Method: Walk through your site and identify the various landscape
types found there. Make a list of these landscape types, and select a
mapping symbol for each one. For example, you may identify
seedling and sapling thickets (SST), mature ponderosa pine stands
(PIPO), pinyon-juniper stands (PJ), and openings and meadows
(OM). Write down some guidelines for identifying each landscape
type in the field; for example, “openings and meadows (OM) are
areas at least 15 feet in diameter with no overhead canopy.” Each
project will have different mapping categories and symbols,
depneding on the project’s goals and site conditions.
Walk each transect along the same compass bearing. Choose a dis-
tance to note the landscape element, for example, every five or ev-
ery 10 feet. At each point, record the landscape element on the data
sheet.
Landscape openings:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before, after, and every 3–5
years after
—
Sample anytime
—
Number of transects depends on site
size
Use Data Sheet B

27
Using a set of parallel transects, you can make a simple but useful
map with different symbols for each landscape feature. This will give
you a rough estimate of the size of open meadow areas relative to the
size of the whole area sampled. By repeating these measurements
over time, you can measure the change of meadow size over time.
The scale for this method will depend on the size of the
landscape features. For example, if meadows are large,
then the sampled area will need to be larger and the
transects and sampling intervals farther apart. If the open-
ings are small, then transects and intervals must be closer
together.
Landscape openings should be sampled before and after
project activities, and every three to five years after the pro-
ject is completed. More information on this method can be
found in Landscape Ecology, by Forman and Godron.
Analysis: On a sheet of paper, draw parallel transects and use
symbols to indicate the landscape types found at each mea-
surement point, and draw boundaries around clusters of like
symbols (see sketch). This will give you a rough map of the
site, showing areas of different vegetation types, forest,
meadow, and so on. The map will give you a general impres-
sion of the heterogeneity of the site and the size of meadows
relative to the size of the forested area. Maps of the same site
drawn before and after treatment will give you a rough indi-
cation of the change in landscape types over time.
2.2 — Bird species abundance and composition
Additional materials needed: Binoculars and North American
birds field identification guide, flagging tape
Birds can be counted on points along line transects. The first point
should be randomly located on the transect. Additional points can
be located every 150 feet after that. Each new transect should be
placed at least 500 feet from the previous transect to minimize the
chance of recording the same birds at multiple points.

28
Bird counts are best done within ½ hour after sunrise and should
be completed no later than four hours after sunrise. Upon reach-
ing a transect, observers should wait 1–2 minutes to orient them-
selves, get data sheets ready, and to allow birds to return to
“normal” activities after being disturbed by the person(s) walking
to the site. Observers should record the species, sex (if possible),
and mode of detection (song, call, visual, other) of all birds seen or
heard within a 150 feet radius of the point on the transect. To help
estimate distance from the counting station, place flagging tape on
trees or stakes at 150 foot distances from each point on the transect
where you are observing birds.
Each point should be sampled three times during the breeding and
five times during the non-breeding season to account for changes
in bird behavior and movements within the season. More visits are
needed in the non-breeding season because birds are more
patchily distributed in smaller groups.
Anyone observing birds should already have the training and skills
to correctly identify them. Local chapters of the Audubon Society
or government or tribal wildlife staff may be able to provide train-
ing or assistance with this method.
Analysis: Make a list of all the bird species observed in the entire
sampling site. The total number of different species observed rep-
resents the observed bird species composition. Add the number of
birds of each species to get species abundances observed during
any one sampling period. Total abundances of birds can be esti-
mated by adding all species abundances together.
2.3 — Butterfly abundance and species composition
Additional materials needed: binoculars, butterfly field guide
Butterflies can be sampled along transects, at least 300 feet in
length. Transects should be located parallel to habitat edges, such
as meadows, and at least 150 feet away from any boundaries. The
species of butterflies should be recorded as well as the number of
Bird abundance and composition:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before, after, and 3–5 years
after
—
Sample 3x in breeding season, 5x in
non-breeding season, from ½ hour
to 4 hours after sunrise
—
Sample 30 points per site
Use Data Sheet C

29
individuals of each species, or genus if the species cannot be iden-
tified. There should be at least 10 transects within the project area.
Transects should be sampled about four to six times during the late
spring and summer months, on sunny, calm days between 10 AM
and 4 PM. The observer should walk the transect at a steady pace,
scanning the area within 15 to 30 feet, focusing on butterflies
alone. A net can be used to catch and release butterflies for identi-
fication, but none should be killed or collected.
Analysis: Make a list of all the butterfly species observed in the en-
tire sampling site. This represents the observed butterfly species
composition. Total the number of individual butterflies for each
species to get abundances observed during any one sampling pe-
riod. Total abundance of all butterflies can be estimated by adding
all species abundances together.
The publication Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress from
the Ecological Restoration Institute provides further information
(see www.eri.nau.edu). Software that can help analyze data col-
lected is available at www.urbanwildlands.org/INCA/ and an ex-
ample of volunteer butterfly monitoring can be found at:
www.mchenry.cc.il.us/faculty_pgs/mgarriso/butterflyproject/aB
MG.html#TableofContents.
2.4  — Seedling density
Additional materials needed: PVC pipe or other strip of wood or
metal that is 4 feet in length
Seedlings are young trees that are less than 4.5 feet high. They can
be counted by walking along the 300-foot transect while holding a
4-foot long PVC pipe parallel to the ground. The PVC pipe should
be placed evenly over the transect line, so that two feet extend on
each side of the transect (see diagram on the next page).
To count seedlings, walk along the transect line and count each
seedling that is within the 4-foot length of the PVC pipe. Identify
Butterfly abundance and
composition:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before, after, and every 2
years after
—
Sample 4–6 times each season, in
late spring and summer, from
10 AM to 4 PM
—
Sample along at least 10 transects
Use Data Sheet D
Seedling density:
Use in forest ecosystems
—
Sample before, after, and 3–5 years
after
—
Sample anytime
—
Sample along 5–8 transects per site
Use Data Sheet E

30
the type of tree seedling and tally the number of each species on
the data sheet. Repeat this on a minimum of 5–8 transects within
the project area.
Analysis: Density is expressed as number of individuals per area. A
sample data sheet and sample analysis are included at the end of
the manual.
1 –
Count the tally marks in all
transects for all seedlings of each
species separately.
2 –
Multiply the length times the
width of each transect to get area in
square feet. Multiply the area of
one transect times the number of
transects.
3 –
Divide the number of seedlings of each species by the
total transect area to get the density for that species.
4 –
Convert the density of seedlings to seedlings per acre. A con-
version formula is found in Appendix 2.
5 –
Total of density of all seedlings can be found by adding the
totals for each species together, and dividing by the total area
sampled.
2.5 — Amount of surface fuel
Additional materials needed: watch with a second hand; piece of
cardboard with a 0.25 inch slot, 1 inch slot, and a 3 inch slot cut
into it; 50 foot tape measure, clinometer, compass
One way to measure the amount of fuels on the ground surface, is
to measure the amount of dead wood that is on the ground. This
woody material is called “dead and downed woody debris.” Woody
Amount of surface fuel:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before, after, and every 3–5
years after
—
Sample anytime
—
Sample along a total of 10–16
surface fuel transects per site
Use Data Sheet F

31
debris should be monitored before and after a project is imple-
mented, and every 3–5 years after the project is finished.
Before heading into the field, prepare a
piece of cardboard (see diagram to the left)
for measuring the different size classes. Cut
three slots in the piece of cardboard to the
following lengths: 0.25 inch, 1 inch, and 3
inches.
To inventory dead and downed woody de-
bris, you will count and classify dead wood
off the main line transect. To do this, you
will create two additional short transects:
one at the beginning of the main transect, and one at the end.
These transects (called “surface fuel transects”) will be placed at a
random angle from the main transect. To determine this random
angle, start by standing at the beginning of the main transect, fac-
ing the transect line. Look at the watch with the second hand.
Whatever direction the second hand is pointing is the direction
you will lay the surface fuel transect. For example, if the second
hand is on the 2, then you will place the surface fuel transect at this
angle from the main transect. Be sure to record
the direction (bearing) of your fuel transect on
the data sheet and use this same bearing when
you return in the future to re-measure fuels.
To create the surface fuel transect, use a second
tape measure to walk 35 feet in the direction
the watch was pointing. Set the tape measure
down. Record the slope of the short transect
with a clinometer, and record the direction of
the surface fuel transect with a compass. Also
make note of the dominant tree species in that
part of the forest. This information will be
needed when you calculate the total fuel load
(see Handbook 6).

32
Classify all woody debris that crosses the transect. Only count
pieces that are:
1 - Dead, not attached to a living tree,
2 - Down, not rooted in the soil (uprooted stumps can be
counted), and
3 - Woody, not needle or leaf litter or herbaceous material.
Do not count pieces of wood that are rotten and have begun to fall
apart. Only sound wood should be included in the census of fuels.
When you finish classifying woody debris at the beginning of the
main transect, go to the other end of the main transect line and es-
tablish a second surface fuel transect. To do this, look in the direc-
tion the second hand of the watch is pointing and lay a 35 foot
transect. Classify all woody debris that crosses this second transect.
Make sure to record the slope and direction of this surface fuel
transect on the data sheet, too.
To classify woody debris, use the following method:
1 –
Along the first 6 feet of the short transect, count all woody
material that is less than 0.25 inches in diameter. (This woody ma-
terial should be smaller in diameter than the 0.25 inch slot in the
cardboard.) Record the number of woody pieces you find in this
size category on the data sheet.
2 –
On the same first 6 feet of the short transect, count all woody
material that is 0.25–0.99 inch in diameter and record this on the
data sheet. (This woody material should be larger than the 0.25
inch cardboard slot and smaller than the 1 inch cardboard slot.)
3 –
From 0–10 feet on the short transect, count all woody mate-
rial that is 1–2.99 inches in diameter and record this on the data
sheet. (This woody material should be larger than the 1 inch card-
board slot and smaller than the 3 inch cardboard slot.)
4 –
From 0–35 feet on the short transect, measure all woody ma-
terial that is greater than 3 inches and record. (This woody mate-
rial should be larger than the 3 inch cardboard slot.) Unlike the
other size classes, where you only count the number encountered,
Dead and down debris includes twigs,
stems, branches and wood from main
trunk of trees and shrubs that are
lying on the ground
—
Dead woody stems and branches still
attached to standing trees are not
counted
—
Uproote stumps and dead roots are
counted
—
Any sound dead wood that is not
attached to a tree or shrub is counted
—
Pieces of wood that are rotten and
have begun to fall apart should not
be counted

33
here you actually measure the diameter of each piece. To measure
these pieces, take the diameter of the piece at the point where it
crosses the transect. Record this diameter on your sheet.
Do not count pieces of wood that lie completely along but do not
cross the tape measure. If wood crosses the tape in more than one
place, count each intersection.
Analysis: You will use a formula to calculate the weight of down
woody debris in tons per acre. There are two different formulas,
one for debris less than 3 inches in diameter and one for debris
greater than three inches in diameter. The formulas and instruc-
tions for calculating fuel load are found in Handbook 6.
Photo guides can also be used to estimate fuel amount on your
site. These types of guides present a series of photographs of dif-
ferent forest conditions, and by finding the photograph that most
resembles your forest, you can estimate fuel load—see Appendix 3.
2.6 — Extent of canopy cover
Additional material needed: Spherical densiometer
Overhead canopy cover is the amount of shade that the canopies of
trees create on the ground. Shade that the trees provide is mea-
sured visually using an instrument called a densiometer (left). The
instrument has a round concave mirror which has a grid marked
on it. The grid divides the mirror into small squares.
To take measurements with the densiometer, hold the mirror level
about 12–18 inches in front of you at elbow height. If you look
down at the round mirror, you can see the reflection of the tree
canopy overhead. You will see areas of dark leaves or needles and
areas of bright sky. In each small square, you imagine four dots ar-
ranged like the corners of a smaller square. If there is a bit of sky at
the dot in one corner of the imaged box, mark a tally for sky. If you
see dark leaves at the other three dots in the corners of the imaged
box, mark three tallies for canopy cover. Each square of the mirror
will have four tally marks, for canopy cover or no canopy cover.
Extent of canopy cover:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before, after, and every 3–5
years after
—
Sample anytime (hard-wood
dominated forests should be
sampled when foliage is present)
—
Sample along a total of 5–8
transects per site
Use Data Sheet G

34
This method requires two people—one to hold the mirror steady
and call out the values, and another to record the values. This
method is more easily and quickly done than described. Every in-
strument comes with clear directions as well.
Four sets of canopy cover values are taken at each sampled point:
facing directly up the transect, directly down the transect, and in
each direction perpendicular to the transect. For each transect,
canopy cover should be sampled every four feet over a total of 40
feet. This will give 10 sampling points per transect and a total of 40
values (four sets of values at each point on the transect).
Analysis: Canopy cover is expressed as a percent, meaning the per-
cent of the sky covered, or the percent of the ground shaded. A
sample data sheet and sample analysis are included at the end of
the manual.
1 –
Count total number of “yes” observations of canopy cover.
2 –
Divide the number of canopy cover values by the total num-
ber of observations. Multiply by 100. The final number will
represent average percent canopy cover for the site.
2.7 — Classification of riparian plant community structure
The height and shape of trees and shrubs play an important role in
providing wildlife habitat in riparian communities. Certain animal
species are highly adapted to particular structural elements and
will abandon an area if that structure is lacking. These structures
should be monitored before and after a project is completed, and
every 3–5 years thereafter. There are six structural types that could
be present within the riparian community (Hink and Ohmart
1984). These are described in detail below but include:
w Types 1 and 2 – mature forests
w Types 3 and 4 – intermediate-age forests or woodlands
w Types 5 and 6 – shrub habitats
Plant community structure:
Use in riparian communities
—
Sample before, after, and every 3–5
years after
—
Sample during peak growing season
—
Sample along 10 or more transects
per site
Use Data Sheet H

35
This method allows an observer to subjectively estimate the vege-
tation of the site by looking at configuration of trees and shrubs
and deciding which of six classes it most looks like. Go to the end
of each transect that is nearest the river. From this point, looking
away from the river, estimate by eye the tree heights and amount
of canopy cover. If you are unfamiliar with estimating tree heights,
practice using a clinometer. (See method 3.3, “Height from
ground to tree crowns” for details on how to estimate tree height).
Use the tree heights and canopy cover to determine which type of
stand structure your site it most resembles. Record this on the data
sheet. For each transect record only one structural type. The struc-
tural types are as follows:
Type 1 – Tall trees with well developed understories. This type is
present if:
w there are tall or mature to mixed-age trees (taller than 40 feet)
with canopy covering more than 25% of the area of the
community, and
w
an understory layer of about 20–40 feet tall covering more
than 25% of the community, and
w
substantial foliage in all height layers.
Type 2 – Tall tree canopy with little or no understory vegetation.
This type is present if:
w there are tall or mature trees (taller than 40 feet), with
w canopy covering more than 25% of the community, and
w an understory layer (20–40 feet tall), with
w less than 25% of the area of the community with a majority of
vegetation over 30 feet.
Type 2 areas are mature stands of trees up to 50 to 60 feet tall with
most of the foliage in the canopy layer taller than 30 feet.

36
Type 3 – Intermediate sized trees with dense understory vegeta-
tion. This type is present if:
w there are intermediate sized trees (20–40 feet tall), with
w canopy covering more than 25% of the area of the community,
and
w with understory layers (taller than 5–20 feet) covering more
than 25% of the area (the majority of foliage will be shorter
than 30 feet tall).
Stands of intermediate-age cottonwood trees with a thick
understory of willow or Russian olive are characteristic of Type 3.
Type 4 – Intermediate-sized trees openly spaced with little
understory. This type is present if:
w there are intermediate-sized trees (from 20–40 feet tall) with
canopy covering less than 25% of the area, and
w a majority of foliage is between 15–30 feet tall.
Relatively open stands of intermediate-age cottonwoods are typi-
cal of Type 4.
Type 5 – Stands with dense shrubby growth. This type is present if:
w dense shrubby growth covers more than 25% of community,
and
w a majority of foliage is shorter than 15 feet tall.
Type 5 has dense vegetation through about 10 or 15 feet, often in-
cluding a thick layer of grass and annuals.
Type 6 – Very young, low, and/or sparse stands. This type is
present if:
w vegetation covers less than 25% of community, and
w a majority of foliage is shorter than 15 feet tall.

37
Type 6 has low and relatively sparse herbaceous and/or shrubby
vegetation, with most vegetation below 5 feet. Much of the salt ce-
dar vegetation fits into this type.
Some stands do not have trees or shrubs. In these cases, the following
classifications should be used to describe the plant community:
CAT:
Cattails
MS:
Meadow
MH:
Marsh with cattail or rush; other permanent
marsh vegetation
Ag:
Agriculture
OP:
Open area (<25% aerial plant coverage)
R:
River
Rd:
Road
OW:
Open water
Analysis: List the classifications that are found in the community.
There will only be one classification per transect. The method
gives a qualitative impression of the type and amount of vegetation
types present at the site.
3 — Plot-based sampling________________________________
Plots are circular or square areas placed on the ground at regular
distances from one another, every 60 feet, for example. The size of
the plot varies depending on the indicator. For example, tree den-
sity is measured with a 30 x 30 foot plot, while understory cover is
measured using a 3 x 3 foot plot. Small plots are typically square,
while large plots can be either circular or square. Table 6 (page 38)
shows the indicators that are measured using small and large plots.
The multiparty group will need to decide whether they will use large
circular or square plots. This may depend on project partners. For ex-
ample, some Forest Service personnel already collect certain kinds of
data in circular plots and some along transects. Your group may want
to use these same sampling methods for consistency. Regardless of
the method, it is a good idea to select one in the beginning and use it
throughout the monitoring project when possible. For simplicity,
only square plot methods are described in this handbook.

38
Both large and small plots are located along transect lines. These indi-
cators can be measured at the same time, and on the same transects, as
those indicators described in transect-based sampling.
Large plot sampling
Materials: 300-foot measuring tape, 50-foot measuring tape, 2 metal
stakes for marking each end of a transect line, 4 pin flags, hammer,
data sheets, clinometer, compass, clipboard and pencils.
Method: Square plots are set up along transects 300 feet in length.
Use the line transect method to establish transects. Large square plots
are 30 feet on each side. Once the transect has been laid, set up the
first plot at the 50 foot mark of the transect. To do this, run a second
tape measure perpendicular to the transect tape and mark 15 feet on
each side of the main transect line with pin flags. Then walk another
30 feet (to the 80 foot mark) and again run a tape measure 15 feet on
each side of the transect line. Mark each side with pin flags. The four
pin flags form the corners of the large plot, 30 x 30 foot.
When the plot is set up, you can collect data for any of the indicators
below. Collect all the data in one plot, and then relocate the plot by
picking up the pin flags and moving down the transect. Transects can
be located every 50 feet on the transect, with plots started at 50, 100,
150, 200, 250 and 300-foot marks on the transect line. Repeat this
Table 6 —  Indicators sampled with plots
Sampling method
Indicator
Large circular or square plots
3.1 Density and size of live trees
3.2 Density and size of dead standing trees
3.3 Height from ground to tree crown
Small square plots
3.4 Understory plant species composition
3.5 Understory cover
3.6 Extent of bare soil

39
process, establishing plots on transects, for each transect in a site area,
or for a suggested total of 10–30 plots altogether.
For every plot, you should record the direction and degree that the
ground slopes. To do this, stand at the corner of the plot, facing the di-
rection the ground is sloping. With a compass, measure and record
the direction in degrees on the data sheet. With a clinometer, record
the amount the ground slopes in percent on the data sheet. Repeat
these two measurements for each plot.
3.1 — Density and size of live trees
Additional materials needed: DBH (diameter at breast height) tape
To measure tree density, count every adult tree and every sapling in
each plot. Adult trees have a diameter larger than 5 inches.
Saplings are smaller than 5 inches in diameter but at least 4.5 feet
tall. Use a DBH tape to measure the diameter of trees if you are
not sure if they are adults. On the data sheet record information
for each adult tree of each tree species.
To measure the tree size, use a DBH tape and measure the diame-
ter at breast height (approximately 4.5 feet from the ground). One
side of the DBH tape has numbers that show the diameter at the
tree, even though the tree is sampled by putting the tape around
the stem of the tree. The other side of the tape shows the tree’s cir-
cumference. Use the side of the tape that measures diameter, not
the side that measures distance.
Take each measurement on the uphill side of the tree. Be consis-
tent with this. Also make sure that the tape goes around the tree
evenly, and that there is no slack or twists in the tape. If a tree is on
the edge of a plot (if for example, only half the tree is within the
plot boundary), count the tree.
For juniper, pinyon pine, and oak trees, measure the diameter at
the base of the tree, not at breast height. If a tree has multiple stems
To calculate the density of woody
plants that produce seeds, fruits,
and nuts, use the methods for
seedling density and density and
size of live trees, but only count
those adult trees and saplings which
produce seeds, fruits, and nuts
important to wildlife. Examples of
these species are junipers, oaks, and
pinyon pine.
Density and size of live trees:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before, after, and 5 or more
years after
—
Sample anytime
—
Sample in 10–30 plots per site
Use Data Sheet I

40
below 4.5 feet, measure the largest stem and note on the data sheet
how many stems the tree has.
Count tree saplings at the same time that you count adult trees.
Count the number of saplings for each species in the plot but do
not measure the diameter. The density of adult trees and saplings
should be calculated separately.
Analysis: Density is expressed as number of individuals per area.
Estimate the density of adult trees and saplings separately.
1 –
Count the number of adult trees in all plots separately for
each species. Count the tally marks in all transects for all
saplings of each tree species separately.
2 –
Calculate the area of all plots as follows:
If using the plot dimensions given above, multiply 900 ft2(the
total area of one plot) by the number of plots sampled.
3 –
Divide the total number of each species by the total area to get
the density for that species. Repeat for each species of adult
tree and each species of sapling.
4 –
Total density of all adult trees can be found by adding the
totals for each species together, and dividing by the total area
sampled.
5 –
Convert the density of adult trees in the area sampled to
density per acre using the conversion formula provided in
Appendix 2.
6 –
To calculate average size of adult trees by species, add together
all the diameter measures for each species. Divide this num-
ber by the number of trees of that species. This gives you
average diameter of that species of tree.
To calculate average slope for the site, add together all the slope values
taken with a clinometer in each plot, and divide by the total number
of plots. Follow the same process to calculate average aspect.

41
3.2 — Density and size of dead standing trees
Additional materials needed: DBH (diameter at breast height) tape
Dead standing trees are sometimes called snags. To measure these
trees, follow the same instructions as for live trees. Sample only
dead standing trees that are larger than five inches at breast height.
Record the species if you can still identify it. Otherwise, record the
number and size of each snag.
Analysis:
1 – Density is an expression of the number of individual trees per
area. To calculate density of snags, follow directions in Section 3.1
(pages 39–40). Snags are not likely to be identifiable by species, so
there will usually be only a single density number for snags.
2 – Convert the density to density per acre using the conversion
formula provided in Appendix 2.
To calculate the average size of snags, add together all the diameter
measures and divide this number by the total number of snags.
What about basal area?
Basal area is not recommended as an indicator for monitoring
changes in fire regime and other restoration values because:
w basal area gives no clear indication of tree size,
w basal area gives no clear indication of tree density, and,
w basal area gives no indication of the species diversity
Instead, we recommend measuring the size and density of trees for
each species found on the site. The size, density, and species of
trees on a site can all affect fire behavior. In addition, tree species,
tree size, and tree density are useful indicators of wildlife habitat
and the preservation of old and large trees.

42
Those wishing to calculate basal area can do so using tree size data
by following these steps:
1 — Divide the diameter of every tree by two to get the radius.
2 — Multiply the radius times iteslf to get radius squared.
3 — Multiply radius squared by 3.14. This is the basal area of each
tree in the plot.
4 — Add together the basal areas of all the trees in all the plots.
This is the total basal area for the sampled area, measured in square
inches.
5 — Divide this number by 144 to get total basal area measured in
square feet.
6 — Convert the basal area of the sampled area to a per-acre basis
by using the conversion formula provided in Appendix 2.
3.3 — Height from ground to tree crowns
Additional materials needed: clinometer, 50-foot measuring tape
This indicator provides information on how low to the ground
tree canopies are. It can be measured in the same plots as those de-
veloped for tree size and density.
To measure this distance, you essentially measure two sides of a
triangle formed between yourself and the tree (diagram at right).
To measure this, stand at the foot of the tree while holding a cli-
nometer. Back away from the tree on level ground (not upslope or
downslope from the tree) until the 45° mark on the clinometer
points directly at the bottom of the canopy. This usually means the
lowest large limb growing from the tree trunk. Measure your dis-
tance to the tree and record on the data sheet. This distance is the
same as the distance from the ground to the first large limb.

43
For each measurement, you must also account for the extra space
from your eye to the ground (usually about 5 feet). You will need
to calculate how much additional length to add to each measure-
ment to account for this.
Analysis: When the angle shown in the clinometer is 45°, the dis-
tance on the ground from the point behind the observer to the tree
base is the same distance from the tree base to the bottom of the
canopy. Calculate an average distance from the ground to the bot-
tom of canopies by adding all the distances together and dividing
by the number of trees measured.
Small plot sampling
Materials: 300-foot measuring tape, one 3 x 3 foot plot square,
data sheets, clinometer, compass, clipboard and pencils
The 3 x 3 foot square plot can be made of 4 pieces of PVC pipe
cut into 3 foot lengths. The pieces can be glued at the corners
and held together with PVC elbows. This makes a permanent
square that is light, solid, and easy to carry in the field.
Method: Square plots are set up along transects 100 feet in
length (usually the first 100 feet of a 300 foot transect). Use the
line transect method to establish transects. Set up the first plot
at the 20 foot mark of the transect, using the main transect as
one side of your plot and extending the plot to the left side of
the transect.
Collect all data within the plot. Then move the square another
20 feet. In total, take measurements at 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100
feet. For each transect line, you will gather data in 5 plots. For
any project area, you should collect data in a minimum of 30
plots.
Height from ground to tree crowns:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before, after, and every 3–5
or years after
—
Sample anytime
—
Sample in 10–30 plots per site
Use Data Sheet I

44
3.4 — Understory plant species composition
Additional materials needed: Field guides to plants, plant press and
paper, pin flags, 50 foot tape measure, digging tool, ziplock bags
and labels (for riparian areas only), and a small plant press
Collecting data on understory plant composition is an ambitious
method, because of the need to be able to identify plants by spe-
cies. Not every monitoring project will want to take on identifica-
tion of plant species. Assistance can be sought from local experts,
colleges and agency personnel, as well as plant species identifica-
tion books.
For understory plant species composition, you will use the small
plots as described above, as well as an additional plot that is 3 feet
by 35 feet. This second type of
plot should be located on the op-
posite side of the transect from
the smaller plots (i.e., on the right
side of the transect), and should
be placed between 30 and 70 feet
on the measuring tape. This
method can be used for plants in
forests such as ponderosa pine or
pinyon-juniper, as well as in ri-
parian communities. Near pools
and wetlands in riparian areas, the
3 x 35 foot plot should be located
as close to the water’s edge as pos-
sible.
In each small plot, look for and record every plant species found
within the plot. Then count the number of individuals of each
species in the plot. Then, in each larger plot, record the name of
each species you find. The total number of different species found
represents the site species composition.
If you cannot identify a plant species in the field, you should col-
lect a sample. To do this, you will need to collect a whole plant that
Understory plant composition:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before and every year after
—
Sample during peak growing season
—
Sample in 30 or more plots per site
Use Data Sheet J

45
is flowering (when possible) and press the plant between two
sheets of newspaper or in a plant press. Record the location of the
collection, a description of where the plant was growing, the name
of the person collecting the plant, and the date of the collection.
These samples are especially important for grasses that are difficult
to identify in the field.
Analysis: Understory species composition is represented by the
number of species found. The number of individuals of each spe-
cies gives you species abundance.
1 –
Count the tally marks in all transects for all individuals of one
species separately.
2 –
Multiply the length times the width of each transect and add
together all transect areas.
3 –
Divide the number of individuals of each species by the total
transect area to get the density for that species.
4 –
Total of density of all understory plants can be found by
adding the totals for each species together, and dividing by the
total area sampled.
3.5 — Understory cover
Using the small plot method, locate plots along transects. In each
small plot, you will estimate the amount of ground that is shaded
by plants growing near the ground surface. These should include
grasses and forbs. Forbs are non-woody, broad-leafed plants, such
as alfalfa.
Count grass cover and the area covered by forbs separately. Do not
count understory cover provided by shrubs. If there is a shrub in
your plot, ignore it. If there are grasses or forbs underneath the
shrub, measure the understory cover provided by these plants.
Understory cover:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample before and every year after
—
Sample during peak growing season
—
Sample in 30 or more plots per site
Use Data Sheet K

46
Plant cover only measures the amount of shade from rooted
plants. Plants that are not rooted but instead are laying on the
ground unrooted, count as litter (see 3.6, “Extent of bare soil”).
Plant cover is estimated in percentages. You may want to cut pieces
of cardboard into different shapes that represent different percent-
ages to train your eye. The palm of your hand is a good estimate for
1% of a 3-foot square plot. The categories for plant cover are
grouped into the following ranges: 0–5%, 5–25%, 25–50%,
50–75%, 75–95%, and 95–100%.
For each cover type (grasses,
forbs, bare soil/rock, and litter),
you should mark only one cover
category. Plant cover can be esti-
mated different according to
how they grow in the ground:
Clumped and matted species.
These plants tend to grow in
tight groups forming clumps or
mats. To estimate the amount of
space these plants cover within
the plot, use the palm of your
hand to count 1% increments.
Scattered plants that do not form dense cover. Some plants grow
individually and do not form clumps. For these plants, it is helpful
to imagine pushing all the plants together into a space and estimat-
ing how much cover these plants provide.
A website at Colorado State University also provides useful tips
for measuring understory plants: www.colostate.edu/projects/
stohlgren/_sampling/mw_plot.html
Analysis: Understory plant cover is expressed as a percent of
ground covered.

47
1 –
Calculate one type of cover at a time. For example, start out
calculating grass cover, then move on to forbs, then bare soil/rock,
and finally litter.
2 –
To calculate cover, first find the midpoint of each cover class.
For the set used above, the midpoints are 2.5%, 15.0%, 37.5%,
62.5%, 85% and 97.5%.
3 –
Convert the cover value for each plot to the midpoint. For
example, if you were calculating grass cover and plot 1 had a mark
for 25-50%, it is now assigned the midpoint value of 37.5%. If plot
2 had 0-5% cover, it is now assigned a midpoint value of 2.5%. So
you will have one midpoint value for each of the plots sampled.
4 –
Add midpoint values together for all the plots.
5 –
Divide by the number of plots. This is the average percentage
cover for the site. Because it is a percent, there is no need to con-
vert it to coverage per acre.
3.6 — Extent of bare soil
The extent of bare soil and rock is measured in the same way as
understory cover. These measures may be taken at the same time.
In fact, sometimes estimating bare soil and rock is a helpful way of
helping to determine the cover provided by scattered plants. If es-
timating bare soil and rock, you may also want to estimate cover
provided by litter. Litter can be pine needles, pine cones, or plants
that are uprooted. There are spaces to record bare soil, rock, and
litter on the same data sheet with the understory cover.
Analysis: Extent of bare ground and other values is expressed as a
percentage. To calculate this percent, follow directions for
“Understory plant cover” in Section 3.5.
Bare soil:
Use in any ecosystem
—
Sample every year
—
Sample during peak growing season
—
Sample in 30 or more plots per site
Use Data Sheet K

48

49
Appendix 1 — Glossary
Abundance: The total number of individuals of a species in an
area or community.
Basal area: The cross-sectional area of a tree trunk, measured at
the base of the tree (about 10 inches up the trunk from the ground
surface) or at breast height, 4.5 feet.
Baseline data: Data collected at the beginning of a project on the
existing situation. These data provide a benchmark against which
change that occurs during the project period can be assessed.
Canopy cover: The percentage of a fixed area covered by tree
crowns, measured as the horizontal cover of the ground that the
canopy covers.
Composition: A list of all the species that grow in an area.
Control site: An area similar to the project site but where no pro-
ject activities occur. The same indicators are measured in the con-
trol area as in the project area.
Cover: The amount of the ground that is shaded by living plants,
usually expressed as a percentage; also, the cover of the ground by
dead plants and plant parts, usually called litter cover, also usually
expressed as a percentage.
Data: A set of observations collected through monitoring. Infor-
mation is derived from data through analysis.
DBH: Diameter at breast height.
Declination: The angle formed between the direction a freely piv-
oting compass needle points and true geographical north. The an-
gle is expressed in degrees, and can be corrected on the compass.
Diameter at breast height: The diameter of a tree at breast height
(approximately 4.5 feet above the ground on the uphill side of the
tree); DBH.

50
Downed log: A fallen tree, log, or part of a log.
Ecosystem: An interacting system of living plants and animals and
the nonliving parts of their environment.
Erosion: The movement of particles of soil across the surface of
the ground or into watercourses; usually caused by water, but
also by wind, gravity, and other factors.
Exotic plants: Plants that are non-native to a particular ecosystem
or community, that often thrive on disturbed conditions and can
become abundant after thinning or burning. Exotic plants can dis-
place and reduce populations of native species.
Factors: Specific events, situations, conditions, policies, attitudes,
beliefs, or behaviors that may affect the desired future condition.
Forb: A broad-leafed green plant whose stems are not woody, but
not including grasses, sedges or rushes.
Goal: A general summary of the desired state that a project is
working to achieve. A good goal meets the criteria of being vision-
ary, relatively general, brief, and measurable. A goal is typically less
specific than an objective.
Ground cover: The cover that grasses, forbs and other plants cast
on the forest floor. Ground cover also includes other materials on
the ground, such as dead needles and other litter and rocks. This
measure is usually expressed as a percentage.
Indicator: A unit of information measured over time that docu-
ments changes in a specific condition. A good indicator meets the
criteria of being measurable, precise, consistent, and sensitive.
Information: Knowledge that is extracted from data through the
process of analysis.

51
Litter: The top layer of soil comprised of a variety of organic mate-
rial such as dead needles, twigs, branches and dead grasses and
forbs.
Monitoring: The periodic collection and evaluation of data rela-
tive to stated project goals, objectives, and activities. Implementa-
tion monitoring is important for multiparty monitoring groups
because it simply asks, ‘did we do what we said we would do?’ Ef-
fectiveness monitoring helps determine whether or not the pro-
ject goals were attained by asking the question ‘did it work?’
Reducing the small trees that compete with old-growth ponderosa
pine, and increasing forage for deer are examples of project goals
that can be measured through effectiveness monitoring. Validation
monitoring involves checking the assumptions upon which our
restoration efforts are based. ‘Did reducing crown cover actually
reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfire?’ is a validation monitor-
ing question.
Monitoring plan: An outline for the steps you will undertake to
ensure that the project is on track. It lists a project’s audience, their
information needs, the strategies that will be used for data collec-
tion, the indicators, the methods that will be used to collect data,
and when, by whom, and where data will be collected.
Objective: A specific statement detailing the desired accomplish-
ments or outcomes of a project. If the project is well conceptual-
ized and well designed, realization of a project’s objectives should
lead to the fulfillment of the project’s goal. A good objective meets
the criteria of being impact oriented, measurable, time limited,
specific, and practical. Objectives are more specific than goals.
Resources: Items that a project needs, such as staff time, manage-
rial time, local knowledge, money, equipment, the presence of
trained people, and social and political opportunities.
Riparian community: A group of plant species that are found
growing along the edges of streams, rivers and other watercourses,
including dry streambeds.

52
Sampling: Measuring a subset of individuals, households, trees or
other factors in a population like a community, forest, watershed,
or transect.
Sapling: A young tree less than 5 inches in diameter but at least 4.5
feet tall.
Seedling: A young tree less than 4.5 feet tall.
Snag: A dead standing tree.

53
Appendix 2 — Area conversion
It is helpful to have all the values that are based on area expressed
in the same units—acres. This creates a standard so that indicator
values, such at the density of trees, can be compared from site to
site and from one restoration project to another.
To convert a value per sampled area to a value per acre:
1 –
Calculate the area sampled.
a.
For the area of a plot, multiply the length times the width
of each plot.
Example: 30 x 30 foot = 900 square feet.
b. Add together all plot areas (for total area sampled).
Example: 30 plots x 900 square feet = 27,000 square feet.
2 –
Divide the value of the total area sampled (in square feet) by
the number of square feet in an acre. The area of an acre is
43,560 square feet. This will give you the number of acres
sampled.
Example: 27,000 square feet/43,560 square feet per acre
= 0.62 acres sampled.
3 –
Divide the number of objects (such as trees) sampled by the
number of acres sampled. This will give you the number of
objects per acre.
Example (continued from above): There were 50 trees in the
30 plots; 0.62 acres were sampled. 50 trees/0.62 acres
= 81 trees per acre.

54
Appendix 3 — Useful monitoring resources
Methods:
Monitoring Plant and Animal Populations, by Elzinga and others,
describes monitoring design and implementation for a wide
range of ecological variables.
The Once and Future Forest, by Saber and McHarg, describes the en-
tire process of multiparty monitoring for community restora-
tions of natural ecosystems.
Methods for monitoring wildlife are presented in Morrison and
Krausman, Wildlife Restoration: Techniques for Habitat Analysis and
Animal Monitoring.
Further information on monitoring butterflies can be found in
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress, by the Ecological
Restoration Institute. An example of volunteer butterfly monitor-
ing can be found at: www.mchenry.cc.il.us/faculty_pgs/mgarriso/
butterflyproject/aBMG.html#TableofContents.
Software that can help analyze data collected is available at
www.urbanwildlands.org/INCA/.
More details on the method for monitoring landscape openings
are provided in the book Landscape Ecology, by Forman and
Godron.
The following website has useful tips for making a sampling design to
measure understory plants:
www.nrel.colostate.edu/projects/stohlgren/_sampling/mw_plot.html.
Full citations for the publications listed above can be found in Ap-
pendix 5.

55
Aerial photographs:
Although not covered in this handbook, aerial photographs can be
useful tools for monitoring. TerraServer provides free online ac-
cess to digital aerial photographs at www.terraserver-usa.com. The
University of Chicago Library contains archives of thousands of
aerial photographs and can be obtained through the following web
address:
memory.loc.gov:8081/ammem/award97/icuhtml/aephome.html.
Photo series for fuel load estimates:
You can also use photo guides to estimate fuel on your project
sites. These guides present a series of representative photographs
of different forest conditions with average fuel load figures. By
comparing your site to the different photographs, you can select
the one that most closely resembles your site and read-off fuel load
estimates. Examples of guides are:
Maxwell, Wayne and Franklin Ward. 1976. Photo series for
quantifying forest residues in the: Ponderosa pine type,
ponderosa pine and associated species type, lodgepole
pine type. GTR-PNW-52. Portland, Oregon: USDA Forest
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station.
Fischer, William. 1981. Photo guide for appraising downed woody
fuels in Montana forests: Interior ponderosa pine, ponderosa
pine–larch–Douglas-fir, larch–Douglas-fir, and interior
Douglas-fir cover types. GTR-INT-97. Ogden, Utah: USDA
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
No name. Photo series for quantifying forest residues in the
southwestern region: Data compiled from Black Hills
ponderosa pine and spruce type, 1990; recompilation of
GTR-PSW-56, 1981, GTR-PNW-105 (1980), and GTR-
PNW-52 (1976). Albuquerque, New Mexico: USDA Forest
Service.

56
Appendix 4 — Materials and equipment
commonly required for monitoring
Item
Estimated cost
Aluminum tags
$35–40
Camera, 35mm
$125 and up
Camera, digital
$200–400 and up
Cassette tapes
$25
Clinometer
$100
Clipboard
$5
Compass
$15–20
Densiometer
$100
DBH (diameter at breast height) tape (also called logger’s tape)
$12–25
Field notebook/paper
$5
Flagging tape
$2
Film, 35mm
$100 or more
G.P.S. (global positioning system) unit
$200–500 and up
Hammer
$10
Increment borer
$150–200
Measuring tape, 100ft
$50
Measuring tape, 300ft
$100
Metal stakes or rebar
$25–50
Penetrometer
$50 and up
Permanent writing markers
$5–15
Pin flags
$5
Soil compaction meter
$250
Various PVC pipe sections for plot squares
$25–50

57
The Ben Meadows Company is a good source of equipment for
ecological field sampling. They can be contacted at Box 5277,
Janesville WI 53547, 1.800.241.6401 or www.benmeadows.com.
Another good equipment source is Forestry Suppliers, Inc., 205
West Rankin St., Box 8397, Jackson MS 39284, 610.354.3565, or
www.forestry-suppliers.com.
Other items, such as field notebooks, permanent markers, or cam-
era equipment may be found at most office supply stores. Some
on-line retailers offer good deals on camera equipment and other
items.

58
Appendix 5 — References
Biodiversity Support Program. 1998. Keeping Watch: Experiences
from the Field in Community-based Monitoring. Lessons from
the Field (Newsletter) Issue No. 1. April 1998.
Bliss, J., G. Aplet, C. Hartzell, P. Harwood, P. Jahnige, D.
Kittredge, S. Sewandowski, and M. Soscia. 2001.
Community-based Ecosystem Monitoring. In: G. Gray,
M. Enzer and J. Kusel (editors) Understanding Community
Based Ecosystem Management in the United States.
Binghamton, New York: The Haworth Press.
Block, W.M., A.B. Franklin, J.P. Ward, Jr., J.L. Ganey, and G.C.
White. 2001. Design and implementation of monitoring
studies to evaluate the success of ecological restoration on
wildlife. Restoration Ecology 9(3): 293–303.
Cooperrider, A.Y., R.J. Boyd, and H.R. Stuart. 1986. Inventory
and monitoring of wildlife habitat. Denver, Colorado: United
States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land
Management.
Dieter, M., and H. Ellenberg. 1974. Aims and Methods of
Vegetation Ecology. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Elzinga, C.L., D.W. Salzer, J.W. Willoughby, and J.P. Gibbs. 2001.
Monitoring Plant and Animal Populations. Malden,
Massachusetts: Blackwell Science.
Ecological Restoration Institute. 2003. Butterflies as Indicators of
Restoration Progress. Working Paper #6. Flagstaff, Arizona:
Ecological Restoration Institute.
Flora, C.B., M. Kinsley, V. Luther, M. Wall, S. Odell, S. Ratner,
and J. Topolsky. 1999. Measuring Community Success and
Sustainability (RRD 180). Ames, Iowa: North Central
Regional Center for Rural Development.

59
Forman, R.T.T. and M. Godron. 1986. Landscape Ecology. New
York: John Wiley and Sons.
Fulé, P.Z., A.E.M. Waltz, W.W. Covington, and T.A. Heinlein.
2001. Measuring forest restoration effectiveness in reducing
hazardous fuels. Journal of Forestry, November; 24–29.
Hastings, B.K. 2002, Soil Loss from a Rapidly Eroding Pinyon-
juniper Woodland in Bandelier National Monument, New
Mexico: Response to Slash Treatment; M.S. Thesis. Fort
Collins, Colorado: Colorado State University.
Herrick, J.E., J.W. Van Zee, K.M. Havstad, and W.G. Whitford.
2001. Monitoring Manual for Grassland, Shrubland, and Savanna
Ecosystems. Co-developed by the USDA-Jornada
Experimental Range, EPA Office of Research and
Development, the Natural Resources Conservation Service,
and the Bureau of Land Management.
Hink, V.C. and R.D. Ohmart. 1984. Middle Rio Grande
Biological Survey. Unpublished final report; contract
DACW47-81-C-0015. Albuquerque, New Mexico. U. S.
Army Corp. of Engineers.
Moir, W. and W. Block. 2001. Adaptive management on public
lands: commitment or rhetoric? Environmental
Management 28: 141–148.
Morrison, M.L. 1994. Resource inventory and monitoring:
concepts and examples for ecological restoration. Restoration
and Management Notes12(2): 179–183.
Morrison, M.L. and P.R. Krausman. 2002. Wildlife Restoration:
Techniques for Habitat Analysis and Animal Monitoring.
Covelo, California: Island Press.

60
National Wildfire Coordinating Group. 1997. Photo Series for
Quantifying Forest Residues in the Southwest Region, NFES
#1395. Boise, Idaho: National Interagency Fire Center.
Savage, M. 2003. Community Monitoring for Restoration Projects in
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. National Community
Forestry Center, Southwest Region; Working Paper 5. Santa
Fe, New Mexico: Forest Trust.
Saver, L. and I. McHarg. 1998. The Once and Future Forest: A
Guide to Forest Restoration Strategies. Covelo, California:
Island Press.

61
Appendix 6 — Ecological monitoring data
sheets
The data sheets on the following pages can be used to record mon-
itoring data and can be copied and used in the field. Data
worksheets include:
A — Permanent photo points
B — Landscape openings
C — Bird abundance and species composition
D — Butterfly abundance and species composition
E — Seedling density
F — Amount of surface fuel
G — Extent of canopy cover
H — Classification of riparian plant community
I
— Density and size of living and dead trees
(plus height to tree crowns)
J
— Understory plant species composition
K — Understory cover (and extent bare soil)

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Permanent photo points
Page #: _______
Data sheet   A 
Time: __________
Transect #: ___________________________ 
Slope: _______________    Aspect: _______________ 
Control site 
Treatment site 
After treatment
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
(for digital photos note the file name in place of the exposure/frame #) 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: ____________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Film roll #: __________  
Photo of site marker 	    = 
exposure/frame #: ______________  
Photo to the North 	
    = 
exposure/frame #: ______________  
Photo to the East	
    =
exposure/frame #: ______________
Photo to the South	
    =
exposure/frame #: ______________  
Photo to the West	
    =
exposure/frame #: ______________  
 
Site description: known human history (grazing or logging), nearby structures or roads, animal signs 
(mounds, grazing, scat, tracks, insect infestation), signs of natural disturbance (fire, windthrow, etc.): 
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Landscape openings 
Page #: _______
Data sheet   B 
Sketch-map of site
Control site 
Treatment site 
Length of transects: __________
Spacing between transects: ___________
Number of years since treatment: ______
Before treatment  
After treatment 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: _____________________________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Note abbreviations used : ______________________________________________________________
(see Handbook 4 page 26) 

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Bird abundance and species composition
Page #: _______
Data sheet   C 
Time: __________
Transect #: ___________________________ 
Slope: _______________    Aspect: _______________ 
Control site 
Treatment site 
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
After treatment 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: ____________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Point # 
Species name 
Mode of detection 
(song, call, visual, other) 
Sex 
Comments
Sampling frequency:
Breeding season
x1 
x2  
x3   
Non-breeding season
x1  
x2 
x3 
x4 
x5 

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Butterfly abundance and species composition
Page #: _______
Data sheet   D 
Time: __________
Transect #: ___________________________ 
Slope: _______________    Aspect: _______________ 
Control site 
Treatment site 
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
After treatment 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: ____________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Point # 
Species name 
Number of
individuals
(tally marks)
Distinguishing
characteristics
(color, size, flight pattern, etc.)
Comments
Point # 

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Seedling density
Page #: _______
Data sheet   E 
(trees less than 4.5 feet tall)
Transect #: ___________________________ 
Slope: _______________    Aspect: _______________ 
Control site 
Treatment site 
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
After treatment 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: _____________________________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Seedlings 
Species 
Number of individuals 
(tally marks) 
Total 
    
                         
     
Use the following abbreviations to record tree species: 
PP = Ponderosa Pine
 
 
AJ = Alligator Juniper 
JN = Juni
=
=
per 
RJ = Rocky Mountain Juniper
GO = Gambel Oak
OJ = One-seed Juniper 
WF = White Fir
DF = Douglas Fir 
PY = Pinyon Pine
For other species make a note here of species and abbreviation(s) used: 

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Page #: _______
Data sheet   F 
Amount of surface fuel  
 
 
Transect #: _____________________ 
Transect length: _________________ 
Transect bearing: ________________
Slope: _______ Aspect: __________ 
Totals
       Control site  
     Treatment site 
       Before treatment 
     After treatment 
Numb
Dominant tree species:  _________________
er of years since treatment: ________ 
Number of woody materials 
1.0 to 2.99
inches in
diameter
along first
10 feet
0.25 to 0.99
inches in
diameter
along first
6 feet
Less than
0.25 inches
in diameter
along first
6 feet
 
Greater than
3 inches in 
diameter
along entire
35ft transect
 
 
 
 
 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: ______________________________________  
Date: ______________________________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Slope: _______ Aspect: __________ 
       Control site  
     Treatment site 
       Before treatment 
     After treatment 
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
Number of woody materials 
1.0 to 2.99
inches in
diameter
along first
10 feet
0.25 to 0.99
inches in
diameter
along first
6 feet
Less than
0.25 inches
in diameter
along first
6 feet
 
Transect #: _____________________ 
Transect length: _________________ 
Transect bearing: ________________
Dominant tree species:  _________________
#    diameter
Greater than
3 inches in 
diameter
along entire
35ft transect
#    diameter

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Extent of canopy cover
Page #: _______
Data sheet   G 
Transect #: ___________________________ 
Slope: _______________    Aspect: _______________ 
Control site 
Treatment site 
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
After treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: ______________________________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Densiometer measurement 
 
Plot #
Forward
Yes									No
Behind
Yes									No
Left
Yes									No
Right
Yes									No

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Classification of riparian plant community structure
Page #: _______
Data sheet   H  
Control site 
Treatment site 
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
After treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: _____________________________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Transect #
Structure type #*
Transect #
Structure type #*
Use the following structure types to describe the site (see Handbook 4 for more details): 
Type 1  
Tall trees with well developed understory 
Type 2  
Tall tree canopy with little or no understory vegetation 
Type 3   
Intermediate sized trees with dense understory vegetation 
Type 4
Intermediate-sized trees openly spaced with little understory 
Type 5  
Stands with dense shrubby growth more than 25% of the community 
Type 6  
Very young, low, and/or sparse stands less than 25% of the community 
=
=
=
=
=
=

Density and size of live and dead trees
– and –
Height from ground to tree crown
Page #: _______
Data sheet    I 
                          
  
Dead standing trees
(snags)
Saplings
tally
Plot #
Slope
Aspect
Species
#
Species
Use the following abbreviations to record tree species: 
PP = Ponderosa Pine 
AJ = Alligator Juniper 
JN = Juni
=
=
per 
RJ = Rocky Mountain Juniper
GO = Gambel Oak
 Oa
OJ = One-seed Juniper 
WF = White Fir 
DF = Douglas Fir 
PY = Pinyon Pine
For other species make a note here of species and abbreviation(s) used: 
Note: If multpile tree stems, measure the largest one and write the number of tree stems under the species name.  
 
— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots — 
Transect #: ___________________________ 
Control site 
Treatment site 
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
After treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: ______________________________ 
Observer(s): _________________________________________________________________________
Adult living trees
larger than 5 inches in diameter
Height to
tree crown
(feet) 
Species
Diameter
(inches)
Diameter
(inches)

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Understory plant species composition
Page #: _______
Data sheet   J 
(natives and exotics) 
Transect #: ___________________________ 
Slope: _______________    Aspect: _______________ 
Control site 
Treatment site 
Number of ye
* Count individual plants in small plots only
ars since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
After treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: _____________________________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Plot # 
Species name 
Number of individuals* 
(tally marks) 
Total*

— Make copies of this sheet for additional transects and/or plots —  
Understory cover
Page #: _______
Data sheet   K 
Transect #: ___________________________ 
Slope: _______________    Aspect: _______________ 
Control site 
Treatment site 
Number of years since treatment: ________ 
 
Before treatment  
After treatment 
Site name: ______________________________________
Elevation: ___________________________
Location: _______________________________________  Date: _____________________________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Plot # 
Type
of
cover
0 to 5%
5 to 25%
25 to 50%
50 to 75%
75 to 95%
95 to 100%
Percent plant cover estimation
(check only one plant cover estimate for each type)
Grasses
Forbs
Bare soil/rock
Litter
Grasses
Forbs
Bare soil/rock
Litter
Grasses
Forbs
Bare soil/rock
Litter
Grasses
Forbs
Bare soil/rock
Litter
Grasses
Forbs
Bare soil/rock
Litter


Acknowledgments
Many individuals offered their time and expertise toward the development
of the monitoring guidelines that form the basis of these handbooks. We
gratefully acknowledge the contribution of the following individuals:
Craig Allen, U.S. Geological Survey/Midcontinent Ecological Science Station
Gregory H. Aplet, The Wilderness Society
Dennis Becker, USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station
William Block, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Sam Burns, Fort Lewis College
Nils Christoffersen, Wallowa Resources
Geneva Chong, U.S. Geological Survey
Max Cordova, El Greco and La Montana de Truchas
Cecilia Danes, University of Vermont
Rick DeIaco, Village of Ruidoso
Tori Derr, Forest Trust
Carl Edminster, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Don Falk, University of Arizona, Tree-Ring Research Lab
Deborah Finch, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Cornelia Flora, Iowa State University, Center for Rural Development
Peter Fulé, Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute
Peter Gaulke, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
John Gerritsma, USDA Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management
Quinn Griffin, Escalante Heritage Center
Richard Hart, Ashland, Oregon
Jan-Willem Jansens, Common Ground
Ajit Krishnaswamy, National Network of Forest Practitioners
Andrea Bedell Loucks, Pinchot Institute for Conservation
Taylor McKinnon, Grand Canyon Trust
Mary Mitsos, National Forest Foundation
Bob Moore, Catron County Citizens Group
Ann Moote, Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute
Dan Neary, USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station
Brian Nowicki, Center for Biological Diversity
Melanie Parker, Northwest Connections
Deborah Potter, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
Michael Quintana, New Mexico Community-based Forestry Alliance
George Ramirez, Las Humanas Cooperative
William H. Romme, Colorado State University
Melissa Savage, Four Corners Institute
Todd Schulke, Center for Biological Diversity
David Seeholtz, USDA Forest Service, Region 3
Tom Stohlgren, Colorado State University
Joe Truett, Turner Endangered Species Fund
Bob Unnasch, The Nature Conservancy
Lisa Wilson, Watershed Research and Training Center
Barbara Wyckoff-Baird, The Aspen Institute

64

65

66
