Fire Progression: The Bear Trap Fire 
The Bear Trap Fire began in early May 2022 on the Cibola National 
Forest, eventually reaching 38,225 acres. Due to exceptionally dry 
and windy conditions, managers attempted to quickly suppress 
the fire. However, there were insufficient resources to achieve 
this goal, and the fire grew quickly. As a result, fire managers 
implemented an indirect strategy that leveraged Potential 
Operational Delineation (POD) boundaries (e.g., fire scars, fuel 
treatments, roads, ridges) previously developed and vetted by 
local fire managers to control the fire. When the fire’s furthest 
extent was achieved at the end of May, significant segments of the 
final perimeter largely aligned with established POD boundaries, 
particularly on the northern, eastern, and southern edges (Figure 
1). Managers noted that there was local buy-in on using an indirect 
strategy within POD boundaries because there were few Values at 
Risk (VAR), limited resources, and high local acceptance of fire on 
the landscape. 
What RMA tools were used and how they were used 
to inform decision-making    
Suppression Difficulty Index (SDI), PODs, Snag Hazard, Potential 
Control Locations (PCL), and Estimated Ground Evacuation Time 
were the primary tools from the RMA dashboard used during the 
incident. These tools were used by local district personnel and 
fire staff before and during the transition between the local Type 
3 IMT and the incoming Type 2 IMT to determine relevant VAR, 
develop Management Action Points, and to complete a Strategic 
Risk Assessment (SRA) - now referred to as the Incident Strategic 
Alignment Process, or ISAP. The SRA analyzed VAR, developed 
strategic actions, evaluated risks to responders, weighed the 
probability of success, and facilitated communication between 
the Team, AAs, and local stakeholders. The primary user of RMA 
on the Type 2 IMT was their Long Term Fire Analyst/Strategic 
Operational Planner who was in charge of overseeing updates to 
the SRA for the incident. However, other members of the IMT used 
Use of Risk Management Assistance on the 2022 Bear Trap Fire, New Mexico
Incident Management Teams (IMTs) and Agency Administrators (AAs) used Risk Management Assistance (RMA) tools on the 2022 Bear 
Trap Fire to communicate and justify decisions and create a common operating picture within and between IMTs, local land managers, 
and the public. RMA tools helped identify viable opportunities and reduced wasted effort by focusing resources on locations most likely 
to contain the fire’s spread. Interviews with IMTs and AAs on the incident illustrated how RMA was used to inform decisions, the benefits 
of RMA, facilitating and frustrating factors, and recommendations to improve the use and utility of RMA. 
The USDA Forest Service developed Risk Management 
Assistance (RMA) in 2016 to improve wildfire decision 
quality, increase accountability, and minimize firefighter 
risk (Calkin et al. 2021). RMA emphasizes pre- and post-
fire training, on-incident support through a publicly-
available online dashboard that houses advanced spatial 
analytics and fire weather behavior data, and line officer 
development.  
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes, in 
partnership with the USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation 
Management, are leading a longitudinal assessment 
of RMA use in incident and non-incident management 
contexts. We conducted an initial assessment on RMA use 
during the 2021 fire season (Beeton et al. 2022). Through 
key informant interviews with AAs and IMTs, this case study 
series builds on our initial assessment and explores how 
RMA tools were used to inform wildfire decision-making 
on three incidents during the 2022 fire season.
What is RMA? 
Case Study 1/3
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
Ignition date: May 1, 2022  
Ignition location: Bear 
Trap Canyon, San Mateo 
Mountains, Magdalena 
Ranger District, Cibola 
National Forest and 
Grasslands   
Ignition type: Likely Human 
Size: 38,225 acres  
Date at fullest geographic 
extent: May 27, 2022  
Management strategy: 
Full suppression utilizing 
indirect tactics  
Teams: Initial Type 3 Team 
for 11 days (May 2 – May 
12), followed by a Type 2 
team for 14 days  
Figure 1. Map of the Bear Trap Fire on the Cibola National Forest  
and relevant incident information
N
NEW MEXICO

RMA tools to orient themselves to the landscape and facilitate 
communication between entities.  
Benefits of RMA  
Communication: The primary benefit of RMA identified by our 
interviewees was the dashboard’s usefulness for communication 
within teams, during team transitions, between IMTs and AAs, 
and with the general public. The use of RMA during the SRA 
process facilitated challenging but beneficial conversations on 
management options aimed at efficiently using resources and 
minimizing risk.   
 
Rapid orientation: The RMA dashboard allowed the Type 2 IMT 
to quickly increase their situational awareness. Members of the 
team said the dashboard provided useful context to the fire by 
orienting them quickly to an unfamiliar landscape. 
Contextualizing decisions: Although managers reported RMA 
tools did not lead to changed actions, the tools helped confirm 
courses of action or helped determine if additional ground-
truthing was needed. The RMA tools provided support for 
justifying their decisions in the Wildland Fire Decision Support 
System (WFDSS).
 
  
Key factors impacting RMA use  
Supportive leadership: RMA use was facilitated by leadership 
who supported engaging fires in a way that accounted for longer-
term risks, and who recognized the benefits of using fire to achieve 
resource management objectives when conditions are appropriate 
and the risks to firefighter and public safety have been considered 
and minimized. Supportive leadership also shared information 
and facilitated trainings on RMA for their teams.  
RMA ease of use and accuracy: The RMA dashboard was 
reportedly easy to access and use. The RMA tools largely aligned 
with the “gut instincts” of career fire managers and what was 
observed on the ground.  
 
Cultural hesitancy: Interviewees noted some fire managers 
were hesitant to utilize RMA tools because they were reluctant 
to change their approaches, didn’t feel the need to justify their 
actions using RMA tools, or were skeptical of the accuracy of the 
tools. These managers reportedly would rather rely exclusively on 
“boots on the ground” approaches. Others suggested the broader 
fire culture in the USDA Forest Service, which tends to value 
experiential knowledge over analytics, may have contributed to 
the slow adoption of RMA.  
 
Training: The lack of knowledge of the RMA dashboard, PODs, 
and SRA, particularly among Type 3 teams, limited RMA use. 
While some local personnel on the Type 3 organization for the 
Bear Trap Fire were familiar with the RMA dashboard and used 
it to develop strategic actions, our interviewees reported that this 
was uncommon for Type 3 teams.  
Recommendations to improve RMA adoption on  
wildfire incidents 
Functionality: Managers noted that there is a need to improve 
some RMA dashboard features, such as clarifying the process to 
create printable maps. They also commented that the dashboard 
symbology and color ramps could be improved to increase 
accessibility for colorblind individuals. One IMT member 
suggested adding a data layer that more clearly communicated 
fire’s benefit over the long term. Risk assessments detailing fire’s 
positive and negative impacts to highly valued resources and assets 
are currently available on the RMA dashboard for many landscapes. 
However, this interviewee said that these assessments were 
not often favored by IMTs when they determined management 
actions. While long-term risk was effectively considered by IMTs 
and AAs on the Bear Trap Fire, this interviewee remarked that 
suppression actions on fires were often greenlit if there weren’t 
obvious safety risks to responders, and that considerations of 
longer-term risk tended to take a back seat. They recommended 
more clearly defining risk assessment outputs on the RMA 
dashboard to assist IMTs with their calculations of overall risk on 
future fires. 
Training:  Personnel on the Bear Trap Fire phoned national RMA 
leaders as needed during this incident to overcome knowledge 
gaps. Interviewees said further training opportunities would 
be needed not just for members of Type 1 and Type 2 teams, 
but also for local resources associated with Type 3 teams. 
Incident Management Response Roundtable (IMRR) meetings 
and National Incident Management Organization (NIMO) 
presentations have been key to introducing these RMA tools and 
processes to Type 1 and Type 2 organizations, and similar tactics 
were recommended for members of local Type 3 teams.  
“
It [the RMA dashboard] is the single most powerful 
briefing tool I’ve ever come into contact with. 
“
“
[RMA] really helps promote good conversation 
to, I would say specifically line officers, when 
you can pull it up on a monitor, show them when 
they’re feeling the social political pressures of 
just wanting the smoke to go away, or you’ve got a 
public that’s wondering why resources are doing 
what they’re doing or not doing what they’re doing.
“
“
For the most part [RMA’s] fairly accurate. It just 
reinforces the reason why we’re going to the 
places we’re going with our containment lines.
“
Literature Cited 
Beeton, T. A., Caggiano, M. D., & Colavito, M. M. (2022). Use of Risk 
Management Assistance During the 2021 Fire Season: A Technical Report. 
 
Calkin, D. E., O’Connor, C. D., Thompson, M. P., & Stratton, R. D. (2021). 
Strategic wildfire response decision support and the risk management 
assistance program. Forests, 12(10), 1407. 
Authors: Niki vonHedemann1, Tyler Aldworth2,  
Tyler Beeton2, Melanie Colavito1, Michael Caggiano3
1Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO. 
2Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff AZ. 
3USFS Region 2, USDA Forest Service, Lakewood, CO
 
April 2023 • cfri.colostate.edu • Contact: Niki.vonHedemann@nau.edu
“
We’re supposed to be an agency that’s driven by 
science and, 99% of the time...we still manage fires 
in the manner very similar to how we did in 1980. 
“
“
There is no discussion or tool or anything to point 
to that longer term risk of either having to put the 
same fire out every year for the next 20 years or not 
having to respond to a fire for the next 20 years. 
“
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
