Use of Risk Management Assistance on the  
2022 Windigo/Potter/Big Swamp Complex, Oregon
Incident Management Teams (IMTs) and Agency Administrators (AAs) used Risk Management Assistance (RMA) tools on the 2022 
Windigo/Potter Big Swamp Complex to communicate and justify decisions and create a common operating picture within IMTs, between 
IMTs and local land managers, and the public. RMA tools helped visualize relevant Values at Risk (VAR), communicate potential strategic 
and operational actions, and facilitate dialogue among IMT members, and between the IMT, AAs and the public, for fires with significant 
jurisdictional complexity. Interviews with IMTs and AAs on the complex illustrated how RMA was used to inform decisions, the benefits 
of RMA, facilitating and frustrating factors, and recommendations to improve the use and utility of RMA.
The USDA Forest Service developed Risk Management 
Assistance (RMA) in 2016 to improve wildfire decision 
quality, increase accountability, and minimize firefighter 
risk (Calkin et al. 2021). RMA emphasizes pre- and post-
fire training, on-incident support through a publicly-
available online dashboard that houses advanced spatial 
analytics and fire weather behavior data, and line officer 
development.  
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes, in 
partnership with the USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation 
Management, are leading a longitudinal assessment 
of RMA use in incident and non-incident management 
contexts. We conducted an initial assessment on RMA use 
during the 2021 fire season (Beeton et al. 2022). Through 
key informant interviews with AAs and IMTs, this case study 
series builds on our initial assessment and explores how 
RMA tools were used to inform wildfire decision-making 
on three incidents during the 2022 fire season
What is RMA? 
Case Study 2/3
Fire Progression: The Windigo/Potter/Big Swamp 
Complex 
The Windigo/Potter/Big Swamp complex in southern Oregon 
was a group of small fires that ignited in late July/early August 
2022 near the shared boundaries of the Umpqua, Deschutes, and 
Willamette National Forests (Figure 1). The largest of these fires 
was the Windigo complex (located on the Umpqua/Deschutes), 
followed by the Potter (Willamette), and Big Swamp (Willamette). 
The majority of each fire’s growth occurred before the end of the 
first Type 2 IMT’s initial deployment. All fires were categorized as 
full suppression for their duration and were declared contained in 
early September. The initial IMT opted to utilize indirect strategies 
on Potter due to dry fuel conditions and a lack of Values at Risk. 
On Windigo and Big Swamp, the team utilized direct and indirect 
strategies due to more favorable fuel moistures and threatened 
VAR.
Tragically, on August 10th, 2022, Collin Hagan of the Craig 
Interagency Hotshot crew was killed by a tree strike on the 
Big Swamp Fire. Though this loss was not the subject of our 
investigation, our interviewees acknowledged Hagan’s death with 
reverence and respect as they shared their perspectives on the use 
of RMA during the complex. 
What RMA tools were used and how they were used 
to inform decision-making  
The primary RMA tools used during the complex were Potential 
Operational Delineations (PODs), Suppression Difficulty Index 
(SDI), Potential Control Location (PCL) analysis, Estimated 
Ground Evacuation Time, and Snag Hazard. Direction to 
consider PODs and the RMA dashboard was included within the 
Delegation of Authority. On the Type 2 team initially assigned to 
the fire, an Operations Section Chief functioning as “Strategic 
Operations” and the Team’s Safety Officer were the primary users 
of RMA tools. The team was familiar with the RMA dashboard 
as they had used it to pilot Strategic Risk Assessments (SRA) 
during incidents in 2021, now known as the Incident Strategic 
Alignment Process, or ISAP.
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
First fire ignition date:  
July 31, 2022  
Ignition locations: Near 
the shared borders of the 
Willamette, Umpqua, and 
Deschutes National Forests 
Ignition type: Lightning 
Sizes: 1,007 ac (Windigo), 
632 ac (Potter), 110 ac (Big 
Swamp) 
Date at fullest geographic 
extent: August 26, 2022 
Management strategy: 
Full suppression using a 
combination of direct and 
indirect tactics 
Teams: Type 2 teams 
in rotation from August 
2nd until September 11th 
(three teams total), then 
downgraded to Type 3 and 
handed off to local units.
Figure 1. Map of the Windigo-Potter-Big Swamp Complex in southern 
Oregon and relevant incident information
N
OREGON

Initially, members of the team and AAs used the dashboard as 
well as additional data layers provided by local land management 
units to discuss and prioritize relevant VAR. From there, the 
team used the analytics to craft strategies for each fire and 
communicate with AAs about potential management actions. 
The team’s “Strategic Operations” Operations Section Chief used 
PODs, SDI, and PCL layers to develop a draft strategy. They then 
shared the draft strategy with the Safety Officer who overlayed 
the Snag Hazard and Estimated Ground Evacuation Time layers 
to consider overall risk to firefighters for each strategic action.  
Benefits of RMA 
Created a common operating picture between the Incident 
Management Team and local land management units: IMT 
interviewees explained that tools on the RMA dashboard helped 
them quickly orient to an unfamiliar landscape and narrow the 
range of viable strategies to consider, which streamlined the 
ground truthing process. Interviewees associated with local land 
management units described how the platform allowed IMTs to 
comprehensively describe potential management actions to those 
with limited fire management experience. 
Provided decision rationale: IMT interviewees reported the 
dashboard allowed them to justify their operational decisions. The 
dashboard and its analytics helped the IMT quantify its actions by 
providing information for Management Action Points, SRAs, and 
Wildland Fire Decision Support System documentation. 
Key factors impacting RMA use 
Previous experience: Those already familiar with the dashboard 
were more likely to be comfortable with its usage from the outset 
of the complex. On this complex, there appeared to be more 
experience using the dashboard among members of the first IMT 
than among AAs. 
Internet connectivity: Some interviewees cautioned that poor 
internet connectivity reduced the dashboard’s functionality. 
Specifically, the map viewer had trouble populating data layers 
when connection speeds were slow. This could be potentially 
problematic for Incident Command Posts with limited 
connectivity.  
Disagreement around VAR data: The complex straddled 
three administrative units, and some interviewees reported 
disagreement about the relevant VAR to prioritize across units. 
Managers thought some of the VAR data on the RMA dashboard 
did not accurately or completely represent their landscape, thus 
representatives from each National Forest brought local VAR data 
layers to supplement data on the RMA dashboard. Although local 
data differed between forests, which resulted in a more time-
intensive prioritization process, the supplemental layers were 
successfully uploaded to the dashboard and supported inter-unit 
dialogue on VAR prioritization. 
Cultural acceptance: The willingness of the IMT, particularly the 
Incident Commander (IC), to accept RMA tool and model outputs 
was a key component facilitating the dashboard’s use. Each tool 
on the dashboard comes with its own set of assumptions, and 
whether the IMT and IC trusted the outputs appeared to be key to 
their use on the complex. 
Recommendations to improve RMA adoption on  
wildfire incidents 
Incorporate dynamic conditions into RMA tools: Interviewees 
recommended tools, such as the SDI and PCL, incorporate dynamic 
weather conditions and forecasts. They also recommended 
including firefighting resource availability on the dashboard. They 
said this would better reflect the changing conditions faced by fire 
managers and result in greater utility of the tools for managers. 
Increased trainings and socialization: More trainings at 
multiple levels of authority and organization would improve 
awareness and use of RMA. According to our interviewees, 
awareness and acceptance of the accuracy of RMA tools appears 
to be inconsistent across IMTs. Enhancing training opportunities 
for Type 1 and Type 2 IMTs on how to use the tools, and exposing 
managers and firefighters not associated with Type 1 or Type 2 
IMTs to the tools may increase RMA use. 
Contextualize model outputs: Some managers recommended 
extra care in contextualizing the SDI and PCL results to temper 
expectations for success and better communicate viable fire 
management options. Dynamic weather conditions are not 
considered in SDI and PCL, and there are a host of other factors that 
dictate where and how to engage a fire (e.g., resource availability, 
VAR). IMT interviewees suggested the need to clearly articulate 
modeling assumptions and limitations. Otherwise, individuals 
with limited fire experience who interact with these tools may 
inaccurately assume some locations will hold a fire under all 
conditions, or that other areas would always be dangerous or 
ineffective areas for firefighters to engage.  
“
It made a measurable difference in my confidence 
in the actual actions that [the IMT] were taking on 
a daily basis...It was a really good way to talk about 
operations…It allowed me to have questions about 
operational tactics based on facts, based on all 
these data points at an appropriate time and at an 
appropriate level.   
“
“
The benefit...is that you’re able to quantify the 
decision making that we [firefighters] do in our 
heads. We’re not changing anything on how we’re 
fighting fire, we’re just able to have a much better 
conversation about the ‘why’. 
“
“
You’ve got to have an IC that’s supportive, who’s 
progressive, and who’s not afraid of new things. 
That’s number one, because he or she sets the 
tone. If your IC’s not really into it… that’s going to 
be reflected in [the team’s] participation. 
“
Literature Cited 
Beeton, T. A., Caggiano, M. D., & Colavito, M. M. (2022). Use of Risk 
Management Assistance During the 2021 Fire Season: A Technical Report. 
 
Calkin, D. E., O’Connor, C. D., Thompson, M. P., & Stratton, R. D. (2021). 
Strategic wildfire response decision support and the risk management 
assistance program. Forests, 12(10), 1407. 
Authors: Tyler Aldworth1, Niki vonHedemann2, Tyler Beeton1, Melanie 
Colavito2, Michael Caggiano3
1Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO. 
2Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff AZ. 
3USFS Region 2, USDA Forest Service, Lakewood, CO
 
April 2023 • cfri.colostate.edu • Contact: Tyler.Aldworth@colostate.edu
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
