The Evolution of  
Wildfire Policy Governing Management  
of Natural Ignitions
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
June 2023

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been significantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: Sitgreaves Complex Fire (2014) on the Kaibab National Forest.  
Photo courtesy USDA Forest Service
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: June 2023
Authors: Scott T. Franz, Melanie M. Colavito, and Catrin M. Edgeley
Reviewers: Alexander ‘Zander’ Evans, Forest Stewards Guild; Stephen Fillmore, Fuels 
Operations Specialist, USDA Forest Service; and Brad Pietruszka, Fire Management Specialist, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Franz, S.T., M.M. Colavito, and C.M. Edgeley. 2023. The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing 
Management of Natural Ignitions. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 31 p.
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. A portion of the research was also supported by 
funding provided by the Arizona Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).

Table of Contents
Executive Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Introduction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Historical Policy Eras . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
	
Fire Protection (1872–1967). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
	
Experimentation (1968–1977). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
	
Re-evaluation (1978–1989). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
	
Maturation (1990–2000). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 
Modern Policy Eras. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
	
Fire Classification (2001–2008). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
	
Operational Flexibility (2009–present). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Current State of Wildfire Policy. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
	
Suggested Terminology and Framing. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
	
Variable Framing of Wildfire as a Threat or Opportunity. .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 16
	
Operational Structures and Social Incentives . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 17
	
Evaluating Coherent Actions to Carry Out Policy. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 18
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
References . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Appendix A: Methods . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Appendix B: Updates to Federal Wildland Fire Management  
Policy from 1995 to 2001. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Appendix C: Updates in Interagency Guidance from 2003 to 2009 . .  . . . 30

2	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary
Since the turn of the 20th century, US land management agencies have wrestled with the challenge of managing 
wildfire and strategies used to do so, from directly suppressing fire to allowing it to fulfill its natural role in a 
variety of ecosystems. What began as a simple and unified effort to suppress all wildfire through the early 1900s 
has evolved into a complex multi-layered system, extending from federal agencies and laws down to local units 
and priorities. Today, policies recognize the ecological importance of wildfire and allow managers to use natural 
ignitions (i.e., lightning strikes) to accomplish objectives on the landscape, including reducing hazardous fuel 
buildup to decrease the risk of catastrophic wildfire in the future. This strategy has undergone many name and 
policy changes over the past century, causing confusion for practitioners, policymakers, and the public. This white 
paper captures developments in wildfire policy governing management of natural ignitions over the past 150 years 
and how policy affects management decisions.
Our policy analysis shows that progress has been made to recognize the duality of wildfire as both a destructive and 
beneficial force of nature. However, building a sound strategy to address this duality still meets resistance. Though 
operational models of the past have changed, redirecting the cultural and institutional inertia of historical wildfire 
suppression has proven challenging. Performance metrics and financial appropriations for wildfire management still 
foster a suppression bias. Regional and jurisdictional complexities cause management actions to lag behind policy 
vision. Complicated terms, framing, and priorities make communicating strategies difficult. Each of these gaps 
must be addressed if we are to confront the wildfire crisis, as well as learn to live with fire and reintroduce it safely 
to fire-adapted systems to benefit ecosystems and communities. Decision support systems can bridge the gaps 
between policy, practitioners, and the public, so long as those systems have the right data and people at the table 
to inform decisions. Managing wildfires for objectives other than full suppression must be part of the approach 
moving forward, and confusion around terminology must be addressed to help reframe wildfire management in a 
way that acknowledges that all fires are addressed with a risk-informed, strategic response. 

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         3
2023 Pass Fire, Gila National Forest. Photo courtesy of InciWeb
Introduction 
On August 2, 2021, Chief of the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service Randy Moore, wrote 
a letter to the agency. Due to the severe drought conditions across the western US, with over 70 large wildfires 
burning and ongoing challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, he declared “managing wildfires for resource benefit 
is a strategy we will not use” until the unprecedented conditions abated (Moore 2021). The strategy he refers to, 
managing wildfire for resource benefit, gives fire managers the ability to use a naturally ignited wildfire (i.e., via 
lightning strike) to accomplish management objectives on the landscape. Compared to a full-suppression strategy, 
whereby teams work to build effective containment around a wildfire to immediately halt its spread, managing 
wildfires for resource benefit can involve indirect tactics that balance ecological and social considerations. These 
include confining wildfire to an area by using natural barriers, roads, and other features; point or zone protection of 
valued resources; and monitoring its effect on natural systems and management objectives (NIFC 2020).
   
Wildfire is an important part of a land manager’s toolbox because of its critical role in wildfire-adapted 
ecosystems. For example, in lodgepole pine forests, like those around Yellowstone National Park, high-severity 
fire opens their serotinous cones for germination (Romme et al. 2011). For ponderosa pine forests, such as 
those found throughout the Intermountain and Southwest US, wildfire has long played an important role in 
maintaining forest health. These forests have co-evolved with wildfire, such that repeated low-severity wildfire 
builds resilience, as lower tree density reduces the spread of crown fires, thereby reducing the risk of high-

4	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
intensity, catastrophic wildfire (Huffman et al. 2020, Stoddard et al. 2020). However, years of wildfire exclusion 
policies and management practices have altered the role of wildfire, especially in North American forests, and 
resulted in extreme fuel buildup that, combined with climate change, has resulted in uncharacteristically large 
and high-severity wildfires (Hagmann et al. 2021).
Reducing the risk of catastrophic wildfire and reintroducing wildfire, with tolerable risk to communities, 
firefighters, and ecosystems, has become a key focus of land management policies. In current policy, wildfire may 
be managed for multiple objectives simultaneously, and while this can give fire managers flexibility, it has also 
compounded the complexity of decision-making. For example, fire managers can directly suppress one flank of 
a wildfire, allow another flank to burn to a ridgeline or road that is safer for firefighters to control, and point-
protect assets or infrastructure in between. Though enhancement in decision-making strategies and decision 
support systems like the Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) and Risk Management Assistance 
(RMA) dashboard may help fire managers navigate that complexity (Beeton et al. 2021, Fillmore and Paveglio 
2023), there is no doubt that wildfires continue to increase in intensity, severity, and duration, leading to what 
some land management agencies, particularly the Forest Service, have dubbed a “Wildfire Crisis” (Wasserman 
2020, USDA 2022b).
The current wildfire crisis emerged from a paradox formed over the past century that addressed short-term risk 
at the expense of long-term risk (Calkin et al. 2015, North et al. 2015, Ingalsbee 2017). A memo from the chief 
of the Forest Service in 1935 outlined what is known as the 10 a.m. policy and demanded “fast, energetic, and 
thorough suppression of all fires … with the aim, without reservation, of obtaining control before 10 o’clock of 
the next morning.” Following this paradigm for decades, the rapid and total suppression of wildfires contributed 
to a steady buildup of fuels, so when lightning strikes or human-caused ignitions inevitably brought wildfire 
back to those landscapes, it came with greater and greater intensity. In his recent letter, Chief Moore stated: 
the 2021 restriction was “not a return to the 10 a.m. policy,” but a temporary and prudent course of action. A 
recent resolution introduced to the US House of Representatives, however, would see that policy reinstated. 
House Resolution 6903 was introduced following the 2021 wildfire season and called for the Forest Service 
to extinguish wildfires “not later than 24 hours after such a wildfire is detected.” Even temporary policies and 
proposed laws can have an impact on political and ecological landscapes, and it remains to be seen how these 
recent developments may affect wildfire management. 
Between the 10 a.m. policy of 1935 and the Forest Service chief’s memo of 2021 is nearly 90 years of history and 
resulting paradigm shifts. Before 1968, managing wildfires for resource benefit was not allowed; full suppression 
was the only approved management strategy. When first codified in policy in 1968, managing wildfires for resource 
benefit was referred to as “prescribed natural fire,” as it required the same planning that goes into deliberately 
ignited “prescribed fires” with the only difference being their ignition source. In the early 2000s, policy shifted 
to classifying such fires as “wildland fire use” (WFU), putting wildfires used to accomplished resource objectives 
into their own unique category separate from prescribed fires and unwanted wildfires (USDA and USDI 2003). 
Today, it is commonly referred to as the term in Chief Moore’s letter, “managing wildfire for resource benefit,” 
“resource objective fire,” or simply “managed wildfire,” though there is no consensus on which term to use due to 
the complexity of wildfire management in the US (Bean and Evans 2023). 
Wildfire management has evolved to a complexity similar to an on-going game of chess (Paveglio 2021). To 
understand and contribute to a game in progress, one must know the moves played so far. Therefore, to navigate 
policies that govern managing wildfire, especially for objectives other than full suppression, it is helpful to know the 
history and context of those policies. Research done by the late Jan van Wagtendonk sets the foundation for this 
history, from the late 19th century to the turn of the millennium (van Wagtendonk 2007). This white paper aims 

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         5
to capture developments in wildfire management policy since he completed his work and show where complexities 
in policy have affected management (see Appendix A for methods). This paper is not intended to be a complete list 
of policies, but rather, it provides an overview of the major paradigm shifts that have shaped wildfire management 
policy in the US. 
In addition, due to the oppression of indigenous nations, their knowledge and relationship with wildfire was 
squandered as US land management agencies emerged and took charge of the American landscape (Vineyta 2022). 
Only recently has land management policy evolved to recognize the value of traditional ecological knowledge 
(TEK) and created mechanisms to empower indigenous communities (Martin 2021, National Forest System Land 
and Resource Management Planning 2016; 81 Federal Register (FR) 90723–90739). For anyone seeking to better 
understand how wildfire management evolved into such a nuanced and complex set of systems, this paper provides 
an overview of the relevant events and policies that shaped those systems from the 1870s to the present day.
Historical Policy Eras
Jan van Wagtendonk’s 2007 publication “The History and Evolution of Wildland Fire Use” in the journal Fire 
Ecology encapsulated the progression of wildland fire use since the 1870s into the following eras: Fire Protection 
(1872-1967), Experimentation (1968-1977), Re-Evaluation (1978-1989), and Maturation (1990-2000). We 
first review this chronology and then extend upon it, proposing two new eras: Fire Classification (2001-2009) 
and Operational Flexibility (2010-present). Figure 1 shows the eras along a rough timeline. Given the time that 
passed since its publication, we assessed policies from 2001 (the end of the Maturation era) onward to determine 
if additional eras had emerged. We grouped policies both temporally and by emergent themes, through which 
the Fire Classification and Operational Flexibility eras were identified. Appendix A provides an overview of our 
methods. Each era is accompanied by the term used most often or codified in policy to describe managing wildfire 
(“term of the era”) and a timeline with some important policies, wildfires, and other events that impacted policy’s 
development during that era.
1870
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
OPERATIONAL
FLEXIBILITY
EXPERIMENTATION
MATURATION
RE-EVALUATION
FIRE
PROTECTION
FIRE
CLASSIFICATION
Figure 1. Eras of Wildfire Policy. The first four eras are those originally proposed by van Wagtendonk (2007), the final two are new eras 
proposed by this paper.

6	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Fire Protection (1872–1967)
Term of the era: light burning
The historical analysis begins circa 1870, when sequestration of indigenous populations, expansion of railroads 
and grazing, and policies of total fire suppression started to trigger a profound shift in the wildfire patterns typical 
to western North America (Hagmann et al. 2021, Swetnam et al. 2016). Around the turn of the 20th century, 
debate ensued about the role of wildfire and associated management approaches. The nation’s only two professional 
foresters, Gifford Pinchot and Bernhard Fernow, argued for wildfire suppression to stop the destruction from 
tragedies like the Peshtigo Fire in 1871 that claimed many lives (Pyne 2009). Contrasting opinions argued that 
regular surface fire rendered forests more resilient but were dismissed as “light burning” or “Indian fires” that 
stood in opposition to the prevailing academic and experiential knowledge (Pyne 2009, Smith 2017). Recent 
research indicates that the language the Forest Service used to pursue this suppression-first agenda was perceived 
as racist and derisive (Vinyeta 2022). Because collective understanding of general ecology, let alone fire ecology, 
was both young and hotly contested (Kormondy 2012), wildfire’s role as the enemy of healthy forests was easier to 
understand and communicate. 
Before the body of ecological research matured, large wildfires burned in the Adirondacks in the Northeast US in 
the early 1900s and the Big Blowup of 1910 burned millions of acres through the Intermountain West and into 
Canada, dominating national news (Pyne 2009, van Wagtendonk 2007). Policy following these events included the 
Forest Fires Emergency Act in 1908, the Weeks Act of 1911, and the Clarke-McNary Act of 1924, which sought 
to authorize and expand the funds and resources available for fire control (Arno 2014). New Deal programs like 
the Civilian Conservation Corps and the establishment of smokejumpers brought military models to firefighting, 
which became further entrenched with World War II propaganda and the creation of Smokey Bear in 1944 (Pyne 
2009, Waxman 2019). Though some foresters of the time realized the negative impacts of total wildfire suppression 
(Box 1), social precedent was set; fire was a villain that must be extinguished. Federal and agency policy further 
solidified this framing. 
Experimentation (1968–1977)
Term of the era: prescribed natural fire
In the Experimentation Era, momentum began to shift away, albeit slowly, from fire suppression, especially within 
land management agencies.  The National Park Service (NPS), using the findings and recommendations of the 
Leopold Committee (Box 1), led the way by becoming the first land management agency to codify the ecological 
importance of wildfire into policy in 1968 (van Wagtendonk 2007). Programs in national parks and monuments 
began using “prescribed natural fire” and paved the way for a growing body of research on fire’s positive ecological 
effects in multiple ecosystem types (Botti and Nichols 1978). The term “prescribed natural fire” was used for natural 
ignitions because policy put it into the same category as a deliberately ignited prescribed fire and both required 
formal prescriptions. Soon after in 1974, the Forest Service initiated guidance, like Chief Moore’s letter, but 
permanent, to move away “from fire control, a simplistic approach, easily communicated and understood, to fire 

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         7
“We have accepted the traditional theory as to  
the place of fire and forests in erosion, and rejected the  
plain story written on the face of Nature.”
—Aldo Leopold
Aldo Leopold, a prominent forester, author, and philosopher of the early 20th century, is often credited 
as a pioneer of wildlife management, environmental conservation, and wilderness. Leopold was 
educated in European traditions of forestry, but he lacked experience with the frequent-fire forest 
systems managed by the fledgling Forest Service. Like his contemporaries, he saw the fires of the 
early 20th century in the US and rejected “light burning” as mining or tribal propaganda that would 
destroy productive stands of timber and other flora (Leopold 1920, Smith 2017). But as the supervisor 
of the Carson National Forest in New Mexico in 1924, he began to recognize fire’s importance to 
ecosystems of the Southwest US and warned of the danger of European traditions affecting American 
forestry (Leopold 1924).
In 1962, the Secretary of the US Department of Interior (DOI) convened a committee to investigate 
wildlife management problems in the National Park Service (NPS), led by Aldo Leopold’s son, Dr. 
Starker Leopold (van Wagtendonk 2007). The committee, aptly named the Leopold Committee, 
discussed recent ecological research that illustrated the dynamic nature of ecosystems and problems 
associated with fire exclusion (Leopold et al. 1963). The Leopold Committee helped to initiate a change 
in fire suppression policies and perspectives.
                         
 
Aldo (left) and Starker (right) Leopold. Photos courtesy of the Aldo Leopold Foundation and University of Wisconsin-
Madison Archives
Box 1. 1963: The Leopold Committee: Lessons Learned Over Generations

8	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
management, a complex scientific approach, not so easily communicated or understood” (DeBruin 1974). Federal 
policy was slower to adapt. For example, the Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act was passed in 1974, and like 
laws in the Fire Protection Era, it focused on fire control (Public Law (PL) 93-498). 
The most influential policies of this era were focused on land management, including, but not limited to, wildfire 
management. Two of the most prominent policies were the 1976 Federal Land Policy and Management Act 
(FLMPA) and the National Forest Management Act (NFMA). FLMPA and NFMA mandated the development 
of regional planning documents to execute the multi-use, sustained yield missions of federal agencies (PL 94-579, 
PL 94-588). These plans, referred to as “land use plans,” “resource management plans,” “land management plans,” 
or “forest plans,” are documents assembled by a county, Forest Service district, BLM region, national park, or other 
management organization to establish the priorities, strategies, and tactics of the given land unit. For this paper, we 
refer to these documents as Land Management Plans (LMPs). LMPs are subject to the protocols established by the 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 (Box 2). Jurisdictional boundaries add complexity to LMPs 
because ecological processes like wildfire often cross boundaries, and LMPs rarely align across boundaries, which 
increases the difficulty of coordinating an effective response to wildfire. 
With the passage of the National Forest Management Act (NFMA) and Federal Land Policy and 
Management Act (FLMPA) in 1976, agencies were required to undertake comprehensive planning, with 
involvement of the public and other stakeholders, following requirements set forth by the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969. NEPA requires an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIS) 
for all Land Management Plans (LMPs), which land units must update every 15 years. To complete 
an EIS takes, on average, almost five years (Figure 2), likely contributing to the number of LMPs that 
have expired (Figure 3). LMPs written before major wildfire management policy changes in 1995, 
2001, and 2009, could conflict with national policies, and therefore, limit the use of wildfire as a 
management tool (Steelman and McCaffrey 2011). Many LMPs have been updated since 2009 to better 
align with federal and interagency guidance, and more are currently under revision. However, the 
time necessary to update LMPs means the effect of federal policy changes will take time to emerge in 
management practices and associated ecological outcomes. 
Box 2. National Environmental Policy Act and Land Management Plans 
USFS
BIA
BLM
FWS
NPS
Years
0            1            2            3            4            5            6
Figure 2. Average time spent to complete an 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). An EIS is 
often necessary to fully revise LMPs. Individual US 
land management agencies spent 3 to 7 years on 
average to complete one, with an overall average of 
4.5 years and a median of 3.5 (CEQ 2020).
Current
Expired
In-Progress
150
100
50
0
Figure 3. Status of LMPs in the Forest Service and 
BLM. Policy mandates that units revise LMPs at a 
minimum every 15 years, and many have missed 
that deadline (USDA 2022a, BLM 2022).

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         9
Before this era, policies governing wildfire management were contained largely to individual land management 
agencies. But as wildfire management grew more complex, the need for coordination across agencies to reduce 
redundancy and cut costs led to the creation of the National Interagency Fire Center in 1965 (NIFC 2022). NIFC 
is home to the fire management programs of all five major land management agencies (Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA), Bureau of Land Management (BLM), US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), NPS, and Forest Service), 
and along with its partners (National Association of State Foresters, US Fire Administration, and National 
Weather Service). NIFC provides “leadership, policy oversight, and coordination to manage the nation’s wildland 
fire programs” (NIFC 2022). As LMPs and NIFC emerged, wildfire policy further fragmented, adding interagency 
and regional nuances and complexities to decision-making.
 
Re-evaluation (1978–1989)
Term of the era: prescribed natural fire
The Re-evaluation era is marked by focusing events, such as the 1978 Ouzel Fire and 1988 Yellowstone fires, which 
led to revisiting existing wildfire management policies. During this era, evidence grew that while suppressing all 
wildfires was difficult, reintroducing fire to the landscape was even more so (Pyne 2009). In 1978 in Rocky Mountain 
National Park, the Ouzel Fire was managed as a prescribed natural fire for over a month without incident, until a 
drastic change in weather caused it to escape control and threaten surrounding communities. A report on the incident 
confirmed that planning gaps led to its escape (Ashley et al. 1978, NPS 2019). A decade later in 1988, multiple 
ignitions in Yellowstone National Park burned over a million acres (Romme et al. 2011, van Wagtendonk 2007). 
The Yellowstone fires resulted in subsequent ecological research that illustrated both negative and positive impacts 
from the fires. While some watersheds experienced short-term degradation due to increase discharge and sediment 
loads in streams, lodgepole pine stands, which rely on the intense heat of high-severity fire to trigger the germination 
process for their cones, saw healthy regeneration in the years following the fires (Romme et al. 2011, Turner et al 
2003). Despite the array of nuanced impacts from these fires, the headlines in the immediate aftermath criticized 
management and focused on the increasing size and intensity of wildfires (Bellinghausen 1988). 
During this era, planning guidelines established by FLMPA and NFMA proved confusing and cumbersome, 
which triggered revisions in 1982 that attempted to “clarify and simplify” the planning process (National Forest 
System Land and Resource Management Planning 1982; 47 Federal Register (FR) 43026). The size, intensity, 
and international attention drawn by the Yellowstone fires led the secretaries of Interior and Agriculture to 
jointly suspend all prescribed natural fire management programs until LMPs were written (Rothman 2007, van 
Wagtendonk 2007). A Forest Service report found that there were many challenges in creating LMPs, including 
internal and external communication of strategies, financial disconnects between plans and budgets, time required 
to complete or amend plans, and complexity of multi-jurisdictional incident management (Larsen et al. 1990, 
Rothman 2007). Thus, with a revised planning policy and an order from the secretaries, federal agencies began to 
re-evaluate their wildfire management programs.

10	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Maturation (1990–2000)
Term of the era: prescribed natural fire
Following the era of re-evaluation, fire programs began to mature in response to a growing body of research and 
policy changes following catalyzing events like the Yellowstone fires. When Yellowstone National Park revised its 
fire program in 1990, it began to see changes as naturally ignited fires burned “in a jigsaw pattern” with reduced 
severity and intensity (van Wagtendonk 2007, Collins et al. 2007). Unfortunately, the Maturation Era was 
dominated by the tragedies of 1994, a year in which 34 firefighters died (NWCG 2017). Firefighter safety came 
under intense scrutiny, as the average number of wildland firefighter fatalities continued to increase into the early 
2000s (NWCG 2017). Growing concerns came to a head with the most significant of these tragic fires, the 1994 
South Canyon Fire in Colorado, which claimed 14 of the 34 fatalities that year (Brown 2019).
The South Canyon Fire led to the first complete revision of federal wildland fire management policy in decades. 
The secretaries of USDA and the DOI chartered the 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and 
Program Review (hereafter, the 1995 Policy), which reaffirmed the top priority of fire management: protect 
human life. Among other directives, the 1995 Policy tasked agencies with: 1) creating an organizational culture 
that supported employees to “implement a properly planned program to reintroduce fire,” 2) considering other 
treatment options in areas like the Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) where fire use was difficult, and 3) improving 
coordination and collaboration with partners, stakeholders, and other agencies (USDA and USDI 1995). 
Yellowstone ranger observing smoke column at Canyon Junction. Photo Credit NPS/Jeff Henry, 1988

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         11
The 1995 Policy supported reintroduction of fire, but maintained the term “prescribed natural fire” and its related 
requirements (USDA and USDI 1995). However, five years later this distinction changed following the 2000 
Cerro Grand Fire in New Mexico. The Cerro Grande Fire started as a prescribed fire, but it escaped control, 
threatened the Bandelier National Monument and the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and burned over 200 
homes and structures (van Wagtendonk 2007, Rothman 2007). The Cerro Grande Fire triggered investigations 
that found a lack of standardization in terminology, lack of clarity in policy implementation, procedural gaps, 
and insufficient coordination between agencies and with communities contributed to the outcome (NPS 2001, 
Hill 2000). Following the investigation, the secretaries convened a new Interagency Federal Wildland Fire 
Policy Review Working Group to assess implementation status and provide recommendations to strengthen 
wildfire management programs. With their release of the 2001 Review and Update of Federal Wildland Fire 
Management Policy (hereafter referred to as the 2001 Update), they provided a broad philosophical and policy 
foundation for wildfire management in the US (USDA and USDI 2001). Though strategic direction underneath 
the 2001 Update has shifted over the past two decades, it remains the current federal wildland fire management 
policy and marks the beginning of the modern policy eras.
Mosaic/jigsaw burn pattern on Bunsen Peak [following 1988 Yellowstone fires]. Photo credit NPS/Jim Peaco, 1988

12	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Modern Policy Eras
With the 2001 Update, we reach the extent of van Wagtendonk’s (2007) original work, which labeled the 2000s simply 
as “the Years Since Cerro Grande.” With over a decade since his publication, we build upon his analysis and propose two 
additional eras: Fire Classification (2001–2008) and Operational Flexibility (2009–Present) (Appendix A). 
Fire Classification (2001–2008)
Term of the era: wildland fire use (WFU)
The 2001 Update added additional directives and modified existing ones, including statements to use best 
available science, develop consistent communication and education programs, and create the means to evaluate 
implementation progress (a full list of changes from 1995 to 2001 can be found in Appendix B). Most notably, 
it altered the statement on “Response to Wildland Fire” to be context-dependent and removed the formal 
prescription requirement. With this change, fire managers were now permitted to use natural ignitions as a 
management tool if the desired outcomes were in alignment with the relevant LMP and no longer needed a formal 
plan like a prescribed burn. The 2001 Update solidified a deferential approach to wildfire management—federal and 
interagency policies defer to local LMPs for how to manage wildfires. Fulfilling land management objectives using 
wildfire is permitted in federal and interagency policy, but LMPs dictate how, where, and why these strategies can 
be used and to what desired outcomes. Federal and interagency policies remain vague so they can appeal to broader 
contexts and garner wider support, leaving prescriptive elements to regional scopes that better understand local 
context (Schultz et al. 2019).
Two additional important policies were enacted in this period: the Healthy Forests Restoration Act (HFRA) 
of 2003 and the 2003 Interagency Strategy for the Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management 
Policy (hereafter referred to as the 2003 Strategy). HFRA emphasized the maintenance and/or restoration of 
pre-fire suppression conditions to protect old-growth landscapes and improve watershed health (Schultz et 
al. 2019). It prioritized fuel reduction projects for communities at risk from wildfire that created Community 
Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPPs), which are documents that identify areas for treatment in coordination 
with local government, fire departments, and other interested parties (PL 108-148). HFRA and CWPPs are 
emblematic of the deferred administration of wildfire policy. HFRA did not define how to make a CWPP, nor 
what specific criteria it should meet, instead it left collaboration and prioritization up to local decision making 
( Jakes et al. 2011). 
Though the 2001 Update set a new vision, fire managers found a lack of guidance in how to execute it (USDA and 
USDI 2003). The 2003 Strategy attempted to fill this need and introduced the term “wildland fire use” (WFU) as 
a unique category of wildfire specifically for accomplishing land management objectives, separate from prescribed 
fire. Fire managers were given the discretion to evaluate if WFU was appropriate based on the circumstances 
in which a wildfire occurred, so long as tactics and priorities were listed in the LMP (USDA and USDI 2001). 
Of the seven operational clarifications in the 2003 Strategy, two are especially important for WFU: 1) only one 
management objective can be applied to a wildland fire, either suppression or resource objectives, not both, and 2) 
when a fire (prescribed or not) fails to achieve resource objectives, managers will declare it a wildfire, meaning it 
must be suppressed and cannot return to resource objectives.  

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         13
We labeled this era the Fire Classification era, because despite removing the need for formal prescriptions and 
creating WFU, the 2003 Strategy put wildfire decisions into discrete, mutually exclusive states. WFU became a 
separate classification along with prescribed fire and wildfire, the latter of which included human ignitions and 
escaped prescribed or WFU events. For a naturally ignited wildfire, managers could pursue either suppression or 
resource objectives but not both, and could use only suppression strategies on unwanted human ignitions (USDA 
and USDI 2003). 
Operational Flexibility (2009–present)
Term of the era: managing wildfire for resource benefits
Limitations to the 2003 Strategy quickly became apparent and necessitated further adjustments (USDA and USDI 
2003, USDA and USDI 2009). As a result, the 2009 Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire 
Management Policy (hereafter referred to as the 2009 Guidance) was created, which permitted managing wildfires 
for one or more objectives. This removed the 2003 Strategy’s restriction, attempting to recognize the inherent 
complexity in wildfire management and give more operational flexibility to fire managers (see Appendix C for 
more details). It also removed WFU as a policy classification, instead categorizing wildland fires into prescribed fire 
(planned ignitions) and wildfire (unplanned ignitions) (Figure 4). Bringing WFU under the umbrella of wildfire 
was meant to acknowledge that wildfires can produce benefits even if the management focus is primarily on 
protection objectives (NWCG 2010). However, it continued to distinguish between human and natural unplanned 
ignitions, the former requiring suppression during initial response, the latter allowing for other strategies derived 
from LMPs. These changes further highlight the difficulty in making consistent terms, interagency processes, 
internal training, and public education (USDA and USDI 2009). 
In addition to the 2009 Guidance, two additional policies emerged in 2009: the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program (CFLRP) and the FLAME Act of 2009. The FLAME Act mandated the creation of 
the National Cohesive Strategy (NCS), which was completed in 2014. The CFLRP encouraged science-based, 
collaborative restoration to reduce wildfire management costs, including through reintroduction of wildfire (PL 
111-11, Schultz et al. 2019). Meanwhile, the NCS set an interagency vision to extinguish fire when needed, use it 
where allowable, and in general, learn to live with fire (USDA and USDI 2014). Figure 5 shows the goals that the 
NCS established to pursue that vision and the challenges in doing so. The NCS used the term “managing wildfire 
for resource benefits” after the retirement of WFU, while research tended to use “managed wildfire” and “resource 
objective fire” during this time (Huffman et al. 2017, Davis et al. 2022, Iniguez et al. 2022).
The vision set by the NCS has permeated into similar strategy documents for individual agencies. For example, the 
Forest Service released “Toward Shared Stewardship” in 2018, which continued to emphasize collaboration and 
added an emphasis on collaborating across jurisdictional boundaries to address the continued trend of increasing 
wildfire size, frequency, and intensity (USDA 2018). In 2022, the Forest Service released “Confronting the Wildfire 
Crisis” (hereafter referred to as the 10-year Strategy) which set 10-year treatment goals for National Forest System 
lands and federal, state, tribal, and private lands at a rate of up to 4–5 times the pace of recent decades (USDA 
2022b). With the 2001 Update still in place as the policy under which these visions and strategies operate, land 
management agencies use documents such as these to show how they frame the problem, the goals to address it, 
and the challenges expected along the way. 

14	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
In response to this fragmented array of decision support and risk assessment tools used in agencies, the Wildland 
Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) was created as a standardized tool to inform and document decisions 
in wildfire management. WFDSS combines fire behavior simulation with assessment of critical infrastructure and 
natural and cultural resources at risk to assist local units in making risk-informed wildfire management strategies 
(Calkin et al. 2011b). WFDSS is integrated with National Incident Management System (NIMS) Incident 
Status Summary (ICS 209) reports, which serve as the primary means for reporting basic information on wildfires 
to coordination and support centers over the lifespan of the incident. The ICS 209 informs resource allocation 
and helps determine incident priorities compared to other active wildfires (NIFC 2020). Because it includes the 
management strategy selected for the incident, researchers have used ICS 209 reports to measure the effect of 
policy on how frequently fires are managed for resource benefit (Young et al. 2020, Iniguez et al. 2021). 
To put these plans into action, it is worth noting the trends in federal funding in this era. In addition to the 
NCS, the FLAME Act established a fund separate from annually appropriated wildland fire suppression 
Figure 4. Fire management categories as established by current federal and interagency guidelines. Visual adapted from Sensibaugh 
and Huffman (2014).
Figure 5. Vision, Goals, and Challenges adapted from the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy of 2014 (USDA and 
USDI 2014).
Planned Ignitions
Prescribed fire
Deliberately ignited fires 
require burn plans and NEPA 
decisions, funded out of proj-
ect dollars and tied to program 
targets.
Human-ignited wildfires
Initial action is 
suppression, with 
consideration for fewest 
negative consequences 
to firefighter and public 
safety.
Naturally-ignited wildfires
Management strategies are 
dictated by risk factors and 
objectives, derived from 
LMPs. Multiple objective 
can be pursued, using an 
array of suppression and 
non-suppression strategies.
Unplanned Ignitions
Vision
Safely and effectively extinguish fire when needed; use fire where allowable;
manage our natural resources; and, as a nation, live with fire
Goals
Restore and Maintain
Landscapes
Fire-adapted
Communities
Safe, Risk-based
Wildfire Response
Challenges
Vegetation
&
Fuels
Homes, 
Communities, &
Values at Risk
Human-caused
Ignitions
Effective &  
Efficient Wildfire
Response

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         15
budgets to help pay for the costs of large (greater than 300 acres), potentially catastrophic (high threat to 
people and property) single fires or fire seasons that were projected to exceed annual appropriations (PL 
111-88). The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 created additional budget authority for fiscal year 
(FY) 2020–2027, allowing an additional $2.25 billion (2020) to $2.95 billion (2027) for wildfire suppression 
operations (PL 115-141). Colloquially referred to as the “fire funding fix,” this funding provides the 
opportunity to use federal disaster funding to cover a portion of agency suppression costs (Clavet 2018). 
More recently, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (also known as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law) 
of 2021 invested over $5 billion into landscapes, watersheds, and communities to help reduce the risk of 
catastrophic wildfire. Another $5 billion came from the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 to improve forest 
conditions on national forests and grasslands and offer competitive grants to non-federal forest landowners, 
state programs, and private forestry (USDA 2022, PL 117-169). The recent influx of federal funding, 
in conjunction with policy that allows for operational flexibility, supports actions to reduce the risk of 
catastrophic wildfire but does not eliminate the complexity of wildfire management, which still varies widely 
depending on local contexts and operational realities (Bean and Evans 2023).
The Current State of Wildfire Policy
Suggested Terminology and Framing
Policies around wildfire have evolved over the last century and a half, and along with policy evolution, there also 
has been an evolution in the terminology and framing used to talk about wildfire. Terminology and framing play an 
important role in how a topic is understood. Thus, it is important to use consistent terminology and framing to help 
facilitate understanding. To that end, we suggest, and will use for the remainder of this paper, the term “managing 
Policies provide broad, high-level directives that are interpreted by federal land management agencies 
into handbooks and standards, which are guidelines that provide additional details and direction on 
how to implement federal policy. These documents are briefly summarized below to provide context.
The National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations, also 
known as the “Red Book,” is the living document that “states, references, or supplements policy 
and provides direction” for the five land management agencies (BIA, NPS, Forest Service, BLM, 
and USFWS). It provides organizational roles and responsibilities for the agencies; the principles of 
planning, preparedness, and response for fire operations; further enforces WFDSS as the standard 
planning and support tool for all fire management agencies; and points to LMPs as the authority on 
fire’s role in an ecosystem. 
Individual agencies have similar materials, for example, the Forest Service Handbook and Manual or 
the National Park Service Reference Manual. These handbooks serve to adopt interagency standards 
into the agency and provide additional guidance for policies specific to service-wide operations of a 
land management agency. In the past (i.e., Fire Protection and Experimentation Eras), each agency 
had to dictate logistics and tactics for its workforce. In the present day, NIFC Standards and individual 
agency documents reference each other, with NIFC Standards taking authority over individual agency 
documents in the event of a discrepancy, as they updated more often (NIFC 2022).
Box 3. Handbooks and Standards

16	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
wildfires for objectives other than full suppression” or “managing wildfires for OTFS”  (e.g., Fillmore et al. 2021). 
We suggest this term for the following reasons. First, “managed wildfire” is too ambiguous to capture the strategic 
choices available. Many have made the case that all wildfires are managed, with objectives ranging from direct 
attack to indirect monitoring. Second, “resource objective fire” or “managing wildfires for resource benefit” both 
capture the appropriate ecological considerations that come with reintroducing wildfire to fire-adapted landscapes. 
However, these terms do not address the rationale given for the removal of WFU from policy, which was that 
resource benefits can be achieved even if the management focus is primarily on protection objectives (NWCG 
2010). Managing wildfires for OTFS simultaneously encapsulates tactics outside of direct-attack, full suppression 
operations, as well as ecological and protection-based decisions that favor indirect approaches. However, 
for whatever terminology is eventually selected, the focus should be to aid communication of management 
strategies, not only intended outcomes (Rumelt 2011). In short, new terminology should help to reframe wildfire 
management in a way that acknowledges that all fires are addressed with a risk-informed, strategic response.
Variable Framing of Wildfire as a Threat or Opportunity
In wildfire management, competing definitions and priorities have persisted, without clear guidance on how to 
reconcile tradeoffs in utilizing wildfire (Schultz et al. 2019). Table 1 shows many of the policies discussed in the 
Fire Classification and Operational Flexibility eras, and whether they framed wildfire primarily as a threat, or as 
both a threat and an opportunity (Appendix A). At the federal and interagency level, policies like the 2001 Update 
framed managing wildfires for OTFS as context dependent; fire plays a natural role, and the opportunities and risks 
associated with the specific incident should dictate response. This competed with the 2003 Strategy’s guidance, 
which included restrictions focused on wildfire risk, and was quickly revised (USDA and USDI 2009). The 2022 
Wildfire Crisis Strategy builds upon the 2014 NCS’s mission to learn to live with wildfire and build resilience into 
ecosystems and communities, but does not emphasize using natural ignitions to do so (USDA and USDI 2014, 
USDA and USDI 2022). 
At the agency level, while the Red Book (Box 3) has the same flexible language as the 2009 Guidance regarding 
multi-objective approaches and deference to LMPs, it defines initial attack as “an aggressive action to put out a 
wildfire by the time the first resources arrive, consistent with firefighter and public safety and values to be protected” 
(NIFC 2022). Budget justifications for the Forest Service emphasize metrics like initial attack success, defined as 
suppressing a wildfire before it reaches 300 acres in size (USDA 2022c). These metrics perpetuate the short-term 
risk bias that pushes fire managers toward suppression, which only begets larger wildfires in the long run, further 
intensifying agency response (North et al. 2015, Ingalsbee 2017). At the regional/local level LMPs can be bound 
to older, suppression-focused paradigms, making it difficult for managers to incorporate updated vision (Box 2) 
(Steelman and McCaffrey 2011). The combination of complicated diagnoses and guiding policies, and the metrics 
used to measure progress toward addressing them prevent the culture shift that researchers argue is necessary to 
normalize the use of wildfire individually and organizationally (Fillmore et al. 2021). Without intervention, bias 
toward short-term risk analysis tends to dominate wildfire events, limiting opportunities for managing wildfires for 
OTFS (Schultz et al. 2019).

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         17
Table 1. Wildfire management problem definition and framing across levels of policy since 2001. Textual analysis grouped wildfire 
management policies into two categories. Policies that more often mentioned wildfire management in the context of “risk,” “danger,” 
“safety,” or “crisis” were grouped in the “threat” category. This group tended to focus on fuel reduction treatments to protect people 
and property threatened by wildfires. Policies that also included terms like “living with fire,” “resource benefits,” fire as a tool to 
“improve forest health/conditions,” or fire’s “natural role,” were grouped into the “threat and opportunity” category. See Appendix A 
for methods.
Policy level
Frames wildfire primarily as  
a threat 
Frames wildfire primarily as  
both a threat and an opportunity
Federal
2003 HFRA
2009 CFLRP
2009 FLAME Act
2001 Update
2012 NFMA planning rule
Interagency
2003 Strategy
2009 Guidance
 
2014 Cohesive Strategy
2022 Red Book
Agency
2022 Confronting the Wildfire Crisis
2018 Toward Shared Stewardship
2023 USFS Budget Justification
2022 FSM
Regional/local
LMPs, depending on completion 
date, could be either
Operational Structures and Social Incentives 
Operational structures and social incentives that guide our approach to wildfire management create further 
complexity. Financial barriers exist, both in the quantity of funds available and the systems that determine 
their allocation. Analysis of the 1995 Policy found that a lack of funds was among the causes of inconsistent 
implementation of its directives (USDA and USDI 2001). Despite the establishment of national accounts to help 
fund firefighting efforts (like the FLAME fund from the 2009 FLAME Act), agencies like the Forest Service have 
exhausted these funds multiple times over the past 20 years, forcing them to divert money from other departments 
to cover the cost, cannibalizing other priorities of the agency (Tidwell 2013). Though the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act of 2018 added to national suppression accounts, research suggests that the structure of such 
accounts can incentivize suppression bias in fire management by disconnecting local fire managers from the costs of 
suppression strategies, encouraging overuse of these resources (Thompson et al. 2013, Calkin et al. 2011a, Calkin et 
al. 2015). Thompson et al. (2013) proposed leveraging these accounts by taking end-of-year surpluses and rewarding 
fire management programs that successfully implement managing wildfire for OTFS strategies. Future work could 
investigate frameworks or processes that create positive incentives and support the managers tasked with putting 
them into practice.
Social barriers exist, as well, in the form of a double standard for fire managers. If they start with suppression 
strategies and the fire escapes control, public perception remains on their side. But if they choose other objectives 
and it escapes, then public perception will lay blame on them for choosing an action other than full suppression 
(Schultz et al. 2021, Chan and Moon 2021). It becomes an all-risk-no-reward trade-off in a space already 
fraught with risk aversion. Key barriers to managing fires for OTFS are the potential political fallout and lack of 
public support, both relating to the “social license” a fire manager needs to manage wildfire for OTFS (Fillmore 
et al. 2021). If managers do not feel confident in both their ability to execute these strategies and the public’s 
understanding of them, risk aversion will continue to push fire managers to avoid these strategies (Rapp et al. 
2020). To address the disconnect between practitioners and the public, more work is needed to identify how 
successful coordination and collaboration manifests when managing wildfires for OTFS, how such strategies can be 

18	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
supported and repeated, and what the outcomes of such strategies are in terms of long-term community protection 
and ecological restoration. 
Decision support systems like WFDSS and more recently Risk Management Assistance (RMA) can bridge gaps 
in planning, analysis, and communication, both internally and externally. WFDSS users found the system valuable 
when fires were expected to burn for longer periods of time and when strategies included both protection and 
resource objectives, as are often the case with wildfires managed for OTFS (Fillmore and Paveglio 2023). RMA 
helps evaluate available management strategies, estimate the likelihood that those strategies will be successful, and 
consider trade-offs multiple strategies or objectives (Calkin et al. 2021). In addition to supporting operations and 
incident objectives, its emphasis on pre-fire and pre-season planning allows it to validate and communicate decision 
rationale to partners (Beeton et al. 2022). Given that collaborative relationships and the communication they 
require are crucial facilitators to managing a wildfire for OTFS (Fillmore et al. 2021), these systems provide vital 
links between the updated wildfire management vision and its execution.
Evaluating Coherent Actions to Carry Out Policy
To determine the quality of any strategy, it is important to first have some means to evaluate its progress (Rumelt 
2011). A key finding of the 2001 Update was that the 1995 Policy was sound, but incomplete implementation 
hindered its progress. It added an explicit directive to build systematic means to evaluate the effectiveness of 
projects and improve accountability (USDA and USDI 2001). Recent research has attempted to evaluate policy’s 
impact on decision-making, with 2009 marked as an inflection point (Iniguez et al. 2021, Young et al. 2020). When 
the 2009 Guidance replaced the 2003 Strategy, it was a clear paradigm shift, allowing for multiple management 
strategies on a wildfire, instead of only one (see Appendix C for more details). However, the 2009 Guidance 
continued to defer authority to LMPs to define wildfire’s role across a given land management unit (PL 94-588, 
PL 94-579, USDA and USDI 2001, USDA and USDI 2009, NIFC 2022). Because many LMPs have expired 
(Box 2), this can create misalignment across management levels and units, making it difficult to assess the impact 
of the 2009 Guidance across the western US given the variability in LMP status. The most recent planning rule 
for NFMA aims to support more frequent LMP amendments between full plan revisions, and some research has 
shown a greater ability to make planning documents more flexible and adaptable (Abrams et al. 2021, National 
Forest System Land Management Planning 2016; 81 FR 90723). Researchers and policymakers should instead 
look to regional units to evaluate the impact of changes to both the NFMA planning rule and interagency guidance 
on planning and operations.
Even with improved regional planning, the current use of ICS 209s as the primary means of documenting wildfires 
lacks the clarity necessary to evaluate policy’s impact. The ICS 209 offers four options for management applied to 
a wildfire: monitoring, confine, point or zone protection, and full suppression. Each of them fails to clearly define 
a coherent strategy, from providing unnecessary specificity, to lacking defined guiding policies, to using goals or 
outcomes in place of processes (Pietruszka 2022). The impact of this is two-fold: first, researchers use these data to 
evaluate impacts, and second, interagency coordination centers use them to provide incident management reports 
that inform the public. A lack of clarity in defined strategies and how they are reported can create inconsistencies 
that degrade public support for wildfire management (Pietruszka 2022). Without clear documentation, we cannot 
accurately evaluate results to determine if shifts in strategy are successful.

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         19
Conclusion
Wildfire policy has evolved over the past 150 years into a multi-layered system mired in complexity. What began 
as a militarized model steeped in Smokey Bear’s singular mission to prevent wildfires, morphed into a collection 
of laws, agencies, coordinating groups, and regional units that have a wide array of priorities and capacities. Our 
policy analysis shows that progress has been made to recognize the duality of wildfire as both a destructive and 
beneficial force of nature. However, building a sound strategy to confront this duality still meets resistance. Though 
operational models of the past have changed, redirecting the cultural and institutional inertia of historical wildfire 
suppression has proven challenging. Performance metrics and financial appropriations for wildfire management 
still foster a suppression bias. Regional and jurisdictional complexities create a lagging effect of bringing policy 
vision to management action. Complicated terms, framing, and priorities make communicating strategies difficult. 
Each of these gaps must be addressed if we are to confront the wildfire crisis, as well as learn to live with fire and 
reintroduce it safely to fire-adapted systems to benefit both ecosystems and communities. Managing wildfires for 
OTFS must be part of the approach moving forward, but confusion around terminology needs to be addressed and 
messaging reframed to acknowledge that all fires are managed with a risk-informed, strategic approach as allowed 
within the 2009 Guidance. 
Decision support systems can bridge the gaps between policy, practitioners, and the public, so long as those systems 
have the right data and people at the table to inform decisions. Our hope is that this paper provides a set of starting 
points to guide future work on the intersection of people and policy. Given the difficulty in normalizing culture to 
managing wildfire for OTFS, the first steps should include rebuilding broken relationships with the indigenous 
nations that were disparaged and marginalized, to learn lessons on living with wildfire. Future work should also 
investigate interpretations of policy to learn how definitions and metrics of success affect decision-making and 
how educational and financial structures can be better built to support fire management organizations, so the right 
knowledge and the right resources can help facilitate the right kind of wildfire.

20	
 Ecological Restoration Institute

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         21
References
Abrams, J., M. Greiner, C. Schultz, A. Evans, and H. Huber-Stearns. 2021. Can Forest Managers Plan for Resilient 
Landscapes? Lessons from the United States National Forest Plan Revision Process. Environmental 
Management, 67(4), 574–588. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-021-01451-4
Ashley, K.R., R.D. Laven, H. Ball, R. Gosnell, and R. Sellers. 1978. Board of Review Report for Ouzel Fire. 
National Park Service.
Bean, R., and A. Evans. 2023. Managed Wildfire: A Research Synthesis and Overview. Special Report. Forest 
Stewards Guild, New Mexico, and Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science 
Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 12 p
Beeton, T.A., M.D. Caggiano, M.M. Colavito, and C. Huayhuaca. 2022. Use of Risk Management Assistance 
During the 2021 Fires Season. SWERI Technical Report. Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes, 23.
Bellinghausen, P. 1988. “Crews ‘manage’ park blazes.” Billings Gazette. July 25, 1988. https://billingsgazette.com/
news/state-and-regional/from-the-archives-front-page-coverage-of-the-yellowstone-fires-in-1988/
collection_216e4bc9-e92d-5005-bed3-d1c70800f86e.html
BLM. 2022a. Bureau of Land Management National Approved Land Use Plans. https://gbp-blm-egis.hub.arcgis.com/
datasets/BLM-EGIS::blm-natl-approved-land-use-plans
BLM. 2022b. Bureau of Land Management National Revision Development Land Use Plans. https://gbp-blm-egis.
hub.arcgis.com/datasets/BLM-EGIS::blm-natl-revision-development-land-use-plans
Botti, S.J., and T. Nichols. 1978. The Yosemite and Sequoia-Kings Canyon Prescribed Natural Fire Programs 1968-1978. 
p. 19.
Brown, H. (Ed.). 2019. Improving safety outcomes at the USDA forest service: 1994-2018. Fire Management 
Today, 77(3), 20–27. CAB Abstracts​ with Full Text.
Calkin, D.E., C. O’Connor, M. Thompson, and R. Stratton. 2021. Strategic Wildfire Response Decision Support 
and the Risk Management Assistance Program. Forests, 12(10), 1407. https://doi.org/10.3390/f12101407 
Calkin, D.E., M.P. Thompson, and M.A. Finney. 2015. Negative consequences of positive feedbacks in US wildfire 
management. Forest Ecosystems, 2(1), 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40663-015-0033-8
Calkin, D.E., M.A. Finney, A.A. Ager, M.P. Thompson, and K.M. Gebert. 2011a. Progress towards and barriers 
to implementation of a risk framework for US federal wildland fire policy and decision making. 
Forest Policy and Economics, 13(5), 378–389. CAB Abstracts​ with Full Text. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
forpol.2011.02.007
Calkin, D.E., M.P. Thompson, M.A. Finney, and K.D. Hyde. 2011b. A real-time risk assessment tool supporting 
wildland fire decision-making. Journal of Forestry, 109(5), 274–280.
CEQ. 2020. Environmental Impact Statement Timelines (2010–2018). Executive Office of the President, Council on 
Environmental Quality.
Chan, S., and S. Moon. 2021. “Before a wildfire grew into an out-of-control blaze, the Forest Service decided to let 
it burn.” CNN. July 24, 2021. https://www.cnn.com/2021/07/23/us/california-tamarack-fire-burn/index.
html
Clavet, C. 2018. Wildfire Funding in the Omnibus Bill: What You Need to Know. Fire Adapted Communities 
Learning Network. April 26, 2018. https://fireadaptednetwork.org/wildfire-funding-omnibus-bill-need-
know/
Collins, B.M., M. Kelly, J.W. van Wagtendonk, and S.L. Stephens. 2007. Spatial patterns of large natural fires in 
Sierra Nevada wilderness areas. Landscape Ecology, 22(4), 545–557. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-006-
9047-5
Consolidated Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 115–141 (2018). https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/
house-bill/1625/text

22	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Davis, E.J., H. Huber-Stearns, M. Caggiano, D. McAvoy, A.S. Cheng, A. Deak, and A. Evans. 2022. Managed 
Wildfire: A Strategy Facilitated by Civil Society Partnerships and Interagency Cooperation. Society & 
Natural Resources, 35(8), 914–932. https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2022.2092803
DeBruin, H.W. 1974. From fire control to fire management: A major policy change in the Forest Service. 
Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference, 14, 11–17. https://talltimbers.org/wp-content/
uploads/2014/03/DeBruin1974_op.pdf
Federal Land Assistance, Management and Enhancement Act of 2009, Pub. L. No. 111–88, 43 USC 1701. 2009. 
https://www.congress.gov/bill/111th-congress/house-bill/1404/text
Federal Land Policy and Management Act, Pub. L. No. 94–579, 43 U.S.C. 1701-1782. 1976.
Fillmore, S.D., S.M. McCaffrey, and A.M.S. Smith. 2021. A Mixed Methods Literature Review and Framework 
for Decision Factors That May Influence the Utilization of Managed Wildfire on Federal Lands, USA. 
Fire, 4(3), 62. https://doi.org/10.3390/fire4030062
Fillmore, S.D., and T.B. Paveglio. 2023. Use of the Wildland Fire Decision Support System (WFDSS) for full 
suppression and managed fires within the Southwestern Region of the US Forest Service. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire, 32(4), 622–635. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF22206
Hagmann, R.K., P.F. Hessburg, S.J. Prichard, N.A. Povak, P.M. Brown, P.Z. Fulé, R.E. Keane, E.E. Knapp, J.M. 
Lydersen, K.L. Metlen, M.J. Reilly, A.J. Sánchez Meador, S.L. Stephens, J.T. Stevens, A.H. Taylor, L.L. 
Yocom, M.A. Battaglia, D.J. Churchill, L.D. Daniels, … A.E.M. Waltz. 2021. Evidence for widespread 
changes in the structure, composition, and fire regimes of western North American forests. Ecological 
Applications, 31(8). https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2431
Healthy Forests Restoration Act, Pub. L. No. 108–148 (2003). https://www.congress.gov/bill/108th-congress/
house-bill/1904/text
Henry, J. 1988. Yellowstone ranger observing smoke column at Canyon Junction [Photograph]. https://www.nps.
gov/media/photo/gallery.htm?id=FD4AF7FF-A94D-4A8A-93DB-0EDAD7EF7486
Hill, B.T. 2000. Lessons Learned from the Cerro Grande (Los Alamos) Fire and Actions Needed to Reduce Fire Risks 
(GAO/T-RCED-00-273). United States General Accounting Office. https://www.gao.gov/assets/t-
rced-00-273.pdf
H.R. 6903. 2022. To require the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out activities to suppress wildfires, and for other 
purposes, H.R. 6903, 117th Congress (2022). https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-
bill/6903/text
Huffman, D.W., J.P. Roccaforte, J.D. Springer, and J.E. Crouse. 2020. Restoration applications of resource 
objective wildfires in western US forests: A status of knowledge review. Fire Ecology, 16(1), 18. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s42408-020-00077-x
Huffman, D.W., A.J. Sánchez Meador, M.T. Stoddard, J.E. Crouse, and J.P. Roccaforte. 2017. Efficacy of resource 
objective wildfires for restoration of ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests in northern Arizona. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 389, 395–403. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2016.12.036
Inflation Reduction Act, Pub. L. No. 117–169. 2022. https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-
bill/5376/text
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, Pub. L. No. 117–58. 2021. https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/
house-bill/3684/text
Ingalsbee, T. 2017. Whither the paradigm shift? Large wildland fires and the wildfire paradox offer opportunities 
for a new paradigm of ecological fire management. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 26(7), 557. 
https://doi.org/10.1071/WF17062
Iniguez, J.M., A.E. Thode, S.M. McCaffrey, A.M. Evans, M.D. Meyer, and S.J. Hedwall. 2021. Effects of changing 
wildfire management strategies (No. 17-01–03). Joint Fire Science Program.

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         23
Jakes, P.J., K.C. Nelson, S.A. Enzler, S. Burns, A.S. Cheng, V. Sturtevant, D.R. Williams, A. Bujak, R.F. Brummel, 
S. Grayzeck-Souter, and E. Staychock. 2011. Community wildfire protection planning: Is the Healthy 
Forests Restoration Act’s vagueness genius? International Journal of Wildland Fire, 20(3), 350. https://doi.
org/10.1071/WF10038
Kormondy, E.J. 2012. A Brief Introduction to the History of Ecology. The American Biology Teacher, 74(7), 441–443. 
https://doi.org/10.1525/abt.2012.74.7.3
Lake, F.K., V. Wright, P. Morgan, M. McFadzen, D. McWethy, and C. Stevens-Rumann. 2017. Returning Fire to 
the Land: Celebrating Traditional Knowledge and Fire. Journal of Forestry, 115(5), 343–353. https://doi.
org/10.5849/jof.2016-043R2
Larsen, G., A. Holden, D. Kapaldo, J. Leasure, J. Mason, H. Salwasser, S. Yonts-Shepard, and W.E. Shands. 1990. 
Synthesis of the Critique of Land Management Planning, Volume 1 (FS-452). USDA Forest Service. https://
www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5127602.pdf
Leopold, A. 1920. “Piute Forestry” vs. Forest Fire Prevention. Southwestern Magazine, 2, 12–13.
Leopold, A.S. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and fire in Southern Arizona. Journal of Forestry, 22(6).
Leopold, A.S., S.A. Cain, C.M. Cottam, I.N. Gabrielson, and T.L. Kimbal. 1963. Wildlife Management in the 
National Parks. 28, 1–18. http://npshistory.com/publications/leopold_report.pdf
Martin, J. 2021. Implications for tribal forest management under new federal legislative directions. ERI White 
paper - Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 15 pp.
Moore, R. 2021. Chief ’s Wildland Fire Direction [Personal communication]. August 2, 2021.
National Forest Management Act, Pub. L. No. 94–588, 16 U.S.C. 1600. 1976.
National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning. 1982. Federal Register, 47, 43026. 36 CFR Part 
219. https://www.federalregister.gov/citation/47-FR-43026
National Forest System Land Management Planning. (2016). Federal Register, 81(241), 90723–90739. https://www.
govinfo.gov/app/details/FR-2016-12-15/2016-30191
NIFC (National Interagency Fire Center). 2020. ICS-209 Program (NIMS) User’s Guide. https://www.
predictiveservices.nifc.gov/intelligence/ICS-209_User_Guide_4.0_2020.pdf
NIFC. 2022. Interagency Standards for Fire and Fire Aviation Operations (National Fire Equipment System Report 
NFES 2724). https://www.nifc.gov/standards/guides/red-book
North, M.P., S.L. Stephens, B.M. Collins, J.K. Agee, G. Aplet, J.F. Franklin, and P.Z. Fulé. 2015. Reform forest fire 
management. Science, 349(6254), 1280–1281. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab2356 
NPS (National Park Service). 2001. Cerro Grande Prescribed Fire [Board of Inquiry Final Report]. https://www.
nwcg.gov/sites/default/files/wfldp/docs/sr-cg-cerro-grande-board-of-inquiry-report-feb-2001.pdf
NPS. 2019. Fire History—Rocky Mountain National Park (U.S. National Park Service). September 27, 2019. https://
www.nps.gov/romo/learn/fire-history.htm
NWCG (National Wildfire Coordination Group). 2010. Terminology Updates Resulting from Release of the 
Guidance for the Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. April 30, 2010. https://
www.frames.gov/documents/catalog/nwcg_2010_glossary-of-wildland-fire-terminology-update.pdf
NWCG. 2017. Wildland Firefighter Fatalities in the United States: 2007–2016 (PMS 841). https://www.nwcg.gov/
sites/default/files/publications/pms841.pdf
Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009, Pub. L. No. 111–11, 123. 2009. https://www.congress.gov/
bill/111th-congress/house-bill/146/text
Paveglio, T. 2021. From Checkers to Chess: Using Social Science Lessons to Advance Wildfire Adaptation 
Processes. JOURNAL OF FORESTRY, 119(6), 618–639. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvab028
Peaco, J. 1988. Mosaic burn pattern on Bunsen Peak [Photograph]. https://www.nps.gov/media/photo/gallery.
htm?id=FD4AF7FF-A94D-4A8A-93DB-0EDAD7EF7486
Pietruszka, B. 2022. Overview of Communication Issues: What is “Managed” Fire? [Oral Presentation]. February 
23, 2022.

24	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Pyne, S.J. 2009. America’s fires: A historical context for policy and practice (Rev. ed). Forest History Society.
Rapp, C., E. Rabung, R. Wilson, and E. Toman. 2020. Wildfire decision support tools: An exploratory study of use 
in the United States. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 29(7), 581. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF19131
Romme, W.H., M.S. Boyce, R. Gresswell, E.H. Merrill, G.W. Minshall, C. Whitlock, and M.G. Turner. 2011. 
Twenty Years After the 1988 Yellowstone Fires: Lessons About Disturbance and Ecosystems. Ecosystems, 
14(7), 1196–1215. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10021-011-9470-6
Rothman, H. 2007. Blazing heritage: A history of wildland fire in the national parks. Oxford University Press.
Rumelt, R.P. 2011. Good strategy, bad strategy: The difference and why it matters (1st ed). Crown Business.
Schultz, C.A., L.F. Miller, S.M. Greiner, and C. Kooistra. 2021. A Qualitative Study on the US Forest Service’s 
Risk Management Assistance Efforts to Improve Wildfire Decision-Making. Forests, 12(3), 344. https://
doi.org/10.3390/f12030344
Schultz, C.A., M.P. Thompson, and S.M. McCaffrey. 2019. Forest Service fire management and the elusiveness of 
change. Fire Ecology, 15(1), 13, s42408-019-0028–x. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42408-019-0028-x
Smith, D.M. 2017. Sustainability and Wildland Fire: The Origins of Forest Service Wildland Fire Research. 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. FS-1085; p. 128. https://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/fs_media/
fs_document/sustainability-wildlandfire-508.pdf
Steelman, T.A., and S.M. McCaffrey. 2011. What Is Limiting More Flexible Fire Management-Public or Agency 
Pressure? Journal of Forestry, 109(8), 454–461.
Stoddard, M.T., P.Z. Fulé, D.W. Huffman, A.J. Sánchez Meador, and J.P. Roccaforte. 2020. Ecosystem 
management applications of resource objective wildfires in forests of the Grand Canyon National Park, 
USA. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 29(2), 190. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF19067
Swetnam, T.W., J. Farella, C. Roos, M.J. Liebmann, D.A. Falk, and C.D. Allen. 2016. Multiscale perspectives 
of fire, climate and humans in western North America and the Jemez Mountains, USA. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 371(1696), 20150168. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2015.0168
Thompson, M.P., D.E. Calkin, M.A. Finney, K.M. Gebert, and M.S. Hand. 2013. A Risk-Based Approach to 
Wildland Fire Budgetary Planning. Forest Science, 59(1), 63–77. CAB Abstracts​ with Full Text. https://doi.
org/10.5849/forsci.09-124
Tidwell, T. 2013. Wildland Fire Management (Before the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources). US 
Senate. 113th Congress.
Turner, M.G., W.H. Romme, and D.B. Tinker. 2003. Surprises and Lessons from the 1988 Yellowstone 
Fires. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 1(7), 351–358. https://doi.org/10.1890/1540-
9295(2003)001[0351:SALFTY]2.0.CO;2
USDA (US Department of Agriculture). 2018. Toward Shared Stewardship Across Landscapes: An Outcome-
Based Investment Strategy. USDA Forest Service. https://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/toward-
shared-stewardship.pdf
USDA. (2022a). Land Management Planning Unit (Feature Layer). https://hub.arcgis.com/datasets/usfs::land-
management-planning-unit-feature-layer/about
USDA. (2022b). Confronting the Wildfire Crisis: A Strategy for Protecting Communities and Improving 
Resilience in America’s Forests. USDA Forest Service. FS-1187a; p. 25. https://www.fs.usda.gov/
managing-land/wildfire-crisis
USDA. (2022c). Fiscal Year 2023 Congressional Budget Justification. USDA Forest Service. https://www.fs.usda.
gov/sites/default/files/2022-03/FS-FY23-Congressional-Budget-Justification.pdf
USDA. (2022d). FACT SHEET: One Year of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law at USDA (Fact Sheet 0243.22). 
https://www.usda.gov/media/press-releases/2022/11/15/fact-sheet-one-year-bipartisan-infrastructure-law-
usda

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         25
USDA & USDI (US Department of Interior). 1995. Federal wildland fire management policy & program review. 
https://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/documents/strategy/foundational/1995_fed_wildland_fire_policy_
program_report.pdf
USDA & USDI. 2001. Review and Update of the 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. https://www.doi.
gov/sites/doi.gov/files/uploads/2001-wfm-policy-review.pdf
USDA & USDI. 2003. Interagency Strategy for the Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. 
https://www.sierraforestlegacy.org/Resources/Community/SmokeManagement/AirQualityPolicy/
FedWldFireMgmtPolicy.pdf
USDA & USDI. 2005. Wildland Fire Use Implementation Procedures Reference Guide. https://winapps.umt.
edu/winapps/media2/wilderness/toolboxes/documents/fire/Wildland%20Fire%20Use%20-%20
Implementation%20Procedures%20Reference%20Guide.pdf
USDA & USDI. 2008. Modification of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy Guidance.
USDA & USDI. 2009. Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (p. 20). https://
www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/uploads/2009-wfm-guidance-for-implementation.pdf
USDA & USDI. 2014. The National Strategy: The Final Phase of the Development of the National Cohesive Wildland 
Fire Management Strategy. https://www.forestsandrangelands.gov/documents/strategy/strategy/
CSPhaseIIINationalStrategyApr2014.pdf
van Wagtendonk, J.W. 2007. The History and Evolution of Wildland Fire Use. Fire Ecology, 3(2), Article 2. https://
doi.org/10.4996/fireecology.0302003
Wasserman, T.N. 2020. Wildfire Trends Across the Western US: Forest Fires Have Increased in Size, Severity, 
and Frequency Across Western Forests. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 10.
Waxman, O.B. 2019. “How a World War II Attack Helped Spark the Creation of Smokey Bear.” Time. Aug. 9, 
2019. https://time.com/5644548/smokey-the-bear-history/
Young, J.D., A.M. Evans, J.M. Iniguez, A. Thode, M.D. Meyer, S.J. Hedwall, S. McCaffrey, P. Shin, and C.-H. 
Huang. 2020. Effects of policy change on wildland fire management strategies: Evidence for a paradigm 
shift in the western US? International Journal of Wildland Fire, 29(10), 857. https://doi.org/10.1071/
WF19189

26	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Appendix A: Methods
To conduct our review of wildfire policies governing management of natural ignitions, we began our search in two 
places: 1) the Department of the Interior’s (DOI) Wildland Fire Policy page (https://www.doi.gov/wildlandfire/
policy) and 2) van Wagtendonk’s (2007) original publication. We collected the available and cited policy documents 
from each source and purposively sampled those that contained material relevant to wildfire management, 
especially pertaining to natural ignitions.  We consulted expert witnesses with fire management experience in 
federal agencies to determine when we had reached saturation on the critical policies. 
At the time of van Wagtendonk’s (2007) work, the years following the turn of the millennium were simply labeled 
“Years Since Cerro Grande.” Given the time that passed since its publication, we assessed policies from 2001 
(the end of the Maturation era) onward to determine if additional eras had emerged. Using inductive coding, we 
grouped policies both temporally and by emergent themes, through which the Fire Classification and Operational 
Flexibility eras were identified. 
Similar coding was used to group policies by how they framed wildfire, as either primarily a risk, or both a risk and 
an opportunity, as seen in Table 1 (Findings/Discussion). Policies that more often mentioned wildfire management 
in the context of “risk,” “danger,” “safety,” or “crisis” were grouped in the “threat” category. Policies in this group 
tended to focus on fuel reduction treatments to protect people and property threatened by wildfires. Policies that 
also included terms like “living with fire,” “resource benefits,” fire as a tool to “improve forest health/conditions,” or 
fire’s “natural role,” were grouped into the latter category “threat and opportunity” category. 

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         27
Appendix B: Updates to Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy from 1995 to 2001
Below is the table provided in Appendix D of the 2001 Review and Update of Federal Wildland Fire Management 
Policy showing the additions, subtractions, and updates to the 1995 policy. Blank entries in the 1995 Policy column 
indicate an element that did not exist in 1995 that was added in 2001, while blank entries in the 2001 Policy 
column indicate an element that existed in 1995 and was removed in 2001.  
POLICY ELEMENT
1995 POLICY
2001 POLICY
S a f e t y
Firefighter and public safety is the 
first priority. All Fire Management 
Plans and activities must reflect this 
commitment.
Firefighter and public safety is the first 
priority. All Fire Management Plans and 
activities must reflect this commitment.
E c o s y s t e m 
S u s t a i n a b i l i t y
---
The full range of fire management 
activities will be used to achieve 
ecosystem sustainability including its 
interrelated ecological, economic, and 
social components.
R e s p o n s e  t o 
W i l d l a n d  F i r e
Fire, as a critical natural process, will 
be integrated into land and resource 
management plans and activities 
on a landscape scale, across agency 
boundaries, and will be based upon 
best available science. All use of fire 
for resource management requires 
a formal prescription. Management 
actions taken on wildland fires will 
be consistent with approved Fire 
Management Plans.
Fire, as a critical natural process, will 
be integrated into land and resource 
management plans and activities on 
a landscape scale, and across agency 
boundaries. Response to wildland 
fires is based on ecological, social and 
legal consequences of the fire. The 
circumstances under which a fire occurs, 
and the likely consequences on firefighter 
and public safety and welfare, natural 
and cultural resources, and values to be 
protected dictate the appropriate response 
to the fire.
U s e  o f  W i l d l a n d 
F i r e
Wildland fire will be used to protect, 
maintain, and enhance resources 
and, as nearly as possible, be 
allowed to function in its natural 
ecological role.
Wildland fire will be used to protect, 
maintain, and enhance resources and, 
as nearly as possible, be allowed to 
function in its natural ecological role. Use 
of fire will be based on approved Fire 
Management Plans and will follow specific 
prescriptions contained in operational 
plans
R e h a b i l i t a t i o n 
a n d  R e s t o r a t i o n
---
Rehabilitation and restoration efforts will 
be undertaken to protect and sustain 
ecosystems, public health, safety, and to 
help communities protect infrastructure.
P r o t e c t i o n 
P o l i c i e s
Protection priorities are (1) 
human life and (2) property and 
natural and cultural resources. If 
it becomes necessary to prioritize 
between property and natural and 
cultural resources, this is done 
based on relative values to be 
protected, commensurate with fire 
management costs. Once people 
have been committed to an incident, 
these resources become the highest 
value to be protected.
The protection of human life is the 
single, overriding suppression priority. 
Setting priorities among protecting 
human communities and community 
infrastructure, other property and 
improvements, and natural and cultural 
resources will be done based on the 
values to be protected, human health 
and safety, and the costs of protection. 
Once people have been committed to an 
incident, these human resources become 
the highest value to be protected.

28	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
W i l d l a n d  U r b a n 
I n t e r f a c e
The operational role of federal 
agencies as a partner in the 
Wildland Urban Interface is wildland 
firefighting, hazard fuel reduction, 
cooperative prevention and 
education, and technical assistance. 
Structural fire protection is the 
responsibility of tribal, State, and 
local governments. Federal agencies 
may assist with exterior structural 
suppression activities under formal 
Fire Protection Agreements that 
specify the mutual responsibilities 
of the partners, including funding. 
(Some federal agencies have full 
structural protection authority 
for their facilities on lands they 
administer and may also enter into 
formal agreements to assist State and 
local governments with full structural 
protection.).
The operational role of federal and State 
agencies as partners in the Wildland 
Urban Interface are wildland firefighting, 
hazard fuels reduction, cooperative 
prevention and education, and technical 
assistance. Structural fire suppression 
is the responsibility of tribal., State, or 
local governments. Federal agencies may 
assist with exterior structural protection 
activities under formal Fire Protection 
Agreements that specify the mutual 
responsibilities of the partners, including 
funding. (Some federal agencies have full 
structural protection authority for their 
facilities on lands they administer and may 
also enter into formal agreements to assist 
State and local governments with full 
structural protection.)
P l a n n i n g
Every area with burnable vegetation 
must have an approved Fire 
Management Plan. Fire Management 
Plans must be consistent with 
firefighter and public safety, values 
to be protected, and land and 
resource management plans and 
must address public health issues. 
Fire Management Plans must also 
address all potential wildland fire 
occurrences and include the full 
range of fire management actions.
S c i e n c e
---
Fire management plans and programs 
will be based on a foundation of sound 
science. Research will support ongoing 
efforts to increase our scientific knowledge 
of biological, physical, and sociological 
factors. Information needed to support fire 
management will be developed through 
an integrated interagency fire science 
program. Scientific results must be made 
available to managers in a timely manner 
and must be used in the development of 
land management plans, fire management 
plans, and implementation plans.
P r e p a r e d n e s s
Agencies will ensure their capability 
to provide safe, cost-effective fire 
management programs in support 
of land and resource management 
plans through appropriate planning, 
staffing, training, and equipment.
Agencies will ensure their capability 
to provide safe, cost-effective fire 
management programs in support of land 
and resource management plans through 
appropriate planning, staffing, training, 
equipment, and management oversight.
Every area with burnable vegetation must 
have an approved Fire Management Plan. 
Fire Management Plans are strategic 
plans that define a program to manage 
wildland and prescribed fires based on the 
area’s approved land management plan. 
Fire management plans must provide 
for firefighter and public safety, include 
fire management strategies, tactics, 
and alternatives; address values to be 
protected and public health issues; and 
be consistent with resource management 
objectives, activities of the area, and 
environmental laws and regulations.

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         29
S u p p r e s s i o n
Fires are suppressed at minimum 
cost, considering firefighter and 
public safety, benefits, and values 
to be protected, consistent with 
resource objectives.
Fires are suppressed at minimum cost, 
considering firefighter and public safety, 
benefits, and values to be protected, 
consistent with resource objectives.
P r e v e n t i o n
Agencies will work together and with 
other affected groups and individuals 
to prevent unauthorized ignition of 
wildland fires.
Agencies will work together and with 
their partners and other affected groups 
and individuals to prevent unauthorized 
ignition of wildland fires.
S t a n d a r d i z a t i o n
Agencies will use compatible 
planning processes, funding 
mechanisms, training and 
qualification requirements, 
operational procedures, values-to-
be protected methodologies, and 
public education programs for all fire 
management activities.
Agencies will use compatible planning 
processes, funding mechanisms, 
training and qualification requirements, 
operational procedures, values-to-
be protected methodologies, and 
public education programs for all fire 
management activities
I n t e r a g e n c y 
C o o p e r a t i o n
Fire management planning, 
preparedness, suppression, fire use, 
monitoring, and research will be 
conducted on an interagency basis 
with the involvement of all parties.
Fire management planning, preparedness, 
prevention, suppression, fire use, 
restoration and rehabilitation, monitoring, 
research, and education will be conducted 
on an interagency basis with the 
involvement of cooperators and partners.
C o m m u n i c a t i o n 
a n d  E d u c a t i o n
---
Agencies will enhance knowledge and 
understanding of wildland fire management 
policies and practices through internal and 
external communication and education 
programs. These programs will be 
continuously improved through the timely 
and effective exchange of information among 
all affected agencies and organizations
A g e n c y 
A d m i n i s t r a t o r 
a n d  E m p l o y e e 
R o l e s
Employees who are trained and 
certified will participate in the 
wildland fire program as the 
situation demands; employees with 
operational, administrative, or other 
skills will support the wildland fire 
program as needed. Administrators 
are responsible and will be 
accountable for making employees 
available.
Agency administrators will ensure that their 
employees are trained, certified and made 
available to participate in the wildland fire 
program locally, regionally, and nationally 
as the situation demands. Employees with 
operational, administrative, or other skills 
will support the wildland fire program 
as necessary. Agency administrators are 
responsible and will be held accountable 
for making employees available.
E v a l u a t i o n
---
Agencies will develop and implement 
a systematic method of evaluation to 
determine effectiveness of projects through 
implementation of the 2001 Federal Wildland 
Fire Management Policy. The evaluation will 
assure accountability, facilitate resolution 
of areas of conflict, and identify resource 
shortages and agency priorities.
E c o n o m i c 
E f f i c i e n c y
Fire management programs 
and activities will be based on 
economic analyses that incorporated 
commodity, non-commodity, and 
social values.
---

30	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Appendix C: Updates in Interagency Guidance from 2003 to 2009 
Below are the changes adapted from Appendix C of the 2009 Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland 
Fire Management Policy (2009 Guidance), showing the adjustments made to operational statements in the 2003 
Interagency Strategy for the Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy (2003 Strategy). 
2003 STRATEGY
2009 GUIDANCE
Only one management objective will be applied 
to a wildland fire. Wildland fires will either be 
managed for resource benefits or suppressed. 
A wildland fire cannot be managed for both 
objectives concurrently. If two wildland fires 
converge, they will be managed as a single 
wildland fire.
A wildland fire may be concurrently managed for 
one or more objectives and objectives can change 
as the fire spreads across the landscape. Objectives 
are affected by changes in fuels, weather, 
topography; varying social understanding and 
tolerance; and involvement of other governmental 
jurisdictions having different missions and 
objectives.
Human caused wildland fires will be 
suppressed in every instance and will not be 
managed for resource benefits
Initial action on human-caused wildfire will be to 
suppress the fire at the lowest cost with the fewest 
negative consequences with respect to firefighter 
and public safety.
Once a wildland fire has been managed for 
suppression objectives, it may never be managed 
for resource benefit objectives.
A wildland fire may be concurrently managed for 
one or more objectives and objectives can change 
as the fire spreads across the landscape. Objectives 
are affected by changes in fuels, weather, 
topography; varying social understanding and 
tolerance; and 
involvement of other governmental jurisdictions 
having different missions and objectives
The Appropriate Management Response 
(AMR) is any specific action suitable to meet Fire 
Management Unit (FMU) objectives. Typically, the 
AMR ranges across a spectrum of tactical options 
(from monitoring to intensive management 
actions). The AMR is developed by using FMU 
strategies and objectives identified in the Fire 
Management Plan
The term Appropriate Management Response 
is removed from implementation guidance with 
“Response to Wildland Fire” as the policy area 
defining 
the actions for managing a wildland fire
The Wildland Fire Situation Analysis process is 
used to determine and document the suppression 
strategy from the full range of responses 
available for suppression operations. Suppression 
strategies are designed to meet the policy 
objectives of suppression.
Managers will use a decision support process to 
guide and document wildfire 
management decisions. The process will provide 
situational assessment, analyze hazards 
and risk, define implementation actions, and 
document decisions and rationale for those 
decisions.

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         31
Wildland fire use is the result of a natural event. 
The Land/Resource Management Plan, or the 
Fire Management Plan, will identify areas where 
the strategy of wildland fire use is suitable. The 
Wildland Fire Implementation Plan (WFIP) is the 
tool that examines the available response strategies 
to determine if a fire is being considered for 
wildland fire use.
Managers will use a decision support process 
to guide and document wildfire management 
decisions. The process will provide situational 
assessment, analyze hazards and risk, define 
implementation actions, and document decisions 
and rationale for those decisions.
When a prescribed fire or a fire designated for 
wildland fire use is no longer achieving the 
intended resource management objectives and 
contingency or mitigation actions have failed, the 
fire will be declared a wildfire. Once a wildfire, it 
cannot be returned to a prescribed fire or wildland 
fire use status
Managers will use a decision support process 
to guide and document wildfire management 
decisions. The process will provide situational 
assessment, analyze hazards and risk, define 
implementation actions, and document decisions 
and rationale for those decisions.

32	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
About the ERI White Paper Series: Issues in Forest Restoration 
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural 
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines ecological 
restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its 
health, integrity and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society 
for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once-diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to 
damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers 
on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing 
natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that 
provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every 
forest restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers 
elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not 
constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions         33
ERI White Papers — Issues in Forest Restoration
1.	
Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2.	
Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3.	
Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4.	
Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests
5.	
Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6.	
Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern 
Arizona
7.	
Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8.	
Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9.	
Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10.	 What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for Practitioners
11.	 Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12.	 Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13.	 Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14.	 Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest Lands
15.	 Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16.	 Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. 	A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. 	Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. 	The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. 	Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. 	Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. 	The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
23. 	Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West
24. 	Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Projects
25. 	Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West
26. 	Wildfire Trends Across the Western US: Forest Fires Have Increased in Size, Severity, and Frequency Across 
Western Forests
27. 	 Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents
28.  	Full-Cost Accounting Remeasurement of the 2010 Schultz Fire: Understanding the Long-term Socio-
Economic Implications of High-Severity Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flooding
29.	 Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions
30. 	Workforce Training Needs of Forestry Contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an Industry Survey

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
