The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of 
communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic 
issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Forest Restoration Treatments Increased Growth, Did Not Change  
Survival of Ponderosa Pines in Severe Drought 
 
By Andrew Sánchez Meador and David Huffman 
Introduction 
Large-scale tree decline and mortality is a hallmark of a warming climate worldwide, and old trees 
are particularly at risk. In much of the western US, today’s ponderosa pine forests are dense and 
dominated by an abundance of young trees, so old trees can suffer from competition and are highly 
vulnerable to severe wildfire. The conservation and resilience of old trees is a central goal in 
ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests and is also a focus in a 2022 
Presidential Executive Order to identify and conserve old growth forests. In this study, our research 
team took advantage of the longest standing, 
intensively measured forest restoration study in 
the southwestern US to investigate long-term 
responses to treatments on mortality and growth 
of both young and old ponderosa pine trees 
during an ongoing megadrought. 
 
Our study included three treatments: an 
untreated control, thinning only, or “partial” 
restoration, and thinning followed by prescribed 
burning, or “full” restoration (Figure 1). The 
site has a high density of old trees (>140 years) 
and conservation of these trees was desired. 
Thinning of young trees occurred 1992–1993 
and prescribed fire was applied in five 
subsequent entries, on a 4-year return cycle. 
 
We tested several hypotheses, including 1) 
survival of old trees would be higher in full and 
partially restored areas; 2) tree diameter growth, 
as determined by measurements of tree rings 
and calculation of annual basal area increment, 
would respond positively to thinning, with 
younger trees growing relatively faster than 
older trees; 3) drought would reduce tree 
growth, but both old and young trees in the full and partially restored areas would experience lesser 
drought impacts than trees in the untreated control; and 4) fine-scale (monthly) influence of climatic 
factors on growth would be lower for trees in the full and partially restored areas.  
 
June 2023 
 

 
Results 
• Hypothesis 1: Survival of old trees was not statistically different in treated areas compared to the 
control (90.5% control, 92.3% full, 82.6% partial), contradicting the first hypothesis. 
• Hypothesis 2: Diameter growth of young and old trees in the full and partially restored areas was 
significantly higher than that of trees in the control, supporting the second hypothesis, despite the 
region experiencing extended drought for the entirety of the experiment. 
• Hypothesis 3: Trees in the full and partially restored areas had increased growth, less growth 
decline during severe drought, and less influence of fine-scale climate factors compared to trees 
in the control area.  
• Hypothesis 4: Trees in the full and partial restored areas were more resilient to the fine-scale 
climate factors: 
• Precipitation was always positively correlated with annual growth (basal area increment) 
• Temperature was always negatively correlated with growth, albeit less strong, in old versus 
young trees. 
 
Conclusions 
This study demonstrates that both partial and full forest restoration treatments at the G.A. Pearson 
Natural Area have led to substantial, sustained improvement in the diameter growth of old and young 
ponderosa pines. Trees in treated areas are relatively less impacted by severe drought and less tightly 
linked to climate controls, implying higher resilience under continuing warming trends as compared 
to trees in untreated forests. Additional key takeaways from this study include: 
• Thinning treatments did not significantly affect old-tree survival in the first two decades 
following treatment, despite an extended warm drought consistent with climate change in the 
Southwest.  
• Prescribed burning, initiated in the full restoration treatment in 1994 and repeated every four 
years, did not lead to a detectable increase in old or young tree mortality. 
• The treatments were largely positive on tree growth and met objectives of ecological restoration 
(i.e., thinning followed by frequent controlled burning can restore structure and function).  
• Annual rings of trees in the full and partially restored areas frequently showed greater growth in 
droughty years compared with those in the control. 
• Trees ranging from 150 to almost 500 years old are capable of extended growth increases 
following thinning treatments, even after decades of inhibition due to drought and competition 
with younger trees. 
• Mortality of old trees across all treatments and controls in our study was low, averaging 11% two 
decades after the initial pretreatment survey; old trees showed relatively stable density and 
gradual basal area increase in the two thinning treatments over the span of this study. 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Fulé, P.Z., A.J. Sánchez Meador, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, T.E. Kolb, D.W. Huffman, D.P. Normandin, 
and J.P. Roccaforte. 2022. Forest restoration treatments increased growth and did not change survival 
of ponderosa pines in severe drought, Arizona. Ecological Applications, e2717.  
 
Journal article corresponding author: Peter Z. Fule, Pete.Fule@nau.edu  
ERI contact: Andrew Sánchez Meador, Andrew.SanchezMeador@nau.edu  
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
