The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and economic vitality of com-
munities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues 
related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions 
 
By Scott Franz, Melanie Colavito, and Catrin Edgeley 
 
Introduction 
Responses to wildfire have varied over time from directly suppressing fire to allowing it to fulfill its 
natural role. What began as a simple and unified effort to suppress all wildfire through the early 1900s 
has evolved into a complex multi-layered system. Reducing the risk of catastrophic wildfire and 
reintroducing wildfire, with tolerable risk to communities, firefighters, and ecosystems, has become a 
key focus of land management policies. In current policy, wildfire may be managed for multiple 
objectives simultaneously, as well as managed for resource benefit, which gives fire managers the 
ability to use a naturally ignited wildfire (i.e., via lightning strike) to accomplish management 
objectives on the landscape. While current policy gives fire managers flexibility, it has also 
compounded the complexity of decision-making. We reviewed the history and context of policies that 
govern managing wildfire, especially for objectives other than full suppression, to identify areas for 
improving the use of natural ignitions to reduce the risk of catastrophic fire. 
  
Policy History 
Jan van Wagtendonk’s 2007 publication, “The History and Evolution of Wildland Fire Use,” in the 
journal Fire Ecology encapsulated the progression of wildland fire use since the 1870s into the 
following eras: Fire Protection (1872–1967), Experimentation (1968–1977), Re-Evaluation (1978–
1989), and Maturation (1990–2000). We reviewed this chronology and extended it, proposing two new 
eras: Fire Classification (2001–2009) and Operational Flexibility (2010–present) (Figure 1). Each era is 
accompanied by the term used most often or codified in policy (“term of the era”) to describe managing 
wildfire and important events that impacted policy development during that era. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 2023 
Figure 1. Eras of Wildfire Policy. The first four eras are those originally proposed by van Wagtendonk 
(2007), the final two are new eras proposed by this paper. 

 
 
Historical Eras 
 
Fire Protection (1872–1967)  
Term of the era: light burning 
Catastrophic wildfires near the turn of the century resulted in a total-suppression approach to 
wildfire by US land management agencies. Indigenous use of fire was dismissed as “light burning” 
that only destroyed timber. 
 
Experimentation (1968–1977)  
Term of the era: prescribed natural fire 
A growing body fire ecology research led some agencies, such as the National Park Service, to 
codify the ecological importance of wildfire into policy. Natural ignitions could be managed for 
ecological objectives as a “prescribed natural fire,” under the same protocol used for a deliberately 
ignited prescribed burn. New federal laws were passed that mandated extensive management plans 
for all units of forested land controlled by agencies. 
 
Re-evaluation (1978–1989)  
Term of the era: prescribed natural fire 
Prescribed natural fire programs and their 
required management plans proved 
cumbersome, as escaped fires in Colorado 
and Wyoming (Figure 2) drew public 
scrutiny. The secretaries of the departments of 
the interior and agriculture suspended all such 
programs until new management plans were 
written. 
 
Maturation (1990–2000)  
Term of the era: prescribed natural fire 
Research began to demonstrate the important 
ecological outcomes from fire, but firefighter 
fatalities drew concerns that triggered the first 
overhaul of federal wildland fire management 
policy in over two decades. 
 
Modern Eras 
 
Fire Classification (2001–2008)  
Term of the era: wildland fire use (WFU) 
The 2001 update of federal policy established WFU as a third wildland fire category, along with 
prescribed fire and wildfire. Interagency guidance in 2003 created mutually exclusive 
classifications, where fire can be managed either for restoration or full suppression, but not both. 
 
Operational Flexibility (2009–present)  
Term of the era: managing wildfire for resource benefits 
The 2003 Guidance was deemed too restrictive and replaced by current policy, the 2009 Guidance 
for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. WFU was removed from policy, 
and managers were given flexibility to manage incidents for multiple objectives simultaneously, 
including resource benefits, as allowed by an existing, approved land, resource, or fire management 
plan that articulates strategies and objectives.  
Figure 2. Yellowstone ranger observing smoke 
column at Canyon Junction. Photo by Jeff Henry, 
National Park Service, 1988 

 
The Current State of Wildfire Policy 
Variable Framing of Wildfire 
Competing definitions and priorities have persisted throughout levels of policy, from federal to 
interagency to agency to regional/ local, without clear guidance on how to reconcile tradeoffs in 
utilizing wildfire. For example, the Red Book for wildfire response uses the flexible language of the 
2009 guidance and reliance on an approved land, resource, or fire management plan. But at the same 
time, the Red Book still defines initial attack as aggressive suppression and budget justifications for 
the Forest Service emphasize metrics like initial attack success.  
 
Operational Structures and Social Incentives 
Financial barriers, both the amount of funding and how funding is allocated, can incentivize a 
suppression-default bias by disconnecting decision-makers from the costs of suppression strategies. 
Social barriers also create a double standard for wildfire managers. If suppression strategies are used 
and communicated, but a wildfire escapes control, managers may retain public support. If other than 
full suppression strategies are used and a wildfire escapes control, managers may lose public support, 
which erodes “social license.” Decision support systems like the Wildfire Decision Support System 
(WFDSS) and the Risk Management Assistance (RMA) dashboard can facilitate the development of a 
wildfire response strategy, as well as assist in communication and coordination, which can build public 
support and understanding. 
 
Evaluating Coherent Actions to Carry Out Policy 
Differing regional management plans and a lack of clear means to report management strategies used 
on wildfire incidents makes it difficult to measure the impact of the 2009 Guidance, which represented 
a paradigm shift that allowed for multiple management strategies on a wildfire. Furthermore, the 
Incident Status Summary (ICS-209) reports used to report basic wildfire information offers limited 
options for clearly explaining a wildfire response strategy, which can lead to further confusion in 
documenting strategy.  
 
Conclusion 
Wildfire policy has evolved over the past 150 years into a system mired in complexity. Though 
operational response strategies have evolved and matured, there is significant cultural and institutional 
inertia to suppress all wildfires. Variable policy terminology and framing make communication and 
coordination difficult. Financial structures, performance metrics, and social incentives still foster 
suppression bias. Differences in regional plans can delay executing policy changes. But to address the 
enormity of the wildfire crisis, managing wildfires for objectives other than full suppression that 
facilitate the reduction of wildfire risk must be a part of the approach. Decision support tools can help 
the planning, coordination, and communication necessary to normalize managing wildfires for 
objectives other than full suppression. Further research should investigate how wildfire managers 
interpret policy to see how it factors into decision-making and how to improve educational and 
financial structures to best support wildfire management organizations. 
 
 
This fact sheet summaries information from the following publication: 
Franz, S.T., M.M. Colavito, and C.M. Edgeley. 2023. The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural 
Ignitions. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University. 31 p. 
Contact: Melanie Colavito, Melanie.Colavito@nau.edu 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
