Journal of Forestry, 2023, XX, 1–18
https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvad036
Advance access publication 14 August 2023
Research Article - fire & fuels management
Metrics and Considerations for Evaluating How Forest 
Treatments Alter Wildfire Behavior and Effects
Anthony G. Vorster,1,*,
 Camille Stevens-Rumann,2 Nicholas Young,1 Brian Woodward,1 
Christopher Tsz Hin Choi,1 Marin E. Chambers,2 Antony S. Cheng,2,
 Michael Caggiano,2 
Courtney Schultz,3 Matthew Thompson,4 Michelle Greiner,3 Greg Aplet,5 Robert N. Addington,6 
Mike A. Battaglia,4 Daniel Bowker,7 Ethan Bucholz,8 Brian Buma,10,9 Paul Evangelista,1 
David Huffman,11 Stephanie Mueller,2 Charles Rhoades,4 William H. Romme,1 
Andrew J. Sánchez Meador,11,12 Wade T. Tinkham,4 Matt Tuten,13, and Amanda West (Fordham)1,8,
1Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA (anthony.vorster@colostate.edu). 
2Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Forest and Rangeland Stewardship Department, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA. 
3Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA. 
4USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO 80526, USA. 
5The Wilderness Society, Denver, CO 80202, USA. 
6The Nature Conservancy, Colorado Field Office, Boulder, CO 80302, USA. 
7Coalition for the Poudre River Watershed, Fort Collins, CO 80524, USA. 
8Colorado State Forest Service, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA. 
9University of Colorado, Denver, CO 80204, USA. 
10Environmental Defense Fund, Boulder, CO 80302, USA. 
11Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA. 
12School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA. 
13USDA Forest Service, Pagosa Springs, CO 81147, USA.
*Corresponding author email: anthony.vorster@colostate.edu
Abstract 
The influence of forest treatments on wildfire effects is challenging to interpret. This is, in part, because the impact forest treatments have on 
wildfire can be slight and variable across many factors. Effectiveness of a treatment also depends on the metric considered. We present and 
define human–fire interaction, fire behavior, and ecological metrics of forest treatment effects on wildfire and discuss important considerations 
and recommendations for evaluating treatments. We demonstrate these concepts using a case study from the Cameron Peak Fire in Colorado, 
USA. Pre-fire forest treatments generally, but not always, experienced reduced burn severity, particularly when surface fuels were reduced. 
Treatments in the Cameron Peak Fire have also been documented as increasing tree survivorship, aiding suppression efforts, promoting fire-
fighter safety, and influencing fire spread. However, the impacts of pre-fire management on primary landscape-scale objectives, like watershed 
protection, are unknown. Discussions about the influence of pre-fire treatments on fire effects must define the indicator(s) being assessed, 
as the same treatment may be considered successful under one measure but not others. Thus, it is critical to bring a common language and 
understanding to conversations about treatment effects and advance efforts to evaluate the range of treatment effects, thus supporting treat-
ment planning.
Study Implications:  Forest management is critical for striving to modify large, high-severity wildfires to benefit fire suppression activities, 
community safety, and healthy, functioning ecosystems. Interpretation of treatment effects on wildfire and what is deemed effective requires 
consideration of many factors such as site and treatment characteristics, burn conditions, spatiotemporal scale, and community and manage-
ment values. Assessments of treatment effects on wildfire should consider multiple metrics to identify how management is affecting a range of 
resources and to identify management trade-offs. Explicit identification of these metrics can improve communications and community engage-
ment by aligning manager intentions, treatment implementation, and public expectations.
Keywords: fire management, prescribed fire, treatment effectiveness, remote sensing, wildfire
As wildfires in many forested ecosystems have increased in 
extent, severity, and frequency in the past several decades 
(Abatzoglou and Williams 2016; Higuera et al. 2021; Stephens 
et al. 2014), they are interacting with a variety of forest man-
agement treatments and revealing the effects of fuel-reduction 
treatments on wildfire impacts in the Western United States. 
Many studies are predicting extreme wildfire conditions will 
continue to increase in the coming decades (Coop et al. 2022; 
Received: March 9, 2023. Accepted: July 14, 2023.
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of American Foresters 2023. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is 
in the public domain in the US.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

2
Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
Riley and Loehman 2016). Given this situation, managers, 
researchers, community members, and ­policy makers grap-
ple with where, when, and under what conditions treatments 
moderate wildfire behavior and ameliorate outcomes and 
how to improve pre-fire management actions going forward. 
However, there is little consistency in how forest treatments 
are evaluated for their effects on wildfire, both within fire-af-
fected communities and across fire research and management 
communities (McKinney et al. 2022). This is especially pro-
nounced in the face of recent large wildfires burning under ex-
treme fire weather conditions and their interaction with often 
much smaller treatments.
Forest treatments are developed to accomplish a wide vari-
ety of goals, and many are not specifically intended to affect 
wildfire behavior. Fuel treatments, which represent a subset 
of forest treatments, encompass mechanical, manual, and pre-
scribed or managed fire methods intended to reduce the total 
quantity or alter the vertical and horizontal arrangement of 
flammable vegetation (Hoffman et al. 2020; Jain et al. 2012; 
Reinhardt et al. 2008; Stephens et al. 2021). Fuel treatments 
vary greatly in their goals and objectives. For example, many 
of the smallest treatments are intended to provide “defensible 
space” with the goal of providing firefighters opportunities to 
protect homes and structures in the event of a wildfire, espe-
cially within the Wildland Urban Interface (WUI; Syphard 
et al. 2014). Fuel treatments are commonly, but not always, 
a component of ecological restoration projects that aim to 
reverse forest changes associated with historical land use and 
fire exclusion. Mastication treatments aim to alter fire behav-
ior by rearranging rather than removing fuels (Battaglia et al. 
2010; Jain et al. 2012; Jain et al. 2018). Many forest treatments 
may not have explicit goals of affecting how a wildfire inter-
acts with a landscape (e.g., regeneration or salvage cut), yet 
the impacts on fuels are considered (Collins et al. 2012), and 
these treatments may be evaluated post hoc against various 
fire metrics, such as rate of spread and ­severity. Additionally, 
even when objectives are explicit regarding fire behavior, treat-
ment intensity is often designed to affect fire behavior under 
certain fire weather conditions (e.g., 95% fire weather), which 
may or may not be the burning conditions when a wildfire 
interacts with a treatment. Prescribed fires and management 
of natural fires as a treatment often have the explicit goals of 
moderating future fire behavior and restoring historical forest 
structure and composition through surface and lower-strata 
fuel consumption along with low-to-moderate tree mortality 
(North et al. 2021). Finally, a combination of these treatments 
may be done in a single area, resulting in a wildfire interact-
ing with multiple treatments. The goals and conditions for 
which treatments are implemented and the resulting influence 
on wildfires varies greatly. Fuel reduction goals sometimes 
drive treatment design and are secondary considerations in 
other scenarios. Treatments also often have tradeoffs, such 
as balancing fuel reduction benefits with ecological outcomes 
and habitat conservation. Regardless of why a treatment is 
initially implemented, whether it be to moderate fire behavior, 
restore historical ecological attributes, facilitate fire manage-
ment during incidents, improve wildlife habitat, regenerate a 
forest, or some other purpose, all treatments have the poten-
tial to burn, and thus we consider all forest treatments that 
remove or modify fuels in this article.
Interpretations of forest treatment effects in moderating 
fire impacts, and whether treatments are deemed effective, 
can vary widely depending on the audience. Treatment effects 
are objective measures of the influence on wildfire parame-
ters, whereas effectiveness connotes a human judgment of 
this effect relative to a value-based goal. News media and 
the public often ascribe a treatment’s effectiveness to a few 
metrics: did treatments reduce the number of homes or high-
value assets lost? Did treatments contain a fire? In contrast, 
firefighters may be focused on effectiveness through the lens 
of their ability to defend structures more efficiently or engage 
in suppression activities that otherwise would not have 
occurred (Jain et al. 2021). Meanwhile, land managers might 
be focused on soil impacts and associated short term water-
shed risks (i.e., debris flows, flooding, sedimentation, threats 
to drinking water supplies), as well as longer term ecosystem 
responses to wildfires, such as forest recovery. Interpretations 
of effectiveness may also change over time, as different out-
comes become more or less important to the management 
goals of a given group.
Treatments can affect wildfires in a number of ways, includ-
ing changing fire behavior and intensity, fire size, or footprint, 
altering impacts to ecological processes, facilitating incident 
operations, reducing suppression costs, and affecting the 
number of homes and structures lost (Agee and Skinner 2005; 
Kalies and Kent 2016; Thompson et al. 2013; Weatherspoon 
and Skinner 1996). However, quantifying the effect of treat-
ments is complicated by the potentially minor influence rel-
ative to numerous other factors driving fire behavior, such 
as vegetation type, fuel arrangement and load, fire weather, 
topography, time of day of burning, and fire suppression 
efforts. In studies that look at these factors combined, the 
dominant influences on fire severity are often temperature, 
wind, and vegetation cover type (Birch et al. 2015; Evers et 
al. 2022; Martinson and Omi 2013; Prichard et al. 2020). 
Another challenge of quantifying the effect of treatments is 
the integration of data and processes operating at multiple 
spatial and temporal scales. Further, the scale of intended 
treatment effects varies widely. For example, some treatments 
are designed for local effects (e.g., defensible space around a 
home) whereas others may be designed for landscape effects 
(e.g., watershed protection). Fire behavior, typically mea-
sured as fire intensity, is commonly reduced following pre-
scribed fire and in areas with previous fuels treatments or 
basal area reductions (Cansler et al. 2022; Kalies and Kent 
2016; Prichard et al. 2020; Ritchie et al. 2007; Symons et al. 
2008). Given these interacting factors, treatment effects are 
hard to quantify yet critical to understand as we are faced 
with growing costs and losses from wildfires (Bayham et al. 
2022; Peterson et al. 2021; Steel et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2021) 
with increasing size and severity of these fires (Abatzoglou 
and Williams 2016; Stephens et al. 2014).
Evaluating treatment performance relative to stated or 
implicit objectives and how landscapes should be managed 
are topics of active research and discussion (Hessburg et al. 
2021; Hood et al. 2022; McKinney et al. 2022; Sánchez et 
al. 2019). We add to these conversations by identifying a 
range of metrics to measure treatment effects on wildfire 
outcomes and considerations, challenges, and recommenda-
tions when evaluating and communicating about treatment 
effects. Here, we (1) present a framework to define metrics 
of treatment effects on wildfires that can be used to eval-
uate effectiveness of forest treatments for mitigating wild-
fire behavior and socioeconomic and ecological outcomes 
and (2) discuss important considerations and recommen-
dations for evaluating these effects of treatments on fires. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
3
We draw on experience and literature primarily from the 
western United States and use the 2020 Cameron Peak Fire 
in Colorado, USA, as a case study to illustrate these consid-
erations and evaluate the multiple modalities of treatment 
effects. Quantifying wildfire outcomes in treated areas pro-
vides better data-driven rationale for assessing effectiveness, 
which can aid in setting realistic expectations for how treat-
ments will fare when confronted by extreme fire behavior 
and thus inform treatment prioritization and justify costs. 
This framework and these considerations can guide evalu-
ations of treatment effects and assist managers, research-
ers, policy makers, and the general public in developing 
a common language for communicating about treatment 
effectiveness.
Cameron Peak Fire Case Study Methods
The Cameron Peak Fire burned 84,544 ha (208,913 ac) in 
2020 and became the largest wildfire in Colorado’s recorded 
history. This fire burned from August 2020 to January 2021 
with vast human impacts, including the loss of 469 struc-
tures, loss of life in postfire flooding, multiple water resources 
compromised, and other damage to infrastructure that is cur-
rently estimated at more than $100 million in total costs, not 
including the $133 million in suppression costs (National 
Interagency Coordination Center 2021). The Cameron Peak 
Fire provides many examples of where wildfires interacted 
with a variety of forest treatment types (figures 1 and 2). 
Given the costly economic and ecological impacts of this fire, 
it provides an excellent case study to describe the complex-
ity of wildfire-treatment interactions and to compare a range 
of treatment types. Here, we use treatment databases, field 
data, remote sensing, and other reports to evaluate multiple 
metrics of treatment effects on the Cameron Peak Fire and 
highlight challenges associated with evaluating treatment 
effectiveness.
Treatment information and previous wildfire footprints 
within the Cameron Peak Fire were aggregated from multi-
ple agency treatment databases. These included geographic 
information system (GIS) data from the 2017 Colorado 
Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI) Fuels Treatment Library 
(Mueller and Caggiano 2022), Forest Activity Tracking System 
(FACTS; US Forest Service 2018), the 2017 Fire History 
Perimeters (National Wildfire Coordinating Group 2017), the 
Stewardship Mapping and Reporting Tool (SMART; USDA 
Forest Service 2020), and the 2016 LANDFIRE Remap 
Public Events Geodatabase (LANDFIRE 2016). We retained 
stand-level treatments from SMART but removed manage-
ment plan–level treatments that are often mapped to the 
entire property boundary rather than the management foot-
print itself. There were twenty-six unique treatment types 
(although some are very similar in practice) in the combined 
database. We reclassified the treatment types into eight cate-
gories to simplify the database and to identify overlapping or 
repeat treatments more efficiently: (1) prescribed (Rx) fire, (2) 
Figure 1 The 2020 Cameron Peak Fire and locations of past forest management and wildfire. A total of 6.8% of the Cameron Peak Fire footprint was 
recorded in the treatment database as having been managed prior to the fire. The Treated, Non-Rx Fire treatment category encompasses all treatments 
that were not prescribed fire for ease of visualization with figure 2 showing more detailed treatment classifications.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

4
Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
thinning, (3) surface fuels treatment (e.g., yarding, piling, or 
rearranging of fuels), (4) pile burning, (5) clearcut, (6) chip-
ping, (7) previous wildfire, and (8) unknown (Table S1). In 
ArcGIS Pro v2.6.4, the intersection geoprocessing tool was 
used to create unique treatment polygons for spatially over-
lapping treatments, including repeated treatment types (Esri 
Inc. 2021). Overlapping treatments were joined to form treat-
ment areas with treatment classifications that reflected the 
combination of treatments that occurred in those areas (e.g., 
Rx fire + thinning, thinning + surface fuels treatment + pile 
burning). Where the same treatment type was repeated 
in the same area, it was defined by the repeated treatment 
type’s name preceded by “Multiple” (e.g., Multiple Surface 
fuel treatments). Treatments recorded in the database span 
from 1994 to 2020; however, fewer than ten treatments were 
recorded in 11 of the 13 years from 1994 to 2006, suggesting 
an incomplete treatment record before 2007 (Figure S1). The 
incomplete record before 2007 explains the seemingly illog-
ical occurrence of some treatment types documented alone, 
such as pile burning (figure 3), that should only occur in this 
region following previous forest management. There were 
also very few treatments recorded in 2019 and 2020, likely 
because they have yet to be recorded in treatment databases. 
Year of treatment was missing for 19.8% of treatments, so 
we were unable to determine the order of implementation for 
overlapping treatments. The multiple types of treatments, but 
not the order, are retained in areas of overlapping treatment. 
In the Cameron Peak Fire, 6.8% of the area (5,758 ha) was 
documented in the treatment database as having been treated 
before the Cameron Peak Fire and 6.0% (5,033 ha) burned in 
previous wildfires from the last roughly four decades (figures 
1 and 2). Prescribed fire was the most expansive pre-fire treat-
ment (3,741 ha; figure 2).
This case study draws on field data and remotely sensed 
burn severity indices. We collected thirty composite burn 
index (CBI; Key and Benson 2006) measurements in 10 m 
radius plots in May and June 2021 in three focal treated and 
untreated paired sites to evaluate treatment effects on the 
Cameron Peak Fire (figure 3). Polygons were delineated in 
adjacent treated and untreated ponderosa pine (Pinus ponder-
osa) dominated forests with a minor component of Douglas-fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii), Rocky Mountain juniper (Juniperus 
scopulorum), and quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides). The 
treated and untreated polygons were created in pairs in the 
field, with each pair being directly adjacent to each other and 
having comparable slope and aspect. Locations for ten CBI 
plots per focal treatment (five treated and five untreated) were 
then randomly generated within these polygons. Treatments I 
and II (figure 3) were treated in 2011 as shelterwood prepara-
tory cuts with the material yarded to the landing using a feller 
buncher. Treatment I has records of piles being burned in 2007, 
indicating that previous thinning may have also occurred on 
this site. Treatment III (figure 3) was thinned and slash was 
piled in 2009. These piles were burned in 2011.
We evaluated treatment effects on burn severity for the 
variety of treatments found across the Cameron Peak Fire 
using remote sensing. We produced maps of burn severity 
from a pair of sensors (Landsat 8 and Sentinel-2), testing how 
image dates and burn severity indices affected the agreement 
of these maps to the aforementioned 30 CBI plots and an 
Figure 2 Area of largest treatment types (including previous wildfire) and the number of individual treatments/previous wildfires within the Cameron 
Peak Fire. The treated or burned area totaled about 11,000 ha (13%) of the 84,000 ha wildfire. Treatment types are only shown here that account for 
more than 1% of the treated area.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
5
additional 139 CBI burn severity field plots. These additional 
139 plots also had a 10 m radius and also were established 
during May and June 2021, but rather than being designed 
to compare treated and untreated areas, they were used to 
characterize burn severity across six focal watersheds and 
represent a variety of vegetation types, burn severities, and 
elevations (figure 1). The burn severity map with the great-
est correlation to field observations, relativized burn ratio 
(RBR; Parks et al. 2015) generated from September 14, 2018 
and September 18, 2021 Sentinel-2 MultiSpectral Instrument 
images, was used for analyses in this case study. The RBR and 
field-measured burn severity have an R2 of 0.74.
Using R Statistical Software v4.2.1, adjacent comparable 
untreated areas were generated for each treated area by cre-
ating a buffer zone from 40–340 m around each treatment 
(R Core Team 2020; Pebesma 2018; Hijmans 2022) for com-
paring treated and untreated RBR values. These untreated 
comparison areas were generated for all treatment types that 
accounted for 1% or more of the Cameron Peak Fire treated 
area. Untreated areas were constrained to the range of existing 
slope and eastness and northness conditions of the correspond-
ing treated area, with other treatments that fell in the buffer 
being excluded. Topographic data was derived from the Shuttle 
Radar Topography Mission (SRTM; NASA Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory 2014). Only pixels with 10% or more pre-fire 
canopy cover in treated and untreated areas were retained for 
analysis (LANDFIRE 2022). We compared RBR in treated 
and untreated areas with two box plots: (1) all treated and 
untreated pixels aggregated by treatment type and (2) the dif-
ferenced mean RBR of each treatment polygon and the mean 
RBR of its untreated buffer, also presented by treatment type.
Interpretations of Effectiveness
Here we summarize sixteen metrics of treatment effects 
on wildfire that have been used in the literature or may 
be important during a wildfire incident itself. We have 
categorized the metrics into three groups: (1) human–fire 
interactions (Table 1), (2) fire behavior (Table 2), and (3) 
ecological impacts (Table 3). Tables 1–3 provide definitions, 
data sources, and measurements for monitoring treatment 
effects and example references of that metric. We selected 
empirical studies of treatment effects when possible rather 
than modeled studies.
Figure 3 Past forest treatment interactions within the 2020 Cameron Peak Fire burn area. The CBI field sampling locations across focal treated (roman 
numerals) and untreated burned areas, which were used to assess burn severity, are also shown. A: combinations of treatments larger than 140 m2. 
Each treatment type within these combinations represents either a single treatment, or repeated treatments (the same treatment occurring multiple 
times over the same area). B: the number of overlapping treatments, with darker areas showing the highest amount of treatment overlaps.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

6
Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
Human–fire interactions are the metrics commonly iden-
tified by news media and the public in conversations of for-
est treatment effects on wildfire. During and immediately 
postfire, the focus is often on effectiveness metrics related 
to lives, homes, and infrastructure lost (Table 1) with an 
initial focus on elements that may determine continued 
livelihood and resilience. Others may be primarily con-
cerned with visual changes to the landscape and to impacts 
on natural and cultural values. Further, national and state 
policymakers query the costs of fire suppression activity, 
with many identifying not only the cost of suppression but 
the combined cost of suppression and prefire and postfire 
treatments and recovery efforts as being the ultimate cost 
(Bayham et al. 2022).
These human-fire interactions are both quantifiable values 
and perceptions. For example, a community may feel that 
a treatment improved the outcomes and protected homes, 
especially those on the perimeter of the fire near the final 
fire boundary, as was seen on the northeast corner of the 
Cameron Peak Fire (figure 3). Alternately, residents within 
the fire interior may feel like no action would have changed 
the outcome given the fire conditions when the fire interacted 
with their property. The lack of knowledge about treatments, 
especially on public lands, may also contribute to perceptions 
of a lack of forest management and thus a lack of pre-fire 
effort to mitigate potential community impacts. Similarly, the 
perceptions of high fire suppression costs, with many homes 
still being lost, and thus higher total costs, may correspond to 
Table 1. Human-fire interaction metrics of treatment effects on wildfire, their definition, and common measures used to evaluate the impact of 
treatment, and citations that use these metrics in empirical studies.
Metric
Definition
Data sources
Evaluation measurements
Citations
Human–fire interactions
Fire suppression 
activities
Treatments altered firefight-
ing actions or decisions 
during the wildfire event
National Incident Fea-
ture Service (NIFS)
ICS-209s
Fire progression maps
Surveys and interviews
WFDSS
Use of treatments as a control 
or anchor point, initial attack, 
structure protection opportu-
nity, or a burn out operation
Incident effectiveness and 
safety
Incident strategy development 
and decision making
Kolden and Henson 
(2019)
Bayham et al. (2020)
Moghaddas and Craggs 
(2007)
Rapp et al. (2020)
Noble and Paveglio 
(2020)
Noonan-Wright and Seiel-
stad (2021)
Greiner et al. (2022)
Fire suppression costs/
incident expenditures
Treatments changed the total 
cost of fire fighting activities
Suppression costs
Dollars per unit area
Total costs
Belval et al. (2019)
Sánchez et al. (2019)
Structure, infrastruc-
ture, and natural and 
cultural value damage
Treatments influenced 
damage to structure and in-
frastructure and natural and 
cultural values
Incident command 
reports
Insurance assessments
Community members
Number of structures lost
Infrastructure damage
Changes to viewsheds
Recreation and cultural access 
closures
Sánchez et al. (2019)
Ingress and egress 
routes
Treatments impacted human 
movement during wildfire 
event
Surveys and interviews
Adequate evacuation, emer-
gency services, and firefighter 
access
Schmidt et al. (2008)
Calkin et al. (2014)
Table 2. Fire behavior metrics of treatment effects on wildfire, their definition, and common measures used to evaluate the impact of treatment, and 
citations that use these metrics in empirical studies.
Metric
Definition
Data sources
Evaluation measurements
Citations
Fire behavior
Barriers, 
skips, and 
fire lines
Treatment influenced extent and/
or spatial pattern of fire
Firefighter observations
Remotely or aerially detected fire 
extent and severity
Qualitative reports
Fire perimeters
Remotely sensed burn severity
Parks et al. (2015)
Keeley et al. (2009)
Prichard et al. (2020)
Rate of 
spread
Treatment resulted in a localized 
change in fire rate of spread
Firefighter observations
Remotely or aerially detected fire 
progression
Rate of spread
Qualitative reports
Ember production
Johnson and Kennedy 
(2019)
Prichard et al. (2020)
Kreye et al. (2014)
Flame 
length
Treatment resulted in a localized 
reduction in flame length
Firefighter observations
Postfire tree charring
Flame height
Char height
Jahdi et al. (2022)
Ager et al. (2020)
Fire type
Treatment resulted in a change 
in dominant spread pattern (e.g., 
active crown fire, passive crown 
fire, torching, surface fire)
Firefighter observations
Postfire fuel consumption and 
charring
Observed crown or surface fire
Char height
Canopy scorch
Needle and branch consumption
Surface fuel consumption
Safford et al. (2009)
Martinson et al. (2003)
Kennedy and Johnson 
(2014)
Symons et al. (2008)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
7
Table 3. Ecological metrics of treatment effects on wildfire, their definition, and common measures used to evaluate the impact of treatment, and 
citations that use these metrics in empirical studies.
Metric
Definition
Data sources
Evaluation measurements
Citations
Ecological indicators
Soils con-
ditions and 
processes
Treatment 
reduced soil burn 
severity and relat-
ed impacts to soil 
function (e.g., 
water infiltration, 
nutrient reten-
tion, etc.)
Remote sensing and 
field observations of soil 
burn severity
Biogeochemical prop-
erties
Erosion
Soil function
Microbiome impacts
Remotely sensed burn severity
Organic matter and surface fuel consumption
Soil structure
Soil nitrogen and carbon concentration
Runoff chemistry
Microbial biomass and composition
Infiltration
Evidence of rilling
Headcutting
Mass of soil eroded and accumulated
Choromanska and DeLuca 
(2001)
Homann et al. (2011)
Fultz et al. (2016)
Watershed 
and water 
impacts
Treatments 
altered impacts to 
water resources
Impacts on water 
quality, erosion events, 
hydrology, debris flows, 
and disruption to water 
supply
Hillslope, stream 
channel, and floodplain 
geomorphology
Riparian and wetland 
habitat condition
Stream channel change
Streamflow amount, timing, and fluctuation
Water chemistry (N, P, and metals)
Sediment transport
Vegetation recovery
Remotely sensed burn severity of watersheds
Evidence of rilling
Headcutting
Jones et al. (2017)
Salis et al. (2019)
Tree sur-
vival
Treatment 
increased tree 
survival
Forest inventory
Remote sensing
Live trees/area
Forest demographics
Remotely sensed burn severity and live tree 
canopy
Shive et al. (2013)
Agee and Skinner (2005)
Stephens et al. (2012)
Waltz et al. (2014)
Prichard et al. (2010)
Ritchie et al. (2007)
Weatherspoon and Skinner 
(1995)
Vegetation 
consump-
tion and 
response
Treatment 
impacted the 
amount of veg-
etation material 
consumed and its 
response
Remote sensing
Field observations
Remotely sensed burn severity and vegeta-
tion recovery
Vegetation consumption and recovery
Charring
Cone consumption
Scorching
Vegetation cover, richness, and composition
Prichard and Kennedy 
(2014)
Springer et al. (2018)
Stevens-Rumann et al. (2016)
Forest 
response
Treatments 
altered forest 
response or 
resilience
Proximity to viable seed
Regeneration surveys
Distance to nearest seed source
Fire severity patch metrics (size, density, 
shape, core)
Cone consumption
Seedling, sapling and sprout stems/area
Cones/tree
Refugia
Tubbesing et al. (2019)
Roccaforte et al. (2018)
Waltz et al. (2014)
Wildlife 
habitat
Treatment 
influenced how 
wildfire changes 
wildlife habitat
Wildlife census
Habitat survey
Habitat suitability: food, shelter, water, space
Survivorship and population connectivity
Stevens-Rumann et al. (2013)
Spatial 
patterns 
and het-
erogeneity
Treatments 
increase post-fire 
heterogeneity or 
result in land-
scape ecology 
conditions that 
increase resilience
Remote sensing
Field observations
Patch metrics of fire severity, forest, openings, 
etc. (size, density, shape, core)
Forest demographics
Remotely sensed burn severity and vegetation 
recovery/structure
Canopy cover and openness
Snow accumulation patterns
Spatial heterogeneity/homogeneity
Shive et al. (2013)
Waltz et al. (2014)
Carbon 
storage
Treatments 
impacted wildfire 
emissions and 
carbon storage 
following wildfire
Carbon stock inventory 
and allocation into each 
pool
Postfire growth rates
Soil carbon loss from 
organic matter con-
sumption or post-fire 
erosion
Biomass consumption
Soil carbon
Carbon stocks and their allocation into live 
and dead and above and belowground pools
Finkral and Evans (2008)
North and Hurteau (2011)
Zhang et al. (2023)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

8
Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
a community’s sense of poor outcomes postfire (Kooistra and 
McCaffrey 2022).
Forest treatments can affect wildfires by facilitating inci-
dent response tactics and decision making during a fire. For 
instance, interviews with fire and fuel personnel revealed 
that existing treatments are generally used during incidents 
for fire assessment, staging, burnout operations, access and 
anchor points, and contingency plans (Greiner et al. 2022). 
During the Cameron Peak Fire, fuel treatments provided inci-
dent management teams greater tactical options that allowed 
for some improved responder safety, additional containment 
opportunities, and some time-saving efficiency for fire crews 
(Greiner et al. 2022). How treatments are incorporated into 
strategic and tactical decisions during fires is not well cap-
tured in databases designed to document the performance of 
burned treatments, such as the Fuel Treatment Effectiveness 
Monitoring application.
Second, treatments may affect fire behavior by altering 
rate of spread, increasing or decreasing flame length, and 
creating fire barriers or fire lines (Table 2). Influencing fire 
behavior is the mechanism for many of the human–fire inter-
actions and ecological impacts. Efforts to stop, slow, and 
influence wildfires are often concentrated in human-inhab-
ited areas. These treatment effects are often witnessed by 
firefighters, incident command teams, or may be measured 
postfire. For example, firefighters may observe a decrease 
in flame lengths or a transition from a crown fire to a sur-
face fire as the active fire interacts with a treatment, but 
these could also be observed by quantifying crown scorch 
or bole char height once the fire is extinguished (Kennedy 
and Johnson 2014; Martinson and Omi 2013). Assessments 
of changes in fire behavior are often made using metrics of 
burn severity or postfire field assessments of burning con-
ditions, as intensity during a wildfire is difficult to assess 
systematically in multiple locations.
Finally, we can assess treatment impacts on a number of 
postfire ecological metrics (Table 3). There are many time 
steps postfire where ecological effects can be observed and 
studied depending on the indicator (see Scale section). Some 
ecological metrics are commonly considered when evaluating 
treatment effects (i.e., tree survival, vegetation consumption 
and response), whereas others are rarely quantified empiri-
cally (soils conditions and processes, wildlife, watershed and 
water impacts; Kalies and Kent 2016). The tools needed to 
monitor certain ecological effects, such as changes to ecosys-
tem carbon and the soil microbiome, are a challenge for cur-
rent science. Further research in these fields is critical to fully 
understand ecological implications of treatments.
Considerations When Evaluating Treatment 
Effects
The current discussions and research about treatment effec-
tiveness underscore that measuring, interpreting, and commu-
nicating treatment effects on goals and wildfire outcomes is 
challenging due to the many nuanced contextual factors at 
play during a wildfire (Hood et al., 2022; Jain et al. 2021; 
Kalies and Kent 2016; McKinney et al. 2022; Sánchez et 
al. 2019). The effect of treatment is difficult to disentangle 
from the many other factors influencing fire behavior (e.g., 
Prichard et al. 2020). Further, the challenges of evaluat-
ing treatment effects propagate into additional challenges 
communicating within and between groups such as forest 
managers, the general public, researchers, and policymakers. 
Below, we summarize considerations when evaluating treat-
ment effectiveness and demonstrate these with Cameron Peak 
Fire examples to improve applied research and communica-
tions. Acknowledging and addressing these considerations 
can improve the design and implementation of forest treat-
ments, advance forest science, inform forest policy, and pro-
mote public understanding and support.
There are limitations regarding how and under what con-
ditions a treatment can modify fire behavior, especially in the 
most extreme fire weather conditions. For example, treat-
ments designed to reduce crown fire under 95th percentile fire 
weather conditions may not be deemed a failure for carrying 
crown fire during 99th percentile conditions. These conditions 
can change from day to day and hour to hour, and thus vary 
even within a single fire footprint. Several studies have found 
treatments to be the most effective in moderating fire behav-
ior on the flanks of a fire or during days of less fire spread and 
mild to moderate fire weather (Davim et al. 2021; Prichard 
et al. 2020). Rain and snow during the Cameron Peak Fire 
enhanced the mitigation effects of a previous wildfire (the 
2012 High Park Fire), which moderated fire behavior and 
allowed for more effective suppression efforts (Caggiano et al. 
2021). On the other hand, mechanical treatments that burned 
under extreme weather conditions and that were oriented 
parallel to the direction of fire spread were unable to contain 
the fire (Caggiano et al. 2021). As burning conditions become 
more extreme under an increasingly favorable climate for fire 
(Coop et al. 2022; Taylor et al. 2022), more treatments may 
experience fire weather conditions beyond the thresholds for 
which they were designed, in turn leading to reduced effec-
tiveness or perceptions thereof.
Site and Treatment Characteristics
The metrics of treatment effects on wildfire (Tables 1–3) 
can be applied across diverse contexts, but the determina-
tion of what is and is not considered effective requires an 
understanding of site-specific criteria, such as forest type and 
treatment type. Forest type and the associated disturbance 
and utilization regimes inform treatment need and design 
and influences interpretations of treatment effectiveness. For 
example, many treatments in the western United States have 
focused on frequent fire forests with fire resistant traits, such 
as the ponderosa pine forests at the lower elevations of the 
Cameron Peak Fire (Kalies and Kent 2016). Thus, the goal 
in these forests is often persistence of forest cover resulting 
in treatments aimed to promote tree survivorship and spa-
tial heterogeneity by reducing fuel loads and ladder fuels 
and retaining the most fire-resistant individuals in patches 
of varying sizes. Alternatively, complete overstory mortality 
may be acceptable in some forest types even within treat-
ments. This was the case in the Cameron Peak Fire with 
resprouting species like quaking aspen or semi-serotinous 
species like lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) as long as viable 
root or seed source remains to regenerate the site. Further, 
treatment type (i.e., thinning, mastication, prescribed fire) 
and surface fuel loading or management method (i.e., lop 
and scatter, whole tree harvest, fall or spring burns) and their 
interaction with forest types can alter effectiveness. Finally, 
the treatment objectives need to be considered when evalu-
ating the effectiveness of a treatment. Although most forest 
treatments modify fuels, not all these treatments have fuel 
reduction as an objective.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
9
There is considerable heterogeneity in stand structure and 
fuel loading across treatments, within treatment types, and 
with various times since treatment. Johnson and Kennedy 
(2019) demonstrated this with findings showing substantial 
variability in stand structures, and thus fire interactions, 
between the same broad treatment type, in this case “thin-
ning” (figure 4). Treatment type and implementation interact 
with site factors to influence the timeframe that treatments 
can be expected to mitigate fire effects (Skinner 2005; 
Stephens et al. 2012; Tinkham et al. 2016). Treatments dif-
fer in terms of their size, intensity, location on the landscape 
relative to topographic features and other treatments, and 
degree of fuel removal (i.e., mastication and chipping gen-
erally redistribute fuel, whereas whole tree logging and pre-
scribed fire both remove and redistribute fuels). Prescribed 
fire is another treatment that results in a wide range of fuel 
and structure conditions within a single treatment type. 
Hunter and Robles (2020) provide a recent review on pre-
scribed fire effectiveness and variability. Even treatments 
with specific goals of mitigating fire behavior may have addi-
tional goals, such as improving wildlife habitat, resulting in 
retention of some understory and ladder fuels (Knapp et al. 
2009). Further, all treatments are constrained by pretreat-
ment forest structure, thus dictating the range of posttreat-
ment conditions that can be created. For example, whereas 
a thinning treatment in primary forests has the luxury of 
retaining large fire-resistant trees, a thinning in secondary 
forests may not have this option and thus may only retain 
smaller trees more sensitive to fire (Symons et al. 2008). 
These site and treatment characteristics influence treatment 
effects on wildfire and interpretations of what is considered 
effective, yet information about these details is difficult to 
locate and often absent from treatment databases (more 
on this in the Attribution of Treatment Effect and Data 
Complexity section). Previous wildfire can moderate fire 
behavior, as exemplified by the 2012 High Park Fire during 
the Cameron Peak Fire (Caggiano et al. 2021). However, in 
other contexts, previous wildfires can readily reburn, with 
severity patterns echoing previous burn severities and vary-
ing by vegetation type and time since fire (Taylor et al. 2021; 
Taylor et al. 2022).
Scale
Scale is central to evaluations of treatment effects on wild-
fire. Metrics are assessed at different spatial and temporal 
scales, and many metrics can be assessed at multiple scales. 
For example, analyses of soil conditions and processes may be 
necessary immediately postfire as managers grapple with the 
need to conduct hillslope stabilization efforts; however, under-
standing long-term sediment loads and impacts of biogeo-
chemical processes and the microbiome may be necessary at 
the decadal scale. Similarly, numerous studies across the west-
ern United States demonstrate that treatments that include 
fire as a component, either previous wildfires, prescribed fire, 
or thinning and burning, are effective at decreasing remotely 
sensed burn severity, and these data are available in the 
months following a wildfire (Hessburg et al. 2015; Kalies and 
Kent 2016; Martinson and Omi 2013; Prichard et al. 2010; 
Prichard et al. 2020; Stephens et al. 2012). Although some 
metrics of vegetation community response may be evident in 
the years immediately following fire (e.g., tree survival), vege-
tation response in some contexts may only be available on the 
order of decades or centuries postfire, depending on the life 
history traits of the species making up a forest, and may vary 
from initial measures of severity depending on fire adaptation 
traits. Attributing vegetation community response to pre-fire 
treatments is further complicated by the influence of postfire 
management, climate, and subsequent disturbances. Human-
fire and ecological metrics of effectiveness continue to change 
years after a fire (Roccaforte et al. 2018).
The success of a treatment is also dependent on spatial 
scale. The scale of treatment impact should be reported rel-
ative to the broader landscape or burned area. Some groups, 
such as homeowners whose houses were spared by the fire, 
may consider localized treatment impacts effective. Others 
may define success as having desirable impacts on a landscape 
scale. Certain metrics are naturally assessed at broader scales, 
like an entire fire (e.g., suppression costs), or smaller scales 
(e.g., flame length). Further, treatment effects can be evaluated 
within (e.g., increasing tree survival within the treatment) or 
beyond the boundary of an actual treatment (e.g., protecting 
structures adjacent to treatments). Evaluating these treatment 
effects at landscape scales becomes increasingly difficult and 
often requires simulation models (Hood et al. 2022; Jain et 
al. 2021).
Watershed and water impact metrics illustrate challenges 
associated with scale and evaluation of landscape-scale 
treatment effects. As is commonly the case in the western 
United States, watershed and water supply protection were 
a motivation for many treatments in the Cameron Peak 
Fire. Monitoring and research are underway to understand 
impacts of the fire on watersheds and water quality and 
quantity. But teasing out the role of pre-fire treatments in 
Figure 4 Three thinning treatments resulting in a variety of forest structures, but that all receive the same classification in most treatment databases. 
Photos taken by Mike Battaglia.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

10
Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
the postfire water response is another challenge altogether. 
Treatment effects are commonly measured on the treated 
hillslopes, whereas watershed impacts are often measured 
in streams draining much larger areas that may only have 
a fraction of the watershed treated. The effectiveness of a 
treatment for mitigating fire effects on water also depends 
on other postfire processes operating at different spatial 
and temporal scales like vegetation recovery and weather. 
Although treatments may be deemed effective at mitigating 
postfire watershed impacts after moderate intensity rainfall, 
these same treatments may not protect water values under a 
more severe rainfall event.
Considering Multiple Metrics
Assessing multiple modalities of treatment effects is com-
plicated because the metrics are often assessed at different 
spatial and temporal scales and require different expertise 
and study designs. Considering multiple treatment effects 
that are related is more common than studies that cross-
cut human–fire interactions, fire behavior, and ecological 
metrics. Furthermore, treatment effects are heterogeneous 
between and within treatments, making it challenging to 
label treatments simply as effective or ineffective for a given 
metric. Rather, the range of treatment outcomes must be 
characterized and associated with other driving factors (e.g., 
weather, topography, proximity to natural fuel breaks) to 
identify under which conditions treatments were effective. 
The influence of treatment may be obvious in some locations 
and for some metrics of effectiveness, nonexistent in oth-
ers, and more nuanced in other cases. For example, several 
thinning and pile burn treatments on the northeast edge of 
the Cameron Peak Fire coincided with the perimeter of the 
fire (figure 3; immediately northeast of 40°44' N, 105°32' 
W). These treatments were implemented with the objectives 
of creating a shaded fuel break to provide opportunity for 
firefighters to engage a fire and to reduce the movement 
of fire through the canopy. The weather conditions were 
less extreme and the treatment accomplished its objective 
of allowing firefighters to establish fire lines in these treat-
ments. This combination of conditions resulted in the treat-
ments being effective under the lens of multiple metrics: 
serving as a location for suppression activities and as a bar-
rier. Another thinning treatment (figure 3; focal treatment 
III) lies just west of the fire perimeter where the fire burned 
through these treatments. They did not serve as a barrier 
but may have contributed to the fire behavior conditions 
that allowed construction of a fire line nearby and, based on 
field measurements, these treatments did reduce tree mor-
tality and burn severity (figure 5) compared with adjacent 
untreated areas. This example illustrates the importance of 
interactions with suppression activities, weather context, 
and potential treatment effects in aggregate.
Attribution of Treatment Effect and Data Complexity
Attributing the role of treatments on wildfire behavior and 
effects requires diverse data sources, and the needed infor-
mation is often incomplete or unavailable. This challenge 
is demonstrated by questions regarding the extent to which 
pre-fire treatments helped contain the Cameron Peak Fire. 
Although only 3% of the Cameron Peak Fire area received 
treatments other than prescribed fire, 8% of the fire perime-
ter overlapped with these treatments (Table 4). This suggests 
that these treatments may have been effective as fire barriers. 
However, as is commonly the case, these treatments tend to 
fall along roads, which makes it challenging to determine post 
hoc the relative importance of treatment, road, fire suppres-
sion, or other factors in containing the fire without eyewitness 
accounts.
Attribution of treatment effect is typically addressed for 
fire behavior and ecological metrics of effectiveness by pair-
ing nearby treated and untreated sites that ideally only differ 
in their treatment history. This approach has the advantage of 
being able to directly compare many metrics of effectiveness 
but often uses time-intensive field measurements. Locating 
neighboring suitable comparisons of treated and untreated 
forest can be prone to bias and difficult, as treatment bound-
aries often coincide with changes in topography, forest struc-
ture, or land ownership. Similarly, treated versus nontreated 
areas may experience the wildfire at different times and thus 
different burning conditions.
Another approach to evaluating treatment effectiveness is 
by examining effects across many treatments and including 
other influential variables. This is typically done with GIS and 
geospatial analyses (Prichard and Kennedy 2014; Stevens-
Rumann et al. 2016), which allow efficient analyses across 
large areas and a range of treatment, forest, and fire condi-
tions. In the Cameron Peak Fire, comparing remotely sensed 
burn severities (RBR) across treatment types shows treat-
ments that included fire (prescribed fire or pile burning) or 
surface fuels management tended to have greater reductions 
in burn severity than comparable untreated areas (figure 6). 
Although thinning alone sometimes had higher burn sever-
ity and sometimes had lower burn severity than untreated 
areas, the median response was slightly reduced burn sever-
ity. Previously burned areas had the lowest burn severity and 
showed the greatest reduction in burn severity when com-
pared with nearby untreated areas (figure 6).
However, the remotely sensed burn severity images central 
to these analyses introduce uncertainties of their own. In one 
case on a different wildfire, we observed treatment differ-
ences in burn severity that were exaggerated by remote sens-
ing, likely because the pre-fire spectral values differ between 
treated and untreated areas and because of differences in the 
timing of data collection between remotely sensed and field 
measured burn severity (Vorster et al., unpublished data). In 
the Cameron Peak Fire, the thinned plots we sampled burned 
at lower severity than neighboring untreated sites according 
to both field and remote sensing data (figure 5; Table S4). 
Each treatment analyzed individually also shows a signifi-
cant reduction in CBI severity relative to the untreated plots 
(Table S4). The magnitude of treatment effect and severity of 
treated sites does, however, differ depending on whether field 
or remotely sensed data are used. For example, within treated 
plots, field-based burn severity measures showed higher sever-
ity and were much more variable compared with the same 
plots measured via remote sensing.
Evaluations of treatment effects are sensitive to analytical 
approach and the measurement used. For example, conclu-
sions about the effect of the treatment classes “thinning” 
and “multiple surface fuel treatments” on burn severity dif-
fer depending on whether treated and untreated areas are 
aggregated and then compared (treated areas tending to have 
higher RBR; figure 6A) or whether treatments are compared 
directly to their untreated analog (treated areas tending to 
have lower RBR; figure 6B). The example above of the three 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
11
focal treatments shows how using different measurements 
(RBR and CBI) did not change the overall conclusion about 
treatments reducing burn severity but changed the magnitude 
of that difference and the burn severity distributions. These 
are just two examples of many methodological decisions that 
influence findings about fuel treatment effects.
Both the RBR analysis across the Cameron Peak Fire and 
the field plot and RBR analysis of three focal treatments show 
that treated areas generally had reduced burn severity rela-
tive to comparable untreated sites. This case study demon-
strates some important considerations about treatment effect 
and effectiveness. The overall treatment effect on RBR was 
consistent, with all treatment types having a median effect of 
reduced burn severity. This effect was also variable. Individual 
treatments of each treatment type could be found that had 
higher burn severity than untreated comparisons (figure 6). 
This serves as a cautionary reminder to evaluate as many 
treatments as possible to capture the range of fire effects. The 
magnitude of treatment effect should be reported when pos-
sible (Tables S2–S4) because ultimately it is this magnitude 
placed in the context of human values and costs or risks asso-
ciated with treatment that determines effectiveness.
Evaluating treatment effectiveness is further complicated by 
the complexity in the data used. Treatment databases provide 
valuable documentation of treatment location, implementa-
tion year, the general prescription, and equipment used. These 
databases are intended for activity reporting, not research, 
and thus often lack the detail needed for rigorous evalua-
tions of treatment effects. Treatments recorded in treatment 
databases can lack spatial fidelity of treatment locations and 
treatment information, treatments of different types and ages 
often overlap in space, and different databases exist across 
agencies and vary in their reporting detail, terminology, and 
years (see USDA Forest Service Activity Tracking System 
2018 for an example of complexity). Critical details, such as 
year of treatment, treatment type, forest structure, amount 
of material removed, equipment used, and residue manage-
ment are important variables for evaluating effectiveness 
but may not be included in databases. As an example, nearly 
20% of treatments in the Cameron Peak Fire did not have a 
year documented. Even the perimeter of treatments shown in 
these databases may not meet research-level needs as some 
treatments are assigned to property boundaries rather than 
the specific location of management activities. Furthermore, 
treatment databases give a partial historical record because 
tracking treatment activities in GIS has only become com-
monplace in the last few decades. Remote sensing of forest 
Figure 5 Field measured burn severity as measured by (A) the CBI and (B) remotely sensed burn severity as measured by the RBR. Values are shown 
for the thirty field plot locations across three focal treated and untreated pairings of the Cameron Peak Fire.
Table 4. The area and perimeter overlap between previous wildfire, 
prescribed (Rx) fire, and treatments other than prescribed fire with the 
Cameron Peak Fire.
Area 
(ha)
Percent 
of Area
Perimeter 
length (km)
Percent of 
perimeter
Cameron Peak 
Fire
84,482
100
524
100
Previous wildfire
5,033
6
47
9
Rx fire
3,741
4
19
4
All treatments 
other than Rx fire
2,287
3
44
8
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

12
Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
treatments offers opportunity for supplementing information 
in treatment databases and thus supporting evaluations of 
treatment effect by providing improved information on treat-
ment year, extent, and the resulting forest structure (Coops 
et al. 2022; Keay et al. 2022; Woodward et al. 2017). The 
utility of remote sensing for treatment tracking is greatest 
for high-intensity treatments and data-rich areas that have 
recent or repeat high-resolution imagery or airborne lidar 
collections.
Another missing component to many of these databases 
is what the original goals and objectives were for the treat-
ment. As discussed above, these are important details both 
when monitoring effects and determining effectiveness. And 
although many of these databases were not set up with 
the intention of being used to evaluate treatment effects 
post-wildfire, they commonly are the only information post 
hoc. When combining treatment databases from multiple 
sources and agencies for the Cameron Peak Fire, we encoun-
tered myriad treatment types (Table S1). Treatment type 
descriptions ranged from sufficient (e.g., “precommercial 
thin,” “clearcut”) to ambiguous (e.g., “Broadcast Burning - 
Covers a majority of the unit,” “silviculture”). Furthermore, 
treatment polygons overlap, forming a complex management 
history on the landscape, making it difficult to ascertain 
which management actions and which combinations were 
effective (figure 3).
Evaluating treatment effects requires integration of data 
from many sources with a range of resolution and accuracy. 
Remote sensing offers critical data for assessing treatment 
effects but often has varying spatial and temporal resolutions. 
For example, 30 m resolution is common for remote sens-
ing burn severity when using Landsat-derived data, whereas 
during an incident, daily fire progression maps often have 
coarser resolution and field measurements may be at a much 
finer scale. Similarly, weather data is derived at different 
scales and often interpolated from sparsely located weather 
stations and are often difficult to match with progression 
maps of variable time windows. Further, repeated measures 
study designs that allow focused understanding of both treat-
ment and wildfire impacts provide the most robust field-based 
understanding; however, these data are rarely available, as we 
cannot predict the location of future wildfires and field-based 
monitoring of treatments is variable across agencies, property 
owners, and implementers.
Interaction with Wildfire Planning and Response
Tables 1 and 2 highlight the importance of firefighter obser-
vations for evaluating treatment effects. However, collating 
information from firefighter observations can be difficult 
because these resources often disperse after the fire. Managers 
and researchers could benefit from knowing what happened 
during a fire, as these observations are easy to conceptual-
ize but are the most difficult to acquire (Moriarty et al. 
2019). Incident response data are challenging to acquire and 
apply, which severely limits our ability to understand how 
and whether forest treatments benefitted response efforts in 
any measurable way outside of anecdote and recollection 
(Gannon et al. 2020; Plucinski 2019; Simpson et al. 2021; 
Thompson et al. 2018).
There is an advantage to using landscape strategies in fire 
management, such as those developed in the 1990s to early 
2000s like the Fireshed Assessment (Bahro et al. 2007), or 
more recently, Potential Operational Delineations (PODs; 
Thompson et al. 2016). Prior to the Cameron Peak Fire, treat-
ments were integrated into strategic pre-fire planning through 
the PODs process initiated by the Arapaho and Roosevelt 
National Forests and Pawnee National Grasslands (Caggiano 
et al. 2021). The boundaries identified for potential engage-
ment during a wildfire are often aligned with key topographic 
features, roads, previous wildfire perimeters, and forest treat-
ments. Some treatments that aligned with PODs boundaries 
influenced suppression tactics and were reinforced during 
the fire. Local managers and incident management members 
credit the PODs strategic planning and forest management 
completed before and during the fire with improving the out-
comes of the Cameron Peak Fire (Caggiano et al. 2021).
Similarly, firefighters would benefit from improved pre-
fire treatment documentation (Greiner et al. 2022). Incident 
management teams and firefighters may make firefighting 
decisions because of forest conditions at a certain site with-
out the knowledge of previous treatment. These decisions 
and changes in suppression activities are often made with-
out treatment boundary or type of treatment details (Kolden 
and Henson 2019). Even with treatment databases to refer-
ence, critical treatment details that influence firefighter deci-
sion-making may be missing from treatment databases, such 
as the treatment of thinning residues. Furthermore, treatment 
effects important to firefighting decisions can be inversely 
related. The reduced surface fuel loads in thinned areas may 
lower flame length or fireline intensity but can also increase 
rate of spread due to a potential increase in fine fuels and 
higher windspeeds due to reduced canopy cover. Incident 
command team culture and experience level in the local fuel 
type can also influence how treatments are utilized during a 
fire (Greiner et al. 2022). Thus, interpretations of treatment 
effectiveness may vary with the particular incident command 
strategic priorities and firefighter backgrounds.
Conclusion
We describe a range of metrics of forest treatment effects on 
wildfire and highlight key considerations and challenges for 
evaluating wildfire treatment effects. Our aims are to advise 
careful consideration when evaluating treatment effectiveness 
and to inform ongoing research and critical discussions on the 
topic. The treatment effects on wildfire metrics (Tables 1–3) 
fit into frameworks for characterizing cross-scale cumulative 
forest treatment impacts, such as the fuel management regime 
presented by Hood et al. (2022). Conversations about treat-
ment effectiveness are prone to oversimplification and bias 
by highlighting certain cases to demonstrate a point while 
ignoring counterfactual evidence. A risk of having so many 
metrics of effects (Tables 1–3) is that every treatment can be 
deemed effective or ineffective post hoc by some metric rather 
than matching postfire metrics with pre-fire intentions for 
that treatment. We provide the following recommendations 
for advancing evaluations of treatment effects on wildfire:
•	 Consider multiple treatment effects metrics and consider 
local context to give a more holistic view of treatment 
interactions with wildfire and to account for regional dif-
ferences such as vegetation types, fire regimes, and man-
agement practices. Although it is important to align these 
metrics with the treatment objectives, additional metrics 
may reveal unintended consequences of treatments and 
can be just as valuable to adapting treatment methods.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
13
•	 Explore and communicate the range of treatment effect 
outcomes across burn conditions, treatment character-
istics, spatial and temporal scales, and treatment effects 
metrics.
•	 Improve documentation of suppression activities and 
firefighter observations, as they are critical for assessing 
many of the metrics and for attributing the effect of treat-
ment or other drivers of fire behavior.
•	 Improve treatment databases by providing more de-
tails and complete attribution of treatment prescrip-
tions, adding historical treatments, providing regular 
updates, and working towards standardization across 
agencies so that data can be more readily used during 
wildfires by incident management teams and firefight-
ers and so effects can be more accurately and efficiently 
measured.
Figure 6 Boxplots comparing remotely sensed burn severity (RBR) by treatment type of (A) all pixels in treated and comparable untreated sites and (B) 
differenced RBR mean values of each treated and untreated pair across the most common treatment types and combinations (including wildfire). The 
untreated areas are a buffer of 40–340 m around each treatment of comparable slope and aspect and excludes any nonforested area or other treated 
areas overlapping this buffer. Negative values in (B) indicate a lower RBR in treated areas than comparable untreated areas. See Table S2 for summary 
statistics for (A) and Table S3 for summary statistics for (B).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

14
Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
•	 Advance capabilities to evaluate treatment effects by 
improving methods for evaluating landscape-scale treat-
ment effects, integrating diverse data streams, and tar-
geting effects that have been difficult to quantify (e.g., 
watershed impacts, wildlife impacts, fire suppression and 
postfire recovery costs).
These recommendations can help to better characterize 
and communicate treatment effects on wildfire, but deter-
mining what is effective incorporates additional consid-
erations, such as value systems, management goals, and 
treatment costs.
We share examples of treatments in the Cameron Peak Fire 
that both successfully and unsuccessfully mitigated human-
fire interaction, fire behavior, and ecological metrics of treat-
ment effects. We show areas treated with a variety of methods 
generally had reduced remotely sensed burn severity, reflect-
ing less-severe wildfire impacts to soils and vegetation relative 
to untreated sites (figure 6). Previous wildfire and treat-
ments that addressed surface fuel by burning or other meth-
ods tended to have the greatest reductions in burn severity. 
Thinning without pile or prescribed burning or surface fuel 
treatment experienced a wide range of outcomes, sometimes 
reducing and sometimes increasing burn severity relative to 
comparable untreated areas (figure 6). Using remotely sensed 
burn severity allowed for comparisons across different burn 
conditions and treatment types. Lessons about other metrics 
that rely on more intensive data collection (e.g., plot data) or 
opportunistic observations (e.g., firefighter observations) were 
more limited. Treatments were documented in these ways to 
increase tree survivorship, aid suppression efforts, reduce 
burn severity, promote firefighter safety, protect structures, 
and control fire spread. However, treatments were ineffective 
under severe weather conditions by other metrics, like con-
taining the fire (Caggiano et al. 2021). Other metrics remain 
difficult to quantify and require further research. The impli-
cations of pre-fire management on postfire critical watershed 
and ecosystem responses and on suppression efforts and costs 
remain unknown. Because these are often primary objectives 
for forest management in these and many areas, more work 
is needed to gauge how management affects a broader set of 
resources.
Emphasis on increasing the scale of forest management to 
mitigate the potential for large, high-severity wildfires that 
affect human communities is growing. Understanding how 
wildfires interact with treatments and how various treat-
ments affect wildfire outcomes is key to improving landscape 
management (Jain et al. 2021). Communication is also crit-
ical; providing context for what a treatment is designed to 
do and the limits of its potential effectiveness for moderat-
ing wildfire behavior and mitigating undesirable outcomes 
is important for both manager and community support. 
Wildfires will continue to shape our forests and landscapes 
in the years to come but continuing to strive for modification 
of large, high-severity events is important for future fire sup-
pression actions, community safety, and healthy, functioning 
ecosystems.
Supplementary Materials
Supplementary data are available at Journal of Forestry on-
line.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the many organizations and individuals 
who made this work possible. We appreciate those that col-
lected field data for this work: Daniel Dominguez, Elizabeth 
Madura, Miles Innes, and CFRI field crews. Thanks to 
the NASA DEVELOP team that helped to organize treat-
ment data: Jorune Klisauskaite, Neal Swayze, and Garrett 
Knowlton.
Funding
This research was funded by the National Institute of Food 
and Agriculture (NIFA) of the USDA [grant number 2019-
67019-29469], Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI) 
Appropriations funding, and the National Science Foundation 
[NSF-EAR 2101068]. This research was supported by the 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. The find-
ings and conclusions in this publication are those of the au-
thors and should not be construed to represent any official 
USDA or US Government determination or policy.
Literature Cited
Abatzoglou, John T., and A. Park Williams. 2016. “Impact of Anthro-
pogenic Climate Change on Wildfire Across Western US Forests.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 (42): 11770–
11775. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1607171113.
Agee, James K., and Carl N. Skinner. 2005. “Basic Principles of Forest 
Fuel Reduction Treatments.” Forest Ecology and Management 211 
(1–2): 83–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2005.01.034.
Ager, Alan A., Ana M.G. Barros, Rachel Houtman, Rob Seli, and 
Michelle A. Day. 2020. “Modelling the Effect of Accelerated 
Forest Management on Long-Term Wildfire Activity.” Ecologi-
cal Modelling 421: 108962. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmod-
el.2020.108962.
Bahro, Bernhard, Klaus H. Barber, Joseph W. Sherlock, and Donald A. 
Yasuda. 2007. “Stewardship and Fireshed Assessment: a Process 
for Designing a Landscape Fuel Treatment Strategy.” In Restoring 
Fire-adapted Ecosystems: Proceedings of the 2005 National Silvi-
culture Workshop: 41–54. USDA Forest Service Pacific Southwest 
Research Station, General Technical Report PSW-GTR-203.
Battaglia, Mike A., Monique E. Rocca, Charles C. Rhoades, and Mi-
chael G. Ryan. 2010. “Surface Fuel Loadings within Mulching 
Treatments in Colorado Coniferous Forests.” Forest Ecology and 
Management 260 (9): 1557–1566. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fore-
co.2010.08.004.
Bayham, Jude, Erin J. Belval, Matthew P. Thompson, Christopher 
Dunn, Crystal S. Stonesifer, and David E. Calkin. 2020. “Weather, 
Risk, and Resource Orders on Large Wildland Fires in the Western 
US.” Forests 11 (2): 169. https://doi.org/10.3390/f11020169.
Bayham, Jude, Jonathan K. Yoder, Patricia A. Champ, and David E. 
Calkin. 2022. “The Economics of Wildfire in the United States.” 
Annual Review of Resource Economics 14 (1): 379–401. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-111920-014804.
Belval, Erin J., Christopher D. O’Connor, Matthew P. Thompson, and 
Michael S. Hand. 2019. “The Role of Previous Fires in the Manage-
ment and Expenditures of Subsequent Large Wildfires.” Fire 2 (4): 
57. https://doi.org/10.3390/fire2040057.
Birch, Donovan S., Penelope Morgan, Crystal A. Kolden, John T. Abat-
zoglou, Gregory K. Dillon, Andrew T. Hudak, and Alistair M.S. 
Smith. 2015. “Vegetation, Topography and Daily Weather Influ-
enced Burn Severity in Central Idaho and Western Montana For-
ests.” Ecosphere 6 (1): 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1890/ES14-00213.1.
Caggiano, Michael D., Tyler A. Beeton, Benjamin M. Gannon, and 
James White. 2021. “The Cameron Peak Fire: Use of Potential 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
15
Operational Delineations and Risk Management Assistance Prod-
ucts.” Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, CFRI-2106. https://
cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2021/06/Cameron-
PeakFirePODsReport.pdf.
Calkin, David E., Jack D. Cohen, Mark A. Finney, and Matthew P. 
Thompson. 2014. “How Risk Management can Prevent Future 
Wildfire Disasters in the Wildland-Urban Interface.” Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (2): 746–751. https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1315088111.
Cansler, C. Alina, Van R. Kane, Paul F. Hessburg, Jonathan T. Kane, 
Sean M.A. Jeronimo, James A. Lutz, and Nicholas A. Povak, et al. 
2022. “Previous Wildfires and Management Treatments Moderate 
Subsequent Fire Severity.” Forest Ecology and Management 504: 
119764. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2021.119764.
Choromanska, U., and T.H. DeLuca. 2001. “Prescribed Fire Alters the 
Impact of Wildfire on Soil Biochemical Properties in a Ponderosa 
Pine Forest.” Soil Science Society of America Journal 65 (1): 232–
238. https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2001.651232x.
Collins, B.J., C.C. Rhoades, M.A. Battaglia, and R.M. Hubbard. 
2012. “The Effects of Bark Beetle Outbreaks on Forest De-
velopment, Fuel Loads and Potential Fire Behavior in Salvage 
Logged and Untreated Lodgepole Pine Forests.” Forest Ecology 
and Management 284: 260–268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fore-
co.2012.07.027.
Coop, Jonathan D., Sean A. Parks, Camille S. Stevens-Rumann, 
Scott M. Ritter, Chad M. Hoffman, and J. Morgan Varner. 2022. 
“Extreme Fire Spread Events and Area Burned Under Recent 
and Future Climate in the Western USA.” Global Ecology and 
Biogeography 31 (10): 1949–1959. https://doi.org/10.1111/
geb.13496.
Coops, Nicholas C., Piotr Tompalski, Tristan R.H. Goodbody, Alexis 
Achim, and Christopher Mulverhill. 2022. “Framework for Near 
Real-time Forest Inventory Using Multi source Remote Sensing 
Data.” Forestry: An International Journal of Forest Research 96: 
(1): 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1093/forestry/cpac015.
Davim, David A., Carlos G. Rossa, and Paulo M. Fernandes. 2021. 
“Survival of Prescribed Burning Treatments to Wildfire in Portu-
gal.” Forest Ecology and Management 493: 119250. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2021.119250.
Esri Inc. 2021. ArcGIS Pro (version 2.6.4). Software. Redlands: Esri 
Inc.
Evers, Cody, Andrés Holz, Sebastian Busby, and Max Nielsen-Pincus. 
2022. “Extreme Winds Alter Influence of Fuels and Topography 
on Megafire Burn Severity in Seasonal Temperate Rainforests un-
der Record Fuel Aridity.” Fire 5 (2): 41. https://doi.org/10.3390/
fire5020041.
Finkral, A.J., and A.M. Evans. 2008. “The Effects of a Thinning Treat-
ment on Carbon Stocks in a Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine For-
est.” Forest Ecology and Management 255 (7): 2743–2750. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2008.01.041.
Fultz, Lisa M., Jennifer Moore-Kucera, Josefine Dathe, Marko Davinic, 
Gad Perry, David Wester, Dylan W. Schwilk, et al. 2016. “Forest 
Wildfire and Grassland Prescribed Fire Effects on Soil Biogeochem-
ical Processes and Microbial Communities: Two Case Studies in the 
Semi-Arid Southwest.” Applied Soil Ecology 99: 118–128. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apsoil.2015.10.023.
Gannon, Benjamin M., Matthew P. Thompson, Kira Z. Deming, Jude 
Bayham, Yu Wei, and Christopher D. O’Connor. 2020. “A Geo-
spatial Framework to Assess Fireline Effectiveness for Large Wild-
fires in the Western USA.” Fire 3 (3): 43. https://doi.org/10.3390/
fire3030043.
Greiner, Michelle, Katie McGrath Novak, and Courtney Schultz. 2022. 
Assessing How Fuel Treatments Are Considered During Incident 
Response: An Interim Report. Public Lands Policy Group Practi-
tioner Paper no. 13, Fort Collins: Public Lands Policy Group, Col-
orado State University.
Hessburg, Paul F., Derek J. Churchill, Andrew J. Larson, Ryan D. 
Haugo, Carol Miller, Thomas A. Spies, Malcolm P. North, et al. 
2015. “Restoring Fire-Prone Inland Pacific Landscapes: Seven Core 
Principles.” Landscape Ecology 30 (10): 1805–1835. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10980-015-0218-0.
Hessburg, Paul F., Susan J. Prichard, R. Keala Hagmann, Nicholas A. 
Povak, and Frank K. Lake. 2021. “Wildfire and Climate Change 
Adaptation of Western North American Forests: A Case for In-
tentional Management.” Ecological Applications 31 (8): e02432. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2432.
Higuera, Philip E., Bryan N. Shuman, and Kyra D. Wolf. 2021. 
“Rocky Mountain subalpine forests now burning more than any 
time in recent millennia.” Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences 118 (25): e2103135118. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2103135118.
Hijmans, Robert J. 2022. “terra: Spatial Data Analysis.” R package ver-
sion 1.5-21. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=terra.
Hoffman, Chad M., Brandon Collins, and Mike Battaglia. 2020. 
“Wildland Fuel Treatments.” In Encyclopedia of Wildfires and 
Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) Fires, edited by Samuel L. Man-
zello, 1160–1166. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Pub-
lishing.
Homann, Peter S., Bernard T. Bormann, Robyn L. Darbyshire, and 
Brett A. Morrissette. 2011. “Forest Soil Carbon and Nitrogen Loss-
es Associated with Wildfire and Prescribed Fire.” Soil Science Soci-
ety of America Journal 75 (5): 1926–1934. https://doi.org/10.2136/
sssaj2010-0429.
Hood, Sharon M., J. Morgan Varner, Theresa B. Jain, and Jeffrey M. 
Kane. 2022. “A Framework for Quantifying Forest Wildfire Haz-
ard and Fuel Treatment Effectiveness from Stands to Landscapes.” 
Fire Ecology 18 (1): 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42408-022-
00157-0.
Hunter, Molly E., and Marcos D. Robles. 2020. “Tamm Review: The 
Effects of Prescribed Fire on Wildfire Regimes and Impacts: A 
Framework for Comparison.” Forest Ecology and Management 
475: 118435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2020.118435.
Jahdi, Roghayeh, Liliana Del Giudice, Massimo Melis, Raffaella Lovre-
glio, Michele Salis, Bachisio Arca, and Pierpaolo Duce. 2022. 
­“Assessing the Effects of Alternative Fuel Treatments to Reduce 
Wildfire Exposure.” Journal of Forestry Research 34: 1–14. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11676-022-01504-2.
Jain, Theresa, Pamela Sikkink, Robert Keefe, and John Byrne. 2018. 
To Masticate or Not: Useful Tips for Treating Forest, Woodland, 
and Shrubland Vegetation. USDA Forest Service General Techni-
cal Report RMRS-GTR-381, 55 p. Fort Collins: Rocky Mountain 
Research Station.
Jain, Theresa B., Ilana Abrahamson, Nate Anderson, Sharon Hood, 
Brice Hanberry, Francis Kilkenny, Shawn McKinney et al. 2021. 
Effectiveness of Fuel Treatments at the Landscape Scale: State of 
Understanding and Key Research Gaps. JFSP PROJECT ID: 19-S-
01-2, Boise: Joint Fire Sciences Program.
Jain, Theresa B., Mike A. Battaglia, Han-Sup Han, Russell T. Graham, 
Christopher R. Keyes, Jeremy S. Fried, and Johnathan E. Sandquist. 
2012. A Comprehensive Guide to Fuel Management Practices for 
Dry Mixed Conifer Forests in the Northwestern United States. 
USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-292, 
331 p. Fort Collins: Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Johnson, Morris C., and Maureen C. Kennedy. 2019. “Altered Vege-
tation Structure from Mechanical Thinning Treatments Changed 
Wildfire Behaviour in the Wildland–Urban Interface on the 2011 
Wallow Fire, Arizona, USA.” International Journal of Wildland Fire 
28 (3): 216–229. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF18062.
Jones, Kelly W., Jeffery B. Cannon, Freddy A. Saavedra, Stephanie K. 
Kampf, Robert N. Addington, Antony S. Cheng, Lee H. MacDon-
ald, et al. 2017. “Return on Investment from Fuel Treatments to 
Reduce Severe Wildfire and Erosion in a Watershed Investment 
Program in Colorado.” Journal of Environmental Management 198 
(2): 66–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.05.023.
Kalies, Elizabeth L., and Larissa L. Yocom Kent. 2016. “Tamm Review: 
Are Fuel Treatments Effective at Achieving Ecological and Social 
Objectives? A Systematic Review.” Forest Ecology and Manage-
ment 375: 84–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2016.05.021.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

16
Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
Keay, Levi, Christopher Mulverhill, Nicholas C. Coops, and Grant 
McCartney. 2022. “Automated Forest Harvest Detection With a 
Normalized PlanetScope Imagery Time Series.” Canadian Journal 
of Remote Sensing 49 (1): 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/0703899
2.2022.2154598.
Keeley, Jon E., Hugh Safford, C.J. Fotheringham, Janet Franklin, and 
Max Moritz. 2009. “The 2007 southern California wildfires: les-
sons in complexity.” Journal of Forestry 107 (6): 287–296.
Kennedy, Maureen C., and Morris C. Johnson. 2014. “Fuel Treat-
ment Prescriptions Alter Spatial Patterns of Fire Severity Around 
the Wildland–Urban Interface During the Wallow Fire, Arizona, 
USA.” Forest Ecology and Management 318: 122–132. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2014.01.014.
Key, Carl H., and Nathan C. Benson. 2006. Landscape Assessment 
(LA). In FIREMON: Fire effects monitoring and inventory system, 
edited by Duncan C. Lutes, Robert E. Keane, John F. Caratti, Carl 
H. Key, Nathan C. Benson, Steve Sutherland, Larry J. Gangi, Gen-
eral Technical Report RMRS-GTR-164-CD, LA-1–55. Fort Collins: 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Knapp, Eric E., Becky L. Estes, and Carl N. Skinner. 2009. Ecological 
Effects of Prescribed Fire Season: a Literature Review and Synthe-
sis for Managers. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report 
PSW-GTR-224. Albany: Pacific Southwest Research Station.
Kolden, Crystal A., and Carol Henson. 2019. “A Socio-Ecological Ap-
proach to Mitigating Wildfire Vulnerability in the Wildland Urban 
Interface: A Case Study from the 2017 Thomas Fire.” Fire 2 (1): 9. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/fire2010009.
Kooistra, Chad, and Sarah McCaffrey. 2022. “Residents’ Perspectives 
on Colorado’s 2020 Cameron Peak Fire.” Coalition for the Poudre 
River Watershed. https://sites.warnercnr.colostate.edu/courtney-
schultz/cameron-peak-fire/.
Kreye, Jesse K., Nolan W. Brewer, Penelope Morgan, J. Morgan Var-
ner, Alistair M.S. Smith, Chad M. Hoffman, and Roger D. Ottmar. 
2014. “Fire Behavior in Masticated Fuels: A Review.” Forest Ecolo-
gy and Management 314: 193–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fore-
co.2013.11.035.
LANDFIRE. 2016. “Public Events Geodatabase Model Ready Events.” 
LANDFIRE 2.0.0. Distributed by LANDFIRE, Earth Resources 
Observation and Science Center (EROS), and US Geological Sur-
vey. https://landfire.gov/publicevents.php.
LANDFIRE. 2022. “Existing Vegetation Cover (EVC) CONUS 2022 
Capable.” LANDFIRE 2.2.0. Distributed by LANDFIRE, Earth 
Resources Observation and Science Center (EROS), and US Geo-
logical Survey. https://landfire.gov/metadata/lf2020/CONUS/LC22_
EVC_220.html.
Martinson, Erik, Phillip N. Omi, and Wayne Shepperd. 2003. “Part 3: 
Effects of Fuel Treatments on Fire Severity.” In Hayman Fire Case 
Study, edited by R.T. Graham (technical editor), USDA Forest Ser-
vice General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-114. 96–126. Ogden: 
Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Martinson, Erik J., and Philip N. Omi. 2013. Fuel Treatments and Fire 
Severity: A Meta-Analysis. USDA Forest Service Research Paper 
RMRS-RP-103WWW. Fort Collins: Rocky Mountain Research 
Station.
McKinney, Shawn T., Ilana Abrahamson, Theresa Jain, and Nathaniel 
Anderson. 2022. “A Systematic Review of Empirical Evidence for 
Landscape-Level Fuel Treatment Effectiveness.” Fire Ecology 18 
(1): 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42408-022-00146-3.
Moghaddas, Jason J., and Larry Craggs. 2007. “A Fuel Treatment Re-
duces Fire Severity and Increases Suppression Efficiency in a Mixed 
Conifer Forest.” International Journal of Wildland Fire 16 (6): 
673–678. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF06066. 
Moriarty, Kevin, Antony S. Cheng, Chad M. Hoffman, Stuart P. Cottrell, 
and Martin E. Alexander. 2019. “Firefighter Observations of ‘Sur-
prising’ Fire Behavior in Mountain Pine Beetle-Attacked Lodgepole 
Pine Forests.” Fire 2 (2): 34. https://doi.org/10.3390/fire2020034.
Mueller, Stephanie E., and Michael D. Caggiano. 2022. “Colorado 
Interagency Fuel Treatment Database.” Distributed by Colorado 
Forest Restoration Institute. https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/
uploads/sites/22/2022/02/Interagency_GDB_Report.pdf.
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 2014. “NASA Shuttle Radar Topog-
raphy Mission Combined Image Data Set.” Distributed by NASA 
Earth Observing System Data and Information System Land Pro-
cesses Distributed Active Archive Center. https://doi.org/10.5067/
MEaSUREs/SRTM/SRTMIMGM.003.
National Wildfire Coordinating Group. 2017. “Wildland Fire Perime-
ters.” Distributed by the National Interagency Fire Center. https://
www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms936/nifs/public-distribution.
National Interagency Coordination Center. 2021. “Wildland Fire Sum-
mary and Statistics: 2020 Annual Report.” https://www.nifc.gov/
sites/default/files/NICC/2-Predictive%20Services/Intelligence/An-
nual%20Reports/2022/annual_report.2.pdf.
Noble, Peter, and Travis B. Paveglio. 2020. “Exploring Adoption of the 
Wildland Fire Decision Support System: End User Perspectives.” 
Journal of Forestry 118 (2): 154–171. https://doi.org/10.1093/jo-
fore/fvz070.
Noonan-Wright, Erin, and Carl A. Seielstad. 2021. “Patterns of Wild-
fire Risk in the United States from Systematic Operational Risk 
Assessments: How Risk is Characterised by Land Managers.” In-
ternational Journal of Wildland Fire 30 (8): 569–584. https://doi.
org/10.1071/WF21020.
North, Malcolm P., and Matthew D. Hurteau. 2011. “High-Severity 
Wildfire Effects on Carbon Stocks and Emissions in Fuels Treated 
and Untreated Forest.” Forest Ecology and Management 261 (6): 
1115–1120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2010.12.039.
North, M.P., R.A. York, B.M. Collins, M.D. Hurteau, G.M. Jones, E.E. 
Knapp, L. Kobziar, et al. 2021. “Pyrosilviculture Needed for Land-
scape Resilience of Dry Western United States Forests.” Journal of 
Forestry 119 (5): 520–544. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvab026.
Parks, Sean A., Lisa M. Holsinger, Carol Miller, and Cara R. Nelson. 
2015. “Wildland Fire as a Self-Regulating Mechanism: the Role of 
Previous Burns and Weather in Limiting Fire Progression.” Ecolog-
ical Applications 25 (6): 1478–1492. https://doi.org/10.1890/14-
1430.1.
Pebesma, Edzer J. 2018. “Simple Features for R: Standardized Support 
for Spatial Vector Data.” The R Journal 10 (1): 439–446. https://
doi.org/10.32614/RJ-2018-009.
Peterson, Geoffrey Colin L., Steven E. Prince, and Ana G. Rappold. 
2021. “Trends in Fire Danger and Population Exposure along the 
Wildland–Urban Interface.” Environmental Science & Technology 
55 (23): 16257–16265. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c03835.
Plucinski, Matt P. 2019. “Fighting Flames and Forging Firelines: Wild-
fire Suppression Effectiveness at the Fire Edge.” Current Forestry 
Reports 5 (1): 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40725-019-00084-5.
Prichard, Susan J., and Maureen C. Kennedy. 2014. “Fuel Treatments 
and Landform Modify Landscape Patterns of Burn Severity in an 
Extreme Fire Event.” Ecological Applications 24 (3): 571–590. 
https://doi.org/10.1890/13-0343.1.
Prichard, Susan J., David L. Peterson, and Kyle Jacobson. 2010. “Fuel 
Treatments Reduce the Severity of Wildfire Effects in Dry Mixed 
Conifer Forest, Washington, USA.” Canadian Journal of Forest Re-
search 40 (8): 1615–1626. https://doi.org/10.1139/X10-109.
Prichard, Susan J., Nicholas A. Povak, Maureen C. Kennedy, and David 
W. Peterson. 2020. “Fuel Treatment Effectiveness in the Context of 
Landform, Vegetation, and Large, Wind-Driven Wildfires.” Ecolog-
ical Applications 30 (5): e02104. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2104.
R Core Team. 2020. “R: A Language and Environment for Statistical 
Computing.” Software. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Com-
puting. https://www.R-project.org/.
Rapp, Claire, Emily Rabung, Robyn Wilson, and Eric Toman. 2020. 
“Wildfire Decision Support Tools: An Exploratory Study of Use in 
the United States.” International Journal of Wildland Fire 29 (7): 
581–594. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF19131.
Reinhardt, Elizabeth D., Robert E. Keane, David E. Calkin, and Jack 
D. Cohen. 2008. “Objectives and Considerations for Wildland Fuel 
Treatment in Forested Ecosystems of the Interior Western United 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

Journal of Forestry, 2023, Vol. XX, No. XX
17
States.” Forest Ecology and Management 256 (12): 1997–2006. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2008.09.016.
Riley, Karin L., and Rachel A. Loehman. 2016. “Mid-21st-Century Cli-
mate Changes Increase Predicted Fire Occurrence and Fire Season 
Length, Northern Rocky Mountains, United States.” Ecosphere 7 
(11): e01543. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.1543.
Ritchie, M.W., C.N. Skinner, and T.A. Hamilton. 2007. “Probability of 
Wildfire-Induced Tree Mortality in an Interior Pine Forest: Effects 
of Thinning and Prescribed Fire.” Forest Ecology and Management 
247 (1–3): 200–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2007.04.044.
Roccaforte, John P., Andrew Sánchez Meador, Amy E.M. Waltz, Mon-
ica L. Gaylord, Michael T. Stoddard, and David W. Huffman. 
2018. “Delayed Tree Mortality, Bark Beetle Activity, and Regen-
eration Dynamics Five Years Following the Wallow Fire, Arizona, 
USA: Assessing Trajectories Towards Resiliency.” Forest Ecology 
and Management 428: 20–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fore-
co.2018.06.012.
Safford, Hugh D., David A. Schmidt, and Chris H. Carlson. 2009. 
“Effects of Fuel Treatments on Fire Severity in an Area of Wild-
land–Urban Interface, Angora Fire, Lake Tahoe Basin, California.” 
Forest Ecology and Management 258 (5): 773–787. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2009.05.024.
Salis, Michele, Liliana Del Giudice, Peter R. Robichaud, Alan A. Ager, 
Annalisa Canu, Pierpaolo Duce, Grazia Pellizzaro, et al. 2019. 
“Coupling Wildfire Spread and Erosion Models to Quantify Post-
Fire Erosion Before and After Fuel Treatments.” International 
Journal of Wildland Fire 28 (9): 687–703. https://doi.org/10.1071/
WF19034.
Sánchez, José J., John Loomis, Armando González-Cabán, Douglas 
Rideout, and Robin Reich. 2019. “Do Fuel Treatments in US Na-
tional Forests Reduce Wildfire Suppression Costs and Property 
Damage?.” Journal of Natural Resources Policy Research 9 (1): 
42–73. https://doi.org/10.5325/naturesopolirese.9.1.0042.
Schmidt, David A., Alan H. Taylor, and Carl N. Skinner. 2008. “The 
Influence of Fuels Treatment and Landscape Arrangement on Sim-
ulated Fire Behavior, Southern Cascade Range, California.” For-
est Ecology and Management 255 (8-9): 3170–3184. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2008.01.023.
Shive, Kristen L., Carolyn H. Sieg, and Peter Z. Fulé. 2013. “Pre-Wild-
fire Management Treatments Interact with Fire Severity to have 
Lasting Effects on Post-Wildfire Vegetation Response.” Forest 
Ecology and Management 297: 75–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2013.02.021.
Simpson, Heather, Ross Bradstock, and Owen Price. 2021. “Quantify-
ing the Prevalence and Practice of Suppression Firing with Opera-
tional Data from Large Fires in Victoria, Australia.” Fire 4 (4): 63. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/fire4040063.
Skinner, Carl N. 2005. “Reintroducing Fire into the Blacks Mountain 
Research Natural Area: Effects on Fire Hazard.” In Proceedings 
of the Symposium on Ponderosa Pine: Issues, Trends, and Man-
agement, edited by Martin W. Ritchie, Douglas A. Maguire, and 
Andrew Youngblood, technical coordinators. General Technical 
Report PSW-GTR-198: 245–257. Albany: USDA Forest Service, 
Pacific Southwest Research Station.
Springer, Judith D., David W. Huffman, Michael T. Stoddard, Andrew 
J. Sánchez Meador, and Amy E.M. Waltz. 2018. “Plant Community 
Dynamics Following Hazardous Fuel Treatments and Mega-Wild-
fire in a Warm-Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest of the USA.” Forest Ecol-
ogy and Management 429: 278–286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2018.06.022.
Steel, Zachary L., Gavin M. Jones, Brandon M. Collins, Rebecca Green, 
Alexander Koltunov, Kathryn L. Purcell, Sarah C. Sawyer, et al. 
2022. “Mega-Disturbances Cause Rapid Decline of Mature Coni-
fer Forest Habitat in California.” Ecological Applications 33 (2): 
e2763. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2763.
Stephens, Scott L., Mike A. Battaglia, Derek J. Churchill, Brandon M. 
Collins, Michelle Coppoletta, Chad M. Hoffman, Jamie M. Lyder-
sen, et al. 2021. “Forest Restoration and Fuels Reduction: Con-
vergent or Divergent?.” Bioscience 71 (1): 85–101. https://doi.
org/10.1093/biosci/biaa134.
Stephens, Scott L., Neil Burrows, Alexander Buyantuyev, Robert W. 
Gray, Robert E. Keane, Rick Kubian, Shirong Liu, et al. 2014. 
“Temperate and Boreal Forest Mega-Fires: Characteristics and 
Challenges.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 12 (2): 
115–122. https://doi.org/10.1890/120332.
Stephens, Scott L., Brandon M. Collins, and Gary Roller. 2012. “Fuel 
Treatment Longevity in a Sierra Nevada Mixed Conifer For-
est.” Forest Ecology and Management 285: 204–212. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2012.08.030.
Stevens-Rumann, Camille, Susan J. Prichard, Eva K. Strand, and Pe-
nelope Morgan. 2016. “Prior Wildfires Influence Burn Severity of 
Subsequent Large Fires.” Canadian Journal of Forest Research 46 
(11): 1375–1385. https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2016-0185.
Stevens-Rumann, Camille, Kristen Shive, Peter Fulé, and Carolyn H. 
Sieg. 2013. “Pre-Wildfire Fuel Reduction Treatments Result in 
More Resilient Forest Structure a Decade After Wildfire.” Inter-
national Journal of Wildland Fire 22 (8): 1108–1117. https://doi.
org/10.1071/WF12216.
Symons, Julie N., Dean H.K. Fairbanks, and C.N. Skinner. 2008. “Influ-
ences of Stand Structure and Fuel Treatments on Wildfire Severity 
at Blacks Mountain Experimental Forest, Northeastern Califor-
nia.” The California Geographer 48 (1): 61–82.
Syphard, Alexandra D., Teresa J. Brennan, and Jon E. Keeley. 2014. 
“The Role of Defensible Space for Residential Structure Protection 
During Wildfires.” International Journal of Wildland Fire 23 (8): 
1165–1175. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF13158.
Taylor, Alan H., Lucas B. Harris, and Stacy A. Drury. 2021. “Drivers 
of Fire Severity Shift as Landscapes Transition to an Active Fire 
Regime, Klamath Mountains, USA.” Ecosphere 12 (9): e03734. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.3734.
Taylor, Alan H., Lucas B. Harris, and Carl N. Skinner. 2022. “Severity Pat-
terns of the 2021 Dixie Fire Exemplify the Need to Increase Low-Se-
verity Fire Treatments in California’s Forests.” Environmental Research 
Letters 17 (7): 071002. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac7735.
Thompson, Matthew P., Phil Bowden, April Brough, Joe H. Scott, Julie 
Gilbertson-Day, Alan Taylor, Jennifer Anderson, et al. 2016. “Ap-
plication of Wildfire Risk Assessment Results to Wildfire Response 
Planning in the Southern Sierra Nevada, California, USA.” Forests 
7 (3): 64. https://doi.org/10.3390/f7030064.
Thompson, Matthew P., Christopher J. Lauer, David E. Calkin, Jon D. 
Rieck, Crystal S. Stonesifer, and Michael S. Hand. 2018. “Wildfire 
Response Performance Measurement: Current and Future Direc-
tions.” Fire 1 (2): 21. https://doi.org/10.3390/fire1020021.
Thompson, Matthew P., Nicole M. Vaillant, Jessica R. Haas, Krista M. 
Gebert, and Keith D. Stockmann. 2013. “Quantifying the Potential 
Impacts of Fuel Treatments on Wildfire Suppression Costs.” Journal 
of Forestry 111 (1): 49–58. https://doi.org/10.5849/jof.12-027.
Tinkham, Wade T., Chad M. Hoffman, Seth A. Ex, Michael A. Batta-
glia, and Jarred D. Saralecos. 2016. “Ponderosa Pine Forest Resto-
ration Treatment Longevity: Implications of Regeneration on Fire 
Hazard.” Forests 7 (7): 137. https://doi.org/10.3390/f7070137.
Tubbesing, Carmen L., Danny L. Fry, Gary B. Roller, Brandon M. Col-
lins, Varvara A. Fedorova, Scott L. Stephens, and John J. Battles. 
2019. “Strategically Placed Landscape Fuel Treatments Decrease 
Fire Severity and Promote Recovery in the Northern Sierra Ne-
vada.” Forest Ecology and Management 436: 45–55. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2019.01.010.
USDA Forest Service Activity Tracking System. 2018. “Hazardous Fuel 
Treatment Reduction: Polygon.” Distributed by the USDA Forest 
Service. 
https://data.fs.usda.gov/geodata/edw/datasets.php?dset-
Parent=Activities.
USDA Forest Service. 2020. “The Stewardship Mapping and Reporting 
Tool (SMART).” Accessed January 4, 2021.
Waltz, Amy E.M., Michael T. Stoddard, Elizabeth L. Kalies, Judith D. 
Springer, David W. Huffman, and Andrew Sánchez Meador. 2014. 
“Effectiveness of Fuel Reduction Treatments: Assessing Metrics 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023

18
<journal-title>, <year>, Vol. <volume>, No. <issue>
of Forest Resiliency and Wildfire Severity After the Wallow Fire, 
AZ.” Forest Ecology and Management 334: 43–52. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2014.08.026.
Wang, Daoping, Dabo Guan, Shupeng Zhu, Michael Mac Kinnon, 
Guannan Geng, Qiang Zhang, Heran Zheng, et al. 2021. “Econom-
ic Footprint of California Wildfires in 2018.” Nature Sustainability 
4 (3): 252–260. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-00646-7.
Weatherspoon, C. Phillip, and Carl N. Skinner. 1995. “An Assessment 
of Factors Associated with Damage to Tree Crowns from the 1987 
Wildfires in Northern California.” Forest Science 41 (3): 430–451.
Weatherspoon, C. Phillip, and Carl N. Skinner. 1996. “Landscape-Level 
Strategies for Forest Fuel Management.” In Sierra Nevada Ecosys-
tem Project: Final Report to Congress, Assessments and Scientific 
Basis for Management Options 2: 1471–1492. Wildland Resources 
Center Report No. 37. Davis: Centers for Water and Wildland Re-
sources, University of California, Davis.
Woodward, Brian, Peder Engelstad, Anthony Vorster, Christopher 
Beddow, Stephanie Krail, Amandeep Vashisht, and Paul Evangelis-
ta. 2017. “Forest Harvest Dataset for Northern Colorado Rocky 
Mountains (1984–2015) Generated from a Landsat Time Series 
and Existing Forest Harvest Records.” Data in Brief 15: 724–727. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2017.10.030.
Zhang, Jianwei, Matt Busse, Silong Wang, Dave Young, and Kim 
Mattson. 2023. “Wildfire Loss of Forest Soil C and N: Do Pre-Fire 
Treatments Make a Difference?.” Science of the Total Environment 
854: 158742. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.158742.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jof/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jofore/fvad036/7242626 by Northern Arizona University user on 16 August 2023
