 
 
Four Forest Restoration Initiative Digital Timber Sale Manager Pilot Project: 
FY22 Progress Report from the Ecological Restoration Institute 
 
July 2023 
 
Prepared for 
USDA Forest Service 
Southwestern Region, Region 3 
 
 
Prepared by 
Melanie Colavito, Melanie.Colavito@nau.edu 
Director of Policy and Communications 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
 
 
Reviewed by 
Dave Cawrse, USDA Forest Service 
David Danker, USDA Forest Service 
Chris Johansen, USDA Forest Service 
Joel Jurgens, The Nature Conservancy 
Mark Nigrelli, USDA Forest Service 
Chaz O’Brien, USDA Forest Service 
Jay Williams, USDA Forest Service 
Travis Woolley, The Nature Conservancy 
Niki vonHedemann, Ecological Restoration Institute 
 
 
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. 
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. 

 
Table of Contents 
Introduction ..........................................................................................................................1 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) Role ........................................................................1 
Digital Timber Sale Manager Background ..........................................................................2 
Digital Timber Sale Manager Overview ..............................................................................3 
Digital Timber Sale Manager FY22 Progress Update .........................................................6 
Review of FY21 DTSM Work Sessions .....................................................................6 
Summary of FY22 DTSM Engagement with Other Forests and Regions ................7 
Common Themes from DTSM Learning ................................................................10 
Next Steps .......................................................................................................................... 11 
Peer Learning and Connection with Forest Service Business Needs ................................ 11 
Contacts ..............................................................................................................................12 
References ..........................................................................................................................12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Introduction 
The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University is collaborating with 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC), the Forest Service Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) 
team, the Forest Service Southwestern Regional Office (R3), and the Forest Service Forest 
Products Modernization (FPM) team to support the development of a Digital Timber Sale 
Manager (DTSM) pilot project. The ERI’s mission is to serve diverse audiences with objective 
science and implementation strategies that support ecological restoration and climate adaptation 
on western forest and woodland landscapes. The ERI is participating in the DTSM project to 
support the implementation of efficient, modernized forest restoration treatments to accelerate 
landscape-scale restoration. 
 
This report provides a progress update and overview of the ERI’s role in the DTSM pilot project 
for the fiscal year (FY) 2022 ERI federal work plan from July 1, 2022, to June 30, 2023. The 
DTSM project will also continue in the FY23 ERI federal work plan. Because the DTSM pilot is 
still in development, this report serves as an intermediate update on the project’s progress as part 
of ERI’s FY22 work plan deliverables. The final project report will be published upon 
completion of the DTSM pilot. 
 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) Role 
The ERI has helped facilitate the co-development of the DTSM pilot through two primary roles: 
1) Convening and facilitating meetings with the DTSM team and other relevant partners. The 
ERI schedules DTSM meetings, invites participants, and develops and distributes agendas. The 
ERI then facilitates meetings, reviews progress from prior meetings, ensures that progress is 
made toward desired meeting outcomes, identifies action items and next steps, and captures and 
shares key notes and action items. The ERI serves in this capacity for recurring, monthly 
meetings but does not participate in all DTSM meetings, such as those among technical experts. 
ERI serving in this role frees up capacity for technical experts to focus on developing the pilot. 
 
2) Capturing and communicating information and learning from meetings and discussions. The 
ERI is continuing to track the progress and learning associated with the DTSM pilot project with 
the end goal of creating a final narrative report to accompany the digital product being developed 
by TNC that can be shared with the broader Forest Service community. ERI serving in this role 
ensures documentation of the DTSM development process and implementation may serve as a 
guide for future efforts. 
 
New tools and approaches need to be sufficiently tested and vetted by end users to ensure that 
they are usable before being adopted locally and nationally. To that end, in FY23, the ERI will 
continue to work with the DTSM team to determine how to pilot and test the tool with end users, 
summarize user feedback, and report outcomes to ensure that the final tool is relevant and 
actionable. The specifics of the vetting process will be determined as the project progresses. 

Digital Timber Sale Manager Background 
The Forest Service is developing and testing innovative technologies and processes to facilitate 
the implementation of forest restoration treatments in partnership with FPM, TNC, and ERI by 
using the 4FRI forests as a pilot group. The ERI has participated in efforts to facilitate 
implementation of restoration treatments on 4FRI since 2017 when efforts first began to identify 
strategies and actions to reduce the time and cost of implementing treatments that remove no- or 
low-value wood. The ERI hosted a workshop in November 2017 that reviewed current efforts to 
improve efficiency for projects designed to remove low-value wood and biomass, identify 
business and implementation practices that should be changed to accelerate implementation, and 
identify solutions to test on 4FRI (Colavito and Vosick 2018). 
 
Over the next two years, the ERI worked with 4FRI, FPM, and TNC to develop and test 
modernization actions identified in the workshop. In October 2019, the ERI facilitated a second 
workshop with the Forest Service, TNC, and other partners to review progress on those 
modernization actions, share lessons learned and recommendations from two years of discovery 
with 4FRI, promote learning, and explore the benefits of partnerships (Vosick and Colavito 
2020). Additional information about the workshop, including workshop materials that provide 
additional details about the innovations being tested on 4FRI, can be found here: 
https://sweri.eri.nau.edu/4fri-modernization-workshop/. 
 
During this time, TNC’s Future Forests Project, which is a 10-year, Master Stewardship 
Agreement (17-SA-11031600-007) between TNC and R3 to work with the wood products 
industry and the Forest Service to test modernization actions, increase operational efficiencies, 
and accelerate implementation, was underway. The Future Forests Project provided a critical 
implementation venue in which to test many of the actions identified in the first ERI workshop. 
 
The DTSM project is a continuation of these efforts. In late 2019, TNC made a “Digital Solution 
Proposal” to the Forest Service to support the development of a comprehensive model for a 
modernized approach to forest management by creating a digital timber sale process. This 
process was proposed to aid in efficiencies and modernization of the various steps in the Gate 3 
system. After discussion between TNC, 4FRI, R3, FPM, and ERI, the DTSM pilot was 
formalized through a challenge cost share agreement (CCSA 20-CS-11030400-191) between 
TNC and the Forest Service in September 2020. The DTSM project was also incorporated into 
the ERI annual federal plan of work for FY20 to provide ERI capacity for the project and was 
continued in FY21 and FY22. TNC is leading the development of the digital tool; the ERI is 
facilitating the process and capturing and sharing learning; and the Forest Service is providing 
capacity, expertise, and direction in tool development by providing detailed information about 
implementation workflows and data management realities, as well as funding for the challenge 
cost share agreement. 
 
 

All of these efforts are occurring in tandem with FPM, which is a strategic effort to align Forest 
Service practices, policies, and guidance to be more agile and better meet current and future 
forest improvement goals, train employees to better use technology, identify actions to make 
restoration implementation work easier, and improve forest conditions (FPM website). FPM was 
launched by the Forest Service in 2017 and began with systems mapping to analyze pinch points 
and identify high priority issues. Since its formation, FPM has been an extremely valuable asset 
to the agency, as well as to partners and is due to expire in the near future. Making FPM a 
permanent program within the Forest Service would allow it to continue to facilitate innovations 
and efficiencies across the agency in perpetuity and encourage institutional innovation. 
 
FPM has been involved in modernization work on 4FRI by helping to facilitate change where 
needed and sharing lessons learned. For example, virtual boundaries were tested on 4FRI 
landscapes and presented at the 2019 workshop, as well as through an agreement with TNC 
(Woolley et al. 2020), all of which helped to inform and test changes in national direction and the 
Virtual Boundary Desk Guide (USDA Forest Service 2019). The FPM team is in the final stages 
of this multi-year effort and exploring how to make innovation a mindset and common business 
practice within the Forest Service. 
 
Digital Timber Sale Manager Overview 
The DTSM is meant to digitize key steps of the timber sale preparation and layout process in 
Gate 3 of the Forest Service implementation process, and to increase sale preparation efficiencies 
and transparency. DTSM is designed as a central hub for the timber sale with modules for each 
phase, maximum flexibility, and a field-based focus to ensure that it meets the needs of end 
users. A key element of the project and resulting DTSM tool is the integration of existing Forest 
Service corporate data sets, software platforms, and processes. Although the development of a 
new process like DTSM takes time, the goal is to generate cost and time savings in the long run 
through dashboards for progress tracking, automated reporting tools, and data sharing and 
syncing capabilities (Figure 1).  

Figure 1. Digital Timber Sale Manager concept diagram. 
 
Specifically, the digital processes being developed in DTSM for timber sale activities provide for 
tracking data from presale through timber sale administration including layout, resource surveys, 
and silviculture walkthroughs. DTSM will increase the use of geographic information systems 
(GIS), including GIS field data collection tools and web-based GIS data analysis dashboards and 
reporting outputs. It will provide specialists in the field mobile applications and data models that 
allow for digital field data collection. It will also simplify the existing process in Gate 3 (Figure 
2) to one that is more streamlined between the various steps (Figure 3).  

Figure 2. Initial flow chart of the Gate 3 system. 
 
Figure 3. Desired flow chart of the Gate 3 system. 

The long-term benefits of DTSM, as stated in the CCSA will be, “to modernize and streamline 
sale prep activities by: creating a digital platform that is capable of collecting real time data, 
automatically updating corporate databases, and providing presale foresters products at the touch 
of a button. All resource areas will be able to update and view project data easily, saving time 
and mistakes.” The internal benefits to the Forest Service are a simplified, efficient sale 
preparation process, better communication throughout the timber sale process with a single place 
for data and continually updated data collected in the field, and robust tracking of field-based 
data for incorporation into official Forest Service databases. The external benefits of DTSM to 
partners include better transparency throughout project development and improved 
communication about project goals and data. 
 
The use of GIS and digital processes through DTSM is meant to increase efficiencies in the 
layout and timber sale package preparation process. Digitizing key elements of the timber sale 
process will contribute to the broader modernization goals of the Forest Service. If the DTSM 
pilot on 4FRI is deemed successful, the long-term objective is for the Forest Service to broadly 
adopt the use of a similar approach throughout all Forest Service regions. In summary, the goal 
of DTSM is to develop a holistic tool for the timber sale process, including a centralized data hub 
and designed for maximum flexibility to work for different forests and districts.  
 
Digital Timber Sale Manager FY22 Progress Update 
Review of FY21 DTSM Work Sessions 
The DTSM focus in FY21 was to complete a series of work sessions with the intended end users 
of DTSM to provide demonstrations of the platform and gather feedback to improve the initial 
pilot tool. Our goal was not to say, “We have a new tool you can use,” but rather to ask end users 
about their challenges and realities and better understand where a new tool might improve their 
processes. Three work sessions were completed that focused on specific areas of the Gate 3 
system, including: 1) Silviculture; 2) Layout and Marking; and 3) Project Initiation. The work 
sessions provided a useful forum for learning and discussion and resulted in some shared themes. 
First, there was general agreement around the need to find efficiencies in the implementation 
process and better integrate current tools that the Forest Service uses with DTSM. Second, 
discussions also focused on issues related to the development of new technology and access to 
existing technology. Third, there was an emphasis on the importance of communication and 
engagement with end users when developing a new platform or process. For a complete 
overview of FY21 updates, see last year’s report (Colavito 2022). 
 
At the end of FY21, there were a number of next steps identified that were tied to the TNC 
spatial data manager position, which was vacated in the spring of 2022. Unfortunately, TNC has 
not yet been able to rehire this position, despite multiple job posting cycles, so the DTSM team 
focused on tasks that did not rely on a spatial data manager. This meant that completing the tasks 
in the handover memo created by the former TNC spatial data manager, integrating DTSM with 
other Forest Service systems, and piloting the tool with key end users in the field had to be 

delayed. However, the DTSM team was able to focus attention on a phased learned process with 
other forests and regions, as well as partners external to the Forest Service, where similar efforts 
are already underway. Those meetings are summarized below.  
 
Summary of FY22 DTSM Engagement with Other Forests and Regions  
In the last year, the DTSM team focused on deeper engagement and learning from other related 
Forest Service and non-Forest Service efforts that are similar or parallel to this effort and focused 
on modernizing the Gate 3 system to help inform the goals of DTSM within the 4FRI context, 
ensure that the DTSM pilot being developed for 4FRI is applicable outside the 4FRI context, and 
clarify that the DTSM pilot does not create a parallel or overlapping process to other efforts but 
rather is value-added and coordinated. Broadly, all of these efforts are aimed at exploring 
existing business processes, identifying areas in need of modernization, and building tools to 
better leverage technology for gaining efficiencies. Similar approaches are employed by third 
party industry partners, as well as state forestry agencies, from which the DTSM team can learn 
and leverage what approaches align within the Forest Service. Intentional collaboration between 
ongoing efforts and evaluation of existing third-party products will help provide a better baseline 
for development and ultimately generate products that are more in line with current and 
anticipated business needs into the future. At the same time, it is important to note that 
throughout the Forest Service, different regions, forests, and districts have slightly different ways 
of doing business, so another goal of DTSM is to determine how to better align Forest Service 
regions, forests, and districts to facilitate coordination, innovation, and modernization of 
implementation processes within Gate 3 in order to increase the pace and scale of forest 
restoration and wildfire risk reduction, as well as the delivery of forest products.  
 
The DTSM team met with the following national forests, programs, and other groups in FY22. 
 
Mark Twain National Forest – In August 2022, the DTSM team met with representatives from 
the Mark Twain National Forest in Missouri where efforts were underway to create consistent 
contract sale maps. Representatives from the Mark Twain National Forest shared lessons learned 
and considerations from their efforts to align contract maps across sales. They also shared some 
challenges associated with data management and described their efforts to work toward 
consistency in data storage and ensure that all spatial data layers are correct, aligned, and stored 
in a standard place such as the Forest Service T drive. It was also noted that using existing Forest 
Service software is helpful, though specific software or tool preferences and uses may vary 
depending on the user. They described trainings that are being offered for GIS users to focus on 
spatial data management consistency, as well as consistency in map products with the use of 
templates. The discussion between the DTSM team and the Mark Twain National Forest was 
useful to recognize some shared challenges, and the more specific focus of the Mark Twain 
National Forest on spatial data management and map templates can provide some useful lessons 
learned for the DTSM effort. 
 

Forest Service Activity Tracking System (FACTS) – In January 2023, the DTSM team met with 
representatives from FACTS to learn more about how treatments are tracked and how this system 
might interface with DTSM. FACTS is a reporting tool designed to track activities and is not a 
data tracking or management system, but in many cases, it was noted that FACTS does end up 
storing data. At the same time, it was also noted that the use of FACTS can vary from place to 
place, and it is important to encourage Forest Service units to enter information into FACTS 
consistently and correctly. Furthermore, most data are entered into FACTS after work has been 
completed or a contract has been awarded, but not in the planning phase. FACTS also stores 
tabular data more effectively than spatial data, so the spatial data that the DTSM tool is designed 
to collect and manage could potentially be synced with tabular data for harvest units in FACTS. 
DTSM might also be able to assist with other solutions such as streamlining data collection 
throughout the life a timber sale, which could then also facilitate the process of entering data for 
reporting into FACTS.  
 
Woodland Solutions Group – In March 2023, the DTSM team met with representatives from the 
Woodland Solutions Group. Woodlands Solutions Group was spun off from Mason, Bruce, and 
Girard (MBG), a private company specializing in providing services and solutions for the 
forestry industry and state/national agencies. MBG was initially identified as a vendor with an 
established history and a software product similar in intent to the DTSM concept. Jim Schriever 
of the Woodlands Solutions Group stated that the group has expanded their software and services 
portfolio since TNC had initially spoken with MBG in 2019. The DTSM team received an 
update on the functionality and features of their software products and services. Many of the 
updates being offered have followed a similar trajectory to the requirements identified through 
the DTSM work sessions in FY21. Woodlands Solutions Group identified with the business 
needs of forestry professionals looking to gain production efficiencies through improved data 
management and services. The company could provide a mechanism to achieve rapid 
development of software tools and services desired by Forest Service field professionals; 
however, more robust market research could identify more companies with similar capabilities, 
products, and services should a proprietary solution ultimately be within the Forest Service’s best 
interest for implementing the DTSM concept. 
 
Wildfires.org – In April 2023, members of the DTSM team met with a representative of 
Wildfires.org. The company has been reaching out to various units within the Forest Service to 
better understand business processes related to planning and implementing fuels reduction 
projects across the country. Through those conversations, the Wildfires.org development team 
have been rapidly building prototype products and services that leverage technology for 
improving spatial data management and automating existing processes related to NEPA planning 
and implementation of fuels reduction projects. Many of the prototypes being worked on by the 
Wildfires.org team at this point in time did not directly relate to the steps in the process being 
addressed through the DTSM concept. However, potential synergies exist between DTSM and 
the prototypes being developed by Wildfires.org that could better tackle the entirety of a project 
lifecycle from NEPA planning through project prep and layout on into implementation.  

Mark Twain National Forest and White Mountain National Forest – In May 2023, the DTSM 
team met a second time with representatives from the Mark Twain National Forest and the White 
Mountain National Forest in New Hampshire to discuss innovative approaches that 
representatives on those forests were using with FieldMaps. On both forests, representatives 
described how they are using FieldMaps to create map templates that are editable in the field 
during the Gate 3 system. This allows data that are collected in the field to be synced to ArcMap 
or ArcPro and then modified on sale maps. In both instances, it was recommended to use ESRI 
software, which is the industry standard, but personal preference for different tools varies. It was 
also noted that blue tooth antennae such as the Arrow 100 are important to ensure that field-
based users can access the map templates and collect more accurate data in the field with varying 
degrees of connectivity. In some instances, field-based users are focused on collecting various 
points, lines, and/or polygons, while in other instances, field-based users are also collecting data 
attributes or making notes about the data collected in the field. Overall, it was clear that in both 
cases, this approach was helpful for sharing data with multiple staff throughout the life of a 
timber sale to ensure that everyone involved in the process has the same data. It was noted that 
there are still challenges to address in terms of effective data management on the backend, such 
as ensuring that data are backed up on the Forest Service T drive and eventually provided to 
FACTS for reporting purposes. Nonetheless, these approaches have helped a great deal in 
developing contract maps using standard spatial data formats and map templates from data 
collected in the field. 
 
Region 3 5-Year Planning Template – Region 3 has developed a comprehensive 5-year planning 
template that incorporates elements of project management. Through these project management 
components, the 5-year plan template provides a structure for tracking the status of project prep 
from out-year planning to project award. Within the DTSM concept, spatial data are collected, 
managed, and available for each resource and step in the project prep phase. There is potential to 
combine this 5-year planning template into the DTSM concept whereby the collection of spatial 
data can help populate the status of various prep elements within the broader 5-year planning 
framework. By providing a consistent data structure, information from individual projects can be 
summarized and combined together to give forest managers and line officers a better 
understanding of the status of the forestry program at larger scales than individual projects and 
begin to identify bottlenecks to implementing the 5-year plan in a more systematic fashion. 
Additionally, providing a real time status of Gate 3 tasks completed with DTSM to line officers 
can help them verify that these tasks were completed when approving Gate Reports.  
 
Forest Products Modernization – The DTSM team has also continued to engage with national 
efforts in the Forest Service and FPM to modernize restoration implementation and forest 
products delivery. It has been an important objective of the DTSM team to ensure that DTSM 
aligns with other ongoing efforts within the Forest Service Chief Information Office (CIO) and 
Forest Service Natural Resource Management (NRM), and, of course, FPM. There is a strong 
recognition that local learning and work on DTSM needs to be effectively connected with 
regional and national efforts to scope out the best way to proceed. The DTSM team is currently 

engaging in a discussion with FPM to determine how best to coordinate future work for DTSM 
with larger changes in the agency focused on technological systems and to develop an 
appropriate series of next steps and a subsequent body of work that builds on existing learning 
within the new context of changing Forest Service business needs around restoration and forest 
products. Additionally, the DTSM team is in the process of determining what specific Forest 
Service business needs the DTSM pilot can address. This may warrant a workshop or series of 
workshops to effectively identify business needs, review existing technology and innovations, 
and determine how best to connect and leverage efforts moving forward.   
 
The meetings in FY22 provided the DTSM team with the opportunity to build bridges between 
past work, similar efforts in the Forest Service, efforts outside of the Forest Service, and broader 
national efforts to modernize restoration implementation. Cross-pollination between efforts will 
help provide Forest Service leadership and CIO with a more complete picture of business 
processes and use cases from planning and project prep through implementation. In this context, 
there is a need to scale this work regionally and nationally as the next phase is developed and 
executed. A great deal of learning has occurred over the course of DTSM, as well as longer, 
ongoing efforts within 4FRI to increase modernization. This learning provides useful case studies 
and examples of the challenges and opportunities to modernize Forest Service restoration 
implementation and forest products delivery. 
 
Common Themes from DTSM Learning  
There are a few common threads throughout the past two years of learning from the DTSM pilot. 
First, the work sessions in FY21 and meetings with other efforts in FY22 both highlighted the 
importance of using existing, and preferably industry standard tools such as ESRI products, to 
develop new approaches to the timber sale preparation and layout process in Gate 3 of the Forest 
Service implementation process, and to increase sale preparation efficiencies and transparency. 
Proprietary tools that are not commonly used throughout the agency will be more difficult to 
integrate into existing business processes, so focusing new and innovative approaches within 
existing technology can facilitate uptake and training for end users.  
 
Another common theme over the past two years of learning is that using consistent, standardized 
spatial data formats, attributes, and databases is important to reduce inefficiencies. Identifying 
ways to streamline data collection, management, and storage is critical, especially as data move 
beyond Gate 3 to reporting in systems like FACTS. This will be especially important with 
increased attention toward funding from recent stimulus bills like the Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Law (BIL) and Inflation Reduction Act (IRA).  
 
Lastly, it remains critical to engage potential end users in the development and deployment of 
new tools, especially when those tools are designed for use in the field for a complicated process 
like the timber sale preparation and layout process in Gate 3. End users have the greatest 
expertise in the realities of their day-to-day work collecting and managing data, so it is important 
that those perspectives are engaged as new approaches are developed and tested. The DTSM 

pilot has provided numerous opportunities to learn about and discuss the realities of innovating 
technological approaches that may be helpful to tier to current efforts and use to inform strategies 
moving forward.  
 
Next Steps 
Moving into FY23, the DTSM team has identified a series of next steps. First, TNC is continuing 
the hiring process for a spatial data manager to help add capacity to develop the tool. 
 
Second, the DTSM team has worked together on a proposal to accomplish some of the next steps 
discussed previously. The purpose statement for the proposal reads: The digital timber sale 
manager (DTSM) is a project and data management system designed to align with the timber 
sale gate system and realize efficiencies through GIS/data-driven tools and technologies. Further 
development is needed to test presale-focused modules developed in the pilot project and to 
expand beyond Gate 3. Coordination and alignment of DTSM with concurrent efforts in 
exploring technologies and efficiencies is essential to modernizing Forest Service treatment 
implementation processes. Additional information from the proposal is below. The DTSM team 
will work with Region 3 leadership and FPM to review and comment on the proposal, as well as 
FPM, CIO, and NRM to ensure that the proposal aligns with Forest Service business needs and 
ongoing modernization efforts within the Forest Service both in forest products delivery and 
technology improvements. 
 
Peer Learning and Connection with Forest Service Business Needs 
The approach to completing the next steps of the DTSM pilot will be one of co-development 
using peer learning through work sessions with staff in each of the areas of focus to ensure that 
the final products are user friendly and applicable. This has been a successful model for the pilot 
development of existing DTSM tools and will be the main tactic for gaining input on needs from 
the field as modules are constructed. These work sessions involve learning current business 
processes, data collection needs, and existing bottlenecks as well as exploration of niche 
solutions that can be expanded for greater benefits. The intent is to tie module development back 
to specific steps in the timber sale gate system in order to provide detailed data needs at each step 
and identify potential gaps in existing databases. The scale of input will expand more broadly to 
reach across regional and national audiences. The tasks will broadly include: continued work 
sessions and workshops for peer learning related to on-the-ground business needs, outreach 
across forests and regions to capture information regarding existing efforts similar/related to 
DTSM, testing of modules and outputs for feedback and improvement, identification of best 
ways to leverage existing or changing databases and where new back-end structures are needed 
for data management and security, and training sessions for end users. This project will engage 
with ongoing, national efforts, such as TIM and FACTS modernization, and leverage any broader 
changes from CIO and NRM that may impact and enhance this effort.  
 

Contacts 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
• Melanie Colavito, Director of Policy and Communications: melanie.colavito@nau.edu  
• Niki vonHedemann, Human Dimensions Specialist: niki.vonHedemann@nau.edu  
The Nature Conservancy 
• Joel Jurgens, Forest Program Manager: joel.jurgens@tnc.org  
• Travis Woolley, Forest Ecologist: twoolley@tnc.org  
Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
• David Danker, Pre-Sale Forester: david.danker@usda.gov  
• Mark Nigrelli, GIS Specialist: mark.nigrelli@usda.gov  
Forest Service Region 3  
• Karen Martinez, Measurements Specialist: karen.martinez1@usda.gov  
• John Williams, Stewardship and Presale Coordinator: john.h.williams@usda.gov  
Forest Products Modernization 
• Chaz O’Brien, WO FRMVE Forest Products Project Manager: colleen.obrien@usda.gov  
• Dave Cawrse, ACES Contractor: dave.cawrse@usda.gov  
References 
Colavito, M., and D. Vosick. 2018. Accelerating Restoration Implementation Workshop. 
Workshop Report. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 14p. 
Available online: 
https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/927/rec/1  
Colavito, M. 2021. Four Forest Restoration Initiative Digital Timber Sale Manager Pilot Project: 
Progress Report from the Ecological Restoration Institute. Progress Report. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 7p. Available online: 
https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/1092/rec/5  
Colavito, M. 2022. Four Forest Restoration Initiative Digital Timber Sale Manager Pilot Project: 
FY21 Progress Report from the Ecological Restoration Institute. ERI Project Report. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 47p. Available online: 
https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/1145/rec/4  
USDA Forest Service. 2019. Virtual Boundary Desk Guide. USDA Forest Service, Washington 
Office, Forest Management Service Center, Ft. Collins, Colorado.  
Vosick, D., and M. Colavito. 2020. Modernizing 4FRI Implementation: Progress After Two Years 
Workshop Final Report. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 22p. 
Available online: 
https://cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p17192coll1/id/1028/rec/4  
Woolley, T., S. Fugate, J. Jurgens. 2020. Virtual Boundaries Agreement #18-CS-11030701-018 
2020 Final Report. The Nature Conservancy, Flagstaff, Arizona.  
