Fire Progression: The Cedar Creek Fire
The Cedar Creek Fire began in late July 2022 on the Willamette 
National Forest in west-central Oregon (Figure 1). Local fire 
managers quickly realized the fire was likely to be a large, long-
duration incident due to the challenging, mountainous terrain 
and heavy fuel loads, and thus requested a Type 1 IMT. To protect 
the adjacent town of Oakridge, OR, from the threat of an east wind 
event similar to the one that had led to catastrophic outcomes 
during the 2020 Labor Day Fires, the first Type 1 IMT deployed a 
long-term indirect strategy to strengthen containment features 
near the community to the west of the fire. Fire managers’ fears 
were realized in early September when a large east wind event 
and significant fire growth threatened the town. However, 
interviewees reported that firefighters held fire spread along 
strengthened containment features.
Fire managers also considered creating containment lines on 
the eastern edge of the fire. Yet, the potential negative ecological 
impacts to the Waldo Lake Wilderness and high ground 
evacuation times outweighed the potential opportunities 
for containment to the east. The fire eventually expanded 
significantly to the east, and though no Values at Risk were lost 
as a result, this eastern growth accounted for a large proportion 
of the total burned area. An east and a west zone for the fire – 
each with its own IMT – were designated during later stages of 
the incident to handle this complexity. The final fire footprint 
totaled 127, 311 acres.
What RMA tools were used and how were they 
used to inform decision-making
The primary RMA tools used during the fire were Suppression 
Difficulty Index (SDI), Potential Control Location (PCL) analysis, 
Use of Risk Management Assistance on the 2022 Cedar Creek Fire, Oregon
Incident Management Teams (IMTs), Agency Administrators (AAs), and other local fire management personnel used Risk Management 
Assistance (RMA) tools during the 2022 Cedar Creek Fire to develop Strategic Risk Assessments (now part of the Incident Strategic 
Alignment Process, or ISAP1) and create a common operating picture between IMT members, local land managers, and other stakeholders. 
RMA tools helped managers plan for an anticipated high-intensity fire weather event and identify containment features that allowed 
managers to protect the community of Oakridge, OR. Interviews with IMT members, AAs, and local fire managers on the incident – 
primarily those involved during the early stages of the incident – illustrated how RMA was used to inform decisions, the benefits of 
RMA, facilitating and frustrating factors, and recommendations to improve the use and utility of RMA.
The USDA Forest Service developed Risk Management 
Assistance (RMA) in 2016 to improve wildfire decision quality, 
increase accountability, and minimize firefighter risk (Calkin et al. 
2021). RMA emphasizes pre- and post-fire training, on-incident 
support through a publicly-available online dashboard that 
houses advanced spatial analytics and fire weather behavior data, 
and line officer development. Strategic wildland fire management 
planning and implementation in the pre-season, during incidents, 
and after fires using local expertise and risk-informed spatial 
analytics like those found on the RMA Dashboard (e.g., Potential 
Operational Delineations, Suppression Difficulty Index, Potential 
Control Locations) can facilitate safer, more effective decisions 
and outcomes (Stratton 2020). 
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes, in partnership 
with the USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation Management, 
are leading a longitudinal assessment of RMA use in incident 
and non-incident management contexts. We conducted an initial 
assessment on RMA use during the 2021 fire season (Beeton 
et al. 2022). Through key informant interviews with AAs and 
IMTs, this case study series builds on our initial assessment and 
explores how RMA tools were used to inform wildfire decision-
making on three incidents during the 2022 fire season.
What is RMA? 
Case Study 3/3
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
Ignition date: July 31, 2022  
Ignition location: Willamette 
National Forest   
Ignition type: Lighting 
Size: 127,311 acres  
Date at fullest geographic 
extent: October 27th, 2022  
Management strategy: Full 
suppression primarily using 
indirect tactics  
Teams: Multiple Type 1 and 
Type 2 teams in rotation 
from August 4th until 
October 27th (9 teams 
total). We focused our IMT 
interviews on a single Type 
1 team deployed early 
during the fire, and we 
captured perspectives from 
the command staff, and 
operations and planning 
sections.   
Figure 1. Map of the Cedar Creek Fire and relevant incident information. 
The Cedar Creek Fire burned over the vast majority of both the 1996 
Moolack Complex (eastern finger of the fire) and the 1991 Warner Creek 
Fire (southern edge). Note the western edge of the Cedar Creek Fire’s 
perimeter closely aligns with the Forest’s POD boundaries. The town of 
Oakridge is located to the west of the fire’s final perimeter. 
1 The Incident Strategic Alignment Process (ISAP) integrates both the Strategic Risk Assessment and Strategic Operations processes into one comprehensive process that integrates collaborative dialogue with RMA 
and other spatial analytics to develop and deploy a consistent, science-based strategic planning model for incident management. ISAP comprises four pillars, including:   1) critical values at risk; 2) strategy and strategic 
actions; 3) risk to responders; and 4) probability of success. For more information, please visit the following link: Incident Strategic Alignment Process Story Map.

Potential Operational Delineations (PODs), Estimated Ground 
Evacuation Time, and Snag Hazard. The direction to use RMA 
tools was included in the incident’s Delegation of Authority. 
RMA tools were used most frequently by an IMT Operations 
Section Chief serving as lead for “Strategic Operations,” 
members of the IMT Planning Section, and local Willamette 
National Forest personnel as they worked together to develop 
Strategic Risk Assessments. These assessments utilized both 
fire behavior modeling and RMA tools to inform long-term 
strategic management actions. To develop the Strategic Risk 
Assessment, the IMT cross-referenced pre-identified PODs with 
SDI, PCL, and Fire Spread Probability (FSPro) modeling runs to 
determine where containment lines should be constructed and 
improved along the fire’s western edge to best prepare for an 
east wind event. Estimated Ground Evacuation Time and Snag 
Hazard were then overlaid to better understand prospective 
firefighter risk exposure across the fire’s entire planning area as 
teams considered where to engage. Our interviewees said using 
RMA tools within Strategic Risk Assessments to weigh risks and 
better understand the probability of success contributed to the 
decision not to engage as heavily on the fire’s eastern edge. Once 
Strategic Risk Assessments were completed, fire managers then 
used them to communicate long-term strategies to forest and 
regional leadership, local responders, and other stakeholders.
Benefits of RMA
Created a common operating picture between IMTs and 
local land management units: Interviewees frequently 
reported that the RMA Dashboard allowed IMTs to rapidly orient 
to the landscape. RMA helped IMT members, AAs and other local 
fire managers quickly discuss the landscape on similar terms, 
eliminate bad options, and proceed with greater efficiency. 
RMA analytics accurately predicted where the fire stopped: 
Interviewees reported that the majority of features that eventually 
held the fire were POD lines and areas on the western flank that 
SDI and PCL layers predicted to be less risky, easier to access, 
and more likely to hold the fire. They said actions to improve 
these containment features during the incident - supported by 
Strategic Risk Assessments and RMA tools - contributed to the 
successful protection of Oakridge.
Key factors impacting RMA use
RMA tools are easy to use and accurate: The RMA dashboard 
and tools were reportedly easy to use and interpret and accurately 
reflected conditions on the ground, insofar as users understood 
the underlying assumptions. Interviewees reported that because 
these tools were so easy to use, they helped to facilitate strategic 
dialogues among a diverse cadre of participants who might not 
otherwise be able to fully engage.
Knowledge of RMA tools is growing but remains limited: 
Regional- and Forest-level personnel and Type 1/Type 2 IMT 
members we interviewed were familiar with RMA. However, 
multiple interviewees cautioned that there is still variability in 
familiarity among potential users, particularly AAs and Type 
3 organizations. They said they expected increased awareness 
and uptake among AAs and Type 3 IMTs as the firefighting 
community continues to be exposed to the RMA Dashboard and 
available tools.
Recommendations to improve RMA adoption on 
wildfire incidents
Training: Interviewees recommended two strategies for 
increasing familiarity with RMA. First, interviewees suggested 
including an incident simulation exercise emphasizing RMA 
during AA annual training. Second, interviewees said continued 
access to coaches and analytical support staff available to answer 
questions during incidents would allow users to better navigate 
RMA tools and the Strategic Risk Assessment process and 
promote consistency in their use and application.
Strategic plans that outlive individual IMTs: Interviewees 
indicated that incoming IMTs often opted to create their own 
Strategic Risk Assessments rather than utilize what previous 
teams developed. Those familiar with multiple assessments 
said new strategies did not differ significantly in substance, 
and the time it took to facilitate collaborative conversations 
and build consensus on revised strategies was inefficient. They 
recommended evolving and adapting a single Strategic Risk 
Assessment throughout an incident rather than completing 
new assessments as conditions change. They argued this would 
facilitate more effective and efficient decision-making.
  
“
I think every tool in the toolbox is a marked 
benefit to how we’re fighting fire now versus how 
we were fighting fire 20 years ago. Being able 
to demonstrate pretty readily when teams are 
coming in, why these areas are concerning, being 
able to look at the Suppression Difficulty Index, 
look at the snag layer [Snag Hazard], show the 
risk associated, and why we have concerns about 
putting people in certain areas is always a marked 
benefit. It expedites that process...
“
“
Pulling up SDI, PCL, all those, and really zooming 
in and looking at the landscapes through different 
lenses I think just helps [us] make a better-
informed decision.
“
Literature Cited 
Beeton, T. A., Caggiano, M. D., & Colavito, M. M. (2022). Use of Risk 
Management Assistance During the 2021 Fire Season: A Technical Report. 
Calkin, D. E., O’Connor, C. D., Thompson, M. P., & Stratton, R. D. (2021). 
Strategic wildfire response decision support and the risk management 
assistance program. Forests, 12(10), 1407. 
Stratton, R. (2020). The Path to Strategic Wildland Fire Management Planning. 
Wildfire, 29:1.
Authors: Tyler Aldworth2, Tyler Beeton2, Niki vonHedemann1, Melanie 
Colavito1, Michael Caggiano3
1Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO. 
2Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff AZ. 
3USFS Region 2, USDA Forest Service, Lakewood, CO
 
August 2023 • cfri.colostate.edu • Contact: Tyler.aldworth@colostate.edu
“
You didn’t have that carryover from team to team 
that made it a long-lasting discussion. It got very 
burdensome to sit in the same conversations and 
then restart every two weeks with a new team ... It 
just became more taxing than beneficial.
“
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
