CFLRP Collaborative Governance 
Assessment Report  
FOR THE RIO CHAMA CFLRP
AUTHORS: Tyler A. Beeton, Adam J. Snitker,  
Nicolena vonHedemann, Melanie M. Colavito,  
Tara L. Teel, Ch’aska Huayhuaca, and Antony S. Cheng
July 2023
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Publication date: July 2023
Cover photo credit: 2-3-2 Partnership field trip to 
Banded Peaks Ranch, August 10, 2022 (Source: 
Dana Guinn).
Authors: Tyler A. Beeton1, Adam J. Snitker1, 
Nicolena vonHedemann2, Melanie M. Colavito2, 
Tara L. Teel3, Ch’aska Huayhuaca1, and Antony S. 
Cheng1
1. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Department of Forest 
and Rangeland Stewardship, Colorado State University, Fort 
Collins, CO
2. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, AZ.
3. Department of Human Dimensions of Natural Resources, 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
Suggested Citation: Beeton, T.A, Snitker, A.J., 
vonHedemann, N., Colavito, M.M., Teel, T.L., 
Huayhuaca, C., and Cheng, A.S., 2023. CFLRP 
Collaborative Governance Assessment Report 
for the Rio Chama CFLRP.
Document Development: In FY21, the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Forest Service (Forest Service) led a collaborative process to develop a 
CFLRP Common Monitoring Strategy that will be required for all newly 
authorized and reauthorized projects under the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). The Forest Service Washington 
Office requested assistance from the Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes (SWERI) in developing and deploying an assessment tool to 
track collaborative governance within and across CFLRP projects through 
time. The collaborative assessment is intended to assess whether CFLRP 
is encouraging an effective and meaningful collaborative approach, a 
component within the CFLRP Common Monitoring Strategy. We developed 
an online, confidential survey that was administered to CFLRP project 
participants. With support from the Forest Service Forest Management, 
Range Management, and Vegetation Ecology program, SWERI conducted 
regional webinars to introduce the assessment and identify project-level 
points of contact, which were followed by in-depth engagement with key 
contacts to determine recruitment strategies, administration timing, and 
project-specific questions. In FY22 and FY23, SWERI will be collecting 
baseline information for all newly authorized and reauthorized projects. 
SWERI will continue to engage in assessing collaborative health and 
performance of CFLRP projects. The Ecological Restoration Institute at 
Northern Arizona University funded survey administration using state 
funding (Arizona Board of Regents through the Technology, Research 
and Innovation Fund), which was used as a match to annual federal 
appropriations to the SWERI.
Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes include three university-
based restoration institutes: the New Mexico Forest and Watershed 
Restoration Institute (NMFWRI), the Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
(CFRI), and the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) in Arizona. These 
institutes were congressionally appointed in 2004 by the Southwest 
Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act (PL 108-317), and the Institutes 
work together to develop a program of applied research and service to 
help create healthy forests, prevent uncharacteristic wildfires, sustain 
the resiliency of water supplies to wildfires, and create jobs. The SWERI 
receive funding from five primary sources: 1) federal appropriations; 2) 
additional federal funding (e.g., the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs 
Act); 3) state appropriations; 4) in-kind support from host universities; and 
5) extramural funding such as grants and agreements. The Southwest 
Ecological Restoration Institutes receive federal appropriations under the 
Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act administered through 
the Forest Service. In accordance with Federal law and USDA policy, these 
institutions are prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, 
national origin, sex, age, or disability. To file a complaint of discrimination, 
write: USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights Room 326-A, Whitten Building 
1400 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, DC, 20250-9410 or call 
(202) 720-5964 (voice & TDD). 
 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI), Northern Arizona University (NAU)
The Ecological Restoration Institute is nationally recognized for mobilizing 
the unique assets of a university to help solve the problem of unnaturally 
severe wildfire and degraded forest health throughout the American West. 
ERI serves diverse audiences with objective science and implementation 
strategies that support ecological restoration and climate adaptation on 
Western-forest landscapes.
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI), Colorado State University 
(CSU)
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute is a science-based outreach 
and engagement organization hosted by the Department of Forest and 
Rangeland Stewardship and the Warner College of Natural Resources at 
Colorado State University. Colorado State University (CSU) is a land-grant 
university with a mission to provide teaching, research, public service, 
and engagement that CFRI strives to uphold. CFRI was established by 
Congress as part of the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes to 
serve as a bridge between researchers, managers, and stakeholders 
working to restore and enhance the resilience of forest ecosystems 
to wildfires in Colorado, the Southern Rocky Mountains, and the 
Intermountain West. CFRI leads collaborations between researchers, 
managers, and stakeholders to generate and apply locally relevant, 
actionable knowledge to inform forest management strategies. CFRI’s 
work informs forest conditions assessments, management goals and 
objectives, monitoring plans, and adaptive management processes.
NAU Land Acknowledgment: Northern Arizona University sits at the base 
of the San Francisco Peaks, on homelands sacred to Native Americans. 
We honor their past, present, and future generations, who have lived here 
for millennia and will forever call this place home.
CSU Land Acknowledgment: Colorado State University acknowledges, 
with respect, that the land we are on today is the traditional and ancestral 
homelands of the Arapaho, Cheyenne, and Ute Nations and peoples. This 
was also a site of trade, gathering, and healing for numerous other Native 
tribes. We recognize the Indigenous peoples as original stewards of this 
land and all the relatives within it. As these words of acknowledgment are 
spoken and heard, the ties Nations have to their traditional homelands 
are renewed and reaffirmed. CSU is founded as a land-grant institution, 
and we accept that our mission must encompass access to education 
and inclusion. And, significantly, that our founding came at a dire cost to 
Native Nations and peoples whose land this University was built upon. 
This acknowledgment is the education and inclusion we must practice in 
recognizing our institutional history, responsibility, and commitment.
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to acknowledge Hannah 
Brown for her insightful feedback on an earlier draft and Angela 
Hollingsworth for designing the layout of this report. We thank Lindsay 
Buchanan and Bryce Esch, Forest Service, for their support in coordinating 
and facilitating regional webinars to introduce the assessment to 
regional and project-level CFLRP leads. We would also like to thank all 
the participants for taking the time to fill out the survey, as well as the 
Rio Chama Executive Committee and especially Dana Guinn, Jeremy 
Marshall, Sandra Dingman, Brandy Richardson, Theresa Nallick, Gabe 
Kohler, and Eytan Krasilovsky for their support in survey recruitment and 
administration. This white paper is published in partial fulfillment of Focal 
Area 2, deliverable #4 in CFRI’s fiscal year 2022 work plan, as well as 
Focal Area 3.3 in ERI’s fiscal year 2022 work plan. This white paper was 
supported with funding from annual federal appropriations to the SWERI. 
Survey administration was supported by funding from the Arizona Board of 
Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Table of Contents
Executive summary........................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction......................................................................................................................................... 5
Approach  ............................................................................................................................................ 6
Framework ..........................................................................................................................................................6
Data collection and analysis ..........................................................................................................................7
Findings................................................................................................................................................ 7
Introductory questions.....................................................................................................................................8
Principled engagement....................................................................................................................................9
Shared motivation..............................................................................................................................................10
Capacity for joint action...................................................................................................................................10
Outcomes..............................................................................................................................................................12
Disruptions...........................................................................................................................................................12
Recommendations to improve the collaborative process ....................................................................14
Discussion and conclusions............................................................................................................ 16
References........................................................................................................................................... 19
Appendix 1: CFLRP Brief................................................................................................................... 20
Appendix 2: SWERI presentation to Rio Chama CFLRP and 2-3-2 Partnership................ 22
Appendix 3: Appended questions.................................................................................................. 33

4                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Executive summary
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
developed a collaboration assessment as part of the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
(CFLRP) Common Monitoring Strategy. The collaboration 
assessment was designed to assess the following 
questions:
1. What are the structural and functional dynamics 
of the collaborative? Does the collaborative exhibit 
characteristics generally associated with healthy, 
well-functioning, and resilient collaboratives?
2. What do participants need or recommend to improve 
the process?
3. To what extent do participants feel the project is 
meeting process, socio-economic, and ecological 
goals? 
4. What challenges or disruptions affect collaborative 
performance and durability?
The SWERI administered an online survey to members 
of the Two Watersheds – Three Rivers – Two States 
Cohesive Strategy Partnership (2-3-2 Partnership), the 
official collaborative for the Rio Chama CFLRP, in the 
winter of 2022. 
The majority of respondents indicated that they agreed 
about the key problems that have impacted their 
landscape, strategies to solve those problems, and the 
purpose and intent of the Rio Chama CFLRP. Respondents 
felt that the collaborative process provided adequate 
venues to identify shared interests and concerns, and 
a neutral space to discuss controversial issues. Also, 
respondents overwhelmingly agreed that the process 
has helped build trust, relationships, internal legitimacy, 
and mutual respect of others’ positions and interests 
even when they are different from their own. A majority 
agreed that they themselves, other organizations, and 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service 
(Forest Service hereafter) were all committed to the 
process. Survey respondents emphasized there were 
strong leaders who worked well across organizations 
and entities, communicated a collaborative vision, and 
motivated others to work together. Respondents felt the 
project had adequate technical expertise and facilitation 
skills to carry out tasks and accomplish their work. A 
majority of respondents indicated that knowledge and 
information were co-produced and shared equitably, and 
that participants were committed and had the flexibility 
to adaptively manage resources and actions through 
social learning. 
However, there were several areas for improvement. These 
included the need for enhanced stakeholder participation, 
engagement, and outreach; increased resource capacity 
(funding and personnel); the development of collaborative 
roles and responsibilities, protocols, and accountability; 
and opportunities to further enhance cross-boundary 
planning and prioritization. 
The Rio Chama CFLRP has started to make progress on a 
number of process, socio-economic, and ecological goals of 
the CFLRP. A majority of respondents reported enhanced 
communication and decision-making, and increased 
opportunities for landscape-scale and cross-boundary 
planning. Most respondents also reported moderate to 
substantial progress on reducing fuel hazards, improving 
or maintaining watershed function, supporting local 
employment or training, and accomplishing more work 
on Forest Service adjacent lands. Many of the desired 
outcomes of the CFLRP may take years to realize. 
A number of disruptions have impacted collaborative 
progress and performance. Biophysical disruptions (e.g., 
Hermit’s Peak/Calf Canyon Fire) and personnel turnover/
vacancies drew resources and attention away from 
collaborative activities and diminished the ability to get 
work done. Other disruptions included limited funding 
and limited industry capacity. The SWERI will continue to 
engage in assessing collaborative health and performance 
of CFLRP projects.
2-3-2 Partnership field trip to Banded Peaks Ranch, August 10, 2022 (Source: Dana Guinn).

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    5
Introduction
The Forest Landscape Restoration Act (FLRA) was 
passed in 2009 and established the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). The purpose of 
the CFLRP was to “encourage the collaborative, science-
based ecosystem restoration of priority forest landscapes”1 
through a competitive funding program administered by 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service (Forest 
Service hereafter) In 2021, CFLRP coordinators, Forest 
Service personnel, and partners led a collaborative process 
to develop the CFLRP Common Monitoring Strategy, a set 
of ecological and socio-economic monitoring questions 
and indicators that will supplement local project multi-
party monitoring plans and will be required for all newly 
authorized and reauthorized projects.2 
One core component of the CFLRP Common Monitoring 
Strategy relates to monitoring collaborative governance.3 
While the CFLRP requires projects to collaborate 
throughout planning, implementation, and monitoring, 
‘collaboration’ was not defined in the FLRA or CFLRP 
requirements, nor did the CFLRP provide specific 
guidelines by which collaborative groups convened and 
engaged in collaborative restoration throughout the life 
of the CFLRP project. This has resulted in a multitude 
of collaborative structures, processes, and practices 
implemented in diverse social and ecological contexts 
across the country. Also, collaborative groups are nested 
within and impacted by changes that occur within 
their group, external changes in social and ecological 
conditions, and a fluid institutional environment, all of 
which require groups to adjust and evolve their structures, 
practices, and processes (Beeton et al., 2022; Ulibarri 
et al., 2020). Yet, a systematic approach to monitoring 
and evaluating attributes of collaborative governance 
and resilience is lacking. Systemic evaluation could 
lead to better understanding of what factors promote or 
challenge collaboration across different contexts, help 
target what kinds of investments are needed, and where 
to maintain and enhance collaborative capacity. 
To address this need, the Forest Service Washington 
Office 
requested 
assistance 
from 
the 
Southwest 
Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) in developing 
and deploying an assessment tool to track collaborative 
governance.3 During the development of the CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy, CFLRP coordinators from 
the Washington Office elicited feedback from CFLRP 
practitioners, CFLRP coordinators, and subject matter 
experts to identify monitoring questions, indicators, 
and available data sources. With respect to collaborative 
governance, partners wanted to address the question, 
how well is the CFLRP encouraging an effective and 
meaningful collaborative approach? CFLRP practitioners, 
coordinators, and subject-matter experts expressed 
interest in documenting collaborative health, function, 
and resilience, as well as performance (perceived 
outcomes). CFLRP practitioners, coordinators, and subject 
matter experts also emphasized the need for a tool that is 
straightforward, not time-consuming, easy to administer, 
and longitudinal. 
We incorporated stakeholder feedback and questions of 
interest developed while drafting the CFLRP Common 
Monitoring Strategy to directly inform the components of 
the collaborative governance assessment. Our objectives 
were as follows:
1. Develop a rigorous, systematic, and longitudinal 
assessment of collaborative governance that is 
grounded in the science and practice of landscape-
scale collaborative forest restoration. 
2. Support program-wide evaluation of collaborative 
progress and performance, and report on findings to 
Forest Service staff and Congress. 
3. Facilitate project-level engagement, reporting, and 
peer-learning to inform local collaborative work and 
adaptive management. 
4. Contribute to the theory and practice of collaborative 
governance through the synthesis of findings and 
lessons learned.
The SWERI administered the collaborative governance 
assessment—an online survey— to the Two Watersheds – 
Three Rivers – Two States Cohesive Strategy Partnership 
(2-3-2 Partnership), the official collaborative for the 
Rio Chama CFLRP, in the winter of 2022. The report 
herein summarizes findings from the collaboration 
assessment. We have also integrated, where appropriate, 
feedback received during our final presentation and open 
discussion with the Partnership. See Appendix 1 for a 
report brief summarizing our findings, and Appendix 2 
for a presentation of findings we led with the Partnership. 
We briefly highlight the approach, followed by a baseline 
assessment of findings and document recommendations 
from respondents to improve the collaborative process. 
 1 PL 111-11 CFLRP Authorizing legislation - https://www.congress.gov/congressional-report/110th-congress/senate-report/370/1
 2 CFLRP National Core Monitoring Strategy - https://www.fs.usda.gov/restoration/documents/cflrp/CMS-Fact-Sheet-final-20221013.pdf
 3 Here, we define governance as “the system of institutions, including rules, laws, regulations, policies, and social norms, and organizations involved in governing environmental resource use and/or protection” 
  (Chaffin et al. 2014). 

6                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Approach  
We developed an online survey to assess: 
1. What are the structural and functional dynamics 
of the collaborative? Does the collaborative exhibit 
characteristics generally associated with healthy, 
well-functioning, and resilient collaboratives?
2. What do participants need or recommend to improve 
the process?
3. To what extent do participants feel the project is 
meeting process, socio-economic, and ecological 
goals? 
4. What challenges or disruptions affect collaborative 
performance and durability? 
Framework 
The survey was structured using concepts from an 
integrative 
collaborative 
governance 
framework 
(Emerson et al., 2012), resilience and adaptability literature 
(Emerson and Gerlak, 2014; Folke et al., 2005; Gupta et al., 
2010), and empirical findings from the first 10 years of 
the CFLRP (Beeton et al., 2022; Butler and Schultz, 2019; 
McIntyre and Schultz, 2020; Schultz et al., 2018).
Collaboration dynamics – To assess collaboration 
dynamics, we operationalized the Integrative Framework 
for Collaborative Governance (Emerson et al., 2012). 
The framework incorporates multiple components of 
collaborative governance that are grounded in collaborative 
practice, link collaboration dynamics to socio-economic 
and ecological outcomes, and promote assessment of 
collaboratives across settings and time. The components 
include principled engagement, shared motivation, and 
capacity for joint action (Emerson et al., 2012). 
Principled engagement refers to ensuring the right 
people are involved, i.e., a representative cross-section 
of people and entities who have a stake in the issue 
participate. Principled engagement also emphasizes the 
principles of open and inclusive communication and 
negotiation, where individuals with diverse perspectives 
and knowledge work together to identify shared 
problems, agree on strategies to solve those problems, and 
agree on the purpose or scope of the collaborative. 
Shared motivation refers to the interpersonal and 
relational elements of collaborative dynamics. Shared 
motivation includes the sub-components mutual trust, 
understanding, and commitment. It is often referred to 
as social capital, or the “glue” that holds groups together 
through networks, norms, rules, and trust that promote 
collective action (Pelling and High, 2005). This glue is 
crucial for effective collaboration; social capital is built 
through investments in social relationships and can be 
expressed through mutual commitment of individuals 
and groups to common collaborative goals.
Capacity for joint action comprises four sub-
components: 
leadership, 
knowledge 
and 
learning, 
resources, and institutional arrangements (Emerson 
and Gerlak, 2014). Leadership is essential for managing 
collaboratives, and leaders can fill many roles including 
convener, sponsor, public advocate, facilitator, and others. 
They are important for: building trust; sensemaking; 
bringing 
people 
together; 
initiating 
partnerships; 
motivating 
people 
to 
work 
together; 
compiling, 
generating, and disseminating knowledge; developing 
visions of and support for change; and managing conflict 
(Folke et al., 2005).
In a collaborative setting, participants should work 
together to co-create and co-develop shared understanding 
and knowledge through social learning; knowledge and 
information should be equally accessible to all members of 
the collaborative; and learning and knowledge should be 
used to inform flexible, adaptive management (Emerson 
and Gerlak, 2014). Social learning occurs through repeated 
interactions and joint problem solving among participants. 
It emphasizes testing, monitoring, and reevaluating 
participants’ 
assumptions 
and 
understanding 
of 
ecosystem responses and feedbacks to learn and adapt 
management actions (Folke et al., 2005; Lebel et al., 2010; 
Sharma-Wallace et al., 2018). Collaboratives often pool 
and share resources to accomplish tasks and get work 
done, including funding, personnel, science and technical 
expertise, facilitation, and coordination.
Institutional arrangements are the processes, protocols, 
and structures needed to manage collaboration over 
time, i.e., the rules of the game. Collaborative structures, 
processes, and protocols should be clearly understood, 
transparent, perceived as fair and equitable, and include 
mechanisms of accountability (Emerson et al., 2012; 
Gupta et al., 2010; Stern and Coleman, 2015). Capacity 
needs change through time, and the relative amount 
of these four capacity types is contingent upon the 
local context – e.g., history of conflict, people involved, 
purpose and objectives of the group, among others 
(Imperial et al., 2016).
Perceived outcomes – Our assessment focuses both on 
perceived “process” outcomes (e.g., did the collaborative 
process reduce conflict, or increase the ability to plan at 
a landscape scale?) and socio-economic and ecological 
outcomes. The outcome metrics chosen for evaluation 
were derived from several sources: the intent of 
the FLRA of 2009 and the CFLRP; project proposals; 
and conversations with local, regional, and national 

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    7
CFLRP coordinators while developing the Common 
Monitoring Strategy.
Challenges or disruptions that affect collaborative 
performance 
and 
durability 
– 
Disruptions—i.e., 
personnel turnover, legal or policy changes, and 
biophysical 
disturbances 
like 
wildfires 
or 
insect 
outbreaks—can happen at any time. These disruptions 
may impact collaborative progress and performance, and/
or force groups to adapt. We developed a list of common 
challenges that CFLRP projects and other landscape 
scale forest collaboratives reported in: 1) breakout group 
discussions and focus group sessions at the 2020 SWERI 
Cross-boundary landscape restoration workshop (SWERI, 
2020) and the 2020 Idaho forest collaborative shared 
stewardship workshops; 2) the 2020 CFLRP Collaboration 
Indicator Survey administered by the National Forest 
Foundation4; and 3) a survey administered to Forest 
Service staff engaged in 2010 and 2012 CFLRP projects 
(Schultz et al., 2018). Identifying current challenges or 
disruptions that CFLRP projects are grappling with 
can support strategic investment towards solutions to 
maintain collaborative performance and durability. 
Needs or recommendations to improve the process 
– We captured respondents’ perspectives on needs and 
recommendations to improve the collaborative process by 
including an open-ended survey question.
Data collection and analysis 
We developed a standardized survey in the 
online survey tool Qualtrics that consisted 
of 21, mostly closed-ended statements using 
a Likert scale. SWERI piloted the assessment 
with and elicited feedback from the Northern 
Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership and 
Northern Blues CFLRP project participants 
(n=37), as well as participants of the Colorado 
Front Range CFLRP (n=3) in FY21 (Beeton et al. 
2022). 
In FY22, SWERI and the Forest Service held 
regionally-focused webinars to introduce the 
assessment and identify key points of contact 
for each newly authorized and reauthorized 
project to help with recruiting participants, 
scheduling the assessment, and identifying 
project-specific questions of interest that were 
appended to the standardized survey, which is 
outlined in our standard operating procedures 
document.5 
The 2-3-2 Partnership coordinator, Rio Chama CFLRP 
coordinators, and other members of the 2-3-2 executive 
committee provided support in recruiting participants 
and administering the survey to the 2-3-2 Partnership 
listserv in December 2022. The survey was sent to all 
members of the 2-3-2 Partnership listserv, which included 
private landowners, tribes, federal, state, and local 
agencies, non-governmental organizations, and research 
and support organizations affiliated with the Rio Chama 
CFLRP. The survey was open for 8 weeks. We received 49 
usable responses, representing 24% of the population. We 
used the statistical software program Statistical Software 
for Social Sciences (SPSS) to summarize survey responses. 
Open-ended questions were analyzed using a thematic 
analysis (Ryan and Bernard, 2003). Small sample sizes 
prohibited further statistical analyses, though this will be 
possible when more data have been collected. 
Findings
Our results are organized as follows. The first section 
includes responses related to respondents’ affiliations, 
motivations for being involved in the CFLRP project, level 
of engagement, and the degree to which respondents 
felt the project was collaborative. We then provide a 
description of findings related to collaboration dynamics 
(i.e., principled engagement, shared motivation, and 
Figure 1: Respondents’ self-identified representation with associated organizations (n=49).
0
5
10
15
20
25
Count
Other (please specify)
Private citizen/interested public
University or research
Non-governmental organization (NGO)
State agency
Local government agency
Tribe
Forest products industry
Other federal agency
USDA Forest Service
14
1
2
0
0
1
21
4
3
2
Group representation
4 CFLRP Collaboration survey administered by the National Forest Foundation - www.nationalforests.org/assets/pdfs/Collaboration-Indicator-Survey-Results-2020-publish.pdf
5 CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment standard operating procedures: https://cfri.box.com/s/hfu5cdk599j5gp5ixphm2qj7gdp4h1ef

8                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
capacity for joint action). We provide a short description of each collaboration dynamic construct in italics to orient 
the reader. We follow with findings on perceived outcomes, disruptions that are challenging collaborative progress 
and performance, and recommendations to improve the process. Results from the appended questions developed in 
coordination with key points of contact affiliated with the Rio Chama CFLRP are presented in Appendix 3. For scale 
items (e.g., strongly disagree to strongly agree, progress scales), figures depict the percentage of survey participants that 
somewhat agree to strongly agree. This was done for consistency in visualization and ease of interpretation. For clarity, 
we describe majority or strong majority results as greater than or equal to 60% agreement and slight majority as greater 
than 50% agreement.
Introductory questions
The 
majority 
of 
participants 
represented 
non-governmental 
organizations and the Forest 
Service. Notably, no respondents 
were affiliated with tribes or 
local 
government 
agencies 
(Figure 1). The most frequently 
reported motivations for being 
involved in the CFLRP project 
were to restore forest resiliency 
(63%), protect or restore water 
resources (51%), reduce wildfire 
risk to communities (41%), and 
increase the pace and scale of 
restoration 
(31%) 
(Figure 
2). 
The level of engagement in 
the CFLRP project during the 
past 12 months varied among 
participants – 77% reported that 
they were moderately to highly 
engaged, while 23% reported low 
engagement (Figure 3). 
Figure 3: Percent of respondents who rated their involvement in this project 
as “Not engaged,” “Low engagement,” “Moderate engagement” or “High 
engagement.”
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
High
engagement
Moderate
engagement
Low
engagement
Not
engaged
23%
32%
45%
0%
Level of engagement
Figure 2: Percentage of respondents who identified the associated motive as reason for their participation in 
the collaborative. Note - respondents were able to select multiple motives (up to three).
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Protect or restore cultural resources
Maintain access to public lands
Avoid litigation
Protect or restore water
Improve recreation opportunities
Create more local jobs
More say in public lands decisions
Reduce community wildﬁre risk
Increase timber harvesting
Protect or restore habitat
Restore forest resiliency
Increase restoration pace and scale
Increase communication
Improve relationships and trust
0%
29%
10%
31%
63%
10%
4%
41%
12%
8%
0%
51%
0%
2%
2%
Motivations to participate
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Very 
collaborative
Collaborative
Somewhat 
collaborative
Not 
collaborative
2%
13%
57%
28%
Degree of collaboration
Figure 4: Percentage of respondents who reported this project to be 
“Not collaborative,” “Somewhat collaborative,” “Collaborative” or “Very 
collaborative”.

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    9
We asked respondents to reflect on the degree to which 
they thought the CFLRP project was collaborative (on a 
scale from not collaborative at all to very collaborative). 
We defined collaboration in the survey as follows: 
“collaboration occurs when multiple parties come 
together to address problems that could not be achieved 
by acting alone. Effective collaboration should typically 
include: inclusive and diverse stakeholder interaction 
throughout the process; venues for open communication 
and negotiation about values, interests, and appropriate 
management actions; and opportunities for social 
learning.” A majority of respondents (85%) indicated the 
CFLRP project has been collaborative to very collaborative 
(Figure 4). 
Principled engagement
Principled engagement refers to having the right people involved 
in iterative and inclusive dialogue to determine shared problems, 
identify shared strategies to solve problems, and agree to the 
shared purpose of the project. 
A majority of respondents (76%) agreed to strongly agreed 
that a representative cross-section of individuals who 
have a stake in the issues and outcomes of the project are 
involved (Figure 5). Open-ended responses to the question 
indicated the need for more participation and engagement 
with Tribes, land grants, traditional forestry and ranching 
communities, other underserved communities, and 
private landowners. Participants suggested additional 
engagement with the biomass and biofuels sectors as well. 
Others suggested that participation was skewed towards 
forest products interests. A majority of respondents 
(93%) agreed to strongly agreed that participants worked 
together to identify shared interests and concerns, and 
a majority (83%) felt the collaborative process created a 
neutral space for CFLRP participants to openly discuss 
controversial issues (Figure 5).
Likewise, a strong majority of respondents indicated that 
participants had a shared understanding of the problems 
that impact their landscape (90%), the strategies to solve 
those problems (87%), and the purpose of the CFLRP 
project (88%) (Figure 6).
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Neutral space 
to discuss 
controversial 
issues
Shared 
interests 
and concerns
Representative 
stakeholders 
involved
43%
33%
27%
66%
33%
50%
Principled engagement:
collaborative environment
Figure 5: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” 
or “Strongly Agree” that representative stakeholders are involved, 
stakeholders have shared interests and concerns, and the collaborative is a 
neutral space to discuss controversial issues.
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Agree on 
project purpose
Agree on 
shared strategies
Agree on 
key problems
Principled engagement: agreement
36%
54%
21%
66%
59%
29%
Figure 6: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that participants agree on the key problems that impact the 
landscape, strategies to solve problems, and purpose of the collaborative.

10                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Seventy percent of respondents felt that the level of 
collaboration between the Rio Chama CFLRP and the 
Forest Service met their expectations during planning 
(Figure 7). A strong majority indicated that collaboration 
between project participants and the Forest Service 
met their expectations during implementation and 
monitoring (66% and 63%, respectively). 
Shared motivation
Shared motivation refers to trust, mutual understanding, 
relationship-building, and commitment to the collaborative 
process. 
A strong majority of participants agreed the collaborative 
process helped build trust in each other (98%), 
relationships (95%), and mutual respect of others’ 
positions and interests (98%; Figure 8). Also, a strong 
majority (95%) of participants trusted in the group’s 
ability to achieve desired actions and outcomes (Figure 8). 
Respondents indicated that they, the Forest Service staff, 
and other project participants were committed to the 
collaborative process (Figure 9). 
Capacity for joint action
Capacity for joint action includes four components: collaborative 
leadership, knowledge and learning, resources, and institutional 
arrangements that support fair governance.
Leadership
Leadership is a critical component for collaborative governance. 
Leaders are needed to convene partners, communicate a shared 
vision, and motivate people to work together.
A strong majority of respondents agreed that the Rio 
Chama CFLRP had leaders who work well with other 
people (98%), maintain and communicate a common 
vision and direction (92%), and motivate others to work 
together (95%, Figure 10). 
Knowledge and learning
Collaboratives should engage in a knowledge generation and 
social learning process for joint action. Knowledge should be 
co-produced, equally available to all partners, and be used to 
implement adaptive management. 
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Collaboration with USFS
48%
23%
28%
38%
25%
38%
Monitoring
Implementation
Planning
Figure 7: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly 
Agree” that the Forest Service met their expectations for collaboration 
during planning, implementation, and monitoring.
Figure 8: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the collaborative process has helped build trust, 
relationships, and mutual respect, as well as the extent to which participants 
trust the group to achieve desired outcomes.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Build mutual 
respect
Build 
relationships
Trust group 
to achieve 
desired 
outcomes
Build trust
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Shared motivation: trust and respect
78%
20%
55%
40%
83%
12%
19%
79%

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    11
Figure 9: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that they, the Forest Service, and other stakeholders are 
committed to the process.
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Other 
stakeholders 
are committed
USFS staﬀ are 
committed
I am committed
12%
86%
59%
26%
46%
51%
Shared motivation: commitment 
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Leaders motivate 
others to work 
together
Leaders 
communicate 
collaborative vision
Leaders work 
well with others
16%
82%
33%
59%
32%
63%
Capacity for joint action: leadership
Figure 10: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the leaders work well with others, communicate a 
common vision and direction, and motivate others to work together.
A strong majority of respondents somewhat agreed 
to strongly agreed that the CFLRP process provided 
opportunities to co-generate knowledge to learn and 
solve problems together (88%), and that knowledge and 
information was shared equally among participants 
(84%). Additionally, strong majorities agreed that 
participants are committed to adjusting management 
practices based on learning and feedback (i.e., adaptive 
management, 83%), they had the flexibility to alter course 
when landscape conditions change (e.g., wildfire affects a 
planning unit, 75%) and when the collaborative changes 
(e.g., new faces or priorities, 72%) (Figure 11). 
Resources
To accomplish tasks and get work done, collaboratives often pool 
and share resources, including funding, personnel time, technical 
expertise, and facilitation, which, in turn, can support buy-in.
Only a slight majority agreed the project had adequate 
access to funds and time to carry out tasks and accomplish 
their work (51% and 54%, respectively). Meanwhile, 
a strong majority of participants agreed to strongly 
agreed they had the appropriate technical expertise (84%) 
and facilitation skills (89%) to accomplish their work  
(Figure 12). 
Institutional arrangements
Institutional arrangements are the rules of the game. They 
include processes, protocols, and structures needed to manage 
collaboration over time. They should be clearly understood, 
perceived as fair and equitable, used appropriately, and include 
accountability mechanisms within and between entities. 
A strong majority of survey respondents somewhat 
to strongly agreed there were protocols in place that 
promote accountability among CFLRP participants 
(81%) and between the Forest Service and CFLRP project 
participants (e.g., decision rules, charters, memoranda 
of understanding, 76%) (Figure 13). Similarly, a strong 
majority agreed those protocols were clearly understood 
among participants (81%), fair and equitable (81%), and used 
appropriately (88%, Figure 13). 
A strong majority of respondents felt that project 
participants understood when and what collaborative 
input was useful to inform Forest Service decisions (67%). 
Further, a strong majority reported the Forest Service was 
responsive to collaborative input (72%) and somewhat 
agreed to strongly agreed the agency was clear with 
CFLRP project participants about the decisions they make 
and why they make them (64%, Figure 14). 

12                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Outcomes
We assessed perceived progress on process, socio-
economic, and ecological outcomes for the Rio Chama 
CFLRP. These outcomes largely mirror the intent and 
goals of the Forest Landscape Restoration Act of 2009 and 
the CFLRP. Notably, the assessment was administered 
during the first year the Rio Chama CFLRP project was 
authorized and funded under the CFLRP, and thus several 
socio-economic and ecological outcomes may not be 
realized for several years. 
According to respondents, the Rio Chama CFLRP has 
supported a number of positive process-related outcomes. 
Those outcomes with the most agreement among 
respondents included enhanced communication (94%), 
enhanced decision-making (94%), landscape-scale planning 
(89%), and cross-boundary planning (89%, Figure 15). A 
strong majority reported moderate to substantial progress 
in meeting the ecological goals of reducing fuel hazards 
(86%) and improving or maintaining watershed function 
(67%, Figure 16). Also, a strong majority of participants felt 
the project had made moderate to substantial progress on 
the socio-economic goals of supporting local employment 
or training (69%) and accomplishing more work on 
adjacent lands (67%, Figure 17).
Disruptions
We developed a list of common challenges that CFLRP 
projects and other landscape scale forest collaboratives 
reported in: 1) breakout group discussions and focus group 
sessions at the 2020 SWERI Cross-boundary landscape 
restoration workshop (SWERI, 2020) and the 2020 Idaho 
forest collaborative shared stewardship workshops; 2) the 
2020 CFLRP Collaboration Indicator Survey administered 
by the National Forest Foundation4; and 3) a survey 
administered to Forest Service staff engaged in 2010 and 
2012 CFLRP projects (Schultz et al., 2018). Based on that 
list, limited available funds (65%), personnel turnover 
(72%), biophysical disruptions (75%), and limited industry 
capacity (84%) were the most significant challenges 
noted by respondents at the time of this survey (Figure 
18). Open-ended responses add some context to these 
perceptions. 
Participants lamented that funds should be allocated 
earlier in the year to enhance planning capacity and 
overcome delays in project implementation. Others 
Figure 11: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly 
Agree” that knowledge and information is co-generated by participants and 
shared equally, that participants are committed to adaptive management, and 
have the flexibility to adapt when conditions change..
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Flexibility 
when forest 
conditions 
change
Committed to 
adaptive 
management
Information 
is shared 
equally
Co-generate 
knowledge
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Knowledge, learning, adaptive management
51%
37%
42%
42%
43%
40%
42%
33%
Flexibility 
when 
collaborative 
changes
30%
42%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Facilitation
Technical
expertise
Time
Funds
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Capacity for joint action: resources
20%
31%
11%
43%
56%
28%
18%
71%
Figure 12: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the collaborative has adequate: funds, time, technical 
expertise, and facilitation skills to accomplish work.

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    13
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Protocols 
are fair 
and equitable
Protocols 
are understood
Accountability 
between 
USFS and 
collaborative
Accountability 
among 
participants
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Capacity for joint action: process and accountability
28%
53%
29%
47%
19%
62%
46%
35%
Protocols 
are used 
appropriately
40%
48%
Figure 13: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly Agree” 
that protocols promote accountability among participants, between Forest Service and 
the collaborative, and that protocols are understood, fair and equitable, and are used 
appropriately.
reported that turnover and vacancies in the Forest Service 
system were key challenges. Participants reported slow 
processes for hiring permanent staff in the Forest Service, 
which leads to temporary “acting” positions and vacancies. 
Participants also reported that the types of hires made by 
the Forest Service did not support implementation—the 
Forest Service has reportedly focused on adding capacity 
in the administrative, coordination, and partnership staff, 
but has done little to add capacity among vegetation 
management staff positions, who support project 
implementation. One respondent noted the challenges 
of virtual and hybrid meetings – while virtual meetings 
provide opportunities for broader participation, the 
virtual approach falls short in facilitating relationship-
building and mutual understanding of differing values 
and opinions:
Virtual meetings have both been a blessing and 
created new challenges to our collaborative. Because 
the landscape is so large, it opens the door to broader 
participation, but the rapport building that happens 
at in person meetings just isn’t there for hybrid/
online participants. Building relationships is really 
what helps generate creative solutions and enables 
stakeholders to identify and understand differences in 
opinion and values.
Participants noted a number of ways in which the group 
has responded to these disruptions. To address lags in 
the dispersal of funds, the San Juan National Forest, 
Forest Stewards Guild6, and Mountain Studies Institute7 
agreed on a gap funding agreement to support ongoing 
collaborative activities until CFLRP funds were in hand. 
Turnover is inevitable, yet it can diminish trust and 
challenge progress. To address this issue, participants 
reported the Forest Service has maintained consistency 
in leadership and worked diligently to fill vacancies with 
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
USFS is 
clear about 
their decisions
USFS is 
responsive 
to collaborative 
feedback
Participants 
understand 
how to inform 
USFS decisions
61%
6%
62%
10%
50%
14%
Capacity for joint action: 
USFS responsiveness and transparency
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
100%
Figure 14: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that they understand how to inform Forest Service 
decisions, the Forest Service is responsive to feedback, and the Forest 
Service is clear about their decisions.
6 The Forest Stewards Guild is a non-governmental organization which “practices and promotes responsible forestry as a means of sustaining the integrity of forest ecosystems and the human communities 
dependent upon them.” (Source: https://foreststewardsguild.org/vision-mission-principles/) 
7 Mountain Studies Institute (MSI) is “an independent not-for-profit mountain research and education center established in 2002 in Silverton, Colorado. MSI develops science that people can use to address 
environmental issues facing the San Juan Mountains.” (Source: https://www.mountainstudies.org/)

14                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Included 
diverse 
perspectives
Enhanced 
decision-making
Minimized 
conﬂict
Enhanced 
communication
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Perceived outcomes: collaborative process
63%
31%
55%
13%
44%
50%
47%
22%
Minimized 
litigation
36%
36%
Enabled 
landscape 
scale planning
Enabled 
cross-boundary 
planning
32%
57%
34%
55%
Figure 15: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that the collaborative process has impacted the 
function and capacity of the collaborative.
permanent or detailed (temporary) positions, while other 
entities (e.g., NGOs) have started to build redundancy into 
their teams so they are not overly reliant on one person to 
engage in collaborative activities. 
Compounding disturbances of drought and large 
wildfires adjacent to the CFLRP have reportedly drawn 
resources and attention away from the Rio Chama CFLRP 
work. In the aftermath of the Hermit’s Peak/Calf Canyon 
Fire, there were new challenges to building collective 
understanding and dialogue about the importance of fire 
as a tool for getting more work done while supporting 
more resilient ecosystems. The fires caused cascading 
downstream impacts to Rio Chama’s program of work, 
communication strategies, and partners. For example, 
prescribed fires planned in the near term were scaled 
back, and partners shifted their focus to more mechanical 
fuels work while the Forest Service and partners worked 
to rebuild trust and address the lasting trauma the 
Hermit’s Peak/Calf Canyon Fire had on local residents and 
communities. The fires highlighted the disproportionate 
vulnerabilities of underserved communities to wildfire. 
Rio Chama CFLRP participants reported potential 
increased interest in considering environmental justice 
and equity as lenses for project planning and monitoring. 
The collaborative group has also shifted focus to post-fire 
recovery, impacts to water resources, and brought in new 
partners, as described here:
This event has shifted collaborative discussion focus 
heavily towards pre-planning for post-fire impacts, 
especially related to water resources and both natural 
and engineered water infrastructure. This prompt 
has increased participation of downstream water 
managers in the collaborative space and interest in the 
Rio Chama CFLR.
Recommendations to improve the collaborative 
process 
We asked participants to suggest recommendations 
to 
improve 
collaborative 
process, 
durability, 
and 
performance. Based on open-ended responses and the 
quantitative data reported herein, we identified four key 
themes for improvement. These included: 1) stakeholder 
participation, engagement, and outreach; 2) resource 
capacity; 3) roles, protocols, and accountability; and 4) 
cross-boundary planning and prioritization. 

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    15
Stakeholder participation, engagement,  
and outreach
Several survey respondents recommended that the Rio 
Chama CFLRP increase communication and engagement 
with Tribes, land grants8, traditional forestry and ranching 
communities, other underserved communities, and 
private landowners. Some participants recommended the 
Rio Chama CFLRP reach out to past partners of the 2-3-2 
Partnership to gauge interest in future participation, and 
increase local community engagement with these groups. 
Participants also suggested additional engagement with 
the biomass and biofuels sectors. In this vein, participants 
noted the need for local champions to serve as a bridge 
connecting information from the Rio Chama CFLRP to 
local communities, and tailoring that information in 
locally-appropriate and context-specific ways:
More consistent communication and use of various 
communication forums and tools is also a need. A clear 
communication plan is under development and very 
much needed, as is an engagement strategy for Tribal 
and underserved communities in our landscape.
Resource capacity
Survey respondents suggested the need for increased 
funding and personnel capacity to support inclusive 
collaborative engagement, planning, and implementation. 
In particular, respondents recommended funding for 
collaborative participants to travel to full Partnership 
meetings and field trips, more funding to pay personnel 
to get work accomplished, and increased funds to support 
implementation on the ground, as noted here:
…the 5 most important projects aren’t necessarily 
completed each year; instead it’s still the #1 or 2 projects 
in each of the sub-geographies that get done based on 
available funding.
Roles, protocols, and accountability
Respondents mentioned that some of the collaborative 
protocols 
were 
in 
development—one 
respondent 
suggested that existing protocols were seemingly 
effective. Others provided recommendations to increase 
accountability and opportunities for informing decisions 
between collaborative members, NGOs, and the Forest 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Improved 
ﬁre use
Reduced 
fuel hazards
Restored
 old growth
Improved or 
maintained 
restoration pace 
and scale
Moderate Progress
Substantial Progress
Perceived outcomes: ecological goals
15%
40%
50%
10%
76%
29%
21%
Improved or 
maintained 
watershed 
function
33%
13%
Improved 
habitat
Invasive 
species
 treatment 
or control
61%
6%
29%
18%
Figure 16: Percent of respondents who reported “Moderate progress” or “Substantial progress” towards ecological goals. Note - 
several participants did not respond to these questions or chose the option “Don’t’ know/not applicable,” and thus were removed from 
this analysis.
8 Land grants – In New Mexico and Colorado, land grants were made to individuals and communities, including a number of Pueblos, by the Spanish and Mexican governments to promote settlement and protect 
rights to land. Source: https://www.srca.nm.gov/land-grants/.

16                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Service. One respondent recommended a two-way flow 
of accountability between the Forest Service on one hand 
and participating NGOs and collaborative on the other:
[We need] mechanisms to document accountability to 
the collaborative process from the Forest Service to the 
collaborative. The accountability seems to only flow in 
the direction from the collaborative and NGOs to the 
Forest Service.
Others reported that the decision-making process was too 
concentrated in the Forest Service or NGO/Forest Service 
sphere. They suggested the need for more “co-working 
[decision] space”: 
NGOs and Agencies seem to just “do the work”, the rest of 
us feel like passengers pulled along.
One specific recommendation was to open up dialogue 
between collaborative members and the Forest Service 
regarding perspectives and expectations for collaboration 
during planning and implementation:
Engage Forest Service staff to discuss their perspectives 
on stakeholder collaborations and their views of the 
benefits of collaboration in forest management overall 
and to provide them tools to apply collaborative best 
practices in their day-to-day work in operations and 
NEPA planning.
Cross-boundary planning and prioritization
One respondent suggested increasing efforts to engage in 
cross-boundary planning and prioritization across the Rio 
Chama landscape:
There needs to be more broad-scale planning that 
spans boundaries. Almost all planning thus far has 
been on individual units. [It’s] hard to see where there 
are common, highly specific goals across the landscape. 
[I] don’t see where there has been much prioritization 
across the landscape.
Discussion and conclusions
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
deployed an online survey to the 2-3-2 Partnership listserv, 
the official collaborative of the Rio Chama CFLRP, in the 
winter of 2022 to assess collaborative health, function, and 
resilience, as well as perceived outcomes of collaborative 
work. Specifically, we assessed: whether the Rio Chama 
CFLRP 
project 
exhibited 
characteristics 
generally 
associated with healthy, well-functioning, and resilient 
collaboratives; the extent to which the Rio Chama CFLRP 
has made progress on meeting process, socio-economic, 
and ecological outcomes; what challenges or disruptions 
affected collaborative performance and durability; and 
actionable recommendations to improve the collaborative 
process from respondents’ perspectives. The assessment 
serves as the collaboration assessment for the CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy (question #12).
The majority of respondents indicated that they agreed 
about key problems that have impacted their landscape, 
strategies to solve problems, and the purpose and 
intent of the Rio Chama CFLRP. Respondents felt that 
the collaborative process provided adequate venues to 
identify shared interests and concerns, and a neutral 
space to discuss controversial issues. Also, respondents 
overwhelmingly agreed that the process has helped build 
trust, relationships, internal legitimacy, and mutual 
respect of others’ positions and interests even when they 
are different from their own. A majority agreed that they 
themselves, other organizations, and the Forest Service 
were all committed to the collaborative process. These 
findings have positive implications for the Rio Chama 
CFLRP. Mutual commitment, especially among those with 
decision-making authority, is critical for collaborative 
Accomplished 
more work 
on adjacent 
lands
Supported 
local 
employment 
or training
Oﬀset 
treatment 
costs 
via byproducts
Reduced 
community 
wildﬁre risk
Moderate Progress
Substantial Progress
Perceived outcomes: socio-economic goals
53%
18%
24%
11%
58%
56%
11%
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Figure 17: Percent of respondents who reported “Moderate progress” 
or “Substantial progress” towards socio-economic goals. Note - several 
participants did not respond to these questions or chose the option “Don’t’ 
know/not applicable,” and thus were removed from this analysis.

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    17
durability. The Forest Service retains decision-making 
authority in treatment planning and implementation 
on Forest Service-managed land. The agency also gives 
substantial discretion in decision-making to local units; 
thus, it is often up to Forest Service unit-level line officers 
to make collaboration a priority by providing staff and 
resources in the CFLRP context (Beeton et al., 2022). 
Survey respondents emphasized there were strong 
leaders who worked well across organizations and 
entities, communicated a collaborative vision, and 
motivated others to work together. Reponses to open 
ended questions specifically called out members of the 
Mountain Studies Institute and Forest Stewards Guild 
as collaborative leaders. Often, groups benefit from 
multiple collaborative leaders who represent a diversity 
of interests across organizational and institutional levels, 
and provide a variety of functions (e.g., coordination, 
expertise/experience) (Emerson and Gerlak, 2014; Ryan 
and Urgenson, 2019). Having diversity and redundancy 
in leadership roles is critical for continuity through 
personnel turnover. Respondents reported the Forest 
Service worked diligently to maintain consistency in 
leadership and fill vacancies with detailed, temporary 
positions, while other entities (e.g., NGOs) worked to 
build redundancy into their teams so they are not overly 
reliant on one person to engage in collaborative activities.
Respondents felt the Rio Chama CFLRP had adequate 
technical expertise and facilitation skills to carry out tasks 
and accomplish their work. A majority of respondents 
indicated that knowledge and information were co-
produced and shared equitably, and that participants had 
the flexibility to adaptively manage resources and actions 
through social learning. A number of activities can be 
used by collaboratives to support social learning and co-
development of knowledge, including field trips, multi-
party monitoring, and joint fact-finding missions. Rio 
Chama CFLRP respondents indicated field trips were the 
best use of their time with respect to collaboration and 
engagement activities (see Figure A5 in Appendix 3). Field 
trips are a critical component of social learning because 
they provide opportunities for groups to let their guard 
down and come to common understandings. Field trips 
can help illustrate how restoration principles translate to 
operations on the ground and allow collaborative groups 
to provide feedback on restoration treatments. Joint 
fact-finding—where stakeholders work together to co-
generate local knowledge and translate it into decision-
making—provides opportunities to develop contextual 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Biophysical 
disruptions
Personnel 
turnover
Legal 
challenges
Funding
Moderate Challenge
Signiﬁcant Challenge
Disruptions
31%
34%
15%
23%
49%
42%
33%
Limited 
agency
 capacity
31%
28%
Conﬂict 
among 
participants
Moving from 
direction-
setting to
 implementation
58%
14%
26%
26%
Limited 
industry 
capacity
4%
3%
26%
Figure 18: Percent of respondents who reported disruptions posed “Moderate challenges” or “Substantial challenges” to collaborative 
performance and durability.

18                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
understanding of local landscapes to support decisions. 
Documenting this learning and knowledge exchange 
is critical to maintaining transparency, equity, and 
institutional knowledge (Beeton et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 
2015). 
However, there were several areas for improvement 
in collaborative function. These included the need for 
enhanced stakeholder participation, engagement, and 
outreach; increased resource capacity (funding and 
personnel); development of collaborative roles and 
responsibilities, protocols, and accountability; and 
enhanced cross-boundary planning and prioritization. 
Responses suggested the need for more engagement 
with and formalized communication and outreach plans 
for Tribes, land grants, other underserved communities, 
and private landowners. None of the survey respondents 
indicated they were affiliated with Tribes. Respondents 
reported inadequate funding, personnel, and time to 
accomplish tasks; in particular, they recommended 
additional funding to pay for participants’ travel fees 
to engage in collaborative activities. A majority of 
respondents indicated in the quantitative portion of the 
survey that there is adequate accountability within the 2-3-
2 Partnership and between the Partnership and the Forest 
Service; most respondents also agreed that collaboration 
between the Forest Service and the Partnership met their 
expectations during planning, implementation, and 
monitoring. Yet, some open-ended responses indicated 
room for improvement in developing accountability 
between the Forest Service and 2-3-2 Partnership, setting 
expectations for collaborative engagement opportunities, 
and clarifying the ways in which the Partnership can 
inform decisions on Forest Service lands.
Survey results also indicated that the Rio Chama CFLRP 
has started to make progress on a number of process, socio-
economic, and ecological goals of the CFLRP. A majority 
of respondents reported enhanced communication 
and decision-making, and increased opportunities 
for landscape-scale and cross-boundary planning due 
to the CFLRP project. A majority of respondents also 
reported moderate to substantial progress on reducing 
fuel hazards, improving or maintaining watershed 
function, supporting local employment or training, and 
accomplishing more work on adjacent lands. However, 
many of the desired outcomes (e.g., increasing fire use, 
enhancing habitat) of the CFLRP may take years to realize. 
A number of disruptions have impacted collaborative 
progress and performance. Turnover and vacancies in 
vegetation management positions needed to scale up 
implementation diminished the collaborative’s ability to 
achieve restoration objectives. Turnover can undermine 
relationships and trust, slow progress, and lead to lost 
institutional knowledge (Beeton et al., 2022; Coleman et 
al., 2020). Collaborative engagement is often not part of 
primary job duties for agency staff; when combined with 
vacant positions and multiple, sometimes conflicting 
mandates and priorities, agency staff may not have the 
capacity to engage to the extent that stakeholders expect 
or desire (Beeton et al. 2022). Participants did note that 
the Forest Service has worked diligently to fill vacancies 
with permanent or detailed (temporary) positions as 
possible. Biophysical disruptions (e.g., Hermit’s Peak/
Calf Canyon Fire) also drew resources and attention away 
from collaborative activities. Wildfires can open up policy 
windows and spur action to increase risk mitigation 
efforts (Mockrin et al., 2018); however, the unlikely event 
of an escaped prescribed fire can do the opposite and halt 
activities, sometimes for an extended period of time.9 For 
the 2-3-2 Partnership and Rio Chama CFLRP, the Hermit’s 
Peak/Calf Canyon Fire shifted focus from prescribed fire 
to mechanical treatments (at least temporarily), post-fire 
recovery planning, and impacts to water resources, and led 
to the engagement with new partners. Other disruptions 
included limited funding and limited industry capacity. 
This 
report 
provided 
a 
baseline 
assessment 
of 
collaborative health and performance among the Rio 
Chama CFLRP. Collaboratives are dynamic—they continue 
to adapt and evolve as needs or priorities change, and in 
response to internal and external disruptions (Imperial et 
al., 2016). Thus, it is important to continue to self-assess 
collaborative progress, durability, and resilience, so that 
groups can identify what is working well, what may need 
some work, and what support and/or guidance is needed 
to address challenges and maintain performance. The 
SWERI will continue to engage in assessing collaborative 
health and performance of CFLRP projects. There will be 
multiple opportunities locally, regionally, and nationally 
for peer-networking and peer-learning events to share 
successes and challenges and learn together about how to 
encourage healthy, durable, and resilient collaboration. 
9 https://wildfiretoday.com/2022/05/20/us-forest-service-pauses-all-prescribed-fire-operations/

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    19
References
Beeton, T.A., Cheng, A.S., Colavito, M.M., 2022. Cultivating 
Collaborative Resilience to Social and Ecological 
Change: An Assessment of Adaptive Capacity, Actions, 
and Barriers Among Collaborative Forest Restoration 
Groups in the United States. Journal of Forestry 
fvab064. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvab064
Butler, W.H., Schultz, C.A., 2019. A New Era for 
Collaborative Forest Management: Policy and Practice 
insights from the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program. Routledge.
Cheng, A.S., Gerlak, A.K., Dale, L., Mattor, K., 2015. 
Examining the adaptability of collaborative governance 
associated with publicly managed ecosystems over 
time: insights from the Front Range Roundtable, 
Colorado, USA. E&S 20, art35. https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-07187-200135 
Coleman, K.J., Butler, W.H., Stern, M.J., Beck, S.L., 2020. 
“They’re Constantly Cycling Through”: Lessons about 
Turnover and Collaborative Forest Planning. Journal of 
Forestry fvaa041. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvaa041
Emerson, 
K., 
Gerlak, 
A.K., 
2014. 
Adaptation 
in 
Collaborative Governance Regimes. Environmental 
Management 54, 768–781. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00267-014-0334-7
Emerson, K., Nabatchi, T., Balogh, S., 2012. An integrative 
framework for collaborative governance. Journal of 
public administration research and theory 22, 1–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/mur011
Folke, C., Hahn, T., Olsson, P., Norberg, J., 2005. Adaptive 
governance of social-ecological systems. Annu. Rev. 
Environ. Resour. 30, 441–473. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.energy.30.050504.144511
Gupta, J., Termeer, C., Klostermann, J., Meijerink, S., 
van den Brink, M., Jong, P., Nooteboom, S., Bergsma, 
E., 2010. The Adaptive Capacity Wheel: a method to 
assess the inherent characteristics of institutions to 
enable the adaptive capacity of society. Environmental 
Science & Policy 13, 459–471. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2010.05.006
Imperial, M.T., Johnston, E., Pruett-Jones, M., Leong, K., 
Thomsen, J., 2016. Sustaining the useful life of network 
governance: life cycles and developmental challenges. 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 14, 135–144. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1249
Lebel, L., Grothmann, T., Siebenhüner, B., 2010. The role 
of social learning in adaptiveness: insights from water 
management. Int Environ Agreements 10, 333–353. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10784-010-9142-6
McIntyre, 
K.B., 
Schultz, 
C.A., 
2020. 
Facilitating 
collaboration 
in 
forest 
management: 
Assessing 
the benefits of collaborative policy innovations. 
Land Use Policy 96, 104683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landusepol.2020.104683
Mockrin, M.H., Fishler, H.K., Stewart, S.I., 2018. Does 
Wildfire Open a Policy Window? Local Government 
and Community Adaptation After Fire in the United 
States. Environmental Management 62, 210–228. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-018-1030-9
Pelling, M., High, C., 2005. Understanding adaptation: 
what can social capital offer assessments of adaptive 
capacity? Global Environmental Change 15, 308–319. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.02.001
Ryan, C.M., Urgenson, L.S., 2019. Creating and sustaining 
collaborative capacity for forest landscape restoration, 
in: A New Era for Collaborative Forest Management. 
Routledge, pp. 78–95.
Ryan, G.W., Bernard, H.R., 2003. Techniques to Identify 
Themes. Field Methods 15, 85–109. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1525822X02239569
Schultz, C., Mclntyre, K., Cyphers, L., Kooistra, C., Ellison, 
A., Moseley, C., 2018. Policy Design to Support Forest 
Restoration: The Value of Focused Investment and 
Collaboration. Forests 9, 512. https://doi.org/10.3390/
f9090512
Sharma-Wallace, L., Velarde, S.J., Wreford, A., 2018. 
Adaptive governance good practice: Show me the 
evidence! Journal of Environmental Management 222, 
174–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.05.067
Stern, M.J., Coleman, K.J., 2015. The Multidimensionality 
of Trust: Applications in Collaborative Natural Resource 
Management. Society & Natural Resources 28, 117–132. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2014.945062
SWERI, 
2020. 
2020 
Cross-Boundary 
Restoration 
Workshop Summary: Advancing all-lands restoration 
in New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, and surrounding 
states. ERI Workshop Report, Ecological Restoration 
Institute, 
Northern 
Arizona 
University. 
https://
cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/
p17192coll1/id/1066/rec/4
Ulibarri, N., Emerson, K., Imperial, M.T., Jager, N.W., 
Newig, J., Weber, E., 2020. How does collaborative 
governance evolve? Insights from a medium-n case 
comparison. Policy and Society 1–21. https://doi.org/10
.1080/14494035.2020.1769288

20                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Appendix 1: CFLRP Brief
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
developed a collaborative governance assessment as 
part of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service 
(Forest Service) Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program (CFLRP) Common Monitoring Strategy1. The 
collaborative governance assessment was designed to 
evaluate collaborative health, function, resilience, and 
perceived outcomes of collaborative work. The SWERI 
administered an online questionnaire to members of the 
Two Watersheds – Three Rivers – Two States Cohesive 
Strategy Partnership (2-3-2 Partnership), the official 
collaborative of the Rio Chama CFLRP, in the winter of 
2022. We received 49 usable responses (24% response rate). 
Figure 1 illustrates what groups were represented in the 
questionnaire. The purpose of this brief is to:
• summarize high-level findings from the collaborative 
governance assessment; and
• document participants’ recommendations to improve 
collaborative performance and progress.
Findings
What is working well for the Rio Chama CFLRP?
Respondents felt that the collaborative process provided 
adequate venues to identify shared interests and concerns, 
and a neutral space to discuss controversial issues. Also, 
respondents overwhelmingly agreed that the process 
has helped build trust, relationships, internal legitimacy, 
and mutual respect of others’ positions (Figure 2). Most 
respondents also agreed that participants were committed 
to the process. These findings have positive implications 
for the Rio Chama CFLRP. Mutual commitment, especially 
among those with decision-making authority, is critical 
for collaborative durability. Survey respondents also 
emphasized there were leaders who were effective 
in working across organizations, communicating a 
collaborative vision, and motivating others to work 
together. There was some evidence of consistency and 
redundancy in leadership so that participants weren’t 
CFLRP collaborative governance assessment: 
Summary of findings for the Two Watersheds – Three Rivers –  
Two States Cohesive Strategy Partnership and Rio Chama CFLRP
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
Figure 1: Respondents’ self-identified representation with associated 
organizations (n=49).
0
5
10
15
20
25
Count
Other (please specify)
Private citizen/interested public
University or research
Non-governmental organization (NGO)
State agency
Local government agency
Tribe
Forest products industry
Other federal agency
USDA Forest Service
14
1
2
0
0
1
21
4
3
2
Group representation
Figure 2: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the collaborative process has helped build trust, 
relationships, and mutual respect, as well as the extent to which participants 
trust the group to achieve desired outcomes.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Build mutual 
respect
Build 
relationships
Trust group 
to achieve 
desired 
outcomes
Build trust
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Shared motivation: trust and respect
78%
20%
55%
40%
83%
12%
19%
79%
1 USDA Forest Service Common Monitoring Strategy - https://www.fs.usda.gov/restoration/documents/cflrp/CMS-Fact-Sheet-final-20221013.pdf

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    21
dependent on any one person. A 
majority of respondents also reported 
that knowledge and information were 
shared equally and that participants 
were committed, and had the flexibility, 
to adapt to changing conditions.
What disruptions have affected 
collaborative 
progress 
and 
performance?
Turnover and vacancies in positions 
needed to scale up implementation 
reportedly 
diminished 
the 
collaborative’s 
capacity 
to 
achieve 
restoration objectives. Turnover can 
undermine trust, slow progress, and 
lead to lost institutional knowledge. 
Participants 
stated, 
however, 
that 
the Forest Service has worked to 
fill vacancies with permanent or 
detailed positions as possible. The 
Hermit’s Peak/Calf Canyon Fire also 
drew resources and attention away 
from collaborative activities. The fire 
shifted focus temporarily away from prescribed fire, and 
led to more interest in post-fire recovery planning, water 
resources impacts, and engagement with new partners. 
Other disruptions included limited funding and industry 
capacity.
Progress towards desired process,  
socio-economic, and ecological outcomes
Respondents reported progress on collaborative process, 
socio-economic, and ecological outcomes, including:
• enhanced communication and decision-making, and 
increased opportunities for landscape-scale and cross-
boundary planning (Figure 3); and
• reduced fuel hazards, improved watershed function, 
support for local employment or training, and more 
work on adjacent lands.
It is important to note that many of the desired outcomes of 
the Rio Chama CFLRP (e.g., increasing fire use, enhancing 
habitat) may take years to realize.
Recommendations to improve the 
collaborative process and performance
Respondents provided a number of recommendations 
to improve the collaborative process and performance, 
including:
• increase 
engagement 
with, 
and 
formalized 
communication and outreach plans for, Tribes, land 
grants, other underserved communities, and private 
landowners. Respondents emphasized the need for 
local champions to facilitate communication transfer 
to local communities and tailoring communication 
and engagement in ways that are locally-appropriate.
• increase funding and personnel capacity to support 
inclusive collaborative engagement, planning, and 
implementation. For example, participants suggested 
the need for stipends for participants to travel and 
engage in 2-3-2 Partnership meetings and committees.
• enhance accountability between the Forest Service 
and 2-3-2 Partnership, document expectations for 
collaborative engagement opportunities, and clarify 
how the 2-3-2 Partnership can inform decisions on 
Forest Service-managed lands. 
• formalize efforts to engage in cross-boundary planning 
and prioritization across the 2-3-2 and Rio Chama 
CFLRP landscape. 
Next steps
Results from this questionnaire provided a baseline 
assessment of collaborative governance among the Rio 
Chama CFLRP and 2-3-2 Partnership. The SWERI will 
continue to engage in assessing collaborative health and 
performance of CFLRP projects, the goal of which is to 
identify where capacities lie and areas for improvement to 
target investments and activities that support resilient and 
durable collaboration.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Included 
diverse 
perspectives
Enhanced 
decision-making
Minimized 
conﬂict
Enhanced 
communication
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Perceived outcomes: collaborative process
63%
31%
55%
13%
44%
50%
47%
22%
Minimized 
litigation
36%
36%
Enabled 
landscape 
scale planning
Enabled 
cross-boundary 
planning
32%
57%
34%
55%
Figure 3: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that the collaborative 
process has impacted the function and capacity of the collaborative.
S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
Authors: Tyler A. Beeton, Adam J. Snitker,  
Nicolena vonHedemann, Melanie M. Colavito,  
Tara L. Teel, Ch’aska Huayhuaca, and Antony S. Cheng
July 2023  • Contact:  Tyler.Beeton@colostate.edu
This work is supported with funding from annual federal appropriations to the 
SWERI and the Arizona Board of Regents through the Technology, Research 
and Innovation Fund. 
IRB approval – This work is approved by the Institutional Review Board 
at Colorado State University (#2679) and Northern Arizona University 
(#1809777-3).

22                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Appendix 2: SWERI presentation to Rio Chama CFLRP and 2-3-2 Partnership
The document can be found online at: https://cfri.box.com/s/4yapf19pwqfn8t9isvz5pnmdmko7t4cx
Tyler Beeton
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University, 
tyler.Beeton@colostate.edu; 
May, 10, 2023 – 2-3-2 Partnership Meeting
CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment: 
Summary of findings for the Rio Chama CFLRP and 2-3-2 Partnership
Objectives for Today
1. Brief reminder of what we are monitoring 
and why
2. Document what is working well
3. Document current challenges impacting 
progress and performance
4. Identify recommendations to improve the 
collaborative process and performance
5.
Next steps and deliverables
6.
Discuss if/how results resonate you and 
how to operationalize recommendations

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    23
Objectives for Today
1. Brief reminder of what we are monitoring 
and why
2. Document what is working well
3. Document current challenges impacting 
progress and performance
4. Identify recommendations to improve the 
collaborative process and performance
5.
Discuss if/how results resonate you
6.
Next steps and deliverables
Background and Context
CFLRP Common Monitoring Strategy
• 2021 – USFS led a collaborative process to 
develop national common monitoring 
strategy
• Core set of social, ecological, and economic 
indicators 
• Meant to:
• supplement but not replace local multi-
party monitoring plans
• Provide standardization across projects
• This survey addresses core monitoring 
indicator question 12: How well is CFLRP 
encouraging an effective and meaningful 
collaborative approach?

24                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
CFLRP Governance Assessment - Approach
Online Confidential Survey
•
Survey: ~20 minutes to answer
•
Collaboration dynamics
•
Collaboration outcomes
•
Recommendations to improve collaborative process
•
Distributed to 2-3-2 Partnership in November-December 
2022
•
49 usable responses – 24% of contact list
•
Results inform:
•
Program-wide evaluation
•
Project-level progress and performance
•
Confidential, longitudinal, and standardized
•
GOAL - Understand what is working well, what needs 
improvement, and how to maintain collaborative progress
and performance through time
Objectives for Today
1. Brief reminder of what we are monitoring 
and why
2. Document what is working well
3. Document current challenges impacting 
progress and performance
4. Identify recommendations to improve the 
process
5.
Discuss if/how results resonate you
6.
Next steps and deliverables

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    25
Collaboration dynamics – Principled engagement 
Strong majority of respondents
•
Shared understanding of the problems that 
impact your landscape
•
Shared understanding of what to do about it
•
Shared agreement on purpose and intent of 
the Rio Chama CFLRP
Collaboration dynamics – Shared motivation
•
Social capital – the “glue” that holds groups 
together
•
Survey respondents
•
Process has built trust, relationships, and 
respect
•
Trust in ability to achieve desired 
outcomes

26                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Objectives for Today
1. Brief reminder of what we are monitoring 
and why
2. Document what is working well
3. Document current challenges impacting 
progress and performance
4. Identify recommendations to improve the 
process
5.
Discuss if/how results resonate you
6.
Next steps and deliverables
Challenges or disruptions
• Limited industrial capacity
• Wildfires that take attention, 
resources, and options away from 
group
• Turnover, vacancies/acting 
positions
• Timing and amount of funding

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    27
Objectives for Today
1. Brief reminder of what we are monitoring 
and why
2. Document what is working well
3. Document current challenges impacting 
progress and performance
4. Identify recommendations to improve the 
collaborative process and performance
5.
Discuss if/how results resonate you
6.
Next steps and deliverables
Collaboration dynamics – Knowledge, learning, and adaptive management
•
Social learning occurs through repeated 
interactions among participants
•
Can reduce conflict, increase understanding, 
action, and trust
•
4 Criteria
•
Participants work together to co-
develop knowledge
•
Knowledge and information is accessible 
to all members
•
Commitment to adaptive management
•
Flexibility to adaptively manage 
resources and actions

28                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Recommendations to improve the collaborative process
Stakeholder 
participation, 
engagement, 
and outreach
Resource 
capacity
Roles, 
protocols, and 
accountability
Cross-
boundary 
planning
Recommendations to improve the collaborative process
Stakeholder 
participation, 
engagement, 
and outreach
Resource 
capacity
Roles, 
responsibility, 
and 
accountability
Cross-
boundary 
planning
More consistent communication and use of various 
communication forums and tools is also a need. A clear 
communication plan is under development and very much 
needed, as is an engagement strategy for Tribal and 
underserved communities in our landscape.
Increased engagement with:
• Tribes, Land Grants, Hispanic forestry and 
ranching communities, private landowners
• Biomass and biofuel sectors
Local champions as connectors to other groups, 
sectors
Formal communication plan and tribal 
engagement strategy

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    29
Recommendations to improve the collaborative process
Stakeholder 
participation, 
engagement, 
and outreach
Resource 
capacity
Roles, 
responsibility, 
and 
accountability
Cross-
boundary 
planning
the 5 most important projects aren’t necessarily 
completed each year; instead it’s still the #1 or 2 projects 
in each of the sub-geographies that get done based on 
available funding.
Increased funds and personnel capacity
• Funding opportunities for travel to Partnership 
meetings and field trips
• Funding to support volunteers
• Increased funds to support implementation
Recommendations to improve the collaborative process
Stakeholder 
participation, 
engagement, 
and outreach
Resource 
capacity
Roles, 
protocols, and 
accountability
Cross-
boundary 
planning
[We need] mechanisms to document accountability to the 
collaborative process from the Forest Service to the 
collaborative. The accountability seems to only flow in the 
direction of from the collaborative and NGOs to the Forest 
Service.
Aligning expectations for collaborative 
engagement and involvement
• Two-way flow of accountability
• More “co-working” space
• Discuss decision-space sideboards and best 
practices for collaboration between Agency and 
broader partnership

30                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Recommendations to improve the collaborative process
Stakeholder 
participation, 
engagement, 
and outreach
Resource 
capacity
Roles, 
protocols, and 
accountability
Cross-
boundary 
planning
There needs to be more broad scale planning that spans 
boundaries. Almost all planning thus far has been on 
individual units. [It’s] hard to see where there are common, 
highly specific goals across the landscape. [I] don’t see 
where there has been much prioritization across the 
landscape.
Cross boundary planning and prioritization across 
2-3-2 landscape
Objectives for Today
1. Brief reminder of what we are monitoring 
and why
2. Document what is working well
3. Document current challenges impacting 
progress and performance
4. Identify recommendations to improve the 
collaborative process and performance
5.
Next steps and deliverables
6.
Discuss if/how results resonate you

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    31
What should you expect next
Short-term – for collaborative discussion and annual 
reporting
• Presentation slide deck
• Larger technical report
• 1-2 page brief on survey findings and discussion today
Longer-term
• Peer-learning sessions with new CFLRP cohort!
Happy to engage in follow-up conversations and/or 
provide support if/when needed!
Iterative process – needs, capacities will change –
periodically take stock and we will reassess in 2026!
Objectives for Today
1. Brief reminder of what we are monitoring 
and why
2. Document what is working well
3. Document current challenges impacting 
progress and performance
4. Identify recommendations to improve the 
collaborative process and performance
5.
Next steps and deliverables
6.
Discuss if/how results resonate you and 
how to operationalize recommendations

32                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Discussion Time
• Do these results resonate with you? What might 
we be missing?
• What else is working well, you want to 
highlight???
• Other challenges??
• Which of recommendations are actionable? 
Which are feasible and desirable? 
• What changes might you make in light of these 
results and how might you go about 
implementing them?
• Where might you need help implementing these 
recommendations?

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    33
Appendix 3: Appended questions
The results to the following questions reported here were 
developed in coordination with the Rio Chama CFLRP 
project coordinator and manager, 2-3-2 Partnership 
coordinator, and partners affiliated with the Rio Chama 
CFLRP and 2-3-2 Partnership. These questions are not part 
of the CFLRP Common Monitoring Strategy.
We asked participants to indicate which, if any, place-
based collaborative or groups they were actively engaged 
with in the 2-3-2 landscape (Figure A1). More respondents 
were engaged with the San Juan Chama Watershed 
Partnership, San Juan Headwaters Forest Health 
Partnership, and Chama Peak Land Alliance, relative 
to other groups in the pre-identified response options 
(e.g., Wildfire Adapted Partnership, Upper San Juan 
Watershed Enhancement Partnership, Cerro Negro Forest 
Council). Respondents had the option of adding other 
groups not listed in the survey. Other groups mentioned 
by respondents included the Rio Grande Water Fund, 
Burned Area Learning Network, Southwest Colorado 
CFLRP, Southwest Colorado Rocky Mountain Restoration 
Communities aﬃliated with this project 
Abiquiu, 
NM 
Tres 
Piedras, 
NM 
Taos,
NM 
Santa Fe, 
NM 
24%
8%
5%
3%
Cuba,
NM 
3%
Canjilon, 
NM 
Dulce, 
NM 
3%
24%
Chama, 
NM 
5%
Arboles, 
CO 
Other
24%
0
20
40
Creede, 
CO 
Pagosa 
Springs, 
CO 
Antonito, 
CO 
0%
0%
0%
0%
Figure A2: Respondents, or the organizations they represent, primary work location within the Rio Chama CFLRP and 2-3-2 
Partnership landscape.  The list was a fixed response. The survey was sent to participants who live or work in these landscapes, 
however some potential respondents did not fill out the survey. 
Figure A1: Number of respondents affiliated with each group. Respondents could select multiple groups.
Upper 
San Juan 
Watershed 
Enhancement 
Partnership 
Santa Fe 
Fireshed 
Coalition 
San Juan 
Chama 
Watershed 
Partnership 
San Juan 
Headwaters 
Forest Health 
Partnership
Local group representation
14
14
5
8
Cerro 
Negro 
Forest 
Council 
3
Northern 
New Mexico 
fuelwood 
Working 
Group 
Wildﬁre 
Adapted 
Partnership 
5
9
Four Rivers 
Resilient 
Forest 
Collaborative 
6
0
3
6
9
12
15
Chama 
Peak 
Land 
Alliance 
Other
11
7

34                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Initiative (RMRI), Rio Trampas Forest Council, Taos 
Valley Watershed Coalition, and the Western Landowners 
Alliance. 
Similarly, we asked respondents to indicate geographically 
where they, or the organization they represent, primarily 
work (Figure A2). Respondents most frequently operated 
in the Santa Fe, NM (24%) and Pagosa Springs, CO (24%) 
areas, though respondents represented many other 
locations.
A large percentage (43%) of respondents indicated that 
they started engaging with the Partnership recently, in 
2021 or 2022. Still, a strong cohort of individuals have 
been engaged since the early days of the Partnership 
(Figure A3). 
A majority of participants (82%) indicated the frequency of 
collaborative engagement opportunities is adequate and 
met their expectations or needs (Figure A4). Participants 
felt that communication and outreach activities like field 
trips, monthly virtual meetings and quarterly in-person 
meetings, and multi-day workshops were the best use of 
their time (Figure A5). 
When asked what specific resources and capacity 
respondents or their organization could contribute 
to the Rio Chama CFLRP, the majority indicated they 
could contribute personnel time, followed by financial 
contributions (Figure A6). Other in-kind contributions 
included technical expertise, such as geospatial support, 
science support, and opportunities to treat forests on 
private lands. Other contributions respondents suggested 
they could provide included grant opportunities, and 
connections to Forest Service Regional Office and 
Washington Office programs and staff. 
Respondents were overwhelmingly accepting of various 
forest management strategies: respondents indicated 
they were moderately to very accepting of prescribed fire 
(90%), strategic removal of trees to reduce hazardous fuels 
(97%), fuel breaks (90%), and managing lighting-ignited 
fires for forest health objectives (92%, Figure A7). 
Figure A3: Percent of respondents who reported when they began to engage in the Partnership by year.
Year respondents began engaging with 2-3-2 Partnership 
5%
5%
24%
19%
3%
0
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
2022 
2021 
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
2016 
2015 
0%
27%
16%
30%

CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama                    35
Figure A6: Number of respondents who reported they, or 
their organization, could contribute “Direct financial support,” 
“Personnel time,” “Other in-kind” resources, or “Other” resources 
to this CLFRP project.
Other 
resources 
Other 
in-kind 
resources 
Personnel 
time 
Direct 
ﬁnancial 
support 
8
30
4
3
Available resources to contribute 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Monthly 
virtual meetings 
with quarterly 
in-person meetings
Monthly 
virtual 
meetings
Monthly 
in-person 
meetings
Field trips
Preferred forms of communication and engagement
31%
24
5
6
Annual 
multi-day, 
in-person 
workshops
21
Other
15
0
5
10
15
20
25
4
Figure A5: Number of respondents who reported they preferred a specific type of communication and engagement for this CLFRP project.
Figure A4: Percent of respondents who reported this project has “Not 
frequent enough,” “Just right,” or “Too frequent” engagement opportunities.
Too 
frequent 
Just right 
Not frequent 
enough 
18%
82%
0%
Frequency of engagement opportunities 
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
100%

36                    CFLRP Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Rio Chama
Figure A7: Percent of respondents who reported that certain forest 
management practices were either “Moderately acceptable” or 
“Very acceptable.” 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Let 
lightning-ignited 
ﬁres burn
Fuel 
breaks
Reduce 
hazard 
fuels
Prescribed 
ﬁre
Moderately acceptable
Very acceptable
Acceptance of forest management practices 
68%
22%
79%
18%
66%
24%
24%
68%

S O U T H W E ST 
ECOLOGICAL
RESTORATION 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
