Preparing landscapes and 
communities to receive and 
recover from wildfire through 
collaborative readiness
A CONCEPT PAPER
AUTHORS: Ch’aska Huayhuaca, Antony Cheng, 
Tyler Beeton, John Sanderson, Alan Barton, 
Aaron Kimple, Melanie Colavito, Joseph Zebrowski, 
Jarod Dunn, Nicolena vonHedemann, Andrew Slack
September 2023
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Publication date: September 2023
Cover: Concept illustration developed by Lauren 
Brown (LV Brown Studios, LLC ) during the 
development process for this report.
Authors: Ch’aska Huayhuacaa, Antony 
Chenga, Tyler Beetona, John Sandersonb, Alan 
Bartonc, Aaron Kimpled, Melanie Colavitoe, 
Joseph Zebrowskic, Jarod Dunna, Nicolena 
vonHedemanne, Andrew Slacka
a Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, CO
b Center for Collaborative Conservation, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO
c New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute, New 
Mexico Highlands University, Las Vegas, NM
d Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes
e Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, AZ.
Suggested Citation: C. Huayhuaca, A.S. Cheng, 
T.A. Beeton, J.S. Sanderson, A.W. Barton, A.D. 
Kimple, M.M. Colavito, J. Zebrowski, J. Dunn, 
N. vonHedemann, A.W. Slack., 2023. Preparing 
landscapes and communities to receive and 
recover from wildfire through collaborative 
readiness: A concept paper. Southwest 
Ecological Restoration Institutes.
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI) was established 
in 2005 as an application-oriented, science-based outreach and 
engagement organization hosted at Colorado State University. 
Along with institutes at Northern Arizona University (Ecological 
Restoration Institute) and New Mexico Highlands University (New 
Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute), CFRI is one of 
three institutes that make up the Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes, which were authorized by Congress through the 
Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act of 2004. 
We develop, synthesize, and apply locally relevant, actionable 
knowledge to inform forest management strategies and achieve 
wildfire hazard reduction goals in Colorado and the Interior West. 
We strive to earn trust by being rigorous and objective in 
integrating currently available scientific information into decision-
making through collaborative partnerships involving researchers, 
land managers, policy makers, interested and affected 
stakeholders, and communities. CFRI holds itself to high standards 
of scientific accuracy and aims to promote transparency in the 
production and communication of science-based information. 
Always carefully evaluate sources for rigor and appropriateness 
before applying them in your own work.
CSU Land Acknowledgment: Colorado State University 
acknowledges, with respect, that the land we are on today is the 
traditional and ancestral homelands of the Arapaho, Cheyenne, 
and Ute Nations and peoples. This was also a site of trade, 
gathering, and healing for numerous other Native tribes. We 
recognize the Indigenous peoples as original stewards of this land 
and all the relatives within it. As these words of acknowledgment 
are spoken and heard, the ties Nations have to their traditional 
homelands are renewed and reaffirmed. CSU is founded as 
a land-grant institution, and we accept that our mission must 
encompass access to education and inclusion. And, significantly, 
that our founding came at a dire cost to Native Nations and 
peoples whose land this University was built upon. This 
acknowledgment is the education and inclusion we must practice 
in recognizing our institutional history, responsibility, 
and commitment.
Document Development: This paper presents the Stages of 
Collaborative Readiness framework, which emerged from 
practice-based knowledge through participation in the Northern 
Colorado Fireshed Collaborative (NCFC). An early version 
of the framework was incorporated into the NCFC’s charter 
by the lead author (former NCFC coordinator). Following a 
literature review, the concept paper was developed by vetting 
the framework through collaborative networks (specifically the 
Southwest Collaboratives Support Network and the Colorado 
Forest Collaboratives Network), and then gathering input and 
feedback from co-authors across the Southwest Ecological 
Restoration Institutes (CFRI, NMFWRI, and ERI) and the Center for 
Collaborative Conservation at Colorado State University.  
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank the 
participants of the Northern Colorado Fireshed Collaborative who 
provided input and review on early versions of the Collaborative 
Readiness Framework for the charter, especially Daniel Bowker, 
Kerry Major, Corrina Marshall, Emily Olsen, Paul Orbuch, Maria 
Pezza, Gretchen Reuning, and Monte Williams. We thank Brett 
Wolk for conceptual feedback throughout the development of 
the framework, as well as Lauren Brown and Reid Armstrong for 
designing and providing feedback on the Stages of Readiness 
graphic, respectively. Editing and layout by Hannah Brown and 
Angela Hollingsworth.
 
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute at Colorado State 
University receives financial support under the Southwest Forest 
Health and Wildfire Prevention Act provided through the United 
States Forest Service. In accordance with Federal law and 
United States Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is 
prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, sex, age, or disability. To file a complaint of discrimination, 
write: USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights Room 326-A, Whitten 
Building 1400 Independence Avenue, 
SW Washington, DC, 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice 
& TDD). 
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University

Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................................................................4
INTRODUCTION.........................................................................................................................4
PURPOSE AND NEED FOR THE COLLABORATIVE READINESS FRAMEWORK...............5
Defining terms and roles........................................................................................................6
FIRESHED-FOCUSED COLLABORATIVES........................................................................................6
SUBSTANTIVE ROLES & CONTRIBUTIONS OF FIRESHED-FOCUSED COLLABORATIVES.7
STAGES OF COLLABORATIVE READINESS FRAMEWORK .............................................11
BACKGROUND ........................................................................................................................................11
STAGES OF COLLABORATIVE READINESS.....................................................................................13
Stage 1: Establish a community of partners around a shared vision .................................14
Stage 2: Translate vision into strategy.........................................................................................15
Stage 3: Translate strategy into action........................................................................................18
Stage 4: Scaling out and sustaining momentum.......................................................................20
CONCLUSION.............................................................................................................................22
REFERENCES.............................................................................................................................24

4                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This concept paper presents a Stages of Collaborative 
Readiness 
framework. 
Collaborative, 
multi-party 
entities provide fundamental roles and contributions 
to prepare landscapes and communities to receive and 
recover from wildfire (identifying, connecting, and 
aligning stakeholders; co-developing strategies at scale; 
synchronizing operations; and facilitating science-
informed, continuous learning). The framework applies 
insights from the collaborative development literature to 
the context of forest and wildland fire risk management. 
It embeds the fundamental roles and contributions 
within a four-stage framework, identifying stage-
appropriate benchmarks and outcomes to increase 
the ability of a collaborative over time to serve those 
important functions. 
The framework includes the following overlapping 
stages: 1) establish a community of partners around a 
shared vision; 2) translate that vision into strategy; 3) 
translate strategy into action; and 4) scale out impact 
and sustain momentum. During Stage 1, partners 
coalesce and establish a community of partnership 
around a shared vision. Depending on the history of 
collaboration, this may require a lengthy period of 
preparation to identify and connect the ‘right’ set of 
stakeholders for the context, requiring investment in 
human resources to conduct outreach and engagement, 
facilitate extensive trust- and relationship-building, 
and lead the development of Stage 1 benchmarks like 
written agreements documenting mutual commitment. 
In Stage 2, partners translate vision into appropriately 
scaled strategies by coupling stakeholder engagement 
processes with analytical platforms and tools to co-
produce maps that provide an important foundation for 
a landscape spatial strategy, and which stimulate the 
dialogue necessary for developing other components 
of a strategy at scale. Stage 3 marks the transition from 
strategy to action and from planning to implementation, 
and the emphasis of collaboration shifts to synchronizing 
operations and supporting joint activities that increase 
the pace and scale of implementation. By Stage 4, the 
collaborative has been sufficiently institutionalized to 
scale and sustain its internal and external functions, and 
is able to navigate disruption and change long term with 
a robust collaborative adaptive management process. Few, 
if any, collaboratives will follow a linear course through 
these stages, and collaborative formalization into a new 
incorporated entity may not be the desired endpoint; 
different models will work for different firesheds. 
Sensitivity to context is essential for designing effective 
and durable cross-boundary and cross-scale collaboration.
The purpose of the framework is to enhance the ability 
of collaboratives to progress within and between stages, 
and to enhance their ability to receive and deploy funding 
to increase the pace and scale of implementation by 
supporting the collective work of partners. It is intended 
to help collaborative entities articulate and justify 
funding and capacity needs at different stages, and to 
encourage more equitable investments in collaboratives 
situated in landscapes with high wildfire risk that are 
early in their development, with limited capacity to obtain 
and mobilize funds for project implementation. The 
framework could be used to: inform self-assessment and 
adaptation by collaboratives; gauge or measure progress 
and development over time; track performance and 
increase accountability; or guide allocation of financial 
and other resources to collaboratives relative to need.
INTRODUCTION
Managers and scientists have long advanced the notion 
that preventing or stopping all wildland fires is neither 
a feasible nor a desirable goal (Arno, 2000; Thompson et 
al., 2018). Forests and plants regenerate through periodic 
fire, resulting in a rich diversity of wildlife habitat, 
functioning watersheds, and an abundance of goods 
and services beneficial to society. However, increasingly 
large and severe fires are putting these resources and 
assets at risk of long-term damage or loss. The issue isn’t 
a simple binary choice of “yes” or “no” to fire, but how to 
ready wildland landscapes and adjacent communities to 
receive and recover from fires in ways that are less likely 
to result in irreparable loss or harm to people, and reduce 
the time it takes for a community to recover (USDA 
Forest Service, 2023). 
Collaborative, multi-party entities and organizations 
working on shared goals to complement the work of 
public land management agencies like the U.S. Forest 
Service have proliferated since the 1990s (Charnley & 
Poe, 2007; Cheng, Danks & Allred, 2011, Huayhuaca, 
2019). While many forest collaboratives retain a focus 
on rural livelihoods and social-economic wellbeing, 
forest collaboratives increasingly focus on addressing 
wildfire risk, particularly in areas experiencing growth 
into the wildland urban interface—or WUI (Paveglio et 
al., 2015)—or for source water protection. Collaboratives 
can play a fundamental role in preparing landscapes and 
communities to receive and recover from wildfire by 
laying the foundation of four essential building blocks: 
identifying, connecting, and aligning stakeholders; co-
developing strategies at scale; synchronizing operations; 
and facilitating science-informed, continuous learning. 
Getting to a point of stability and capacity to play this role 
long term requires time, resources, and learning-by-doing. 

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    5
There are many resources in the literature that elaborate 
the benefits of collaboration (e.g., Brick, Snow, & van de 
Wetering, 2001) or provide general guidance for designing 
successful multi-stakeholder or inter-organizational 
collaboratives (e.g., Bryson, Crosby & Middleton Stone, 
2006; Wondolleck & Yaffee, 2000). This document focuses 
specifically on the complex challenge of how to prepare 
for a future with wildfire and advance collaborative 
cross-boundary forest and wildland fire management 
systems, or firesheds, in fire-prone regions of the western 
U.S.1. Collaboratives create value in different ways as they 
develop (Imperial et al., 2016), and the types and amounts 
of resources needed change over time. In this concept 
paper, we present a four-stage Collaborative Readiness 
framework as a way to gauge collaboratives’ ‘readiness’ to 
lay those essential building blocks and support long-term, 
fireshed-level engagement. 
PURPOSE AND NEED FOR THE 
COLLABORATIVE READINESS FRAMEWORK
The need for this framework arises from the confluence 
of several trends. Over the last 20 years, increasingly large 
and severe fires and longer fire seasons put infrastructure 
within the expanding WUI at risk of damage or loss, 
driving a need to scale up wildfire risk mitigation 
(Dennison et al., 2014; Yung et al., 2022). Numerous 
policies, programs, organizations, and large amounts of 
funding have been directed at addressing this challenge 
over the past 20 years, such as the National Fire Plan of 
2000 or the 10-Year Wildfire Crisis Strategy of 2022 (USDA 
Forest Service, 2022a). Collaboration features prominently 
in programs and policies like the Joint Chiefs Landscape 
Restoration Partnership, Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program, and Shared Stewardship. With 
the proliferation of forest collaboratives and widespread 
recognition of the need for cross-boundary collaboration, 
federal and state agencies are increasingly expected to 
work with collaboratives to meet national- and state-level 
policy goals related to wildfire mitigation (Beeton et al., 
2022; Yung et al., 2022). Concurrent with these trends is 
the emergence of decision support tools grounded in risk 
management science that can be used to support cross-
boundary strategic planning and prioritize geographic 
areas where investments of limited resources will be most 
likely to have the greatest impact on desired outcomes. 
It would seem the stage is set for strategic, outcomes-
based, cross-boundary collaboration to ready landscapes 
to receive and recover from wildland fire. And yet, 
forest restoration activities remain disconnected across 
landownerships and jurisdictions; without spatially 
explicit strategies at scale, large wildfires will continue to 
overwhelm uncoordinated and opportunistic mitigation 
actions under increasingly extreme environmental 
conditions (Government Accountability Office [GAO], 
2015). Thus, there is still work to be done to strengthen 
collaboration in areas that currently lack stakeholder 
engagement to develop and support cross-boundary 
strategic 
planning, 
prioritization, 
implementation, 
monitoring, and adaptive management. In areas that 
have collaboratives already, there is a need to bolster 
those entities to effectively navigate and use decision 
support tools and incorporate relevant science to co-
develop, implement, and adapt long-term landscape-level 
strategies.  
This concept paper presents a Stages of Collaborative 
Readiness framework, which provides stage-appropriate 
benchmarks 
and 
outcomes 
of 
fireshed-focused 
collaboratives as they evolve in their role in preparing and 
advancing systems to live with wildfire. The purpose of 
the framework is to inform reasonable expectations of 
the kinds of outputs and outcomes that can be achieved at 
different stages, and enhance the ability of collaboratives 
to progress within and between stages, such that they 
are increasingly able to: a) fulfill important functions in 
their fireshed into the future, and b) receive and deploy 
funding to increase the pace and scale of implementation 
by supporting the collective work of partners. This 
framework is intended to increase understanding 
of the time and resources needed to establish a high 
functioning, mature collaborative, and help collaborative 
entities articulate and justify funding and capacity needs 
at different stages. The framework aims to encourage 
more equitable investments in collaboratives situated 
in landscapes with high wildfire risk that are early 
in their development, with limited capacity to obtain 
and mobilize funds for project implementation. The 
framework could be used to: inform self-assessment and 
adaptation by collaboratives; gauge or measure progress 
and development over time; track performance and 
increase accountability; or guide allocation of financial 
and other resources to collaboratives relative to need. It 
applies concepts from existing collaborative development 
literature to collaboratives situated within a wildland 
fire management context, and elaborates on several 
substantive roles and contributions that collaboratives 
can provide in a fireshed.
The paper begins by defining firesheds and collaboratives 
before presenting an overview of four roles and 
contributions 
that 
fireshed-focused 
collaboratives 
can provide. This is followed by a description of the 
1 While insights may be applicable more broadly, this paper focuses on fire-prone regions of the western United States, as they share 
commonalities in patterns of public lands ownership and wildfire, and other natural resource policy contexts, in addition to similar fire regimes.

6                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
background and components of a framework delineating 
the stages of readiness that collaboratives commonly 
step through and must maintain to prepare firesheds 
and communities to receive and recover from wildfire. 
The framework was developed in coordination with a 
large landscape collaborative in northern Colorado and 
is based on decades of collaborative governance theory 
development and on-the-ground practice. The audience 
for this paper includes collaborative conveners, leaders, 
and members; boundary organizations2 that support 
collaborative capacity and decision-making; agencies and 
organizations that sponsor or fund collaboratives and 
collaborative work; and evaluators, researchers, or other 
observers of collaboration. 
DEFINING TERMS AND ROLES
FIRESHED-FOCUSED COLLABORATIVES
Wildfire risk3 occurs at the intersection of biophysical 
factors (like fuels and topography) and social factors 
(like human behavior and policy processes) operating 
at different spatial and temporal scales (Kline, Ager & 
Fischer, 2015). This presents a scale mismatch challenge4 
resulting from a failure to link information defined at 
one scale with the scale at which decisions are made or 
implementation occurs (such as planning boundaries and 
processes that leave key stakeholders out to the detriment 
of plan implementation or outcomes).  Recent efforts 
to address the scale mismatch challenge through risk 
assessment modeling offered the concept of “Firesheds,” 
defined in the Fireshed Registry and the 10-year U.S. 
Forest Service strategy “Confronting the Wildfire Crisis” 
as ~250,000 acre containers characterizing the likelihood 
of an ignition spreading to communities and exposing 
buildings (Ager et al., 2021; USDA Forest Service, 2022a). 
For the purposes of this paper, we adapt an earlier 
definition of “fireshed” by Bahro et al. (2007), using the 
term to describe a landscape-scale5 geographic area where 
wildland fire has the potential to overlap and interact 
with socially important resources and assets, and where 
coordinated mitigation, response, and recovery strategies 
could influence wildfire outcomes relative to those values. 
By rooting itself in the strategic goals of the National 
Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy (USDA 
Forest Service, 2014)—i.e., restore and maintain landscapes, 
wildfire response, and fire adapted communities—this 
definition of a fireshed extends to a broader wildland 
fire management system (Zimmerman & Stutler, 2020). It 
also identifies a flexible spatial scale to potentially ‘fit’ the 
extent of the problem and address scale mismatch. The 
high degree of heterogeneity and spatial variability that 
a fireshed is likely to have in terms of socially important 
values and priorities among actors at multiple levels on 
multiple scales (jurisdictional, managerial, etc.) presents 
a tradeoff. On the one hand, benefits of a higher-level 
governance arrangement include the ability to consider 
landscape-level ecological processes and align with 
the scale at which long-term forest, fuels, and resource 
management planning occurs on national forests; on the 
other hand, this scalar advantage can come at the cost 
of sensitivity to the local-level needs and priorities of 
stakeholders (Young, 2002). Overcoming this tradeoff to 
coordinate actions in a fireshed over an extended period 
of time requires collaboration to occur across scales. 
Collaboration 
brings 
autonomous 
stakeholders 
together across boundaries (e.g., jurisdictions, levels 
of government, or public/private/civil sector divides) 
to explore, deliberate on, and possibly implement co-
developed solutions through structured processes 
(Emerson, Nabatchi, & Balogh, 2012; Gray, 1989; Wood & 
Gray, 1991). Multi-organizational entities that primarily 
function to sustain cross-boundary collaboration over 
time to achieve collective goals, or carry out an otherwise 
unachievable public purpose, are commonly referred to 
in the literature as collaborative governance regimes, 
or CGRs (Emerson, Nabatchi & Balogh 2012). As CGRs 
develop, they may begin to act as a single entity, taking 
on characteristics of a new collaborative organization, 
in which relationships are governed by rules and norms 
(Imperial, 2005). CGRs may formalize into collaborative 
organizations to acquire funding and human resources, to 
stabilize and encourage longevity for the partnership, or 
add value through services such as convening dialogues, 
resolving conflict, building capacity, catalyzing action, 
etc. (Imperial & Koontz, 2007). CGRs and collaborative 
2  Boundary organizations are formal organizations that play an intermediary role between different arenas (e.g., science and policy) or 
different levels of management. They translate knowledge through boundary objects (such as maps or reports) and facilitate knowledge co-
production across boundaries where needs or interests converge, with accountability to either side of the boundary (Sternlieb et al., 2013). 
3  Wildfire risk is characterized by the combination of likelihood and intensity (together called hazard), and exposure and susceptibility 
(together called “vulnerability”) (Scott, Thompson & Calkin, 2013).
4  A scale mismatch challenge is a type of social-ecological systems problem in which scale dependencies of an ecological system’s critical 
functions or processes fail to align with scale dependencies of a social system’s management actions, regulatory institutions, or other social 
processes and behaviors affecting ecosystems (Bodin, 2017; Cash et al., 2006; Kline et al., 2015; Young, 2006).
5  In their hierarchy of planning scales, Addington et al. (2018) define a ‘broad landscape’ as equivalent to a National Forest or 4th level 
watershed (100,000-1,000,000+ acres), and a ‘local landscape’ as 1,000-10,000+ acres, or a 6th level watershed. Smaller subsequent scales 
are project areas, treatment units, and stands. For the purposes of this paper, ‘landscape scale’ or ‘landscape level’ generally refers to the 
broad landscape, though we acknowledge that flexibility is needed in defining the appropriate spatial scale or watershed level for a fireshed.

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    7
organizations can evolve over time along a spectrum 
of formality that includes unincorporated networks, 
loose coalitions, fiscally sponsored partnerships, public 
bodies, and nonprofits. For the purposes of this paper, 
we use the term “collaborative” to broadly refer to CGRs 
and collaborative organizations that function at least in 
part to convene dialogues and processes of collaboration. 
This definition includes place-based collaboratives 
with ties to local communities or geographies, as well 
as large landscape or “all-lands” collaboratives that 
align programmatic resources and actions across 
multiple 
communities 
and 
geographies. 
All-lands 
collaboratives generally support cross-scale, landscape-
level collaboration by coordinating, communicating, 
and implementing a shared vision across large 
landscapes and multiple landownerships, convening 
partners from multiple agencies and organizations, and 
potentially smaller-scale collaboratives (Cowan & Davis, 
2022). Whatever their configuration, fireshed focused 
collaboratives address scale challenges by operating at 
a spatial scale appropriate to fit the extent of wildfire 
risk planning and management problems, while also 
bringing together the many actors across that landscape 
needed to inform decision making at the right levels to 
make an impact.
SUBSTANTIVE ROLES & CONTRIBUTIONS OF 
FIRESHED-FOCUSED COLLABORATIVES
Among other general functions, Emerson and Nabatchi 
(2015) describe substantive functions of collaboratives, 
which relate to collaboratives’ externally directed goals 
and their intended outcomes for the social-ecological 
system of which they are a part. For fireshed-focused 
collaboratives, intended outcomes generally pertain 
to readying landscapes and communities to receive 
and recover from wildfire through some combination 
of efforts to increase landscape resilience to wildfire, 
improve the safety and effectiveness of wildfire response, 
enhance community adaptedness and preparedness 
for wildfire, and improve the ability of communities to 
recover after wildfires. In this section we characterize 
substantive functions as the iterative and ongoing roles 
and contributions that fireshed-focused collaboratives 
can perform in pursuit of intended outcomes: identifying, 
connecting, and aligning stakeholders; co-developing 
strategies at scale; synchronizing operations; and 
facilitating 
science-informed, 
continuous 
learning 
(Figure 1). We present these roles and contributions as 
ideal scenarios, but we recognize that social, political, 
economic, and other contextual factors may prevent or 
constrain collaboratives from serving these functions; we 
discuss some of these constraints in Section II: Stages of 
Collaborative Readiness.
Identifying, connecting & aligning stakeholders
Coordinating action to overcome scale mismatch 
challenges in a fireshed requires long-term engagement 
among stakeholders across boundaries and scales. 
Fireshed stakeholders are individuals and entities that 
have jurisdictional authority over, are interested in, or 
are affected by, wildland fire mitigation, response, and 
recovery among firesheds of concern6.  Collaboratives 
can provide the structures and venues for inclusive, 
transparent, and open participation of all participants. 
Over time and through iterative processes, these 
stakeholders a) build a composite vision and mission to 
address wildfire risk to their shared values; b) agree to 
share risks, responsibilities, and resources in pursuit of 
that vision and mission; and c) establish a framework to 
ensure the continuity of the collaborative environment as 
needed to achieve desired outcomes in their fireshed. 
Identifying, 
connecting & aligning 
stakeholders
Synchronizing 
operations
Co-developing 
strategies at scale
Science informed, 
continuous learning
Figure 1. Substantive roles and contributions of fireshed-focused 
collaboratives
6  We use the term “stakeholder” as shorthand to refer to those with interests in or potential to affect or be affected by wildland fire 
management decisions. When considering who are stakeholders, it is important to consider communities whose rights, opinions, and 
influence have historically been marginalized (Bendtsen, Clausen & Hansen, 2021). It is also important to recognize that many Indigenous 
communities have a legal status that is different from other stakeholders or partners. For example, Tribal Nations in the US have a 
government-to-government relationship with the federal government, a consideration that makes it incorrect to lump them in with other 
stakeholders or ‘the general public’. Instead, Sarkki, Heikinnen, and Lӧf (2021) recommend the term rights holders be used when engaging 
Indigenous peoples and Tribes in collaboration around land and resource management.

8                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
Place-based collaboratives are well-positioned to build 
and sustain trust among partners and serve as neutral 
arbiters of conflict among organizations. Place-based 
collaboratives with goals that include forest health, 
wildfire, watershed health, rural livelihoods, and/or 
community sustainability (e.g., watershed groups, forest 
health partnerships, wildfire councils, and some resource 
conservation districts) are particularly situated to do 
this because they already have broad-based ties to the 
communities impacted by wildfires. Such groups can 
provide a point of access for local community members 
to engage in fireshed-level issues, and as a result have 
greater sensitivity to local values and priorities. 
In landscapes where place-based collaboratives do 
not yet exist, these processes can be catalyzed (or 
potentially convened, if resources allow) by other kinds 
of community-connected organizations that are hubs of 
local communication and trusted local knowledge, but 
have primary functions other than multi-stakeholder 
collaboration (e.g., land conservancies, conservation 
districts, fire protection districts, and local governments). 
Alternatively, an existing process convening diverse 
stakeholders for a fixed time around a targeted outcome 
(like Community Wildfire Protection Plan [CWPP] work 
groups) could be leveraged to address a larger set of issues 
over a longer period of time. Sponsors of collaboration 
(i.e., those funding the endeavor) may also contract with 
a professional facilitator to convene the process, though 
these facilitators may not have broad-based ties to 
impacted communities or subject matter expertise.  
All-lands collaboratives operate at a scale more 
commensurate with firesheds, but there are potential 
tradeoffs in terms of access for diverse participation by 
community-level stakeholders. Increasing the spatial 
scale at which collaboration takes place simultaneously 
increases the heterogeneity of values, economies, and 
politics represented by participants, which require the 
accommodation of appropriately scaled decision-making 
structures (Heikkila & Gerlak, 2005; Kark et al., 2015). 
This tension between problem ‘fit’ and participation has 
been called the paradox of scale in collaboration (Cheng 
& Daniels, 2005), where barriers to inclusive collaboration 
are lower at smaller scale, but the problem requires 
collaboration at larger scales. In firesheds fortunate 
enough to have multiple place-based collaboratives, all-
lands collaboratives can function as a “meta-collaborative” 
by leveraging their access to local communities while 
helping to coordinate and scale up the impacts of smaller-
scale groups (Cowan & Davis, 2022, p. 5). In the absence of 
place-based collaboratives, all-lands collaboratives must 
rely on other kinds of community-connected partners to 
access community-level stakeholders and avoid becoming 
too top-heavy.
The specific partners and stakeholders engaged will vary 
by context and over time. Community-connected partners 
and nongovernmental organizations that serve as hubs 
of local communication and trusted local knowledge 
should be recruited early on, as these entities will play an 
important role in outreach to more diffuse populations of 
community residents and landowners across the fireshed. 
Likewise, nonprofits working at larger scales that serve 
as hubs of broader communities of practice can bring 
valuable knowledge and resources to the table. Leadership 
and decision authorities, implementers, and managers 
of relevant jurisdictions play a crucial role in setting the 
stage for discussions about common goals and values; they 
must be recruited and engaged early and often to begin 
building trust through interaction and communication. 
Jurisdictions may include Tribal Nations, which are 
sovereign entities that may require a specific approach 
to government-to-government relations. They may also 
include land grants, acequias, and other existing local and 
regional governance structures.  Collaboratives should 
ensure that crucial, powerful, or influential local entities, 
and entities that would benefit from participation, 
are invited to the table. Also critical to the process are 
science partners and researchers with expertise and 
local knowledge about wildland fire behavior, mitigation, 
management, and social science. Boundary organizations 
with the mission to unite and integrate science into land 
and wildland fire management decision-making, such as 
the Fire Science Exchanges supported by the Joint Fire 
Science Program, the Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes, or Cooperative Extension, can serve as bridges 
to the research community. 
Co-developing strategies at scale
Collaboratives can bring stakeholders together to do 
fireshed-scale strategic planning across jurisdictions and 
ownerships to address wildland fire behavior, wildfire 
risk, and impacts of wildfire to values and resources 
people care about. This involves multiple scales of 
management action from the project and watershed levels 
to the entire landscape of the fireshed to accomplish a 
strategy for meaningful risk reduction. Locally developed 
CWPPs and watershed assessments can be effectively 
supplemented by science-based analytical platforms and 
spatial decision support frameworks that characterize 
risk and risk management to support planning at larger 
scales. Grounded in risk management science, these 
tools mathematically parameterize consequences to 
resources and assets from fire (both beneficial and 
harmful), and generate outputs like maps, tables, and 
other data visualizations to identify priority locations and 
actions on the landscape (Colavito, 2021). The goal of such 
actions may not be to prevent or stop fire completely, 
but to: increase the likelihood that landscapes and their 

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    9
Quantitative risk 
assessments, or QRAs 
(Scott et al., 2013), assess 
the potential for wildfire 
to interact with values 
and resources people 
care about and the 
positive and negative 
impacts to those values 
and resources should 
a wildfire occur. QRAs 
are computer modeling 
simulations that utilize 
empirical data to: (a) calculate the likelihood of a 
wildland fire igniting and spreading under different 
weather and topographic scenarios; (b) estimate the 
expected fire intensity as expressed by flame length 
for each scenario; (c) incorporate local stakeholder 
knowledge about the extent to which highly-valued 
resources and assets (HVRAs) would be affected 
(both positively and negatively) by different types of 
fire intensities; and (d) integrate wildfire risk based on 
local stakeholders’ weighting of the relative importance 
of the HVRAs. HVRAs can include built infrastructure 
(homes, water supply infrastructure, utility transmission 
infrastructure, communications facilities, recreation 
facilities) as well as ecological resources (old-growth 
forests, critical habitat for sensitive terrestrial and 
aquatic species, riparian areas and wetlands). QRA 
outputs often include “hot spots” or color-coded 
gradients for locating which HVRAs would be most 
impacted by wildland fire, both positively and negatively.
Scenario investment 
prioritization and planning 
modeling couples 
the outputs of QRA 
with costs of different 
management options 
and budget constraints 
(Ager, 2022; Ager et 
al., 2021). Given limited 
resources, these models 
can help stakeholders 
identify what types of 
work can be done to have 
the highest likelihood of 
changing the outcomes 
of fire to HVRAs given the cost –i.e., a “bang 
for the buck” tradeoff analysis for different 
budget scenarios (Dunn & Wolk, 2023).
Potential 
Operational 
Delineations 
(PODs) are a 
spatial planning 
framework in which 
fire responders, 
resource managers, 
and other cross-
jurisdictional 
partners bring 
their local knowledge to a process to identify areas 
of risk and opportunity for wildfire containment and 
suppression, facilitated by spatial analysis tools 
developed and maintained by the U.S. Forest Service 
Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS) (Thompson et 
al., 2016). Through a series of workshops, participants 
use reference layer maps (e.g., roads, burned area 
perimeters, topography, and jurisdictional boundaries) 
to identify potential control lines, or PCLs, that will 
have a high likelihood successfully containing wildfire. 
PODs were initially developed for incident response 
and management, but have increasingly been used 
for pre-fire fuels mitigation and fire planning (Stages 
of Collaborative Readiness). The result is a network 
of spatial containers that can used as summary units 
for spatial data, such as locations of HVRAs, to inform 
treatments within a POD or along POD boundaries.
Integrating Spatial Tools with Collaborative Strategy
PODs can be combined with QRA and other spatial 
analytics to identify prioritize areas for fuels and forest 
health treatments, support safe and effective wildfire 
response, and identify suppression and non-suppression 
opportunities in advance of ignition (Dunn et al., 2020). 
If an objective of the collaborative strategy is to promote 
more prescribed and managed fire on the landscape, 
this must be tiered to actions designed to increase 
HVRA resilience. Localized planning processes such 
as watershed wildfire plans or CWPPs often focus on 
reducing risk and improving HVRA resilience by lowering 
their susceptibility to wildfire loss or damage up to a 
threshold of fire intensity, and increasing the benefits 
they receive from fire. By expanding the scope to a larger 
fireshed, partners can identify areas on the landscape 
where investment in mitigation is likely to yield desired 
outcomes, prioritize those areas for outreach and 
preparation, and take advantage of windows of opportunity 
as they open up across the landscape. Collectively 
recognizing that fire is inevitable and acknowledging 
what can realistically be achieved through mitigation 
could also feed into collaborative planning for post-fire 
recovery. Spatial planning tools can be used to prioritize 
preparing infrastructure for the aftermath of wildfire within 
(and possibly beyond) the boundaries of the fireshed.
BOX 1: Spatial Decision Support Frameworks and Tools Examples
Example of risk-informed investment prioritization 
from Chaffee County, Colorado (Dunn & Wolk 2023)
Quantatative risk assessment output from 
Chaffee County, Colorado (Dunn & Wolk 2023)
POD Network delineated on the Grand Mesa Uncompahgre 
and Gunnison National Forests (Ritter & Caggiano 2022)

10                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
embedded communities can receive fire with reduced 
loss or damage to valued resources and assets, promote 
safe and effective fire response, and restore ecosystem 
services and functioning. Three spatial decision support 
frameworks with relevance to fireshed systems include 
quantitative risk assessments (Scott, Thompson & Calkin, 
2013), scenario investment prioritization and planning 
(Ager, 2022), and Potential Operational Delineations 
(Thompson et al., 2016) (See Box 1: Spatial Decision 
Support Frameworks and Tools Examples). 
A spatial strategy: 1. delineates geographic areas where 
different wildfire outcomes are to be achieved; 2. outlines 
a suite of coherent, connected actions tiered to those 
outcomes that will be carried out by specific entities over 
a specified time period; and 3. describes the conditions 
under which those actions are expected to be effective in 
producing the outcomes. A hand-in-hand combination 
of analytical platforms and local knowledge can be 
used to identify priorities and co-develop a spatially 
explicit strategy linking desired outcomes, potential 
fire mitigation and response actions, and effectiveness 
parameters across scales. 
While spatial decision support frameworks and tools 
like QRA and PODs can be run with minimal stakeholder 
input (e.g., by fire response teams alone), they are 
well positioned to invite collaborative engagement 
with a broader set of stakeholders. The models and 
outputs (e.g., maps) generated by spatial decision 
support frameworks do not provide “The Answer” for 
a collaborative, but they can facilitate communication 
among a diversity of individuals to develop shared 
language and understanding, and to advance learning, 
dialogue, and deliberation around strategy at spatial 
scales commensurate with wildfire potential (Davis et 
al., 2021). Spatial decision support products are further 
strengthened and made actionable when they are 
the outcome of collaborative processes that expand 
participation beyond fire response teams to include land 
managers, biological resource specialists, local interested 
and affected parties, landowners, community-connected 
partners, project contractors, and other implementers. 
These individuals can help identify HVRAs to 
incorporate into the frameworks, locate them on the 
landscape, define potential scenarios, and ultimately 
increase the likelihood that the resulting products will 
be used (Beeton & Caggiano, 2022). Incorporating local 
knowledge and values also advances local ownership of a 
product that could otherwise be perceived as out of touch 
with local concerns.
Collaboratively produced maps provide an important 
foundation for a spatially explicit strategy and 
support the dialogue necessary for developing other 
components of a strategy at scale; these discussions 
might include monitoring indicators and timeframes 
for assessing the effect of smaller-scale actions on 
predicted and actual wildfire outcomes, or identifying 
where to target community outreach and engagement 
activities in advance of project implementation. Another 
potential component of a fireshed strategy at scale are 
standard operating procedures (SOPs) for coordinated 
implementation across jurisdictions, ownerships, and 
conditions, especially when implementing prescribed fire 
or managing wildfires. 
Synchronizing operations
Coordinating 
cross-jurisdictional 
actions 
among 
project implementers (e.g., fire managers or foresters) 
requires a firm foundation of trust. Collaborative 
processes of interaction (e.g., planning) and structures 
(e.g., committees) provide venues to connect and build 
trust among the many jurisdictions with authority and 
capacity for wildland fire management within a fireshed. 
Opportunities to share resources, communicate across 
organizational boundaries, and ‘think outside the box’ can 
increase awareness of and ability to utilize a fuller range 
of response options to safely achieve desired outcomes 
(Zimmerman & Stutler, 2020). Collaborative activities 
can also build trust among field-level personnel from 
different organizations and agencies, which is essential 
for effective coordination in complex and fluid situations 
(Saab et al., 2013) like prescribed fire implementation 
or wildland fire response and management.  When 
developing and applying collaborative strategies and 
SOPs, operations specialists must establish and sustain 
trust through frequent communication, cooperative 
training, and working on fires together. Sharing risks 
(including the political risks faced by organizations and 
agencies utilizing prescribed or managed fire) requires 
the knowledge that others “have your back” and will stand 
beside you when unexpected events happen.
Facilitating science-informed, continuous learning
Collaboratives 
can 
facilitate 
continuous 
learning 
among stakeholders about the science and practice of 
forest health restoration, wildland fire risk mitigation, 
response, and recovery. Co-developed strategies must 
incorporate locally relevant forest, fire, risk management, 
and social science knowledge; collaboratives can help 
ensure that strategies are tailored to local contexts and 
applied through participatory processes of engagement. 
Before employing science-based analytical platforms 
to supplement local knowledge and expertise, science 
partners and boundary organizations should work with 
(or be embedded within) collaboratives to build literacy 

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    11
about those decision support tools. Stakeholders need 
time to internalize the inputs and outputs of models so 
they are better equipped to engage in the fireshed-level 
strategic planning process. Decision makers need to be 
able to understand and explain the science and products 
to their constituents and colleagues. Managers and 
implementers need to understand the capabilities of 
the analytical tools to better utilize the information in 
decision making (Zimmerman & Stutler, 2020).
The management options laid out in a co-developed 
landscape level strategy can be constrained or enabled 
by social and political influences, like acceptability of 
fuels management treatments (Zimmerman & Stutler, 
2020). Collaboratives can lead or coordinate outreach 
and communication efforts with communities about 
the science and practice of wildland fire and risk 
mitigation. Community-connected partners and place-
based coalitions are well positioned to understand local 
contexts, community characteristics, and social networks, 
and can tailor and target communication and outreach 
strategies locally based on the larger landscape strategy—
e.g., working to build trust to increase acceptance of 
treatments, or increase local capacity to plan for and 
respond to wildfire (McCaffrey et al., 2012, Paveglio 
et al., 2015). In a collaborative setting, community-
connected partners can coordinate and draw on each 
other’s lessons learned and the expertise of partners (e.g., 
communications specialists, public information officers, 
and social scientists) to ensure consistent messaging, 
accurate science translation, and a transparent and 
accessible science process. 
Collaboratives can facilitate the co-development and 
application of ecological and socio-economic monitoring 
to inform collaborative adaptive management (CAM) by 
providing a stable, predictable, and long-term process 
for knowledge co-production and social learning 
among partners (Cheng et al., 2019; Scarlett, 2013). CAM 
approaches to landscape-scale wildfire risk mitigation 
in the western US have proliferated in the wake of the 
establishment of the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program (CFLRP) in 2009 (Barrett et al., 
2021), but are often applied outside of the CFLRP policy 
context (Butler & Schultz, 2019). Research on CFLRP 
CAM performance suggests that it is important to 
institutionalize the process; documents that detail timing 
and sequence of actions and responsible parties are 
formally incorporated into the bureaucratic decision-
making processes of the agency(ies) where decision 
authority lies (Cheng et al., 2019). 
STAGES OF COLLABORATIVE READINESS 
FRAMEWORK 
BACKGROUND 
The substantive roles and contributions of collaboratives 
described in the previous section characterize what 
fireshed-focused collaboratives can potentially achieve 
in support of their intended outcomes. However, getting 
to a place where partners are capable of fulfilling those 
roles and performing together takes time and resources, 
and requires stepping through stages of collaborative 
readiness. Prior to introducing the framework and its 
four stages, this section briefly presents its origins.
The concept of collaborative readiness is rooted in 
the theory and practice of collaborative development 
and change. Multi-stage frameworks describing the 
theoretical development and evolution of collaboratives 
have emerged from the collaboration and institutional/ 
organizational literature (Imperial et al. 2016; Taylor and 
Cheng 2012; Imperial 2022; Ulibarri et al. 2020; Siddiki and 
Ambrose 2022; Bell and Olivier 2022; Heikkila and Gerlak 
2016), as well as from applied insights from experience 
with programmatic investments in collaborative capacity 
(e.g., the National Forest Foundation; see Wyckoff & 
DiBari, 2008). According to this literature, collaboratives 
evolve over time, going through stages of activation, 
collectivity, and institutionalization, followed by either 
stability, decline, re-orientation, or re-creation (Imperial et 
al., 2016). 
In the first stages of collaborative development—
typically characterized by creativity and low resistance 
to change—collaborative entrepreneurs and champions 
investigate the potential public value of creating a new 
collaborative. If there is a niche to fill, collaborative 
leaders will begin acquiring inputs to create and sustain 
the collaborative (Imperial & Koontz, 2006). As long as the 
public value generated is still evident, the collaborative 
may continue acquiring resources and may formalize or 
even incorporate (e.g., as a nonprofit). If the collaborative 
has built in strong feedback loops for monitoring and 
evaluation and commitment remains high, the group 
may adapt as the need for change becomes evident. As 
context and interests change, the group may shift or 
expand the scope of collaboration and take on new issues 
or policy problems. Alternatively, they may spin off new 
collaborative partnerships to address different issues 
outside the scope or scale of the original collaborative. 
The collaborative may decide it has attained its collective 
goals and decide to disband. Or it may fail to adapt as it 
experiences mission drift, declining membership and 
commitment, performance problems, and external 
disturbances, leading to rapid or gradual collapse 

12                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
(Imperial et al., 2016; Ulibarri et al., 2020). Collaboratives 
may go dormant for a period and regenerate when the 
need arises on the landscape. Even as new collaborative 
partnerships emerge, they may build on the infrastructure 
and capacity developed by previous collaboratives in the 
area (Taylor & Cheng, 2012; Monroe & Butler 2016). 
The collaborative development stages focus solely on 
the collaborative entity regardless of its social-ecological 
context, and there is not one-to-parity with the stages 
proposed here in the Collaborative Readiness Framework. 
However, the premise is the same: collaboratives provide 
value in different ways as they evolve, and produce 
different outputs and outcomes along the way. In turn, 
they require different resources and support as they 
develop, depending on internal dynamics and local 
context (Imperial et al., 2016; Taylor & Cheng, 2012; 
Ulibarri et al., 2020). 
The Stages of Collaborative Readiness framework emerged 
from practice-based knowledge through participation 
in the Northern Colorado Fireshed Collaborative 
(NCFC), an all-lands collaborative of governmental and 
non-governmental organizations covering approximately 
4 million acres in the northern Colorado Front Range 
(Figure 2). The network connects over 50 organizations, 
including several watershed coalitions and forest and 
wildfire partnerships at different stages of development. 
The NCFC connects place-based collaboratives already 
working across the landscape, and operates as a platform 
for coordinated forest management activities to enhance 
landscape resilience to wildfire by collaboratively 
identifying, building support for, and implementing 
projects in strategic priority areas. 
This framework was initially developed with input 
from NCFC partners as a way for funding organizations 
(specifically the USDA Forest Service) to allocate resources 
to 
collaboratives 
and 
other 
community-connected 
partners in a way that is equitable and transparent, and 
also accounts for differences in the ‘readiness’ of each 
collaborative to receive and deploy funds to implement 
on-the-ground projects. Since its initial development in 
coordination with the NCFC, the framework has been 
refined by insights from other regional collaborative 
learning networks (i.e., the Southwest Collaboratives 
 Figure 2. Northern Colorado Fireshed Collaborative boundary

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    13
Support Network and the Colorado Forest Collaboratives 
Network). 
Beyond the NCFC, we have observed a tendency for state 
and federal grant programs (as well as researchers) to 
overlook younger or smaller collaboratives in favor of 
investing in more mature, well-resourced collaboratives 
with a track record of success—so-called “shovel ready.” 
Many projects that typically receive funding have 
capacity that surpasses under-represented local networks 
and collaboratives. Often, historically under-represented 
groups and rural, under-resourced communities have 
little capacity to hire staff, develop proposals, secure 
matching funds, and effectively compete for funding 
opportunities that could support rural economies and 
promote ecosystem sustainability in locally plausible and 
desirable ways. 
Further, under-resourced groups may not have the 
technical expertise or experience to co-design restoration 
strategies and monitoring plans and use spatial decision-
support tools and processes to inform strategies. These 
are critical antecedents for moving from direction-
setting to implementation and developing a multi-year 
implementation strategy. As a result, lower-capacity 
projects are often left out of large funding opportunities, 
creating a feedback loop where existing capacity begets 
more capacity (Cheng & Dale, 2020; Smith, 2023). With 
this framework, we hope to encourage more equitable 
investment in early-stage collaboratives or in landscapes 
with high risk but low collaborative capacity. 
STAGES OF COLLABORATIVE READINESS
The Stages of Collaborative Readiness framework 
(Figure 3) aims to develop an outcomes-focused model 
to a) enhance the ability of collaboratives to fulfill 
important functions, and b) receive and deploy funding 
to increase the pace and scale of implementation 
by supporting the collective work of partners. It 
applies insights from collaborative development 
literature to the context of forest and wildland fire 
risk management. It embeds the substantive roles and 
contributions of fireshed-focused collaboratives (which 
are iterative and ongoing) to varying degrees within a 
four-stage framework, with each stage representing 
increased ability over time of a collaborative to serve 
those important functions. The framework includes the 
following overlapping stages: 1) establish a community 
of partners around a shared vision; 2) translate that 
vision into strategy; 3) translate strategy into action; 
and 4) scale out impact and sustain momentum.
For each stage, the substantive roles and contributions of 
fireshed-focused collaboratives are translated into critical 
components of work, associated skills, and benchmarks 
of readiness. Each stage includes a table summarizing the 
critical components of work and benchmarks of readiness. 
Key factors that can affect and constrain progress towards 
benchmarks or between stages are also highlighted. 
The framework may be useful to collaboratives for self-
assessment and adaptation, and to help them articulate 
and justify their capacity and financial needs at different 
stages. It can also be applied by outside interests to 
gauge or measure progress and development over time, 
track performance, increase accountability, and inform 
expectations of the kinds of outputs and outcomes that 
can be achieved by collaboratives at different stages. 
In the NCFC, the framework has been used to guide 
the allocation of funding to collaboratives and other 
community-connected partners relative to need. 
Importantly, we agree with a caveat noted across the 
literature: as inter-organizational or multi-stakeholder 
arrangements, collaboratives are dynamic systems 
and we do not assume any inherent linearity or 
sequential patterns of progression through stages. 
Collaboratives may be working on benchmarks at 
multiple stages simultaneously and/or may need to 
return to a previous stage due to internal or external 
disruptions (Beeton et al., 2022). A single collaborative 
may contain committees operating at different stages 
simultaneously. Likewise, in firesheds with multiple 
place-based collaboratives, each may be participating 
in an all-lands collaborative at a different stage of 
readiness (such is the case for the NCFC).   
A key advantage of collaborative arrangements is 
their ability to fit problem context. Increasingly large 
Figure 3. Stages Of Collaborative Readiness. Illustration credit: Lauren Brown

14                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
investments in collaboratives necessitates mechanisms 
for accountability, but it is also important to consider 
tradeoffs to flexibility and avoid over-prescription of 
form or function. For this reason, we have avoided 
trying to capture specific timelines or costs associated 
with each stage and its benchmarks. However, there 
may be circumstances where incorporation of such 
information could be valuable and appropriate. Because 
this framework was developed in the context of a single 
all-lands collaborative and its constituent place-based 
collaboratives (as well as community-connected partners, 
agencies, and other kinds of partners), its components 
and benchmarks need to be further cross-walked with 
other collaboratives in different contexts and at different 
scales to determine its generalizability and proposed 
utility in other settings.
Stage 1: Establish a community of 
partners around a shared vision 
Stage 1 encompasses an initial period during which 
there may be an identified need for cross-boundary 
collaboration, but no collaborative (or even a history 
of collaboration) in place. In such cases, there may be 
a lengthy period of basic preparation and situation 
assessment to analyze context, define broad conceptual 
goals (i.e., “reduce wildfire risk”), and identify 
conveners (e.g., the entity responsible for planning 
and leading the effort, which may be a collaborative 
entrepreneur or champion, an existing collaborative 
organization or community-based nonprofit, boundary 
organization at a university, local government staff, or 
contracted facilitator).
While not limited to Stage 1, a critical component of 
work at this stage is fulfilling the substantive role of 
identifying, connecting, and aligning stakeholders. 
Early on, the convener of collaboration identifies key 
stakeholders and interests, potential members, missing 
partners, and begins bringing people together to initiate 
relationship and trust building processes (Emerson & 
Nabatchi, 2015; Wyckoff & DiBari, 2008).  Membership 
may be unstable initially, as participants weigh whether 
and how collaboration will advance their individual 
or organizational goals (Imperial et al., 2016). Through 
iterative processes of engagement, stakeholders explore 
problem definition, define the appropriate geographic 
boundaries, find zones of agreement, and develop their 
composite vision, mission, and shared theory of change 
for addressing risk, safe response, and recovery from 
inevitable wildfires (Table 1). As they do so, collaborative 
membership, processes, and structures begin to stabilize 
(Imperial et al., 2016). 
Critical components at this stage
Benchmarks of readiness
•	 Assess situational context and identify key 
stakeholders (e.g., jurisdictional leadership, 
science partners, community-connected 
partners, underrepresented and/or historically 
marginalized individuals and communities, etc.) 
•	 Conduct outreach and engage with key 
stakeholders, recruit partners
•	 Establish processes and structures that 
promote inclusivity, transparency, accountability, 
trust, and conflict management 
•	 Define the problem, the appropriate fireshed 
boundary (and sub-boundaries, if needed)
•	 Articulate zones of agreement, shared 
theory of change, and composite vision and 
mission for addressing risk, safe response, 
and recovery from inevitable wildfires
•	 Forge shared intent and document 
commitment to work together through 
iterative processes of engagement
•	 Situation assessments/stakeholder assessments, 
member lists, or other documentation of 
interested parties that should be and/or are 
represented as process participants
•	 Indications that key science partners and other 
critical Stage 2 partners have been identified for 
consultation or are in place among participants
•	 Critical paid positions filled or contracted out 
(e.g., coordinator/facilitator, executive director)
•	 Written statements communicating a 
shared understanding of a clearly defined 
problem and composite vision 
•	 Codes of conduct, process protocols
•	 Written agreements (e.g., a collaborative framework, 
charter, by-laws, or memorandum of understanding 
[MOU]), with evidence of support and commitment 
from entities with decision authority over the resource
Table 1. Critical components and benchmarks of collaboratives at Stage 1 readiness

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    15
Collaboratives early in this stage are generally working 
to build the basic internal capacity needed to convene 
and participate in collaborative processes, including 
sufficient 
human 
resources 
with 
the 
necessary 
skills to fill critical roles, such as coordination and 
direction. Critical roles are often filled initially by 
volunteer champions and conveners, but this can lead 
to overdependence on volunteer capacity, bottlenecks, 
burnout, disruption (if the volunteer leaves before new 
capacity is recruited), and associated loss of relationships, 
institutional knowledge, etc. Collaboratives should 
endeavor to raise funds for a paid position or contractor 
to convene and carry out the basic internal functions 
of collaboration. Important skills for conveners during 
Stage 1 include facilitation, collaborative process 
design, systems thinking, conflict management, and 
grant writing (Cheng & Sturtevant, 2012). Knowledge 
of local social networks (held by the convener and/or 
collaborative partners) and subject matter (of forest 
and fire management, science, and policy) is needed 
throughout this stage to effectively recruit, understand 
decision space, define the problem, etc. 
An outcome of investing time and resources in early-
stage collaboration should include increased capacity 
to engage the ‘right’ set of partners to ready landscapes 
and communities to receive and recover from future 
fires. This shared intent should be described in written 
statements communicating a clearly defined problem 
and composite vision. A stakeholder assessment and 
description of the jurisdictions within the defined 
boundary of the fireshed can help identify critical 
partners including: leadership and decision authorities, 
community-connected partners, managers and project 
implementers, 
science 
partners, 
local 
community 
members, and voices that have historically been left out 
of forest management decisions such as Tribes. Some 
partners critical to future stages—e.g., science partners—
may need to be recruited from beyond the fireshed’s 
boundaries. Partners may be documented through contact 
lists, stakeholder assessment, recruitment strategy, or as 
part of a governance document. 
While important at any stage, a key factor that can 
enable or constrain the ability of a collaborative to 
progress through this stage is the capacity of its partner 
organizations to engage in collaboration. Early-stage 
collaboratives often face unstable budgets and financial 
insecurity, and rely heavily on working boards, champions, 
and volunteers. Stage 1 can be long and protracted if key 
partners aren’t available to share their knowledge and 
expertise. Organizations that aren’t established and do 
not have sufficient organizational capacity nor additional 
volunteer capacity may be inadvertently excluded from 
funding opportunities at this stage. Adequate capacity 
and funding can support underserved communities and 
build a foundation for collaboration. 
While 
informal 
“handshake” 
collaboration 
may 
be appropriate at small scales or among relatively 
homogeneous actors, more formal articulations of 
codes of conduct and commitment are often necessary 
to overcome steep transaction costs of connecting the 
numerous and diverse partners across the large spatial 
and temporal scales that characterize forest and wildfire 
dynamics (Cheng & Daniels, 2005; Huayhuaca, 2019; 
Poteete, Janssen, & Ostrom, 2010). Early investments in 
human resources who have skills in process design and 
facilitation improve capacity to convene the open and 
transparent processes that foster the relationships and 
trust needed to synchronize operations, share risks, learn 
together, and otherwise ensure the continuity of the 
collaborative environment. In contrast to the stages of 
collaborative development described in Section I, greater 
stability of membership, structure, and process may be 
needed to move to the second stage and begin translating 
vision into strategy (i.e., Stage 1 for collaborative 
readiness may encompass stages 1 and 2 of collaborative 
development). Key benchmarks of stability include 
written agreements, statements of leadership support 
for collaboration, and codified commitment to the shared 
vision—e.g., a collaborative framework, charter, by-laws, 
or memorandum of understanding (MOU) (Table 1).
Stage 2: Translate vision into strategy
With stakeholders in place and growing capacity for 
joint action, collaboratives can co-develop a program of 
work with partners using strategic planning tools and 
processes to develop deliverables that communicate the 
shared strategy. For all-lands collaboratives with nested 
place-based collaboratives, this may be a tiered program of 
work linking landscape-to-local conditions and priorities. 
The focus of work in Stage 2 centers on delivering 
co-developed strategies at scale, including plans for 
community engagement and outreach, collaborative 
adaptive management, and coordinated operations, all of 
which connect to a landscape spatial strategy (Table 2). 

16                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
Using science-based tools like QRA and PODs in a 
collaborative setting empowers partners to formulate a 
landscape strategy informed by values, local ecological 
knowledge, and realistic expectations about outcomes. 
In advance of developing the strategies at scale, science 
partners and subject matter specialists help conveners 
to lay the groundwork for meaningful collaborative 
engagement that integrates spatial decision support 
frameworks. This includes building stakeholder literacy 
about the concepts and tools being used, what products 
those tools will generate, and how to interpret and 
apply those products. This may entail: partners giving 
presentations at collaborative meetings; developing 
shared glossaries, briefs, or handbooks; and documenting 
examples of use and application locally.  These processes 
and products collectively comprise “boundary objects” 
that serve to memorialize shared understandings and 
knowledge among a diverse set of partners. Whether 
collaboratives develop new assessments and custom 
spatial decision support tools or use existing assessments 
and tools to support collaborative decision-making, the 
maps generated can help partners leverage resources, 
plan larger projects, and avoid completing scattershot 
treatments with little likelihood of affecting wildfire 
outcomes. 
Spatially explicit plans must be directly and coherently 
tied to implementation to be useful to and used by 
implementing and coordinating partners like foresters 
and fire and resource managers (Colavito, 2019). Project 
implementers, who bring operational knowledge of what 
is feasible and realistic, must be included in the strategic 
planning process alongside policy makers, planners, 
scientists, and other relevant stakeholders (Cheng et al., 
2015; Cheng et al., 2019). Local implementing partners 
who depend on opportunities with willing landowners 
to accomplish work may be skeptical or concerned that 
spatial prioritization processes will reduce their ability 
to get work done by directing resources outside of their 
jurisdiction or away from opportunities (a reasonable 
concern—if everything is a priority, then nothing is a 
priority). Bringing these partners along regarding the 
value and need for a landscape spatial strategy that 
includes prioritization takes time, and relies on the 
trust and good relationships established during Stage 1. 
Frameworks that link landscape-level desired conditions 
to project-level desired conditions can help get partners 
on board as they work together to identify and design 
treatments to compound benefits where they do have 
opportunities to work. To support linkages across 
scales, implementing partners should be involved in co-
developing and documenting best practices and operating 
procedures for cross-jurisdictional treatment design and 
implementation to guide synchronized operations in 
Stage 3 and beyond.
A few key constraints should be noted regarding 
engagement around decision support tools and co-
developed 
spatial 
strategies. 
Incorporating 
these 
technologies into a collaborative process can be a big 
lift, particularly for place-based collaboratives; science 
partners or boundary organizations with the right 
Critical components at this stage
Benchmarks of readiness
•	 Collaboratively utilize science-
based risk assessment and 
scenario analysis platforms to 
formulate a landscape strategy 
informed by values, local ecological 
knowledge (e.g., past fire history 
and behavior) and realistic 
expectations about outcomes
•	 Collaboratively develop and deploy 
public outreach and engagement 
about the shared vision and goals
•	 Co-develop best practices 
and operating procedures for 
cross-jurisdictional treatment 
design and implementation
•	 Co-develop a monitoring plan and 
adaptive management strategy 
that includes shared definitions 
of success and outcomes 
•	 Documented processes of collaborative assessment and 
strategic planning (at multiple scales, if applicable)
•	 Collaboratively developed risk assessments and decision 
support tools, and/or utilization of those tools
•	 Collaboratively developed maps representing priority 
areas for action based on risk assessments
•	 Written plans for communications and community 
outreach and engagement to build understanding and 
social consent in advance of implementation
•	 Collaboratively developed principles, best practices, 
or standard operating procedures
•	 A collaboratively developed monitoring and adaptive management plan
•	 For federal lands within the boundary of the fireshed, evidence 
of consideration and linkage between the collective strategy and 
requirements for broader public involvement and strategic considerations 
inherent in policies such as the APA, FACA, and/or NEPA
Table 2. Critical components and benchmarks of collaboratives at Stage 2 readiness

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    17
technical expertise are critical, but unevenly distributed. 
Thus, while tools like QRA may allow for collaborative 
input, their use depends on whether the right partners 
are at the table to facilitate the process of co-development, 
interpretation, and utilization. All-lands collaboratives 
with access to science partners can help address this 
challenge by more efficiently developing and sharing 
knowledge resources useable by multiple place-based 
collaboratives. Alternatively, collaboratives may focus 
solely on co-developing desired conditions, which may 
be less technologically intensive than an explicit spatial 
strategy (desired conditions are a common output of 
collaboration as part of the NEPA process). Such processes 
can be valuable for stakeholder alignment and for 
accountability, but less helpful for guiding investments of 
scarce resources on the landscape. 
Another challenge pertains to socializing the tools. If not 
adequately integrated with local or traditional knowledge, 
some communities may find these tools to be divisive, 
off-putting, or disruptive of collaborative dialogue. 
Similarly, the extent to which a collaborative is successful 
in its role of facilitating science-informed learning at this 
and other stages will be influenced by the backgrounds 
and views of its members and the communities it serves. 
Collaboratives can advocate for incorporating scientific 
knowledge into policy debates, but there is no certainty 
that their approach will be viewed as more valid than 
other kinds of knowledge.
Frameworks to guide social learning processes at 
multiples scales are also developed during Stage 
2. Through facilitated learning, partners develop a 
monitoring framework for defining and measuring 
ecological and socio-economic outcomes of their 
landscape strategy that indicates whether and to what 
extent their shared vision is being realized. In addition to 
a written plan, this learning may entail shared monitoring 
protocols, surveys, and a strategy outlining steps, roles, 
and responsibilities to guide the CAM process.  
To build understanding and social consent in advance 
of project implementation, communications specialists 
along with community-connected partners from across 
the fireshed bring their knowledge of local context, 
community characteristics, and social networks to the 
table to develop a written plan to guide community 
engagement and public outreach. Products may include: 
guides for messaging and talking points pertinent 
the shared vision and mission; protocols for regular 
internal and external communications; communications 
tactics and tools (e.g., social media, newsletter, events, 
or engaging neighborhood captains); and co-developed 
outreach products designed to effectively educate and 
engage with key audiences (e.g., event tabling materials, 
story maps, or infographics explaining different kinds 
of treatments). If connected to spatial prioritization, the 
plan may also identify priority preparatory activities and 
timelines for community outreach in advance of projects. 
For federal lands within the boundary of a fireshed (or 
if federal funds will support project implementation on 
non-federal lands), plans for community engagement and 
outreach around the collective strategy should consider 
and/or be linked to requirements for broader public 
involvement and strategic considerations inherent in 
policies such as the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 
Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA), and/or National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) (See Box 2: Collaborative 
NEPA).
The overall focus of work during Stage 2 is the 
identification of critical factors for achieving landscape-
level resilience to wildfire; ideal outcomes of this stage are 
the plans describing skillfully designed and coordinated 
actions to address those factors moving forward (Rumelt, 
2011). Given the different entities typically involved 
in planning and implementation across scales (which 
have different jurisdictions, organizational missions, 
values, and goals), collaboration across a fireshed is 
challenging, but crucial for connecting large-landscape-
scale strategies to site-specific mitigation, restoration, or 
recovery activities. Collaboratives at Stage 2 need a firm 
knowledge of their decision space, strategic planning 
expertise, and participation from representatives with 
authority to make decisions and implement the plans 
they develop. They need ready access to data, information, 
and technology useful for planning (e.g., spatial decision 
support platforms). They need subject matter experts 
with scientific and technical expertise (e.g., skills in 
wildfire 
modeling, 
ecological 
and 
socio-economic 
monitoring, data compilation and synthesis, and GIS), 
soft skills, knowledge of community dynamics, and an 
understanding of operational feasibility. These individuals 
should preferably be embedded as collaborative partners. 
To generate the written plans and outputs that serve as 
benchmarks at this stage, conveners need strong skills in 
writing, organization, communication, negotiation, and 
facilitation of social learning processes. The breadth of 
expertise and relationships needed to co-develop these 
different kinds of strategies means that work at this stage 
is often carried out through sub-committees or working 
groups of partners who may have limited capacity to 
engage. The ability of a collaborative partnership to hire 
contractors or dedicated staff to assist with planning 
can support the critical work of committees at this stage, 
making the most of partners’ limited time and availability 
by maintaining lines of communication and continuity 
between meetings.  

18                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
Stage 3: Translate strategy into action
With partnership commitments and a strategic foundation 
in place, collaboratives and their implementing partners 
are well-positioned to begin working together on pilot 
projects and building a project portfolio. A major focus 
of work at Stage 3 pertains to synchronizing operations 
(Table 3). Thus, an enabling factor that needs to be in place 
at this stage (particularly for federally managed lands) 
is the willingness of landowners and stewards to open 
up their decision space to allow collaborative input and 
coordination on out-year planning and implementation. 
The nature of collaboration may change in Stage 3 as the 
roles for implementers and partners with agreements 
in place with land management agencies increase in 
importance. Place-based collaborative organizations 
with staff and programs, such as nonprofit watershed 
organizations, may or may not be implementing projects 
themselves; collaboratives that are purely convening 
entities are less likely to be directly involved with on-the-
ground project implementation. 
Whatever their configuration, collaboratives in Stage 
3 generally continue to fulfill roles of connecting and 
aligning stakeholders: weaving together community 
perspectives with common interests among partners, 
providing venues to coordinate and build trust, gathering 
and sharing information, and supporting joint activities 
that increase the pace and scale of implementation. 
Building the trust and relationships necessary to develop 
social consent with community members and landowners 
takes time, so deployment of some form of co-developed 
outreach and engagement strategy by community-
connected partners should be underway early in Stage 3 if 
not before. Partners should work to build awareness and 
preparation with communities and private landowners 
adjacent to priority project areas identified by the 
landscape spatial strategy. 
Collaboratives provide the setting for implementing 
partners to begin rolling out the landscape spatial 
Alignment with NEPA is vital for accomplishing objectives in firesheds where federal land is a parcel in a larger 
landscape. To build trust between the collaborative(s) and the federal agency completing the NEPA analysis, co-
developed strategies and plans should inform or be reflected in NEPA stages from project development to decision, 
and should help guide adaptive implementation. Documenting and institutionalizing collaboratively developed 
priorities within NEPA increases accountability of the agency to collaborative partners and stakeholders (Beeton et 
al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2015). 
One potential NEPA approach for large landscape-level decision making pertinent to fireshed-focused collaboratives 
is condition-based management (CBM). CBM is a decision framework that can be used to engage collaboratives to 
design flexible suite of treatment options in response to large forest disturbances (e.g., pathogens and wildfires). 
CBM relies less on the where of a project, and more on the how and why, with exact locations determined during 
pre-implementation verification of on-the-ground conditions. Actions are chosen from the range of available options 
based on the actual landscape condition at the time of implementation. This approach allows managers to respond 
to on-the-ground conditions with greater flexibility in choosing the right actions in the most impactful locations at the 
right time (USDA Forest Service, 2022b). This flexibility is checked by accountability through consistent engagement 
with place-based collaboratives and their constituent communities during out-year planning, implementation, 
monitoring, and adaptive management. CBM processes may benefit from engaging with collaboratives in Stage 3 or 
4. Such established collaboratives have the relationships, governance structures, and resources in place to engage 
in the CBM project long term, and they have developed effective strategies for building trust, understanding, and 
social consent within affected communities. 
Box 2: Collaborative NEPA

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    19
strategy on the ground, and coordinate implementation 
schedules and locations to take advantage of geographic 
proximity and economic efficiencies. Partners may work 
together to apply for funding for equipment, workforce 
training, and organizational capacity (discussed in Stage 
1) to support implementation or monitoring. Once funds 
are secured, transparent agreements articulating how 
partners will pool and share resources can lessen the 
likelihood of conflict arising over how those funds are 
directed. Increased cross-jurisdictional coordination will 
result in jointly developed and submitted applications 
and resource sharing agreements.  Later in this stage, 
investments begin yielding preliminary results on the 
ground, as indicated by completed projects that are clearly 
tied to the landscape spatial strategy. Trust is built through 
incremental successes as the partners move through Stage 
3 and eventually complete projects that support shared 
values. With pilot projects underway, partners can begin 
testing out and refining the monitoring and adaptive 
management plan, which may entail collecting data 
using shared protocols, or convening initial learning and 
adaptation dialogues. If capacity allows, the collaborative 
may be able to start generating monitoring reports that 
summarize the effects of initial projects.
Early benchmarks in Stage 3 might include short-term 
metrics tracking progress towards increasing social 
consent for conducting forestry and prescribed fire 
work, or other objectives of the co-developed community 
engagement and outreach strategy. For example, the 
collaborative might track metrics like community-
connected partners’ unidirectional engagement and 
outreach (e.g., number of landowners in priority areas 
contacted), or metrics associated with the frequency 
of and participation in interactive events or exchanges 
(e.g., number and nature of field trips, webinars, public 
meetings etc.).  
While the focus of investment begins to shift towards 
implementation in Stage 3, maintaining and expanding 
collaborative capacity to fulfill stakeholder convening 
and coordination roles remains important. Investments 
should also be made in developing the tools and 
mechanisms for coordinating implementing partners 
long-term, such as websites, data sharing platforms, or 
geospatial databases to provide a common operating 
picture for project planning and tracking. If not present 
in previous stages, a fiscal sponsor or legal designation 
may be necessary to secure and accept funds (like 501 
(c)(3) status) and funnel resources to implementation 
and capacity maintenance over several years. If the 
collaborative is directly involved in implementation, 
staff will need skills in project development, contracting, 
oversight, and reporting. 
With a growing body of work, collaboratives readying to 
move to Stage 4 may need to hire, co-employ, or contract 
from beyond the collaborative’s working boundaries with 
mitigation specialists, GIS specialists, communication/
social media specialists, grant writers/administrators, 
accountants, and potentially even legal support (e.g., to 
review MOUs and agreements that facilitate resource 
sharing). Capacity is also needed to carry out a program of 
monitoring and adaptive management. 
Critical components at this stage
Benchmarks of readiness
•	 Coordinate implementation schedules and 
locations to take advantage of geographic proximity 
and economic efficiencies to reach scale
•	 Build trust among collaborative partners 
through successful implementation 
and supporting shared values
•	 Pool and share implementation resources 
and costs through agreements
•	 Secure and direct financial resources for equipment, 
workforce training and organizational capacity 
to support implementation and monitoring
•	 Testing out and refining the monitoring and adaptive 
management plan on pilot projects (collecting 
information, convening learning and adaptation 
dialogues, iterating and refining as needed) 
•	 Completed project(s) that are clearly connected 
to values and strategies (locally and at scale)
•	 A fiscal agent or other mechanism for accepting funds
•	 Jointly developed and submitted funding applications
•	 Agreements to share resources
•	 Agreements for how funding will be 
allocated and managed across partners
•	 Monitoring report(s) summarizing the effects of 
initial actions or results of early socio-economic 
assessments; progress reports on collaborative 
performance (e.g., tracking efforts to build 
social consent), self-evaluation forms, etc.
Table 3. Critical components and benchmarks of collaboratives at Stage 3 readiness

20                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
Stage 4: Scaling out and sustaining momentum
When a collaborative has demonstrated capacity to 
successfully administer funds, implement or coordinate 
implementation of projects, complete grant activities 
within allowable award periods, aggregate and present 
stories of success, and leverage financial resources for 
joint projects with other partners, partners can ideally 
begin scaling out with a multi-year program of work 
across the landscape. Collaboratives at this stage can be 
considered ‘mature,’ in that they have taken on sufficient 
organizational characteristics to endure change over time, 
while maintaining their functions: act as non-partisan 
convenors of stakeholders, coordinate and synchronize 
operations tied to collaboratively developed strategies at 
scale, and facilitate continuous science-informed learning 
(Table 4). 
The long-term program of work might include a pipeline 
and growing portfolio of shovel-ready projects across 
jurisdictions, with landowner agreements and NEPA 
decisions in place, and sufficient workforce, operators, 
and infrastructure available to carry out the work. 
There should be alignment—often indicated by cross-
reference—between co-developed strategies and plans 
such as forest plan amendments, response strategies, and 
NEPA documents developed by collaborative members. 
Critical components at this stage
Benchmarks of readiness
•	 Co-develop a 5+ year program 
of work with partners 
•	 Institutionalize expectations 
of collaborative practices, 
performance, monitoring, 
and adaptive management to 
endure changes in personnel 
within the partnership 
•	 Diversify and leverage 
funding sources
•	 Foster broader systemic 
readiness by working 
to address factors like 
workforce, biomass 
utilization, policy issues, 
and the capacity of partner 
organizations and agencies
•	 Build support for the 
collective work of partners 
•	 Maintain accountability 
and inclusive, transparent 
processes to fulfill substantive 
roles long-term
•	 Assess progress, 
learn and adapt 
•	 Portfolio of shovel-ready projects within the context of a landscape-scale 
strategy, plus clear plans for administering and executing these projects 
•	 Collaboratively-developed NEPA 
•	 An agreed upon organizational model, at whatever level of formality is 
appropriate, with long-term mechanisms in place to receive funds
•	 Co-developed strategy and plans that are cross-referenced with 
those of partners, including those working at different scales
•	 Established budgeting process, identified funds, and 
strategy for managing funds across the partnership
•	 Updated or revised recruitment strategies, stakeholder 
assessments, and participant lists
•	 Results or recommendations generated by 
collaborative performance evaluations
•	 Collaboratively developed principles and strategies to navigate 
disturbances like personnel turnover, additional funding, 
elimination of funding, or changes in political administrations
•	 Updated or revised governance or strategy documents, or 
other plans, signifying periodic review and adjustment
•	 Documentation of ongoing co-learning processes, such as adaptive 
management workshops, field trips, annual reports, or joint publications
•	 Sufficient staff or paid positions with skills needed to provide 
substantive roles and contributions within the fireshed long term
Table 4. Critical components and benchmarks of collaboratives at Stage 4 readiness

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    21
At Stage 4, the expectation is that collaborative 
practices have been institutionalized. At this point, the 
administrative costs combined with transaction costs of 
large-landscape collaboration might be better addressed 
by formalizing to some degree into a collaborative 
organization that serves to sustain and lead collaboration 
long term. Managing the complexity of people, finances, 
accounting, reporting, and information management 
adds layers of administration and bureaucracy to a 
collaborative that may be better handled by a separate 
existing or new 501 (c)(3) entity.  However, collaborative 
formalization into a new, incorporated organization may 
not work for all firesheds. Formalization can change the 
dynamics of decision-making, participation, and shared 
governance, which may actually destabilize collaboration. 
Alternatively, the collaborative may be sustained by 
a pre-existing collaborative organization, perhaps by 
expanding the scope of a place-based collaborative to 
coordinate partners at a larger scale and serve as fiscal 
sponsor. Another arrangement might entail an all-lands 
“meta” collaborative (coordinates across multiple place-
based collaboratives and community connected partners) 
using multi-year agreements to fund staff positions at 
one or more partner organizations. These staff can then 
coordinate different aspects of decentralized collaboration 
and committee work, with one entity serving as the 
primary fiduciary. This latter model is utilized by the 
NCFC. Finding the right fit for a given fireshed will 
require a sensitivity to: contextual factors like political 
dynamics and network characteristics among partners; 
socio-economic and cultural characteristics of nested 
communities; and a history of conflict or collaboration in 
the region (Emerson & Nabatchi, 2015). 
Whatever 
the 
agreed-upon 
organizational 
model, 
the collaborative should have mechanisms in place 
to be able to absorb large amounts of funding. If not 
adequately planned for, large influxes of funding can 
challenge group cohesion by upsetting shared objectives, 
causing mission drift, creating winners and losers, or 
undermining trust. An established budgeting process 
and strategy for identifying, managing, and allocating 
funds may help address the challenge.  A collaborative 
should also diversify and leverage funding sources to: 
sustain the operations and coordinating capacity of itself 
or its primary convening organization(s); support the 
synchronized operations of its partners; and gradually 
foster broader systemic readiness of the fireshed to 
receive and recover from wildfire by working (e.g., 
through committees or joint programs) to address factors 
like workforce, biomass utilization, or policy constraints.
By this stage, the collaborative should be working to 
legitimize and build external support for itself and the 
collective work of its partners through both horizontal 
networks (e.g., with community members and other 
collaboratives) and vertical networks (with higher-
level decision authorities and policy makers) (Cheng & 
Sturtevant, 2012). External support is important for the 
collaborative’s ability to harness financial resources, 
sustain its internal functions, maintain transparent 
processes, and continue to perform its substantive roles 
long-term. While commitment and participation from 
land management agencies is critical, the collaborative 
should be vigilant to avoid the perception that they 
are subservient to these agencies. At the same time, 
the collaborative should be working to maintain 
accountability, particularly when it comes to public 
lands and the public interest. In Stage 4 collaboratives 
may revisit stakeholder assessments and recruitment 
strategies periodically to ensure that membership 
is inclusive of new stakeholders, and that potential 
opponents and litigants have opportunities to join the 
fold and be heard; this may avoid a single party undoing 
the hard work of collaboration up to that point.    
The role of the collaborative in facilitating science-
informed, continuous learning across the fireshed 
through CAM is particularly important in Stage 4 as the 
results of evaluation, monitoring, and assessments build 
and reveal needs for course-correction. As conditions 
change, collective vision and strategies may need to 
change as well. Formative, summative, or longitudinal 
performance evaluation (of process and outcomes) can 
inform updates or changes to guiding documents and 
policies, and generate recommendations to improve the 
collaborative process. Performance evaluation can help 
partners navigate internal and external disturbance, 
signal the need to modify internal collaboration dynamics 
to adapt and sustain momentum, or indicate the need to 
spin off or recreate collaboration to meet current needs 
and conditions (Beeton et al., 2022; Imperial et al., 2016; 
Ulibarri et al., 2020). 
Likewise, Stage 4 collaboratives have principles or 
strategies in place for dealing with contingencies like 
turnover in personnel among key partners or leaders 
within the collaborative (a common example of internal 
disturbance). Such strategies might include succession 
plans, record-keeping/memos, and long-term plans 
for growth or maintenance of personnel to continue 
providing services. Collaboratives may also face external 
disturbance (i.e., occurring outside the collaborative), 
both directly (such as the COVID-19 pandemic and 
subsequent sea change in meeting technology and 
modes of engagement), as well as indirectly through 
changes in political administrations or in the institutional 
landscape.  A robust and holistic CAM process can keep 

22                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
the collaborative agile to sustain momentum or re-create 
itself while conserving critical elements of the network 
and protecting the substantial time, social, and other 
capitals invested in developing a mature collaborative. 
As monitoring results build and indicate any needed 
changes to implementation, collaboratives can convene 
periodic tours and workshops to share findings from 
ecological 
and/or 
socio-economic 
monitoring 
and 
discuss necessary adjustments. All-lands collaboratives 
with nested place-based collaboratives may be able 
to coordinate and leverage CAM cycles happening at 
smaller scales to increase efficiencies and meet the 
information needs of partners working at multiple, tiered 
scales. Through CAM workshops, field trips, reports, 
etc., implementing partners can share lessons learned 
about challenges to completing their work and develop 
strategies to address those challenges.
Having moved through these stages (often non-linearly), 
collaboratives in Stage 4 are ready and able to fulfill 
their substantive roles and contributions within their 
fireshed long-term. They are sufficiently stable to receive 
and effectively deploy funds to implement projects, or 
support implementation through the collective work of 
partners. In addition to the other noted benchmarks like a 
collaboratively developed NEPA decision, the collaborative 
convener(s) should have sufficient staff (or paid positions 
distributed across partners) with the knowledge, skills, 
and abilities needed to carry out their portion of the 
program of work. Further, all key stakeholders of the 
collaborative must have the capacity to play their roles 
(including federal agency partners). Identifying under-
resourced partners and stakeholders and working to 
advocate for or build their capacity could contribute to the 
long-term success of the collaborative and the fireshed as 
a whole. 
CONCLUSION
In this concept paper, we have presented a Stages of 
Collaborative Readiness framework that describes 
critical components of the focus of work and 
proposes appropriate benchmarks at each stage. The 
framework was developed through practical experience 
participating in an all-lands collaborative consisting 
of several nested place-based collaboratives and 
community-connected partners within the Northern 
Colorado Fireshed. The purpose of the framework is to 
enhance the ability of collaboratives to move between 
stages, such that they are increasingly able to a) fulfill 
important functions in their fireshed effectively into the 
future, and b) receive and deploy funding to increase 
the pace and scale of implementation by supporting the 
collective work of partners. 
While multi-stage collaborative development frameworks 
are not new, we advance the discussion by situating 
collaborative development within the unique context of 
firesheds as forest and wildland fire management systems. 
We also embed the substantive roles and contributions of 
fireshed-focused collaboratives (identifying, connecting, 
and aligning stakeholders; co-developing strategies at 
scale; synchronizing operations; and providing venues 
for science-informed, continuous learning) to varying 
degrees within a four-stage framework; at each stage, 
a collaborative increases its ability to serve those 
important functions. The framework attempts to focus on 
achievable outcomes by translating the substantive roles 
and contributions into critical components of work, and 
identifies stage-appropriate outcomes and benchmarks. 
The critical components and benchmarks presented 
in Tables 1-4 could be used to: inform self-assessment 
and adaptation by collaboratives; gauge or measure 
progress and development over time; track performance 
and increase accountability; or guide allocation of 
financial and other resources to collaboratives and 
other community-connected partners relative to need. 
Collaboratives may find the framework useful for 
articulating and justifying their capacity and financial 
needs at different stages. We hope the framework can 
inform reasonable expectations of the kinds of outputs 
and outcomes that can be achieved at different stages, 
and increase understanding (particularly among outside 
observers or funders) of the time and resources needed to 
establish a high functioning, mature collaborative.
As collaboratives develop, they create value in different 
(and not always quantifiable) ways; thus, the type and 
amount of resources needed to sustain value will change 
(Imperial et al., 2016). During the Stage 1, partners coalesce 
and establish a community of partners around a shared 
vision. Depending on the history of collaboration, this 
may require a lengthy period of preparation to identify 
and connect the ‘right’ stakeholders Stage 1 requires 
investment in human resources to conduct outreach and 
engagement, facilitate extensive trust- and relationship-
building, and lead the development of Stage 1 benchmarks 
like 
written 
agreements 
documenting 
mutual 
commitment. In Stage 2, partners translate vision into 
appropriately-scaled strategies by coupling stakeholder 
engagement processes with analytical platforms and tools 
to co-produce maps that provide an important foundation 
for a landscape spatial strategy. These processes and 
products stimulate the dialogue necessary for developing 
other components of a strategy at scale. Stage 3 marks the 
transition from strategy to action and from planning to 
implementation. The emphasis of collaboration shifts to 
synchronizing operations and supporting joint activities 
that increase the pace and scale of implementation. 

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    23
By Stage 4, the collaborative has been sufficiently 
institutionalized to scale, and sustain its internal and 
external functions, and is able to navigate disruption and 
change long term with a robust CAM process. 
The 
roles 
and 
contributions 
of 
fireshed-focused 
collaboratives, as well as the Stages of Collaborative 
Readiness have been presented as ideal scenarios, but we 
have acknowledged important constraints and caveats 
throughout. Few, if any, collaboratives will follow a 
linear course through these stages, and collaborative 
formalization into a new incorporated entity may not 
be the desired endpoint; different models will work for 
different firesheds. Sensitivity to context is essential 
for designing effective and durable cross-boundary and 
cross-scale collaboration. 
Regardless of form, collaboration takes time and resources. 
While some volunteer-driven collaboratives can achieve a 
great deal with low collaborative capacity for a while, the 
impact of the work will likely be limited in scope as key 
leaders burn out or move on. Achieving landscape-level 
objectives through engagement of the many and varied 
stakeholders involved in firesheds requires investment 
in human resources to overcome the high transaction 
costs of collaboration at this scale. The initiation of Stage 
3 and shifting emphasis from collaborative planning 
to coordinated implementation does not end the need 
for continued investment in collaborative capacity and 
human resources. Not all collaboratives are designed or 
even intended to endure long term. However, if the aim is 
to institutionalize and enable collaboration in a complex 
and evolving fireshed to achieve long-term social-
ecological outcomes, then investments in collaborative 
capacity are particularly important at the early stages of 
visioning and strategizing, and a plan to sustain and grow 
capacity in later stages and into the future is needed. 
Low risk tolerance among funders is a persistent 
challenge 
to 
increasing 
equitable 
investment 
in 
early-stage collaboratives or in landscapes with low 
collaborative capacity (Sanderson et al., 2022). Funders 
want their investments to be successful, so they favor 
investing in groups with a proven record of success, 
rather than investing in innovation or need. Many of the 
stage-specific components and benchmarks proposed 
in this concept paper—such as securing commitments 
and developing strategies to navigate disturbance—
are intended to address this challenge by increasing 
collaborative resilience in the face of uncertainty. More 
programs that provide stand-alone funding sources for 
collaborative capacity and community-based stewardship 
(such as the National Forest Foundation’s Community 
Capacity and Lands Stewardship) are needed, and should 
be specifically designed to support early stage or low-
capacity collaboratives in high risk firesheds. Eliminating 
funding match requirements can also increase equity 
and readiness in lower-capacity and lower-income 
communities and collaboratives (Smith, 2023). 
The Stages of Collaborative Readiness framework 
presented in this paper provides general benchmarks 
and guideposts, but it could be refined or customized 
for different applications by developing more specific 
indicators, metrics, criteria, costs, or timelines at each 
stage. For example, the framework could be used to pair 
appropriate funding sources, types, and amounts with 
appropriate stages of collaborative readiness. Benchmarks 
could be more narrowly specified so that outcomes 
from one stage lead into the funding eligibility criteria 
at the next stage. However, take care when applying 
this framework to avoid an overly rigid interpretation 
of the stages, critical components, and benchmarks—
particularly when applied for investment or resource 
allocation purposes. The framework has been used to 
guide allocation of resources among partners of the 
NCFC, but the members of that collaborative had input in 
developing the framework and applied it to themselves (as 
constituent place-based collaboratives and community-
connected partners) to articulate and justify capacity 
funding needs. Collaboratives themselves will often be 
best able to gauge and interpret their progress towards 
achieving benchmarks and outcomes. Alternatively, 
observers who are close enough to the process that they 
are familiar with local context and constraints can verify 
the quality of collaboration and associated benchmarks. 
The framework is not intended to be prescriptive, and 
context and constraints may call for adjustments to 
critical components of work and benchmarks across 
stages.
While beyond the scope of this paper, further elaboration 
of needs for and barriers to moving from one stage to the 
next (such as recruitment and retention issues) could 
improve the applicability of this framework for conveners 
and leaders working to build capacity in their own 
collaboratives. Future refinements of this framework will 
also delve deeper into specific metrics to assess targets 
and outcomes for different purposes and at different 
stages. Beyond its application to collaboratives, further 
investigation is also needed to evaluate the applicability 
of this framework to the organizations and agencies that 
partner with these collaboratives, and which also face 
collaborative capacity constraints. 

24                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
REFERENCES
Addington, R. N., Aplet, G. H., Battaglia, M. A., Briggs, 
J. S., Brown, P. M., Cheng, A. S., … Wolk, B. (2018). 
Principles and practices for the restoration of 
ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer forests of 
the Colorado front range. USDA Forest Service – 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR (No. 373).
Ager, A.A. (2022). Contribution of risk science 
and scenario planning to build the 2022 
US Wildfire Crisis Strategy. Environmental 
Sciences Proceedings, 2022(17), 15. https://
doi.org/10.3390/environsciproc2022017015
Ager, A. A.; Day, M. A.; Ringo, C.; Evers, C. R.; 
Alcasena, F. J.; Houtman, R. M.; Scanlon, 
M.; Ellersick, T. (2021). Development and 
application of the fireshed registry. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RMRS-GTR-425. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 47 p. 
https://doi.org/10.2737/  RMRS-GTR-425. 
Arno, S. (2000). Fire in western forest ecosystems 
(chapter 5). In: J.K Brown and J.K. Smith (Eds.), 
Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects of fire on 
flora (pp. 97-120). USDA Forest Service, General 
Technical Report RMRS-GTR (No. 42, Vol 2).
Bahro, B., Barber, K. H., Sherlock, J. W., & Yasuda, D. 
A. (2007). Stewardship and fireshed assessment: 
A process for designing a landscape fuel 
treatment strategy. USDA Forest Service – 
General Technical Report PSW-GTR (No. 203).
Barrett, K. J., Cannon, J. B., Schuetter, A. M., & 
Cheng, A.S. (2021). Effects of collaborative 
monitoring and adaptive management on 
restoration outcomes in dry conifer forests. 
Forest Ecology and Management, 488, 119018. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2021.119018
Beeton, T.A. & Caggiano, M.D. (2022). PODs for 
non-incident management: WADNR Forest 
Health Assessment and Treatment Framework 
case study. CFRI-2208. https://cfri.colostate.
edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2022/05/
WDNR_PODsNonIncidentMgmt_Final.pdf
Beeton, T.A., Cheng, A.S., & Colavito, M.M. (2022). 
Cultivating collaborative resilience to social 
and ecological change: An assessment of 
adaptive capacity, actions, and barriers among 
collaborative forest restoration groups in the 
United States. Journal of Forestry, 120(3), 316-
335. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvab064 
Bell, E.V. & Olivier, T. (2022). Following the paper trail: 
Systematically analyzing outputs to understand 
collaborative governance evolution. Journal of 
Public Administration Research and Theory, 32, 
671–684. https://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/muab054
Bendtsen, E. B., Clausen, L. P. W., & Hansen, S. 
F. (2021). A review of the state-of-the-art for 
stakeholder analysis with regard to environmental 
management and regulation. Journal of 
environmental management, 279, 111773. 
Bodin, Ö. (2017). Collaborative environmental 
governance: Achieving collective action in social-
ecological systems. Science, 357(6352), eaan1114. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111773
Brick, P. D., Snow, D., & van de Wetering, S. 
(2001). Across the Great Divide: Explorations 
in collaborative conservation and the 
American West. Retrieved from http://books.
google.com/books?id=R-h-AAAAMAAJ 
Bryson, J. M., Crosby, B. C., & Middleton Stone, 
M. (2006). The design and implementation of 
cross-sector collaborations: Propositions from the 
literature. Public Administration Review, 66, 44–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2006.00665.x
Butler, W.H, & Schultz, C. A. (Eds.). (2019). A new era 
for collaborative forest management: Policy and 
practice insights from the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program. Routledge.
Cash, D. W., Adger, W. N., Berkes, F., Garden, P., 
Lebel, L., & Olsson, P. (2006). Scale and Cross-
Scale Dynamics: Governance and Information in 
a Multilevel World. Ecology And Society, 11(2), 8. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06281.x 
Charnley, S., & Poe, M. R. (2007). Community forestry 
in theory and practice: where are we now? Annual 
Review of Anthropology, 36(1), 301–336. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev.anthro.35.081705.123143
Cheng, A.S., Aplet, G.H., & Waltz, E.M. (2019). 
Challenges and opportunities for collaborative 
adaptive management in forest landscape 
restoration (Chapter 7). In: W.H. Butler and 
C.A. Schultz (Eds.), A new era for collaborative 
forest management: Policy and practice 
insights from the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program. Routledge.
Cheng, A. S., & Dale, L. (2020). Achieving 
adaptive governance of forest wildfire risk 
using competitive grants: Insights from the 
Colorado Wildfire Risk Reduction Grant Program. 
Review of Policy Research, 37(5), 657-686.

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    25
Cheng, A. S., & Daniels, S. E. (2005). Getting to “we”: 
Examining the relationship between geographic 
scale and ingroup emergence in collaborative 
watershed planning. Human Ecology Review, 
12(1), 30–43. https://doi.org/10.1111/ropr.12379
Cheng, A. S., Danks, C., & Allred, S. R. (2011). 
The role of social and policy learning in 
changing forest governance: An examination 
of community-based forestry initiatives in the 
U.S. Forest Policy and Economics, 13(2), 89–96. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2010.09.005
Cheng, A. S., Gerlak, A. K., Dale, L., & Mattor, K. 
(2015). Examining the adaptability of collaborative 
governance associated with publicly managed 
ecosystems over time: insights from the Front Range 
Roundtable, Colorado, USA. Ecology and Society, 
20(1). https://www.jstor.org/stable/26269758
Cheng, A.S., & Sturtevant, V. (2012). A framework 
for assessing collaborative capacity in 
community-based public forest management. 
Environmental Management, 49(3), 675–689. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-011-9801-6
Colavito, M. (2019). Assessment of Community 
Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona 
and Communities-at-Risk throughout the 
West Project Report. Flagstaff, AZ.
Colavito, M. (2021). The human dimensions of 
spatial, pre-wildfire planning decision support 
systems: A review of barriers, facilitators, 
and recommendations. Forests, 12(4), 483. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/f12040483
Cowan, E., & Davis, E.J. (2022). Governance 
strategies for large landscape partnerships in the 
West. Rural Voices for Conservation Coalition.
Davis, E.J.; Huber-Stearns, H.; Cheng, A.S.; & 
Jacobson, M. (2021). Transcending parallel 
play: Boundary spanning for collective 
action in wildfire management. Fire, 4(41), 
20. https://doi.org/10.3390/fire4030041
Dennison, P. E., Brewer, S. C., Arnold, J. D., & 
Moritz, M. A. (2014). Large wildfire trends 
in the western United States, 1984–2011. 
Geophysical Research Letters, 41(8), 2928-
2933. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014GL059576
Dunn, C. J., D O’Connor, C., Abrams, J., Thompson, M. 
P., Calkin, D. E., Johnston, J. D., ... & Gilbertson-Day, 
J. (2020). Wildfire risk science facilitates adaptation 
of fire-prone social-ecological systems to the new 
fire reality. Environmental Research Letters, 15(2), 
025001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab6498
Dunn, J. & Wolk, B. (2023). Risk Assessment 
Decision Support (RADS) in Chaffee County, 
Colorado: A collaborative process case study. 
CFRI-2303. https://cfri.colostate.edu/wp-content/
uploads/sites/22/2023/03/Dunn_Wolk_
ChaffeeCountyCaseStudy_CFRI_2303.pdf
Emerson, K., Nabatchi, T., & Balogh, S. (2012). 
An Integrative Framework for Collaborative 
Governance. Journal of Public Administration 
Research and Theory, 22(1), 1–29. https://
doi.org/10.1093/jopart/mur011 
Emerson, K., & Nabatchi, T. (2015). Collaborative 
governance regimes. Georgetown University Press.
Engle, N. L. (2011). Adaptive capacity and 
its assessment. Global Environmental 
Change, 21(2), 647–656. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.01.019
Fernández-Giménez, M.E., Augustine, D.J., 
Porensky, L.M., Wilmer, H., Derner, J.D., Briske, 
D.D., & Stewart, M.O. (2019). Complexity 
fosters learning in collaborative adaptive 
management. Ecology and Society, 24(2). https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0072.2005.00134.x
Government Accountability Office. (2015). Forest 
restoration: Adjusting agencies’ information-
sharing strategies could benefit landscape 
scale projects. (GAO Publication No. 15-398). 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Gray, B. (1989). Collaborating: Finding common ground 
for multiparty problems. Jossey-Bass San Francisco.
Heikkila, T., & Gerlak, A.K. (2016). Investigating 
collaborative processes over time: A 10-
year study of the South Florida Ecosystem 
Restoration Task Force. The American Review 
of Public Administration, 46, 180–200. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0275074014544196
Heikkila, T. & Gerlak, A.K. (2005). The formation of 
large-scale collaborative resource management 
institutions: Clarifying the roles of stakeholders, 
science, and institutions. Policy Studies, 33, 583-612.
Huayhuaca, C. (2019). The State of collaboration: 
an analysis of form and function in Colorado’s 
natural resource collaboratives (Doctoral 
dissertation, Colorado State University).
Imperial, M. T. (2005). Using Collaboration 
as a Governance Strategy: Lessons From 
Six Watershed Management Programs. 
Administration & Society, 37(3), 281–320. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0095399705276111 

26                    Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness
Imperial, M. T., Johnston, E., Pruett-Jones, M., 
Leong, K., & Thomsen, J. (2016). Sustaining 
the useful life of network governance: Life 
cycles and developmental challenges. 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 14(3), 
135–144. https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1249 
Imperial, M. T., & Koontz, T. (2007). Evolution of 
Collaborative Organizations For Watershed 
Governance: Structural Properties, Life-cycles, and 
Factors Contributing to the Longevity of Watershed 
Partnerships. 29th Annual Association for Public 
Policy Analysis and Management, (November).
Imperial, M.T. (2022). Life cycle dynamics and 
developmental processes in collaborative 
partnerships: Examples from four watersheds 
in the U.S. Environmental Management, 1-19. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-022-01699-4
Kark, S., Tulloch, A., Gordon, A., Mazor, T., Bunnefeld, 
N., & Levin, N. (2015). Cross-boundary collaboration: 
key to the conservation puzzle. Current Opinion 
in Environmental Sustainability, 12, 12–24.
Kline, J., Ager, A. A., & Fischer, P. (2015). A conceptual 
framework for coupling the biophysical and 
social dimensions of wildfire to improve fireshed 
planning and risk mitigation. Proceedings of the 
13th International Wildland Fire Safety Summit 
& 4th Human Dimensions of Wildland Fire 
Conference, 215–223. Retrieved from https://
www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/52508 
McCaffrey, S., Toman, E., Stidham, M., & Shindler, 
B. (2012). Social science research related 
to wildfire management: an overview of 
recent findings and future research needs. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire, 22(1), 
15-24. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF11115
Monroe, A.S. & Butler, W.H. (2016). Responding 
to a policy mandate to collaborate: Structuring 
collaboration in the collaborative forest landscape 
restoration program. Journal of Environmental 
Planning and Management, 59, 1054–1072. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2015.1053562
Paveglio, T. B., Moseley, C., Carroll, M. S., Williams, 
D. R., Davis, E. J., & Fischer, A. P. (2015). 
Categorizing the social context of the wildland 
urban interface: Adaptive capacity for wildfire and 
community “archetypes”. Forest Science, 61(2), 
298-310. https://doi.org/10.5849/forsci.14-036
Poteete, A. R., Janssen, M. A., & Ostrom, E. 
(2010). Working together: Collective action, 
the commons, and multiple methods in 
practice. Princeton University Press. 
Ritter, S. and Caggiano, M. (2022). Grand 
Mesa, Uncompahgre and Gunnison National 
Forests: Potential Operational Delineations 
Technical Document. CFRI-221
Rumelt, R. P. (2011). Good strategy/bad strategy: The 
difference and why it matters. Crown Business.
Saab, D. J., Tapia, A., Maitland, C., Maldonado, 
E., & Tchouakeu, L. M. N. (2013). Inter-
organizational coordination in the wild: Trust 
building and collaboration among field-level ICT 
workers in humanitarian relief organizations. 
Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary 
and Nonprofit Organizations, 24(1), 194-213.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11266-012-9285-x
Sanderson, J., Alper, R., Barrack, J., Byrd, C., 
Glenn, E., Jespersen, K., ... & Archibald, J. (2022). 
Best practices for collaborative conservation 
philanthropy. Conservation Science and Practice, 
4(10), e12811. https://doi.org/10.1111/csp2.12811
Sarkki, S., Heikkinen, H.I., & Löf, A. (2021). Reindeer 
herders as stakeholders or rights-holders? 
Introducing a social equity-based conceptualization 
relevant for indigenous and local communities. 
In: Nord, D.C. (eds) Nordic Perspectives on 
the Responsible Development of the Arctic: 
Pathways to Action. Springer Polar Sciences. 
Springer, Cham. https://doi-org.ezproxy2.library.
colostate.edu/10.1007/978-3-030-52324-4_13
Scarlett, L. (2013). Collaborative adaptive 
management: Challenges and opportunities. 
Ecology and Society, 18(3), 26. https://
www.jstor.org/stable/26269353
Scott, J., Thompson, & M. Calkin, D. (2013). A 
wildfire risk assessment framework for land and 
resource management. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-
GTR-315. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 83 p.
Siddiki, S. & Ambrose, G. (2022). Evaluating change 
in representation and coordination in collaborative 
governance over time: A study of environmental 
justice councils. Environmental Management, 1-21. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-022-01688-7
Smith, K. (2023, January). Match requirements 
prevent rural and low-capacity communities from 
accessing climate resilience funding. Headwaters 
Economics. https://headwaterseconomics.
org/equity/match-requirements/

Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness                    27
Sternlieb, F., Bixler, R. P., Huber-Stearns, H., 
& Huayhuaca, C. (2013). A question of fit: 
reflections on boundaries, organizations 
and social-ecological systems. Journal of 
Environmental Management, 130, 117–125. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2013.08.053
Taylor, P. & Cheng, A. (2012). Environmental 
governance as embedded process: Managing 
change in two community-based forestry 
organizations. Human Organization, 71, 110–122. 
https://doi.org/10.17730/humo.71.1.y8r020v56618247j
Thompson, M. P., Bowden, P., Brough, A., Scott, J. 
H., Gilbertson-Day, J., Taylor, A., ... & Haas, J. R. 
(2016). Application of wildfire risk assessment 
results to wildfire response planning in the 
southern Sierra Nevada, California, USA. Forests, 
7(3), 64. https://doi.org/10.3390/f7030064
Thompson, M. P., MacGregor, D. G., Dunn, C. J., Calkin, 
D. E., & Phipps, J. (2018). Rethinking the wildland 
fire management system. Journal of Forestry, 116(4), 
382-390. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvy020
Ulibarri, N., Emerson, K., Imperial, M.T., Jager, 
N.W., Newig, J., & Weber, E. (2020). How 
does collaborative governance evolve? 
Insights from a medium-N case comparison. 
Policy and Society, 39, 617–637.
USDA Forest Service (2014). National Cohesive 
Wildland Fire Management Strategy. Wildland 
Fire Leadership Council. https://www.fs.usda.
gov/rm/pubs_other/rmrs_2011_usda_fs001.pdf 
USDA Forest Service. (2022a). Confronting the 
wildfire crisis: A 10-year implementation plan. Report 
FS–1187b. https://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/
files/Wildfire-Crisis-Implementation-Plan.pdf 
USDA Forest Service. (2022b). Conditions-based 
management: Frequently asked questions. 
Ecosystem Management Coordination. https://
www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/2022-
04/%27CBM_FAQs_24JAN22%27%20of%20
%27AR-%20Project%20Development%27.pdf 
USDA Forest Service. (2023). National Cohesive 
Wildland Fire Management Strategy Addendum 
Update. Wildland Fire Leadership Council. https://
www.forestsandrangelands.gov/documents/
strategy/natl-cohesive-wildland-fire-mgmt-
strategy-addendum-update-2023.pdf 
Wondolleck, J. M., & Yaffee, S. L. (2000). Making 
collaboration work: Lessons from innovation in 
natural resource management. Island Press.
Wood, D. J., & Gray, B. (1991). Toward a 
Comprehensive Theory of Collaboration. The 
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 27(2), 
139–162. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021886391272001 
Wyckoff, B. & DiBari, K. (2008). The collaboration 
cloverleaf: Four stages of development. 
National Forest Foundation. 
Young, O. R. (2002). Institutional interplay: 
the environmental consequences of cross-
scale interactions. In The Drama of the 
Commons (pp. 263–291). Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press.
Young, O. R. (2006). Vertical Interplay among Scale-
dependent Environmental and Resource Regimes. 
Ecology And Society, 11(1), 27. Retrieved from http://
www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art27/ 
Yung, L., Gray, B. J., Wyborn, C., Miller, B. A., 
Williams, D. R., & Essen, M. (2022). New types 
of investments needed to address barriers to 
scaling up wildfire risk mitigation. Fire Ecology, 
18(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s42408-022-00155-2 
Zimmerman, T., & Stutler, J. (2020). Crafting 
a fire system for the future: A perspective 
on matching modernization with changing 
complexity in our wildland fire management 
system. Wildfire, July-September, 16-25.
