Federal and state agencies are increasingly expected to work 
with collaborative initiatives to meet national- and state-level 
policy goals related to wildfire mitigation. Collaboratives are 
increasingly recognized as important for addressing large 
landscape, cross-boundary challenges to forest resilience. 
Successful collaboratives can provide important functions 
to prepare landscapes and communities to receive and 
recover from wildland fire (see table on the right). 
It takes time and resources for collaboratives to get to a point 
where they can successfully fulfill these important functions 
and receive and deploy large amounts of funding to achieve 
implementation at scale. Collaboratives provide value in 
different ways and require different resources and support 
as they develop. However, funders generally want to invest 
in proven success, which presents a challenge for equitable 
investment in early-stage collaboratives, or in landscapes 
with few resources to support collaborative capacity. 
The Stages of Collaborative Readiness Framework seeks 
to address this challenge by providing stage-appropriate 
benchmarks for tracking progress and success of 
collaboratives as they evolve in their ability to prepare 
systems to live with wildfire. Few collaboratives follow a 
linear path through the stages, and  readiness may look 
different in different places. Sensitivity to local context is 
essential for designing effective and durable cross-boundary 
and cross-scale collaboration.   
This framework can help collaboratives and the entities that 
support them: 
•	 Inform: self-assessment and adaptation, and enhance 
their ability to progress within and between stages over 
time; 
•	 Articulate: their current capacity and justify funding 
needs;
•	 Guide: resource allocation between collaborative 
members and partners;
•	 Inform: reasonable expectations and outcomes at different collaborative capacity levels.
This summary provides an overview of the four stages of readiness and highlights intended outcomes 
and example benchmarks at each stage as a guidepost to inform progress and performance. For more 
detailed and complete information, refer to Preparing landscapes and communities to receive and 
recover from wildfire through collaborative readiness: A concept paper. 
Stage One: Partners coalesce and form community around a shared vision
There is a need for collaboration, but a period of basic preparation and situation assessment is required 
if infrastructure and relationships are not yet in place. With broad conceptual goals and collaborative 
S O U T H W E S T 
E C O L O G I C A L
R E S T O R AT I O N 
I N S T I T U T E S
Northern Arizona 
University
Colorado State 
University
New Mexico Highlands  
University
Collaborative Readiness: Prepare Landscapes and 
Communities to Receive and Recover from Wildfire
Functions of Collaboratives
Identify, connect, 
and align interested 
parties
Gather and engage individuals 
and entities that have jurisdictional 
authority over, are interested in, 
or are affected by, wildland fire 
mitigation, response, and recovery.
Co-develop strategies 
at scale
Convene inclusive and transparent 
strategic planning processes that 
include spatial planning using 
decision support tools for risk 
assessment and prioritization.  
Coordinate operations
Develop trust that other 
partners will follow through on 
implementation of co-developed 
strategies and share risks.
Facilitate science-
informed, continuous 
learning
Build understanding about 
decision support tools and 
empower collaborative adaptive 
management.
Stages of Collaborative Readiness Framework

conveners identified, the initial partners begin communicating, building trust, and recruiting broader participation. 
Through an iterative process of engagement, participants explore problem definition, delineate the appropriate geographic 
boundaries, and zones of agreement. They develop their composite vision, mission, and goals for addressing risk, and effective 
response, and recovery from inevitable wildfires. Collaborators need to understand their decision space and work to obtain 
commitment from partners with decision-making authority over the lands and processes they are seeking to influence. 
Outcomes of Stage One
Example Benchmarks 
(tangible indicators of progress)
The collaborative has sufficient internal capacity to 
convene and/or participate in collaborative processes.
Funded position/contractor to convene and 
organize: facilitate, design and document 
processes, write grants, etc.
The shared vision develops and coalesces 
along with membership.
Statements articulating shared vision, codes of 
conduct, process protocols/frameworks, charters etc.
Interests are identified and the key stakeholders 
are engaged (including jurisdictional leadership, 
science partners, community-connected partners, 
and historically excluded partners).
Written commitment from entities with decision-
making authority (i.e., Memoranda of Understanding)
The collaborative has access to sufficient knowledge 
of local networks and expertise in critical subject 
matter to inform strategic planning in the next stage.
Stage Three: Translate Strategy into Action
With collaborative commitments and strategic foundations in place, implementing partners begin 
coordinating operations with work on pilot projects, and a project portfolio begins to take shape. Partners 
work together on joint grant applications. The collaborative needs a way to absorb and distribute funding 
through a fiscal sponsor or a legal designation (like 501(c)(3) status; configurations will vary by context). 
The collaborative’s role may evolve during this stage as focus shifts to implementation, but it supports 
continual trust and community building. 
Outcomes of Stage Two
Example Benchmarks 
(tangible indicators of progress)
The collaborative has identified crucial factors for 
achieving landscape resilience to wildfire, and developed 
plans that describe coordinated action to address 
those factors and achieve desired future conditions.
Strategic documents, including: spatial plans with 
coherent links to implementation, community engagement 
and outreach plans, and a strategy outlining steps and 
roles of the collaborative adaptive management process.
Planning processes result in the development of 
structures or products that represent shared meaning 
and knowledge and facilitate collaboration.
Collaboratively created: maps, subject matter 
presentations, shared glossaries, science or practice 
briefs/handbooks, monitoring protocols for assessing 
ecological and socio-economic outcomes of projects.
Frameworks to guide social learning are generated.
Products and protocols for community engagement: 
messaging/talking points, internal & external 
communications protocols, outreach products like 
infographics, tabling materials, presentations, etc.
Stage Two: Translate Vision into Strategy
With the collaborative partners in place, the group begins to co-develop a landscape-scale program 
of work that links spatial strategic planning tools and processes with tiered plans for community 
engagement, operational coordination, and adaptive management. The collaborative understands its 
decision space, and has the capacity, partners, subject matter expertise, data, and technology necessary 
to build integrated strategies. Science partners work with community-connected partners to build 
literacy about spatial decision support concepts, tools, and products, and the collaborative has a plan for 
communicating the shared strategy outside of the group. 

Stage Four: Scaling out and sustaining momentum
A mature collaborative can ideally begin scaling out with a multi-year, cross-boundary program of work. 
Sufficient structures and relationships are in place to allow the collaborative to navigate internal and 
external disturbance and change (such as personnel turnover or the emergence of a new external policy 
directive). The collaborative is able to maintain momentum with current partners while still bringing 
new partners—even old opponents—to the table. Collaboratives at this stage should strive to remain 
independent from (and not be perceived as subservient to) agencies, even as relationships with agencies 
improve. With increasing administrative needs, some collaboratives may choose to formalize into an organizational entity 
to increase stability and durability. However, this can change the dynamics of decision-making, participation, and shared 
governance, which may destabilize collaboration. The configuration of the collaborative must fit the context and work for 
the partners.
Outcomes of Stage Three
Example Benchmarks 
(tangible indicators of progress)
Investment shifts towards implementation as the spatial 
strategy is rolled out on the ground, and completed 
projects are clearly connected to the landscape strategy.
A growing portfolio of completed projects
Implementation schedules and locations are 
coordinated to magnify impact and efficiency.
Agreements about how to distribute 
aquired funding among partners
Trust builds through incremental successes, and learning 
begins on the earliest pilot projects as the monitoring 
and adaptive management plan is tested and refined.
Monitoring and progress reports
Early metrics of social consent and results 
of outreach are tracked and shared.
Outcomes of Stage Four
Example Benchmarks 
(tangible indicators of progress)
Planned projects have landowner agreements in place 
and are in alignment with relevant planning requirements.
A pipeline of shovel-ready projects across 
jurisdictions that is ready to roll out.
Collaborative priorities and strategies are 
institutionalized in NEPA or other agency planning 
protocols to increase accountability of agencies 
to collaborative partners and communities.
Collaboratively developed NEPA.
The collaborative convener has sufficient staff and is able 
to absorb and distribute funding, with agreements in place 
to do so—otherwise, group cohesion may be challenged.
Established budgeting process, identified funds, and 
strategy for managing funds across the partnership.
The group is supported by collaborative adaptive 
management such that the vision, strategies, and 
structure can shift and evolve with changing conditions 
while preserving the network. Long-term, the 
collaborative can contribute to landscape and community 
preparedness by advocating and building capacity for 
under-resourced partners as they collectively take on 
broader systemic challenges to forest resilience.
Monitoring and assessment results shared 
through tours, workshops, and other venues to 
identify needed adjustments, share lessons learned, 
and develop strategies for improvement.
Authors: Ch’aska Huayhuaca, Antony Cheng, Tyler Beeton, John Sanderson, Alan Barton, Aaron Kimple, 
Melanie Colavito, Joseph Zebrowski, Jarod Dunn, Nicolena vonHedemann, Andrew Slack
Illustrations developed by Lauren Brown, LVB Studio
Contact: Chaska.Huayhuaca-Frye@colostate.edu • September 2023 • cfri.colostate.edu
