Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding:  
A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire  
Near Flagstaff, Arizona
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE
Issues in Forest Restoration
October 2023

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain 
West. These forests have been significantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: A neighborhood street is lined with mud from a recent monsoon event that delivered 
significant rainfall over the Museum Fire burn scar. Photo courtesy of Coconino County. 
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
(928) 523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: October 2023
Author: Melanie Colavito, Catrin Edgeley, and Nicolena vonHedeman
Reviewers: Tyler Beeton, Colorado Forest Restoration Institute; Clint Carney, Colorado State 
University; Paul Oltrogge, City of Flagstaff; Andrew Patterson, USDA Forest Service; Jay 
Smith, Coconino County
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay 
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Colavito, M.M., C.M. Edgeley, and N. vonHedemann. 2023. Public Experiences with Wildfire 
and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona. ERI White 
Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University. 57 p.
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. A portion of the research was also supported by 
funding provided by the Arizona Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).

Table of Contents
Executive Summary . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Introduction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Background . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Previous Work . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2022 Survey Approach. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Findings. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
	
Respondent Demographics . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
	
Geographic Distribution of Respondents in 2022. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 11
	
Experiences With Recent Flooding Events . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 11
	
Communication During Flood Events. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
	
Flood Risk Perceptions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
	
Flood Insurance Coverage. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
	
Mitigating Flood Risk . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
	
Managing Flood Risk, Wildfires, and Forests . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 23 
Management and Policy Implications. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
	
Communication About Flooding After the Museum Fire. .  .  .  . . . . . 29
	
Improving Safety During Flood Events. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
	
Reducing Flood Impacts. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
	
Future Forest Management . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Acknowledgements. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Appendix 1. 2022 Survey Booklet:  
	
“Your experiences with recent flooding in Flagstaff”. .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 37
Appendix II. Additional Context Provided by Survey Comments. .  .  . . . 52


Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona       1
Flood waters and muddy debris litter a neighborhood street in Flagstaff after monsoon rains over the Museum Fire scar. 
Photo courtesy of Coconino County.
Executive Summary
Like many communities across the western United States, the greater Flagstaff area in northern Arizona has 
experienced multiple wildfires in recent years that have resulted in postfire flooding. The 2019 Museum Fire 
provides a case study for better understanding how the cascading disturbances of wildfire and postfire flooding, 
which can be further compounded by adjacent disturbances like monsoon-related flooding, impacted Flagstaff 
residents, and how they were informed of, perceive, and respond to these risks. In 2022, we conducted a survey 
in Flagstaff after 2021 flooding associated with the Museum Fire burn scar and monsoonal events to better 
understand attitudes “before” and “after” flooding. This resulted in findings in eight thematic areas: 1) respondent 
demographics; 2) geographic distribution of respondents in 2022; 3) experiences with recent flooding events;  
4) communication during flood events; 5) flood risk perceptions; 6) flood insurance coverage; 7) mitigating flood 
risk; and 8) managing flood risk, wildfires, and forest management. This work builds upon a survey we completed in 
2019 immediately following the Museum Fire that evaluated respondents’ experience with the fire and evacuation, 
communication of fire emergency information, and opinions regarding forest management.
This white paper provides findings from the 2022 survey and includes some comparisons to the 2019 survey results 
to identify general trends and changes over time in perceptions related to fire and flooding. We found that residents 
living in areas with higher modeled flood risk are more likely to experience mental health impacts, renew their flood 
insurance, and take most mitigation actions, although there were respondents who do not have modeled flood risk who 
also believe they have moderate to high risk. Respondents in 2022 had less trust in most sources of information regarding 
flood risk compared to their trust in these same sources in 2019 with regards to information on fire, either indicating 
a decrease in trust overall or a lack of clarity on where to get accurate information on flooding. The large majority of 
residents supported a variety of options to manage flood risk and continued partnerships to implement many types of 
forest management, including the use of prescribed fire and allowing lighting-ignited fires to burn. We conclude with 
suggestions for: 1) enhancing communication about flooding in postfire contexts, 2) improving safety during flood events, 
3) reducing flood impacts, and 4) facilitating future forest management to mitigate fire and flood risk.

2	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Introduction
In the last 15 years, the greater Flagstaff area in northern Arizona has experienced multiple wildfires that have 
resulted in significant postfire flooding. One of those recent events is the 2019 Museum Fire. The fire began on 
July 21, 2019, likely due to thinning equipment engaged in hazardous fuels reduction, and burned 1,961 acres 
in the Dry Lake Hills, a popular recreational area north of the city of Flagstaff where a hazardous fuel thinning 
project designed to protect watershed health was underway. Subsequent monsoonal rains on the Museum Fire’s 
burn scar resulted in significant flooding, but not until the summer of 2021 due to a two-year period with little 
to no summer monsoon rains over the burn scar. Heavy rain in the summer of 2021 also resulted in flooding in 
nearby areas not associated with the burn scar. Downstream areas also received water from both types of flooding 
(e.g., burn scar and non-burn scar related), which created challenges for messaging, communication, response, 
and mitigation.  
Following the 2019 Museum Fire, we conducted a survey to better understand how residents in the Flagstaff 
area experienced the fire and how it impacted support for forest management (Edgeley and Colavito 2020, 
Edgeley and Colavito 2022). After the 2021 floods, we conducted a follow-up survey to understand how 
residents experienced recent flooding and to identify potential changes in support for forest management. To 
that end, the Museum Fire provides a case study for better understanding how the cascading disturbances 
of wildfire and postfire flooding, which can be further compounded by adjacent disturbances like monsoon-
related flooding, impact the public and how residents were informed of, perceived, and responded to these 
risks. Drawing upon results from both 2019 and 2022 surveys, this white paper also provides insights into 
public experiences with and perceptions of wildfires, postfire flooding, and forest management more broadly 
over time. We conclude with recommendations for improving the exchange of information between and 
among agencies and the public to facilitate mutual understanding and enhance adaptive capacity for future 
wildfires and flood events.
Background
The Museum Fire began on July 21, 2019, in the Dry Lake Hills, a popular recreational area north of the city 
of Flagstaff, Arizona (Figure 1). Work associated with the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project (FWPP), a 
hazardous fuel thinning project designed to protect watershed health, was underway in this area, which left woody 
debris on the ground from recent thinning treatments and log decks awaiting sale and removal (Box 1). The fire was 
likely caused by a spark generated from forest thinning equipment that smoldered undetected despite the operator 
following protocol and completing a one-hour fire watch before leaving the site. Two log decks were burned over 
the course of the fire, which was contained on August 12, 2019. The Museum Fire was relatively small (1,961 
acres), but 12% of the acres burned at high severity, and much of the area burned on steep slopes prone to postfire 
flooding1 (Museum Fire BAER Team 2019). 
Notably, the Museum Fire started in July, which is typically the monsoon rain season in the area, but in 
2019, the monsoon activity was uncharacteristically low. It was followed by an even more uncharacteristically 
inactive monsoon season in 2020, making 2019 and 2020 the lowest seasons on record for monsoonal 
activity in the area at the time (National Weather Service 2020). In 2021, the monsoons returned and led to 
significant flooding. At the time, the 2021 monsoon season was the 15th wettest on record in the Flagstaff 
1	 Postfire flooding is any flooding event where large quantities of water flow over burned and dry land and is an increasingly common 
secondary hazard of high-severity wildfire, especially on steep slopes, where debris flows, landslides, and erosion can lead to a range of 
ecological, social, and economic impacts (Neary and Leonard 2019). Burn scars, particularly in high burn severity areas, cause flooding 
because the lack of vegetation destabilizes soils and facilitates faster water movement, and high-severity fires create hydrophobic soils that 
do not allow water to infiltrate. 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona       3
Figure 1. Map of significant wildfires that have impacted the greater Flagstaff, Arizona area from 2010 to 
2022. Data sources: USDA Forest Service.
area, resulting in a total of five rainfall events that led to flooding from the Museum Fire burn scar area 
(Coconino County 2021). During some of the precipitation events in the summer of 2021, significant rainfall 
also occurred in a neighborhood directly adjacent to the neighborhood downstream from the Museum Fire 
burn scar. The precipitation over the adjacent neighborhood also resulted in flooding, but it was not a result of 
the Museum Fire burn scar. Nonetheless, it received national attention and was widely miscommunicated as 
postfire flooding. For example, a video of a Toyota Prius washing down a street spread widely online and was 

4	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
blamed on postfire flooding but was actually a result of flooding originating outside the burn scar (Milman 
2021). Meanwhile, areas downstream from both neighborhoods received water from the burn-scarred and 
non-burn-scarred areas that received heavy rain. These compounding and adjacent flooding events became 
difficult to distinguish, and multiple theories as to the causes of the flooding were discussed throughout the 
community. 
Flagstaff has experienced multiple significant wildfires and postfire flooding events, in addition to the 
Museum Fire. For example, in 2010, the Schultz Fire burned 15,075 acres northeast of Flagstaff and resulted 
in postfire flooding that had impacts over the next several years. A full cost accounting of the fire suppression, 
flood mitigation, and adaptation costs demonstrated that the Schultz Fire alone resulted in over $100 million 
in total costs (Colavito et al. 2021). More recently, in 2022, the Flagstaff area experienced two notable 
wildfires, the Tunnel Fire in April and the Pipeline Fire in June, both of which burned over areas that had 
been impacted by the 2010 Schultz Fire and contributed to postfire flooding in the summer of 2022  
(Figure 1). 
These events provide opportunities to better understand community perceptions of and reactions to hazards 
like wildfire and postfire flooding. To further characterize these impacts over time, we conducted another 
survey in 2022 to build on the 2019 survey following the Museum Fire and learn what changes had occurred 
in terms of community perceptions and responses following the 2021 flooding. This survey was already in 
production when the 2022 fires occurred, and thus, they were not included as part of the study. The findings 
from the recent survey provide insights for decision-makers and managers working to increase community 
adaptation and mitigation to ongoing hazards associated with wildfire and postfire flooding. 
Previous Work 
We conducted a mixed-mode survey in 2019 following the Museum Fire. The survey was mailed to three distinct areas: 
1) all homes placed under some form of wildfire evacuation warning during the Museum Fire; 2) all homes that had a
projected risk of flooding up to three inches in depth after the Museum Fire based on modeling used by the Coconino
County Flood Control District; and 3) a random sample of households within the Flagstaff city limits that did not
Following the 2010 Schultz Fire and postfire flooding, the community of Flagstaff galvanized around 
the need to increase the pace and scale of forest restoration treatments to protect Flagstaff’s municipal 
watersheds. Voters approved a $10 million bond measure in November 2012 with a high degree 
of approval (73.6% in favor) to fund an effort to reduce hazardous fuels in those watersheds. The 
resulting effort is known as the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project (FWPP), the objective of which 
was to “reduce the risk of unnatural, high-severity wildfire on roughly 11,000 acres and the associated 
risk of postfire flooding by utilizing a variety of treatment options on steep slopes, potentially 
including cable and helicopter logging methods” (Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project 2012). FWPP 
resulted in strong collaborative partnerships to implement projects using innovative approaches 
across boundaries with a shared motivation to reduce hazardous fuels and protect watershed health 
(Mottek Lucas 2015). More information on FWPP can be found here:  
https://flagstaffwatershedprotection.org/. 
BOX 1. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona       5
Figure 2. Map of 2019 survey areas associated with the Museum Fire. Data sources: USDA Forest Service 
(Museum Fire areas); Coconino County and JE Fuller (3-inch flood depth area).
fall under the first two categories (Figure 2). A total of 2,758 homes were mailed a paper survey, and it was also made 
available online via the Flagstaff Community Forum. There was a total of 787 total survey responses. Please refer to 
Edgeley and Colavito (2022) for complete methods. 
The 2019 survey yielded results in five thematic areas: 1) the respondent’s experience with the Museum Fire; 2) 
perceptions of post-fire flood risk; 3) communication of emergency information during the Museum Fire; 4) 
evacuation experiences and the Ready, Set, Go! (RSG) notification system; 5) opinions regarding forest management 
in the Flagstaff area, including the FWPP; and 6) basic demographic information. A summary of findings from the 
first survey is provided in Box 2. For complete results, please refer to Edgeley and Colavito (2020). 

6	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Findings and Recommendations from 2019 Museum Fire Survey 
Based on the findings from their survey, Edgeley and Colavito (2020) developed a set of evidence-
based recommendations for decision-makers to facilitate and support community adaptation and 
safety during wildfire and post-fire flooding events. The following recommendations are from the 
fact sheet, “Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk” (Colavito and 
Edgeley 2020).
Communication During the Museum Fire
•	
Virtual public meetings to communicate with residents during the fire were well attended. We
recommend officials continue to stream in-person meetings on multiple platforms to reach a
wider audience.
•	
Residents are most trusting of local organizations and entities, such as the local Forest Service
units and local fire departments. We recommend using these entities to communicate with the
public during fires.
•	
Many residents found communication of information about flooding unclear, predominantly
because they were uncertain about whether it was relevant to them. Local entities responsible for
communicating about flood risk may need to provide more detailed information for residents to
make decisions about the safety of their homes regarding flood risk.
•	
Many residents signed up for the Coconino County alert system and received alerts during the
Museum Fire. We recommend the county continue to use the system to communicate to residents
during an emergency and maintain efforts to encourage residents to sign up for alerts.
Ready, Set, Go Evacuation Notification System2 
•	
High dependence on official evacuation notices among survey respondents indicates a clear
need to provide residents with knowledge that can help them make evacuation decisions
autonomously. Creating and sharing resources and information with residents about fire behavior,
possible thresholds for evacuation, and evacuation decision-making can encourage a reduced
reliance on in-person communication and increase public safety.
•	
Many residents expressed confusion regarding whether all three RSG levels will occur,
and whether they will be announced incrementally from “ready,” to “set,” to “go.” Wider
communication about the RSG system in advance of fire season, with more detail about how it
may be implemented under different scenarios, can help clarify this uncertainty.
•	
Advanced public listing of outlets where RSG evacuation warnings will be communicated and
updated can streamline public information receipt during fires. Survey findings indicate that
many Flagstaff residents are signed up for the Coconino County emergency alert system, but are
not aware that they will receive evacuation notices through that platform. Providing resources
that help residents connect communication systems with their uses could alleviate stress and
encourage the use of trustworthy information sources during wildfires.
Box 2. Summary of Findings and Recommendations from the 
First Survey on the 2019 Museum Fire
2	
Since this data collection and report were completed, the City of Flagstaff and Coconino County have updated their 
coordination and approach for use of RSG. For example, Coconino County developed a map of predetermined evacuation 
zones to reduce confusion around neighborhoods included in evacuations (https://coconinocounty.maps.arcgis.
com/apps/instant/sidebar/index.html?appid=c579ef2e9406468d8575a289253d73d9). While now potentially outdated, 
recommendations made here prior to that change still hold value for other local governments exploring ways to improve 
their evacuation planning.

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona       7
•	
Many residents were confused by incorrect place names in evacuation notices during the Museum
Fire. Confirmation that neighborhood or subdivision names are accurate in emergency messaging
before they are publicly shared can reduce confusion and improve public response time to
notifications. Use of maps to present evacuation information can eliminate further uncertainty
associated with diverse names used by different populations for the same location.
•	
Many evacuated residents expected to be notified that RSG for their neighborhoods had been
lifted or relaxed through the Coconino County emergency alert system so that they could return
home, but did not receive any information through this channel. Clear communication about 1)
when and where RSG evacuation notices have been lifted or reduced, and 2) where residents will
be able to access the most up-to-date information about their neighborhood will be beneficial for
evacuees during future fires.
Post-Fire Flood Risk 				
•
Flagstaff residents have a strong understanding of the connectivity between wildfires and post-
fire flooding; however, those who are evacuated in fire risk areas often have different experiences
and perceptions to those in flood risk areas that should be considered during communication and
outreach.
•
Maintaining communication about post-fire flood risk between local agencies and residents is
critical to encourage continued awareness downslope of the Museum Fire burn scar. Lower risk
awareness and support for long-term mitigation to address post-fire flooding by residents in the
flood risk area suggests that these efforts should span multiple years, and can also benefit from
communication across the greater Flagstaff area to maintain support.
•
Rapid public communication, such as public meetings held in person and virtually, about flood
risk while the Museum Fire was still burning was well received and well attended by residents
throughout the Flagstaff area. We recommend that officials continue to introduce flood risk
information early and through a range of communication channels, taking care to highlight which
neighborhoods or areas that information is pertinent to.
•
Residents indicated willingness to see flood mitigation efforts, such as sandbags and Jersey
barriers, maintained in order to reduce future flood risk. Residents in the flood risk zone were less
likely to state that flood mitigation measures should be maintained, suggesting they may be
experiencing some fatigue in living with the mitigation measures. This might warrant additional
communication with these areas about the reasons for keeping the measures in place.
Forest and Fire Management 
•	
High public support for active forest management through proactive and collaborative approaches
seems likely to continue following the Museum Fire.
•	
Survey respondents indicated a preference for collaborative forest management across
agencies, governments, and organizations as a path forward to address wildfire risk and forest
management. A significant portion of survey respondents stated an interest in the continuation of
FWPP or the introduction of a similar bond format to reduce fire and flood risk in the future.
•	
Efforts to implement additional taxation for Flagstaff residents to support forest management may
benefit from a prorated approach that takes annual household income into consideration.
•	
Residents largely recognize that they are responsible for reducing fire risk on their own properties.
High awareness that FWPP does not reduce this need indicates that many Flagstaff residents
may be receptive to resident-focused outreach efforts and resources that they can use to manage
vegetation and structure risk on their property. Practices that are shared and promoted among
residents should highlight the benefits of shared responsibility for wildfire risk reduction.

8	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
In 2021, two years after the Museum Fire, the monsoons returned, and resulted in flooding downstream from 
both burned and non-burned areas. These events prompted unique communication needs and challenges, as well 
as responses from residents and local officials. It also provided an opportunity to conduct a longitudinal analysis 
of the Flagstaff area’s experiences with wildfire and postfire flooding and further enhance evidence-informed 
recommendations for local officials. To that end, we conducted a follow-up survey to better understand how 
the flooding associated with the Museum Fire, in combination with other flooding, had affected community 
perceptions and needs. 
Community members fill sandbags in preparation for monsoon flooding events post-fire. Photo courtesy former Flagstaff Mayor 
Paul Deasy.

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona       9
2022 Survey Approach
Repeat studies of areas affected by wildfire and associated flooding are scarce, and where they do exist, they have 
focused on assessing long-term impacts (Hjerpe et al. 2023). We developed a survey that expanded on the 2019 
Museum Fire work to present an investigation of resident attitudes “before” and “after” flooding. Given that 
flooding during the summer of 2021 was driven by numerous factors, generic language about “flooding” was used to 
avoid biasing respondents. The survey instrument included a small number of questions duplicated from the 2019 
survey to explore changing attitudes regarding flood risk, as well as many new questions that sought to understand 
impacts and mitigation strategies at the household level. The 2021 survey yielded results in eight thematic areas:  
1) respondent demographics; 2) geographic distribution of respondents in 2022; 3) experiences with recent flooding 
events; 4) communication during flood events; 5) flood risk perceptions; 6) flood insurance coverage; 7) mitigating 
flood risk; and 8) managing flood risk, wildfires, and forest management.
The sample frame for this second survey was expanded from the 2019 survey to include all residential addresses in areas 
between Route 66 and the Museum Fire burn scar, to focus on areas that had experienced recent flooding from both 
the burn scar and other sources (Figure 3). This expansion allowed us to focus on gathering data from residents in areas 
with the greatest flood risk, as the 2019 survey sample frame included fire evacuation areas and randomly selected city 
addresses that were not experiencing high flood risk in 2021. A total of 3,825 addresses were identified within this area as 
eligible to participate in this study. We note that differences in our sampling approach in 2019 and 2022 mean that results 
from both data collection efforts are not directly comparable, but can provide insights into perceptions and impacts of 
subsets of the greater Flagstaff area’s population at different points in time as risk has evolved.
The survey was administered via mail during the summer of 2022 in three waves: 1) a packet containing an 
explanatory letter, survey booklet, and pre-paid return envelope, 2) a reminder postcard, and 3) a final reminder 
postcard, each sent approximately three weeks apart. All survey materials also included information on how to 
complete the survey online to maximize response rates. We received a total of 623 completed survey responses 
Figure 3. Map of 2022 survey area. Data sources: USDA Forest Service (Museum Fire perimeter).

10	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
between June and October 2022. We tested respondent characteristics in several ways to make sure they were 
representative of the area, including comparison of demographic data to census block data, and comparison of early 
and late survey responses to determine data set consistency. While over 70% of surveys did not contain qualitative 
comments, we analyzed those that were included for themes (see Appendix II).
Following survey completion, we engaged in meetings with Coconino County, City of Flagstaff, and USDA 
Forest Service representatives to share preliminary findings from this survey. These discussions included a review 
of basic descriptive (i.e., summary) statistics, much of which is shared in the findings section of this white paper. 
Conversations with these decision-making audiences prompted additional areas of inquiry, particularly exploring 
how our results varied spatially across the study area. 
Upon receiving this feedback, we conducted a spatial analysis of patterns and trends in responses using ArcGIS. 
We obtained GIS data from a local contractor, JE Fuller Hydrology and Geomorphology, Inc. (herein JE Fuller), 
who conducts hydrological and watershed modeling and works with local managers in the Flagstaff area. Following 
the Museum Fire in 2019, JE Fuller had generated preliminary flood risk mapping area that showed a larger 
flood risk area resulting from a 3-inch in 45-minute rainstorm for planning purposes (Figure 4). We met with JE 
Fuller in the spring of 2023 to obtain updated flood risk information and learned that new modeling had been 
conducted in late 2022 that provided a more refined analysis of potential flooding, accounted for current watershed 
conditions, including mitigation work following the fire, and provided a higher level of detail for different storm 
depth scenarios. We determined that for our goal of identifying which respondents in our survey lived in modeled 
Figure 4. Map of 3-inch rain event in 45 minutes flood risk area modeled by JE Fuller in 2019 and 2-inch rain 
event in 45 minutes flood risk area modeled by JE Fuller in 2022 resulting in greater than 0.5-feet of inundation. 
These data were used to determine respondents’ flood risk for spatial analyses, although the 2022 modeled 
flood risk map was not publicly available when the survey was conducted in 2022. Data sources: USDA Forest 
Service (Museum Fire perimeter); Coconino County and JE Fuller (flood risk areas).

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         11
flood risk areas, that the scenario of a 2-inch storm over 45 minutes would be appropriate. Results from that 
modeling were then simplified to show inundation limits with depths greater than 0.5 feet of flooding (a common 
curb height) would be the most representative to make the determination that a given property was at risk of 
flooding (Figure 4). JE Fuller provided us with the data for this scenario, and we conducted additional spatial 
analysis to classify respondents into flood risk groups. Basic statistical tests were run to explore the significance of 
relationships between variables; results presented in this white paper were identified using ANOVA, t-tests, and chi 
square analyses. It should be noted that this updated modeling was conducted after the survey had been closed, so 
respondents who completed the survey did not have the latest flood modeling information when they responded 
to the survey. Therefore, respondents’ assumptions of risk may have been based on anecdotal evidence, the 2019 
modeled flood risk area (which had been made available to the public prior to the 2022 survey period), or other 
factors. At the same time, respondent perceptions of risk may not be tied directly to modeled risk (i.e., a respondent 
may still perceive risk even if they view mapping that indicates they are not at risk or vice versa). The modeling 
information helps us to determine general areas of risk and tying it to respondent perceptions allows us to identify 
general trends. However, this study does not attempt to directly connect these two factors.  
Findings 
Findings from the 2022 survey are organized into the following thematic areas: 1) respondent demographics;  
2) geographic distribution of respondents in 2022; 3) experiences with recent flooding events; 4) communication 
during flood events; 5) flood risk perceptions; 6) flood insurance coverage; 7) mitigating flood risk; and  
8) managing flood risk, wildfires, and forest management. Throughout this section, we provide both quantitative 
data and snippets of comments from survey respondents provided at the end of their responses.
Respondent Demographics
Of the 623 respondents, approximately 47.8% identified as male, 51.9% as female, and 0.3% as non-binary 
or another gender identity, with an average age of 58 years old. The majority (77.3%) of respondents had 
completed a bachelor’s degree or a higher level of education. Respondents’ reported race and ethnicity were 
3.9% American Indian or Alaskan Native, 1.8% Asian, 0.8% Black or African American, 11.6% Hispanic 
or Latino, 1.0% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 75.6% Caucasian, and 2.2% other. About a quarter 
(25.9%) of respondents lived in households where total household income before taxes was under the 
Coconino County average of $61,888 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2021). The average survey respondent had lived 
in the Flagstaff area for almost 29 years. Approximately 89.5% of respondents owned the property where 
they received a survey, and 92.7% of respondents resided at that property full time. These demographics were 
representative of the census block data for the area. 
Geographic Distribution of Respondents in 2022
Using the two different modeled flood risk areas from 2019 and 2022 (Figure 4), we were able to geographically classify 
respondents according to their modeled flood risk. Of the respondents to the 2022 survey, 14.0% were located in the 
2019 modeled flood risk area and 57.6% of respondents were in the 2022 modeled flood risk area (Figure 4), and 13.3% 
of respondents were located in both the 2019 and 2022 modeled flood risk areas. Lastly, 41.8% of respondents were not 
in either modeled flood risk area. 
Experiences With Recent Flooding Events
A minority (9%) of respondents were concerned about flood risk when they moved into their Flagstaff property, 
while 12.9% of respondents stated that potential flood risk was disclosed to them when they purchased or began 

12	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
renting their property. Approximately 16.2% of respondents reported experiencing some level of flooding on 
their property prior to 2021. Figure 5 shows the flood experiences of respondents in 2021, during which 75.6% 
of respondents reported some level of flooding in their area, including 28.5% who experienced flooding on their 
property or into their homes.
Approximately 30.2% of the total respondents reported property damage caused by flooding in 2021. Figure 6 
illustrates what types of flood damage those 30.2% of respondents reported, with non-structural damage being by far 
the most common (83.7%), as well as 21.9% of respondents indicating there was damage to the interior of their home. 
Impacts related to flood events were documented through a series of survey questions focused on respondent well-
being and mental health in addition to more targeted statements about short-term impacts. Figure 7 shows the most 
commonly reported impacts to daily functioning and resource access as a result of flood events. Disruption to routines 
was the most commonly reported impact, while income and dependent-related impacts were typically less frequent. 
Additionally, 47.2% of respondents shared that they had sheltered in their home during a 2021 flood event, with only 
1.3% stating that they had evacuated from their home to a safer location; 44.5% took neither option. 
Figure 5. Respondent flood experiences in 2021.
Figure 6. Types of flood damage that respondents (30.2% of total respondents) who reported property damage 
experienced. 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         13
Figure 8 shows self-reported wellbeing impacts to respondents. A large majority of respondents reported worry 
about the safety of family, friends, or neighbors (77.1%), and nearly half (46.2%) worried about their property 
or generally felt anxious or worried because of flood risk (47.4%). A smaller but not insignificant number of 
respondents reported more severe consequences associated with flood events such as inability to relax (24.6%), 
loss of sleep (23.8%), significant stress (21.9%), depression (19.1%), and tiredness (15.5%). More than half of 
respondents (54.4%) reported that they remained worried about future flood risk.
Respondents who live in the modeled flood risk areas were also more likely to report some of these health impacts. 
Approximately 14.7% of all respondents reported agreement with the statement “my mental health suffered as a 
Figure 7. Reported impacts of flooding on daily functioning and resource access.
Figure 8. Impacts to wellbeing and mental health because of flood risk or flood experiences. Yellow colors 
illustrate the highest impacts.

14	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
result of flood risk;” however, respondents in the 2019 
modeled flood risk area were more likely to express 
agreement (32.6%) compared to those outside of that 
area (11.9%). Survey respondents living in the 2019 
modeled flood risk area also reported higher levels 
of loss of sleep, stress, anxiety about flood events, 
depression, feeling tired or having a little energy, and 
physical health issues related to flooding compared to 
those outside the 2019 flood risk area. Worry over the 
safety of friends and family was documented broadly 
across all areas, indicating that social connectivity 
within the city of Flagstaff means that many 
respondents, regardless of location, experienced some 
level of impact to their wellbeing.
A few respondents wrote comments about their 
negative flooding experiences. One respondent said, 
“We were very lucky to have been inside our house when the first flood wave 2–3 feet deep hit. If we had been 
outside, we would have been seriously injured if not knocked off our feet and killed by the debris, boulders, tree 
trunks, and wooden structures moved by the rapidly flowing flood waters.” 
Communication During Flood Events 
Better understanding of how respondents currently access information and who they trust during fire and flooding 
events can inform how to best communicate key messages. Respondents typically learned of flood events via text 
messages, automated phone calls, or emails sent through emergency communication platforms and from first-hand 
observation (Figure 9). Less than 1% of respondents reported being contacted in person about flood events, which 
highlights the importance of not relying on in-person notifications by officials to make decisions about evacuation — 
an expectation that was held by more than 40.1% of respondents to the 2019 survey (Edgeley and Colavito 2020).
Figure 9. Communication modes through which respondents learned about flooding occurring in their area. 
Responses are organized from most to least common. Respondents could select multiple options.

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         15
The most trustworthy source of information for making decisions on flooding for respondents was emergency alerts 
on their cell phones (77.4% found these to be somewhat to very trustworthy) (Figure 10). Over half of respondents 
found Coconino County (60%), the City of Flagstaff (57.4%), media (e.g., newspapers, TV news, or radio) 
(55.4%), their family and friends (55.0%), or their neighbors (50.1%) to be somewhat to very trustworthy sources 
of information on flooding, but these were markedly lower levels of trust than cell phone alerts. Less than half of 
respondents trusted the Forest Service (47.5%), law enforcement (40.1%), and the local fire department/district 
(37.1%) with information on flooding. It is interesting to note that cell phone alerts are sent by Coconino County, 
yet more respondents trust the alerts than the county as a provider of information on flooding. This could be a 
Figure 10. Respondents’ perceptions of trustworthiness of different information sources for making decisions 
about flood risk in the 2022 survey. 
Figure 11. Respondents’ perceptions of trustworthiness of different information sources for making decisions 
about Museum Fire risk in the 2019 survey. Data from Edgeley and Colavito 2020.

16	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Figure 12. Responses to the question, “To what extent did flooding during the summer of 2021 align with your 
expectations for the Flagstaff area?” 
Figure 13. Responses to the question, “How long do you anticipate that flood risk will last in your area?” 
3	  Risk was not defined for survey respondents. We define it as the possibility that a flood could occur and cause damage.
result of how the survey options were presented but may also indicate that the mode of delivery (i.e., cell phone 
alerts) can affect trustworthiness. 
These results differ from the 2019 survey, where respondents were asked about information related to the 
Museum Fire, rather than postfire flooding (Figure 11). In 2019, markedly more respondents found the Forest 
Service (78.8%), Coconino County (73.5%), law enforcement (68.4%), local fire department (66.5%), City of 
Flagstaff (65.1%), and media (63.9%) to be somewhat to very trustworthy for information related to the fire. 
One reason for these differences may be the role that organizations play in responding to and communicating 
about fire is different than flooding.
Flood Risk Perceptions
Given the impact of recent flood events on private property, understanding risk3 perceptions among respondents 
in flood-prone areas was a central component of our survey because it can help determine future communication 
needs and mitigation strategies. Figures 12 and 13 document the extent to which flooding did or did not exceed 
respondent expectations for the area. The majority of respondents (60.9%) reported that flooding was far more 
severe than expected and another 25.7% reported that it was somewhat more severe than expected (Figure 12). 
Perspectives on how long flood risk might last were far more varied; while a quarter of respondents felt that flood 
risk to the area was now permanent, almost half of respondents expected it to last 10 years or less (Figure 13).

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         17
Figure 14. Respondents’ characterization of flood risk to their property at the time of the 2022 survey.
Figure 15. Respondents’ perceived likelihood of flood risk versus actual flood risk using modeled flood risk areas 
in 2019 and 2022.
Respondents were also asked to characterize current flood risk to their specific property at the time they received 
the survey (Figure 14), with most (67.7%) respondents believing their property has low to moderate flood risk. 
We also used 2019 and 2022 modeled flood risk areas to determine whether respondents who thought they 
had risk at their private property were located in areas with modeled flood risk. Figure 15 demonstrates that 
respondents who were located in both the 2019 and 2022 modeled flood risk areas were well aware of flood risk, 
with 88% of those respondents indicating moderate to extreme risk perceptions. However, respondents with no 
flood risk in either modeling year also perceived a sense of risk, with 42% of respondents indicating extreme to 
moderate risk perceptions. 
Respondents to both the 2019 and 2022 survey were asked an identical series of questions about the likelihood that 
various flood events would occur during the next 10 years (Figure 16). Perceived likelihood of flood events at larger 
scales consistently increased during the second survey. However, the perceived likelihood of a flood event damaging 
the respondent’s home decreased between surveys (38.9% in 2019 vs. 32.4% in 2022); this may be due in part to a 
lack of impacts among some respondents during the most recent flood events.

18	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Respondents were also asked how influential different natural and human factors driving potential flood risk were 
during the summer of 2021. Figure 17 reveals that the majority of respondents felt that the Museum Fire burn scar 
was the most influential driver, followed by monsoonal rainfall events.
Flood Insurance Coverage
Understanding insurance coverage among residents in flood prone areas remains important for navigating recent 
and potential future impacts among private residences. Standard home insurance does not cover flood damage, so 
homeowners must purchase a separate flood insurance policy that covers damage caused by flooding. Insurance is 
available through the National Flood Insurance Program or private insurance companies. Flood insurance costs 
vary depending on location and construction considerations. 
Figure 16. Respondents’ perceived likelihood of flood events occurring at different geographic scales between 
2019 and 2022.
Figure 17. Respondent perceptions of the influence of environmental factors on flooding.

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         19
Approximately 22.3% of survey respondents had purchased 
flood insurance for their property, most commonly between 
July and August of 2019. Approximately 22.4% of these 
respondents had purchased flood insurance prior to the 
Museum Fire. The majority of these respondents (63.8%) had 
retained their coverage continuously between 2019 and 2022. 
Only 4.7% reported filing insurance claims associated with 
flooding damages in 2021, while 15.6% had flood impacts to 
their property that were not covered by insurance. The average 
out-of-pocket cost for these damages was $33,362. One
homeowner expressed dismay at the potential cost of flood
insurance in a comment provided at the end of the survey: 
When we were considering putting an offer on our home, 
our realtor freaked us out by saying that we might not be 
able to purchase it because flooding might force us to buy 
flood insurance, which would have put us out of our budget. 
Respondents that reported holding flood insurance coverage in the 2022 survey were asked how long they 
planned to renew their coverage (Figure 18). Half of respondents (50%) planned to renew flood insurance 
coverage as long as they resided at their current property; a smaller group intended to renew for up to five years 
after the survey was completed. After conducting statistical testing, renewal of insurance for longer periods of 
time was found to be motivated by two variables: 1) whether they were in the 2019 modeled flood risk area, and 
2) their perceived likelihood of a flood event impacting their private property in the next 10 years. Perceived 
duration of flood risk was not an influence on planned duration of insurance coverage. 
Figure 18. Anticipated duration of future flood insurance renewal among respondents who held flood insurance 
in 2022.  

20	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Mitigating Flood Risk 
Residents can take a variety of actions to mitigate flood risk on their property through both personal measures 
and seeking help from a variety of sources. Most respondents did not interact with a formal organization 
(Figure 19) to discuss and/or address flood risk on their private property. Interaction that did occur was most 
likely with the City of Flagstaff or Coconino County through face-to-face conversations or public meetings. 
Respondents were asked which actions they took on their private property to address flood risk (Figure 20). The 
most common actions were clearing flood debris (36.9%), parking vehicles off the street (23.9%), or building an 
emergency “stay kit” of important items for shelter in place (16.3%). 
Figure 19. How respondents interacted with different organizations to discuss and/or address flood risk on their 
property 
Figure 20. Additional actions respondents took to address flood risk.

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         21
Some respondents implemented their own structural measures on their private property to mitigate flood risk. The 
most common action was placing sandbags around structures on their property: twice as many respondents did this 
during the 2021 monsoon season (27%) as prior to 2021 (13%) (Figure 21). Approximately 10% of respondents 
also constructed barriers around their homes or ensured the lower levels of their homes were waterproofed during 
the 2021 rainy season. Additional analysis of respondents in the 2019 modeled flood risk area highlighted that they 
were far more likely to engage in all of the actions listed in Figure 21. 
Some qualitative comments addressed mitigation actions, particularly sandbag placement. One respondent 
commented on both positive and negative outcomes of being forced to take on these types of actions: 
This flooding was an inflection point that changed our lives in temporary and permanent ways. It led us 
to remortgage our house to pay for repairs and prevention. It has taken countless hours for prevention, 
mitigation, advocacy, and planning. One positive outcome was getting to know our neighbors and feeling 
more connected to them. 
Others noted that while sandbags often provided some help at the time, they were not a long-term solution or lead 
to movement of floodwaters elsewhere. Two respondents wrote: 
Thank you for the on-going efforts being made on all fronts, but the sandbags are just a quick seasonal fix. 
Something more substantial and permanent needs to be done. 
The sandbag management and implementation was TERRIBLE and stressful. I did not consent to 
sandbags being placed on my property and I came home to my garage being sandbagged in. I had to move 
all the sandbags to be able to access my garage by myself … Ultimately, I ended up selling my house and 
moving because of the stress and it feeling like a war zone all the time [because a fence was removed to 
Figure 21. Actions taken on private property to address flood risk.  

22	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
mitigate flood issues, which led to increased park access in front of the respondent’s house]. My first buyer 
backed out because of their concern about the flood mitigation, and I ended up having to compromise with 
a back-up buyer.
 
Some respondents took action to address flood risk in their area, beyond their personal property (Figure 22). The 
most common actions taken were helping to collect, fill, and/or place sandbags (41.6%) and talking with neighbors 
about mitigation efforts (41.4%). 
Respondents living in the 2019 modeled flood risk area were significantly more likely to conduct the majority of 
actions shown in Figure 22; the only exceptions were talking with neighbors about mitigation efforts and helping 
to collect, fill and/or place sandbags, for which no differences emerged in areas with and without flood risk. This 
suggests that respondents that have had to respond in the past can help to advocate for community organization 
and mitigation.
Figure 22. Actions taken to address flood risk beyond personal property.
Respondents were also asked why they did not take more actions (Figure 23). A majority (66.5%) either moderately 
or strongly agreed that their property’s flood risk was too low to warrant taking the mitigation efforts in Figure 22. 
A smaller majority disagreed that mitigation actions were not taken because their property was insured (56.8%) or 
because no one in the household could perform the mitigation work (53.9%). Respondents were divided on other 
reasons for not taking more mitigation actions, such as uncertainty that the actions would reduce flood risk, high 
cost, large time commitment to implement, high upkeep effort, or reduction of property appearance. 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         23
Managing Flood Risk, Wildfires, and Forests 
The USDA Forest Service, Coconino County and its flood control district, City of Flagstaff, and other entities have 
taken steps toward reducing wildfire and flooding risk in Northern Arizona for nearly thirty years. For example, 
the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project is focused on hazardous fuel reduction to provide watershed health 
and reduce flood risk (Box 1). Many other initiatives with similar missions, such as the Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative, are also ongoing in Northern Arizona and the greater Flagstaff area. The survey asked respondents a 
series of questions on support for different types of initiatives and management actions.
The majority of respondents supported a variety of efforts to manage flood risk (Figure 24). Over 90% either 
moderately or strongly supported channel redesign to redirect flood water (91.2%), engineering work to mitigate flood 
risk (92.2%), or reforestation in burned areas (95%). Over three-quarters of respondents supported continued forest 
thinning (76.2%) or use of prescribed fire (76.6%). A smaller majority (61.8%) supported federal grants to purchase 
properties from owners in flood-prone areas. For example, one respondent wrote that the “city should purchase 
affected homes, raze the houses on them, and create adjacent green areas to the affected water sources.” Others 
cautioned how to approach future flood mitigation because of challenges they have seen with existing initiatives: 
I think you should be extremely careful with mitigation projects as these projects sometimes cause bigger 
problems or just shift the problem to another area. The city’s ‘watershed protection project’ [FWPP] ended 
up causing the Museum Fire and the floods of 2021. Some of the county’s “flood control” projects just shifted 
the flooding to other areas or created a mosquito and public health problem. Mitigation should be small 
check dams upstream of potential flood areas, reseeding, small projects that spread the water and slow the 
flow in the upper and mid watershed areas.
Respondents did not agree that enough has been done to reduce flood risk on a variety of property ownerships 
(Figure 25). A small majority of respondents moderately to strongly disagreed that enough has been done on flood 
easements (50.3%), Forest Service land (51%), or city property, streets, and roads (59.4%). Most respondents either 
disagreed or were neutral on enough work being done on the county right-of-way or on private lands. Respondents 
Figure 23. Responses regarding mitigation actions that respondents chose not to pursue. 

24	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Figure 25. Respondents’ opinions on flood risk reduction on various jurisdictions 
were more mixed in perceiving enough being done on their property or neighbors’ properties, and the majority 
(69%) were neutral with regards to lands belonging to utility companies. 
There was strong agreement among respondents that responsibility for flood risk management lies with all types of land 
jurisdictions (Figure 26). The entities most commonly seen as responsible for flood risk management included the City 
of Flagstaff (91.6% moderately or strongly agree), Coconino County (90.5%), the local flood control district (89.9%), and 
the Forest Service (86.1%). While fewer respondents viewed private property owners and FEMA as responsible for flood 
management, a majority still agreed they have responsibility, as well (65.7% and 68.9%, respectively). 
Figure 24. Support for management efforts to manage flood risk. 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         25
Figure 26. Respondents’ perceptions of jurisdictions responsible for flood risk management.
Respondents strongly supported partnerships for achieving fire and watershed protection goals, yet were more divided 
on how this type of work is funded (Figure 27). There was strong agreement that partnerships between the city, Forest 
Service, and other organizations are the best way to address fire risk in Flagstaff (89.6% moderately to strongly agree), 
and that the federal government should pay for risk reduction activities on federal land (87.8%). A small majority 
(53.5%) disagreed, however, that the federal government has sufficient resources to manage local forests and watersheds. 
Respondents were more divided on perceptions of fairness related to payments by citizens; around half of respondents 
thought it was fair for citizens to pay for local wildfire risk reduction (51.8%), local watershed protection (51.7%), or local 
forest health (48.8%), and with around a quarter of respondents feeling neutral about these ideas. A majority (59.7%) of 
Figure 27. Respondents’ perceptions of forest management responsibilities. 

26	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
respondents supported an increase in their taxes to reduce risks to their 
property. One survey respondent wrote: 
In my opinion the most important topic addressed in this survey 
is climate change/forest health. We are not doing enough in this 
regard. More thinning, more prescribed burns. More restoration 
effort. I would be happy to pay higher taxes so that the relevant land 
management agencies are better able to handle these tasks. 
A strong majority of respondents agreed that continued forest 
management is important to reduce wildfire and flood risk (Figure 
28). Around 90% of respondents agreed that continued forest 
management in the Flagstaff area will improve forest health or 
reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfire. Fewer but still a large 
majority of respondents moderately to strongly agreed that 
continued forest management would protect city water resources 
(73.9%), minimize future costs associated with postfire flooding (77.8%), reduce the risk of postfire flooding 
(80.7%), minimize future costs associated with wildfire (81.4%), and improve watershed health (84%). A 
handful of commenters also noted that the Museum Fire was started by thinning crews and argued for greater 
accountability: “It will take a long time to restore faith in forest thinning, and I don’t see anyone talking 
about the horrible mistakes that were made.” Another argued that FWPP caused the Museum Fire and that, 
“Taxpayers paid 10 million dollars for a mismanaged project that floods neighborhoods. Now we have increased 
water bills to pay for the rest of the failed project.” However, respondents overall showed support for active forest 
management and partnerships to accomplish this goal. 
Respondents strongly supported a variety of forest management practices (Figure 29). Nearly 90% of respondents 
find creating fuel breaks (removal of vegetation to halt fire spread) or strategic removal of trees to reduce hazardous 
Figure 28. Respondents’ opinions on continued forest management impacts. 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         27
Figure 29. Respondents’ perceptions on different forest management strategies. 
fuels moderately to very acceptable in the Flagstaff area. Respondents were also largely supportive of fire on the 
landscape, with 74% finding lightning-ignited fires being allowed to burn to improve forest health acceptable, and 
79.5% finding prescribed fire acceptable. This level of support is slightly higher than the 2019 survey, when 78.4% 
of respondents found prescribed fire acceptable, and 69.8% of respondents found more open forests acceptable. One 
commenter on the survey reflected a commonly stated concern over human ignitions, arguing for more forest use 
restrictions because, “Thinning is certainly a piece of the solution but is not the end-all … High winds during dry 
conditions make fires almost unstoppable.” 
Respondents expressed high levels of concern for most suggested environmental issues in the Flagstaff area (Figure 
30). Over 80% of respondents were somewhat to very concerned with climate change (81.4%), snowpack on the 
San Francisco Peaks (81.9%), watershed health (87.9%), flooding (91.4%), forest health (93.2%), drought (93.2%), 
and wildfire (96.4%). A smaller majority (61.3%) was concerned about Flagstaff area air quality. 
Respondents largely perceived a link between climate change and fire and flood risk, but were more mixed in their 
perception that impacts are preventable (Figure 31). Over three-quarters of respondents agreed that climate change 
is worsening flood risk in their area (76.8%), affecting their community (82.6%), and worsening wildfire risk in 
their area (83.3%). A smaller majority (65.4%) disagreed that enough action is being taken to address climate 
change impacts in Flagstaff. Respondents were much more divided on the question of whether climate change 
impacts in Flagstaff are preventable, with 36.5% disagreeing and 39.3% agreeing. 

28	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Figure 31. Respondents’ perceptions of climate change. 
Figure 30. Respondents’ concern about environmental issues in Flagstaff. 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         29
Management and Policy Implications
Survey findings from Flagstaff respondents living in areas with flood risk indicate that retaining public interest 
in active risk reduction after wildfires is challenging over multi-year periods. Below, we provide evidence-based 
suggestions for decision-makers organized around several key takeaways from these data, with the goal of better 
informing public communication and safety related to post-fire environments and flooding. 
Communication About Flooding After the Museum Fire
Survey respondents had greater difficulty identifying trustworthy sources of information for flooding when compared with 
similar questions about fire information in the 2019 survey. It is not clear if this change is due to a change in trustworthiness 
or a change in the hazard (i.e., fire versus flooding). The prevalence of discussions around Inciweb and successful use of 
social media by local fire departments and governments has ensured that residents have a suite of information sources to 
seek out during fire, but the same does not exist for flooding in this area. Furthermore, it is not clear whether respondents 
can differentiate between different sources of information when it is actively provided to residents (e.g., Can they tell 
whether the person who visited their home with information was from the county or the city?). We note that numerous new 
communication efforts such as the aforementioned Coconino County evacuation map have recently emerged to advance 
local preparedness; in addition to these tools, we provide the following recommendations:
•	
Communication about which source(s) are most trustworthy for flood information should be present 
in discussions with the public about postfire flooding. This might be provided in the form of a list or flier 
documenting sources and the kinds of information they can provide in flooding contexts or pointed to 
consistently among professionals in public meetings to encourage differentiation between reliable and unreliable 
sources. For example, the Coconino County Evacuation Zone map (https://coconinocounty.maps.arcgis.com/
apps/instant/sidebar/index.html?appid=c579ef2e9406468d8575a289253d73d9) provides information for multiple 
types of hazards. This could also benefit people with different information-seeking behaviors.
•	
Interactions around flooding between professionals and residents can benefit from clear communication 
about representation, such as t-shirts with the agency logo or sharing of materials with agency logos 
and contact information so that residents can recall with whom they spoke if they have additional 
communication needs.
•	
Given difficulty differentiating information sources among residents in flood-prone areas, there may be 
benefits to the establishment of an interagency or interorganizational flood communication group that 
is public facing and distinctly branded. Members representing each party involved in flood risk or sediment 
reduction4 and communication could collate important information to ensure both consistency in messaging 
and increase overall trustworthiness of flood communications, allowing a centralized “hub” for consistent 
communication to emerge. This group would be most critical during the monsoon season following a fire 
event, which may be immediately after a fire and could be reprised annually until flood risk has decreased.
•	
Our findings indicate that many respondents who do not have modeled flood risk still believe they are at risk, 
while there are respondents who do have modeled flood risk that did not indicate that they perceive they are at 
risk. Communication of flood risk and associated mitigation recommendations at the parcel and household 
level is necessary to ensure that at-risk residents are aware of that risk and know how to respond without 
creating a scenario where residents without risk are also taking actions and potentially using resources they 
do not need. Many factors beyond understanding modeled flood risk play into residents’ risk perceptions, but 
having access to detailed and up-to-date information can help them make informed decisions. 
4	  The Museum Fire Sediment Reduction Project was a partnership between the City of Flagstaff, Coconino County, and the Coconino 
National Forest to restore watersheds on the Coconino National Forest near the Museum Fire burn scar through restoration and 
stabilization of the watershed to reduce sediment runoff. (https://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/coconino/news-events/?cid=FSEPRD990858)

30	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
A county official inspects a washed out road as flood waters flow from the Museum Fire burn. Photo courtesy of Coconino County.
Improving Safety During Flood Events
While a significant amount of research explores behaviors during fire, far less is known about what residents 
do during flood events in areas that have recently experienced fire. Approximately 47.2% of survey respondents 
sheltered in their homes during a flood, but only 16.3% had prepared an emergency stay kit for this kind of event, 
indicating a disconnect between planning and action at the household level. The following recommendations may 
support improved planning and public safety during future flood events in Coconino County:
•	
Communication to inform decision-making surrounding evacuation or sheltering in place during a 
flood event should be paired with suggestions about planning or preparation efforts each household 
should consider. That may mean communicating that sheltering in place is the preferred action, and 
that the creation of an emergency kit including certain items (e.g., radio, flashlight, bottled water) can 
improve the safety of members of that household, particularly if flooding limits access to their property. 
Timing of such communication should be tied to seasonal events so as not to create confusion when 
recommendations during fire season emphasize the need to prepare emergency kits to take in the event 
that a fire warrants evacuation. 
•	
Continue to set expectations around communication about an incoming flood event. The majority of 
survey respondents learned about flooding via text or observation; only 0.8% had a visit from an emergency 
professional. Our research in Flagstaff suggested that 40.1% of survey respondents expect to be notified in 
person about the need to evacuate during a wildfire (Edgeley and Colavito 2020); ensuring that this expectation 
does not persist during flood events can redirect information-seeking behaviors to more appropriate channels.

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         31
Reducing Flood Impacts
Flood events in Flagstaff city limits during 2021 impacted numerous private properties. Respondents associated 
these events with monsoon rains and the Museum Fire burn scar, and there is evidence to suggest that not all 
flooding was driven by precipitation over burned areas. Impacts to wellbeing and mental health appeared to be 
more short-lived following these flood events in comparison to similar questions answered by residents in the 
Schultz Fire flood areas (Colavito et al. 2021). A decline in insurance policy renewal also mirrored behaviors of 
those in the Schultz Fire flooding survey. We suggest the following to continue to reduce the impacts of flooding 
during possible future events:
•	
Emphasize the connection between preparation and mental health. Higher levels of preparation such as 
property-level mitigation and purchase of flood insurance can offer peace of mind given that sudden onset 
flooding minimizes opportunities for risk reduction upon learning of a possible precipitation event. 
•	
Sharing information related to the unpredictability of monsoon rains and fluctuations in precipitation 
year-by-year and the impact that can have on revegetation and soil stabilization can help residents 
understand that a lack of monsoon rain in one year does not necessarily equate to a reduction in risk the 
following year. 
•	
Continued communication about the importance of maintaining flood insurance is needed, particularly at 
the two-year mark after a fire when interest begins to decline. Preparing materials to share that highlight key 
differences between private and federal insurance programs, including average cost per month, delay period 
before coverage starts after purchase, and what is covered can help residents in affected areas make accelerated 
and informed decisions. This should be paired with up-to-date, readily available, and easy-to-understand 
information on modeled flood risk that helps residents understand how their flood risk may continue well after 
the fire is extinguished and change with new mitigation efforts.
•	
The cost of flood insurance has increased over time, and low-income households and renters are 
particularly limited in their ability to purchase and retain coverage over time. Some respondents noted 
that insurance did not cover all of their flood-related damages, with out-of-pocket costs averaging 
$33,362. Exploring grants, cost shares, or other funding mechanisms related to insurance and/or other 
forms of flood mitigation can help support more equitable adaptation to flooding, particularly after fire 
in areas that had no prior flood risk, meaning that residents are unlikely to have budgeted or planned for 
such risks. 
•	
Residents are looking toward public agencies for longer-term solutions that move beyond sandbag use, 
particularly the city, county, flood control districts, and Forest Service. While many are taking actions on 
their private properties, they ultimately see flood control and sediment reduction responsibility as an issue 
beyond their capacity to mitigate themselves and are supportive of using a variety of measures (channel 
redesign, engineering work, reforestation, forest thinning, prescribed or managed fire, and — to a lesser 
extent — purchasing properties) to reduce risk. As mentioned earlier, establishment of an interagency or 
interorganizational group that is public facing could benefit this work. Using a variety of measures, in addition 
to forest management, is important to develop a holistic approach to building and sustaining community 
resilience to wildfire and flood risk. 

32	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Future Forest Management
The Museum Fire was likely caused by equipment engaged in hazardous fuels reduction, though the exact 
cause could not be determined, raising questions about continued public support for active forest management 
in the Flagstaff area. This survey is the latest of several that reveal continued overall high support for such 
activities, regardless of recent events (i.e., not only the Museum Fire but also the Pipeline and Tunnel Fires 
burning during portions of the survey period), suggesting that most Flagstaff residents may have reached a 
level of acceptance of fuels management (including using prescribed and managed fire as tools) that is resilient 
in the face of wildfire events. We found that climate change was a significant driver of concern in the area, 
indicating this may be a useful framing for discussions with local residents about the importance of forest 
management activities. 
•	
Continued high support for forest management bolstered by a history of effective communication about the 
value of fire in Flagstaff introduces the opportunity to begin engaging the public in more nuanced discussions 
related to forest management, while continuing to sustain current communication approaches for new 
residents. One potential topic to explore is the use of managed wildfire5; survey respondents indicated high 
support for this tool, though to a somewhat lesser degree than other approaches, but communication about it 
has typically been scarce with the public, and there are numerous challenges that managers face in using this 
tool. Some survey respondents commented on the need to focus on reducing human ignitions through forest 
closures and enforcement of forest use restrictions, a suggestion that was not evaluated in the quantitative data 
but is already an action being explored by the Forest Service.
•	
Concerns about air quality were far lower than concerns related to other forest management impacts in 
the Flagstaff area. We suggest that this indicates a vocal minority are communicating with agencies about 
smoke impacts during prescribed fires and slash pile burning. Therefore, seeking out solutions that can 
directly reduce the smoke impacts on vocal minorities can alleviate hesitancy towards managed wildfire. 
This might include investment in an expanded HEPA filter loan program within the City of Flagstaff, 
development of mailing lists specifically to communicate about local air quality, or communication about 
resources for proactively monitoring air quality in the area.
•	
Frame the need for forest management using recent recommendations for messaging and terminology 
(Metz, Everitt, and Weigel 2022) and in a way that acknowledges concerns held by residents while helping 
them understand the alignment between forest management activities and their own values. For example, 
Flagstaff respondents gravitated toward a framing that highlights the connection between climate change and 
forest management, but appropriate framing may vary among communities. 
•	
Survey results also indicate continued support for future initiatives for implementing forest management in the 
Flagstaff area, but that respondents’ willingness to pay for work seems to have declined slightly compared to 
other studies (Edgeley and Colavito 2020). Local officials should emphasize success stories and initiatives 
related to publicly funded treatments and highlight the need for additional funding to mitigate risk into the 
future. Local residents may benefit from better understanding decision-making rationale for what management 
is occurring in which locations, as well, since the underlying reason for forest management is already 
understood.  
5	 Managed wildfire refers to an approach to allow natural ignitions to burn under favorable conditions and when an existing, approved land, 
resource, or fire management plan is in place to allow fire to fulfill its role in fire-adapted systems and accomplish restoration, community 
protection, firefighter safety, and other objectives (Bean and Evans 2023).

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         33
Conclusion
This white paper summarizes findings from a survey of respondents in the Flagstaff, Arizona area following 
flooding in the summer of 2021 associated with, but not limited to, the burn scar from the 2019 Museum Fire. 
These findings led to a series of evidence-based recommendations for decision-makers organized around several 
key takeaways from these data, with the goal of better informing public communication about flooding, improving 
safety during flood events, reducing flood impacts, and facilitating future forest management. 
This study represents another thread in a long-term assessment of post-wildfire impacts to the greater Flagstaff 
area. The findings therein, combined with findings from previous work (e.g., Edgeley and Colavito 2020, Colavito 
et al. 2021) indicate that there is a high degree of public support for continued active forest management to reduce 
the risk of catastrophic wildfire and mitigate the impacts of postfire flooding. Our survey period happened to 
overlap with the 2022 Pipeline Fire, which had significant impacts on the Flagstaff area, but still support for forest 
management remained high in our findings. Residents of Flagstaff have a high degree of understanding of the 
links between broader-scale drivers, such as climate change, with local wildfire and flood risk, and respondents 
remain highly supportive of actions to mitigate and minimize risk associated with these types of hazards. Residents 
are also looking toward public agencies for longer-term solutions that move beyond short-term solutions (e.g., 
sandbag use) and facilitate a longer-term, holistic approaches that include forest management, as well as channel 
redesign, reforestation, and more that build and sustain community resilience to wildfire and postfire flooding. For 
decision-makers and managers working in forest and fire management, as well as flood mitigation, we stress that 
public support for a variety of management approaches in the Flagstaff area is high, but that there remain many 
opportunities for agencies and officials to better communicate decision-making rationale to a highly supportive and 
informed public that is interested in the why and how of decisions that may impact them.

34	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
References
Bean, R., and A. Evans. 2023. Managed Wildfire: A Research Synthesis and Overview. Special Report. Forest 
Stewards Guild, New Mexico, and Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science 
Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 12 p.
Coconino County. 2021. Museum Flood Area Frequently Asked Questions: Summer of 2021 Rainfall and Flood 
Events. 
Colavito, M.M., and C.M. Edgeley. 2020. Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood 
Risk. ERI Fact Sheet. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.
Colavito, M.M., T. Combrink, E. Hjerpe, C. Edgeley, J. Burnett, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2021. Full-Cost 
Accounting Remeasurement of the 2010 Schultz Fire: Understanding the Long-Term Socio-Economic 
Implications of High-Severity Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flooding. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest 
Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University Flagstaff, AZ.
Edgeley, C.M., and M.M. Colavito. 2020. Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood 
Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area Residents. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 40 p.
Edgeley, C., and M. Colavito. 2022. Characterizing Divergent Experiences with the Same Wildfire: Insights from 
a Survey of Households in Evacuation, Postfire Flood Risk, and Unaffected Areas After the 2019 Museum 
Fire. Journal of Forestry. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvac018
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project. 2012. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project Executive Summary and 
Implementation Plan. The City of Flagstaff and the Flagstaff Ranger District, Coconino National Forest. 
16p. 
Hjerpe, E., M. Colavito, C. Edgeley, J. Burnett, T. Combrink, D. Vosick, and A. Sánchez Meador. In press. 
Measuring the Long-Term Costs of Uncharacteristic Wildfire: A Case Study of the 2010 Schultz Fire in 
Northern Arizona. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 
Hjerpe Evan E., Colavito Melanie M., Edgeley Catrin M., Burnett Jack T., Combrink Thomas, Vosick Diane, 
Sánchez Meador Andrew (2023) Measuring the long-term costs of uncharacteristic wildfire: a case study 
of the 2010 Schultz Fire in Northern Arizona. International Journal of Wildland Fire.  
https://doi.org/10.1071/WF23036
KNAU Staff. 2023. Coconino National Forest extends year-round camping and campfire ban in Flagstaff-area. 
KNAU. Available online: <https://www.knau.org/knau-and-arizona-news/2023-05-02/coconino-national-
forest-extends-year-round-camping-and-campfire-ban-in-flagstaff-area>. 
Metz, D., M. Everitt, and L. Weigel. 2022. American Voter Views of Wildfire and Forest Management. Memo 
to Interested Parties. Available online: https://www.nature.org/content/dam/tnc/nature/en/documents/
Views_Wildfire_Forest_Management.pdf
Milman, C. 2021. Flagstaff declares a state of emergency as Arizona hit by devastating floods. The Guardian. 
Available online: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/jul/16/arizona-floods-flagstaff-state-of-
emergency.
Mottek Lucas, A. 2015. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community 
Partnerships. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 28 p.
Museum Fire Burned Area Emergency Response Team. 2019. Museum Fire Burned Area Emergency 
Response Executive Summary. Coconino National Forest, Flagstaff, Arizona. Available online: 
https://flagstaffwatershedprotection.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Museum-BAER-Executive-
Summary-8-7-19.pdf
National Weather Service (NWS). 2020. Yearly Monsoon Statistics for Flagstaff. NOAA. Available online:  
https://www.weather.gov/media/fgz/MonthlyYearlyReview/WeatherClimateSummary_2020.pdf 
Neary, D.G. and J.M. Leonard. 2019. Physical Vulnerabilities from Wildfires: Flames, Floods, and Debris Flows. In 
‘Human Impact on the Environment’ (H. Naser, ed.). 17p.

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         35
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Joe Loverich at JE Fuller Hydrology and Geomorphology, Inc. for providing us with data 
and information about flood risk modeling. We would also like to thank Aidan Franko with the School of Forestry 
at Northern Arizona University for her assistance designing the data figures and infographic designs. We are also 
very grateful to all of the respondents who took time to provide their perspectives for this work. Additionally, 
we would like to thank our partners and reviewers for their helpful insights throughout this research and in the 
development of this white paper.
A front loader works to clear the streets after a flooding event. Photo courtesy of Coconino County.

36	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
Appendix I
 
 
Your experiences with 
recent flooding in Flagstaff 
Flood events affected several Flagstaff neighborhoods during the summer of 
2021. This survey asks about related impacts your household may have 
experienced. Your responses will inform future local flood risk management. 
 
Survey ID: 
 
 
 
 
To be completed by the adult in the residence (age 18 or older) who has had the 
most recent birthday and is able to make decisions about the Flagstaff-area  
property that is the focus of this survey. 
Picture credit: ABC15 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         37
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 1: Your experiences with recent flooding  
This section of the survey will ask you about your experience with flooding during the summer of 
2021 to help us better understand the impact these events have had on Flagstaff residents.  
 
The term flooding is used in this survey to include flood water, debris flows, mud slides, and 
similar water-driven events. Floods can be caused by multiple factors, including heavy or 
extended periods of rainfall and surface runoff. 
Q1.  Had your Flagstaff area property ever been affected by flooding prior to 2021? Please    
mark one answer.  
 Yes 
 No 
 I’m not sure 
Q3. How, if at all, were you made aware of flood events in Flagstaff during 2021? Please mark 
all that apply. 
 I or someone else in my household received a text, call and/or email through 
the Coconino County emergency alert system 
 I received a flash flood warning on my phone from the National Weather Service 
 I saw flood water begin to collect in my neighborhood 
 An official came to my property to alert my household 
 A neighbor, friend, or relative contacted me to alert my household 
 Observation of live web camera footage in the Museum Fire burn scar  
 Observation of rain gauge data in my area 
 Observation of local weather forecasting 
 Other, please explain: _____________________________________ 
 I was not aware of flooding in the Flagstaff area last year 
Q2. Multiple flood events were recorded in Flagstaff during the summer of 2021. Please indicate 
the extent of the flooding you observed last summer, if at all. Please mark all that apply. 
 
Flooded my 
neighborhood 
Flooded 
my street 
Flooded my 
property 
Flooded 
inside my 
home 
No flooding 
in my area 
Tuesday       July 13th 2021 
  
  
  
  
  
Wednesday July 14th 2021 
  
  
  
  
  
Friday           July 16th 2021 
  
  
  
  
  
Wednesday July 21st 2021 
  
  
  
  
  
Tuesday August 17th 2021 
  
  
  
  
  
Other date(s), please list: 
___________________ 
  
  
  
  
  

38	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q6.  How long do you anticipate that flood risk will last in your area? Please mark one answer.  
 Flood risk is no longer present     
 1 to 5 years 
 6 to 10 years 
 11 to 25 years 
 26 to 50 years 
 51 to 100 years 
 More than 100 years 
 Flood risk in this area is permanent 
Q4.   Did you take any of the following protective actions during flood events in the summer of 
2021? Please mark all that apply. 
 I sheltered in my home  
 I evacuated from my home to a safer location 
 Other, please explain: _______________________________________ 
 None of the above 
Q5.  To what extent did flooding during the summer of 2021 align with your expectations for the 
Flagstaff area? Please mark one answer.  
 Flooding was far more severe than I expected 
 Flooding was somewhat more severe than I expected 
 Flooding was about what I expected 
 Flooding was somewhat less severe than I expected 
 Flooding was far less severe than I expected 
Q7.   Please indicate how influential or uninfluential you think the following factors were on 
flooding in Flagstaff during the summer of 2021. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Not influential 
at all 
Slightly 
influential 
Moderately 
influential 
Very 
influential 
Extremely 
influential 
Monsoonal rainfall events 
 
 
  
  
  
  
The Museum Fire  
burn scar 
  
  
  
  
  
Burn scars from other 
fires (e.g. 2010 Schultz 
Fire or 1977 Radio Fire) 
  
  
  
  
  
Recent forest 
management efforts 
  
  
  
  
  
Blockages or overflow of 
existing storm water 
infrastructure 
  
  
  
  
  
Climate change 
  
  
  
  
  

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         39
 
4 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q1.  Were you concerned about potential flood risk when you moved into your Flagstaff area 
property? Please mark one answer.  
 Yes 
 No 
Q2.   Was potential flood risk disclosed to you when you purchased or began renting your 
Flagstaff area property? Please mark one answer.  
 Yes 
 No 
Q8.   How trustworthy or untrustworthy were the following sources of information for making 
decisions about flood risk posed to your household during the summer of 2021? Please 
mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Very trust-
worthy 
Somewhat 
trust-
worthy 
Neutral 
Somewhat 
untrust-
worthy 
Very 
untrust-
worthy 
I didn’t 
use this 
source 
My local fire department or 
fire district 
  
  
  
  
  
 
U.S. Forest Service 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Internet searches 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Social media 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Emergency alerts via my cell 
phone 
  
  
  
  
  
 
My neighbors 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Media (e.g., newspapers, TV 
news, radio) 
  
  
  
  
  
 
The City of Flagstaff  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Law enforcement (e.g., 
Sheriff’s Office) 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Coconino County 
  
  
  
  
  
 
My family and friends 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Neighborhood groups (e.g., 
Homeowners Association) 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Social groups (e.g., 
recreation clubs) 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Section 2: Flood risk to your property  
This section of the survey will ask you about current flood risk to your property to identify areas 
that residents are concerned about in the Flagstaff area. 

40	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
 
5 
 
 
 
Q3.  How would you characterize current flood risk to your property? Please mark one answer.  
 Extreme 
 High 
 Moderate 
 Low  
 There is no flood risk to my property 
Q4.   Please indicate the likelihood that the following events will occur during the next 10 years. 
For each scenario, fill in the chance that the event occurs; where 0 indicates a 0% chance and 
100 indicates that you are 100% certain that event will occur.  
 
A flood event occurs anywhere in Coconino County 
 
A flood event occurs on private property in Coconino County 
 
A flood event occurs within Flagstaff City limits 
 
A flood event damages a neighborhood in the City of Flagstaff 
 
A flood event damages your Coconino County home 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
Section 3: Flood impacts to your household  
This section of the survey will ask you about any impacts to your property caused by flooding 
during the summer of 2021, as well as flood insurance coverage and related claims. 
Q2.  Please indicate whether you experienced any of the following impacts because of flood 
events during the summer of 2021. Please mark all that apply.  
 I could not attend work  
 I had to rearraange my schedule or cancel plans  
 I have children who were unable to attend school  
 I could not access childcare  
 I lost income  
 I made a health insurance claim  
 Other, please describe: ____________________________________ 
 None of the above 
Q1.  Has recent flood risk negatively impacted your property value? This could be a decrease in 
value you, a County Assessor, or another third party have identified. Please mark one answer.  
Yes à Please estimate the decrease in your property’s value: 
No 
I don’t know 
I do not own the Flagstaff property I live at 
$ 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         41
 
6 
 
 
Q4.  Was your Flagstaff area property damaged by flooding during 2021? Please mark one 
answer.  
No 
Yes à  What kind(s) of damage occurred on your property? Mark all that apply. 
Non-structural (e.g., driveways, landscaping, fences) 
Home foundation/area under home 
Exterior home/structures (including attached garages) 
Interior of home (living space) 
Secondary structures (e.g., sheds, barns) 
Other, please describe in the space provided below: 
 
Q3.  Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements 
about your well-being during and after the 2021 flood events. These impacts could have 
occurred at any point in in the past year. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
I lost sleep as a result of flood risk 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I was worried about the safety of my 
property because of flood risk 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I was worried about the safety of 
family, friends, or neighbors because of 
flood risk 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I felt anxious or worried after flooding 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I felt depressed after flooding 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I had trouble relaxing after flooding 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I frequently felt tired or  
had little energy after flooding 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I experienced significant stress as a 
result of flood risk 
 
 
  
  
  
  
My physical health  
suffered as a result of flood risk 
 
 
  
  
  
  
My mental health  
suffered as a result of flood risk 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I had an existing health condition that 
was made worse by flood risk 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I am still experiencing health issues 
related to flood risk now 
 
 
  
  
  
  
I often worry about the impacts that 
future floods in this area could cause 
 
 
  
  
  
  

42	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
 
7 
 
 
Q7.   For how long do you plan to renew your flood insurance? Please mark one answer.  
 Less than 12 months 
 1-2 years 
 3-5 years 
 6-10 years 
 More than 10 years 
 As long as I live at this property  
 I do not have flood insurance at present 
Q6.  Did you make an insurance claim associated with flooding damages in 2021? Please mark 
one answer. 
 
No   
Yes à Please answer the following questions: 
How many times did you make a flood-related insurance claim in 2021? 
 
 
 
 
 
What was the total estimated cost of the damage? 
 
How much did your insurer compensate you? 
 
Please describe the impacts or losses that you made claims for: 
 
 
$ 
$ 
 
Q5. Have you purchased flood insurance for your Flagstaff area property before?   
No à Skip to Question 8 on the next page 
Yes à Please write the approximate date you first purchased flood insurance for 
your Flagstaff area property:  
 
MM/YYYY 
 
Was your flood insurance coverage continuous between 2019 and 2022? 
Yes 
No 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         43
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q8.  Did you sustain any flood impacts to your property that were not covered by insurance in 
2021? Please mark one answer. 
No    
Yes à Please estimate the total cost of losses and repairs: 
 
Please describe the losses and repairs you made in the space below: 
 
 
 
$ 
 
Section 4: Addressing flood risk on your property  
This section of the survey will ask you about actions that have been taken on your property to 
address flood risk. 
Q1.  Which of the following have you engaged in to address flood risk in your area? Please 
mark all that apply.  
 I talked with my neighbor(s) about mitigation efforts 
 I encouraged my neighbor(s) to purchase flood insurance 
 I shared tools or resources with my neighbor(s) 
 I helped my neighbor(s) with work on their property 
 I helped collect, fill, and/or place sand bags 
 I worked with my neighbor(s) to coordinate our mitigation efforts 
 I requested a flood mitigation site assessment 
 I attended a meeting in person or online about flood risk mitigation efforts  
 I donated an easement for flood mitigation 
 I donated money to flood relief efforts 
 I volunteered to help with flood mitigation efforts  
 Other, please explain __________________________ 
 None of the above 
Q2.  Which actions have been taken on your private property to address flood risk? This 
could be actions conducted by you, a previous owner, or the person/company that you 
rent from. Please mark all that apply. 
 Placed belongings at higher points inside my home 
 Parked vehicles off the street  
 Built an emergency “stay kit” of important items for sheltering in place 
 Cleared flood debris from drainage areas, roads and/or sidewalks 
 Made a call to the Museum Flood Area Call Center 
 Called an elected official to discuss flooding 
 Other, please explain: __________________________ 
 None of the above 

44	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Q3.  Which actions have been taken on your private property to address flood risk? This could 
be actions conducted by you, a previous owner, or the person/company that you rent from. 
Please mark one answer for each action. 
 
Before 
2021 
During 
2021 
I did not take 
this action 
Placed sandbags around structures on my property 
  
  
  
Ensured the lower levels of my home were waterproofed 
  
  
  
Signed an MOU with the City of Flagstaff to place sandbags on 
my property 
  
  
  
Constructed barriers around my home 
  
  
  
Installed flood openings in foundations and/or enclosure walls 
  
  
  
Elevated my home’s electricity, gas, and/or water sources 
  
  
  
Other, please explain: __________________________ 
  
  
  
Q4.  If there are actions listed in the first three questions for this section that you did not engage 
in or conduct on your private property, please indicate the extent to which you agree or 
disagree with the following statements. Please mark one answer for each statement. If you 
conducted all the actions listed in this section so far, please move on to the next question. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
My property’s flood risk is too 
low to warrant those mitigation 
efforts 
  
  
  
  
  
Those actions would not reduce 
flood risk to my home  
  
  
  
  
  
My property is insured, so 
mitigation actions seem less 
necessary  
  
  
  
  
  
The cost to carry out those 
actions is too high 
  
  
  
  
  
Those actions take too  
much time 
  
  
  
  
  
Those actions require too much 
upkeep 
  
  
  
  
  
Those actions would detract from 
the appearance of  
my property 
  
  
  
  
  
No one in this household  
is able to perform  
those actions 
  
  
  
  
  
Other: ____________________ 
  
  
  
  
  

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         45
 
10 
 
 
Q1.  Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements 
about flood risk reduction. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
Enough has been done to 
reduce flood risk… 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
On County right-of-way  
  
  
  
  
  
On flood easements 
  
  
  
  
  
On City property, streets 
and roads 
  
  
  
  
  
On US Forest Service land 
  
  
  
  
  
On private lands 
  
  
  
  
  
On my property 
  
  
  
  
  
On my neighbors’ properties 
  
  
  
  
  
On land belonging to utility 
companies  
  
  
  
  
  
Section 5: Managing flood risk, wildfires, and forest management  
This section asks you about approaches you would support or oppose related to flood risk, 
wildfires, and forest management to inform efforts in the Flagstaff area moving forward. 
Q5.  How, if at all, have you interacted with the following organizations to discuss and/or address 
flood risk to your property?  Please mark all that apply. 
 
Face to face 
conversation 
Public 
meeting 
Email
Phone 
call 
No 
interaction 
Other, please explain: 
Local fire 
department 
  
  
 
  
  
 
_________________ 
U.S. Forest Service 
  
  
 
  
  
_________________ 
Coconino County 
  
  
 
  
  
_________________ 
The City of 
Flagstaff  
  
  
 
  
  
 
_________________ 
United Way 
  
  
 
  
  
_________________ 
Utility companies, 
please list: 
_______________ 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
_________________ 
Other, please list: 
_______________ 
  
  
 
  
  
 
_________________ 

46	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q2.   Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements 
about flood risk management. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
Responsibility for flood risk 
reduction lies with… 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neutral 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Private property owners 
 
 
  
  
  
  
Coconino County 
  
  
  
  
  
City of Flagstaff 
  
  
  
  
  
Local flood control district 
  
  
  
  
  
US Forest Service  
  
  
  
  
  
The State of Arizona 
  
  
  
  
  
Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) 
  
  
  
  
  
Other: _____________ 
  
  
  
  
  
Q4.   Please indicate the extent to which you find the following forest management strategies 
acceptable or unacceptable for the Flagstaff area. Please mark one answer for each 
statement. 
 
Very 
unacceptable 
Moderately 
unacceptable Neutral 
Moderately 
acceptable 
Very 
acceptable 
Prescribed fire 
 
 
  
  
  
  
Strategic removal of trees 
to reduce hazardous fuel 
  
  
  
  
  
Fuel breaks (removal of 
vegetation to halt fire spread) 
 
 
  
  
  
  
Lightning-ignited fires that 
are allowed to burn to 
improve forest health 
  
  
  
  
  
Q3.   Please indicate the extent to which you support or oppose the following management 
efforts to manage flood risk. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Strongly 
oppose 
Moderately 
oppose 
Neutral 
Moderately 
support 
Strongly 
support 
Engineering work to mitigate      
flood risk 
 
 
  
  
  
  
Channel redesign to redirect 
flood water 
  
  
  
  
  
Federal grants to purchase 
properties in flood-prone areas 
from owners 
  
  
  
  
  
Continued forest thinning 
  
  
  
  
  
Use of prescribed fire 
  
  
  
  
  
Reforestation in burned areas 
  
  
  
  
  

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         47
 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q5.  Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements 
about the implementation of forest management activities in the Flagstaff area. Please 
mark one answer for each statement. 
Continued forest 
management… 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Will reduce the risk of 
catastrophic wildfire 
  
  
  
  
  
Will reduce the risk of post-fire 
flooding 
  
  
  
  
  
Will protect city water resources 
  
  
  
  
  
Will minimize future costs 
associated with wildfire 
  
  
  
  
  
Will minimize future costs 
associated with post-fire 
flooding 
  
  
  
  
  
Will improve forest health 
  
  
  
  
  
Will improve watershed health 
  
  
  
  
  
Q6.  Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements 
about forest management. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
The federal government has 
sufficient resources to manage 
local forests and watersheds 
  
  
  
  
  
Partnership between the City, 
U.S. Forest Service, and other 
organizations are the best way 
to address fire risk to Flagstaff 
  
  
  
  
  
It is fair for citizens to pay for 
local watershed protection 
  
  
  
  
  
It is fair for citizens to pay for 
local forest health  
  
  
  
  
  
It is fair for citizens to pay for 
local wildfire risk reduction 
  
  
  
  
  
I would support an increase in 
taxes if it meant risks to my 
property were reduced 
  
  
  
  
  
The federal government 
should pay for risk reduction 
activities on federal lands 
  
  
  
  
  

48	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
 
13 
 
 
Q8.  Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements 
about climate change. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Moderately 
disagree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Moderately 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Climate change is affecting 
my community 
  
  
  
  
  
Climate change is worsening 
flood risk in my area 
  
  
  
  
  
Climate change is worsening 
wildfire risk in my area 
  
  
  
  
  
Impacts of climate change are 
preventable in Flagstaff 
  
  
  
  
  
Enough action is being taken 
to address climate change 
impacts in Flagstaff 
  
  
  
  
  
Q7.   Please indicate the extent to which you are concerned or unconcerned about the following 
environmental issues in the Flagstaff area. Please mark one answer for each statement. 
 
Extremely 
unconcerned 
Somewhat 
unconcerned 
Neutral 
Somewhat 
concerned 
Extremely 
concerned 
Wildfire 
 
 
  
  
  
  
Flooding 
  
  
  
  
  
Drought 
  
  
  
  
  
Air quality 
  
  
  
  
  
Snowpack on the San 
Francisco Peaks 
  
  
  
  
  
Watershed health 
  
  
  
  
  
Forest health 
  
  
  
  
  
Climate change 
  
  
  
  
  
Please continue to the next page 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         49
 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q3.   Do you own or rent your Coconino County property? Please mark one answer. 
 Own 
 Rent 
Q4.  How much time do you spend at your Coconino County property each year?  Please mark 
all that apply. 
 6 months or more 
 Less than 6 months 
 I stay here intermittently for short periods of time 
 I rent this property to others 
Q5.   Please indicate the highest level of education that you have completed. Please mark one 
answer.   
 Elementary school 
 High school diploma or GED 
 Associate’s degree 
 Technical or trade school 
 Bachelor’s degree or other four-year degree 
 Master’s degree 
 Professional degree (e.g., MD, DSS, DVM, JD) 
 Doctorate degree (e.g., Ph.D., EdD) 
Section 6: Background information 
These questions help us understand who has been most affected by the 2021 flood events. All of 
the information you provide in this survey will be treated as confidential. 
Q2.  Approximately how many years have you lived in the Flagstaff area?   
 
 
(e.g., 15) 
Q1.   In which month and year did you move into the Coconino County property that is the focus 
of this survey? This helps us understand whether you moved here before or after recent flood 
events in the Flagstaff area. 
   
 
(e.g., 05/1981) 
MM 
YYYY 

50	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q8.  Please indicate your race/ethnicity below. Please mark all that apply. 
 American Indian or Alaskan Native 
 Asian 
 Black or African-American 
 Hispanic or Latino 
 Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander 
 White/Caucasian 
 Other 
Q6.  In what year were you born?   
 
 
(YYYY, e.g., 1978) 
Q9.   Which of the following brackets best describes the total annual income of this 
household before taxes? If you are retired, please indicate the amount of money you 
receive from your annual retirement benefits. Please mark one answer. 
 Less than $20,000 per year 
 $20,000 to 39,999 per year 
 $40,000 to $59,999 per year 
 $60,000 to $79,999 per year 
 $80,000 to $99,999 per year 
 $100,000 to $149,999 per year 
 $150,000 to $199,999 per year 
 $200,000 to $249,999 per year 
 $250,000 or more per year 
Q7.  What is your gender? Please mark one. 
 Male 
 Female 
 Non-binary or other 
Please continue to the next page 

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         51
 
16 
 
 
To better understand resident experiences with the Museum Fire, we may be interested in 
inviting you to provide your thoughts in additional studies. If you would be willing to 
participate in other future research efforts such as a one-on-one interview or group discussion, 
please provide your preferred contact information below:  
 
Email: 
Phone: 
 
Thank you for completing this survey. Your time and opinions are appreciated. If you have 
any additional thoughts about recent flooding or related topics, please share them below. 
Please place this completed booklet in the pre-paid envelope provided and 
return it via mail at your earliest convenience. 

52	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
While over 70% of surveys did not contain any qualitative comments, the most common were respondents 
describing flooding causes, some of which expressed anger at perceived mismanagement by different agencies. 
Table 1 lists themes that emerged in these comments and representative quotes. Several respondents argued that 
debris blocking drainages (from poorly designed structures, trash, or forest biomass) was a major source of flooding 
regardless of other management efforts. Another repeated theme was respondents advocating for the Forest 
Service to increasingly restrict forest access, including longer forest closures and better enforcement of forest use 
restrictions, to reduce human ignitions (the Coconino National Forest did increase the scope of their camping and 
campfire restrictions in 2023 (KNAU 2023)). Others expressed anger at the way existing forest management efforts 
were implemented on national forest land, such as letting fires burn or not removing slash piles after forest thinning 
efforts. Some commenters blamed the city and county for poor flood control, sometimes referencing specific 
problem drainages or outreach efforts to city and county officials that resulted in what respondents perceived to 
be insufficient solutions. Overall, comments with themes blaming various local actors for causing or exacerbating 
flooding were written by less than 10% of the survey respondents and are not representative but do provide insights 
into subgroups that are voicing concerns.  
Appendix II: Additional Context Provided by Survey Comments

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         53
Table 1. Qualitative comments from the survey on flooding causes and mismanagement. Comments with themes blaming various 
local actors for causing or exacerbating flooding were written by less than 10% of the survey respondents.  
Respondents’ Perceptions 
of Flooding Causes and 
Mismanagement
Selected Representative Quotes
Blocked drainages are a 
primary cause of flooding
“One of the key problems in our neighborhood is that the Forest Service does not 
keep the drainages on their land clean of debris. During a big event, this debris clogs 
culverts and drainages and then the systems don’t work. This is the same problem with 
the City … Spending more money on infrastructure won’t solve the problem if you 
don’t maintain the drainages.”
The Forest Service should close 
the forest longer and better 
monitor it to reduce human 
ignitions
“The U.S. Forest Service bears most of the responsibility for recent fires, including 
the Museum Fire and subsequent flooding. They should: 1. Close the forest when fire 
danger is ‘EXTREME,’ 2. Restrict dispersed camping to consolidated areas when 
it can be monitored OR: prohibit it entirely if it’s impossible to monitor, 3. Have a 
far greater ‘presence’ in the forest, at forest entry points, at dispersal campsites, with 
morning and evening patrols, especially in high use areas near the city. Managing the 
risk of human caused fires would save so much money in the long run.”
“The Museum Fire, Tunnel Fire, and Pipeline Fire all seem like they could have been 
avoided if the forest was closed (that means closed for everyone including the forest 
thinning workers.) Nearly every neighbor I talk with is baffled why forests are still 
open when it is obviously dry and windy. It gives us zero confidence that the USFS 
values the health of the Coconino County community. Instead I (we) see a USFS that 
placates to tourists from the valley. And we as a community are left with the cleanup 
from these bad decisions.”
The Forest Service should 
actively manage forests better
“I do believe the Forest Service should be financially responsible for forest fires. We 
have no say in how they manage the forest or fires.”
“I will continue to support watershed protection efforts; however, the federal Forest 
Service needs to have better oversight and control over these types of efforts to 
eliminate the possibility of another catastrophic event due to forest thinning or 
prescribed burns.”
The city and county need to 
better manage flooding
“Nature didn’t destroy our neighborhood — the choices made by the city and county 
did.”
“County and city staff worked tirelessly during the floods of 2021 to help the 
community and continue to do so with severely limited budgets, staff and resources.”
“The strategy of this town is to ignore those affected until they give up and go away 
… I’ve had city engineers flat out tell me the city’s inaction caused residential damage 
including mine, and still nothing was done.”
“We have been told that [a neighborhood] drainage ‘is adequate’ and the city and county 
will not be making any updates to the structures. This is frustrating and sad. We feel 
vulnerable and left to our own resources to protect our own properties, while if we were 
in the burn scar flooding area, we would be getting assistance … It seems unjust that 
areas that newly have flood risk get flood mitigation before we do.”

54	
 Ecological Restoration Institute
About the ERI White Paper Series: Issues in Forest Restoration 
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural 
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines ecological 
restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its 
health, integrity and sustainability … Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society 
for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded 
during the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and 
lack their once-diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to 
damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers 
on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing 
productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, 
and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural 
processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research 
and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every forest 
restoration is site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decision-makers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not 
constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.

Public Experiences with Wildfire and Flooding: A Case Study of the 2019 Museum Fire Near Flagstaff, Arizona         55
ERI—Issues in Forest Restoration
1. 	 Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. 	 Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. 	 Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. 	 Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa 
Pine Forests
5. 	 Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. 	 Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern 
Arizona
7. 	 Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. 	 Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. 	 Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. 	What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for Practitioners
11. 	Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. 	Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. 	Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. 	Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest Lands
15. 	Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level 
16. 	Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. 	A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. 	Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. 	The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010
20. 	Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. 	Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships
22. 	The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
23. 	Planning for and Implementing Prescribed Fire in Fire-Dependent Forests of the Intermountain West
24. 	Assessing Metrics of Landscape Restoration Success in Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Projects
25. 	Assessment of Community Wildfire Protection Plans (CWPP) in Arizona and Throughout the West
26. 	Wildfire Trends Across the Western US: Forest Fires Have Increased in Size, Severity, and Frequency Across 
Western Forests
27. 	Local Experiences with the 2019 Museum Fire and Associated Flood Risk: A Survey of Flagstaff-Area 
Residents
28.  	Full-Cost Accounting Remeasurement of the 2010 Schultz Fire: Understanding the Long-term Socio-
Economic Implications of High-Severity Wildfire and Post-Wildfire Flooding
29.  	Implications for Tribal Forest Management Under New Federal Legislative Directions
30. 	Workforce training needs of forestry contractors in the US Southwest: Results of an industry survey
31. 	The Evolution of Wildfire Policy Governing Management of Natural Ignitions

P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
