Northern	  Arizona	  University	  
Inside	  NAU	  –	  special	  Earth	  Day	  edition	  
April	  22,	  2010	  
	  
Historic	  agreement	  boosts	  forest	  health	  	  	  
	  
	  Fifteen	  years	  ago,	  forest	  ecologists	  such	  as	  Wally	  
Covington,	  executive	  director	  of	  Northern	  
Arizona	  University’s	  Ecological	  Restoration	  
Institute,	  estimated	  old	  growth	  ponderosa	  pine	  
trees	  had	  only	  about	  30	  more	  years	  before	  most	  
of	  them	  would	  disappear	  from	  the	  Southwest.	  
These	  are	  those	  towering	  golden	  or	  orange-­‐
barked	  ponderosas	  that	  smell	  like	  a	  delicious	  
blend	  of	  vanilla	  and	  butterscotch	  and	  lazily	  
stretch	  their	  branches	  outward,	  as	  far	  as	  20	  feet	  
in	  some	  cases.	  	  	  The	  oldest	  of	  these	  trees	  are	  more	  
than	  500	  years	  old,	  with	  some	  living	  in	  excess	  of	  
1,000	  years.	  These	  are	  the	  same	  trees	  that	  
greeted	  and	  dazzled	  the	  first	  European	  visitors	  to	  
the	  West.	  But	  after	  100	  years	  of	  suppressing	  fire	  
and	  other	  land	  management	  practices,	  Western	  
forests	  are	  out	  of	  balance	  and	  declining	  
fast.	  	  Unprecedented	  fire	  storms,	  massive	  pest	  
infestations,	  disease	  outbreaks	  and	  drought-­‐stressed	  ecosystems	  have	  conspired	  to	  
take	  down	  these	  giants.	  However,	  with	  the	  recent	  agreement	  from	  community	  
leaders,	  governmental	  organizations,	  environmentalists,	  scientists	  and	  private	  
industry	  leaders	  about	  a	  proposed	  course	  of	  action	  to	  restore	  health	  to	  Arizona’s	  
degraded	  ponderosa	  pine	  forests,	  Covington	  is	  hopeful	  about	  landscape-­‐scale	  
restoration	  treatments	  that	  will	  protect	  old	  growth	  ponderosas	  and	  the	  many	  other	  
important	  components	  of	  Western	  ecosystems.	  	  “The	  time	  to	  act	  is	  now	  for	  healthy,	  
biologically	  diverse	  ecosystems	  that	  are	  assets	  not	  threats	  to	  future	  generations,”	  he	  
said.	  	  	  That	  proposed	  course	  of	  action	  is	  detailed	  in	  the	  Path	  Forward	  document,	  
which	  will	  be	  submitted	  to	  the	  Forest	  Service	  to	  provide	  guidance	  to	  the	  agency	  as	  
part	  of	  its	  ongoing	  4	  Forest	  Restoration	  Initiative.	  The	  document	  is	  significant	  
because	  it	  ties	  together	  the	  diverse	  interests	  of	  a	  large	  group	  of	  individuals	  and	  
organizations,	  including	  the	  ERI	  at	  NAU,	  collectively	  known	  as	  the	  4FRI	  
Collaborative	  Stakeholder	  Group,	  into	  one	  clear	  vision	  to	  restore	  about	  2.4	  million	  
acres	  in	  the	  Kaibab,	  Coconino,	  Apache-­‐Sitgreaves	  and	  Tonto	  national	  forests.	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  “What	  this	  means	  is	  we	  are	  all	  focused	  on	  the	  same	  goal,	  ultimately	  to	  return	  health	  
and	  sustainability	  to	  Arizona’s	  forests,”	  said	  4FRI	  stakeholder	  group	  member	  Ethan	  
Aumack.	  “We	  are	  promoting	  the	  use	  of	  the	  best	  science	  available	  to	  restore	  
ecological	  and	  economic	  health	  by	  reducing	  fire	  danger	  and	  protecting	  communities,	  
returning	  our	  forests	  and	  rangelands	  to	  a	  healthier	  condition	  that	  can	  function	  with	  
low-­‐intensity	  natural	  fire,	  and	  providing	  opportunities	  to	  create	  jobs	  and	  stimulate	  

local	  economies.”	  	  The	  Path	  Forward	  outlines	  broad-­‐based	  support	  for	  forest	  
restoration	  treatments	  that	  will	  be	  designed	  to	  reduce	  high	  densities	  of	  small	  trees.	  
Those	  small	  trees	  will	  be	  used	  by	  wood	  products	  industries,	  which	  in	  turn	  helps	  
create	  jobs,	  enhance	  local	  economies,	  and	  reduce	  restoration	  and	  fire	  management	  
costs.	  	  	  The	  4	  Forest	  Restoration	  Initiative	  seeks	  to	  treat	  50,000	  acres	  per	  year	  over	  
a	  20-­‐year	  period.	  Historically,	  only	  about	  15,000	  acres	  a	  year	  have	  been	  treated	  in	  
northern	  Arizona	  forests.	  The	  first	  large	  project	  planning	  effort	  associated	  with	  4FRI	  
is	  expected	  to	  begin	  this	  fall.	  It	  will	  be	  designed	  to	  cover	  750,000	  acres	  on	  the	  
Mogollon	  Rim,	  guided	  by	  a	  landscape	  strategy	  for	  the	  entire	  2.4	  million	  acres.	  
