Collaborative Governance 
Assessment Report  
FOR THE SHORTLEAF-BLUESTEM 
COMMUNITY CFLRP
AUTHORS: Adam J. Snitker, Ch’aska Huayhuaca,  
Tyler A. Beeton, Nicolena vonHedemann,  
Melanie M. Colavito, Tara L. Teel, and Antony S. Cheng
October 2023

Publication date: October 2023
Cover photo credit: Colorado Forest Restoration Institute
Authors: Adam J. Snitker1, Ch’aska Huayhuaca1, Tyler A. Beeton1, Nicolena 
vonHedemann2, Melanie M. Colavito2, Tara L. Teel1, and Antony S. Cheng1
1. Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
2. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ.
Suggested Citation: Snitker, A.J., Huayhuaca, C., Beeton, T.A., 
vonHedemann, N., Colavito, M.M., Teal, T.L., and Cheng, A.S., 2023. 
Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem 
Community CFLRP.
Document Development: In FY21, the USDA Forest Service led 
a collaborative process to develop a CFLRP Common Monitoring 
Strategy that will be required for all newly authorized and reauthorized 
projects under the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program (CFLRP). The USDA Forest Service Washington Office 
requested assistance from the Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes (SWERI) in developing and deploying an assessment tool to 
track collaborative governance within and across CFLRP projects and 
through time. The collaborative governance assessment is intended 
to assess whether CFLRP is encouraging an effective and meaningful 
collaborative approach, and addresses question #12 of the CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy. We developed an online, confidential 
survey that was administered to CFLRP project participants to address 
this question. With support from the USDA Forest Service Forest 
Management, Range Management, and Vegetation Ecology program, 
SWERI conducted regional webinars to introduce the assessment 
and identify project-level points of contact, which was followed by 
in-depth engagement with key contacts to determine recruitment 
strategies, administration timing, and project-specific questions. In 
FY22 and FY23, SWERI will be collecting baseline information for all 
newly authorized and reauthorized projects. SWERI will continue to 
engage in assessing collaborative health and performance of CFLRP 
projects. The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona 
University funded survey administration using state funding (Arizona 
Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation 
Fund), which was used as a match to annual federal appropriations to 
the SWERI.
Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes include three 
university-based restoration institutes: the New Mexico Forest and 
Watershed Restoration Institute (NMFWRI), the Colorado Forest 
Restoration Institute (CFRI), and the Ecological Restoration Institute 
(ERI) in Arizona. These institutes were congressionally appointed in 
2004 by the Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act 
(H.R.2696), and the Institutes work together to develop a program 
of applied research and service to help create healthy forests, 
prevent uncharacteristic wildfires, sustain the resiliency of water 
supplies to wildfires, and create jobs. The SWERI receive funding 
from five primary sources: 1) federal appropriations; 2) additional 
federal funding (e.g., the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act); 3) 
state appropriations; 4) in-kind support from host universities; and 5) 
extramural funding such as grants and agreements. The Southwest 
Ecological Restoration Institutes receive federal appropriations under 
the Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act provided 
through the USDA Forest Service. In accordance with Federal law 
and USDA policy, these institutions are prohibited from discriminating 
on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. To 
file a complaint of discrimination, write: USDA, Director, Office of Civil 
Rights Room 326-A, Whitten Building 1400 Independence Avenue, SW 
Washington, DC, 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice & TDD). 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI), Northern Arizona University 
(NAU)
The Ecological Restoration Institute is nationally recognized for 
mobilizing the unique assets of a university to help solve the problem 
of unnaturally severe wildfire and degraded forest health throughout 
the American West. ERI serves diverse audiences with objective 
science and implementation strategies that support ecological 
restoration and climate adaptation on Western forest landscapes.
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI), Colorado State 
University (CSU)
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute is a science-based outreach 
and engagement organization hosted by the Department of Forest 
and Rangeland Stewardship and the Warner College of Natural 
Resources at Colorado State University. Colorado State University 
(CSU) is a land-grant university with a mission to provide teaching, 
research, public service, and engagement that CFRI strives to uphold. 
CFRI was established by Congress as part of the Southwest Ecological 
Restoration Institutes to serve as a bridge between researchers, 
managers, and stakeholders working to restore and enhance 
the resilience of forest ecosystems to wildfires in Colorado, the 
Southern Rocky Mountains, and the Intermountain West. CFRI leads 
collaborations between researchers, managers, and stakeholders to 
generate and apply locally relevant, actionable knowledge to inform 
forest management strategies. CFRI’s work informs forest conditions 
assessments, management goals and objectives, monitoring plans, 
and adaptive management processes.
NAU Land Acknowledgment: Northern Arizona University sits at the 
base of the San Francisco Peaks, on homelands sacred to Native 
Americans. We honor their past, present, and future generations, who 
have lived here for millennia and will forever call this place home.
CSU Land Acknowledgment: Colorado State University 
acknowledges, with respect, that the land we are on today is the 
traditional and ancestral homelands of the Arapaho, Cheyenne, and 
Ute Nations and peoples. This was also a site of trade, gathering, 
and healing for numerous other Native tribes. We recognize the 
Indigenous peoples as original stewards of this land and all the 
relatives within it. As these words of acknowledgment are spoken 
and heard, the ties Nations have to their traditional homelands are 
renewed and reaffirmed. CSU is founded as a land-grant institution, 
and we accept that our mission must encompass access to education 
and inclusion. And, significantly, that our founding came at a dire cost 
to Native Nations and peoples whose land this University was built 
upon. This acknowledgment is the education and inclusion we must 
practice in recognizing our institutional history, responsibility, and 
commitment.
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to acknowledge Hannah 
Brown for her insightful feedback on an earlier draft and Angela 
Hollingsworth for designing the layout of this report. We thank Lindsay 
Buchanan and Bryce Esch, USDA Forest Service, for their support 
in coordinating and facilitating regional webinars to introduce the 
assessment to regional and project-level CFLRP leads. We would 
also like to thank all the participants for taking the time to fill out the 
survey, as well as Jeff High, Virginia McDaniel, and Don Seale for their 
support in recruitment and administration. This white paper was made 
possible with funding from the SWERI through the Southwest Forest 
Health and Wildfire Prevention Act. The white paper is published in 
partial fulfillment of Focal Area 2, deliverable #4 in CFRI’s fiscal year 
2022 work plan, as well as Focal Area 3.3 in ERI’s fiscal year 2022 
work plan. The survey portion of this project and survey administration 
is supported by funding from the Arizona Board of Regents through 
the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF). 

Table of Contents
Executive Summary..................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction................................................................................................................................... 4
Approach ................................................................................................................................................. 5
Framework ................................................................................................................................................5
Data Collection and Analysis ...............................................................................................................6
Findings.................................................................................................................................................... 7
Introductory questions...........................................................................................................................7
Principled engagement..........................................................................................................................8
Shared Motivation....................................................................................................................................9
Capacity for Joint Action.......................................................................................................................9
Outcomes...................................................................................................................................................12
Disruptions.................................................................................................................................................12
Recommendations to Improve the Collaborative Process .........................................................14
Discussion and Conclusions...................................................................................................... 15
References..................................................................................................................................... 17

4                    Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community
Executive Summary
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
developed a collaborative governance assessment as 
part of the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program (CFLRP) Common Monitoring Strategy. The 
collaborative governance assessment was designed to 
assess the following questions:
1.	What are the structural and functional dynamics 
of the collaborative? Does the collaborative exhibit 
characteristics generally associated with healthy, 
well-functioning, and resilient collaboratives?
2.	What do participants need or recommend to improve 
the process?
3.	To what extent do participants feel the project is 
meeting process, socio-economic, and ecological 
goals? 
4.	What challenges or disruptions affect collaborative 
performance and durability?
The SWERI administered an online survey to members 
of the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community CFLRP in the 
winter of 2023. The majority of respondents indicated 
that they agreed about key problems impacting their 
landscape, strategies to solve problems, and the purpose 
of their collaborative restoration project. Respondents 
felt that the process has helped build trust, relationships, 
and mutual respect of others’ positions and interests, 
and they felt participants were committed to the 
process. Survey respondents found that there were 
strong leaders who worked well across organizations 
and entities, communicated a collaborative vision, and 
motivated others to work together. A majority agreed that 
participants worked together to co-generate knowledge 
and solve problems. Knowledge and information 
were reportedly shared equally among participants. 
Respondents felt that the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community 
CFLRP had adequate funding, time, facilitation skills, 
and technical expertise to carry out tasks and accomplish 
work. Respondents also generally agreed that the USDA 
Forest Service (USFS) was responsive to collaborative 
input. However, a few respondents noted several areas 
for improvement. Some respondents wanted to see 
more collaborative engagement between the Shortleaf-
Bluestem Community CFLRP and USFS. Respondents felt 
that the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community CFLRP could be 
more inclusive of some interests and groups. 
Many of these challenges were reiterated in open-ended 
responses focused on recommendations to improve 
the collaborative process, which included the need to: 1) 
coordinate additional outreach and engagement; and 
2) increase opportunities for shared decision space and 
accountability among the USFS and non-USFS partners. 
Survey results suggested that the Shortleaf-Bluestem 
Community CFLRP has started to make progress on 
all social, economic, and ecological goals of the CFLRP. 
However, frequent turnover and funding disruptions 
challenged collaborative progress and performance. 
The SWERI will continue to engage in assessing 
collaborative health and performance of CFLRP projects, 
with the goal of gauging capacities and identifying areas 
for improvement.
Introduction
The Forest Landscape Restoration Act (FLRA) was 
passed in 2009 and established the Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). The purpose 
of the CFLRP was to “encourage the collaborative, 
science-based ecosystem restoration of priority forest 
landscapes”1 through a competitive funding program 
administered by the USDA Forest Service (USFS). In 
2021, CFLRP coordinators, USFS personnel, and partners 
led a collaborative process to develop a CFLRP Common 
Monitoring Strategy consisting of ecological and socio-
economic monitoring questions and indicators that 
will supplement local project multi-party monitoring 
plans and will be required for all newly authorized and 
reauthorized projects.2   
One core component of the CFLRP Common Monitoring 
Strategy relates to monitoring collaborative governance.3 
While the CFLRP requires projects to collaborate 
throughout planning, implementation, and monitoring, 
‘collaboration’ was not defined in the FLRA or CFLRP 
requirements, nor did the CFLRP provide specific 
guidelines by which collaborative groups convened and 
engaged in collaborative restoration throughout the life 
of the CFLRP project. This has resulted in a multitude 
of collaborative structures, processes, and practices 
implemented in diverse social and ecological contexts 
across the country. Also, collaborative groups are nested 
within and impacted by changes that occur within 
their group, external changes in social and ecological 
conditions, and a fluid institutional environment, all of 
which require groups to adjust and evolve their structures, 
practices, and processes (Beeton et al., 2022; Ulibarri 
et al., 2020). Yet, a systematic approach to monitoring 
and evaluating attributes of collaborative governance 
and resilience is lacking. Systematic evaluation could 
  1 PL 111-11 CFLRP Authorizing legislation - https://www.congress.gov/congressional-report/110th-congress/senate-report/370/1
  2 CFLRP National Core Monitoring Strategy - https://www.fs.usda.gov/restoration/documents/cflrp/CMS-Fact-Sheet-final-20221013.pdf
  3 Here, we define governance as “the system of institutions, including rules, laws, regulations, policies, and social norms, and organizations involved in governing environmental 
resource use and/or protection” (Chaffin et al. 2014). 

Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community                    5
lead to better understanding of what factors promote or 
challenge collaboration across different contexts, help 
target what kinds of investments are needed, and where 
to maintain and enhance collaborative capacity. 
To address this need, the USFS Washington Office 
requested assistance from the Southwest Ecological 
Restoration Institutes (SWERI) in developing and 
deploying an assessment tool to track collaborative 
governance.  During the development of the CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy, CFLRP coordinators from 
the Washington Office elicited feedback from CFLRP 
practitioners, CFLRP coordinators, and subject matter 
experts to identify monitoring questions, indicators, 
and available data sources. With respect to collaborative 
governance, partners wanted to address the question: 
how well is the CFLRP encouraging an effective and 
meaningful collaborative approach? CFLRP practitioners 
and coordinators expressed interest in documenting 
collaborative health, function, and resilience, as well as 
performance (perceived outcomes). CFLRP practitioners 
and coordinators also emphasized the need for a tool 
that is straightforward, not time-consuming, easy to 
administer, and longitudinal. 
We incorporated stakeholder feedback and questions 
of interest developed during the drafting of the CFLRP 
Common Monitoring Strategy to directly inform the 
components of the collaborative governance assessment. 
Our objectives are as follows:
1.	Develop a rigorous, systematic, and longitudinal 
assessment of collaborative governance that is 
grounded in the science and practice of landscape-
scale collaborative forest restoration. 
2.	Support program-wide evaluation of collaborative 
progress and performance, and report on findings to 
USFS staff and Congress. 
3.	Facilitate project-level engagement, reporting, and 
peer-learning to inform local collaborative work and 
adaptive management. 
4.	Contribute to the theory and practice of collaborative 
governance through the synthesis of findings and 
lessons learned.
The SWERI administered the collaborative governance 
assessment—an online survey—to the Shortleaf-Bluestem 
Community CFLRP in the winter of 2023. The report 
herein summarizes findings from the collaborative 
governance assessment.  Below, we briefly highlight the 
approach, followed by a baseline assessment of findings 
and document recommendations from respondents to 
improve the collaborative process. 
Approach 	
We developed an online survey to assess: 
1.	What are the structural and functional dynamics 
of the collaborative? Does the collaborative exhibit 
characteristics generally associated with healthy, 
well-functioning, and resilient collaboratives?
2.	To what extent do participants feel the project is 
meeting process, socio-economic, and ecological 
goals? 
3.	What challenges or disruptions affect collaborative 
performance and durability? 
4.	What do participants need or recommend to improve 
the process?
Framework 
The survey was structured using concepts from an 
integrative 
collaborative 
governance 
framework 
(Emerson et al., 2012), resilience and adaptability literature 
(Emerson and Gerlak, 2014; Folke et al., 2005; Gupta et al., 
2010), and empirical findings from the first 10 years of 
the CFLRP (Beeton et al., 2022; Butler and Schultz, 2019; 
McIntyre and Schultz, 2020; Schultz et al., 2018).
Collaboration dynamics – To assess collaboration 
dynamics, we operationalized the Integrative Framework 
for Collaborative Governance (Emerson et al., 2012). 
The framework incorporates multiple components 
of collaborative governance that are grounded in 
collaborative practice, link collaboration dynamics to 
socio-economic and ecological outcomes, and promote 
assessment of collaboratives across settings and time. 
The components include principled engagement, shared 
motivation, and capacity for joint action (Emerson et al., 
2012). 
Principled engagement refers to ensuring the right 
people are involved, i.e., a representative cross-section 
of people and entities who have a stake in the issue 
participate. Principled engagement also emphasizes the 
principles of open and inclusive communication and 
negotiation, where individuals with diverse perspectives 
and knowledge work together to identify shared 
problems, agree on strategies to solve those problems, and 
agree on the purpose or scope of the collaborative. 
Shared motivation refers to the interpersonal and 
relational elements of collaborative dynamics. Shared 
motivation includes the sub-components mutual trust, 
understanding, and commitment. It is often referred to 
as social capital, or the “glue” that holds groups together 
through networks, norms, rules, and trust that promote 
collective action (Pelling and High, 2005). This glue is 
crucial for effective collaboration; social capital is built 

6                    Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community
through investments in social relationships and can be 
expressed through mutual commitment of individuals 
and groups to common collaborative goals.
Capacity for joint action comprises four sub-
components: 
leadership, 
knowledge 
and 
learning, 
resources, and institutional arrangements (Emerson 
and Gerlak, 2014). Leadership is essential for managing 
collaboratives, and leaders can fill many roles including 
convener, sponsor, public advocate, facilitator, and others. 
They are important for: building trust, sensemaking, 
bringing 
people 
together, 
initiating 
partnerships, 
motivating 
people 
to 
work 
together, 
compiling, 
generating, and disseminating knowledge, developing 
visions of and support for change, and managing conflict 
(Folke et al., 2005). 
In 
a 
collaborative 
setting, 
participants 
should 
work together to co-create and co-develop shared 
understanding and knowledge through social learning; 
knowledge and information should be equally accessible 
to all members of the collaborative; and learning and 
knowledge should be used to inform flexible, adaptive 
management (Emerson and Gerlak, 2014). Social 
learning occurs through repeated interactions and joint 
problem solving among participants. It emphasizes 
testing, monitoring, and reevaluating participants’ 
assumptions and understanding of ecosystem responses 
and feedbacks to learn and adapt management actions 
(Folke et al., 2005; Lebel et al., 2010; Sharma-Wallace et 
al., 2018). Collaboratives often pool and share resources to 
accomplish tasks and get work done. These can include 
funding, personnel, science and technical expertise, 
facilitation, and coordination.
Institutional arrangements are the processes, protocols, 
and structures needed to manage collaboration over 
time, i.e., the rules of the game. Collaborative structures, 
processes, and protocols should be clearly understood, 
transparent, perceived as fair and equitable, and include 
mechanisms of accountability (Emerson et al., 2012; 
Gupta et al., 2010; Stern and Coleman, 2015). Capacity 
needs change through time, and the relative amount of 
these four capacity types is contingent upon the local 
context – e.g., history of conflict, people involved, purpose 
and objectives of the group, among others (Imperial et al., 
2016).
Perceived outcomes – Our assessment focuses both on 
perceived “process” outcomes (e.g., did the collaborative 
process reduce conflict, or increase the ability to plan at a 
landscape scale?) and socio-economic and environmental 
outcomes. The outcome metrics chosen for evaluation 
were derived from several sources: the intent of the 
FLRA of 2009 and the CFLRP, project proposals, and 
conversations with local, regional, and national CFLRP 
coordinators while developing the Common Monitoring 
Strategy.
Challenges or disruptions that affect collaborative 
performance 
and 
durability 
– 
Disruptions—i.e., 
personnel turnover, legal or policy changes, and 
biophysical 
disturbances 
like 
wildfires 
or 
insect 
outbreaks—can happen at any time. These disruptions 
may impact collaborative progress and performance, and/
or force groups to adapt. We developed a list of common 
challenges that CFLRP projects and other landscape-
scale forest collaboratives reported in: 1) breakout group 
discussions and focus group sessions at the 2020 SWERI 
Cross-boundary landscape restoration workshop (SWERI, 
2020) and the 2020 Idaho forest collaborative shared 
stewardship workshops; 2) the 2020 CFLRP Collaboration 
Indicator Survey administered by the National Forest 
Foundation; and 3) a survey administered to USFS staff 
engaged in 2010 and 2012 CFLRP projects (Schultz et al., 
2018). Identifying current challenges or disruptions that 
CFLRP projects are grappling with can support strategic 
investment towards solutions to maintain collaborative 
performance and durability.  
Needs or recommendations to improve the process 
– We captured respondents’ perspectives on needs and 
recommendations to improve the collaborative process by 
including open-ended survey questions.
Data Collection and Analysis 
We developed a standardized survey in the online survey 
tool Qualtrics that consisted of 21, mostly closed-ended 
statements using a Likert scale. SWERI piloted the 
assessment with and elicited feedback from the Northern 
Blues All-Lands Restoration Partnership and Northern 
Blues CFLRP project participants (n=37), as well as 
participants of the Colorado Front Range CFLRP (n=3) in 
FY21 to refine the survey (Beeton et al., 2022). SWERI and 
the USFS held regionally-focused webinars to introduce 
the assessment and identify key points of contact for 
each newly authorized and reauthorized project to help 
with recruiting participants, scheduling the assessment, 
and identifying project-specific questions of interest that 
were appended to the standardized survey (Appendix 1), 
which is outlined in our standard operating procedures 
document.4 
Jeff High, Virginia McDaniel, and Don Seale provided 
support in recruiting participants and administering 
the survey through group’s listserv in February 2023. 
  4 https://cfri.box.com/s/hfu5cdk599j5gp5ixphm2qj7gdp4h1ef 

Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community                    7
The survey was open for 6 weeks. We received 29 usable responses, representing more than 30% of the population. We 
used the statistical software program Statistical Software for Social Sciences (SPSS) to document mean responses and 
variation in responses. Open-ended questions were analyzed using a thematic analysis (Ryan and Bernard, 2003). Small 
sample sizes prohibited further statistical analyses, though this will be possible when more data has been collected. 
Findings
Our results are organized as follows. The first section includes responses related to respondents’ affiliations, 
motivations for being involved in the CFLRP project, level of engagement, and the degree to which respondents felt the 
project was collaborative. We then provide a description of findings related to collaboration dynamics (i.e., principled 
engagement, shared motivation, and capacity for joint action). We provide a short description of each collaboration 
dynamic construct in italics to orient the reader. We follow with findings on perceived outcomes, disruptions that are 
challenging collaborative progress and performance, and recommendations to improve the process. Finally, we present 
results from the appended question set that was developed in coordination with key points of contact affiliated with the 
Shortleaf-Bluestem Community CFLRP. For scale items (e.g., strongly disagree to strongly agree, progress scales), figures 
depict the percentage of survey participants that somewhat agree to strongly agree. This was done for consistency in 
visualization and ease of interpretation. For clarity, we describe majority or strong majority results as greater than or 
equal to 60% agreement and slight majority as greater than 50% agreement. Local questions appended to the standard 
survey questions are reported in Appendix 1.
Introductory questions
The majority of participants represented state agencies, the USFS, and the forest products industry (Figure 1). The 
most frequently reported motivations for being involved in the CFLRP project were to restore forest resiliency, protect 
or restore habitat, increase restoration pace and scale, and improve relationships and trust (Figure 2). The level of 
engagement in the CFLRP project during the past 12 months varied between participants – 74% reported that they were 
moderately to highly engaged, while 22% reported low engagement, and 4% reported that they were not engaged (Figure 
3). 
Count
Other (please specify)
Private citizen/interested public
University or research
Non-governmental organization (NGO)
State agency
Local government agency
Tribe
Forest products industry
Other federal agency
USDA Forest Service
Group representation
0
2
4
6
8
10
9
2
6
3
1
0
6
1
0
0
Figure 1: Respondents’ self-identified representation with associated organizations.
We asked respondents to reflect on 
the degree to which they thought the 
CFLRP project was collaborative (on 
a scale from not collaborative at all to 
very collaborative) as defined in the 
survey: 
collaboration 
occurs 
when 
multiple parties come together 
to address problems that could 
not be achieved by acting alone. 
Effective 
collaboration 
should 
typically include: inclusive and 
diverse 
stakeholder 
interaction 
throughout the process; venues 
for open communication and 
negotiation about values, interests, 
and 
appropriate 
management 
actions; and opportunities for 
social learning.
A majority of respondents (60%) indicated 
the CFLRP project has been collaborative 
to very collaborative (Figure 4). 

8                    Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Protect or restore cultural resources
Maintain access to public lands
Avoid litigation
Protect or restore water
Improve recreation opportunities
Create more local jobs
More say in public lands decisions
Reduce community wildﬁre risk
Increase timber harvesting
Protect or restore habitat
Restore forest resiliency
Increase restoration pace and scale
Increase communication
Improve relationships and trust
0%
24%
17%
28%
52%
52%
10%
10%
17%
3%
0%
10%
0%
3%
3%
Motivations to participate
Figure 2: Percentage of respondents who identified the associated motive as reason for their participation in the 
collaborative. Note - respondents were able to select multiple motives.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Very 
collaborative
Collaborative
Somewhat 
collaborative
Not 
collaborative
4%
36%
46%
14%
Degree of collaboration
Figure 4: Percentage of respondents who reported this project to be “Not 
collaborative,” “Somewhat collaborative,” “Collaborative” or “Very 
collaborative.”
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
High
engagement
Moderate
engagement
Low
engagement
Not
engaged
22%
44%
30%
4%
Level of engagement
Figure 3: Percent of respondents who rated their level of engagement. 
Principled engagement
Principled engagement refers to having the right people involved in iterative and inclusive dialogue to determine shared problems, 
identify shared strategies to solve problems, and agree to the shared purpose of the project. 
A majority of respondents (70%) agreed to strongly agreed that a representative cross-section of individuals who have 
a stake in the issues and outcomes of the project are involved (Figure 5). However, open-ended responses indicated 
that there is a need to include more stakeholders, specifically “a significant number of wood product companies, 
loggers, and small sawmills” and “local constituents and communities” should be better represented within the group. A 
majority of respondents (86%) 
agreed to strongly agreed that 
participants worked together 
to identify shared interests and 
concerns, and a majority felt the 
collaborative process created a 
neutral space (76%) for CFLRP 
participants to openly discuss 
controversial 
issues 
(Figure 
5). A majority of respondents 
indicated that participants had 
a shared understanding of the 
problems that impact their 
landscape (67%), the strategies 
to solve those problems (73%), 
and the purpose of the CFLRP 
project (88%; Figure 6). Most 
respondents felt that the level 
of 
collaboration 
between 
the 
Shortleaf-Bluestem 
Community CFLRP and the 
USFS met their expectations 
during 
planning 
(68%), 
implementation 
(83%), 
and 
monitoring (88%) (Figure 7). 

Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community                    9
Shared Motivation
Shared motivation refers to trust, mutual understanding, 
relationship-building, and commitment to the collaborative 
process. 
A strong majority of participants agreed the collaborative 
process helped build: trust in each other (93%), 
relationships (97%), mutual respect of others’ positions 
and interests (81%), and trust in the group’s ability to 
achieve desired actions and outcomes (84%) (Figure 8). 
Respondents also indicated that they, the USFS unit level 
staff, and other project participants were all committed to 
the process (Figure 9). 
Capacity for Joint Action
Capacity for joint action includes four components: collaborative 
leadership, knowledge and learning, resources, and institutional 
arrangements that support fair governance.
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Neutral space 
to discuss 
controversial 
issues
Shared 
interests 
and concerns
Representative 
stakeholders 
involved
26%
44%
30%
56%
38%
38%
Principled engagement:
collaborative environment
Figure 5: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that representative stakeholders are involved, 
stakeholders have shared interests and concerns, and the collaborative is a 
neutral space to discuss controversial issues.
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Agree on 
project purpose
Agree on 
shared strategies
Agree on 
key problems
Principled engagement: agreement
41%
26%
27%
46%
48%
40%
Figure 6: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” on the key problems that impact the landscape, strategies 
to solve problems, and purpose of the collaborative.
Leadership
Leadership is a critical component for collaborative governance. 
Leaders are needed to convene partners, communicate a shared 
vision, and motivate people to work together.
A strong majority of respondents agreed that the 
Shortleaf-Bluestem Community CFLRP had leaders who 
work well with other people (88%), and maintain and 
communicate a common vision and direction (83%). A 
smaller majority of respondents (64%) agreed that leaders 
motivate others to work together (Figure 10). 
Knowledge and Learning
Collaboratives should engage in a knowledge generation and 
social learning process for joint action. Knowledge should be 
co-produced, equally available to all partners, and be used to 
implement adaptive management. 
For the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community CFLRP, a strong 
majority of respondents somewhat agreed to strongly 
agreed that the CFLRP process provided opportunities to 
co-generate knowledge to solve problems together (84%), 
that knowledge and information was shared equally 
among participants (76%), and that participants are 

10                    Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community
committed to informing adjustments to management 
practices based on learning and feedback, i.e., adaptive 
management (80%). Further, the majority of respondents 
also agreed that the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community 
CFLRP had the flexibility to alter course when landscape 
conditions change (e.g., wildfire affects a planning unit; 
71%) and when the collaborative changes (e.g., new faces 
or priorities; 71%) (Figure 11). 
Resources
To accomplish tasks and get work done, collaboratives often pool 
and share resources, including funding, personnel time, technical 
expertise, and facilitation, which, in turn, can support buy-in.
The majority of participants somewhat agreed to strongly 
agreed that the project had adequate access to the funds 
(68%), and time (60%) needed to accomplish their work. 
Meanwhile, a strong majority of participants somewhat 
to strongly agreed that the project had the technical 
expertise (96%), and facilitation skills (96%) to get work 
done (Figure 12). 
Institutional Arrangements
Institutional arrangements are the rules of the game. They 
include processes, protocols, and structures needed to manage 
collaboration over time. They should be clearly understood, 
perceived as fair and equitable, and include accountability 
mechanisms within and between entities. 
A majority of survey respondents somewhat to strongly 
agreed there were protocols in place that promote 
accountability among CFLRP participants (66%) and 
between the USFS and CFLRP project participants (e.g., 
decision rules, charters, memoranda of understanding; 
53%) (Figure 13). Similarly, a majority agreed those 
protocols were clearly understood among participants 
(69%), fair and equitable (83%), and used appropriately 
(66%) (Figure 13). 
A majority of respondents felt that project participants 
understood when and what collaborative input was 
useful to inform USFS decisions (71%). Further, a majority 
reported the USFS was responsive to collaborative input 
(66%), and the agency was clear with CFLRP project 
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Collaboration with USFS
45%
23%
22%
61%
42%
46%
Monitoring
Implementation
Planning
Figure 7: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly 
Agree” that the USFS collaborates during planning, implementation, and 
monitoring stages.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Build mutual 
respect
Build 
relationships
Trust group 
to achieve 
desired 
outcomes
Build trust
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Shared motivation: trust and respect
58%
35%
38%
46%
62%
35%
27%
54%
Figure 8: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the collaborative process has helped build trust, 
relationships, and mutual respect, as well as the extent to which participants 
are committed to the process.

0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Other 
stakeholders 
are committed
USFS staﬀ are 
committed
I am committed
12%
81%
24%
59%
38%
46%
Shared motivation: commitment 
Figure 9: Percentage of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that they, the USFS, and other stakeholders are committed 
to the process.
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Leaders motivate 
others to work 
together
Leaders 
communicate 
collaborative vision
Leaders work 
well with others
50%
38%
29%
54%
32%
32%
Capacity for joint action: leadership
Figure 10: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the leaders work well with others, communicate a 
common vision and direction, and motivate others to work together.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Flexibility 
when forest 
conditions 
change
Committed to 
adaptive 
management
Information 
is shared 
equally
Co-generate 
knowledge
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Knowledge, learning, adaptive management
42%
42%
36%
40%
36%
44%
25%
46%
Flexibility 
when 
collaborative 
changes
38%
33%
Figure 11: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly 
Agree” that knowledge and information is co-generated by participants, shared 
equally, and used by participants to adjust management practices.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Facilitation
Technical
expertise
Time
Funds
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Capacity for joint action: resources
16%
52%
52%
52%
44%
46%
50%
8%
Figure 12: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that the collaborative has adequate: funds, time, 
technical expertise, and facilitation skills to accomplish work.

12                    Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community
participants about the decisions they make and why they 
make them (80%) (Figure 14). 
Outcomes
We assessed perceived progress on process, socio-
economic, and ecological outcomes for the Shortleaf-
Bluestem Community CLFRP. The assessment was 
administered after the first 10-year CFLRP funding 
period. Each question was voluntary, and 20% or more 
of the respondents did not respond to questions about 
perceived outcomes. A strong majority of respondents 
agreed to strongly agreed that the collaborative process 
had improved across all measures. These include 
the 
following: 
enhanced 
communication 
among 
participants (84%), minimized conflict (86%), enhanced 
decision making (77%), included diverse perspectives 
(75%), minimized litigation (82%), enabled landscape-
scale planning (87%), and enhanced planning across 
boundaries (77%) (Figure 15). A majority reported 
moderate to substantial progress in meeting the 
ecological goals (Figure 16). Specifically, a strong majority 
indicated moderate to substantial progress on improved 
or maintained restoration pace and scale (90%), reduced 
fuel hazards (95%), improved fire use (90%), and improved 
habitat (85%). Most respondents also reported the project 
had made moderate to substantial progress on socio-
economic goals (Figure 17), but emphasized progress on 
reducing community wildfire risk (89%), and support for 
local employment or training (82%).
Disruptions
We developed a list of common challenges CFLRP 
project participants and other landscape-scale forest 
collaboratives reported in forest collaborative meeting 
breakout groups and in the literature. Based on that list, 
frequent personnel turnover and funding were the most 
substantial challenges Shortleaf-Bluestem Community 
CLFRP faced at the time of this survey (Figure 18). Both the 
amount and timing of funding was reportedly disruptive. 
In a short answer response, one respondent noted that:
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Protocols 
are fair 
and equitable
Protocols 
are understood
Accountability 
between 
USFS and 
collaborative
Accountability 
among 
participants
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Capacity for joint action: process and accountability
33%
33%
37%
16%
31%
38%
50%
33%
Protocols 
are used 
appropriately
33%
33%
Figure 13: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly 
Agree” that protocols promote accountability among participants, between USFS 
and the collaborative, and that protocols are understood, fair and equitable, and 
are used appropriately.
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
USFS is 
clear about 
their decisions
USFS is 
responsive 
to collaborative 
feedback
Participants 
understand 
how to inform 
USFS decisions
52%
19%
33%
33%
67%
13%
Capacity for joint action: 
USFS responsiveness and transparency
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
100%
Figure 14: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or 
“Strongly Agree” that they understand how to inform USFS decisions, 
the USFS is responsive to feedback, and the USFS is clear about their 
decisions.

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Included 
diverse 
perspectives
Enhanced 
decision-making
Minimized 
conﬂict
Enhanced 
communication
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Perceived outcomes: collaborative process
42%
42%
48%
38%
32%
45%
25%
50%
Minimized 
litigation
35%
47%
Enabled 
landscape 
scale planning
Enabled 
cross-boundary 
planning
39%
48%
32%
45%
Figure 15: Percent of respondents who either “Somewhat Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that the collaborative process has impacted the 
function and capacity of the collaborative.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Improved 
ﬁre use
Reduced 
fuel hazards
Restored
 old growth
Improved or 
maintained 
restoration pace 
and scale
Moderate Progress
Substantial Progress
Perceived outcomes: ecological goals
55%
35%
50%
58%
37%
37%
53%
Improved or 
maintained 
watershed 
function
35%
50%
Improved 
habitat
Invasive 
species
 treatment 
or control
26%
53%
22%
38%
25%
Figure 16: Percent of respondents who reported “Moderate progress” or “Substantial progress” towards ecological goals. Note - several 
participants did not respond to these questions or chose the option “Don’t know/not applicable,” and thus were removed from this 
analysis.

14                    Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community
We need money early in the year to accomplish Rx-fires 
in Jan- April. If funding doesn’t come until May, then our 
Rx fire season is mostly over and acres don’t get burned. 
We are often limited in doing Rx fire in the summer 
because personnel are on fires out west or we are at PL 
5 and are prevented from doing critical summer burns 
due to FS direction from Chief. So, getting funding in a 
timely manner is important to us getting the work done.
The same respondent acknowledged that “delay[s] 
in the funding effects [sic] when we can hire people” 
and accomplish on-the-ground work. In addition, a 
respondent suggested that burn windows have also been 
limited by burn bans and smoke restrictions. The CFLRP 
has responded to this challenge by bringing in out-of-
state crews to support spring burn opportunities. 
Recommendations to Improve the  
Collaborative Process 
We asked participants to suggest recommendations 
to 
improve 
collaborative 
process, 
durability, 
and 
performance. Based on open-ended responses and 
Accomplished 
more work 
on adjacent 
lands
Supported 
local 
employment 
or training
Oﬀset 
treatment 
costs 
via byproducts
Reduced 
community 
wildﬁre risk
Moderate Progress
Substantial Progress
Perceived outcomes: socio-economic goals
50%
33%
39%
53%
29%
14%
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
40%
43%
Figure 17: Percent of respondents who reported “Moderate progress” or 
“Substantial progress” towards socio-economic goals. Note - several 
participants did not respond to these questions or chose the option “Don’t 
know/not applicable,” and thus were removed from this analysis.
the quantitative data reported herein, respondents 
highlighted two recommendations: 1) additional outreach 
and engagement; and 2) increase opportunities for shared 
decision space and accountability among the USFS and 
non-USFS partners. 
Additional outreach and engagement
Several respondents recommended the CFLRP consider 
including addition entities in the collaborative process. 
Respondents recommended additional outreach and 
engagement with a broader network of NGOs, tribal 
partners, the state forestry association, representatives 
from the timber industry (wood products companies, 
loggers, smaller mills), local communities, and counties. 
In this vein, a respondent called for more inclusive and 
equitable partner participation. 
Increase opportunities for shared decision space 
and accountability among the USFS and non-USFS 
partners
Respondents recommended clear communication and 
opportunities for dialogue and negotiation of the shared 
decision space between agency and non-agency partners. 
A few respondents indicated that they felt left out of 
decision-making processes, as one respondent stated:
We need more opportunity for open discussion with 
honest dialogue and clear answers. We need to be able to 
have clear answers from Forest Service about decisions 
and know that they are taking into account opinions of 
stakeholders. 
Another respondent noted a desire to have open and honest 
discussions about the development of new shared goals or 
directions among the group. One respondent added context 
to this by suggesting that while a number of partners have 
been engaged in the collaborative process, they felt that 
decisions were dominated by the NRCS and USFS, and 
thus wanted to see more active involvement of all partners 
engaged in the CFLRP. In this vein, a more open venue for 
healthy communication and dialogue could help identify 
areas of shared agreement and disagreement, both of which 
are healthy conversations to have:
[we need to] seek out areas where disagreements exist in 
the need for/proper methods of forest restoration.  Too 
much agreement leads to confirmation bias and [the] 
echo chamber effect.
Finally, a respondent recommended the group work 
towards developing mechanisms of accountability for 
getting work done and reaching goals set forth in the 
CFLRP project proposal. 

Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community                    15
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Biophysical 
disruptions
Personnel 
turnover
Legal 
challenges
Funding
Moderate Challenge
Signiﬁcant Challenge
Disruptions
44%
33%
10%
24%
48%
17%
Limited 
agency
 capacity
24%
10%
Conﬂict 
among 
participants
Moving from 
direction-
setting to
 implementation
10%
30%
10%
Limited 
industry 
capacity
10%
10%
29%
Figure 18: Percent of respondents who reported disruptions posed “Moderate challenges” or “Substantial challenges” to collaborative 
performance and durability.
Discussion and Conclusions
The Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) 
deployed an online survey to the Shortleaf-Bluestem 
Community CFLRP in the winter of 2023 to assess 
collaborative health, function, and resilience, as well as 
perceived outcomes of collaborative work. Specifically, 
we assessed: whether the CFLRP project exhibited 
characteristics generally associated with healthy, well-
functioning, and resilient collaboratives; the extent to 
which the project has made progress on meeting process, 
socio-economic, and ecological outcomes; what challenges 
or disruptions affected collaborative performance and 
durability; and actionable recommendations to improve 
the collaborative process from respondents’ perspectives. 
The assessment serves as the collaborative governance 
assessment for the CFLRP Common Monitoring Strategy 
(question #12).
The majority of respondents indicated that they agreed 
about key problems that have impacted their landscape, 
strategies to solve problems, and the purpose of their 
collaborative restoration project. Also, respondents 
overwhelmingly agreed that the process helped build 
trust, relationships, and mutual respect of others’ 
positions and interests even when they are different 
from their own. A majority agreed that they, other 
organizations, and the USDA Forest Service (USFS) were 
all committed to the process. Mutual commitment, 
especially among those with decision-making authority, 
is critical for collaborative durability. The USFS retains 
decision-making authority in treatment planning and 
implementation on USFS-managed land. The agency also 
gives substantial discretion in decision-making to local 
units; thus, it is often up to USFS unit-level line officers 
to make collaboration a priority by providing staff, 
resources, etc., or not (Beeton et al., 2022). 
Survey respondents acknowledged that leaders worked 
well across organizations and entities, communicated 
a collaborative vision, and motivated others to 
work together. Often, groups benefit from multiple 
collaborative leaders who represent a diversity of 
interests across organizational and institutional levels, 
and provide a variety of functions (e.g., coordination, 
expertise/experience) (Emerson and Gerlak, 2014; Ryan 
and Urgenson, 2019). Having diversity and redundancy 
in leadership roles is critical for continuity through 
personnel turnover. 

16                    Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community
Most respondents felt the collaborative had adequate 
funding and time, whereas nearly all respondents 
indicated the collaborative had sufficient technical 
expertise and facilitation skills needed to carry out 
tasks and accomplish their work.  A strong majority 
of respondents also agreed that participants worked 
together to co-generate knowledge and are committed 
to adaptive management. Knowledge and information 
were reportedly shared equally among participants. 
Collaboratives can engage in a number of activities 
to support social learning and co-development of 
knowledge, including field trips, multi-party monitoring, 
and joint fact-finding missions. Field trips are a critical 
component of social learning because they provide 
opportunities for groups to let their guard down and 
come to common understandings. Field trips can 
help illustrate how restoration principles translate to 
operations on the ground and allow collaborative groups 
to provide feedback on restoration treatments. Joint 
fact-finding—where stakeholders work together to co-
generate local knowledge and translate it into decision-
making—provides opportunities to develop contextual 
understanding of local landscapes to support decisions. 
Documenting this learning and knowledge exchange 
is critical to maintaining transparency, equity, and 
institutional knowledge (Beeton et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 
2015). 
However, the survey also identified a couple of areas 
where the collaborative could improve. These issues were 
discussed in open-ended responses as recommendations 
to improve the collaborative process. Two themes 
emerged from these responses, including the need for: 
1) inclusion of additional stakeholders and 2) improved 
communication between USFS and the collaborative.
Survey results also indicated that the Shortleaf-Bluestem 
Community CFLRP has started to make progress on a 
number of process, socio-economic, and ecological goals 
of the CFLRP. Respondents agreed to strongly agreed 
that the collaborative process has improved across all 
items we measured, including minimization of conflict 
(86%) and litigation (82%), enhanced communication 
(84%), and landscape scale planning (87%). A strong 
majority indicated moderate to substantial progress on 
improved or maintained restoration pace and scale (90%), 
reduced fuel hazards (95%), improved fire use (90%), and 
improved habitat (85%). Meanwhile, respondents also 
acknowledged progress on socio-economic goals, such as 
reduced community wildfire risk (89%) and support for 
local employment and/or training (82%). 
Frequent personnel turnover (72%) and funding (77%) were 
the most substantial challenges the Shortleaf- Bluestem 
Community CFLRP faced at the time of the survey. 
Turnover can undermine relationships and trust, slow 
progress, and lead to lost institutional knowledge (Beeton 
et al., 2022; Coleman et al., 2020). The Shortleaf-Bluestem 
Community CFLRP might want to consider whether 
partners have the capacity to deal with turnover and 
limited funds, what they have done to address these 
challenges, and/or what other support is needed to 
overcome these challenges. 
This 
report 
provided 
a 
baseline 
assessment 
of 
collaborative health and performance among the 
Shortleaf-Bluestem Community CFLRP. Collaboratives are 
dynamic - they continue to adapt and evolve as needs or 
priorities change, and in response to internal and external 
disruptions (Imperial et al., 2016). Thus, it is important to 
continue to self-assess collaborative progress, durability, 
and resilience, so that groups can identify what is 
working well, what may need some work, and what 
support and/or guidance is needed to address challenges 
to maintain performance. The SWERI will continue to 
engage in assessing collaborative health and performance 
of CFLRP projects. There will be multiple opportunities 
locally, regionally, and nationally for peer-networking and 
learning events to share successes and challenges and 
learn together about how to encourage healthy, durable, 
and resilient collaboration. 

Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community                    17
References
Beeton, T.A., Cheng, A.S., Colavito, M.M., 2022. Cultivating 
Collaborative Resilience to Social and Ecological 
Change: An Assessment of Adaptive Capacity, Actions, 
and Barriers Among Collaborative Forest Restoration 
Groups in the United States. Journal of Forestry 
fvab064. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvab064
Butler, W.H., Schultz, C.A., 2019. A New Era for 
Collaborative Forest Management: Policy and Practice 
insights from the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program. Routledge.
Cheng, A.S., Gerlak, A.K., Dale, L., Mattor, K., 2015. 
Examining the adaptability of collaborative governance 
associated with publicly managed ecosystems over 
time: insights from the Front Range Roundtable, 
Colorado, USA. E&S 20, art35. https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-07187-200135 
Coleman, K.J., Butler, W.H., Stern, M.J., Beck, S.L., 2020. 
“They’re Constantly Cycling Through”: Lessons about 
Turnover and Collaborative Forest Planning. Journal of 
Forestry fvaa041. https://doi.org/10.1093/jofore/fvaa041
Emerson, 
K., 
Gerlak, 
A.K., 
2014. 
Adaptation 
in 
Collaborative Governance Regimes. Environmental 
Management 
54, 
768–781. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00267-014-0334-7
Emerson, K., Nabatchi, T., Balogh, S., 2012. An integrative 
framework for collaborative governance. Journal of 
public administration research and theory 22, 1–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/mur011
Folke, C., Hahn, T., Olsson, P., Norberg, J., 2005. Adaptive 
governance of social-ecological systems. Annu. Rev. 
Environ. Resour. 30, 441–473. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.energy.30.050504.144511
Gupta, J., Termeer, C., Klostermann, J., Meijerink, S., 
van den Brink, M., Jong, P., Nooteboom, S., Bergsma, 
E., 2010. The Adaptive Capacity Wheel: a method to 
assess the inherent characteristics of institutions to 
enable the adaptive capacity of society. Environmental 
Science & Policy 13, 459–471. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2010.05.006
Imperial, M.T., Johnston, E., Pruett-Jones, M., Leong, K., 
Thomsen, J., 2016. Sustaining the useful life of network 
governance: life cycles and developmental challenges. 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 14, 135–144. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1249
Lebel, L., Grothmann, T., Siebenhüner, B., 2010. The role 
of social learning in adaptiveness: insights from water 
management. Int Environ Agreements 10, 333–353. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10784-010-9142-6
McIntyre, 
K.B., 
Schultz, 
C.A., 
2020. 
Facilitating 
collaboration 
in 
forest 
management: 
Assessing 
the benefits of collaborative policy innovations. 
Land Use Policy 96, 104683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landusepol.2020.104683
Pelling, M., High, C., 2005. Understanding adaptation: 
what can social capital offer assessments of adaptive 
capacity? Global Environmental Change 15, 308–319. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.02.001
Ryan, C.M., Urgenson, L.S., 2019. Creating and sustaining 
collaborative capacity for forest landscape restoration, 
in: A New Era for Collaborative Forest Management. 
Routledge, pp. 78–95.
Ryan, G.W., Bernard, H.R., 2003. Techniques to Identify 
Themes. 
Field 
Methods 
15, 
85–109. 
https://doi.
org/10.1177/1525822X02239569
Schultz, C., Mclntyre, K., Cyphers, L., Kooistra, C., Ellison, 
A., Moseley, C., 2018. Policy Design to Support Forest 
Restoration: The Value of Focused Investment and 
Collaboration. Forests 9, 512. https://doi.org/10.3390/
f9090512
Sharma-Wallace, L., Velarde, S.J., Wreford, A., 2018. 
Adaptive governance good practice: Show me the 
evidence! Journal of Environmental Management 222, 
174–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.05.067
Stern, M.J., Coleman, K.J., 2015. The Multidimensionality 
of Trust: Applications in Collaborative Natural Resource 
Management. Society & Natural Resources 28, 117–132. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2014.945062
SWERI, 
2020. 
2020 
Cross-Boundary 
Restoration 
Workshop Summary: Advancing all-lands restoration 
in New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, and surrounding 
states. ERI Workshop Report, Ecological Restoration 
Institute, 
Northern 
Arizona 
University. 
https://
cdm17192.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/
p17192coll1/id/1066/rec/4
Ulibarri, N., Emerson, K., Imperial, M.T., Jager, N.W., 
Newig, J., Weber, E., 2020. How does collaborative 
governance evolve? Insights from a medium-n case 
comparison. Policy and Society 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1
080/14494035.2020.1769288
 

18                    Collaborative Governance Assessment Report for the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community
The results of the following questions reported here were 
developed in coordination with local CFLRP project staff, 
coordinators, and partners affiliated with the Shortleaf-
Bluestem Community CFLRP. These questions are 
not part of the CFLRP Common Monitoring Strategy. 
Respondents indicated that the frequency of group 
meetings were either just right (63%) or not frequent 
enough (38%) but no respondents indicated that meetings 
were too frequent (Figure A1). Nearly all respondents 
indicated that they planned to continue their involvement 
in the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community CLFRP, whereas 
no respondents indicated they will not be engaged in the 
future, and a few were unsure (8%) (Figure A2).
Future project engagement
0
20
40
60
80
100
Unsure
No
Yes
92%
8%
Figure A2: Percent of respondents who reported that they planned, did not 
plan, or were unsure if they would participate in future project engagements.
0%
20%
40%
60%
Somewhat 
agree
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree
Somewhat 
disagree
Strongly 
disagree
This CFLRP project has met expectations
13%
4%
21%
33%
Strongly 
agree
29%
Figure A3: Percent of respondents who reported that this CFLRP has met 
their expectations. 
Frequency of engagement opportunities
0
20
40
60
80
100
Too frequent
Just right
Not frequent 
enough
38%
63%
0%
Figure A1: Percent of respondents who reported this project has “Not 
frequent enough,” “Just right,” or “Too frequent” engagement opportunities.
Finally, the majority of respondents somewhat to 
strongly agreed that the Shortleaf-Bluestem Community 
CFLRP had met their expectations (62%). However, a 
group of respondents somewhat to strongly disagreed 
that their expectations had been met (17%). In short 
answer responses, a few respondents credited the CFLRP 
with enabling, “me and my NGO to communicate better 
and understand what is being done for the wildlife and 
habitat,” or for bringing, “a number of partners together 
in our state.” However, other respondents suggested 
that, “certain stakeholders are given more say and 
Appendix 1: Appended Questions
opportunities creating an inequitable environment,” that, 
“there is little to no open discussion or ability to set new 
goals or directions,” or that the groups is, “dominated by 
NRCS and USFS in the decision-making process.” One 
respondent indicated that a more equitable distribution 
of funds to eastern forests for fuel reduction is needed. 
A more equitable distribution of these funds to eastern 
forests would help enable additional capacity to carry out 
more prescribed fire, which is needed.   

