Arizona, Europe can learn from common fire threats 
Friday, April 14,20069:59 AM CDT 
Droughts of a severity never before encountered. Intense wildfires, the largest in history, burning through a  
growing proportion of the mountaintop pine forests in arid landscapes. Wildfire suppression costs rising to un­ 
precedented levels. And worst of all, the loss of lives fighting these fires.  
It sounds like Arizona, of course, but these trends are also occurring in Spain and other Mediterranean countries.  
Wildfires bum an average of nearly 2 million acres annually around the Mediterranean basin; 95 percent are hu­ 
man caused. In one region of Spain, fires in just two years burned almost 15 percent of the pine forests, propor­ 
tionally an even bigger impact than Arizona's huge Rodeo-Chediski fire in 2002.  
In Flagstaff, we are familiar with the ponderosa pine story: Frequent surface fires were interrupted by grazing,  
logging and fire suppression, allowing dense fuels to build up. Severe fires follow, especially in the increasingly  
hot, dry conditions we expect for the future . Is the story the same in Europe? Yes, in the sense that human­ 
caused changes influenced fire, but there are important differences also.  
Mediterranean Europe's experiences with fire parallel some of the most critical American problems: larger and  
more intense wildfires, erosion, property damage, and long-lasting loss of forestlands. The historical reasons are  
often different, but people on both continents can share ideas and techniques to make forests more resistant to  
severe burning and recover better after fires.  
Europe's lands have been heavily fanned and grazed for more than 3,000 years, but after the Second World  
War people began moving to the cities, and agricultural uses declined. A combination of natural revegetation of  
abandoned fields, plus planting of millions of acres ofpines, led to thick, connected fuels.  
The climate has warmed while sununer rainfall has declined since the 1960s. And while dry lightning is less  
common than in the southwestern United States, people start many fires accidentally (for example, sparks from  
trains), through negligence (a fire started by picnickers killed 11 firefighters last July in Guadalajara, Spain) or  
arson.  
The traditional response to wildfire was to stabilize fire sites by seeding grasses and building check dams  
against soil erosion, remove the burned trees, and replant pine trees, except in the areas where pines reseeded  
themselves. But the increase in fire size and severity has led foresters and ecologists to re-think the feasibility of  
this strategy. New concepts that are emerging now center on setting practical priorities for restoration for sus­ 
tainable, long-term conservation.  
Rather than trying to perpetuate fire-prone forests ofpure pines, foresters are experimenting with mixed-spe­ 
cies forests where native oaks are encouraged and planted where needed. The mixed forests are less flammable,  
because the oaks don't have the resinous chemicals of pines, and the mixed forests also provide more diverse  
habitats for wildlife and surface-growing plants. Wide firebreaks are still used, but foresters also thin trees  
within forest stands to create safe sites where fires can 't spread through the canopy.  
In some places, prescribed fire is being tested as an alternative for reducing fuels. Timber cutting is often not  
economically feasible , but fuel treatments are still considered worth supporting by national governments and the  
European Union because of the high value of forests for watershed protection, recreation, and non-timber forest  
products such as cork and mushrooms. And ecologists are encouraging people to recognize that vegetation will  
inevitably change as climate warms, especially where forests are already growing at their environmental limits.  

While the situation is different in many ways in Arizona, all of us who value pine-oak forests can learn from 
each other's successes and failures. 
Peter Z. Fule is an associate professor in Northern Arizona University's Ecological Restoration Institute and 
School of Forestry. He is currently on sabbatical at the University of Barcelona, Spain. He can be reached at 
Pete.Fule@nau.edu. 
