July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7 •  BioScience 661
Articles
T
he interaction between climate, fuels, and the
frequency and severity of wildfires across Rocky Moun-
tain forests is complex.A comprehensive understanding of the
relative influence of fuels and climate on wildfires across this
heterogeneous region is necessary to predict how fires may re-
spond to a changing climate (Dale et al. 2001) and to define
effective fuel management for controlling wildfires in this 
increasingly populated region (USDA 2002). The annual
area burned by wildfires has apparently increased during the
last few decades across North America, and in the southern
Rocky Mountain region in particular,possibly in response to
recent climate change and the gradual accumulation of fuels
following decades of effective fire suppression (figure 1;
Grissino-Mayer and Swetnam 2000).However,more complete
modern records, and an increase in land under federal 
protection since the 1960s,may also have contributed to this
apparent trend over the last half-century. Nonetheless, the
United States recently experienced a series of big fire years:
According to the National Interagency Fire Center (www.nifc.
gov),wildfires in 1988,2000,and 2002 burned 3.0 million,3.4
million, and 2.8 million hectares (ha), respectively, Most of
these fires took place in the western United States, which is
characterized by fire-prone ecosystems.
In an effort to mitigate the risk to life and property from
wildfires and the high cost of fighting fire throughout the 
western United States, fuel reduction has become an impor-
tant forest and fire management tool. In 2002, thinning and
prescribed-fire projects were carried out across 1 million ha
of federal land as part of the US National Fire Plan (www.
fireplan.gov) to reduce the fire hazard and to restore histori-
cal species composition and stand structures.The goals of fire-
hazard reduction and ecological restoration may converge in
some ecosystems, yet they may be incompatible in others
(Veblen 2003).
The idea that decades of fire suppression have promoted
unnatural fuel accumulation and subsequent unprecedent-
edly large, severe wildfires across western forests was devel-
oped primarily from experience in dry ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa) forests in the US Southwest, the interior
West, and the Sierra Nevada (Covington and Moore 1994,
Caprio and Swetnam 1995, Moore et al. 1999). Historically,
short-interval, low-severity surface fires maintained sparse,
open stands in most dry ponderosa pine forests (Swetnam and
Tania Schoennagel (e-mail: tschoe@colorado.edu) is a postdoctoral research
associate, and Thomas T. Veblen is a professor, in the Department of
Geography, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309. William H. Romme
is an associate professor in the Department of Forest, Rangeland, and 
Watershed Stewardship, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523.
© 2004 American Institute of Biological Sciences.
The Interaction of Fire, Fuels,
and Climate across Rocky
Mountain Forests
TANIA SCHOENNAGEL, THOMAS T. VEBLEN, AND WILLIAM H. ROMME
Understanding the relative influence of fuels and climate on wildfires across the Rocky Mountains is necessary to predict how fires may respond 
to a changing climate and to define effective fuel management approaches to controlling wildfire in this increasingly populated region. The idea
that decades of fire suppression have promoted unnatural fuel accumulation and subsequent unprecedentedly large, severe wildfires across western
forests has been developed primarily from studies of dry ponderosa pine forests. However, this model is being applied uncritically across Rocky
Mountain forests (e.g., in the Healthy Forests Restoration Act). We synthesize current research and summarize lessons learned from recent large
wildfires (the Yellowstone, Rodeo-Chediski, and Hayman fires), which represent case studies of the potential effectiveness of fuel reduction across 
a range of major forest types. A “one size fits all” approach to reducing wildfire hazards in the Rocky Mountain region is unlikely to be effective 
and may produce collateral damage in some places.
Keywords:  fire ecology, forest management, forest health, Rocky Mountain forests, climate 

Baisan 1996). With fire suppression, young fire-intolerant
trees can establish during lengthened fire intervals. Denser
stands provide “ladder” fuels at intermediate heights that
carry fire up into continuous canopy fuels, promoting un-
precedentedly large, catastrophic fires. This system has pre-
sented a strong case for thinning to reduce the fire hazard and
to restore historical stand structure.
Ecological restoration and fire mitigation are urgently
needed in dry ponderosa pine forests, where previous re-
search supports this management action.However,we are con-
cerned that the model of historical fire effects and 20th-century
fire suppression in dry ponderosa pine forests is being applied
uncritically across all Rocky Mountain forests, including
places where it is inappropriate (e.g., USDA 2002, White
House 2002).Of particular concern is President Bush’s Healthy
Forests Initiative, which identifies unnatural fuel buildup as
a widespread risk across the West: “Today, the forests and
rangelands of the West have become unnaturally dense, and
ecosystem health has suffered significantly.When coupled with
seasonal droughts, these unhealthy forests, overloaded with
fuels, are vulnerable to unnaturally severe wildfires. Cur-
rently, 190 million acres [77 million ha] of public land are at
increased risk of catastrophic wildfires”(White House 2002,
executive summary).This initiative was recently enacted as HR
1904, the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003.
The relative contribution of fuels and climate to recent fire
activity across forest types throughout the western United
States is hotly debated (e.g., see Conservation Biology, vol. 15
[2001]). It is easy to identify either local situations in which
fire suppression has allowed unusual fuel accumulations or,
by contrast,those in which fuel conditions remain within the 
historical range and the effects and frequency of fire are con-
trolled primarily by weather conditions, not by fuels. What 
is lacking is a broad synthesis of the geographical patterns 
in historical fire regimes, and of 20th-century changes in
these regimes, addressing these key questions:
• Where, in what ecosystem 
types, and to what degree 
have fuels increased with fire 
suppression across the Rocky 
Mountain region (Arizona,
New Mexico, Colorado, Utah,
Wyoming, Montana, and 
Idaho)? 
• Where are forest restoration 
treatments appropriate, and 
how will fire respond to fuel-
reduction treatments in dif-
ferent forest types? 
• Where and when is the influ-
ence of short-term (i.e., sea-
sonal and annual) climatic 
variation expected to override
the effectiveness of fuel treat-
ments?
To address these questions, we
synthesize current understanding of
the different types of fire regimes
(defined by the historical range of
variability in fire size, severity, and
frequency) that occur across the
Rocky Mountain region. The fire
regime is a central concept in fire
ecology and is essential for under-
standing the character, effect, and
variability of disturbance patterns
across regions.Our analysis of dif-
ferent fire regimes is based on the
classic fire triangle of weather,
fuels, and ignition, which identi-
fies the factors controlling com-
bustion. All three factors must be
present in a form conducive to
662 BioScience  •  July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7
Articles
Figure 1. Area burned by wildfires in different regions under federal protection across
North America. The apparent increase in the extent of fires over the last century is most
pronounced in the southwestern United States (Arizona and New Mexico), although we
urge caution in interpreting these trends. Source: Grissino-Mayer and Swetnam (2000);
reprinted with permission from The Holocene.
Canada
Hectares burned (× 100,000)
11 Western states
Arizona and New Mexico
Year

combustion, or fire will not occur. However, the inherent
variability, and therefore the limiting role, of these three in-
gredients is dramatically different among forest types and geo-
graphic regions.For example,we argue below that fuel types
and amounts are less limiting to fire spread in subalpine
forests than in low-elevation forests,but suitably dry weather
conditions for fire spread in subalpine forests occur infre-
quently. Hence, variability in seasonal and annual climate is
more limiting and has a greater influence on fire extent and
severity in these generally cool, moist ecosystems.
In contrast,periods of several months of warm,dry weather
occur almost annually in most southwestern ponderosa pine
forests,leaving fuels sufficiently desiccated for extensive fires
to occur annually. Given the higher frequency of weather
conditions that desiccate fuels in this ecosystem, factors that
affect fuel type, quantity, and configuration are more limit-
ing than climate in controlling this fire regime.Variations in
local site productivity, and in the time elapsed since the last
fire event, affect fuel accumulation in the dry, low-elevation
ponderosa pine forests. Annual climatic variation affects 
fuels indirectly in these forests both through short periods of
above-average moisture availability, which enhance the pro-
duction of fine fuels (e.g., leaves, grasses, forest litter), and
through fuel-desiccating drought.But overall,climate is more
limiting in subalpine forests, where short-term (i.e., months
to a few years) variability in climate primarily affects fire
severity and spread through fuel desiccation and wind,not fuel
abundance. In contrast, the fire regime in dry ponderosa
pine woodlands is more limited by annual variability in fine
fuel amounts and by ladder-fuels related to the time elapsed
since the last fire. Ignition sources also may be important, at
least locally, but in this study we do not identify spatial pat-
terns in this component of the fire regime. Assuming in-
stead that ignition sources are always available,we evaluate the
relative importance of variability in short-term climatic vari-
ation and in fuel quantity and configuration.
We identify three major types of historical fire regimes (Agee
1998): (1) high severity,(2) low severity,and (3) mixed sever-
ity.In addition to developing a general theoretical framework
for assessing controls on local fire regimes,we summarize the
lessons learned from three recent large wildfires (the 1988 Yel-
lowstone fires and the 2002 Rodeo-Chediski and Hayman
fires). These case studies reveal the potential effectiveness of
fuel reduction under varying climate conditions across a
range of major forest types and historical fire regimes.Finally,
we develop coarse estimates of the spatial extent of the three
major historical fire regimes to broadly quantify hetero-
geneity in fire regimes and responses to fire suppression
across the Rocky Mountain region.
To develop coarse estimates of the proportion and extent
of historical fire regimes across the Rockies,we rely on research
reported in the peer-reviewed literature to group major for-
est types that historically experienced each of the three ma-
jor fire regimes we discuss. Because it is relatively difficult to
define the spatial extents of different fire regimes at this scale,
we rely on two independent maps of forest cover to highlight
general trends and degrees of uncertainty in the relative 
proportion of major fire types across the Rocky Mountain re-
gion. In the first analysis, forest types are based on a map of
Küchler’s potential natural vegetation (PNV) groups (cli-
max vegetation types that are expected,given the occurrence
of natural disturbances such as fire, based on site character-
istics such as soils, climate, and topography), modified by
Schmidt and colleagues (2002). In our reclassification of
these data, we combine eight PNV groups into three main 
forest types: (1) ponderosa pine (pine forest and Great Basin
pine),(2) mixed ponderosa pine (pine–Douglas fir,Douglas
fir,grand fir–Douglas fir,and Southwest mixed conifer [Ari-
zona, New Mexico]), and (3) spruce–fir (spruce–fir and
spruce–fir–Douglas fir). In the second analysis, forest types
are based on a map of current cover types,which Schmidt and
colleagues (2002) developed by combining the Forest and
Range Resource Planning Act map of US forest type groups
with AVHRR (Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer)
satellite imagery. In our reclassification of these data, we
combine the current cover types into three main forest types,
similar to those obtained by combining the PNV groups: (1)
ponderosa pine,(2) Douglas fir,and (3) spruce–fir–lodgepole
pine.
In this summary,we assume a one-to-one correspondence
between forest types and fire regimes; however, as we em-
phasize throughout the text, this is a considerable over-
simplification. Nonetheless, this summary reveals coarse
levels of heterogeneity in fire regimes across the Rocky Moun-
tain region,unaccounted for in current forest policy debates.
Other endeavors to define fire regimes at this scale include the
work of Schmidt and colleagues (2002),who developed a map
of historical fire regimes and departures from historical con-
ditions throughout the continental United States for strate-
gic fire-planning purposes, but who relied primarily on
managers’expert knowledge rather than on peer-reviewed em-
pirical studies in defining fire regimes. In addition, McKen-
zie and colleagues (2000) developed a regional model of fire
frequency within the interior Columbia River basin,based on
a large fire-history database from the western United States.
Overall,our analysis highlights the heterogeneity of forest
types and fire regimes across the Rocky Mountain region.Fur-
ther,it provides insight into pressing management questions
of when and where various fuel treatments are consistent with
the goal of ecological restoration,and where such treatments
are likely to be successful in reducing the size and severity of
wildfires.We focus on the Rocky Mountain region; however,
the spatial and geographic heterogeneity in fire regimes across
this region is also evident throughout the West (e.g., Agee
1998).
High-severity fire regimes
High-severity or stand-replacing fires are defined by the
death of canopy trees,in contrast to low-severity fires,which
do not kill overstory trees. High-severity fires typically burn
the treetops (crown fires) but may also kill trees through
very hot surface fires, which primarily burn the forest floor.
July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7 •  BioScience 663
Articles

High-elevation subalpine forests in the Rocky Mountains
typify ecosystems that experience infrequent, high-severity
crown fires (Peet 2000,Veblen 2000).The forest types that oc-
cur in the subalpine zone range from mesic spruce–fir forests
to drier, dense lodgepole pine stands; and xeric, open wood-
lands of limber and bristlecone pine. The most extensive
subalpine forest types are composed of Engelmann spruce
(Picea engelmannii), subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa), and
lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta), all thin-barked trees easily
killed by fire.
Extensive stand-replacing fires occurred historically at
long intervals (i.e.,one to many centuries) in subalpine forests
(Romme 1982, Kipfmueller and Baker 2000, Veblen 2000,
Schoennagel et al. 2003), typically in association with infre-
quent high-pressure blocking systems that promote extremely
dry regional climate patterns (Romme and Despain 1989,
Renkin and Despain 1992,Bessie and Johnson 1995,Nash and
Johnson 1996). Persistent high-pressure blocking systems 
affect regional temperature and precipitation patterns
throughout the Rockies and may respond to global climate
anomalies (Baker 2003). Regional synchrony of large, high-
severity fires across subalpine forests corroborates the idea that
high-elevation forest fires respond to broad scale synoptic cli-
mate (Nash and Johnson 1996,Kipfmueller and Baker 2000,
Veblen 2000,Baker 2003).In moist high-elevation forests,suc-
cessive seasons of drought can initiate large, stand-replacing
fires (Balling et al.1992,Kipfmueller and Swetnam 2000).In
these generally cool subalpine environments, significant
drought events are infrequent, which prevents the frequent
occurrence of large, high-severity fires.Although they occur
infrequently, drought-induced large fire events ac-
count for the greatest percentage of the area burned in
subalpine forests (figure 2; Bessie and Johnson 1995).
Subalpine forests typically experience stand-
replacing crown fires, rather than low-severity 
surface fires, because they lack fine fuels on the forest
floor but have abundant ladder fuels that carry fire into
the treetops. These dense, closed-canopy forests 
typically support sparse understory vegetation, and
the short, stout needles of subalpine trees compact
tightly on the forest floor,creating a poor substrate for
fire spread (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). This is in
stark contrast to the warmer, open-canopied, pro-
ductive forests at lower elevations, which support
abundant, well-aerated fine fuels on the forest floor
(Swetnam and Baisan 1996). Although fine surface
fuels are sparse in subalpine forests, ladder fuels are
abundant. Shade-tolerant fir and spruce trees have
abundant lateral branches, which easily carry fire up
into the canopy. By contrast, shade-intolerant lodge-
pole pines have few lateral branches,but these trees tend
to grow in very dense stands that thin over time, con-
tributing to abundant dead ladder fuels (figure 3).
The abundance of ladder fuels,the proximity of crowns,
and the lack of abundant,spatially continuous fine sur-
face fuels all promote high-severity crown fires that
dominate subalpine forests.
The low abundance of small fuels,and the relatively
high abundance of large dead and live fuels, explains
why fires are infrequent but typically large in subalpine
forests. Fuel moisture levels respond to ambient envi-
ronmental conditions and are critical in determining
fire potential.Small-diameter dead fuels dry quickly;for
example,1-hour fuels (particles less than 0.6 centime-
ters [cm] in diameter) approach equilibrium with am-
bient relative humidity within an hour.By contrast,dead
branches, logs, or other large, slow-drying materials
(7.6 to 20.3 cm in diameter) are known as 1000-hour
fuels because they require 1000 hours to equilibrate (fig-
ure 4).Live fuels dry even more slowly than dead fuels
and are influenced most strongly by sustained periods
664 BioScience  •  July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7
Articles
Figure 2. (a) Histogram of the occurrence of different size classes 
of stand-replacing fires in Yellowstone National Park (1895–1991).
(b) Proportion of the total area burned in each size class for the same
period (1.0 = 100% of total area). Although large stand-replacing fires
(i.e., fires that burn more than 1000 hectares) are infrequent, they are
the dominant influence on subalpine forests. Data are from Balling
and colleagues (1992).
a
Number of fires
b
Proportion of area burned
< 99
Fire size (ha)
100–999
1000–9999 10,000–99,999 > 100,000

of drought.Because of the paucity of small
dead fuels such as needles and grasses in
subalpine forests, short-duration drying
episodes generally do not create sufficiently
dry conditions to sustain a fire. However,
prolonged dry weather conditions (about
40 days without precipitation) can suffi-
ciently dry live fuels and larger dead fuels
to carry large,intense fires once they are ig-
nited (figure 5). Conditions necessary for
large fires are infrequent and often coupled
with the occurrence of lightning.This sug-
gests that Native Americans probably did
not have a major influence on fires in the
subalpine forest types, except in some 
localized areas.
The recent period of consistent, effec-
tive fire suppression in remote high-
elevation sites,which has lasted 50 years at
most, represents only a small portion of
typical fire-free intervals in subalpine
forests. Studies of fire history show that
long fire-free periods (as long as,or longer
than, the fire exclusion period during 
the 20th century) characterized the fire
regimes of these forests before Euro-
American settlement (Romme 1982,
Romme and Despain 1989, Kipfmueller
and Baker 2000, Veblen 2000, Schoen-
nagel et al. 2003). Therefore, it is unlikely
that the short period of fire exclusion has
significantly altered the long fire intervals
in subalpine forests (Romme and Despain
1989, Johnson et al. 2001, Veblen 2003).
Furthermore, large, intense fires burning
under dry conditions are very difficult, if
not impossible, to suppress (Wakimoto
1989), and such fires account for the ma-
jority of area burned in subalpine forests
(figure 2; Romme and Despain 1989,
Bessie and Johnson 1995). At lower ele-
vations within its range, lodgepole pine
may also experience occasional small sur-
face fires (Kipfmueller and Baker 2000),
but their spatial extent and frequency are
not well quantified.Suppression of smaller,
less intense fires under moderate climate
conditions probably has had little influence
on the dominant fire regime in subalpine
forests (Johnson et al. 2001,Veblen 2003). Our understand-
ing of the dominant fire regime in these high-elevation,cool
forests leads us to conclude that any recent increases in area
burned in subalpine forests are probably not attributable to
fire suppression. Evidence from the subalpine forests of Yel-
lowstone indicates that fires of comparable size to the 1988
fires occurred in the early 1700s (Romme and Despain 1989).
Moreover,there is no consistent relationship between time
elapsed since the last fire and fuel abundance in subalpine
forests (Brown and Bevins 1986), further undermining the
idea that years of fire suppression have caused unnatural
fuel buildup in this forest zone. For example, lodgepole pine
stands experience high rates of self-thinning that contribute
large dead fuels as stands mature (Kashian 2003). However,
July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7 •  BioScience 665
Articles
Figure 3. Typical subalpine forest stand structure, which easily carries fire into the
canopy, promoting high-severity crown fires. (a) Lodgepole pine stand with sparse
understory fuels and high tree densities. (b) Spruce–fir stand with abundant live
ladder fuels throughout the vertical profile. Photographs: Tania Schoennagel.
a
b

the legacy of wood from the prefire stand contributes abun-
dant loads of large fuel to young postfire stands (Romme
1982).Bessie and Johnson (1995) report little variation in to-
tal fuel loads, relative to variation in weather, in subalpine
forests of different ages.No evidence suggests that spruce–fir
or lodgepole pine forests have experienced substantial shifts
in stand structure over recent decades as a result of fire sup-
pression.Overall,variation in climate rather than in fuels ap-
pears to exert the largest influence on the size, timing, and
severity of fires in subalpine forests (Romme and Despain
1989, Bessie and Johnson 1995, Nash and Johnson 1996,
Rollins et al.2002).We conclude that large,infrequent stand-
replacing fires are “business as usual” in this forest type, not
an artifact of fire suppression.
Case study: The 1988 Yellowstone fires. In 1988, according
to the National Interagency Fire Center, more than 700,000
ha burned in mostly high-elevation subalpine forests through-
out Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho. Yellowstone National
Park was the focus of public attention during these fires.
Some 40% of the park burned, much of it at high severity
(Turner et al.1994).Drought,which had started years earlier,
extended beyond its immediate region during the summer of
1988.From 1977 to 1989,a strong Pacific North America pat-
tern developed, creating a blocking ridge over the north-
western United States that reduced winter snowpack across
Montana and Wyoming (Baker 2003).Low winter snowpack
in 1988, followed by an unusually dry, hot, and windy sum-
mer, contributed to extreme burning conditions in the park
(Balling et al.1992).Precipitation in July and August was only
20% of normal levels; relative humidity fell to 6%; and strong,
dry,gusty winds (60 to100 kilometers [km] per hour) spread
multiple fires ignited by humans and lightning.
Variation in daily
area burned was high-
ly correlated with the
moisture content of
100-hour (2.5- to 7.6-
cm diameter) and
1000-hour dead fuels
(Turner et al. 1994).
Once fuels reached
critical moisture lev-
els later in the season,
the spatial pattern of
the large,severe stand-
replacing fires was
controlled by weather
(wind direction and
velocity),not by fuels,
stand age, or fire-
fighting activities (Min-
shall et al.1989,Waki-
moto 1989, Turner et
al. 1994). Variation in
fuel abundance and
topography (including formidable barriers such as the 
Grand Canyon) had little influence on the severity or direc-
tion of the fire when fuel moistures were critically low (Turner
et al. 1994). Stand-replacing fire affected stands of all ages,
including some as young as 7 years old (Schoennagel et al.
2003).
Contrary to popular opinion, previous fire suppression,
which was consistently effective from about 1950 through
1972,had only a minimal effect on the large fire event in 1988
(Turner et al. 1994). Reconstruction of historical fires indi-
cates that similar large,high-severity fires also occurred in the
early 1700s (Romme and Despain 1989). Given the histori-
cal range of variability of fire regimes in high-elevation sub-
alpine forests, fire behavior in Yellowstone during 1988,
although severe, was neither unusual nor surprising.
Summary: High-severity fire regimes in subalpine forests. 
Subalpine forests that experience infrequent,high-severity fires
cover approximately 32% to 46% of the forested area in the
Rocky Mountain region, which encompasses the three ma-
jor forest types discussed in this article (table 1).The follow-
ing insights are drawn from analyses of historical fire regimes
and contemporary fire behavior in subalpine forests.
• Infrequent, high-severity, stand-replacing fires dominate
the historical and contemporary fire regime in these
forests.
• Climatic variation, through its effects on the moisture
content of live fuels and larger dead fuels, is the pre-
dominant influence on fire frequency and severity.
• Dense trees and abundant ladder fuels are natural in
subalpine forests and do not represent abnormal fuel
accumulations.
666 BioScience  •  July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7
Articles
Ambient relative humidity (percentage)
Fuel moisture (percentage)
Hours
1000-hr fuels
100-hr fuels
10-hr fuels
Ambient RH
Figure 4. A theoretical example illustrating differences in fuel-moisture time lags for small (10-hour),
intermediate (100-hour), and large (1000-hour) fuels. Small fuels dry out rapidly and respond more
quickly to short-term variability in ambient relative humidity, while large fuels exhibit a more
lagged response, requiring much longer dry periods to reach similar dryness.

• Fire suppression has had minimal influence on the size,
severity, and frequency of high-elevation fires.
• Mechanical fuel reduction in subalpine forests would
not represent a restoration treatment but rather a
departure from the natural range of variability in stand
structure.
• Given the behavior of fire in Yellowstone in 1988, fuel
reduction projects probably will not substantially
reduce the frequency, size, or severity of wildfires under
extreme weather conditions.
Low-severity fire regimes
In marked contrast to the infrequent, high-severity 
fire regimes characteristic of subalpine forests, many low-
elevation ponderosa pine forests historically experienced 
frequent, low-severity fires. A meta-analysis of 63 fire histo-
ries from similar-size southwestern ponderosa pine sites (10
to 100 ha) indicates that surface fires returned at mean in-
tervals of 4 to 36 years (based on fire dates recorded for more
than 10% of the sampled trees; Swetnam and Baisan 1996),
an order of magnitude shorter than the intervals for subalpine
forest stands. Some low-elevation ponderosa pine stands in
Colorado, near the Plains grasslands, show evidence of 8- to
10-year intervals for fire returning to the same small stand or
tree before the 1900s (Veblen et al. 2000). In the Black Hills
of South Dakota, the mean fire interval was 20 to 23 years at
each of four low-elevation ponderosa pine sites (about 100
ha each) for the period from 1388 to 1900 (Brown and Sieg
1996). Although detailed comparison of fire-interval statis-
tics across study sites is problematic because of differences in
the extent of the study area and the intensity of sampling,these
studies clearly indicate a significant difference in fire interval
and severity between low-elevation, dry ponderosa pine
forests and high-elevation, moist subalpine forests.
Frequent, low-severity fire regimes occurred predomi-
nantly in dry,low-elevation ponderosa pine forests that were
formerly open woodlands with abundant, contiguous fine 
fuels in the understory.This surface fuel layer,dominated by
grasses and long cast needles,dries easily and thus promotes
the spread of frequent surface fires.Historically,climate,fine-
fuel abundance,and fire were highly interrelated in dry,low-
elevation ponderosa pine forests. El Niño–Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) patterns correlate tightly with the inci-
dence of synchronous,low-severity fires in dry,low-elevation
forests of the Southwest (Swetnam and Baisan 1996,Grissino-
Mayer and Swetnam 2000,Kitzberger et al.2001).The ENSO
cycle alternates between El Niño and La Niña conditions at
July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7 •  BioScience 667
Articles
Figure 5. Maps of fuel moisture for small (10-hour) and large (1000-hour) fuels, showing responses to (a)
short-term (1- to 2-day) and (b) longer-term (1- to 2-month) drying conditions in the southwestern United
States. Large fuels dry sufficiently to carry fire only under longer drying conditions, while smaller fuels may
dry sufficiently to carry fire under short-term or moderate drying conditions. The maps were developed by 
the National Interagency Fire Center (17 June 2004; www.fs.fed.us/land/wfas/wfas10.html).
a.     13 May 2003
b.      3 July 2003
1000-hr fuel moisture
1000-hr fuel moisture
10-hr fuel moisture
10-hr fuel moisture

2- to 6-year frequencies.In the southern Rockies,El Niño years
are characterized by wetter-than-average winter and spring
conditions,which enhance the growth of fine fuels (especially
grasses). Drier-than-average La Niña years typically follow,
desiccating abundant fine surface fuels. Time-lag analysis
shows that dry, low-elevation ponderosa pine forests com-
monly experience more extensive fires when wetter conditions
1 to 3 years before a fire are followed by dry conditions dur-
ing the year of the fire. Infrequent or anomalous prolonged
drought conditions are not the primary factor promoting fires
in dry, low-elevation pine forests, as they are in subalpine
forests.Summers in the low-elevation forests are typically dry
enough to promote low fuel moisture levels that would per-
mit ignition, although the abundance and continuity of fine
surface fuel historically were the primary limiting factors
(Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Rollins et al. 2002).
Unlike the historical fire regime in subalpine forests,the fire
regime in dry,low-elevation ponderosa pine forests has been
significantly altered as a result of fire suppression and its ef-
fects on historical fuel structure (Arno and Gruell 1983,
Swetnam and Baisan 1996,Veblen et al.2000).Before fire sup-
pression, the frequent, low-severity surface fires in these
forests kept dry ponderosa pine stands sparse and open by
killing young, newly established trees. With fire suppression
and livestock grazing (which reduces the amount of grass fuel),
fire intervals have lengthened, and dense stands have devel-
oped in which fine grass fuels are less abundant and dense lad-
der fuels are capable of carrying fire up into the canopy
(figure 6). Consequently, high-severity fires potentially can 
occur in dry ponderosa pine forests, where historically they
were rare because of the sparse ladder fuels and the lack of con-
tiguous tree crowns.This pattern has been well documented
on the basis of fire scars, repeat photography, and stand age
structures, especially for forests in Arizona and New Mexico
(Covington and Moore 1994,Allen et al.1998,Mast et al.1999,
Moore et al. 1999), for some sites in the Colorado Front
Range (Veblen and Lorenz 1991,Brown et al.1999,Kaufmann
et al.2000),and for portions of the Bitterroot Range in Mon-
tana (Gruell 1983,Arno et al.1995).As a consequence of fire
suppression,the size and occurrence of high-severity fires has
increased in this forest type.Reduction of ladder fuels through
mechanical thinning and prescribed fire can effectively reduce
the unprecedented occurrence of extensive crown fires and re-
store the historical surface fire regime in dry, low-elevation
ponderosa pine forests (Covington et al.1997,Allen et al.2002,
Fule et al. 2002).
Case study: The 2002 Rodeo-Chediski fire complex. The
Rodeo-Chediski fire, which burned 189,095 ha in northern
Arizona from 18 June through 7 July 2002,was the largest Ari-
zona fire in recorded history.The area burned was dominated
by ponderosa pine,with isolated pockets of mixed conifers at
higher elevations along the Mogollon Rim,where the north-
ern half of the fire burned.Fire-history studies conducted be-
fore the fire,in nearby ponderosa pine stands,record frequent
surface fires with mean fire intervals of 7 to 10 years (based
on fires recorded by more than 10% of sampled trees in 10-
to 100-ha study areas; Swetnam and Baisan 1996). In 2002,
high-severity crown fire affected 48% of the Rodeo-Chediski
fire area,an extent of severe burning that is unprecedented in
the low-elevation, dry ponderosa pine forests of this area.
The summer of 2002 marked the fourth year of drought
in the Southwest. That May had been the second driest on
record across Arizona and New Mexico in 108 years. Levels
668 BioScience  •  July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7
Articles
Table 1. Two coarse estimates of the extent and proportion of three major forest types across the Rocky Mountain region
(Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho). The first estimate is based on a map of Küchler’s
potential natural vegetation groups, modified by Schmidt and colleagues (2002). The second estimate is based on a map of
current cover type developed by Schmidt and colleagues (2002). A different historical fire regime is associated with each of
the three forest types, although the correspondence is not exact.
Area 
Associated severity of 
Forest type
(hectares)
Percentage of total
historical fire regime
Based on PNV groups
Ponderosa pine (pine forest, Great Basin pine)
8,201,600
17.7
Low 
Mixed ponderosa pine (pine–Douglas fir, Douglas fir,
grand fir–Douglas fir, Southwest mixed conifer)
23,176,200
49.9
Mixed 
Spruce–fir (spruce–fir, spruce–fir–Douglas fir)
15,056,000
32.4
High 
Total
46,433,800
100.0
Based on current cover types
Ponderosa pine
13,009,100
36.7
Low 
Douglas fir
6,176,000
17.4
Mixed
Spruce–fir–lodgepole pine (lodgepole pine, fir–spruce)
16,287,200
45.9
High
Total
35,472,300
100.0
PNV, potential natural vegetation.
Note: Total is the forested area in the Rocky Mountain region defined by the three major forest types listed. Some other forest types, such as piñon-
juniper woodlands, are not included.

of fuel moisture before the fire were
unusually low: 7% in 1000-hour fuels,
as low as 2% in 10-hour (0.6- to 2.4-
cm diameter) and 100-hour fuels,and
below critical thresholds in live pine
and brush fuels (Wilmes et al. 2002).
The Haines index is a measure of
lower-atmosphere stability and dry-
ness correlated with wildfire growth.
Low values (2 or 3) indicate moist,
stable conditions;the highest values (5
or 6) represent dry, unstable condi-
tions that favor moderate to high fire
activity. The Haines index was 6 on
many days during the Rodeo-Chediski
fire.
Prescribed fire, salvage logging in
previously burned stands, and fuel-
reduction treatments (including the
removal of slash, or woody debris,
from branches and treetops) were ef-
fective in reducing fire severity and
spread in the Rodeo-Chediski fire,
even under extreme weather condi-
tions (figure 7;Wilmes et al.2002),as
predicted by restoration research in
Arizona (Fule et al.2002).High-sever-
ity crown fires affected 35% of the
stands that had been treated within the
last 15 years, compared with 55% of
the untreated stands. The average
stand density of treated and untreated
stands was 387 and 1108 trees per
hectare, respectively. All prefire fuel
treatments appeared to lower burn
severity except for precommercial treatments, which in-
creased it.In precommercial treatments,slash (branches and
tree tops) was lopped and scattered throughout the stand,
which contributed to higher fuel loads than those in un-
treated stands.Areas that had high forage production and low
tree density experienced less severe burning during the Rodeo-
Chediski fire, suggesting that open stands with abundant
fine surface fuels were more resistant to high-severity canopy
fire (figure 8).Overall,burn severity was positively correlated
with overstory tree density (Wilmes et al.2002).This outcome,
in clear contrast with the findings from Yellowstone (where
weather rather than fuel type and arrangement influenced fire
behavior),highlights the heterogeneity of forest types and fire
effects across the Rocky Mountain region.
Summary: Low-severity fire regimes in low-elevation pon-
derosa pine forests. Dry,low-elevation ponderosa pine forests
in the Rocky Mountain region,which were historically char-
acterized by frequent low-severity fire regimes, make up an
estimated 19% to 37% of the forested area that encompasses
the three forest types discussed in this article (table 1). Such
historically sparse forests, subject to high-frequency fires,
comprise much of the ponderosa pine forest in Arizona and
New Mexico but only a small fraction of the ponderosa pine
forest in the central and northern Rockies. Regional model-
ing of fire regimes, based on a large fire-history database
from the western United States,similarly predicts decreasing
fire frequency from southern to northern latitudes (McKen-
zie et al. 2000). Important lessons about fire regimes in dry,
low-elevation ponderosa pine forests are listed below.
• The historical fire regime in these forests was character-
ized by frequent, low-severity surface fires.
• Historically, the frequency, size, and severity of fires
were largely controlled by spatial and temporal varia-
tion in fine fuels.
• Fire suppression has significantly increased tree densi-
ties and ladder fuels in low-elevation ponderosa pine
forests.
• As a consequence of this change in stand structure,
unprecedented high-severity fires now occur.
July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7 •  BioScience 669
Articles
Circa 1930
Tree recruitment
Fire
Today
Figure 6. A comparison of historical and contemporary stand structure of dry pon-
derosa pine stands from the Jemez Mountains of New Mexico, and the relationship of
this change to the frequency of low-severity surface fires. Source: Modified from Allen
et al. 1998.

• Fuel-reduction treatments involving mechanical thin-
ning and prescribed fire are likely to be effective in miti-
gating extreme fire behavior and restoring this forest
type to the historical fire regime.
Mixed-severity fire regimes
Mixed-severity fire regimes are intermediate between the 
infrequent, high-severity fire regimes of high-elevation sub-
alpine forests and the frequent, low-severity fire regimes of
dry, low-elevation ponderosa pine forests. Both high- and 
low-severity fires can occur at varying frequencies in mixed-
severity fire regimes. This fire regime occurs predominantly
at mid elevations,where topographic variation creates a com-
plex moisture gradient resulting in a mosaic of tree species and
densities that is sometimes referred to as mixed conifer 
forest. There is also evidence of mixed-severity fire regimes
that predate fire suppression in some forests dominated by
ponderosa pine, and even in pure or nearly pure ponderosa
pine stands at low to mid elevation (Veblen and Lorenz 1986,
Mast et al.1998,Kaufmann et al.2000,Ehle and Baker 2003).
Historically, forests that experienced mixed-severity fire
regimes had variable densities of ponderosa pine,Douglas fir
(Pseudotsuga menziesii), grand fir (Abies grandis), and west-
ern larch (Larix occidentalis),depending
on their location. These forests consti-
tuted a mosaic of even-aged stands re-
sulting from stand-replacing fire,
interspersed with uneven-aged stands
that experienced low-severity surface
fires and episodic tree regeneration
(Arno 1980, Brown et al. 1999, Kauf-
mann et al. 2000). Pre-1900 stand-re-
placing fires in these forest types have
been documented by historic pho-
tographs and by the occurrence of even-
age stand structures whose age
corresponds to that of fire scars on ad-
jacent trees (Gruell 1983, Veblen and
Lorenz 1986, 1991, Arno et al. 1995,
Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Shinneman
and Baker 1997,Mast et al.1998,Brown
et al. 1999, Kaufmann et al. 2000, Ehle
and Baker 2003). Low-severity fires are
also well documented by historic pho-
tographs, fire scars, and all-age stands
that include centuries-old trees,although
these surface fires usually occurred less
frequently than in the lower-elevation
dry ponderosa pine forests described
above (Arno 1980, Veblen and Lorenz
1991,Swetnam and Baisan 1996,Brown
et al.1999,Moore et al.1999,Kaufmann
et al. 2000,Veblen et al. 2000). The rel-
ative importance of surface versus
crown fires and the size of these post-
disturbance patches in shaping forests
of mixed-severity fire regimes remain uncertain and have
probably varied spatially and temporally.
Since the late 19th century, the densities of relatively fire-
intolerant and shade-tolerant species, such as Douglas fir
and grand fir, have increased in response to the suppression
of low-severity fires in areas that historically experienced
mixed-severity fire regimes (Arno et al.1995,Kaufmann et al.
2000). Increases in density probably have occurred more
commonly at lower elevations,on drier aspects,and adjacent
to grasslands where frequent, low-severity fires were more
dominant historically.Sites that previously supported denser
stands because of favorable topographic and edaphic condi-
tions have probably changed less as a result of fire suppres-
sion; those sites historically experienced stand-replacing fires,
and high stand densities are a normal part of the postfire re-
covery process (Veblen and Lorenz 1986,Arno et al.1995,Mast
et al.1998,Kaufmann et al.2000,Ehle and Baker 2003).With
fire suppression,forests that historically experienced mixed-
severity fire regimes have developed a more homogenous
forest structure across the landscape,resulting in larger areas
of continuously dense forest and perhaps in larger patches of
crown fire than were witnessed historically.In some areas,tree
regeneration following logging of these forests in the late
670 BioScience  •  July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7
Articles
Figure 7. Proportion of different prefire fuel treatments burned at different severi-
ties during the Rodeo-Chediski fire in the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, Ari-
zona, 2002. Burn severity, defined by the Burned Area Emergency Rehabilitation
team (www.fs.fed.us/r3/asnf/salvage/publications/proj_record/001_rodeo_baer_
report_7-29-02.pdf), ranges from unburned (surface fire with little or no canopy
damage, tree foliage unscorched) through low severity (some tree crowns scorched
but most trees not killed) and moderate severity (variable tree mortality, foliage
scorched but not consumed) to high severity (complete tree mortality, foliage com-
pletely consumed). Fuel treatments are defined as salvage (removal of trees after a
fire), fuels (thinning, chipping, and pile burning), prescribed fire (broadcast burn-
ing), commercial (removal, seed cut, regeneration, harvest, partial removal, final
cut, or thinning), or precommercial (thinning with chipping, lopping, or both; no
slash removal). Data are from Wilmes and colleagues (2002).

19th and early 20th centuries has contributed to high stand
densities (Veblen and Lorenz 1986, Kaufmann et al. 2000).
Overall, fire suppression has probably significantly affected
only sites within the mixed conifer zone at lower elevations,
on drier aspects, and adjacent to grasslands where fires his-
torically were more frequent.Therefore,current fire regimes
and stand densities in mixed conifer forests are likely to be
within the historical range of variability,or at least are not likely
to be as far outside this range as those in the dry ponderosa
pine forests discussed above (Veblen 2003). However, addi-
tional research is needed on the causes of variability in mixed-
severity fire regimes and the attendant effects of fire
suppression.
In mixed-severity fire regimes, climate and fuels interact
in a complex manner to control the frequency and severity
of fires. Arno (1980) describes this interaction in mixed-
severity fire regimes: “Under severe burning conditions,
especially with strong winds, fires sometimes crowned and
covered sizeable areas. When conditions moderated, fire
would creep along the ground, with occasional flare-ups.
Often the major fires burned at several intensities in reaction
to changes in stand structure,fuel loadings,topography,and
weather. The result was a mosaic of fire effects on the land-
scape”(p. 463). In mixed-severity regimes, in contrast to the
previous two types of fire regime discussed, both climate
and fuels (surface and ladder fuels) vary considerably and are
important drivers of fire frequency and severity. We look to
the example of the Hayman fire to tease apart these interac-
tions in more detail.
Case study: The 2002 Hayman fire. The Hayman fire burned
a 55,915-ha area southwest of Denver, Colorado, where pre-
vious fire history and forest structure studies (Brown et al.
1999, Kaufmann et al. 2000), mechanical fuel treatments,
and burns (wild and prescribed) had occurred. Making use
of this unplanned experiment, researchers assessed the rela-
tive effect of fuels and climate on fire behavior in the area,
which had a historical mixed-severity fire regime (Finney et
al. 2003).
Short-term drought during the 5 years before the fire 
created important antecedent conditions. In particular,
below-normal precipitation and unseasonably dry air masses
had persisted since 1998, when drier-than-average La Niña
conditions began to develop. These conditions persisted in-
termittently through the spring of 2002.As a consequence,the
Colorado Front Range received low snow during the winters
of 2001 and 2002,with snowpack recorded in May 2002 at less
than 50% of normal levels.By spring 2002,measurements of
large-fuel moisture (moisture in 100-hour and 1000-hour 
fuels) in mid- to low-elevation forests of the southern Rock-
ies were among the driest in the previous few decades,
dipping as low as 3% when typically they exceed 12% 
(Graham 2003).
The size and severity of the Hayman fire can largely be 
explained by the extreme fire activity during two separate 
periods associated with sustained,exceptionally dry,forceful
winds. First, on 9 June, the fire grew from 485 to 24,700 ha
(43% of the total fire size); later,on 18 June,it traveled 5 miles
along its southeastern flank (figure 9). During these two 
periods, mean relative humidity dipped below 8%, maxi-
July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7 •  BioScience 671
Articles
Unburned
Low
Moderate
High
50
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
1000
Average
1500
100
80
60
40
20
0
Proportion of total area burned
Forage production class (kilograms forage per hectare)
Figure 8. Proportion of different forage production classes burned at different severities during the
Rodeo-Chedeski fire in relation to forage production classes for Carlisle and Town Tank allotments on
the Lakeside Ranger District, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. Data are from Wilmes and colleagues
(2002).

mum wind gusts reached 84 miles (135 km) per hour,and the
Haines index was 6, marking very dry, unstable conditions
conducive to high fire spread.Both periods produced exten-
sive torching,crown fire,and spotting (firebrands thrown in
advance of the fire). These high-activity periods terminated
with the passage of fronts followed by upslope winds that sub-
stantially increased ambient relative humidity (Finney et al.
2003).
During the substantial fire-progression days of 9 and 18
June,most fuel treatments had very little impact on the sever-
ity or direction of the fire (Finney et al.2003).On 9 June,for
example, the burned area included more than 2400 ha that
had experienced previous prescribed fires or other fuel-
reduction treatments. These treatments, which included 
previous wildfires (in 1963 and 1998),prescribed fires (in 1990,
1992, 1995, and 1998), and numerous stand modifications
with and without subsequent slash removal (table 2), had 
virtually no effect on the Hayman fire. This is in marked
contrast to the behavior of the Rodeo-Chediski fire, whose
severity was affected by previous fuel-reduction treatments
even under extreme climate and weather conditions. In the
Hayman fire, extreme weather conditions overwhelmed the
effectiveness of most fuel treatments.However,the fire stopped
abruptly at the edge of the area that had been burned by two
fires months to weeks before, in fall 2001 (Schoonover fire)
and May 2002 (Polhemus prescribed burn),where very little
fuel had accumulated during a spring of extreme drought 
(figure 9; Finney et al. 2003). Overall, the direction, severity,
and size of the fire on extreme days were mostly explained by
high wind and low relative humidity (table 3), with little 
effect of past fire or thinning activity.The Hayman review team
concluded that “fuel modifications generally had little influ-
ence on the severity of the Hayman Fire during its most 
significant run on June 9th” (Finney et al. 2003) but 
acknowledged that the small size of these treatments con-
tributed to their lack of effectiveness.On days of moderate fire
growth,however,fuel modifications did influence fire spread
and severity; of these modifications,recent wild or prescribed
fires and thinning with slash removal were most effective. In
an example of the interactions between fuels and climate,on
17 June the Hayman fire split into two runs on either side of
the area burned by the Big Turkey fire in 1998 (figure 9); how-
ever, when the weather became more extreme the following
day, this effect on fire shape and extent was obliterated 
(figure 9; compare 17 June and 18 June perimeters).
672 BioScience  •  July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7
Articles
Schoonover fire, 2002
Polhemus prescribed
burn 2001
Big Turkey fire,
1998
Fire progression
Fire severity
Unburned
Light overstory mortality
Moderate overstory mortality
High overstory mortality
Total overstory mortality
6/9
6/9
6/9
6/10
6/12
6/14
6/17
6/18
Final
Figure 9. Map of the Hayman fire progression during the period 9–18 June 2002. Note the signifi-
cant progress of the fire on 9 June (black line) and 18 June (brown line). Not all days are shown,
because fire perimeters on slow-growth days overlapped previous days. Burn severity classes are
based on the difference-normalized burn ratio from the US Geological Survey’s National Burn
Severity Mapping Project. Gray line represents the Cheesman Reservoir boundary, pink lines 
represent the perimeter of recent burns. Source: Modified from Finney and colleagues (2003).

Summary: Mixed-severity fire regimes in the Rocky Mountain
region. Mixed-severity fire regimes account for an 
estimated 17% to 50% of the forested area in the Rocky
Mountain region that encompasses the three major forest
types discussed in this article (table 1). These forests experi-
ence the most complex type of fire regime and the least un-
derstood. Nonetheless, we have learned several important
lessons about mixed-severity fire regimes in Rocky Mountain
forests.
• The historical fire regime in these forests is complex,
including both low-severity surface fires and infrequent
high-severity crown fires.
• Both fuels and climate have major influences on the 
frequency, severity, and size of fires.
• Fire suppression has had variable effects on fuel 
densities in mixed-severity fire regimes, with the 
greatest impacts on sites that formerly supported 
open woodlands.
• The occurrence of high-severity crown fires is not 
outside the historical range of variability, although 
their size and frequency may be increasing.
• Extreme climate and weather conditions can over-
ride the influence of stand structure and fuels on fire
behavior.
• Fuel-reduction treatments (mechanical thinning and
prescribed burning) may effectively reduce fire severity
under moderate weather conditions, but these treat-
ments may not effectively mitigate fire behavior under
extreme weather conditions and may not restore the
natural complexity of historical stand and landscape
structure.
Implications for fire mitigation and restoration
What does an understanding of the spatial variation in dom-
inant controls on wildfire frequency and severity mean for eco-
logical restoration and for effective fuel treatments to reduce
the threat of large, severe wildfires? The Yellowstone fires in
1988 revealed that variation in fuel conditions, as measured
by stand age and density,had only minimal influence on fire
behavior. Therefore, we expect fuel-reduction treatments in
high-elevation forests to be generally unsuccessful in reduc-
ing fire frequency,severity,and size,given the overriding im-
portance of extreme climate in controlling fire regimes in this
zone.Thinning also will not restore subalpine forests,because
they were dense historically and have not changed significantly
in response to fire suppression. Thus, fuel-reduction efforts
in most Rocky Mountain subalpine forests probably would
not effectively mitigate the fire hazard,and these efforts may
create new ecological problems by moving the forest struc-
ture outside the historic range of variability (Veblen 2003,
Romme et al. 2004).
In contrast, for many low-elevation, dry ponderosa pine
forests, it is both ecologically appropriate and operationally
possible to restore a low-severity fire regime through thinning
and prescribed burning (Covington et al. 1997, Allen et al.
1998, 2002). Fuels rather than climate appear to be the most
significant factor affecting fire spread and severity in these
forests.Fire suppression in dry ponderosa pine forests appears
July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7 •  BioScience 673
Articles
Table 2. Distribution of fire severity classes among fuel-modified areas on moderate slopes
(defined as slopes of less than 30%) that burned in the Hayman fire on 9 June 2002.
Fire severity class (percentage)
Level of prefire fuel modification
Area (ha)
Unburned
Low
Moderate
High 
Unmodified
9128
4
18
8
70
Recent modifications (after 1990)
Wildfires
5
0
0
25
75
Prescribed fires
291
6
20
11
63
Fuel treatment
0
NA
NA
NA
NA
Improvements and treatment
160
0
19
7
74
Improvements, no treatment
253
3
12
9
76
Harvest and treatment
657
5
14
10
71
Harvest, no treatment
236
0
1
33
66
Plantation
55
0
8
5
87
Older modifications (before 1990)
Wildfires
Unknown
NA
NA
NA
NA
Prescribed fires
34
17
50
8
25
Fuel treatment
2
0
86
14
0
Improvements and treatment
0
NA
NA
NA
NA
Improvements, no treatment
592
1
14
8
77
Harvest and treatment
1
0
16
9
75
Harvest, no treatment
384
3
27
2
68
Plantation
127
0
27
10
63
Source: Finney et al. 2003.

to have contributed to an unprecedented buildup of fuels and
to the occurrence of high-severity fires.Indeed,the objectives
of fire mitigation and forest restoration generally converge in
forests of this type.
Perhaps the most difficult forests to assess are the mid-
elevation forests that historically were characterized by mixed-
severity fire regimes.Because mixed-severity fire regimes are
most complex and least well understood,we must exert cau-
tion in developing simple prescriptions for wildfire mitiga-
tion that may not bring predictable results under extreme
climate conditions. Our analysis reveals that fire regimes,
climate, fuel type and abundance, and stand structure vary 
significantly across the Rocky Mountain region. As a conse-
quence,the heterogeneous forests in this region require very
different approaches to restoration and wildfire manage-
ment (Gutsell et al. 2001). Clearly, policymakers need to 
incorporate ecological heterogeneity into their decisions in 
order to implement sound forest management policy.
In addition to the fuel-management operations described
above, we need new research to clarify the geographic varia-
tion in fire regimes across different forest types in this large,
heterogeneous region. There is great geographical variation
in the distribution of the three broad fire regimes defined here.
In Montana, for example, subalpine forests cover roughly
40% of the forested area,while in Arizona the extent of these
forests is significantly smaller and they are more isolated on
scattered mountaintops. At a regionwide scale, it is difficult
to define the precise extent of these different fire regimes
and their spatial location (and especially to distinguish between
the low-severity and mixed-severity fire regimes),as illustrated
by the variation between the estimates based on PNV groups
and those based on current cover type (table 1). There is
also significant variation in fire regimes within each of the
three broad fire-regime classes in response to local topogra-
phy and landscape position, and there are other important 
vegetation types not covered in this brief article (e.g.,piñon-
juniper woodlands; Romme et al. 2003).
A “one size fits all”approach to reducing wildfire hazards
in the Rocky Mountain region is unlikely to be effective 
and may even produce collateral damage in some places.We 
do not advocate delaying action until all of the ecological 
questions have been answered; in many places,there is an ur-
gent need and a solid ecological basis for restoration and
fire-mitigation efforts. In other areas, however, where the
ecological basis for aggressive fuel reduction is inadequate or
lacking,uncritical extrapolation of models from other systems
may cause more harm than good.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank numerous researchers who have
added to our understanding of fire regimes throughout the
Rocky Mountain region. In particular, we thank Tom Swet-
nam and three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments
and perspectives on an earlier draft.This work was funded in
part by a National Science Foundation Postdoctoral Fellow-
ship in Biological informatics,by the US Geological Survey’s
Biological Resources Division, by an award from the Na-
tional Science Foundation (DEB-0314305), and by research
grants from the National Science Foundation and the US
Forest Service that supported fire ecology research in Yel-
lowstone National Park and the southern Rocky Mountains.
References cited 
Agee JK. 1998. The landscape ecology of western forest fire regimes. North-
west Science 72: 24–34.
Allen CD, Betancourt JL, Swetnam TW. 1998. Landscape changes in the
southwestern United States: Techniques,long-term data sets,and trends.
Pages 71–84 in Sisk TD,ed.Perspectives on the Land-Use History of North
America:A Context for Understanding Our Changing Environment.Fort
Collins (CO): US Geological Survey.
Allen CD, Savage M, Falk DA, Suckling KF, Swetnam TW, Schulke T, Stacey
PB, Morgan P, Hoffman M, Klingel JT. 2002. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad perspective. Ecolog-
ical Applications 12: 1418–1433.
Arno SF.1980.Forest fire history in the northern Rockies.Journal of Forestry
78: 460–465.
Arno SF,Gruell GE.1983.Fire history at the forest-grassland ecotone in south-
western Montana. Journal of Range Management 36: 332–336.
Arno SF, Scott JH, Hartwell MG. 1995. Age-Class Structure of Old Growth
Ponderosa Pine/Douglas-Fir Stands and Its Relationship to Fire History.
Ogden (UT): US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Inter-
mountain Research Station. Research Paper INT-481.
674 BioScience  •  July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7
Articles
Table 3. Comparison of the mean and range of weather indices associated with the type (high, moderate, or
low) of fire-growth days during the Hayman fire, 9 June to 18 June 2002.
Mean (range)
Relative humidity
10-minute average 
Maximum wind 
Fire-growth days
n
(percentage)
wind (kph)
gust (kph)
Haines index
Low
4
36.6 (8–68)
11.2 (0–30.4)
22.4 (3.2–57.6)
3.7 (2–6)
Moderate
4
27.6 (5–76)
11.2 (0–28.8)
24 (1.6–54.4)
4.2 (2–6)
High
2
7.8 (5–15)
16 (1.6–48)
38.4 (3.2–134.4)
5.7 (5–6)
kph, kilometers per hour.
Note: The Haines index, ranging from 2 to 6, measures the moisture and stability of the lower atmosphere; low values indicate
moist, stable conditions, and high values indicate dry, unstable conditions conducive to fire. The two high fire-growth days occurred
on 9 and 18 June. High- and moderate fire-growth days are identified on the Hayman fire progression map (figure 9); low fire-growth
days are those omitted from the map because fire perimeters were not significantly different from previous days. Data are summarized
from Finney and colleagues (2003).

Baker WL. 2003. Fires and climate in forested landscape in the U.S. Rocky
Mountains.Pages 120–157 in Veblen TT,Baker WL,Montenegro G,Swet-
nam TW,eds.Fire and Climatic Change in Temperate Ecosystems of the
Western Americas. New York: Springer.
Balling RC, Meyer GA, Wells SG. 1992. Relation of surface climate and
burned area in Yellowstone National Park. Agricultural and Forest 
Meteorology 60: 285–291.
Bessie WC,Johnson EA.1995.The relative importance of fuels and weather
on fire behavior in subalpine forests. Ecology 76: 747–762.
Brown JK, Bevins CD. 1986. Surface Fuel Loadings and Predicted Fire 
Behavior for Vegetation Types in the Northern Rocky Mountains.
Ogden (UT): US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Inter-
mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.Research Note INT-358.
Brown PM, Sieg CH. 1996. Fire history in interior ponderosa pine com-
munities of the Black Hills, South Dakota. International Journal of
Wildland Fire 6: 97–105.
Brown PM, Kaufmann MR, Shepperd WD. 1999. Long-term landscape  
patterns of past fire events in a montane ponderosa pine forest of
central Colorado. Landscape Ecology 14: 513–532.
Caprio AC, Swetnam TW. 1995. Historic fire regimes along an elevational 
gradient on the west slope of the Sierra Nevada, California. Pages
173–179 in Brown JK, Mutch RW, Spoon CW,Wakimoto RH, tech. co-
ords. Proceedings: Symposium on Fire in Wilderness and Park Man-
agement, Missoula, MT, March 30–April 1, 1993. Ogden (UT): US
Department of Agriculture,Forest Service,Intermountain Research Sta-
tion. General Technical Report INT-GTR-320.
Covington WW,Moore MM.1994.Southwestern ponderosa forest structure:
Changes since Euro-American settlement.Journal of Forestry 92: 39–47.
Covington WW, Fule PZ, Moore MM, Hart SC, Kolb TE, Mast JN, Sackkett
SS,Wagner MR. 1997. Restoration of ecosystem health in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Journal of Forestry 95: 23–29.
Dale VH,et al.2001.Climate change and forest disturbances.BioScience 51:
723–734.
Ehle DS, Baker WH. 2003. Disturbance and stand dynamics in ponderosa
pine forests in Rocky Mountain National Park, USA. Ecological Mono-
graphs 73: 543–566.
Finney MA, et al. 2003. Fire behavior, fuel treatments, and fire suppression
on the Hayman fire. Pages 59–96 in Graham RT, ed. Hayman Fire Case
Study Analysis. Ogden (UT): US Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Fule PZ,Covington WW,Smith HB,Springer JD,Heinlein TA,Huisinga KD,
Moore MM.2002.Comparing ecological restoration alternatives: Grand
Canyon, AZ. Forest Ecology and Management 170: 19–41.
Graham RT, tech. ed. 2003. Hayman Fire Case Study: Summary. Ogden
(UT): US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station. Technical Report RMRS-GTR-115.
Grissino-Mayer H,Swetnam TW.2000.Century-scale climate forcing of fire
regimes in the American Southwest. The Holocene 10: 213–220.
Gruell GE. 1983. Fire and Vegetative Trends in the Northern Rockies: In-
terpretations from 1871–1982 Photographs. Ogden (UT): US Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station. General Technical Report GTR-INT-158.
Gutsell SL, Johnson EA, Miyanishi K, Keeley JE, Dickenson M, Bridge SRJ.
2001.Varied ecosystems need different fire protection.Nature 409: 977.
Johnson EA, Miyanishi K, Bridge SRJ. 2001. Wildfire regime in the boreal 
forest and the idea of suppression and fuel buildup. Conservation 
Biology 15: 1554–1557.
Kashian DM.2003.Variability and convergence in forest structure and func-
tion following large fires in Yellowstone.PhD dissertation.University of
Wisconsin, Madison.
Kaufmann MR, Regan CM, Brown PM. 2000. Heterogeneity in ponderosa
pine/Douglas-fir forests:Age and size structure in unlogged and logged
landscapes of central Colorado.Canadian Journal of Forest Research 30:
698–711.
Kipfmueller KF, Baker WL. 2000. A fire history of a subalpine forest in
south-eastern Wyoming, USA. Journal of Biogeography 27: 71–85.
Kipfmueller KF,Swetnam TW.2000.Fire-climate interactions in the Selway-
Bitterroot Wilderness Area. Pages 270–275 in Cole DN, McCool SF,
Borrie WT, O’Laughlin J, eds. Wilderness Science in a Time of Change
Conference: Missoula, Montana, May 23–27, 1999, vol. 5: Wilderness
Ecosystems, Threats and Management. Missoula (MT): US Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Kitzberger T, Swetnam TW,Veblen TT. 2001. Inter-hemispheric synchrony
of forest fires and El Niño–Southern Oscillation. Global Ecology and 
Biogeography 10: 315–326.
Mast JN,Veblen TT, Linhart YB. 1998. Disturbance and climatic influences
on age structure of ponderosa pine at the pine/grassland ecotone,
Colorado Front Range. Journal of Biogeography 25: 743–755.
Mast JN, Fule PZ, Moore MM, Covington WW,Waltz AEM. 1999. Restora-
tion of presettlement age structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest.
Ecological Applications 9: 228–239.
McKenzie D, Peterson DL, Agee JK. 2000. Fire frequency in the interior 
Columbia River Basin: Building regional models from fire history data.
Ecological Applications 10: 1497–1516.
Minshall GW,Brock JT,Varley JD.1989.Wildfires and Yellowstone’s stream
ecosystems. BioScience 39: 707–715.
Moore MM, Covington WW, Fule PZ. 1999. Reference conditions and eco-
logical restoration:A southwestern ponderosa pine perspective.Ecological
Applications 9: 1266–1277.
Nash CH, Johnson EA. 1996. Synoptic climatology of lightning-caused 
forest fires in subalpine and boreal forests. Canadian Journal of Forest
Reseach 26: 1859–1874.
Peet RK.2000.Forests of the Rocky Mountains.Pages 63–101 in Billings WD,
ed.North American Terrestrial Vegetation.Cambridge (United Kingdom):
Cambridge University Press.
Renkin RA, Despain DG. 1992. Fuel moisture, forest type, and lightning-
caused fire in Yellowstone National Park. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research 22: 37–45.
Rollins MG,Morgan P,Swetnam T.2002.Landscape-scale controls over 20th
century fire occurrence in two large Rocky Mountain (USA) wilderness
areas. Landscape Ecology 17: 539–557.
Romme WH. 1982. Fire and landscape diversity in subalpine forests of
Yellowstone National Park. Ecological Monographs 52: 199–221.
Romme WH, Despain DG. 1989. Historical perspective on the Yellowstone
fires of 1988. BioScience 39: 695–699.
Romme WH, Floyd-Hanna ML, Hanna DD. 2003. Ancient piñon-juniper
forests of Mesa Verde and the West:A cautionary note for forest restora-
tion programs. Pages 335–350 in Fire, Fuel Treatments, and Ecological
Restoration: Conference Proceedings,16–18 April 2002,Fort Collins,CO.
Fort Collins (CO): US Department of Agriculture,Forest Service,Rocky
Mountain Research Station. Proceedings RMRS-P-29.
Romme WH,Turner MG,Tinker DB,Knight DH.2004.Emulating natural
forest disturbances in the wildland-urban interface of the Greater 
Yellowstone Ecosystem of the United States. In Perera AH, Buse LJ,
Weber MG, eds. Emulating Natural Forest Landscape Disturbances:
Concepts and Applications. New York: Columbia University Press.
Schmidt KM, Menakis JP, Hardy CC, Hann WJ, Bunnell DL. 2002. Devel-
opment of Coarse-Scale Spatial Data for Wildland Fire and Fuel Man-
agement. Fort Collins (CO): US Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. General Technical Report
RMRS-GTR-87.
Schoennagel T, Turner MG, Romme WH. 2003. The influence of fire inter-
val and serotiny on postfire lodgepole pine density in Yellowstone 
National Park. Ecology 84: 2967–2978.
Shinneman DJ, Baker WL. 1997. Nonequilibrium dynamics between cata-
strophic disturbances and old-growth forests in ponderosa pine landscapes
of the Black Hills. Conservation Biology 11: 1276–1288.
Swetnam TW,Baisan CH.1996.Historical fire regime patterns in the south-
western United States since AD 1700.Pages 11–32 in Allen CD,tech.ed.
Fire Effects in Southwestern Forests: Proceedings of the Second La Mesa
Fire Symposium, Los Alamos, New Mexico, March 29–31, 1994. Fort
Collins (CO): US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.General Technical Re-
port RM-GTR-286.
July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7 •  BioScience 675
Articles

Turner MG, Hargrove WH, Gardner RH, Romme WH. 1994. Effects of fire
on landscape heterogeneity in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming.
Journal of Vegetation Science 5: 731–742.
[USDA] US Department of Agriculture.2002.A Collaborative Approach for
Reducing Wildland Fire Risks to Communities and the Environment:
10-Year Comprehensive Strategy. (18 June 2004; www.fireplan.gov/
reports/7-19-en.pdf)
Veblen TT.2000.Disturbance patterns in southern Rocky Mountain forests.
Pages 31–54 in Knight RL, Smith FW, Buskirk SW, Romme WH, Baker
WL, eds. Forest Fragmentation in the Southern Rocky Mountains.
Boulder: University Press of Colorado.
———. 2003. Historic range of variability of mountain forest ecosystems:
Concepts and applications. Forestry Chronicle 79: 223–226.
Veblen TT, Lorenz DC. 1986. Anthropogenic disturbance and recovery 
patterns in montane forests,Colorado Front Range.Physical Geography
7: 1–24.
———.1991.The Colorado Front Range:A Century of Ecological Change.
Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Veblen TT,Kitzberger T,Donnegan J.2000.Climatic and human influences
on fire regimes in ponderosa pine forests in the Colorado Front Range.
Ecological Applications 10: 1178–1195.
Wakimoto RH. 1989. National fire management policy: A look at the need
for change. Western Wildlands 15: 35–39.
White House.2002.Healthy forests:An Initiative for Wildfire Prevention and
Stronger Communities. (10 June 2004; www.whitehouse.gov/infocus/
healthyforests/Healthy_Forests_v2.pdf)
Wilmes L, Martinez D, Wadleigh L, Denton C, Geisler D. 2002. Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests Rodeo-Chediski Fire Effects Summary 
Report. Springerville (AZ): Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests.
676 BioScience  •  July 2004 / Vol. 54 No. 7
Articles
