 
 
 
June 12, 2002  
 
 
 
          Contact:  Bonnie Holmes-Stevens 
For Immediate Release 
 
 
 
              928/527-3344 
 
Anniversary of Mount Elden Fire 
Serves as Reminder of Catastrophic Fire’s Long-term Impacts 
 
(Flagstaff, Ariz.)  As the 25th anniversary of Mount Elden’s Radio Fire approaches, 
researchers, land managers and firefighters are reminding those who live in forest 
communities how catastrophic fire can change the landscape and threaten homes, and 
how the need for forest restoration is urgent. 
 
Researchers say the ponderosa pine forest that once covered Mount Elden won’t be 
growing back any time soon because the shallow, thin soils that existed on top of the 
bedrock took thousands of years to develop and will take that long to come back. 
 
“After a fire of that intensity and the erosion that follows, you’re almost going back to a 
primary succession state, like you’d have after a volcanic eruption or a landslide, where 
you’ve lost the biological legacy,” says Rocky Mountain Research Station Soil Scientist 
Steve Overby.     
 
A teenager’s campfire on June 17, 1977 was the source of the blaze that scorched 4,594 
acres.  The event, that forever changed Flagstaff’s backdrop, occurred on a hot, breezy 
summer day following one of the driest winters on record. 
 
This June, dry forest conditions are even more severe than they were in 1977 and large 
fires are raging across the parched Southwest.    
 
“Never has a drought coincided with the fuel buildup we have in the forests today,” says 
Ecological Restoration Institute Director Wally Covington, Ph.D.  “The fires we’re seeing 
are burning in areas of overly dense forest vegetation due to 120 years of fire exclusion.  
The damage could have been prevented if ecological restoration treatments had been 
implemented.  This is a fire season that’s stacking up to be the worst ever.” 
        
Currently, restoration projects are underway in the Southwest as lawmakers, 
researchers, land management agencies and citizens work toward tackling the daunting 
task of restoring forest ecosystems and reducing the massive fuel load. 
 
For more information about restoration projects and a look back at the Radio Fire, a new 
publication, Living with Fire:  25 Years after the Mount Elden Burn, is available at the 
ERI at Northern Arizona University, at Coconino National Forest offices and at Flagstaff 
Fire Stations. 
### 
