 
1 
 
 
 
 
CENTRE FOR EVIDENCE-BASED CONSERVATION 
 
 
 
 
 
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW No. 42 
 
 
WORKING TITLE: 
 
DO THINNING AND/OR BURNING TREATMENTS ON PONDEROSA PINE 
AND RELATED FORESTS IN WESTERN USA PRODUCE RESTORATION 
OF NATURAL FIRE BEHAVIOUR? 
 
 
 
 
 
REVIEW PROTOCOL 
 
 
 
 
Lead Reviewer: 
Dr. Peter Fulé 
 
 
 
Postal Address: 
Northern Arizona University 
 
P.O. Box 15018 
 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
 
E-mail Address: 
Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
Telephone: 
00+1+928-523-6906 
Fax: 
00+1+928-523-0296 
 
 

 
2 
COVER SHEET 
 
Title 
Working Title: Do thinning and/or burning treatments on 
ponderosa pine and related forests in western USA 
produce restoration of natural fire behaviour? 
Systematic review  
No.42 
Reviewer(s) 
Peter Fulé, John Paul Roccaforte, Joe Crouse  
+ others to be identified 
Date draft protocol 
published on website 
6th March 2008 
Date final protocol 
published on website 
28th April 2008 
Date of most recent 
amendment 
25th April 2008 
Date of most recent 
SUBSTANTIVE 
amendment 
25th April 2008 
Details of most recent 
changes 
Incorporated peer review comments regarding regional 
variability and mixed-species forests 
Contact address 
Northern Arizona University 
P.O. Box 15018 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
 
Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
Sources of support 
- 
Conflicts of interest 
- 
 

 
3 
1. 
BACKGROUND 
 
Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and related species (P. jeffreyi, P. durangensis) range over 
approximately 10,000,000 ha of western North America, forming forests of great ecological 
and social value.  These pines are adapted to a disturbance regime of frequent surface fires 
(Keeley and Zedler 1998), consistent with the dry, fire-prone habitats they have occupied 
over evolutionary time scales.  Frequent fires maintained relatively open uneven-aged forests 
with abundant, diverse understories over most of the landscape (Cooper 1960, Minnich et al. 
1995, Brown and Cook 2006), although some areas may also have experienced infrequent 
severe fires (Sherriff and Veblen 2007, Pierce and Meyer 2008).  From the mid-nineteenth 
century (California, Oregon, South Dakota) till the mid-twentieth century (northern Mexico), 
forest structure, composition, and disturbance patterns across the vast range of these species 
were affected by impacts associated with industrialized society: grazing of large herds of 
introduced livestock, extensive logging and conversion to even-aged forests, and extended 
fire exclusion.  As a consequence, forest structure changed to dense stands of young trees, 
forest floor fuels accumulated, and fire-sensitive conifers such as Abies and Pseudotsuga 
expanded in pine/mixed-conifer ecotones.  High-severity wildfires were first reported in 
ponderosa pine forests as early as 60-70 years ago (Weaver 1943, Cooper 1960).  But in 
recent years, the presence of heavy contiguous canopy and surface fuels (Fiedler et al. 2002) 
has facilitated the exponential growth in the size of severe fires, especially during the 
droughts that have become increasingly frequent with warming global temperatures 
(Westerling et al. 2006).  Insect herbivory on stressed trees and direct mortality from drought 
interact with fire to magnify disturbance severity (Breshears et al. 2005).  Severe fires in 
these formerly fire-adapted forests have led to widespread topsoil loss (Moody and Martin 
2001), tree mortality and conversion to non-forest vegetation (Savage and Mast 2005), and 
invasion by introduced weedy species (Keeley 2006).  These issues are not confined to North 
America; strikingly similar patterns of larger fires resulting from higher fuel loads and 
warmer climate have been observed across pine forests of the Mediterranean Basin in 
southern Europe and northern Africa (Pausas 2004, Leone and Lovreglio 2004). 
 
Early in the twentieth century, Aldo Leopold (1924, 1937) called attention to the problems 
stemming from the changing patterns of ecosystem structure and disturbance.  The concept of 
ecological restoration was advanced by Leopold in 1949 in A Sand County Almanac.  Early 
experiments in ecological restoration through reinstatement of surface fire by means of 
controlled burns (Weaver 1951, Lindenmuth 1960, Sweeney and Biswell 1961) were poorly 
received by forest managers, who preferred to rely on intensive silvicultural cuttings to 
control density.  By the 1960s and 70s, fire policies were adjusted to admit the ecological role 
of fire and permit more burning (Stephens and Ruth 2005).  Relatively liberal fire-use 
policies are credited with successful restoration of fire-resilient forests in some places, 
especially remote and unharvested forests such as those of the Gila Wilderness in New 
Mexico (Rollins et al. 2001).  However, many forests have become altered to that the point 
where surface fires are insufficient to reverse deleterious changes (Sackett et al. 1996, Miller 
and Urban 2000).  Impelled by the costly and damaging effects of severe fires, a number of 
experimental and observational research studies have focused on combined forest treatments 
of tree thinning, prescribed burning, and other interventions that may restore resiliency to 
severe burning as well as restoring structural, compositional, and functional attributes that 
were characteristic of these ecosystems prior to recent anthropogenic disruption (Covington 
et al. 1997, Stephenson 1999, Allen et al. 2002).  The literature on this topic has grown 
rapidly but has not been synthesized in a comprehensive manner.   
 

 
4 
Our focus in this systematic review is to ask if thinning and/or burning treatments on 
ponderosa pine and related forests in western USA produce restoration of natural fire 
behaviour.  The Society for Ecological Restoration International (SER) defines restoration as 
“the process of assisting the recovery of an ecosystem that has been degraded, damaged, or 
destroyed” (http://www.ser.org/content/ecological_restoration_primer.asp).  Nested beneath 
this broad definition are a set of attributes of restored ecosystems.  Key features include 
attention to the range of variability in reference ecosystems, either in the form of intact, 
preserved sites or as reconstructed from paleoecological and historical evidence (Meine et al. 
2005), recovery of natural resiliency to characteristic disturbances, and evidence of 
sustainability—though climate change is affecting the concept of “sustainability” worldwide 
(Harris et al. 2006).  There has been considerable debate among ecologists about the relative 
merits of the term “natural” vs. “historical” in describing reference ecosystems, with some 
authors objecting to the implication in “natural” of statis, normative value, and linear 
successional trajectories (a detailed discussion is available in Stephenson 1999). Resolution 
of this question is not within the scope of this review but here we use “natural,” first because 
reference ecosystems are not only found in the historical past but also in modern times, such 
as remote or protected areas, and second because the implicit link to specific time periods in 
the term “historical” tends to understate the evolutionary lineage of ecological attributes.  For 
example, the differing fire-related adaptations of surface-fire adapted Pinus ponderosa (thick 
bark, large buds, resilience to canopy scorch) vs. crown-fire adapted Pinus contorta 
(serotinous cones, thin bark) did not separate from common ancestors in the past few 
centuries but rather over millions of years of selection under different fuel, weather, and 
ignition environments (Axelrod 1986, Keeley and Zedler 1998), supporting the assertion that 
the respective fire regimes associated with these species can be described as natural.  In any 
event, studies reviewed in this exercise will include restoration goals stated with either or 
both of these terms. 
 
Many practical fuel treatments have been developed outside the specific framework of 
“ecological restoration,” but still with strong consideration of reference conditions.  A key 
example is the USA-wide research program called “Fire/Fire Surrogates” (FFS) (Youngblood 
et al. 2005).  A “fire surrogate” is a treatment designed to reduce fuels without using fire, 
because of the costs, risks, and externalities of fire use.  Examples include thinning-only or 
thinning plus fuel mastication.  The other FFS treatments usually include fire-only and fire + 
thinning.  Research from these experimental sites includes assessment of effects on fire 
behaviour (e.g., Stephens and Moghaddas 2005) as well as related studies on other ecological 
implications of the treatments (Metlen et al. 2004).  Treatments to reduce fuels or alter fire 
behaviour have also been designed with no attention or resemblance to reference ecosystems.  
For example, clearcutting of broad firebreaks was a common, albeit often ineffective and 
ecologically damaging, forestry practice to interrupt fuel continuity (Agee et al. 2000).  These 
sorts of treatments are now uncommon in the western USA and will not be considered in this 
review. 
 
Testing treatment effectiveness in restoring natural fire behaviour is not entirely amenable to 
direct experimentation.  Numerous studies have shown that treated sites can be burned safely 
and effectively with prescribed fire (e.g., Sackett et al. 1996, Stephens and Moghaddas 2005), 
but it is not possible to deliberately ignite severe experimental fires in treated ponderosa pine 
forests.  Two alternative methods of research, both included in this review, are simulation 
modelling of fire behaviour (e.g., Scott 1998, Stephens 1998, Fiedler et al. 2002) and 
retrospective observational studies evaluating the behaviour of severe wildfires that burned 

 
5 
through treated and paired untreated forests (e.g., Pollett and Omi 2002, Cram and Baker 
2003, Martinson and Omi 2003, Finney et al. 2005).   
 
Literature reviews have not kept pace with the growing body of literature in the field and 
there are no systematic reviews on the topic.  Existing reviews have examined specific 
aspects of the effectiveness of forest treatments.  For example, Fernandes and Botelho (2003) 
sought to review the effectiveness of prescribed burning treatments.  Graham et al. (2004) 
integrated silvicultural and fire behaviour concepts to develop treatment recommendations.  
Agee and Skinner (2005) drew upon the literature to standardize concepts and terminology 
associated with fuel reduction.  The most recent and thorough review was published by 
Hunter et al. (2007), which took a broad approach to synthesis of the literature in support of 
developing guidelines for forest treatments.  Hunter et al. (2007) included the topics of 
treatment effects on fire behaviour and the relationship between ecological restoration and 
other fuel treatments, but these themes comprised a small fraction of the report (2 of 75 
pages).  The systematic review proposed here will be a useful synthesis of the literature 
because of the comprehensive systematic methodology, the direct focus on fire behaviour, the 
limitation to ponderosa pine and related species, and the explicit consideration of ecological 
restoration principles. 
 
2. 
OBJECTIVE OF THE REVIEW 
2.1 
Primary question 
Do thinning and/or burning treatments on ponderosa pine and related forests in 
western USA produce restoration of natural fire behaviour? 
 
2.2 
Secondary question (if applicable) 
Potential secondary questions could be: What is the functional relationship between 
the variables and fire behaviour? How might relationships differ among pure 
ponderosa pine forests versus related forests (Jeffrey pine, dry mixed conifer, ecotonal 
ponderosa forests)?  How might regional variability (Southwest, central Rockies, 
Black Hills, northern Rockies, Sierra Nevada, northern Mexico) affect restoration 
methods and outcomes? 
 
3. 
METHODS 
3.1 
Search strategy 
• Internet search engines and databases supported by Cline Library, 
Northern Arizona University: Ingenta, Forest Science Database (Ovid), 
JSTOR, Google Scholar. 
• U.S. government databases (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service publications and proceedings) 
• Libraries at universities with Forestry programs (M.S. and Ph.D. 
theses). 
Search terms to include: western forests AND fuels treatments, fuels treatments AND 
ponderosa pine, fuels treatments AND Jeffrey pine, fuels treatments AND mixed 
conifer, thinning AND ponderosa pine, thinning AND Jeffrey pine, thinning AND 
mixed conifer, burning AND ponderosa pine, burning AND Jeffrey pine, burning 
AND mixed conifer, fire behaviour AND ponderosa pine, fire behaviour AND Jeffrey 
pine, fire behaviour AND mixed conifer.  Searches will be conducted on both the 
common names (“ponderosa pine”) and scientific names (“Pinus ponderosa”) of the 
species. 
 

 
6 
3.2 
Study inclusion criteria  
• Relevant subject(s): coniferous forests dominated by ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa), Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi), or dry mixed conifer 
forests dominated by one of these pine species but also containing firs 
(Abies spp.), Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menzieseii), other pine species 
(e.g., Pinus lambertiana, Pinus coulteri) and aspen (Populus tremuloides). 
• Timeframe: studies from 1970-present will be included, but references 
that appear in the literature to relevant earlier research will be tracked 
down. 
• Types of intervention: 
• Thin only 
• Burn only (prescribed fire and/or wildland fire use) 
• Thin and burn 
• Season of burning 
• Types of comparator: 
• Replicated randomized experiments 
• Before-after control-impact (BACI) studies 
• Observational studies 
• Expert opinion 
• Types of outcome: Forest stand and fire behaviour modelling variables 
• Crowning index based on fire behaviour models 
• Torching index based on fire behaviour models 
• Canopy bulk density 
• Canopy base height 
• Tree density 
• Basal area 
• Species composition 
• Diameter distribution 
• Forest biomass 
• Actual fire behaviour  
• Types of study:  
Studies investigating actual or predicted crown fire response to actual or 
simulated thinning and/or burning treatments. 
• Potential reasons for heterogeneity: 
There is heterogeneity in the pine ecosystems distributed across a broad region 
of North America, both in terms of historic conditions prior to impacts from 
industrialized society and present conditions.  This heterogeneity is associated 
with the latitudinal and elevational gradients where these forests occur and 
ecotones with adjacent ecosystems.  There is also heterogeneity in the types of 
thinning and burning treatments and the characteristics of studies 
(experimental, observational, etc.). 
3.3 
Study quality assessment 
 
Studies will be evaluated based on the types of methodology comparator, with 
the greatest weight given to replicated randomized experiments and less to 
observational and opinion studies.   
3.4 
Data extraction strategy 
 
All studies included at full text will be read by two members of the review 
panel.  We will assemble review information in a master spreadsheet, 
recording qualitative and quantitative aspects of the studies.   

 
7 
 
3.5 
Data synthesis 
 
Data synthesis will be done by the review panel after reading the studies.  We 
will assemble basic data about the studies reviewed (e.g., number of studies 
identified in the search, number and percent deemed relevant for review, 
distribution of geographic locations and information type).  We will focus on 
evidence from literature regarding the specific outcome variables.  These will 
probably be grouped into a few categories: forest structure (density, diameter 
distribution, biomass, and basal area), species composition, canopy fuels 
(canopy bulk density and base height), predicted fire behaviour (crowning and 
torching indices), and actual fire behaviour.  We will draw inferences about 
the similar and different effects of treatments and highlight areas where further 
research is needed. 
 
4.  
POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND SOURCES OF SUPPORT 
 
 
The review is led by researchers from Northern Arizona University who have 
contributed to the literature on this topic.  We will address the possibility of conflict 
of interest by broadening the review panel to include scientists from other institutions 
and regions.  Another independent check is the review process through CEBC and 
additional reviews solicited from scientists who are not on the review panel and not 
affiliated with Northern Arizona University. 
 
 
Support for this review, consisting of partial salary funding and computer/office space 
is provided by the U.S. Forest Service and by Northern Arizona University. 
 
5. 
REFERENCES 
 
Agee, J.K., B. Bahro, M.A. Finney, P. Omi, D.B. Sapsis, C.N. Skinner, J.W. van 
Wagtendonk, C.P. Weatherspoon.  2000. The use of shaded fuelbreaks in landscape 
fire management.  Forest Ecology and Management 127:55-66. 
Agee, J.K., and C.N. Skinner.  2005.  Basic principles of forest fuel reduction treatments.  
Forest Ecology and Management 211:83-96. 
Allen, C.D., D.A. Falk, M. Hoffman, J. Klingel, P. Morgan, M. Savage, T. Schulke, P. 
Stacey, K. Suckling, and T.W. Swetnam.  2002. Ecological restoration of 
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad framework. Ecological 
Applications 12:1418-1433. 
Axelrod, D.I. 1986.  Cenozoic history of some western American pines.  Ann. Missouri Bot. 
Gard. 73:565-641. 
Breshears, D.D., N.S. Cobb, P.M. Rich, K.P. Price, C.D. Allen, R.G. Balice, W.H. Romme, 
J.H. Kastens, M.L. Floyd, J. Belnap, J.J. Anderson,  O.B. Myers, and C.W. Meyerd.  
2005.  Regional vegetation die-off in response to global-change-type drought.  
PNAS 102:15144-15148.  
Brown, P.M., and  B. Cook.  2006. Early settlement forest structure in the Black Hills 
ponderosa pine forests. For. Ecol. Manag. 223: 284-290. 
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwestern pine forests 
since white settlement. Ecology 42:493-499. 
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. Sackett, and 
M.R. Wagner. 1997.  Restoration of ecosystem health in southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests.  Journal of Forestry 95: 23-29. 

 
8 
 
Cram D.S., and T.T. Baker.  2003.  ‘Annual report: Inventory and classification of wildland 
fire effects in silviculturally treated vs. untreated forest stands of New Mexico and 
Arizona.’  College of Agriculture and Home Economics, New Mexico State 
University. (Las Cruces, NM). 
Fernandes, P.M., and H.S. Botelho.  2003.  A review of prescribed burning effectiveness in 
fire hazard reduction.  International Journal of Wildland Fire 12:117 – 128. 
Fiedler, C. E., C. E. Keegan, III, S. H. Robertson, T. A. Morgan, C. W. Woodall, and J. T. 
Chmelik.  2002.  A strategic assessment of fire hazard in New Mexico.  Final report 
to the Joint Fire Science Program, Boise, Idaho. 
Finney, M.A., C.W. McHugh, and I.C.Grenfell.  2005 Stand- and landscape-level effects of 
prescribed burning on two Arizona wildfires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 
35:1714-1722. 
Graham, R.T., S. McCaffrey, and T.B. Jain.  2004.  Science basis for changing forest 
structure to modify wildfire behaviour and severity.  Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-
120. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. 43 p. 
Harris, J.A., R. J. Hobbs, E. Higgs, and J. Aronson.  2006. Ecological restoration and global 
climate change.  Restoration Ecology 14:170–176  
Hunter, M.E., W.D. Shepperd, J.E. Lentile, J.E. Lundquist, M.G. Andreu, J.L. Butler, and 
F.W. Smith.  2007. A comprehensive guide to fuels treatment practices for 
ponderosa pine in the Black Hills, Colorado Front Range, and Southwest. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-198. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 93 p. 
Keeley, J.E.  2006.  Fire management impacts on invasive plants in the western United States.  
Conservation Biology 20: 375-384. 
Keeley, J.E., and P.H. Zedler.  1998.  Evolution of life histories in Pinus.  Pages 219-250 in: 
Ecology and biogeography of Pinus. Ed. D.M. Richardson. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Leone, V., and R. Lovreglio. 2004.  Conservation of Mediterranean pine woodlands: 
scenarios and legislative tools.  Plant Ecology 171:221-235. 
Leopold, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and fire in southern Arizona. Journal of Forestry 22: 
1-10.  
Leopold, A. 1937.  Conservationist in Mexico.  American Forests 37: 118-120, 146. 
Lindenmuth, A.W.  1960. A survey of the effects of intentional burning on fuels and timber 
stands of ponderosa pine in Arizona. Sta. Pap. No. 54. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station. 22 p.Martinson EJ, Omi PN (2003) ‘Performance of fuel 
treatments subjected to wildfires.’ USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station Proceedings RMRS-P-29. (Fort Collins, CO) 
Meine, C., D. Egan, and E.A. Howell (eds.).  2005.  The Historical Ecology Handbook: A 
Restorationist's Guide to Reference Ecosystems.  Island Press, Covelo, CA. 
Metlen, K. L., C.E. Fiedler, and A. Youngblood.  2004.  Understory response to fuel 
reduction treatments in the Blue Mountains of Northeastern Oregon.  Northwest 
Science 78: 175-185. 
Miller, C., and D. L. Urban.  2000.  Modeling the effects of fire management alternatives on 
Sierra Nevada mixed-conifer forests.  Ecological Applications 10:85-94. 
Minnich, R.A., M.G. Barbour, J.H. Burk, and R.F. Fernau.  1995. Sixty years of change in 
Californian conifer forests of the San Bernadino Mountains. Conservation Biology 
9:902-914. 

 
9 
Moody, J.A., and D.A. Martin.  2001. Initial hydrologic and geomorphic response following 
a wildfire in the Colorado Front Range: Earth Surface Processes and Landforms. 26: 
1049-1070. 
Pausas, J.G.  2004.  Changes in fire and climate in the eastern Iberian Peninsula 
(Mediterranean Basin).  Climatic Change 63:337-350. 
Pierce J., and G. Meyer.  2008. Long-term fire history from alluvial fan sediments: the role of 
drought and climate variability, and implications for management of Rocky 
Mountain forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire 17:84–95. 
Pollet J., and P.N. Omi.  2002. Effect of thinning and prescribed burning on crown fire 
severity in ponderosa pine forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire 11:1-10. 
Rollins, M.G., T.W. Swetnam, and P. Morgan.  2001.  Evaluating a century of fire patterns in 
two Rocky Mountain wilderness areas using digital fire atlases. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research 31:2107-2123. 
Sackett, S.S., S.M. Haase, and M.G. Harrington.  1996.  Lessons learned from fire use for 
restoring southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems.  Pages 53-60 in W. W. 
Covington and P. K. Wagner, technical coordinators, USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report RM-GTR-278, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 
Savage, M., and J.N. Mast.  2005. How resilient are southwestern ponderosa pine forests after 
crown fires? Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35:967-977. 
Sherriff, R.L., and T.T. Veblen.  2007. A spatially-explicit reconstruction of historical fire 
occurrence in the ponderosa pine zone of the Colorado Front Range. Ecosystems 
10:311-323. 
Stephens, S.L.  1998. Evaluation of the effects of silvicultural and fuels treatment on potential 
fire behavior in Sierra Nevada mixed-conifer forests. Forest Ecology and 
Management 105:21-35. 
Stephens, S.L., and J.J. Modhaddas.  2005.  Experimental fuel treatment impacts on forest 
structure, potential fire behavior, and predicted tree mortality in a California mixed 
conifer forest.  Forest Ecology and Management 215:21-36. 
Stephens, S.L., and L.W. Ruth.  2005.  Federal forest-fire policy in the United States.  
Ecological Applications 15:532-542. 
Stephenson, N. L.  1999.  Reference conditions for giant sequoia forest restoration: structure, 
process, and precision.  Ecological Applications 9:1253-1265. 
Sweeney, J.R., and H.H. Biswell.  1961.  Quantitative studies of the removal of litter and duff 
by fire under controlled conditions.  Ecology 42:572-575. 
Weaver, H.  1943.  Fire as an ecological and silvicultural factor in the ponderosa pine region 
of the Pacific Slope.  Journal of Forestry 41:7-15. 
Weaver, H. (1951) Fire as an ecological factor in the southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Journal of Forestry, 49, 93-98. 
Westerling, A.L., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam.  2006. Warming and earlier 
spring increase western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313:940-943. 
Youngblood, A., K. L. Metlen, E.E. Knapp, K.W. Outcalt, S.L. Stephens, T.A. Waldrop, and 
D. Yaussy.  2005. Implementation of the Fire and Fire Surrogate study—a national 
research effort to evaluate the consequences of fuel reduction treatments.  Balancing 
Ecosystem Values Proceedings, Fire and Fire Surrogates.  USDA Forest Service. 
 
