 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration for Environmental Evidence 
 
 
 
 
Systematic Review CEE 10-012 
 
 
DO NON-NATIVE PLANTS INVADE BURNED PONDEROSA 
PINE FORESTS MORE INTENSELY AFTER PRESCRIBED OR 
WILD FIRES? 
 
 
Protocol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead Reviewer: 
Judith D. Springer 
 
 
Postal Address: 
Northern Arizona University 
 
Box 15017 
 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
 
 
E-mail Address: 
Judith.Springer@nau.edu 
Telephone: 
00+1+928-523-7751 
Fax: 
00+1+928-523-0296 
 
 

 
 
2 
Cover Sheet 
 
Title 
Do non-native plants invade burned ponderosa pine 
forests more intensely after prescribed or wild fires? 
Systematic review  
No.CEE10-012 
Reviewer(s) 
Judy Springer, Christopher M. McGlone, Justy Leppert  
Date draft protocol 
published on website 
21 September 2010 
Date final protocol 
published on website 
7 January 2010 
Date of most recent 
amendment 
-- 
Date of most recent 
SUBSTANTIVE 
amendment 
-- 
Details of most recent 
changes 
-- 
Contact address 
Northern Arizona University 
Box 15017 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
 
Judith.Springer@nau.edu 
Sources of support 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Conflicts of interest 
None 
 

 
 
3 
1. 
Background 
 
 
Fire plays an integral role in ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa)-dominated 
forests by maintaining low tree densities, a diverse understory, sparse litter 
accumulation, and regulating many ecosystem processes (Weaver, 1951; Cooper, 
1960; Hart et al., 2005; Laughlin and Fulé, 2008). Native ponderosa pine forests, 
which range from southern British Columbia south to northern Mexico, historically 
supported frequent, low-intensity fires that burned unevenly across the landscape. 
Starting in the late 1800s, land managers actively disrupted the historical fire regime 
in forests dominated by ponderosa pine. Ponderosa pine forests were heavily grazed 
by livestock, reducing the fine fuels generated by perennial grasses that carried 
surface fires through the system. The removal of perennial grasses by grazing also 
created germination sites for woody species, especially ponderosa pine seedlings, 
resulting in a denser canopy. The reduction in fine fuels and increases in woody 
species shifted the fire regime away from frequent surface fires to less-frequent crown 
fires. In the early twentieth century, active fire suppression reduced the acreage 
burned with each new ignition (Cooper, 1960; Covington and Moore, 1994). As a 
result, these forests have become densely stocked with ponderosa pine trees and have 
a sparse understory community. The increased density of trees, coupled with changes 
in climate, has led to an increase in the number of hectares burned annually by 
wildfire (Swetnam, 1990; Covington et al., 1997; Westerling et al., 2006). In addition, 
more land is treated each year for fuels management with prescribed fire (Interagency 
Fire Center; www.NIFC.gov), often in combination with mechanical tree thinning 
prior to burning. Disturbances created by these treatments may facilitate the spread of 
undesirable non-native plant species (hereafter non-natives) into the burned 
landscapes (D'Antonio and Vitousek, 1992; Keeley, 2006). Regardless of whether the 
fire is prescribed or wild, non-natives have been documented in the post-fire 
understory community of ponderosa pine forests. 
 
Many non-natives are well adapted to fire (D'Antonio and Vitousek, 1992; 
Brooks et al., 2004) and are generally considered an undesirable component of the 
post-fire plant community (Allen et al., 2002; D'Antonio and Meyerson, 2002). They 
are often early successional species that can capitalize on open niches created by fire 
faster than their native counterparts (Rejmanek, 1995). The impact of non-natives in 
the post-fire community is highly variable. Some species, such as prickly lettuce 
(Lactuca serriola) and common dandelion (Taraxacum officinale), tend to have a 
subordinate role in the disturbed ecosystem. More aggressive invaders, such as 
cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum), can dominate an ecosystem, changing herbaceous 
diversity, fire cycles, and belowground processes (Whisenant, 1990; Knapp, 1996; 
Evans et al., 2001; Belnap et al., 2005). While the fire return interval in a heavily-
invaded ponderosa pine forest is often not altered, the fires tend to burn more evenly 
across the landscape, leaving few unburned areas. 
 
Increasingly, thinning and burning treatments are implemented with a focus on 
ecological restoration in addition to fuels reduction. While ecological restoration 
treatments are intended to reinvigorate all aspects of forest health, including the native 
understory community, there is a growing concern among land managers, scientists, 
and other stakeholders about the risk of encroachment by non-natives into these 
systems (Moore et al., 1999; Allen et al., 2002).  Implementation of ecological 
restoration usually involves an elevated level of disturbance.  Prescribed fire and 
mechanical removal of excess trees are common restoration practices which can 
perturb the soil and disturb vegetation (D'Antonio and Meyerson, 2002).  The 

 
 
4 
disturbances generated by thinning and burning treatments can create openings for the 
invasion of highly competitive non-native species (Hobbs and Huenneke, 1992). 
Research has shown that areas burned in wildfires can be more susceptible to 
nonnative invasion than those burned in prescribed fires (Crawford et al., 2001; 
Griffis et al., 2001, Keeley et al., 2003).  Other evidence suggests that past and 
present land management practices, overall level of disturbance on the site, and 
proximity to invasive species seed sources can be more important in determining the 
likelihood of invasion.  Research in the Southwest has shown high levels of non-
native invasion in prescribed slash pile burns with long fire residence time (Korb et 
al., 2004).  Conversely, low levels of plant invasion were detected within the 
perimeters of wildfires in remote areas with comparatively little anthropogenic 
disturbance (Laughlin et al., 2004). 
 
While there have been many studies examining non-native response to 
wildfires and prescribed burning, both with and without thinning, there has been no 
comprehensive systematic review of non-native encroachment into ponderosa pine 
forests throughout the native range of these forests. Land management agencies are 
expected to minimize the spread of non-natives into public lands. It is, therefore, 
important that information be available to practitioners about the risk of non-native 
invasion in response to prescribed burning treatments compared to wildfires. In this 
review we will examine levels of non-native invasion in response to prescribed 
burning treatments, with and without tree thinning, in ponderosa pine forests through 
North America. We will then compare these results to levels of invasion reported in 
wildfires. Lastly, we will look for common factors in prescribe burned areas and 
wildfire areas that did not experience high levels of non-native invasion. 
 
 
 
2. 
Objective of the Review 
 
2.1 
Primary question 
 
 
 
In ponderosa pine forests do prescribed fire treatments, with and 
without tree thinning, or wildfire lead to greater increases in non-native plant 
establishment? 
 
2.2 
Secondary question (if applicable) 
 
 
In ponderosa pine forests that are not invaded by non-natives after 
prescribed fire treatments, with and without tree thinning, or wildfire are there 
detectable similarities among sites (fire behaviour, the pre- or post-fire 
vegetation community, soils, etc.) that can explain the lack of invasion? 
 
 
In ponderosa pine forests do prescribed fire treatments, with and 
without tree thinning, or wildfire lead to greater persistence or non-native 
plants as a dominant component of the understory? 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
3. 
Methods 
 
3.1 
Search strategy 
 
 
Databases supported by Cline Library at NAU: 
 
 
Web of Science 
 
 
JSTOR 
 
 
AGRICOLA 
 
 
Forest Science Database (Ovid) 
 
 
Proquest (Theses and dissertations) 
 
 
General web search: 
 
 
Google Scholar 
 
 
 
U.S. government databases: 
 
 
 
Treesearch 
 
 
 
Search strings: 
As our searches are focused on a single species, which clearly orients 
the search engines towards very precise articles, we chose to combine 
the results of two simple search strings 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ponderosa pine OR Pinus ponderosa) AND (prescribed burn* 
OR prescribed fire* OR thinning OR wildfire) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(Ponderosa pine OR Pinus ponderosa) AND (non-native OR 
exotic OR invasion OR invasive) 
 
3.2 
Study inclusion criteria  
 Relevant subject(s): Ponderosa pine-dominated forests that have 
been treated with tree thinning and prescribed burning or have 
burned in wildfires. 
 Types of intervention:  
o Tree thinning and prescribed burning 
o Burned in wildfire 
 Types of comparator: 
o Prescribe burned v. no treatment 
o Thinned and prescribe burned v. no treatment 
o Wildfire v. unburned 
o Prescribe burned v. wildfire 
o Thinned and prescribe burned v. wildfire 
o Heavy invasion v. slight or no invasion 
 Types of outcome: 
o Cover of non-native plants 
o Biomass of non-native plants 
o Non-native species richness 
o Relative abundance of non-natives compared to total 
abundance 
o Persistence of non-natives after disturbance 

 
 
6 
 Types of study: We will use all research articles reporting data on 
non-native establishment in treated or burned areas and untreated 
or unburned areas. Observational studies, expert opinion, and 
anecdotal reports that do not report data will only be considered if 
the qualitative information is presented in a ranked system (e.g. 
high, medium, or low) that allows for cross-study comparisons. 
 
 
3.3 
Potential reasons for heterogeneity: 
There is tremendous variability in ponderosa pine forests across the native 
range of the species. Heterogeneity is driven by latitudinal and elevational differences 
in forests, management history, and historical levels of disturbance. Additionally, 
there is typically a high level of variability in burn severity within a single wildfire.  
Understory response to thinning and burning treatments can vary depending on 
thinning intensity, prefire fuel loads, and season of burn. Lastly, there is not 
ubiquitous agreement on the nativity of some species (i.e. Poa pratensis). When 
possible, we will adjust all data to be consistent with nativity as listed in the USDA 
PLANTS database (USDA, NRCS 2010). In most instances, we will be dependent on 
the original authors’ determination of which species are non-native. 
 
 
3.4 
Study quality assessment 
Studies will be evaluated based on the types of methodology comparator, with 
the greatest weight given to replicated, randomized experiments. 
 
 
3.5 
Data extraction strategy 
 
All studies included at full text will be read by two members of the review 
panel. We will compare the level of agreement on study inclusion between reviewers 
using Kappa analysis. We will assemble review information in a master spreadsheet, 
recording qualitative and quantitative aspects of the studies. Key variables 
include non-native plant cover, non-native biomass, non-native species richness, and 
the contribution of non-native species to the total understory for all variables. If 
sufficient data are obtainable from the reviewed articles, we will examine specific 
non-native species or certain common growth habits (annual grasses, perennial forbs, 
etc.). 
 
3.6 
Data synthesis and presentation 
 
Data synthesis will be done by the review panel after reading the studies. We 
will assemble basic data about the studies reviewed (e.g., number of studies identified 
in the search, number and percent deemed relevant for review, distribution of 
geographic locations and information type). We will focus on studies reporting a 
quantitative response in non-native vegetation to wildfire or thinning and burning. 
Assuming we have sufficient studies with comparable data, we will use meta-
analytical methods, such as Cohen’s d effect size analysis, to test the data. Lastly, we 
will draw inferences about the similar and different non-native response to prescribed 
burning versus wildfire and highlight areas where further research is needed. 
 
 
 

 
 
7 
4.  
Potential Conflicts of Interest and Sources of Support 
 
 
We foresee no potential conflicts of interest. 
 
Funding is provided by the Ecological Restoration Institute. 
 
5. 
References 
 
Allen, C., Savage, M., Falk, D., Suckling, K., Swetnam, T., Schulke, T., Stacey, P., 
Morgan, P., Hoffman, M., Klingel, J., 2002. Ecological restoration of 
Southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological 
Applications 12, 1418-1433. 
Belnap, J., Phillips, S., Sherrod, S., Moldenke, A., 2005. Soil biota can change after 
exotic plant invasion: does this affect ecosystem processes? Ecology 86, 3007-
3017. 
Brooks, M., D'Antonio, C., Richardson, D., Grace, J., Keeley, J., DiTomaso, J., 
Hobbs, R., Pellant, M., Pyke, D., 2004. Effects of invasive alien plants on fire 
regimes. Bioscience 54, 677-688. 
Cooper, C., 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwestern pine 
forests since white settlement. Ecological Monographs 30, 129-164. 
Covington, W., Moore, M., 1994. Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: changes 
since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92, 39-47. 
Covington, W., Fulé, P., Moore, M., Hart, S., Kolb, T., Mast, J., Sackett, S., Wagner, 
M., 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the 
Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95, 23-29. 
Crawford, J., Wahren, C., Kyle, S., Moir, W., 2001. Responses of exotic plant species 
to fires in Pinus ponderosa forests in northern Arizona. Journal of Vegetation 
Science 12, 261-268. 
D'Antonio, C., Meyerson, L., 2002. Exotic plant species as problems and solutions in 
ecological restoration: a synthesis. Restoration Ecology 10, 703-713. 
D'Antonio, C., Vitousek, P., 1992. Biological invasions by exotic grasses, the 
grass/fire cycle, and global change. Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics 23, 63-87. 
Evans, R., Rimer, R., Sperry, L., Belnap, J., 2001. Exotic plant invasion alters 
nitrogen dynamics in an arid grassland. Ecological Applications 11, 1301-
1310. 
Griffis, K., Crawford, J., Wagner, M., Moir, W., 2001. Understory response to 
management treatments in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Forest 
Ecology and Management 146, 239-245. 
Hart, S., DeLuca, T., Newman, G., MacKenzie, M., Boyle, S., 2005. Post-fire 
vegetative dynamics as drivers of microbial community structure and function 
in forest soils. Forest Ecology and Management 220, 166-184. 
Hobbs, R., Huenneke, L., 1992. Disturbance, diversity, and invasion: implications for 
conservation. Conservation Biology 6, 324-337. 
Keeley, J., 2006. Fire management impacts on invasive plants in the western United 
States. Conservation Biology 20:375-384. 
Keeley, J., Lubin, D., Fotheringham, C., 2003. Fire and grazing impacts on plant 
diversity and alien plant invasions in the southern Sierra Nevada. Ecological 
Applications 13, 1355-1374. 

 
 
8 
Knapp, P., 1996. Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum L) dominance in the Great Basin 
Desert: history, persistence, and influences to human activities. Global 
Environmental Change 6, 37-52. 
Korb, J., Johnson, N., Covington, W., 2004. Slash pile burning effects on soil biotic 
and chemical properties and plant establishment: recommendations for 
amelioration. Restoration Ecology 12, 52-62. 
Laughlin, D., Fulé, Z., 2008. Wildfire effects on understory plant communities in two 
fire-prone forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 38, 133-142. 
Laughlin, D., Bakker, J., Stoddard, M., Daniels, M., Springer, J., Gildar, C., Green, 
A., Covington, W., 2004. Toward reference conditions: wildfire effects in an 
old-growth ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology and Management 199, 137-
152. 
Moore, M., Covington, W., Fulé, P., 1999. Reference conditions and ecological 
restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological 
Applications 9, 1266-1277. 
Rejmanek, M., 1995. What makes a species invasive? In P. Pysek, K. Prach, M. 
Rejmanek, M. Wade, eds., Plant invasions: General aspects and special 
problems. Amsterdam: SPB Academic Publishing. 
Swetnam, T., 1990. Fire history and climate in the southwestern United States. In 
Effects of fire management on southwestern natural resources. USDA Forest 
Service General Technical Report RM-191. 
USDA, NRCS, 2010. The PLANTS Database (http://plants.usda.gov, 9 September 
2010). National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. 
Weaver, H., 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. Journal of Forestry 49:93-98. 
Westerling, A., Hidalgo, H., Cayan, D., Swetnam, T., 2006. Warming and earlier 
spring increase western U.S. wildfire activity. Science 313, 940-943. 
Whisenant, S., 1990. Changing fire frequencies on Idaho's Snake River plains: 
ecological and management implications. Pages 4-10 in Symposium on 
Cheatgrass Invasion, Shrub Die-off, and Other Aspects of Shrub Biology and 
Management USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station General 
Technical Report INT-276, Las Vegas, NV. 
 
