E c o l o g i c a l  R e s t o r a t i o n  I n s t i t u t e
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
Designing a Framework for Evaluating
the Impacts and Outcomes of
Forest Service Appeals
Workshop Summary
January 6-8, 2003
 McMenamins Edgefield
Troutdale, Oregon
Hanna J. Cortner
Jacqueline Vaughn
Gretchen M. R. Teich
March 2003

The Ecological Restoration Institute
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. These forests have been significantly altered over the last century, 
with decreased ecological and recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-
intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of large-scale fires. The ERI is working 
with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to a more ecologically 
healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant communities.
The Program in Restoration Policy at the ERI strives to connect the ecological aspects of 
restoration with wider social and policy issues. The Program conducts a variety of social 
science research and outreach activities guided by the explicit assumption that 
ecological restoration and ecological sustainability are intricately linked to human 
community, society, and democratic processes. For more information contact us at the 
address below. 
All material copyright ©2003 ERI
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
Box 15017, Flagstaff AZ 86011-5017
928.523.7182 • www.eri.nau.edu
Publication date:  March 2003
Please contact authors for reproduction policies

ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
E c o l o g i c a l  R e s t o r a t i o n  I n s t i t u t e
N o r t h e r n  A r i z o n a  U n i v e r s i t y
B o x  1 5 0 1 7 ,  F l a g s t a f f  A Z  8 6 0 1 1 - 5 0 1 7
9 2 8 . 5 2 3 . 7 1 8 2  •  w w w . e r i . n a u . e d u
March 2003
Designing a Framework for Evaluating
the Impacts and Outcomes of
Forest Service Appeals
Workshop Summary
January 6-8, 2003
 McMenamins Edgefield
Troutdale, Oregon
Hanna J. Cortner
Jacqueline Vaughn
Gretchen M. R. Teich


ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
iii
Workshop Co-Sponsors
American Forests
Washington, D.C.
College of Environmental Sciences and Forestry
State University of New York
Syracuse, New York
Communities Committee of the Seventh American Forest Congress
Columbia Falls, Montana
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
Flagstaff, Arizona
Pinchot Institute for Conservation
Washington, D.C.
Society of American Foresters
Bethesda, Maryland
Sustainable Northwest
Portland, Oregon
The Wilderness Society
Seattle, Washington

Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
iv

ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
v
Table of Contents
Executive Summary...................................................................................................... 1
I.
Workshop Purpose and Need...................................................................................... 3
Forest Service Appeals..................................................................................................4
II.
Evaluating the Appeals Process................................................................................... 5
The Importance of Context..........................................................................................5
The Need for Case Studies........................................................................................... 6
The Benefits of Participatory Research (Civic Science)................................................6
III. Focus on Appeals: Things We Might Be Able to Determine.......................................8
Prior to the Appeal.......................................................................................................8
Once an Appeal is Filed................................................................................................9
Post Appeal...................................................................................................................11
IV. Focus on Appeals: Things We Don’t Know and Might Never Know With Certainty. 13
How Much Does the Appeals Process Cost?................................................................13
What Delays are Created Because of the Appeals Process?....................................... 13
V.
Is Collaboration an Alternative to Appeals?...............................................................15
VI. Conclusion.................................................................................................................... 16
VII. References Cited...........................................................................................................19
VIII.Appendices................................................................................................................... 21
Agenda......................................................................................................................... 21
Participant List..............................................................................................................23

Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
vi

1
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
Executive Summary
USDA Forest Service administrative appeals have recently been a focus of considerable
political debate. Congressional legislation and new administrative rules to change the
appeals process and exclude certain fuel reductions projects from environmental review and
appeal are under consideration. Meanwhile, there has been little systematic analysis of the
claims and counterclaims being put forward about the ecological, social, economic, and
administrative impacts of appeals.
The workshop, Designing a Framework for Evaluating the Impacts and Outcomes of Forest
Service Appeals, engaged researchers, agency representatives, and various affected interests
who use appeals, or are affected by their use, to discuss development of a framework by
which the impacts and outcomes of Forest Service appeals can be systematically docu-
mented and analyzed. Participants identified what is important to evaluate about the
appeals process, and discussed how to realistically conduct such evaluations so that results
are credible to all. The purpose of the workshop was to focus research and analysis on
critical issues surrounding the appeals process to better inform ongoing policy debates.
Three themes from the workshop addressed how research and analysis could be con-
ducted to enhance meaning and credibility. They include: the importance of examining
appeals not in isolation but within the overall context of public lands management and a
multi-staged decision process; the usefulness of case studies for exploring the intangibles
and non-quantifiable factors that affect impacts and outcomes; and the benefits of involving
stakeholders in research design and implementation.
While keeping in mind the importance of the larger context, there are, nevertheless,
also a number of things that can be said specifically about various aspects of the administra-
tive appeals process itself. A “cradle to grave” or “life cycle” approach can examine signifi-
cant factors prior to the appeal, once an appeal is filed, and post appeal.
The number of Forest Service decisions that are actually appealed out of the total
universe of proposed projects has been a contested political and methodological issue.
Determining these totals with more precision is doable. Appeal records could also be
examined to identify the legacy of conflict surrounding issues prior to filing of an appeal,
appellants’ stated reasons for appeals, and the types of projects most frequently appealed.
What happens as a result of a project appeal could also be examined from both procedural
and substantive dimensions, providing data to address the contested question of whether
appeals substantively change project parameters or whether they simply result in changes in
environmental documentation. Subsequent links to litigation could also be examined.
Another theme in the workshop was the need for greater clarity about the things we
don’t know and might never know with certainty. Two of these issues are ones around
which much political attention has been focused: the overall costs of appeals, and delays
caused by the appeals process. Credible cost data are not available. While it is possible to
determine the length of time between the filing date of an appeal (or date of project deci-
sion) and the final appeal decision date, many other impacts of delays are less tangible to

2
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
discern, difficult to separate from other intervening factors like funding, and inseparable
from various stakeholders’ political perspectives as to whether those impacts are “costs” or
“benefits.”
Collaborative processes as an alternative to appeals received considerable attention in
the workshop. Although it does not need to be a question of appeals or pre-decisional
collaboration—the two processes are not mutually exclusive and both could encouraged and
promoted—addressing pre-decisional collaboration as an alternative to appeals does bring to
the forefront issues and concerns about trade-offs between the two types of processes.
Existence of the appeals process may provide the agency with incentives to avoid appeals by
engaging in collaborative processes, as well as provide alternatives for stakeholders who do
not believe the agency’s pre-decisional participation activities provide meaningful, up-front
opportunities for input. Alternatively, existence of the appeals process may provide disin-
centives for parties to develop on-going, collaborative relationships. Another trade-off that
receives considerable attention is how each process affects the balance between local and
national interests.
The evolving role of administrative appeals in agency decision making does deserve
scrutiny. By examining appeals from many stakeholder viewpoints, using a variety of
qualitative and quantitative research and evaluation methods, everyone can gain a better
understanding of the many facets of appeals, from their function as instruments of demo-
cratic accountability and public participation to their impact upon project design and
implementation. Comprehensive and systematic analysis of the issues under debate can raise
the current level of discourse from rhetoric and anecdotes, and better inform decision
making processes about the future of appeals.

3
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
Designing a Framework for Evaluating the Impacts and Outcomes
of Forest Service Appeals
 I.
Workshop Purpose and Need
USDA Forest Service administrative appeals have recently been a focus of considerable
political debate. Congressional legislation and new administrative rules to change the
appeals process and exclude certain fuel reduction projects from environmental review and
appeal are under consideration. Meanwhile, there has been little systematic analysis of the
claims and counterclaims being put forward about the ecological, social, economic, and
administrative impacts of appeals.
The workshop, Designing a Framework for Evaluating the Impacts and Outcomes of Forest
Service Appeals, engaged researchers, agency representatives, and various affected interests
who use appeals, or are affected by their use to discuss development of a framework by
which the impacts and outcomes of Forest Service appeals can be systematically docu-
mented and analyzed. Participants identified what is important to evaluate about the
appeals process, and discussed how to realistically conduct such evaluations so that results
are credible to all. The purpose of the workshop was to focus research and analysis on
critical issues surrounding the appeals process to better inform ongoing policy debates.
There are a number of researchers, whether in academic institutions, government
agencies, or non-governmental organizations who are currently doing work on the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the administrative appeals process, or who are
planning to conduct research. Research subsequently conducted using workshop results
should be of value to all stakeholders in the current debate regardless of their positions
about the current appeals process or their positions on the various proposals for revising or
repealing the process. Having a common framework of analysis can also provide opportuni-
ties for researchers to make linkages among their projects. Moreover, because potential users
of any resulting analyses are being involved up-front in the identification of key variables,
the analytical results should have greater utility and legitimacy for planning and decision
making.
Workshop participants did not debate the merits of any specific legislative or executive
proposal to change the appeals process. Agreement was sought on more limited terms: on
what factors should be systematically addressed to better inform participants in the policy
debate, and whether such criteria could be realistically measured, and if so, how.
This summary represents what we thought were fairly consistent workshop themes. It
relies very heavily on ideas presented by participants, but does not reflect workshop consen-
sus. We have tried to reach a balance between simply presenting a “flip chart dump” and a
report reflecting only our perspectives.
All workshop participants had an opportunity to review an earlier draft of this sum-
mary. Reflecting a commitment to participants, no remarks contributed during breakout
sessions or general discussions are attributed to specific individuals or organizations. An
exception to this occurs, however, for comments made by panelists during their scheduled
presentations.

4
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
Forest Service Appeals
The Forest Service has had some sort of mechanism for administrative appeal of decisions
almost since its inception as an agency. As Mary Coulombe traced in her presentation, this
process has significantly changed over time. While early processes were largely used by
business interests as an informal avenue for review and resolution of disputed agency
decisions, today involvement in the process is more widespread and often focuses on
overarching questions about the purposes and management of national forests. Until 1989
all appeals were handled under the same set of regulations. As a result, however, of Title III,
Section 322, of the FY 93 Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act (106 Stat
1374), Forest Service project appeals became legislatively mandated, making the Forest
Service the only federal agency with a statutorily mandated appeals process. Today there are
three different types of appeals:
Forest Plan Revisions and Amendments
36 CFR Part 217
Projects or Activities, documented in an
36 CFR Part 215
    EA, EIS or Decision Memo (NEPA)
Permits or Written Authorizations
36 CFR Part 251 (Subpart C)
Political controversy over administrative appeals is nothing new. Forest plan appeals, for
example, have consistently been a focus of debate, from the first set of regulations under the
National Forest Management Act of 1976 (90 Stat 2949), to current proposals for revising
the planning regulations. A Forest Service proposal to revise the appeals process in 1992
created a maelstrom of controversy, and eventually resulted in the legislative language
mandating project appeals. As Coulombe’s presentation concluded, “there is strong senti-
ment for the right to object.”

5
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
II.
Evaluating the Appeals Process
Three themes from the workshop addressed how research and analysis could be conducted
to enhance meaning and credibility. These themes include: the importance of examining
appeals not in isolation but within the overall context of public lands management and a
multi-staged decision process; the usefulness of case studies for exploring the intangibles
and non-quantifiable factors that affect impacts and outcomes; and the benefits of involving
stakeholders in research design and implementation.
The Importance of Context
The role of appeals and their impacts and outcomes need to be considered within the
overall context of public lands management issues, as well as within the context of a multi-
staged decision process. First, the appeals process must be understood within the historical
context of its development. A number of paths have affected the evolution of appeals in
Forest Service decision making, including changing public expectations and rapidly chang-
ing problem definitions. Any analysis of the appeals process needs to be placed within the
context of all other decision processes and factors that contribute to what the Forest Service
does or doesn’t do, including NEPA decision stages, litigation, funding, organizational
culture, and how appeals impact the larger debate on national forest management. A broad
treatment of context also recognizes the connection between biophysical and socioeconomic
factors and outcomes.
Second, examining the appeals process in a broad context invariably leads to question-
ing problem definitions: Are appeals symptoms or causes? Are appeals a result of conditions
on the ground or are conditions a result of appeals? Why do some people believe the
appeals process is broken? Is the appeals process even “the problem”? Or is the problem that
interests are successfully using the process? Have the issues of wildland fire and hazardous
fuels reduction provided convenient triggers for a broader political goal of “reducing bur-
densome environmental regulations?” Or is the problem disagreement over the purposes
and uses of national forests, and appeals just a convenient tool for fighting that battle?
Finally, outcomes can be both tangible and intangible both in space and time. Data-
bases, such as the one constructed by the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern
Arizona University from appeal records posted on the Forest Service website (Cortner et al.
2003), might be useful for identifying, tracking, and understanding trends over time
(number of appeals filed and their disposition, number and types of appellants, types of
projects appealed, projects appealed and subsequently litigated, etc.), but databases alone
cannot tell the entire story. A study, for example, might look at the tangible outcome of
how many appealed projects were eventually litigated, but would not capture the long-term
impacts appeals may have had on the overall direction of forest management. Likewise,
calculating in isolation the length of time it took for an appealed project to be implemented
sheds no light on the role of other factors (e.g., funding) in moving a project through the
planning, environmental review, and implementation processes.

6
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
Forest management can be described as composed of a mutually interdependent set of
particularly “wicked” problems, in which problems are fuzzy, ambiguous, and equivocal.
This hyper-complexity belies treating any forest management problem—including ap-
peals—simply as a technical or process-related problem that can be resolved with the
application of “good science.” In other words, “beware of stalking quantitative indicators
devoid of context.”
The Need for Case Studies
Case studies are an important vehicle for a more thorough exploration of the intangibles
that affect impacts and outcomes. Only case studies, for example, will be able to address
relationships that, albeit extremely important, cannot be portrayed by cause-effect correla-
tions. Case studies enrich understanding of context and can place project appeals within the
overall history and dynamics of forest management debates on a district, forest, or regional
level. They can be used to ground-truth agency databases or inventories. Because case
studies can combine a number of research techniques, including structured surveys, trend
analysis, and semi-structured interviews, they can balance out the strengths and weaknesses
of any one particular research method.
Commonly, case studies are criticized as isolated studies that cannot be generalized or
can be abused by choosing cases to prove a predetermined argument. However, systemati-
cally chosen case studies or a series of case studies can yield valuable results. If researchers,
who necessarily will have somewhat different objectives, can coordinate across case studies,
they can begin to build a cumulative body of knowledge—a preponderance of evidence so
to speak. Without case studies to provide context and to expand beyond the confined
boundaries dictated by quantitative research, many important questions of governance and
impacts upon communities, the environment, and the agency cannot be understood.
The Benefits of Participatory Research (Civic Science)
 Like research and evaluation in many other areas of public policy, evaluation of appeals can
be enhanced by involving an array of stakeholders, including organized groups, community
interests, and individuals. As Jonathan Kusel pointed out from his experiences in doing
policy evaluations and community assessments, while this is indeed more challenging, it
also makes for more robust results. Because science and analysis are likely to be contested, it
makes sense to have an array of interests actively engaged in the scientific process, examin-
ing the assumptions that bound the questions being asked, and reviewing the research
judgments that affect data selection and interpretation. Pragmatically also, cooperation is
needed to do case studies and for people to engage in surveys, semi-structured interviews,
etc. For example, as Kusel also pointed out, much cannot be known about community
impacts without the active involvement of community members, and these individuals are
increasingly expecting to be more than passive subjects in the research process. Likewise
with environmental groups: to get at the nuanced role of appeals as just one tool in a larger
toolbox of strategies for accessing decision making will require the cooperation and partici-

7
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
pation of those groups. For all groups who are asked to give precious time and resources to
respond to researcher questions, there needs to be some assurance that research results will
yield insights germane to their activities. To achieve this purpose a more civic science is
required. Scientists and analysts cannot operate in a vacuum. A study in which participants
have a vested interest in prioritizing the questions to be explored, and a role in overseeing
the conduct of the research and reviewing draft study results, can enhance the credibility of
results as well as their policy relevance. It also legitimizes the research by focusing on
neutral methodologies. There are a number of ways the users of research and analysis can be
involved. Research advisory committees, for example, are one mechanism.

8
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
III.
Focus on Appeals: Things We Might Be Able to Determine
Keeping in mind the importance of the larger context, there are also a number of things
that can be said about the administrative appeals process itself. A “life cycle” or “cradle to
grave” approach can be taken. As Don Floyd suggested, questions about the effectiveness,
efficiency, and equity of appeals could be evaluated on both process and outcome dimen-
sions. Such an approach also needs to recognize that the very existence of an appeals mecha-
nism has repercussions prior to the filing of an appeal. (Table 1, page 17, presents a sum-
mary checklist of items that could be included in case studies of appeals.)
Prior to the Appeal
The number of Forest Service decisions that are actually appealed out of the total universe
of proposed projects has been a contested political and methodological issue (General
Accounting Office 2001; USDA Forest Service 2002a; The Wilderness Society 2002;
Morton and McCarthy 2002). However, the number is not currently tracked by the Forest
Service, and cannot easily be discerned from agency appeal records posted on the Internet.
Nonetheless, determining these totals is doable, within reasonable parameters. The Sched-
ule of Proposed Actions (SOPA) could be examined to determine the number of total
projects, the time they were proposed and what other kinds of projects were proposed at the
same time. SOPA records, however, do not track projects designated as categorical exclu-
sions, so even here there might be projects that would escape documentation. (A General
Accounting Office study expected to be released in March 2003 is surveying all 155 Forest
Service units to provide better documentation of the relationship between the number of
proposed and the number of appealed and litigated fuel reduction projects).
Case studies could examine and evaluate the legacy of conflict around the appealed
issues prior to filing of the particular appeal, and the nature and effectiveness of pre-
decisional public involvement (such as scoping and informal discussion) by various stake-
holders, including industry, university researchers, local and non-local advocacy groups,
elected officials, etc. It must also be recognized that an appeal is not born in isolation; in
most cases there is likely a long-standing conflict around the appealed issue(s). Is there a set
of triggering or recurring themes? Case studies could further examine the economic status
of communities (unemployment rates, population growth, past forest activities, education
level of citizens, median income) to explore the relationship of the social context to con-
tested issues in the community. What factors might affect the likelihood of an appeal being
filed on a particular forest? Proximity to large cities, type of ecosystem, number of endan-
gered species, and type and level of recreational use are just a few indicators that might be
examined to determine patterns. For example, do forests within close proximity to major
urban centers generate more appeals, or do forests with extensive old-growth resources get
more appeals?
Examining pre-appeal decision and public involvement processes (comment periods,
hearings, informal meetings, collaborative efforts, mediated or facilitated meetings, etc.)

9
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
would give an idea of how issues were aired pre-decision and if there were discernible
differences in the types of processes used in instances where projects were appealed and
those in which they were not. Since current proposals by the Forest Service call for putting
more emphasis on collaborative pre-decisional processes, focusing on the nature and effec-
tiveness of these processes for providing access points and opportunities to influence agency
decision making would be a significant line of inquiry. Review of individual project records
could be undertaken to determine the history of community involvement, the Forest
Service’s intent in proposing the project and the perceptions of others of that intent, the
range of alternatives offered for consideration in the decision making process, and how the
proposed actions were modified as the result of public input, new scientific knowledge, or
other factors.
Once an Appeal is Filed
Appeal records could be examined to identify appellants’ stated reasons for appeals, which
would facilitate comparisons of the procedural versus substantive issues most frequently
cited. Deriving such information would necessitate contacting individual forests and scruti-
nizing project case files, since on-line data generally include the Record of Decision and its
review, not the original appeal letter. However, not all issues or reasons will be readily
apparent from reading just the appeal letter. There may also be unstated, strategic reasons to
appeal (such as to buy time by forcing project delay, establish standing for litigation, raise
public consciousness about a decision, or gain additional political clout), which could only
be determined through interviews with appellants and other stakeholders. Interviews would
help determine, for instance, why some groups and individuals appeal projects on a regular
basis, while others do not. For example, the Forest Guardians is the leading appellant
nationally, while the Wilderness Society does not appeal as much as might be hypothesized
or perceived (Cortner et al 2003). This information would clarify the nature of project
appeals that are perceived to be substantive efforts to affect change, and those considered
“frivolous” or boiler plate appeals. Examples cited include: university classes filing appeals as
a class exercise, or appeals that consistently use the same broad, general language (e.g.,
“insufficient scientific analysis”). In some cases, appeals are not used to primarily affect the
design or environmental impacts of a particular project, but to change overall national
forest policy (e.g., achieve zero cut). However, in many cases, one person’s frivolous appeal
is another’s heartfelt goal. Moreover, whether it is a legitimate use of appeals to achieve a
broader public policy goal rather than challenging the particular project itself would also be
a matter of debate.
Don Floyd and his colleagues have pointed out that for some groups lack of interest in
pre-decisional processes is a conscious choice. They do not have the time and personnel to
participate in lengthy and often expensive pre-decisional processes; appeals are a more
efficient way of participating. Related to this, what considerations affect the decisions of
individuals or groups to file as interested parties? What kinds of stakeholder are likely to file

10
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
as interested parties and what are their characteristics? Why do they choose this form of
participation? Additional research on why particular groups favor certain methods over
others could provide a more comprehensive picture of how appeals fit into the entire
picture of participatory strategy and tactics. Moreover, do participants view the appeals
process as open, neutral, fair, and why or why not?
Another unstated reason that may prompt the filing of an appeal is its role in raising
public awareness. How do appellants use appeals to publicly highlight values at stake and to
raise public consciousness? In addition to appellant interviews, an indicator of using appeals
to attain this objective might include whether there was a press release or press conference
surrounding the filing of an appeal, and the level of media coverage achieved.
Considerable political attention has focused on the types of projects being appealed,
especially concerns about the percentage of “mechanical treatments” or hazardous fuels
reduction projects that are appealed (General Accounting Office 2002; USDA Forest
Service 2002a; Morton and McCarthy 2002; The Wilderness Society 2002). While seem-
ingly a straightforward question, making determinations about what kinds of projects are
appealed is methodologically far more difficult in practice. First, the Forest Service does not
have a standard system for defining project type, and devising one would not be an easy
task. Many projects have multiple purposes, and there are often multiple projects under a
single decision. Second, there is the real and/or perceived problem of the agency trying to
fit a project within a certain project category, especially if projects in that category are
legally given special treatment. Previous political controversy surrounding agency declara-
tions of salvage timber sales is a case in point. There is already significant concern that
projects labeled “fuels reduction” may actually resemble conventional timber sales, or that
the agency will abuse proposed new categorical exclusion provisions with the same result.
Finally, not only is there the problem of categories being given special legal treatment, but
also the problem of proposing projects under categories that just seem less controversial—
e.g., “fuels reduction” instead of “commercial thinning.” Agency intentions for a project
and appellants’ perceptions of these intentions may vary significantly, and this is often no
small point of contention, either analytically or for project decision making.
Additional questions have been raised as to how and under what circumstances some
appellants work in conjunction with each other. Why would an individual file singly as
opposed to joining an established group? Why do some projects generate multiple appel-
lants, either alone or as joint filers? Do groups with restricted resources join in appeals filed
by larger, more experienced organizations, or do they seek access to the process in other
ways? Are “frequent filers” perceived differently by the Forest Service than “one-shotters?”
Once an appeal is filed, very little is known about the role of the informal resolution
process. How often are meetings held and with what result? How do the agency and appel-
lant groups view the efficacy and effectiveness of such meetings? Are there potentials here
that are not being realized? How often does the agency let the 45 day filing period expire
and just allow appellants to take their concerns to court?

11
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
Post Appeal
What happens as the result of a project appeal? This can be approached from both a proce-
dural and substantive dimension.
If an appeal was dismissed, why? Was the project withdrawn or ultimately revised by the
Forest Service, was there informal resolution among the parties, or was the appeal with-
drawn by the appellant? How many times are appeals dismissed because of procedural
problems (e.g., lack of postmark, project not appealable, lack of participation by appellant
in the pre-decision process), versus those that are reviewed and denied based on substantive
refutation of appellants’ contentions.
Claims also have been made that while considerable time is spent dealing with appeals
and beefing up environmental review documents, the project does not change substantially.
Others claim many appeals are simply frivolous. These are tangible results that can be
tracked by comparing the initial proposal with on-the-ground project implementation.
Likewise, environmental groups’ claims that they are highly successful in their use of
appeals (and litigation) can also be examined. If the appeal was granted or remanded back
for additional study and review, it can be determined whether the end result was a proce-
dural or substantive change. On the one hand, perhaps the appeal resulted in development
of more legally complex documents (e.g., an EIS was done rather than an EA or additional
information was added to the environmental documentation) while the project essentially
remained the same. Alternatively, if there were significant changes in project design—
modifications in project location and boundaries, addition of new mitigation measures, or
revision of implementation schedules—these can be documented. The number of projects
abandoned or withdrawn because of appeals can also be discerned. Did the same project
eventually come back with a new name? Was there then a subsequent appeal by the same or
different appellants? What was the outcome?
Finally, was the project litigated, and, if so and on what basis? If the project was not
litigated, was it implemented and if so, how long after the appeal was withdrawn or dis-
missed? With what results? What kinds of cases are more likely to be litigated? How does
case law from litigation affect Forest Service actions? While seemingly straightforward
questions, making the link from appeals to litigation is not easy. There is no central “cache”
of records on litigation, and no direct way of linking appeals to litigation. Appeals are given
a distinct Forest Service identification number; litigation cases are assigned a distinct num-
ber by the District Court. Any linkage is most likely to be established through the institu-
tional memory of an individual at the national forest level. The majority of project appeals
that are litigated are handled through motions and briefs that result in an out-of-court
settlement agreement or a bench decision, with no central depository of paper records kept
except the decision outcome.
Important, but admittedly tougher to document and evaluate, outcomes of appeals
processes include the effects of appeals on dialogue. Is the use of appeals foreclosing oppor-
tunities to engage in pre-decisional dialogue, or are appeals used by groups who feel that
this is their only way to get the agency’s attention? Another set of impacts include the

12
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
effects of appeals as agents of agency change. Previous research has indicated that appeals
serve as a tool to prompt organizational learning and professional development (Jones and
Taylor 1995). What further explication can be made of this relationship? Finally, how can
the link convincingly be made between ecological conditions and administrative processes?

13
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
IV.
Focus on Appeals: Things We Don’t Know and Might Never
Know With Certainty
Another theme in the workshop was the need for greater clarity about the things we don’t
know and might never know with certainty. Of significance, two of these issues are ones
around which much of the political debate has centered: how much the appeals process
costs, and what delays are caused by the appeals process.
How Much Does the Appeals Process Cost?
Even though the Forest Service clearly noted that it was only an educated guess, the claim
that planning and assessment consume 40 percent of the total direct work at the national
forest level (USDA Forest Service 2002b) has been frequently cited. So how much do
appeals, as part of overall planning and assessment, actually cost? There is no way of track-
ing the financial costs of processing Forest Service appeals within the current budget struc-
ture. People can only guess. The task of determining costs is not as simple as counting the
salaries of staff designated to handle appeals, since there are often staff from other units
assigned as well, and their time and the attendant costs to their home programs are not
accounted for. Moreover, it would be very difficult to determine the costs of appeals to
appellants, interested parties, and others affected by appeals. How do you measure, for
example, a season of lost work for community groups when project implementation was
halted because of an appeal filed right before work was to begin? In addition, some eco-
nomic indicators, like jobs lost, don’t tell the whole story. There are few reliable ways of
telling how a community would be doing today even if a project had gone forward.
Finally, is there an appropriate cost/benefit? Whether costs are justified or not is a
political judgment. If, as Nancy Manring pointed out, appeals are a tool for legal, political,
and professional accountability (i.e., a way to show the agency listened to the public, have
taken into account the best available science, and are seriously thinking about environmen-
tal consequences), how can these be measured economically? How much is democratic
accountability worth or valued? If appeals have evolved from their original intention as
ways to settle grievances between the agency and affected parties to a form of institutional-
ized public participation, how are the costs and benefits of this function to be determined?
Deriving economic indicators is thus no easy task. Economic indicators need to be put in
the larger context of “unquantifiable” costs and benefits. So, there is a good reason, as
economist Dave Iverson noted, to be “wary of economists bearing information gifts.”
What Delays are Created Because of the Appeals Process?
Is the forest literally burning because groups appeal and litigate as political rhetoric and
media coverage have suggested (Flatten and Nowicki 2002)? This issue needs to be broken
down into two parts. The first part concerns the length of time it takes to process adminis-
trative appeals. This is more easily discernible. Once the filing date of an appeal (or project
decision date) is determined, it can be compared with the appeal decision date. However,

14
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
since agency appeal records posted on the internet do not always note the filing date,
obtaining such information requires an examination of the project files at each individual
forest office. Within the ERI data base, for example, 62 percent of records did not indicate
a filing date.
More importantly, however, many delays are often indirect rather than direct, with
intangible effects often far removed from timing of the actual appeal. While researchers
might be able to more precisely track the time between when a project is announced and
the direct changes resulting from an appeal, what is intangible is the impact appeals might
have on projects even before they are announced. Scholars have called this the “Rule of
Anticipated Reaction” (Culhane 1981). For instance, how does the mere existence of an
appeals process force the agency to pay greater attention to environmental concerns, know-
ing the decision will be carefully scrutinized to ensure compliance? Are certain kinds of
options not pursued because of fear of appeals? Do appeals prompt the agency to broaden
or narrow the range of alternatives it addresses or to modify a project even before it is
proposed? Or, is delay a result of agency personnel trying to “bullet-proof” documents so
they will meet legal and regulatory tests of adequacy? Are “good” decisions not made
because of fear or appeals, or are “bad” projects not proposed at all because of the potential
of appeals? Is there the possibility of more litigation, and hence more delays, if the appeals
process is not available?
While the time from project announcement to implementation can be measured, other
intervening factors cannot be determined as easily. What other factors might be interven-
ing? For example, what if a project sits on the shelf either during or after the planning
process because of lack of funding? Do projects get delayed because of factors like weather
or lack of contractor bids? To what extent is an appeal the reason that fuel reduction
projects are being delayed, or is it a multiplicity of variables?
Delay is not necessarily an undesired outcome, depending upon one’s political perspec-
tive. Delays are used as strategic tools in all sorts of venues, from filibusters in Congress to
time-outs in football. A project delay might enable participants to simultaneously pursue
other entry points to the political process to achieve their goals before a final decision
forecloses options that are undesirable to the group. For example, Mike Anderson spoke of
the Wilderness Society’s appeal of a timber sale in a proposed wilderness area: the appeal
delayed the project long enough to gain permanent protection of the area through congres-
sional action. On the other hand, examples have also been given of the significant social
impacts of delayed restoration projects, including lost work, denied access to winter
fuelwood, or the occurrence of a destructive fire in a planned project area. Whether delays
achieve either undesirable or desirable outcomes is thus highly subjective. Delays need to be
evaluated from several perspectives and in context of the goals to be achieved.

15
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
V.
Is Collaboration an Alternative to Appeals?
Collaborative processes as an alternative to appeals received considerable attention in the
workshop. As an alternative to appeals, President Bush, members of Congress, and the
Forest Service desire to focus public input in pre-decisional forums. New planning regula-
tions, for example, propose replacing appeals with a pre-decision objection process. How-
ever, it is not clear what the proposed pre-decision process looks like, and how it would
differ from the way the agency has traditionally sought pre-decision input. As noted above,
for some environmental interests the appeals process is believed to offer their best option
for public involvement. They believe that there hasn’t been a place for “meaningful public
involvement” up-front in the agency’s decision making, so they resort to the appeals process
as their democratic process alternative. This then raises the question about what new
innovations will be introduced in pre-decisional processes to account for deficiencies in
existing participatory processes if there are no longer appeals? Comparison of the Forest
Service post-decision appeals process with the Bureau of Land Management’s pre-decision
objection process could provide some insights on how a pre-decisional objection process
might be implemented in the Forest Service and with what costs and consequences.
Although it does not need to be a question of appeals processes or pre-decisional col-
laboration—they are not mutually exclusive and both could encouraged and promoted—
addressing pre-decisional collaboration as an alternative to appeals does bring to the fore-
front issues and concerns about trade-offs between the two types of processes. Is collabora-
tion the result of the appeals process, providing the agency with an incentive to avoid future
appeals by engaging in collaborative processes? Alternatively, perhaps the appeals process is
adversely affecting on-going relationships between parties and impeding the evolution to
collaboration. The Forest Service’s Process Predicament report, for example, asserted that
“instead of helping parties work out their differences, the appeals process can all too easily
become a tool for obstruction” (USDA Forest Service 2002b). Or, as Nils Christoffersen
noted, communities may view environmental group appeals as being dismissive of commu-
nity concerns, with each appeal “another nail in our coffin.” Battles are chosen, and it
might be difficult for stakeholders to invest in an up-front collaboration process if there
were still an opportunity or the right to appeal. The psychological impacts of appeals in
driving parties apart, noted Christoffersen, is an equally important impact.
Another trade-off that receives considerable attention is how each process affects the
balance between local and national interests. On one hand, it is feared that place-based
collaboration silences broader national interests, which the appeals process facilitates. On
the other hand, community interests, who feel precluded from having much impact on the
national policy scene to which many Washington-based environmental interests have good
access, are desirous of better forums for providing their input. How you view the effective-
ness and equity of governance processes often depends on where you sit.

16
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
VI.
Conclusion
Debate about the costs, delays, and environmental, social, and economic impacts of appeals
could certainly be elevated by informed research and analysis. The fires of 2002 tied the
issue of appeals to fuels reduction project implementation. However, without systematic
analysis it is difficult to determine the validity of the many claims and counterclaims being
offered for public consumption, making the link between appeals and fire events more
elusive than the political rhetoric would lead one to believe. For many issues surrounding
the appeals process the data are simply not available. As Jacqueline Vaughn challenged the
workshop participants at the outset: “show me the data.” In other instances, the data that
have been cited rests on some rather shaky methodological foundations. Best “guesstimates”
research with a large margin for error has been used as hard “facts” with a level of certainty
that is unwarranted. While databases such as the one constructed by ERI researchers begin
to discern some trends, they necessarily omit vital information that is not consistently
reported or not reported in a timely manner. The Forest Service can be encouraged to do a
better job of record keeping in terms of following their NEPA, appeals, and litigation
activities. Finally, for other issues like financial costs, we are unlikely to get “proof.”
As the workshop participants stressed, appeals must be understood as part of the larger
picture of public forest management and other components of decision processes. The
evolving role of administrative appeals in agency decision processes does deserve scrutiny.
By examining appeals from many stakeholder viewpoints, using a variety of qualitative and
quantitative research and evaluation methods, everyone can gain a better understanding of
the many facets of appeals, from their role as instruments of democratic accountability and
public participation to their impact upon project design and implementation. Comprehen-
sive and systematic analysis of the issues under debate can raise the current level of dis-
course from rhetoric and anecdotes and better inform decision making processes about the
future of appeals.
—

17
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
Table 1:
Checklist for Case Studies
Prior to the appeal
•
 Local participation in forest policymaking by various stakeholders (timber companies, Chamber
of Commerce, university researchers, community groups, business, non-local advocacy groups,
elected officials)
•
Economic status of the community (unemployment rates, past forest activities, education level of
citizens, median income)
•
History of unresolved conflict around the appeal issues, or history of appeals being filed on a
regular basis
•
Forest Service intent in proposing the project
•
Media coverage of forest issues generally
•
Release of Schedule of Proposed Actions (how far in advance, what other projects were proposed
at the same time)
•
Public scoping process (comment periods, hearings, informal meetings, list of interested parties,
legal or public notice announcements, focus groups, mediators or facilitators)
•
Ecological basis for the project
Once an appeal is filed
•
Stated and unstated (in appeal) motivations of the appellant(s) to file an appeal (e.g., enhance
notoriety or clout, establish standing for potential litigation, modify or block a project, buy time
for negotiations with other stakeholders)
•
Range of alternatives offered by Forest Service in decision-making process
•
Number and relationship of appellants (single filers, joint filers, cooperative/adversarial, local/
non-local, groups or individual filers)
•
Type of appellant (law firm, advocacy group, local citizen)
•
Type of project appealed by appellant
•
Comprehensiveness of appeal and attention to detail (number and extent of issues and
contentions; political issues/scientific issues; citation of applicable statutes/rules)
•
“Boilerplate” or “template” appeals that appear to be minimally related to a specific project
•
Identification of interested parties
•
Press releases/press conferences to bring attention to appeal
•
Media coverage of appeal (local/non-local)
•
Attempts to resolve issues informally by Forest Service and appellant
Post appeal
•
Remanded back to district for further study or action
•
Dismissal (project withdrawn by Forest Service, informal resolution among the parties, appeal
withdrawn by appellant)
•
Procedural dismissal (lack of postmark, project not appealable, lack of participation by appellant
in pre-decision process)
•
Substantive denial based on refutation of contentions identified by appellant
•
Changes made in environmental document as a result of appeal
•
Changes in project design made as a result of appeal
•
Litigation filed and results
•
Implementation of project (compare with original proposal to determine what, if any changes
were made; project size and scale, implementation schedule, participants)
•
Time from date proposed project is publicly identified through each stage (appeal, litigation,
implementation begins)
•
Effects on future dialogue
•
Effects on organizational learning (Forest Service and appellant groups)
•
Perceptions about public accountability

18
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary

19
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
VII.
References Cited
Cortner, Hanna J., Gretchen M.R. Teich, and Jacqueline Vaughn. 2003. Analyzing USDA Forest Service
appeals: phase, I, the database. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University, Ecological
Restoration Institute.
Culhane, Paul J. 1981. Public lands politics: interest group influence on the Forest Service and Bureau
of Land Management. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Flatten, Mark, and Dan Nowicki. 2002. Green group lawsuit blocked forest thinning. East Valley
Tribune, July 8 at www.easvalleytribune.com/rodeofire.
General Accounting Office. 2001. Forest Service: appeals and litigation of fuel reduction projects.
GAO-01-1114R. Washington, D.C.: General Accounting Office, August 31.
Jones, Elise, and Cameron P. Taylor. 1995. Litigating agency change: the impact of the courts and
administrative appeals process on the Forest Service. Policy Studies Journal 23(2): 310-336.
Morton J., and L. McCarthy. 2002. A comparison of two government reports on factors affecting
timely fuel treatment decisions. Santa Fe, NM: The Forest Trust.
USDA Forest Service. 2002a. Factors affecting timely mechanical fuel treatment decisions.
Washington, D.C.: USDA Forest Service.
USDA Forest Service. 2002b. The process predicament: how statutory, regulatory, and administrative
factors affect national forest management. Washington, D.C.: USDA Forest Service.
Wilderness Society. 2002. Forest Service continues to blow smoke: why the USFS report on appeals is
wrong. Washington, D.C.: The Wilderness Society.

20
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary

21
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
VIII.
Appendices
Agenda
Designing a Framework for Evaluating
the Impacts and Outcomes of Forest Service Appeals
—
January 6-8, 2003
McMenamins Edgefield, Troutdale, Oregon
Monday, January 6
5:00 - 5:30p.m.
Welcome, Participant Introductions, and Expected Outcomes
Hanna Cortner, Northern Arizona University
5:30-6:00
Presentation: Show Me the Data: Moving from Anecdotal Stories to
Systematic Analysis
Jacqueline Vaughn, Northern Arizona University
6:00-7:00
No-host Social
7:00
Dinner
Tuesday, January 7
(Moderated by Maia Enzer, Sustainable Northwest)
8:15- 10:00
Food for Thought: Examining Appeals from Several Perspectives
Session One, Environmental and Social/Community Impacts
Panels—
A Sense of History: The Origins and Evolution of Appeals
Mary Coulombe, American Forest and Paper Association
Environmental Perspectives on Impacts and Outcomes
Michael Anderson, The Wilderness Society
Community Perspectives on Impacts and Outcomes
Nils Christoffersen and Diane Synder, Wallowa Resources
Researching Community and Social Impacts
Jonathan Kusel, Forest Community Research
General Discussion
10:00-10:30
Break
10:30- noon
Breakout Sessions on Ecological and Social Impacts and Outcomes.
The task of each breakout is to discuss the following:
1.
What specific criteria/variables should be used to evaluate the impact and
outcomes of appeals along the several dimensions—legal/administrative,
economic, social, economic, ecological—so that the results would be
acceptable by all?

22
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
2.
How could these criteria be realistically measured, using both quantitative
studies and qualitative analyses? For example, how could such measures be
applied to a representative sample of appeal cases?
3.
What additional research protocols, if any, might be used so that the results
would be well-received by a variety of interests (outside of the normal
standards of the scientific method or mandated human subjects review), and
what might the final products look like?
noon-1:15
Lunch
1:15-2:45
More Food for Thought: Economic and Legal/Administrative Impacts and
Outcomes
Panels—
Economic Impacts
Dave Iverson, USDA Forest Service
Appeals and Public Participation
Don Floyd, Environmental Sciences and Forestry/SUNY
Administrative and Agency Impacts
Steve Segovia, USDA Forest Service
Appeals as Instruments of Accountability
Nancy Manring, Ohio University
General Discussion
2:45-3:15
Break
3:15- 4:45
Breakout Sessions on Economic and Legal/Administrative Criteria
Apply the three questions to economic and legal/administrative
dimensions.
Prepare report for next day’s report out.
Dinner
Wednesday, January 8
 (Moderated by Gerry Gray, American Forests)
8:15-9:15a.m.
Report Outs from Breakout Sessions
9:15-10:00
General Discussion
10:00-10:30
Break
10:30-11:00
General Discussion
11:00-11:30
Martin Goebel, Sustainable Northwest
11:30
Adjourn
11:30
Lunch
Workshop Sponsors: American Forests, College of Environmental Science and Forestry/ State University
of New York, Communities Committee of the Seventh American Forest Congress, Northern Arizona
University, Pinchot Institute for Conservation, Society of American Foresters, Sustainable Northwest
(local host), The Wilderness Society.

23
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
Participant List
Anderson, Mike
The Wilderness Society
1424 4th Ave., Suite 816
Seattle WA 98101-2217
Tel:  206-624-6430 x227, fax: 206-624-7101, email:  manderson@twsnw.org
Bird, Bryan
Sierra Club, National Forest Campaign
7 Avenida Vista Grande, #173
Santa Fe NM 87508
Tel:  505-466-2459, fax: 505-466-6266, email:  bryan.bird@sierraclub.org
Brown, Rick
Defenders of Wildlife
1880 Willamette Falls Dr., Suite 200
West Linn OR 97068
Tel:  503-697-3222, fax: 503-697-3268, email:  rbrown@defenders.org
Brown, Susan Jane
Gifford Pinchot Task Force
Box 61647
Vancouver WA 98666
Tel:  360-992-8733, fax: 360-992-8736, email:  brownsj@bigfoot.com
Brownscomb, Brett
Conservation Director, Hells Canyon Preservation Council
Box 2768
La Grande OR 97850
Tel:  541-963-3950, fax: 541-963-0584, email:  brett@hellscanyon.org
Christoffersen, Nils
Wallowa Resources
Box 274
Enterprise OR 97828
Tel:  541-426-8053, fax: 541-426-9053, email:  ndc-wr@oregonvos.net
Clark, Lance
Forest Resource Policy, Oregon State Forestry
2600 State St.
Salem OR 97310
Tel:  503-945-7410, fax: 502-945-7314, email:  lclark@odf.state.or.us
Cortner, Hanna
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University
Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
Tel:  928-523-8533, fax: 928-523-0296, email:  hanna.cortner@nau.edu
Coulombe, Mary
American Forest and Paper Association
1111 Nineteenth St., NW, Suite 800
Washington DC 20036
Tel: 202-463-2752, fax: 202-463-2058, email: mary_coulombe@afandpa.org

24
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
Daly, Carol
Flathead Economic Policy Center/Communities Committee
919 Elk Park Rd.
Columbia Falls MT 59912
Tel: 406-892-8155, fax: 406-892-8161, email: cdaly@digisys.net
Enzer, Maia
Sustainable Northwest
620 SW Main, Suite 112
Portland OR 97205
Tel: 503-221-6911 x 111, fax: 503-221-4495, email: menzer@sustainablenorthwest.org
Floyd, Don
SUNY - College of Environmental Science and Forestry
306 Bray Hall, 1 Forestry Dr.
Syracuse NY 13210
Tel: 315-470-6691, fax: 315-470-6535, email: dfloyd@esf.edu
Gillespie, Jere
Okanogan Communities Development Council
Box 468
Okanogan WA 98840
Tel: 509-422-1976, email: columbiana@televar.com
Goebel, Martin
Sustainable Northwest
620 SW Main, Suite 112
Portland OR 97205
Tel: 503-221-6911, fax: 503-221-4495, email: mgoebel@sustainablenorthwest.org
Gray, Gerry
American Forests
910 17th St., NW, Suite 600
Washington DC 20006
Tel: 202-955-4500 x217, fax: 202-955-4588, email: ggray@amfor.org
Hartzell, Cate
Collaborative Learning Circle
Box 1137
Ashland OR 97520
Tel: 541-482-4421, fax: 541-482-7282, email: hart@mind.net
Heiken, Doug
Oregon Natural Resources Council
Box 11648
Eugene OR 97440-3848
Tel: 541-344-0675, fax: 541-343-0996, email: dh@onrc.org
Iverson, Dave
Regional Economist, USDA Forest Service
324 25th St.
Ogden UT 84401
Tel: 801-625-5278, fax: 801-625-5277, email: diverson@fs.fed.us

25
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy
Kusel, Jonathan
Forest Community Research
Box 11
Taylorsville CA 95983
Tel: 530-284-1022, fax: 530-284-1023, email: kusel@fcresearch.org
Malmsheimer, Robert
SUNY - College of Environmental Science and Forestry
320 Bray Hall, 1 Forestry Dr.
Syracuse NY 13210
Tel: 315-470-6909, fax: 315-470-6535, email: rwmalmsh@esf.edu
Manring, Nancy
Department of Political Science
Ohio State University
Athens OH 45701-2979
Tel: 740-593-4375, fax: 740-593-0394, email: manring@ohio.edu
McKinnon, Taylor
Grand Canyon Trust
2601 North Fort Valley Rd.
Flagstaff AZ 86001
Tel: 928-774-7488, fax: 928-774-7570, email: mckinnon@grandcanyontrust.org
Moseley, Cassandra
Ecosystem Workforce Program
1293 West 12th Ave.
Eugene OR 97402
Tel: 541-346-4545, fax: 541-346-2040, email: cmoseley@darkwing.uoregon.edu
Mutz, Katherine
Natural Resources Law Center
University of Colorado, Campus Box 401
Boulder CO 80309-0401
Tel: 303-492-1293, fax: 303-492-1297, email: kathryn.mutz@colorado.edu
Nelson, Peter
Biodiversity Northwest
4649 Sunnyside Ave. North, #323
Seattle WA 98103
Tel: 206-545-3734 x16, fax: 425-671-9950, email: petern@biodiversitynw.org
Neznek, Rita
Society of American Foresters
5400 Grosvenor Ln.
Bethesda MD 20814-2198
Tel: 301-897-8720 x 115, fax: 301-897-3690, email: neznekr@safnet.org
Nie, Martin
School of Forestry
University of Montana
Missoula MT 59812
Tel: 406-243-6795, fax: 406-243-6656, email: mnie@forestry@umt.edu

26
Forest Service appeals: workshop summary
Ogden, Roger
USDA Forest Service
333 SW First Ave.
Portland OR 97204
Tel: 503-808-2426, fax: 503-808-2255, email: rmogden@fs.fed.us
Sample, Al
Pinchot Institute
1616 P St., NW
Washington DC 20005
Tel: 202-797-6581, fax: 202-797-658, email: alsample@pinchot.org
Segovia, Steve
Ecosystem Management, USDA Forest Service
Box 96090
Washington, DC 20090-6090
Tel: 202-205-1066, fax: 202-205-1012, email: ssegovia@fs.fed.us
Shanteau, Cherie
U.S. Institute for Environmental Conflict Resolution
110 South Church Ave., Suite 3350
Tucson AZ 85701
Tel: 520-670-5299, fax: 520-670-5530, email: shanteau@ecr.gov
Steer, Karen
HFHC Program Officer, Sustainable Northwest
620 SW Main, Suite 112
Portland OR 97205
Tel: 503-221-6911, fax: 503-221-4495, email: ksteer@sustainablenorthwest.org
Teich, Gretchen
Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU School of Forestry
Box 15018
Flagstaff AZ 86011-5018
Tel: 928-523-6652, fax: 928-523-0296, email: gretchen.teich@nau.edu
Vaughn, Jacqueline
Department of Political Science
Northern Arizona University
Flagstaff AZ 86011-5036
Tel: 928-523-8224, fax: 928-523-6777, email: jacqueline.vaughn@nau.edu
Wickwar, Denise
USDA Forest Service Inventory and Monitoring Institute
2150 Centre Ave., Suite 300
Fort Collins CO 80526
Tel: 970-295-5717, fax: 970-295-5885, email: dwickwar@fs.fed.us

27
ERI Papers in Restoration Policy

E c o l o g i c a l  R e s t o r a t i o n  I n s t i t u t e
N o r t h e r n  A r i z o n a  U n i v e r s i t y
B o x  1 5 0 1 7 ,  F l a g s t a f f  A Z  8 6 0 1 1 - 5 0 1 7
9 2 8 . 5 2 3 . 7 1 8 2  •  w w w . e r i . n a u . e d u
