My door’s open 
08/26/2001 
 
To the editor:  
In a recent letter to the editor, the conservation chairman of the Maricopa Audubon Society 
attacks the ponderosa pine forest restoration treatments that my colleagues and I have developed 
based on 26 years of scientifically rigorous research. The letter was filled with incorrect 
information and unethical personal attacks.  
For decades I have been an outspoken advocate of the need to restore degraded pine forests to 
their full ecological health by protecting old growth trees, thinning unnaturally dense thickets of 
younger trees, and reintroducing the natural fire regime of frequent, low intensity surface fires. 
The majority of environmental groups in the Southwest, including chapters of the Audubon 
Society, published a document in 1996 (quoting me and my work throughout) that supports that 
position.  
An important goal of forest restoration is to reverse a 125-year trend of declining animal and 
plant species diversity. When there are too many trees, the grasses and shrubs cannot receive 
enough sunlight and water to allow them to flourish as they did before Euro-American 
settlement. The wildlife species dependent upon these understory plants decline as well.  
Research shows that by opening the forest through comprehensive ecological restoration 
treatments, including thinning and burning, these species begin to return. The Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University working with a broad range of organizations 
is involved in the testing of nearly 30 different treatments to determine what we can do to help 
these degraded ecosystems heal. Our treatments always conserve and protect old growth trees 
and thin only younger, post-settlement trees so that natural, low intensity, ground fire can safely 
return.  
I have made many attempts to share scientific information with Maricopa Audubon and have 
offered to lead field trips to explain why ecological restoration is important to the Audubon 
mission. My door remains open. My invitation still stands.  
WILLIAM WALLACE COVINGTON  
Regents' Professor of Forest Ecology and  
Director, The Ecological Restoration Institute  
NAU  
