Expert: Forest restoration critics misuse his research 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
04/11/2000 
 
A national wildfire expert says critics of an ambitious project to restore thousands of 
acres of congested ponderosa pine forest around Flagstaff have been unfairly using his 
research to attack the plan.  
At Northern Arizona University yesterday, independent fire researcher Jack Cohen 
briefed foresters on his landmark studies on reducing wildland fire threat to homes and 
communities.  
Cohen's recommendations, gleaned from fire modeling, experiments and case studies, 
include clearing flammable vegetation away from structures and using flame-resistant 
building materials.  
But he said opponents of the Flagstaff restoration project are taking his research on urban 
wildfire threats "out of context" and applying it to a project that deals with the ecological 
restoration of thousands of acres outside the urban zone.  
"The issue is dealing with the landscape and one aspect of that is the threat to 
communities, the threat to structures with a whole host of other aspects to dealing with 
landscape restoration left undiscussed (by restoration opponents)," Cohen said.  
Cohen's work on reducing wildfire threat in the "urban interface" -- where the forest 
meets the city -- has drawn the attention of the Flagstaff Fire Department and the Grand 
Canyon Forests Partnership.  
The partnership advocates cutting small-diameter trees across 100,000 acres to restore the 
ponderosa pine ecosystem and prescribed burns to reduce forest fuels to reduce the risk of 
catastrophic wildfire.  
The fire department is continuing a program of thinning and burning forest fuels on 500 
acres in the city to prevent wildfires from sweeping through neighborhoods.  
The Partnership's plan to selectively log 1,700 pilot acres in the Fort Valley area for 
restoration and fire prevention has been challenged in U.S. District Court by Flagstaff 
environmental activists, the Forest Conservation Council and the Forest Guardians of 
Santa Fe, N.M.  

Forest Conservation Council executive director Bryan Bird says that instead of logging 
national forest lands, the Forest Service should consider an alternative that "encourages 
private landowners to take actions to reduce fire risk on their own lands."  
Bird, citing Cohen's research for the Forest Service, said "such an alternative has the 
highest likelihood of accomplishing project objectives at the least cost."  
Cohen's research, which he outlined Monday at the Southwest Forest Sciences Complex , 
involved what he calls the "home ignition zone."  
According to his research with the Forest Service's Fire Sciences Laboratory in Montana, 
Cohen said a series of variables, such as a structure's distance away from a wildfire, the 
materials composing the roof and outside walls and specific building methods, 
determines if a home exposed to a wildfire will ignite.  
In a comprehensive study, Cohen found that a structure can survive a devastating wildfire 
if it is located a minimum of 33 feet away and does not come into direct contact with 
flames. If the flames do reach the structure, the likelihood of a destructive fire can be 
reduced with the use of fire-resistant building materials and construction methods that 
prevent fire from getting inside, he added.  
By understanding the dynamics of the "home ignition zone," damage can be prevented, 
he said.  
The idea is not to build a "fire break around the community" but to use the home itself as 
a fire break, Cohen said.  
Cohen said he is aware that opponents of the Partnership's restoration plan have been 
using his research to challenge the project in court. To the extent the Forest Conservation 
Council and others are taking his urban interface work and applying it to the restoration 
of undeveloped forest lands, they are using it "out of context," he said.  
Asked if landscape restoration with the goal of reducing wildfire threat makes economic 
sense, given his research on reducing fire damage to homes and communities that 
includes relatively simple and inexpensive steps by homeowners, Cohen said he couldn't 
say.  
"I don't think we've determined that," he said, adding that more studies are needed 
contrasting both methods.  
He said the Partnership's decision to move ahead with both widescale landscape thinning 
and local efforts to reduce fire fuels in the community reflect local values and don't lend 
themselves to criticism.  

"What people want to do certainly should be consistent with physical reality, but there are 
lots and lots of ways to deal with this problem and I don't think anybody has got the 
formula." Cohen said.  
NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute Program Coordinator Doc Smith called Cohen's 
research "complementary" to the Partnership's approach.  
"It's not a matter that you do this and you don't do that. It's a matter of putting them 
together and decreasing fire risk on a much larger scale. I think it fits right in," Smith 
said.  
Smith said Cohen's findings should be heeded by homeowners in the Flagstaff area.  
"We need to work at the household protection area a lot. I don't think people moving here 
understand what they can do to make their home safer. We need to continue to work on 
that and we need to continue to work on the vegetation management hat leads into the 
house," Smith said.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251.  
 
