DWARF MISTLETOE-PANDORA MOTH INTERACTION 
AND ITS CONTRIBUTION TO PONDEROSA PINE MORTALITY IN ARIZONA 
Michael R. Wagner' and Robert L. Mathiasen ' 
A BSTRACT.-
The interaction between Southwestern dwarf mistlet oe, Arceuth obtum vagina l um subspecies crup­
topodum, infestation and defoliation by the pandora moth, Coloradia pandora pandora , on the Kaibab Plateau in 
Arizona was evaluated. Heavy defoliation of ponderosa pine, fi,ms ponderosa, in 1979 and 1981 result ed in mortality of 
individu al trees in areas of heavy dwarf mistletoe infestation. Postmortem eva luation of pond erosa pines indicated that 
dead trees had a significantly higher dwarf mistletoe rating than did nearb y pair ed live trees. Of25 tree pairs evaluated, 
only two live trees had higher dwarf mistletoe ratings than the paired dead tree. Mean dwarf mistletoe ratings were: live 
trees 2.9, dead tre es 4.6 (6 class dwarf mistletoe ratin g system). Implications for management of the pandora moth are 
discussed. 
An outbreak of the pandora moth , Color­
adia pandora pandora Blake (Lepidoptera: 
Saturniidae), began in 1979 on the Kaibab 
Plateau in northern Arizona. Defoliation of 
ponderosa pine, Pinus ponderosa Doug!. ex 
Laws., occurred overS,000 acres in 1979 and 
19,000 acres in 1981 (Bennett and Ragenovich 
1982). Pandora moth defoliation resulted in 
radial growth loss between 17% (Miller 1983) 
and 25% (Bennett and Andrews '1983). Tree 
mortality was not significantly greater in defo­
liated plots than nondefoliated control plots 
(Benne tt and Andrews 1983). Though there 
was no significant effect of defoliation on mor­
talit y on a stand basis, there were clearly small 
pockets of mortality (Wagne r pel's. obs.). 
Field observations by th e authors indicated 
that many of the trees that died were infected 
with Southwestern dwarf mistletoe, Arceu­
thobium vaginatum subsp. cruptopodum (E n­
gelm.) Hawksw. & Wiens. Bennett and An­
drews (1983) found that radial growth loss in 
trees with mistletoe and pandora moth was 
greater than for those with only pandora moth 
in this area. 
Many insects and diseases do not cause di­
rect serious impact on their host but rather 
function to predispose trees to other damag­
ing age nts. Num erous authors have reported 
that pandora moth defoliation increased the 
incidence of bark beetle mortality (Carolin 
and Knopf 1968, Keen 1952, Massey 1940, 
Patterson 1929, Wygant 1941). Dwarf mistle­
toes, which are serious damaging agents in 
western forests (Hawksworth 1961, Hawks­
worth and Wiens 1972), are a common agent 
predisposing trees to oth er agents. The nu­
merous interactions between dwarf mistle­
toes and forest insects have been reviewed by 
Stevens and Hawksworth (1984). We report in 
.this paper that ponderosa pine mortality, fol­
lowing the pandora moth outbreak in north­
ern Arizona, occurred primarily on trees 
heavily infect ed with dwarf mistletoe. 
MATERIA LS AND METHODS 
The study site was approximately two miles 
north of Jacob Lake, Arizona, in an area heav ­
ily defoliated in 1979 and 1981 by the pandora 
moth. The sample area was approximately 100 
acres in size and constituted the largest pocket 
of mortality that had occurred following defo­
liation (Wagner pel's. obs .). The study site was 
outside the area sprayed with Acephate" in 
1981 (based on maps in Bennett and Ragen­
ovich 1982). 
A system atic sample with a random start 
was used to survey the area of mortality. Sam­
ple plots were two chains apart and one chain 
in radiu s. The nearest dead tree to the plot 
center was selected, and the nearest live tree 
of similar diameter (maximum acceptable dif­
feren ce four inches dbh) identified (Fig. I) . 
The diam et er breast height (dbh) and 6-class 
dwarf mistletoe rating (DMR) (Hawksworth 
'School or Forestry, Box.4098, Northern Arizona Univer sity. Flagstaff, Arizona 8601l. 
423 

rig. 1. Typical paired sample of a livin g and dead pon derosa pin e . Note the heavier dwarf mistletoe infecti on on the 
dead tree. 

TAB LE 1. Mean diameters and dwarf mistletoe ratings 
of paired live and dead ponderosa pines, 
Live trees 
Dead trees 
dbh 
DMR 
db h 
D MR 
Mean (X) 
SO 
Range 
16.4 
8. L 
5.9--35.9 
284 
1.75 
0--6 
16.5 
8. 1 
5.6-34.2 
4.64 
1.35 
L-6 
1977) were determined for each tree in the 
pair. If a suitable pair of tr ees could not be 
locat ed within a plot, th e plot was reject ed. A 
total of 38 plot s we re examined, of which 25 
met th e crite ria of having a suitable pair of 
trees . 
Data we re analyzed using a nonparametric 
sign test (Conover 1980) (0. = 0.005). The sign 
test indicates whe the r one ran dom varia ble in 
a pair tends to be larger than th e other ra ndom 
variable in the pa ir. The null hypothesis was 
that there was no differe nce in the dwarf 
mistletoe ratings between dead and live trees 
in the stand . 
RESULTS 
The mean d iamete rs and mean DMR's of 
th e paired trees are give n in Table 1. There 
was no statistica lly significa nt difference in 
mean dbh between live and dead trees, as 
sho uld be expecte d because of the pairs cho­
se n. Howe ver, th ere was a highly siz ruficant 
difference in th e mean DMR of live an d dead 
trees. Dead trees sampled ge nerally had signs 
of heavy dwarf mistle toe infec tio n (D M R 5 or 
6). Dead trees had a higher mean DMR rating 
than th ei r paired live trees in all but two sam­
pled pairs, where the live tree had a highe r 
DMR th an the dead tree. We obs er ved th at 
th e mortality occ ur red over a considerable 
range of tree diamete rs. Non e of the dead 
trees we examined we re free of dwarf 
mistle toe . 
DISC USSIO N 
Our data indicate ponderosa pine mo rtality 
tended to occu r on tr ees that were heavily 
infecte d wit h dwarf mistletoe . We ca n co n­
clude that the probability of mortality as a 
result ofpandora moth defoli ati on is greate r in 
stands heavily infeste d with dwarf mistletoe . 
Our experimental design does not pe rmit th e 
es tablishment of a cause-effec t relati onship, 
but it appears reason able th at dwarf mistl etoe 
is p redisposing trees to mortality following 
defoliation. We do not feel there is evidence 
to suggest that the pandora moth prefers 
dwarf-mistl etoe-infested trees, since defolia­
tion is ofte n uniform over large areas. Rather, 
we feel trees weakened by dwarf mistletoe 
infection probably are less tolerant of defolia­
tion than are healthier trees. We did not at­
te m pt to sys te ma tically dete rmi ne the ca use 
of mo rtality of each sam pled tree in th e stud y 
area. Howe ver, th e few trees we did exa mine 
did not ap pear to be killed by bark beetles or 
othe r secondary agents. 
T he se findings have important implicatio ns 
for ma nagement of the pandora moth . Since 
growth loss is moderate and probabl y does not 
Occ ur for more th an one or two years, co ntrol 
attempts d irected at reducing growth loss are 
not jus tified . Mortali ty is a more se rious im­
pact and wo uld jus tify control measures if ex­
pe cted to occur over lar ge areas. We wo uld 
recommend co ntrolling th e agen t predispos­
ing trees to mortality (dwarf m istletoe) as the 
preferred option. Silvicultural co ntrol strate­
gies for dwarf mistl etoes are well es tablished 
(Sc harpf an d Parmeter 1978). We would 
sp ecifically recom me nd se lec tively removing 
trees w ith a D M R of 3.0 Or greate r in sta nds 
likel y to be heavily defoliated by the pandora 
moth. Becau se the importance dwarf mi stle­
toes play in reducing growth is we ll known 
(H awksworth and Wiens 1972), the added ef­
~ect . of expecte d defoliat ion would certainly 
Justify co ntrol efforts in man aged forest 
stands. 
In forest areas no t under intensive forest 
management, de foliation by the pandora 
moth may ac tually hav e a beneficial effect. 
Since mortality prefere ntially occ urs on the 
more heavily d warf-mistletoe-infected trees 
pand ora moth defoliation may have th e affect 
of reducing stand mistl etoe infestati on levels. 
This may increase the desirability of th es e 
ar eas for future use as managed stands . Ce r­
tai nly the morta lity of some trees wo uld 
provide con siderable wildlife habitat for a va­
riety of cavity- nesting birds. 
ACK NOWLED GMENT 
.We acknowledge E. A. Blake and J. M. 
DIMatteo for th eir assi stance in data col1ec­
tion. 

LITERAT URE CITED 
BEN NETI, D. D.. AND M. A. ANDREWS. 1983. Biological 
eva lua tion of the pandora moth-Kaibab National 
Forest. USDA Forest Service. Southwestern Re­
gion. Forest Pest Management Rep ort R-3 83-7. 
15 pp. 
BENNETI, D. D , AND 1. R. R~CE N OVI CH . 1982. A pilot 
contro l project to evalua te Acephate" for controlof 
th e pandor a moth , Coloradia pandora Blake (Lep­
idoptera: Saturnii dae) , Jacob Lake, Arizona 1981. 
USDA Forest Service . Southwestern Region, 
Forest Pest Managem ent Rep ort R-3 82-1O. 36 pp. 
CAROUN, V. M , AND J A E. KNOPF. 1968 . The pando ra 
moth . USDA Forest Se rvice, Pacific Northwest 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. Fo res t 
Pest Leaflet 114. 7 pp. 
CONOVER, W. J 1980. Pages 122-142 in Practical non­
parametric statistics, 2d ed. , John Wiley & Sons 
Inc., New York. 
HAWKSWORTH, F. G. 1961. Dwarf mistletoe of ponderosa 
pine in the Southwest. USDA Forest Service 
Technical Bulletin 1246. 112 pp . 
_ _ . 1977. The 6-class dwarf mistl etoe rating system. 
USDA Forest Se rvice. General Techni cal Rep ort 
RM-48. 7 pp. 
HAWKSWORTH, F. G.. AND D. WIENS. 1972. Biology and 
classificat ion of dwa rf mistletoes (Arceuthobium ). 
\ 
\.. 
USDA Forest Se rvice Agriculture Handbook 401. 
234 pp . 
KEEN. F. P. 1952. Pages 8~6 in Insect ene mies of west­
ern forests. USDA Miscell aneous Pub lication 273. 
MASSEY. C. L. 1940. Th e pandora moth (Coloradia pan­
dora Blake), a defoliator oflodgepole pin e in Colo­
rado. 
Un published thesis. Du ke 
University. 
Durh am , North Carolina. 33 pp. 
MILLER. K. K. 1983. The ecology and impact of the pan ­
dora moth , Coloradi a pando ra pandora Blake . in 
northe rn Arizona. Unpublished thesis. Northern 
Arizona Unive rsity. Flagstaff. 62 pp . 
PATIERSON.J. E. 1929. The pandora moth , a peri odic pest 
of western pin e fore sts. USDA Technical Bullet in 
137.20 pp . 
SCHARPF. R. F , AND J R. PARAMETER, EDS. 1978. Proceed­
ings of the sym posium on dwarf mis tletoe control 
through forest managemen t. US DA Forest Ser­
vice Gen eral Tec hnical Rep ort PSW-31. 190 pp. 
STEVENS, R. E., AND F. G HAWKSWORTII. 1984. Insect ­
dwarf mistlet oe associations: an update. Pages 
94-100 in Proceedi ngs biology of dwarf mistletoe. 
USDA Forest Se rvice Gen eral Technical Rep ort 
RM:l 11. 
WYCAIIT, N. D. 194 1. An infestation of the pandora moth, 
Coloradia pandora Blake, in lod gepole pin e in 
Co lorado. J. Econ. Ent. 34(5):697-702. 
