 
 
NAU student helps with restoration 
By BONNIE STEVENS 
Special to the Sun 
08/31/2003 
Fossil Creek, northwest of Strawberry, is a spring-fed stream and lush riparian area, 
shaded by huge willow trees and teeming with life, including six native fish species. It is 
especially pristine above the small dam--built by APS in 1908 to generate electricity 
where water flows freely and because the dam has acted as a barrier to keep non-native 
fish and non-native crayfish from migrating upstream.  
A number of agencies including the Forest Service, U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 
Arizona Game and Fish Department and Bureau of Reclamation have undertaken the 
enormous task of restoring the creek. The restoration plan includes decommissioning the 
dam in December 2004 to restore the historic flow level and possibly chemically treating 
the water to do away with exotic species, except for crayfish.  
Crayfish, with their dark bodies and big claws, look like small lobsters that, some say, 
taste like a combination of shrimp and lobster. And although some humans and bass may 
consider them to be delicious, their recent population explosion in Fossil Creek is causing 
environmental concerns.  
"Our restoration plan won't get rid of crayfish. That's the one exotic species we don't 
know how to eradicate, so we are conducting studies to determine what their impact is to 
the creek and what we should do about them, if anything," said Northern Arizona 
University biology professor Jane Marks.  
Helping her with the research this summer is 22-year-old environmental science student 
Gricelda Meraz. The work, funded by the National Science Foundation through the 
Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology program, the Arizona Heritage 
Program and the Ecological Restoration Institute at NAU, is to determine where the 
crayfish are and what they are eating. It involves camping along the creek and setting 
traps at night because the crayfish are nocturnal.  
"The night trapping has been a little creepy because we hear noises all over from the little 
creatures that live by the creek. At sunset we'd set up traps, then we'd have to navigate 
back to camp using headlamps to show us the way," said Meraz.  
Aside from the crayfishes' appetite for fish eggs, Meraz said they feed on the plants along 
and in the stream.  

"Where there are large populations of crayfish the creek is murky, there's little vegetation, 
no algae and no snails. Where the crayfish aren't, the creek looks beautiful, insects are 
feeding on the algae, small fish are eating the insects, it's all good," she said.  
Studying crayfish in the high desert of Arizona (and feeling the occasional pinch of their 
claws) is a unique experience for this student who grew up working in the melon and 
cotton fields of the Parker Valley. Her parents, migrant farm workers who worked in 
California's San Joaquin Valley, didn't have the opportunity to extend their education 
beyond the eighth grade, but now have two college-educated daughters--Gricelda and her 
sister, who graduated from NAU's School of Hotel and Restaurant Management.  
Gricelda was selected to participate in NAU's Undergraduate Mentoring in 
Environmental Biology Program, which targets outstanding minority students to conduct 
original research.  
"Research is hard work," she said. "But I hope these findings will help us understand just 
how prevalent the crayfish are and how they are affecting the food chain in Fossil Creek."  
Meraz's findings are expected to be compiled this fall.  
 
