RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE REPRODUCTION
FOLLOWING INJURY TO YOUNG ANNUAL GROWTH'
C. K. COOPERRIDER
(WITH THIRTEEN FIGURES)
Introduction
In the plateau region of northern Arizona peculiar geologic formations
account for the lack of the living natural waters that are typical of most high
mountain districts.
They also exert a profound influence on the plant
growth, and the character of forage through their effect on soil and avail-
able moisture.
In the forested areas most affected by these formations ani-
mals are particularly apt to browse pine reproduction.
Tip moths are also
very destructive in places, sometimes over large areas.
Thus control of
injury to young trees, the future forest, is an important problem in the
management of these forest lands.
In order to exercise proper control, it is necessary to know at least some-
thing of what constitutes serious injury.
This depends not only on the
degree to which pine seedlings are damaged but also on the power they
have to recover.
This recovery phase of the problem was investigated in
connection with a long-time range-timber reproduction study.
Recovery
was found to depend principally on the powers ponderosa pine has to
replace lost shoots through the development of extraordinary buds.
Literature
A review of the literature has revealed but little concerning the power
of pines to replace those shoots browsed
off by animals.
BUSGEN and
MUNCH (1) say, "In general the tendency to epicormic branch formation is
less in conifers than in broad-leaved trees.
Our Scots pine opens dormant
buds only in extremity, after complete defoliation by caterpillars.
A few
dwarf shoots with ordinary double needles may then be formed from dormant
whorl buds, and the dormant eyes between the destroyed needles of the
dwarf shoots may become rosette shoots...
BUSGEN and MUNCH continue
their discussion with statements con-
cerning conifers,
as follows:
"The North American Pinus rigida, not
infrequently
cultivated
in Germany
.
.
.,
develops
preventitious
shoots
very readily even on old stems."
(No statement pertaining to the cir-
cumstances of development
is made.)
These authors state further that
"the clothing of the stem with green and the replacement of lost shoots,
1 Publication of the Senior Range Examiner at the Southwestern Forest and Range
Experiment Station, maintained at Tucson, Arizona, by the Forest Service, United States
Department of Agriculture, in cooperation with the University of Arizona.
0

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
besides being brought about by dormant buds produced normally on the
young annual shoots (preventitious buds) may be effected through so-called
secondary buds
.
.
. in the axils of leaves or bud scales in which no per-
fected bud would normally have developed.
The power of producing such
secondary buds is possessed especially by the spruce, and on this to a great
extent depends the inexhaustible power of recovery after cutting or grazing
which makes it so suitable a hedge plant."
This "inexhaustible" power of spruce trees to recover was observed years
ago on Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmanni) on too frequently used sheep
bed grounds in the high mountains of northern New Mexico.
When substitute buds were observed on ponderosa pine (1925), it was
considered most unusual, for there seemed to be a common belief that loss of
terminal buds or shoots cut short the development of young pines and that
when the primary leader and lateral were destroyed, recovery depended on
the presence of an uninjured lower branch.
Before this, in writing of sheep
injuries to ponderosa pine in Idaho, SPARHAWK
(5) recognized recovery
through the ascendancy of a side branch and probably the development of
buds also when he said, "An uninjured side branch or a new bud takes the
place of the leader.'
.
. H"ILL (3) also recognized the common occurrence
of recovery where the leading growth was destroyed but does not describe
any recovery process.
During recent years several authors, including GRA-
HAM and BAUMHOFER (2), KIENHOLZ (4), and WAKELEY (6), have described
growth from substitute buds following tip moth and frost injury to pines.
Observations
Unmistakable evidences of substitute bud and shoot development on
browsed ponderosa pine seedlings were observed during the late summer
of 1925 and again in 1926 while working range study plots in the forests
of northern Arizona.
In 1927 intensive investigations on the relation of
grazing to natural regeneration on cut-over timberlands were initiated in
the same district.
These studies, which were continued over a period of 10
years, offered the opportunity to determine the processes and circumstances
of extraordinary shoot development.
In addition, observations were ex-
tended to the main pine forest areas of Arizona and New Mexico and to
some extent to those of southern Colorado.
Cattle and browsing game animals, as well as sheep and tip moths, did the
principal amount of injury to seedlings older than 3 years, whereas cutting
off top parts of the younger seedlings was done mainly by rodents.
Brows-
ing by livestock and game animals, although common and severe in some
districts, was lacking or almost so in other districts.
The replacement of lost current growths through the development of
substitute buds or shoots proved to be common.
It was also found that
6

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
there are several different processes whereby ponderosa pine develops sub-
stitute buds and shoots, particular development depending on a number
of circumstances or factors, such as time when injury occurred in relation
to annual shoot growth, factor causing injury, and the parts of a plant
removed or injured.
Processes of recovery
SUBSTITUTE GROWTHS
The replacement of lost shoots on older plants takes place on stubs of
shoots left and on the stems from which shoots have been removed.
SUBSTITUTE GROWTHS ON YOUNG SHOOTS.-These may open when needles
are left on the stubs of injured shoots through development of (a) needle-
bundle buds between the needles of the uppermost bundles left, and (b)
rarely through whorl buds and the secondary buds in the axils of scales;
but stubs without needles die.
SUBSTITUTE GROWTHS ON OLD STEMS.-Such growths may develop from
(a) dormant whorl buds, (b) secondary buds in the axils of scales from
which no short shoot sprang, and (e) buds of unknown origin herein dis-
cussed under other substitute growths.
SUBSTITUTE GROWTHS IN JUVENILE SEEDLINGS.-In plants of the cotyledon
stage these growths commonly arise from (a) dormant buds that are a part
of the growth point above the cotyledons, and in 1- and 2-year-old plants
from (b) dormant buds in the axils of primary leaves.
None of these dif-
ferent growths are considered adventitious, because they arise from buds
formed in due order or from the dormant eye between the needles of short
shoots.
This excellent statement concerning adventitious buds
is taken
from BUTSGEN and MUNCH: "They must not be confused with the dormant
buds
.
.
., which while they may indeed produce shoots out of proper order,
were nevertheless originally formed in due order from cells whose active
formation has already ceased.
This is the case, for example, with Begonia
leaves which the gardener cuts off and places in moist sand for propagation
purposes."
In order to make clear the different processes of substitute shoot de-
velopment, the normal growth habits of pines will be briefly presented
here.
Pines 3 years and older have two distinct forms of branches or shoots,
long and short.
Long shoots bear the scale leaves and short shoots (also
known as modified stems, dwarf shoots, and spurs) the needle bundles or
foliage leaves.
There is an entirely different behavior in young pines less
than 3 years old.
On the first growth above the smooth cotyledons and also
on the leading growth of the second year are borne spirally arranged
single-toothed leaves known as primary leaves,
so closely spaced as to
7

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
resemble tufts.
Branching begins the third year with the development
of long shoots.
SUBSTITUTE GROWTHS ON YOUNG ANNUAL SHOOTS.-Unstimulated dormant
buds (whorl buds and secondary buds) and likewise the eye initial within
each needle bundle remain asleep.
Either may awaken when the buds or
growth point above them are destroyed.
The inconspicuous dormant whorl
buds lie -close below the shoot's tip, hence they seldom escape being taken
with the part of the shoot browsed off by animals.
Likewise, if tip moth
larvae kill a shoot's tip, the dormant whorl buds are destroyed also.
Sec-
ondary buds (dormant buds in the axils of scales and from which no short
shoots grew) develop only when foliage persists to keep the stub alive,
and then only rarely.
Needle bundles, on the other hand, are usually left
on the stubs of browsed shoots and development of eye initials is common.
.
..
..i.^
...
I.~..
FIG. 1.
Stubs of browsed shoots:
1, resin-capped stub with several needle bundles,
showing early stages of bud development in the two uppermost bundles; 2, stub with a
very young bud (from a small plant); 3, stub (dying for lack of foliage); 4, stub with
only one needle bundle in which bud development has begun.
8

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
NEEDLE-BUNDLE BUDS
Browsing animals and tip moths attack young shoots in early summer,
mainly during the latter two-thirds of the period of elongation.
When
browsing, animals jerk off growing terminals, usually leaving stubs 1 or
more inches in length with needle bundles.
Development of the eye initial
in one or more of these soon begins. A similar development takes place fol-
lowing tip moth injury, but the effects of tip moth continue throughout the
several weeks' period of development of the larvae in a shoot and subsequent
bud development is much less likely to take place.
Stubs without needle
bundles soon wither and die.
Typical development of needle-bundle buds takes place on stubs of
browsed-off young shoots, such as those in figure 1.
The stub of a browsed-
off shoot exudes a clear sticky resin that soon hardens and covers the injured
tissues.
The earliest indication of bud development is a slight swelling
Y.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
FIG. 2.
X. Needle-bundle buds on the stub of a shoot that was browsed in June
(photographed in August).
The bud on the left is typical of development in the fall,
following injury.
The bud on the right has begun growth.
Some needles were removed
to aid photographing.
Y. Three stages in the development of an extraordinary bud or
shoot from an eye initial.
A, stub of a shoot soon after injury, showing the usual stage
of needle growth when browsing begins.
B, the same stub, in August, with a well-devel-
oped needle-bundle bud.
C, extraordinary shoot
(on stub shown in B)
1 year later.
Note the peculiar needles (a, b, c) of the bundle from which the substitute growth opened.
Note also how perfectly the new shoot has become a part of the stem.
9

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
within the paper-like sheath of one or more of the uppermost needle bundles
on a stub.
Such development becomes noticeable about 30 or 40 days after
injury, but a slightly magnified section of the uppermost needle bundle, the
one most likely to develop a bud, will show development of the eye initial
in a much shorter time.
Buds that appear early in the summer develop
rapidly and may elongate into shoots several inehes long by October.
Cur-
rent development usually is confined to buds (never more than one to a
short shoot), hereinafter called needle-bundle buds which, in the fall, resem-
ble the terminal buds of normal shoots (fig. 2).
During the period of development, such a bud swells, breaks the needle
sheath, and pushes the needles apart until they appear to be single leaves
on a short shoot which now bears a well-developed bud.
Thus such a short
shoot has begun to function as a long shoot.
The part of any grazed-off stub above its uppermost needle bundle soon
withers and sloughs away.
As the young bud develops, it turns upward
and, particularly on the stub of a primary shoot, gradually pushes the
sloughing tissues above it away and becomes the new terminal bud of the
injured shoot (B in Y, fig. 2).
Recovery through the growth of such a bud
often is so complete that the only indication of past injury is a rind union
or crease which resembles a finger-joint line on the palm side of the hand.
This crease is formed by the union of the new shoot, which turns upward
across the injured end of the stem, with the rind on the opposite side of the
old stem from which the needle-bundle bud developed.
Change in function of a short shoot, such as is brought about through
development of its eye initial, also is indicated by the needles the shoot bears.
These needles attain abnormal size and become so broad at the base as to
resemble the leaves of the century plant or agave (X, fig. 2).
They set early,
whereas normal needles remain soft at the base and may be easily pulled
from the sheath so long as they grow, usually until late fall.
The needles
surrounding a needle-bundle bud also become so fibrous and firmly fixed
that they are never shed as are the normal needles but, unless knocked off,
persist even after death.
Some plants kept under observation retained such
needles after 9 years.
In fact, these peculiar needles, which become fixed
because the short shoot on which they grow becomes a stem and is not shed
with the leaves as ordinary short shoots are, furnish unmistakable evidence
of former injury.
They have been found persisting on the lower part of
the main stems of trees, as the one in A of figure 3, that were from 5 to
25 feet tall.
Incidentally, the needles of bundles from which buds spring sometime
clearly show that the foliage leaves, which may be short when shoots are
browsed, grow from the base and not from the tip end.
The needles are
particularly apt to adhere to the sheath of a bundle in which bud develop-
10

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
__PI
.*fl5$.
FIG.
3.
Main stem of a ponderosa pine 5 years after injury from browsing.
Note
how straight it is.
A, single old needle (one of the original bundle show-n in B), and,
immediately above it, a line where the rind of stub and substitute shoot joined.
B, needle-
bundle bud through which recovery took place.
ment is taking place.
As these needles elongate, they bow outward, being
unable to extend in a straight line, burst through the sides of the sheath,
and form into loops.
DORMANT WH-ORL BUDS AND SECONDARY BUDS ON YOUNG ANNUAL SHOOTS
Some normal shoots develop well-defined terminal buds early in summer.
Injury to such leading buds without destruction of dormant whorl buds
seldom occurs.
Only a very few shoots have been observed on which the
terminal buds had been destroyed by some undetermined factor and sub-
stitute buds formed, apparently from dormant whorl buds.
In order to
test for such a. response, the leading terminal anad lateral buds were pinched
from forward shoots in midsummer.
By fall such destroyed buds were
replaced by one or more small but otherwise apparently normal buds which
opened normal shoots the following year.
A few growths which were considered to be from secondary buds, be-
cause of their location in the axils of scales, were observed.
They occur
only on shoot stubs having, foliage, for stubs without foliage die before new
growth develops.
On stubs with foliage, needle-bundle buds usually develop
so readily that secondary buds remain dormant.
Development of dormant whorl and secondary buds on shoots is too rare
to be of any practical importance and is described merely to show that such
responses do take place.
11

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
GROWTHS ON OLD STEMS
SUBSTITUTE GROWTHS.-Old stems as well as current growths may de-
velop substitute shoots.
Furthermore, when vigorous plants are pruned
severely for several years, the stubs of current shoots with foliage leaves
may develop needle-bundle buds and old stems bearing these stubs may
develop substitute growth from whorl or secondary buds.
Usually shoot
development on old stems takes place in extremity, or where no stubs of
shoots with needle bundles are left.
When tip moth and browsing animals severely damage young pines,
leading terminal and lateral shoots sometimes are killed or pulled off close
f~~"
'
X
FIG. 4.
X. Three stages in the development of substitute growth from a dormant
whorl bud.
A, main stem with three stubs of browsed shoots without any needle bundles
(June).
B, new shoot (a) opening from a whorl bud on the old stem (Aug.).
The dead
stubs have shrunk.
C, substitute shoot 1 year later (Aug.).
The second year following
injury, the main stem was almost straight.
Y. Two kinds of substitute growths on a
browsed plant.
A, new shoot opening from a whorl bud on old stem.
B, needle-bundle
bud on stub of browsed-off shoot.
Note the short growths that resemble primary leaves
on shoot A and the needle bundles in the axil of the lower of these leaves.
The old stem
is that part with mature foliage.
12

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
to the old stem bearing them.
These
lost shoots usually
are replaced
through development of either dormant whorl or secondary buds on the old
stem.
DORMANT WHORL BUDS.-Whorl buds open readily from uninjured year-
old stems, but where injuries occur year after year stems that have been
tipped when they were shoots have no whorl buds.
The absence of whorl
buds on some stem growths, however, does not prevent recovery, for these
buds may develop and open shoots on stems 2 or more years old.
When the growth of the old stem that bears the stubs of lost shoots (A in
X, fig. 4) was not injured the previous year, the year it was a terminal shoot,
one or more of its sleeping whorl buds located just below the dying stubs is
almost certain to awaken.
Sometimes both needle-bundle and whorl buds
develop, as is the case in Y of figure 4.
These whorl bud growths from their
beginning resemble elongating shoots.
No conspicuous buds form, as in the
case of the development of needle-bundle buds.
Instead, a cluster of scales
and of needle points which otherwise resemble the cone of an elongating
normal shoot burst forth, making shoots 1 or more inches long and some-
times much longer the year the plant was injured (B in X and A in Y, fig.
4).
These current growths from whorl buds are easily distinguished by
their short needles which are crowded on short stem growths, resembling the
well-known secondary growth of a normal shoot, which growth also takes
place so late in the season that it is stunted by low fall temperature.
Plants that have been injured and have recovered through the growth
of dormant whorl buds show that such injuries may be detected with reason-
able certainty years after they occur.
Whorl bud growths having much
longer base than top needles are cone-shaped.
Any growth length of the
main stem of a plant, which is much shorter than the lengths above and
below it and which bears the short crowded needles referred to or their scars,
is from a whorled bud, or is normal secondary growth.
Such a growth, par-
ticularly one without side branches near its base (laterals are uncommon in
the case of whorl bud growths), when accompanied by stubs of shoots or
their scars and/or a slight crook in the main stem, is unmistakable evidence
of shoot injury and recovery through bud development (fig. 5).
Where main stems are the product of uninjured shoots and stubs of
shoots, dormant whorl buds may be lacking on stem growths 1 or more years
old, because they have been destroyed.
In such cases new shoots have been
observed on stems 2 or more years old.
Wood sections and the location near
the tips of annual growths indicated whorl-bud origin of these shoots.
Furthermore some records were taken in sufficient detail to determine which
stem growths were uninjured when they were current shoots, and thus which
ones might have dormant whorl buds.
SECONDARY BUDS.-Still other but rather rare-occurring substitute shoots
were observed on year-old stems.
They occurred on stubs of stems that had
13

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
FIG.
5.
A many-times injured plant, height 18 inches, illustrating the peculiar
appearance of current growth from whorl buds, accelerated growth following release from
injury, and recovery.
A, shoot growth (1933) from one-half inch stub (a) of a browsed
(1932) shoot.
B, late season whorl-bud growth (1931) following early summer loss of
shoots.
The visible part of the main stem is the product of two uninjured growths (A
and B, both from extraordinary buds) and three short stubs of shoots.
The uninjured
1933 growth (A) represents one-half the total height of the 13-year-old tree.
been tipped when they were shoots and from which needle-bundle-bud
shoots had opened and been destroyed the following year.
Thus such a
year-old stem had no whorl buds left and the shoot stub
it bore had
neither whorl buds nor needle bundles from which substitute growth could
develop.
These old-stem shoots were considered to arise from dormant sec-
ondary buds because of their location with respect to the axils of scales from
which no short shoots had developed.
To definitely establish the fact, more
detailed morphological study than has been made is necessary.
OTHER SUBSTITUTE GROWTHS
Small shoots which resemble the slow-growing terminals of oldest side
branches appear from time to time on the main stems of young pines below
14
%!
1
......

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
their oldest side branches.
They open on uninjured as well as injured
plants, but occur principally before the stem is covered with thick flakes of
corky bark.
They may last no longer than the foliage leaves they bear or
they may put on puny terminal growth for only a year or two.
But if the
leading growths above are lost, passive main-stem shoots may become active,
may put on annual shoots similar to those of normal leadingf growths, and
may become the main stems.
Vigorous shoots similar to those of normal leading growths may also
spring from the lower main stems of repeatedly damaged plants.
The origin
of many of these main-stem shoots seems to bear relation to the location of
dormant buds.
Such awakened buds push through places where the rind is
thin, as scale scars and where the inner bark is exposed in vertical cracks
which are so common in the smooth rind of the main stem of young pines.
Sometimes vigorous shoots springing from cracks in the rind seem to bear no
relation to the probable location of any dormant buds; possibly they are
adventitious.
Adventitious budding is also indicated by the opening of shoots from
wounds.
To illustrate: A small pine was found cut off close to the ground,
presumably by a porcupine.
The following summer a vigorous shoot ap-
peared above the grass at the mapped location of the cut-off plant.
It sprang
from the cut surface of the stump's rind but may have grown from a dor-
mant bud.
Were this the case, the rarity of their occurrences could be
explained by the small number of young pines that are cut off when a stim-
ulus for growth is on and by the poor chance that many of them would be so
severed as to expose some dormant bud that still retained its vital connec-
tions with the stem.
SUBSTITUTE GROWTH IN JUVENILE SEEDLINGS.-Extraordinary budding
readily takes place in seedlings in the primary leaf stage.
The only animals
that appreciably injured seedlings in the cotyledon stage or during the year
of germination were rodents, although mortality from other causes, such as
drought, was very high.
Rodents, principally ground squirrels and mice, may be very destructive.
They cut off the stems of many young plants and all or a part of the cotyle-
dons of others.
Most of the injured cotyledons are taken before or while
unfolding and in a manner that could not be done by any large-mouthed
animal.
Small rodents do this when they take the seed coats from germi-
nating plants.
This accounts for the fact that any number of the leaflike
cotyledons (fig. 6A), from all to only a few, or any amount of all or only a
few cotyledons may be cut off, the parts taken depending on the parts still
in the seed coat when it is taken.
Obviously when a seedling was cut off below the cotyledons it died, but
many rodent-damaged plants with only a few cotyledons or parts of them
15

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
B,4~ ~~~~7
FIG.
6.
Growths on young seedlings.
A, cotyledon stage
(ordinary growth soon
after shedding of seed coat).
B, substitute growths that are similar to the lost first lead-
ing growth.
(The first leading growth was bitten off below all leaves (a).
The substi-
tute growths, with primary leaves, opened from a point above the cotyledons, which per-
sisted.)
C, substitute growths (a) in the axils of primary leaves.
(A part of the leading
growth (b) of the second year was lost.)
D, substitute growths on a three-year-old seed-
ling; a, growths, with primary leaves in the axils of primary leaves; b, a needle-bundle
bud.
(The plant's first long shoot was bitten off leaving one needle bundle on the stub
(c) of that growth and primary leaves on the older growth.)
survived.
Where such injuries occur without damage to the plumule, the
plant develops normally.
The first leading growth above the cotyledons also
was commonly damaged by rodents and sometimes by browsing animals.
Recovery from such injury took place through the opening of substitute
growth at a point above the cotyledons, as is shown in B of figure 6.
GROWTH THE SECOND YEAR
Under average conditions, substantial primary growth begins when seed-
lings are nearly 1 year old.
The leading growth above the cotyledons is so
nearly covered by primary leaves that even if such growth were cut off by
rodents or jerked off by browsing animals, some undamaged leaves usually
were left.
Buds and then new growths (one bud to a leaf) may open in the
axil of one or more of the uppermost of these leaves soon after injury.
They
open rapidly, forming new growths (C, fig. 6) which also bear primary
leaves.
Sometimes when substitute growth is injured soon after it is made, a
second growth forms on the remnant of the first and after the same manner
as the first.
This exceptional ability to produce more than one substitute
growth in a season is accounted for by the tendency of pines in the primary-
leaf stage to grow throughout the summer rather than to complete growth
elongation during early summer, as older plants usually do.
16

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
GROWTH THE THIRD YEAR
During the third year normal seedlings form long shoots from buds nest-
ingf in the axil of some primary leaves of the second year's growth.
The first
long shoots may bear more than one short shoot or may be so small as to have
only one with good foliage leaves.
As a rule, only shoots of appreciable
length are damaged by browsing animals, but tip moths injure smallest shoots
also.
When a first long shoot is killed, an undeveloped bud in the axil of some
primary leaf opens and a new shoot soon takes the place of the one destroyed.
Should the substitute shoot be injured so as to leave a short shoot with foliage
leaves, a needle-bundle bud develops after the manner already described,
which is shown in D of figure 6.
SUBSTITUTE BUDDING, TO BE EXPECTED
It seems appropriate at this point to call attention to the relation of extra-
ordinary buds and shoots to the normal life of pines.
As has been pointed out, young pines, beginning with the cotyledon stage,
have dormant buds which possess powers of growth similar to those of pri-
mary buds.
The needle-bundle bud may be considered the most unusual of the sub-
stitute growths, unless possibly pines do produce adventitious buds, and this
Needle
bundle
(Londutcldinal IE;P,d_w.,s
5ectiori)
Plipnl
Dsk(pd
-Y.n.co-i1o,
brFp.nco-ls.C...dpilxs
A.
Short shoot
1r E1t
no
(Lorngtudinal
(Crers
sedaen)
P,th@
d
e
z
3ccion
r tee
B;
Ayiem~~
FIG.
7.
X, cross-section of a young shoot and longitudinal section of one of its short
shoots (ponderosa pine), shoiing
the relation between the eye initial in the needle bundle
and the shoot (enlarged 9 diameters).
Y, the eye initial a growsth point.
A, longitudinal
section (ponderosa pine) through uninjured long and short shoots, showving the connection
between the eye initial and the vital parts of a young shoot.
B, the stub of a browsed
shoot, showing early stages in the development of the eye initial into a needle-bundle bud.
(Enlarged 9 diameters.)
17

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
has not been definitely established.
But are there any good reasons why
development of the needle-bundle bud should be unexpected?
A short shoot
is but a branch of a long shoot.
It retains all its connections with the parent
long shoot when current growth and occasionally when 1 or 2 years old.
It
has an eye initial on its tip.
Thus a short shoot has all the parts required
for transformation into a long shoot if called on to so function (fig. 7).
At the time these observations were begun, beliefs regarding substitute
budding may have been influenced by the behavior of particular pines.
Perhaps the tendencies to substitute shoot development may be much less in
some species than in others, or some may not form such shoots at
all.
GRAHAM and BAUMHOFER (2) show that tip-mothed ponderosa pine devel-
oped needle-bundle buds less readily than other pines studied at Halsey,
Nebraska.
On the other hand, men who were shown examples of substitute
budding in the Southwest and who suggested that ponderosa pine may have
a particular tendency toward epicormic branching, have since found these
extraordinary growths on pines in other regions.
As a matter of interest,
one or more of the forms of substitute shoot development that has been de-
scribed for ponderosa pine has also been observed in the southwestern yellow
pines, Chihuahua (Pinus leiophylla) and Arizona (P. arizonica).
The suggestion that this tendency may be peculiar to 3-needled pines has
also been received.
As regards white pines, a few limber pines (P. flexilis)
occur in the same general region where ponderosa pine was studied.
They
produce extraordinary growths when injured quite as readily as do pon-
4 ~~~~~~~~~4
S.
w.S..
MESn
FIG. 8.
Extraordinary growths on a young limber pine, which shoots opened from
needle-bundle buds, as evidenced by the five needles (characteristic of limber pine) at the
base of each shoot.
18

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
derosa pine (fig. 8).
Such growths have been found on Mexican white pine
(P. strobiformis) also.
So far as is known, there are no other records of this
growth phenomenon in white pines.
In ornamental plantings in the Southwest, evidence of recovery from
injury through development of needle-bundle buds has beeni observed on
several different unidentified young 3- and 5-needled pines and on the
2-needled Scotch pinie (P. sylvestris).
Factors causing injury, in relation to recovery
Destructive factors, the injuries they do, and the eircumstaniees under
which injury takes place will be discussed in other presentations for publi-
cation-those presenting the results of the grazinig-timber reproduction study
previously mentioned.
Only summarized statements of findings which show
the influence different factors have on extraordinary bud development will
be given here.
TiP MOTHS
Tip moths deposit eggs on the current growth of pines during the early
period of shoot elonlgation.
The larvae, on hatching, eat into and sometimes
through the entire length of a shoot.
Badly affected shoots die; others die
in part (fig. 9).
In any event, moth injury influences the chances and proc-
esses of recovery somewhat differently than mechanical injury, as from
browsing.
If only the tip part of a moth-injured shoot dies, as is frequently
FIG. 9.
Three tip-mothed ponderosa pine shoots.
Left, only the tip was injured, but
all except the lower four or five bundles were affected, and they show no evidence of bud
development.
Right, entirely dead (the three lower needle bundles developed before the
larvae reached them).
Middle, shoot, nearly full growth, damaged only at tip and side.
Such a shoot that attains nearly full growth before its tip dies and that has many unaf-
fected leaves does not, as a rule, develop needle-bundle buds.
19

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
the case, needle-bundle buds may or may not open.
In contrast to other
injuries, the effect of moth injury is progressive and cumulative; it may
possibly be toxic.
Larvae may be active throughout most of the period of
shoot elongation, and any foliage leaves that survive may become stunted
and weak.
When living but weakened leaves are left on a shoot, no needle-
bundle buds usually develop.
The stage of development of pine shoots at the time moth larvae become
active may vary considerably from year to year.
In some years when moths
fly early and their larvae attack shoots during the early period of elongation,
the chances of recovery through opening of needle-bundle buds is seriously
affected.
Such years were 1927 and 1928, when examinations of thousands
of moth-injured shoots showed needle-bundle buds on less than 1 per cent.
In years when moths fly late, the vigorous and rapid shoot growth of mid-
season seems to counteract the damaging effects of larvae and many injured
shoots have only destroyed tips or sides, in which event a large percentage
of the shoots with undamaged foliage leaves develop needle-bundle buds.
Where shoots are destroyed to the extent that no needle-bundle buds open
from them, whorl buds commonly develop on the old stems below the larvae-
destroyed leading -growth.
However, where substitute shoots from whorl
buds are moth-injured, the chances of additional substitute growth are
greatly reduced, because of the lack of other dormant buds from which
such growths might open.
The cumulative effect of injuries and the small
percentage of recovery through needle-bundle buds indicate how serious tip-
moth damage may become.
Some tip-mothed plants
(in places nearly
all of them) on large areas, particularly in warmer parts of southwestern
pine forests, remain bushy and deformed until they reach a height beyond
which moths ordinarily fly.
However, most tip-mothed trees apparently do
recover ultimately.
Tip moths are particularly destructive to small plants during the first
few years of long-shoot growth; for their shoots are small and any affected
shoot usually is completely destroyed.
Small plants soon become bushy on
account of recurring injury to leading growth and regrowth through opening
of numerous substitute buds.
BROWSING ANIMALS
Browsing animals took only young shoots and, excepting deer, browse in
about the same manner and during the same period.
Any browsing of consequence by cattle, sheep, and antelope occurs during
dry periods.
It begins in early summer on the most advanced shoots after
they have made substantial length growth, but while their needles are still
short, as those in A of Y figure 2.
Browsing continues throughout the early
summer dry period, but ceases with the first summer rains, regardless of the
20

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
stage of shoot developmenit.
During occasional years of few and irregular
summer rains, browsing recurs to some extent during any extended dry
period between rains.
In most years the period of pine browsing extends
from about mid-June to early July.
The earlier shoots are browsed during the annual growth period, the
sooner substitute shoots and buds appear and the more pronounced is their
development.
Where leading growth is browsed off after shoot elongation
is complete, either needle-bundle or old-stem buds may fail to develop, at
least to any noticeable degree during the same year.
The growth of buds
that are but slightly stimulated is tardy the following year and the shoots
that open from them sometimes are weak and persist as side branches only.
Thus, late injury and consequent weak substitute growth tends to produce
the greater temporary deformities in the plant.
Deer, in contrast to other animals studied, may destroy terminal buds
soon after shoot elongation begins in spring.
On parts of experimental
ranges where deer congregated and where fresh deer tracks but no sign of
other browsing animals could be found, shoots were browsed in May during
the early stages of growth before livestock were on these ranges.
Similar findings and general observations over a period of years showed
that deer browse pine shoots earlier than other animals.
As the season
advanced, deer-browsed shoots became difficult to identify because livestock
were then taking shoots, and deer scattered from the particular areas where
spring damage was found.
However, observations indicate that deer con-
tinue to take shoots throughout the period when other animals browse.
The
most conclusive proof of this was found in the Kaibab country north of the
Grand Canyon.
Here deer have browsed shoots just as severely as cattle and
sheep ever do and also continue browsing throughout the period of shoot
elongation, or at least until the coming of summer rains.
Where deer peel all the developed terminal buds from a stem, the whole
shoot,. which is then very short, ordinarily is destroyed.
Under such circum-
stances old-stem whorl buds develop rapidly and soon may form extraor-
dinary growths that closely resemble ordinary shoots
(fig. 10).
Likewise,
if the tip of a very small shoot is so taken as to leave one or more of the
then slightly developed short shoots, needle-bundle buds may develop and
grow into large shoots the same year.
Test of injury and recovery
Individual plants under controlled conditions were injured mechanically
and compared with uninjured plants in order to test the effect of different
kinds, combinations, and degrees of browsing where given injuries were
repeated on the same plant over a period of years.
Incidental to the purpose and main findings of this study, it was observed
that extraordinary budding took place just as it did on browsed plants, so
21

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
FIG. 10.
Young substitute shoots (early August) from whorl buds in which growth
was stimulated through loss of terminal buds before shoot elongation began in the spring
(late May), showing how such early-growing extraordinary growths resemble ordinary
shoots.
Deer peeled the swelling buds, leaving the stubs and scales (a).
long as shoots were injured at about the same stage of growth and in a similar
manner as was done by browsing animals.
In short, needle-bundle, whorl,
and secondary buds developed when young annual growths were removed
mechanically.
Among these mechanically injured plants, the extent of current develop-
ment of substitute buds or shoots also bore a definite relation to the stage of
normal shoot development when injury occurred.
To wit, the best buds were
produced where shoots were removed before elongation was completed; and
among well-developed
shoots,
only those with immature foliage
leaves
(needles continue to grow after full shoot length is attained) produced buds
the same year.
Plants from which leading shoots were removed-when both
shoots and foliage were fully developed failed to produce noticeable evidences
22

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
of buds.
On some of these, buds appeared the following year but sometimes
failed to open shoots.
This shows that substitute buds are awakened most
readily and some develop only during the periods when the plant is normally
expending stored energy in the production of annual shoot growth.
It would
seem to indicate that the extent of development of current substitute growth
is determined by the amount of unexpended annual growth energy in the
plant.
Another interesting and significant observation made on both mechani-
cally injured and browsed plants, and which was demonstrated again and
again by the different kinds of growths, is the strong tendency for substitute
buds on leading growths to produce leading growths
(fig. 11).
In most
instances shoots from needle-bundle buds gain the lead even where some
(
FIG. 11. A many-times browsed ponderosa pine seedling (12 in. high, 10 years old),
showing how injured leading shoots tend to produce leading shoots, and how stem length
may represent a succession of stubs.
A, unsketched part of main stem (3 in.) which car-
ried evidence of several injuries and substitute growths.
B, rind creases, evidence of sub-
stitute growth following injury.
C, dead stub of browsed 1926 growth.
D, stub of 1927
shoot from a whorl bud on 1925 growth (stem), following removal of the one leading
shoot (C) in 1926.
E, stub of 1928 growth from a needle-bundle bud.
(Note the peculiar
needles at the base of this and other extraordinary needle-bundle growths.)
F, 1929 shoot
from a needle-bundle bud.
The left branch shows uninjured 1927 and injured 1928 growth
(d).
The 1927 shoot was from a whorl bud, as D.
The browsed 1928 shoot gave rise to
two needle-bundle buds from which opened the 1929 shoots (e).
Branch to right: a, stub
of 1927 growth which was produced and injured as D; b, stub of 1928 shoot that opened
from a needle-bundle bud; c, 1929 growth from a needle-bundle bud.
23

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
uninjured shoot or branch assumes control for one or more years; and buds
on leader stubs are more apt to produce leaders than buds on laterals where
both are present.
In the absence of needle-bundle buds, uppermost whorl
buds (any of which might have been the leading gro^wth in the past) gain the
lead when stimulated to make growth.
The uppermost bud, either needle-
bundle or whorl, on the main stem where substitute buds open on both main
stem and branches, is most apt to produce leading growth.
The tendency of
leading growth to retain 'the lead is also influenced by the energy the plant
has expended in making shoot growth at the time injury occurred.
As evi-
dence of this, practically all exceptions to the rule that buds on leading
growths produce leading growths were found on plants that were injured too
late in the growth period to develop vigorous buds or shoots.
Substitute growths and recovery of injured pines
This discussion of substitute budding naturally leads to consideration of
the bearing these recovery processes have on reforestation.
How dormant
buds are stimulated and how substitute growths take the place of lost leading
growths have been described.
What peculiar influence, if any, substitute
growths may have on the future life of trees beyond the pole stage can be
determined only after a long-time study.
Repeatedly browsed and tip-mothed young pines may be temporarily as
bushy as the most common hedge plants.
Particularly where juveniles are
injured, many substitute shoots are produced for each normal growth that
is lost.
When such shoots in turn are injured, numerous others open and
persist within the margin of the older branches, although any current shoot
may be tip-mothed and when it extends beyond the old branches may be
browsed.
Thus hedged plants build up branches and foliage and gradually
gain height.
They function and grow through opening of extraordinary
buds and shoots which persist through the protection that hedged growth
affords (fig.. 12).
Tests, on the basis of comparison with normal plants of
the same age, showed that hedged plants have about as much foliage, both
.according to number and surface area and total weight of needles- as the
niormal plants, and also a good root system.
The behavior previously described is characteristic of severely injured
plants, but most seedlings on any large range, even in districts where brows-
ing is apt to occur, are not injur'ed ev6ery year and never become bushes from
browsing, although some plants on areas of animal concentration on the same
range may be injured for several years in succession.
Furthermore, condi-
tions peculiar to some districts where browsing occurs vary so greatly that
many pines may be browsed in some years and few in others.
Where for any
reason plants escape' browsing on some years, they open exceptionally large
leading shoots the same years and thus maintain reasonably normal growth
over a period of years (fig. 13).
24

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
FIG. 12.
Two pine bushes about 6 inches high and 9 years old, hedged as the result
of many browsing and tip-moth injuries.
They show how injured young plants continue
growth through the opening of many substitute shoots, and how the stubs of old shoots
furnish some protection to the new shoots.
Plant on right was severely browsed the year
it was photographed; that on left developed a 2-inch leader.
FIG. 13.
Accelerated growth made by a formerly short, bushy ponderosa pine.
Three-
fourths of the total height growth of this plant was made in 3 years, despite the fact that
the leading shoot was removed once during that time.
On the year following this injury,
the long unbranched part of the main stem opened from a needle-bundle bud.
The many
branches (bush)
on the first base foot of the stem died when accelerated growth sup.
planted the need for the 4- to 7-year-old foliage which had persisted on these branches.
25

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
Accelerated growth of hedged plants continues for several years following
release from injury, some substitute shoot ordinarily assuming the lead, and,
in 3 or 4 years, extending a heavy normally straight stem far above the limits
of the hedge from which it sprang (figs. 5, 12, and 13).
Almost as soon as
such a new main stem has clothed itself with branches and foliage that is in
accord with normal plants of its size, the hedged branches at its base cease
to function, and die.
The extraordinary ability to produce substitute buds and shoots accounts
for the power ponderosa pine has to recover from shoot injury.
If it were
not for this ability to bud, areas having peculiar conditions that induce ani-
mals to browse pines probably could not be grazed by livestock or large game
animals at all without jeopardizing future forests.
Rodents and tip moths
certainly would prevent reforestation in places.
The same may be said of
the past concerning conditions under which older or mature forest stands
developed.
When considering the districts in central Arizona below the
Mogollon Rim, where nearly all young pine trees up to large pole size are
injured year after year by tip moths, one wonders whether many, or even
any, of the mature trees escaped injury when they were young.
It is for-
tunate that browsing and tip moth injury affect only current shoot growth
and so allow for the development of needle-bundle and dormant whorl buds,
and that such injuries occur during periods of normal shoot production when
substitute buds are most readily awakened, otherwise injuries would result
in much more serious consequences than they do.
But little may be said concerning grazing and timber reproduction rela-
tionships in this discussion of recovery processes.
The following results are
recorded as they indicate the importance of the fact that pines replace lost
shoots through a number of different processes of substitute growth.
Of the 2139 ponderosa pine seedlings (about 7 years old in 1927) on 31
plots so scattered as to represent conditions on a 24,000-acre area, 1484, or
69 per cent., were browsed one or more times, some every year during the
9-year period from 1927 to 1935.
Of the browsed plants, 2.8 per cent. died.
Small rodents injured 171, or 7.9 per cent. of the total number of trees on
the same plot areas.
Of the 171 injured trees, 127, or 74 per cent., died.
Most of the rodent injury consisted of barking or cutting off of main stems.
Of the 5172 recorded seedlings that survived the first 2 months, when
mortality from natural causes was tremendous, a total of 74, or 1.4 per cent.,
were killed by browsing animals and 382, or 7.3 per cent., by rodents.
Neither these data nor the statements regarding recovery processes should
be interpreted to mean that overgrazing or poor range management may be
disregarded.
The results of the range-timber reproduction study, which will
be presented in future publications, show grave dangers in such practices.
26

COOPERRIDER: RECOVERY PROCESSES OF PONDEROSA PINE
It is well known that trees, particularly hardwoods, when grown from
stump and trunk sprouts sometimes are small as compared with seed-pro-
duced trees, and may take on bushy or coppice form.
No such tendency has
been observed in young ponderosa pine poles that developed from extraordi-
nary buds.
In this connection, the processes of recovery which have been
described take place during the early life of the plant, and substitute shoots
actually take the place of lost shoots, rather than form the source of new
growth that is superimposed on a part of an old tree, as is often the case with
dwarf and coppice growths from sprouts.
SOUTHWESTERN FOREST AND RANGE EXPERIMENT STATION
TUCSON, ARIZONA
LITERATURE CITED
1. BUSGEN, M., and MUNCH, E.
The structure and life of forest trees.
English translation by THOMAS THOMSON.
New York.
1931.
2.
GRAHAM, S. A., and BAUMHOFER, L. G.
Susceptibility of young pines
to tip moth injury.
Jour. For. 28: 54-65.
1930.
3.
HILL, ROBERT R.
Effects of grazing upon western yellow-pine reproduc-
tion in the national forests of Arizona and New Mexico.
U. S.
Dept. Agr. Bull. 580.
1917.
4.
KIENHOLZ, R.
Frost damage to red pine.
Jour. For. 31: 392-399.
1933.
5.
SPARHAWK, W. N.
Effect of grazing upon western yellow pine repro-
duction in central Idaho.
U. S. Dept. Agr. Bull. 738.
1918.
6. WAKELEY, P. C.
Preliminary observations on the pine tip moth (Rhya-
cionia frustrana Comst.) on southern pines.
Fourth Int. Cong.
Ent. (1928)4, Trans. 2: 865-868.
1929.
27
