 
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
27 
Chapter 2 
The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
W. WALLACE COVINGTON 
Forests composed of ponderosa pine and closely related species such as Apache 
pine (Pinus engelmannii), Arizona pine (P. arizonica), and Durango pine (P. 
durangensis) cover more than 7 million acres (2.8 million hectares) in the 
Southwest (Little 1971; Brown 1994) and some 30 million acres (12.1 million 
hectares) in other western states, Canada, and northern Mexico (Powell et al. 
1993; Figure 2.1). Throughout this range, pine ecosystems occur in a belt of 
varying width that ranges from a high of approximately 9,500 feet (2,900 meters) 
in the southern portion of its range to a low of 1,000 feet (300 meters) in the 
northern portion and that typically occurs above woodland, grassland, and 
chaparral ecosystems and below montane mixed conifer and spruce-fir forests 
(Covington et al. 1994). Most of these forests have changed dramatically in 
structure and function in the 120 to more than 300 years since the onset of 
Euro-American settlement (Covington and Moore 1994b; Fule et al. 1997; 
Moore et al. 1999; Swetnam et al. 1999; Allen et al. 2002; Chapter 7). Forests 
that were characterized by open stands with widely scattered, large pines now 
support dense thickets of thin "doghair" pines. Where historical photographs 
depict an understory of varied grasses and forbs, today's forests often support 
little herbaceous growth. 
The secondary changes brought about by these shifts in forest structure have 
significant implications for ecosystem functioning and for human welfare, 
and they make up much of the material in this volume. Cumulatively, they 
make clear the need for ecological restoration of these forests. But we cannot 
hope to implement restoration responsibly without understanding how the 
Southwest's ponderosa pine forests were shaped. Specifically, we need to 
understand both the long-term evolutionary environment of these forests-
why did they come to occur in the places and forms 
FIGURE 2.1. Range of ponderosa pine and closely related long-needled pines in 
  
the southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico. Adapted from Little 1971. 
 
that they do?-as well as their recent history-what forces have 
degraded ecosystem structure and function and have thereby caused the 
ecosystem to depart from its previous evolutionary trajectory? 
 
 
The Evolutionary Environment 
Ponderosa pine is the most widespread member of an ecologically similar 
group of western long-needled pines in the subsection Ponderosae. These 
plants have been present in western North America for millions of years. The 
oldest paleoecological record of their presence is 50 million years old, from 
southern British Columbia, while macrofossils 25 million years old have 
been found near Creede, Colorado. Over evolutionary time, they and their 
associated microbial, plant, and animal communities have tracked 
 

28 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
favorable climatic conditions, not just elevationally, but also latitudinally and 
longitudinally (Bonnicksen 2000). At times these ecosystems were much 
more widespread than today, most notably during the Miocene, 5 to 7 
million years ago. 
Over the past several million years the evolutionary history of the species that 
constitute today's ecosystems has been characterized by major climatic 
fluctuations (Delcourt and Delcourt 1988; Bonnicksen 2000) that have 
resulted in substantial changes in geographical and altitudinal ranges. During 
the last major glacial period (30,000 to 14,000 years ago) continental ice sheets 
cooled middle latitudes. Coniferous forests and woodlands shifted south and 
lower in elevation, only to shift back again with warmer temperatures. 
Generally, plants appear to have responded to such climate changes as 
individual species, not as plant associations; some species remained 
unchanged, others appear to have increased, while others decreased or 
became locally extinct. Ponderosa pine trees appear to have returned to the high 
plateaus and mountains of northern Arizona beginning a little over 10,000 
years ago (Anderson 1989, 1993; Anderson et al. 2000; Weng and Jackson 
1999) and to the central Rocky Mountains only about 5,000 years ago (pers. 
comm., J. Norris, S. T. Jackson, and J_ L. Betancourt, U.S. Geological Survey). 
The evolutionary biogeography of ponderosa pine elsewhere is discussed by Baker 
(1986b), Latta and Milton (1999), and Millar (1998). 
Evolutionary biology, ecological restoration, and conservation biology all 
rest upon the concept of the evolutionary environment. The term refers to the 
environment in which a species or groups of species evolved-the 
environment of speciation. Over evolutionary time species not only adapt 
to their evolutionary environment, but may come to depend upon its con- 
ditions for their continued survival (Mooney 1981; Wilson 1992). Fire 
appears to have exerted sufficient selection pressure on ponderosa pine 
and other western long-needled pines to have become a factor that these 
species not just tolerate but in fact rely on for long-term survival and repro- 
duction. All share evolutionary traits that serve as adaptations to frequent 
low-intensity surface fires, including protected buds, thick bark, prolific 
seed production, rapid seedling growth, longevity, long, resinous needles, 
and highly flammable litter (Agee 1998). 
Fire has not been the only important disturbance agent in these 
forests-insects, disease, and even such rare and localized disturbances as 
volcanic eruptions have helped to shape and will continue to shape forest 
structure. These disturbances varied in kind, frequency, intensity, and extent 
(Covington et al. 1994), served as natural ecological checks and balances on 
populations, and ensured spatial and temporal habitat diversity 
 
  
(Cooper 1960; Covington and Moore 1994b). But fire was particularly 
important in shaping the forest communities present at the time of Euro-
American settlement. It was present not only because the Southwest has a 
seasonally wet-and-dry climate cycle conducive to an abundance of dry 
fuels, and because the region has a high incidence of lightning strikes, but 
also because human beings have lived in the region since postglacial pon-
derosa pine forests were established (Chapter 3). 
What's Natural? 
In order to define what restoration of natural forest conditions might mean, 
it is important to define what "natural" means. One of the most 
controversial concepts in ecosystem management (Christensen et al. 1996), 
"natural" is ambiguous, yet also ecologically, aesthetically, spiritually, and 
politically important. "Naturalness" is fundamental to conservation 
biology and restoration ecology. In the context of ecological restoration 
"natural" implies native species, structures, and processes, in contrast to exotic 
species, structures, and processes. Indigenous ecological components and 
processes are "natural." Alien ecological components and processes are not. 
Anderson (1991) suggested that naturalness could be assessed by the 
proportion of native to nonnative species, the amount of human energy 
needed to maintain current ecosystem conditions, and the relative change in 
an ecosystem if human inputs cease. Hammond and Holland (1995) 
defined a natural ecosystem as one in which 
• indigenous (native) species interact in a self-sustaining manner 
• species persist through natural recruitment rather than managed 
reproduction 
*population dynamics are regulated internally 
 
• disturbance regimes function within their predisruption range of 
variability 
• trophic dynamics are sustainable over time 
An unnatural ecosystem, by contrast, 
• has a high proportion of nonnative species 
• exhibits wide swings in population dynamics, thereby requiring 
management actions 
• is dominated by exotic disturbance regimes far outside those present 
before ecosystem degradation 
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
29 
 
 

 
30 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
 
Other authors have defined the dynamic nature of ecological systems by 
referring to a range of ecological states over time, which determine what has 
been called the "natural range of variability" (Landres et al. 1999) or other 
similar terms (Egan and Howell 2001). According to this concept, "natural" 
ecosystems operate within this range, and altered or exotic ecosystems outside 
it. 
In the context of ecological restoration Stephenson (1999) defined "nat-
ural" as "the (dynamic) conditions that would exist if the dominant Euro-
American culture had never arrived, but Native Americans had continued to 
use the landscape." In the case of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, 
"natural" surely should be considered to include human impacts, since 
humans have been present in the region since today's forests were established. 
Though the extent to which indigenous peoples affected forest structures is 
debatable (Chapter 3), it is clear that they coexisted with the region's 
ponderosa pine forests in a generally sustainable fashion. 
Contemporary forest conditions, on the other hand, often meet Ham-
mond and Holland's definition of "unnatural" because they are not self-sus-
taining. The environmental pressures associated with Euro-American set-
tlement, especially the introduction of exotic plants, animals, and land-use 
practices and the disruption of natural disturbance regimes (White 1979), are 
outside the natural range of variability, indeed unprecedented in the recent 
evolutionary environment. They have disrupted the evolutionary trajectory 
of these forests and are leading to pervasive degradation of their ecological 
systems. 
Determining Reference Conditions 
Ecologists can use numerous tools in determining the "reference condi-
tions" that help define the evolutionary environment of ecosystems (Egan 
and Howell 2001). The use of many of these tools is described in various 
chapters in this volume, including soil phytoliths that help ascertain 
whether sites were open or forested (Chapter 14) and tree-ring scars that 
shed light on past histories of fire and of insect infestations (Chapter 17). But 
several other tools stand out as of particular importance. 
HISTORICAL RECORDS 
Spanish explorers and settlers arrived early in New Mexico, but much of the 
Southwest was not explored, settled, or exploited by Euro-Americans until 
the nineteenth century. As a result, written records do exist that 
 
 
 
 
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
31 
 
 
describe the area's ecosystems before they were extensively disrupted by 
resource exploitation. Among these records, quite a few descriptions of 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests are remarkably uniform: 
Jemez Mountains, New Mexico, 1904: " . . . generally an open park like 
forest with well spaced trees and clean grama turf beneath. The trees are large 
and symmetrical, often 5 feet in diameter and 80 to 100 feet high with 
beautifully smooth trunks" (Vernon Bailey, quoted in Allen 2002). 
Chuska Mountains, Arizona/New Mexico, 1849: "The pines are tall 
and large, the grass luxuriant, and the surface of the ground, which is 
sweetly undulating, is covered with a profusion of the most beautiful and 
delicate flowers" (James Simpson, quoted in Pynes 2000). 
Northern Arizona, 1857: "We came to a glorious forest of lofty pines ... every 
foot being covered with the finest grass, and beautiful broad grassy vales extending 
in every direction. The forest was perfectly open and unencumbered with 
brush wood, so that the travelling was excellent" (Beale 1858). 
It is difficult to quantify these impressions, and it should be noted that 
Beale also described a different ponderosa pine stand as "black with heavy 
timber ... a heavy forest of pine" (Beale 1858). Open stands certainly 
would have allowed easier travel than heavier stands, so a natural bias may 
have crept into explorers' journals. More easily quantifiable are the records of 
early foresters, who left sometimes detailed records of sizes and numbers of 
pine trees per acre. Of particular note are the remarkably detailed data 
provided by Pearson and others dating from 1909, and a related set of his-
torical permanent plots established between 1909 and 1914 in ponderosa pine 
and mixed conifer forests throughout the Southwest (Woolsey 1911, 1912; 
Pearson 1923, 1950). 
Historical records will never tell us precisely what all parts of the south-
western ponderosa pine forest were like, but the summary from Cooper 
(1960) is clear: "The overwhelming impression one gets from the older 
Indians and white pioneers of the Arizona pine region is that the entire forest 
was once much more open and parklike than it is today." 
DENDROCHRONOLOGY 
Tree rings have been used to construct detailed records of past climate patterns, 
insect outbreaks, and human cultural practices (Kipfmueller and Swetnam 
2001). Tree rings also often carry evidence of forest fires, and den-
drochronological records have been used to construct precise chronologies of 
past fire regimes in southwestern forests (Swetnam 1990; Swetnam and Baisan 
1996; Figures 2.2, 2.3). Though such fire regime reconstructions 
 

2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
33 
32 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
 
FIGURE 2.2. "Catfaces" such as this preserve records of past fires. Photograph by Doc 
Smith/Ecological Restoration Institute. 
have been questioned by some critics (Baker and Ehle 2001), a broad sci-
entific consensus exists that before Euro-American settlement fires burned 
frequently through southwestern ponderosa pine forests, recurring at average 
intervals that generally ranged from two to twenty-five years depending upon 
local conditions and the scale of measurement (Figure 2.4). After settlement, 
these fires stopped abruptly. 
STAND RECONSTRUCTION 
Dendrochronological techniques can also be used to reconstruct tree den-
sities in presettlement ponderosa pine forests (Covington and Moore 1994b; 
Covington et al. 1997). In this approach, increment cores are taken from 
 
 
 
 
1995 
 
1869 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             1851 
1630 
FIGURE 2.3. Pine fire scars from Durango, Mexico (left), and Mount Trumbull in the 
Uinkaret Mountains of northern Arizona (right). Arrows indicate rings with fire scarring; 
outermost dates indicate when the fire scars were collected. In Mexico, fires continued at 
regular intervals through the twentieth century. In northern Arizona regular fires ceased 
with the onset of large-scale livestock grazing, with the last fire occurring in 1869. 
Photograph by Dan Boone/Northern Arizona University. 
 
 
live and dead trees in the sampled area, tree age and diameter are deter-
mined, and the results are used to estimate tree density at past dates. The 
very slow decay rates of wood in southwestern ponderosa pine forests make this 
a valid approach in stands that have not burned since the date to which one is 
reconstructing the stand. If fires have occurred, fallen and decaying
 

 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.4. Fire history diagram from ponderosa pine forest at Camp Navajo, northern 
Arizona, showing, as do many such diagrams from the Southwest, a dramatic drop-off in fire 
occurrence in the late nineteenth century. Each horizontal line corresponds to a fire-scarred 
sample tree. Dashed lines show where the sample is not considered a recording tree (e.g., 
before the first fire scar forms), and continuous lines show recording periods. Fire dates are 
indicated by short vertical lines, and the dates are displayed along the lower axis. Frequent 
fires were interrupted after 1883, the year in which the transcontinental railroad was 
completed across the northern edge of the study area. The top to bottom order of samples 
runs roughly from north to south. Figure 2 from Fule et al. 1997. Reprinted by permission of 
Ecological Society of America. 
wood may have been consumed, thus confounding stand density interpretations. 
Reconstructions using this method have resulted in estimates in the range of 20 to 
60 trees per acre (49 to 150 per hectare) before settlement, in contrast to the 
200 to 600 trees per acre (490 to 1,500 per hectare) observed in many 
contemporary stands (Covington and Moore 1994b). 
RELICT STANDS 
Though it is safe to say that all southwestern ponderosa pine forests have been 
affected to some degree by modern human-induced impacts, some 
 
 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
34
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
35 
 
 
have been altered less than others. On isolated points along the North Rim of 
the Grand Canyon, logging and livestock grazing have been excluded at 
least since 1938, and remoteness and topography have generally 
restricted fire-suppression efforts, so that some lightning-caused fires were 
allowed to burn at various times during the twentieth century (Fule et al. 
2002a; Figure 1.1). Some isolated mesa tops in Zion National Park have never 
been logged or grazed by livestock (Madany and West 1983). El Malpais 
National Monument in New Mexico has also been examined as a relict 
site (Grissino-Mayer and Swetnam 1997). Some remote forest tracts in the 
Sierra Madre of northern Mexico show few effects of logging and have 
continued to undergo a fire regime similar to that preceding EuroAmerican 
settlement (Fule and Covington 1996). Comparison of altered forests with 
these less altered sites can provide valuable data about longterm ecological 
changes. 
Historic Forest Conditions 
Throughout southwestern pine forests, these reference tools are in broad 
agreement about forest structures that existed before Euro-American set-
tlement. Ponderosa pine forests were generally open (Woolsey 1911; Pearson 
1950; Cooper 1960). Frequent, light surface fires, competition from 
abundant grasses and other understory plants, and a climate largely unfa-
vorable for establishment of seedling pines maintained this open structure 
(Weaver 1951a; Cooper 1960; Swetnam and Baisan 1996). The open structure, 
in turn, promoted the growth of understory vegetation. Stand-replacing fires 
were rare or entirely absent (Cooper 1960), though they did occur occasionally 
at higher elevations where ponderosa pines mingle with Douglas-fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii), white fir (Abies concolor), quaking aspen (Populus 
tremuloides), and other tree species that prefer cooler, more mesic 
conditions (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). 
Other disturbances also determined forest structure. Heterogeneous 
forest cover, open canopies, and predators maintained stable insect pop-
ulations. Outbreaks occurred wherever tree hosts grew in abundance 
(Covington et al. 1994), but were generally localized. Root diseases were 
present but limited in extent. Southwestern dwarf mistletoe (Arceutho-
bium vaginatum ssp. cryptopodum) was present but kept in check by 
recurring fire. Establishment of ponderosa pine seedlings was rare, but 
once they were established mature trees often lived for centuries, devel-
oping a large stature, flaky yellow bark, and often numerous fire scars 
(Mast et al. 1999). 
 

 
 
36 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
 
 
Changing Land Uses 
Though the list of changes in land uses in southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests that began with Euro-American settlement is lengthy, several factors in 
particular have interacted to profoundly change ecological conditions, 
especially herbivory by domestic livestock, timber harvest, fire suppression and 
exclusion, population growth, and road construction and other impacts of 
development and recreation. 
Livestock Grazing 
One of the earliest export industries in the Southwest was the production of 
livestock, which was introduced by the Spaniards in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries and soon adopted as a subsistence practice by some 
Native American tribes, with severe ecological consequences for some 
forests (Savage and Swetnam 1990). Euro-Americans in the nineteenth 
century raised livestock at a far greater scale as grazing practices came to be 
defined by economic rather than ecological reasoning. More than 300,000 
sheep grazed on southern Colorado's Rio Grande National Forest in the late 
nineteenth century, for example, causing severe ecological harm (USDA Forest 
Service 1996a; Raish 1996). 
Overgrazing soon resulted in profound ecological changes such as 
decreased abundance of forage plants, erosion, loss of topsoil, sedimentation of 
waterways and drainages, lowering of groundwater tables, invasion of meadows 
by woody species, and invasion of noxious weeds, many of which were 
introduced either in livestock feed or on imported livestock themselves 
(Clary 1975; Fleischner 1994). One of the most significant changes was the 
reduction of fine herbaceous fuels (Covington and Moore 1994b; Belsky and 
Blumenthal 1997); in many southwestern grasslands and forests, frequent low-
intensity fires ceased with the advent of large-scale livestock grazing, altering 
vegetation structure, biological diversity, and fire behavior. This loss of 
herbaceous, landscape-scale fuel continuity has set the stage for the tree 
population irruptions, fuel accumulations, and severe crown fires now seen 
throughout ponderosa pine forests. 
Industrial Timber Harvest 
Native Americans harvested ponderosa pines and other trees for building 
materials (Chapter 3), but their rate of harvest was minuscule compared 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to that which began with Euro-American settlement. Early harvests in the 
Southwest were carried out to produce lumber for mining and building 
(Scurlock and Finch 1997); ponderosa pine was preferred over other 
regional species because of its greater strength and durability. The first harvests 
for commercial exports began in the late 1800s as new railroads enabled easy 
transportation (Pearson 1950; Schubert 1974). Many areas were virtually 
denuded of large, valuable pines. Logging slash was generally left where it 
fell, creating abnormal fuel loads that fueled both extensive fires and calls 
for professional fire suppression. Where commercially less valuable species 
such as Douglas-fir and white fir grew, they were generally left standing, 
leading to changes in species composition. The potential for future epidemics 
of insects and disease and more destructive fires was quickly established. 
The establishment of the national Forest Service in 1905 brought some 
control to the cut-and-run timber industry, but large-scale industrial logging of 
old-growth trees continued as road building and new technology allowed 
access to trees that had previously been inaccessible. Snags were often felled 
due to safety considerations or concern that they were the source of 
lightning-caused wildfires. Timber harvests increased steadily through most 
of the twentieth century; on southern Colorado's Rio Grande National Forest, 
for example, timber production increased from less than 5 million board feet 
(11,800 cubic meters) in 1948 to 31 million (73,160 cubic meters) in 1967 
(USDA Forest Service 1996a). Harvests continued to rise until 1990, when a 
total of 433 million board feet (1 million cubic meters) were harvested from 
public and private forests in Arizona and New Mexico (Scurlock and Finch 
1997). Thickets of young trees developed throughout the century, but with 
few exceptions little thought was given to the potential fire, insect, and disease 
hazards they posed (Schubert 1974). Ever-larger areas changed from low-
density stands composed mainly of large pine to dense stands of small-diameter 
pines and, at higher elevations, of white fir, Douglas-fir, and limber pine 
(Pinus flexilis). 
Not until the 1990s did changing economic conditions, environmental 
concerns, and an overall lack of large trees cause sharp declines in the logging 
industry in the Southwest. A number of regional sawmills closed; in Arizona 
and New Mexico, the volume of ponderosa pine cut dropped from 227 million 
board feet (535,720 cubic meters) in 1979 to 30.8 million board feet 
(72,688 cubic meters) in 1995 (Raish et al. 1997). In Montezuma County, 
Colorado, where the San Juan National Forest includes extensive stands of 
ponderosa pine, the percentage of county income 
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
27 
 

 
 
38 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
 
earned from timber production dropped from 5 percent in 1971 to less 
than 1 percent in 1997 (Wilderness Society 2000). Today fewer than 5 percent 
of ponderosa pine stands in southern Colorado and New Mexico are 
classified as "old-growth" (SREP 2000), and other parts of the Southwest 
similarly lack old trees. 
Fire Suppression 
Early Forest Reserve management plans often urged heavy grazing to eliminate 
the herbaceous fuels that allowed surface fires to sweep across the land 
(Drake 1910). Early foresters became convinced that any wildfires, even low-
intensity ground fires, were detrimental to the forest (Pyne 1982). Organized 
fire suppression efforts by private foresters date back to the late 1800s 
(Ashworth 1991), and by the Forest Service to the first decade of the twentieth 
century; in 1935 the Forest Service further instituted a policy that all fires 
were to be extinguished by 10 A.M. of the day following their detection (Pyne 
1982). Throughout most of the twentieth century, foresters continued to 
extinguish all fires regardless of ignition cause, intensity, or degree of danger 
to human safety or property. Widespread fire suppression efforts continue 
today, and federal resources continue to be focused much more on 
suppression than on pre-fire fuel control, including restoration. 
Population Growth and Recreation 
The population of the Southwest has swelled dramatically and will likely 
continue to do so. Cities, many rural areas, and some Native American 
nations in the Southwest have been growing quickly. Between 1990 and 
2000 Nevada, Arizona, Colorado, and Utah were the four most quickly 
growing states in the nation, with increases almost twice those of the 
national average (U.S. Census Bureau 2001); this growth occurred in both 
urban and rural areas (Theobald 2000). 
Though the recent surge in population has gone hand in hand with a 
general decline in extractive industries such as livestock production and 
logging, it has its own ecological consequences. Long considered more 
benign than extractive activities, outdoor recreation-both motorized and 
nonmotorized-is today one of the principal human impacts on forest 
ecosystems in the West (Knight and Gutzwiller 1995; Knight 2000), one of the 
top two causes of the endangerment of species that live on public land 
 
 
 
(Losos et al. 1995), and one of the chief concerns of forest managers. In 
particular, the impact of roads and trails is of concern, as they directly 
impact wildlife through noise, poaching, and increased stress; they also 
change habitats by damaging vegetation, spreading invasive species, com-
pacting soils, and increasing access to formerly remote areas (Forman and 
Alexander 1998; Trombulak and Frissell 2000). Roads also play a not 
insignificant role in altering fire regimes. While recreationists using roads 
cause many fires to start, roads also act as firebreaks that break up the con-
tinuity of forest-floor fuels. In the southern Rocky Mountains, about 50 
percent of ponderosa pine forest lies within 0.25 miles (400 meters) of a 
road, and only 12 percent is part of either a protected area or an extensive 
roadless area (SREP 2000). 
Resulting Ecological Changes 
Measurements of many parameters document how southwestern ponderosa 
pine forest ecosystems have been degraded by the interaction of these land-
use practices, including increases in fire severity and size; increases in the 
likelihood and scale of insect outbreaks; decreases in soil moisture and 
nutrient availability; decreases in stream and spring flows; increases in 
mortality of the oldest trees; decreases in growth and diversity of both 
herbaceous and woody plants; and spread of invasive and noxious species. 
Many of these symptoms are consistent with the ecosystem health distress 
syndrome discussed by Rapport (1995). 
Fire Regimes 
A century of changing fuel loads and fire exclusion has not reduced the 
danger of fire in southwestern ponderosa pine forests; rather, it has 
increased it. Attempted exclusion of frequent but low-intensity surface fires has 
resulted in a shift to infrequent crown fires and then to increasingly large 
crown fires (Chapter 8). Forests that once burned at relatively short intervals 
now burn less frequently but at higher intensity, often resulting in crown fires 
and in large areas of stand mortality (Covington and Moore 1994b; USGAO 
1998; Covington 2000; Figures 2.5, 8.5). Areas with high fuel loading are now 
much more continuous across the landscape than in the past, resulting in the 
potential for ever larger fires that are dangerous 
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
39 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.5. Large fires on the Coconino National Forest near Flagstaff, 1950s to the 
present. Most but not all acreage burned comprises ponderosa pine forest. 
Map data courtesy of Coconino National Forest. 
to ecological attributes and to human lives and property. Severely burned 
areas often experience severe soil erosion and invasion by nonnative 
species, and will not again support old-growth pine trees for centuries. 
Tree Population Explosions 
Though large, old pines have become rare, more than a century of live-
stock grazing and fire suppression have caused ponderosa pine forests to 
increase in density as abundant tree seedlings have grown (Cooper 1960; 
Figure 2.6). These thickets of postsettlement trees serve as fuel ladders that 
can easily carry fire into the overstory of remnant old pines (Covington and 
Moore 1994b; Figures 8.3, 8.4). Where other conifer species mix with 
ponderosa pines, open, fire-maintained pine stands have been removed by 
logging and replaced by a mixture of small-diameter pines and numerous 
 
40       THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
 
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
41 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.6. Old stumps such as this one, now surrounded by a dense stand of young 
trees, hold records of climate, forest structure, and fire for many years in the 
arid Southwest. Photograph by Tom Bean. 
small Douglas-fir and white fir trees, which are more vulnerable to fire as well 
as to a broad variety of insects and diseases (Wickman et al. 1993; Covington et 
al. 1994). Coniferous trees have also spread widely into onceopen grasslands 
and meadows (Swetnam et al. 1999; Figures 12.2, 12.3). Competition for 
moisture and nutrients is intense in these dense stands, and results in stress 
that increases vulnerability to insect and disease attack (Vasechko 1983; 
McDonald 1991). Large, old ponderosa pines are also suffering increased 
mortality rates as a result of competition with small trees (Mast et al. 1999). 
These dense, highly flammable stands, dead or alive, support intense 
wildfires that cause severe ecological damage and cost millions of dollars in 
suppression expenditures. 
Insects and Pathogens 
When ecosystem attributes such as species composition, tree density, hor-
izontal and vertical diversity, and above-ground biomass change, so do 
insect and pathogen dynamics. A growing body of evidence suggests that 
today's dense ponderosa pine forests are increasingly susceptible to attack 
 

42 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
by such herbivorous insects as pine bark beetles (Dendroctonus spp.) and Ips 
beetles, especially because stressed trees in dense stands have decreased 
resistance to these insects (Chapter 17). Dwarf mistletoe, once kept in 
check by frequent fires and an open forest structure, has become more 
widespread in some areas (Chapter 13). These instances of "unnatural" 
insect and pathogen damage, though, are symptoms of declining forest 
health, rather than causes. 
Hydrologic Regimes 
The land-use practices that accompanied Euro-American settlement have 
altered hydrologic regimes throughout the West (Chapter 10). Fire exclusion 
and the resultant increase in understory trees and forest floor accumulations 
increased interception and evapotranspiration in coniferous forests and have 
likely reduced surface, subsurface, and instream flows and water availability in 
upslope soils. Road construction and timber harvesting have resulted in erosion 
and instability of slopes. Loss of grass and other herbaceous and ground cover 
has reduced plant cover of soils, increased surface erosion, increased the 
severity of flooding, destabilized riparian areas, and reduced water quality. 
Large-scale, severe forest fires can result in extremely high levels of soil 
erosion (Figure 10.2) and sedimentation, causing significant damage to riparian 
ecosystems (Covington et al. 1994). 
Understory Vegetation 
Overgrazing and increased canopy closure have reduced the density and 
biomass of herbaceous and shrubby understory species in ponderosa pine 
forests as well as in other southwestern forest and woodland types (Clary 1975, 
1988). The loss of understory diversity and production from canopy closure is 
due to decreased light levels, buildup of litter on the forest floor, and 
allelopathic inhibition of understory seed germination (Anderson et al. 1969; 
Clary 1975). A simultaneous decline in soil seed reserves of these species is 
less obvious, but has significant implications for ecological restoration 
(Chapter 14). 
Exotic Species 
Exotic species introduced primarily from Europe and Asia have colonized 
ponderosa pine forests and other communities throughout the Southwest, 
 
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
43 
 
with deleterious effects on native plants, animals, and watersheds. Natural 
population control mechanisms for the exotics, such as predators or com-
petitors, are usually absent, conferring a major successional advantage over 
native species. Since restoration treatments typically involve ground distur-
bance, the potential is high for further spread of invasive species into these 
areas, and managers need to be aware of mitigation measures (Chapter 15). 
Domestic livestock represent exotic animal species that have also dra-
matically impacted southwestern forests through herbivory and trampling. 
Restoration treatments may require short-term or long-term cessation of 
livestock grazing in order to facilitate recovery of understory vegetation 
(Chapter 16). 
Climate Changes 
Though we know that most southwestern ponderosa pine forests are currently 
on an evolutionary trajectory very unlike their natural course, not all factors 
that will affect those trajectories are known. Shifts in climate have occurred 
since these forests were established, and will likely continue to do so; 
compelling evidence exists that they may be exacerbated by anthropogenic 
climate change caused by atmospheric buildup of greenhouse gases (Watson 
2002). 
These shifts take place on various time scales. The El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon stems from shifts in equatorial Pacific 
Ocean currents and results in swings between wet and dry periods in the 
Southwest that have been labeled, respectively, El Nino and La Nina events. 
These short-term shifts correlate closely with broad historic wildfire patterns in 
the Southwest (Swetnam and Betancourt 1990), as severe fire events often 
come when a dry year follows an El Nino event that has produced extensive 
growth of fine herbaceous fuels. The Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) is a 
recurring pattern of ocean-atmosphere climate variability that is correlated with 
high and low pressure systems over the northern Pacific Ocean and that appears 
to shift over a time period of twenty to thirty years (Mantua et al. 1997). 
During positive PDO periods the Southwest receives relatively high levels of 
precipitation; during negative periods it receives relatively lower levels. These 
shifts pertain particularly to winter precipitation, which has a much larger role 
in water infiltration than summer precipitation (Baker 1986a). Some 
climatologists believe that a negative period began in the mid-1990s, 
suggesting that the Southwest may 
 

2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context
44 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
 
receive relatively low levels of winter precipitation in coming decades. 
Longer-term shifts-at the scale of centuries-also have profound effects on 
regional climate and vegetation communities (Millar and Woolfenden 1999), 
but are difficult to predict. 
Finally, long-term shifts in global climate likely are already under way as a 
result of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and global warming. A 
comprehensive recent analysis of climate data documents an average global 
temperature increase of 0.6 °C in the twentieth century (Watson 2002). 
Climate models predict that concentrations of atmospheric CO2 will 
continue to rise at rates not seen within at least the last 20,000 years, and 
to a level probably not seen in the last 20 million years. As a result of 
increased concentrations of this and other greenhouse gases, various 
models predict an increase of 1.4 to 5.8 °C in mean annual temperature 
within the next century (Watson 2002). The change is likely to be 
accompanied by an increase in extreme weather events, including high 
temperatures, droughts, and extreme precipitation events (Watson et al. 
1998). Fires and insect outbreaks are two of the other important forest 
disturbance factors whose cycles are likely to be altered by climate change 
(Dale et al. 2002). 
The aggregate effect of these climate trends on southwestern forests is 
uncertain, but some species may be unable to acclimate to these new con-
ditions with sufficient rapidity to survive (Davis 1989). Meteorological 
records indicate that the Inland West region is particularly vulnerable to global 
warming and to extreme moisture stress, which is a primary limiting factor in 
the growth of trees in the region. A systems analysis of forest responses to a 
greenhouse climate in western Montana (Running and Nemani 1991) 
concluded that 
• annual photosynthesis of forest ecosystems may increase by 20 to 30 
percent 
• growing seasons, and fire seasons, may lengthen by two months 
• snowpack may decrease by two months 
• hydrologic outflow may decrease by 30 percent 
Some critics have written that climate change makes it impossible to 
return contemporary forests to anything resembling their reference conditions 
(Wagner et al. 2000), but the likelihood of continuing and unpredictable 
future changes is a compelling reason to work toward increasing forest 
resilience, rather than unsustainability and vulnerability. 
Restoration and Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 
The Southwest is the birthplace of much modern thought regarding eco-
logical restoration, ecosystem health, the wilderness idea, conservation 
biology, and ecosystem management. The tradition began with the explorer 
John Wesley Powell, who had learned by studying at the feet of Native 
Americans that they had long managed the dry forests and woodlands of the 
American Southwest (Chapter 3). His ethnographic experience, though, did 
not sway most professional foresters of the day, who followed Gifford 
Pinchot in adhering to a European-based model that all forest fires were 
detrimental because of the damage they did to merchantability. As a 
consequence, federal policy was based on the assumption that fire was an 
enemy that must be vanquished and banished from western wildlands (Pyne 
1982). Foresters assumed that the utility of the land would be enhanced by the 
application of European-style agricultural approaches. This thinking 
remained dominant in the West until the 1970s. 
Aldo Leopold was the first scholar to systematically address problems of 
declining ecosystem health in the Southwest. During the first part of his 
career, while he worked as a forester in Arizona and New Mexico, he 
became concerned about the irruption of woody vegetation throughout the 
region's heavily grazed watersheds. In a seminal paper, largely overlooked at 
the time, Leopold discussed the interaction between grazing, fire, and land 
health (Leopold 1924), describing the population irruption of trees and other 
woody vegetation that had occurred north of the U.S.-Mexico border, where 
forests and woodlands were assiduously protected from fire; south of the 
border, such irruptions had not occurred. He took these lessons from his 
southwestern field experiences with him when he became a professor in game 
management at the University of Wisconsin, where he and his colleagues 
established the first formal experiments in ecological restoration. 
By the middle of the twentieth century Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
forester Harold Weaver and others recorded declines in forest health in the 
ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest and other parts of the inland West 
(Weaver 1951 a). Weaver, Harold Biswell of the University of California at 
Berkeley, and BIA forester Harry Kallendar worked with Apache people in 
east-central Arizona to support the large-scale reintroduction of fire through a 
formalized prescribed burning program in the early 1950s (Chapter 3). This 
work dovetailed with that of BIA forester Charles F. Cooper, who 
45 
 

46 
THE CONTEXT FOR RESTORATION 
 
conducted research that included interviews with children and grand-
children of both Apaches and Euro-American settlers, as well as direct 
measurements of forest structure, in order to determine what changes had 
taken place in ponderosa pine forest structure (Cooper 1960). 
In 1974 the first formal prescribed fire research program in the Southwest 
was established by John Dieterich and Stephen Sackett of the Forest 
Service's Rocky Mountain Research Station. I joined them in 1975. 
Dieterich and Sackett began to determine current forest fuel loadings and 
natural fire regime characteristics, and instituted replicated experiments to 
determine the effects of prescribed fire at intervals ranging from one to ten 
years. They sought to determine what frequency of burning is necessary to 
reduce and maintain safe fuel loading to prevent crown fires from continuing 
to grow in size and severity. 
For a few years, interval burning appeared to work. Fuel loadings were 
greatly reduced, nutrient availability increased, and herbaceous production 
flourished (Sackett 1979; Harris and Covington 1983). But by 1979 it was 
clear that something was terribly wrong; instead of killing the young, 
postsettlement trees, the fires were killing large, old trees. Further study by 
Sackett and by Michael Harrington and Sally Haase of the Rocky Mountain 
Research Station revealed that this mortality was a consequence of girdling 
and large root mortality, which in turn resulted from the smoldering, glowing 
combustion of extremely high fuel loads at the bases of the old trees. 
Postsettlement trees lacked these heavy fuel accumulations, in large part 
because they had not had the time to develop the large, platy, flaking bark 
characteristic of old ponderosa pines. 
The observation that even "cool" fires do not safely thin postsettlement 
trees and can kill old trees led me, in collaboration with Forest Service fire 
management specialists, to begin a research effort to develop and test various 
combinations of raking around the bases of old-growth trees, mechanical 
thinning of excess postsettlement trees, reintroduction of periodic burning, 
seeding with native plants, and other ecological restoration treatments. Our 
assumption was that if we sufficiently altered the fuel structure and thinned 
out the excess postsettlement trees, we could safely reintroduce fire in such a 
way that it could more closely emulate its natural role in the ecosystem. A 
series of randomized experimental restoration treatments in northern Arizona 
has since contributed much valuable information to our understanding of how 
we can develop, apply, monitor, and test operational adaptive management 
experiments to restore ponderosa pine ecosystem health (Walters and Holling 
1990). 
2. The Evolutionary and Historical Context 
47 
 
This work became controversial in the mid-1990s when a new paper 
(Covington and Moore 1994b) was published that analyzed postsettlement 
changes in forest stand structure, wildlife habitat, ecosystem characteristics, and 
human habitat values and explored the idea of restoring southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Representatives of traditional forest resource interest 
groups, such as the wood products and cattle industries, began touting this 
work as a way not only to enhance ecological health but also to benefit their 
particular interests. This provoked opposition from environmental groups. 
Some cooperation did occur. For example, 1996 saw the publication of Forests 
Forever!, a plan to restore ecological and economic integrity to the region's 
forests from the Southwest Forest Alliance that used much of this new science 
(SWFA 1996). Since then, though, much of the debate about forest 
restoration has been characterized by acrimony (Chapter 5). 
Thanks to the growing national interest in forest health and wildfire 
danger, national officials took notice; the experimental restoration treatments 
around Mount Trumbull in far northern Arizona (Chapter 12) were one major 
result of that attention. Since the mid-1990s significant federal funding has 
continuously advanced our scientific understanding of the issues 
surrounding forest restoration. That funding has helped the Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University to monitor a wide range of 
restoration approaches, including those proposed in Forests Forever! and many 
others. 
Restoration, then, draws on a long history in southwestern forests. By 
integrating that history with new scientific advances, restoration has the 
potential to heal the scars of past land management practices. Humans have 
been intervening in forest ecology for many years. The question, then, is not 
whether we should intervene; it is how we should intervene in order to restore 
both ecological health and healthy relations between humans and their 
surroundings. 
 
