 
 
Many communities vulnerable to fast-moving fires 
By JACQUES BILLEAUD 
Associated Press Writer 
06/22/2003 
PHOENIX -- The fire struck in the worst 
possible place: close to town, in difficult 
terrain and in a forest suffering from years 
of drought and the ravages of tree-killing 
bark beetles.  
 
The remains of a house lies in ruin in Summerhaven, 
Ariz., Saturday, June 21, 2003 two days after the 
Aspen fire burned through the small town atop Mount 
Lemmon. The Aspen Fire has already claimed more 
than 200 homes in Summerhaven and fire officials fear 
that it will continue to grow. (AP Photo/John Miller)  
Throw hot, dry weather and gusting wind 
into the mix and a hamlet in the pines was 
doomed.  
An estimated 250 homes were destroyed in 
Summerhaven, an area of several hundred 
cabins and second homes atop a mountain 
just outside Tucson and firefighters sweated 
to save what remained.  
Many communities face a similar threat.  
"If you went throughout the West, there are well over 1,000 communities in similar 
circumstances," said Wally Covington, director of the Ecological Restoration Institute at 
Northern Arizona University.  
One such place is Prescott, a booming, mile-high city of 34,000 about 90 miles north of 
Phoenix. What makes Prescott a magnet for retirees and others is what makes it 
vulnerable: homes built on the surrounding forested hillsides.  
As Prescott Mayor Rowle Simmons watched coverage of the Summerhaven fire, he got 
an uneasy feeling. "That could have been us," he said.  
Prescott survived a close call last year when firefighters were able to beat down a fast-
moving fire that broke out just outside town. Still, 1,300 acres of forest and six homes 
burned.  
Since then, workers have thinned some areas of the forest around Prescott. But Simmons 
said there weren't nearly enough people or dollars to do what was needed, especially 
removing the large number of trees killed by bark beetles.  
Bark beetles have exacerbated the fire danger all over the West and South, laying waste 
to trees on some 15 million acres.  
In Arizona alone, the insects have killed about 2.5 million ponderosa pines and at least 4 
million pinyon pines during the past year.  

In addition to the insect damage, much of the country endured drought last summer as 
wildfires burned more than 7 million acres. Those blazes included the Rodeo-Chediski 
fire, the largest in Arizona history, which blackened 469,000 acres, destroyed 491 
buildings and forced the evacuation of 30,000 people.  
Experts say this fire season shouldn't be as bad as last year, when fires already had begun 
in the Southwest by April. Still, some areas of the West will face a tough fire season until 
rain brings relief, said Rick Ochoa, national fire weather program manager for the 
National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho.  
In Arizona, that relief comes in the form of summer monsoon thunderstorms as moisture 
rolls in from the gulfs of California and Mexico. The season usually runs from July until 
September.  
Larry Humphrey, commander of the team fighting the fire at Summerhaven, said the 
danger to communities set in the forest is magnified by property owners who want their 
homes surrounded by trees and fronted by narrow roads.  
"That's two things that are really bad when you're trying to protect their houses," he said.  
In Payson, a forest community 80 miles northeast of Phoenix, Mayor Kenneth Murphy 
said his community of 14,000 is surrounded by overgrown forest full of thick brush and 
dead trees.  
"A fire could blow right through here and there's nothing to stop it," Murphy said.  
Murphy blamed the situation on government red tape and lawsuits by environmentalists.  
Experts at a forest summit put on last week by the Western Governors' Association cited 
years of wildfire suppression that have left forests clogged with fuel.  
The Bush administration has proposed a Healthy Forests initiative, which promotes the 
thinning of woodlands to cut the risk of fire. Environmentalists say it's an excuse for the 
timber industry to grab marketable trees from public land.  
Covington said the fire at Summerhaven underscores the need for projects that increase 
distance between trees and remove brush and small trees.  
They won't eliminate forest fires, but they would reduce the chance of fires that spread 
from treetop to treetop, he said.  
------  
On the Net:  
National Interagency Fire Center: http://www.nifc.gov  
 
