 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Impacts of fire hazard assessment and fuel reduction priorities on mega-fire* outcomes: 
A hypothetical test using the Wallow Fire in Arizona  
 
BACKGROUND 
Mega-fire refers to large-scale wildfires that “feature extraordinary rates of spread and high resistance to control” (NIFC 
2011). While large fires are globally important components of fire-adapted systems, these fires are unprecedented in that 
our fire-adapted ecosystems are burning with fire severities and intensities at scales well outside their evolutionary history. 
Mega-fires seen today are a result of multiple variables, the core of which includes a lack of ecosystem resiliency or integ-
rity. The scale of cascading impacts, ecological, social and economic, challenge existing priorities and may require review 
of strategic objectives for wildfire protection (Williams 2008).  
 
In 2011, the Wallow Fire burned over 538,000 acres on the Apache-Sitgreaves (ASNF) and Gila National Forests, Tribal 
and private lands in Arizona and New Mexico. The fire burned through coniferous forest, including pinyon and juniper 
woodlands, ponderosa pine and higher elevation mixed conifer 
forests. More than 30% of the fire burned at high severities 
(RAVG 2010), which is uncharacteristic when compared to 
historic patterns of fire severity in those forested systems 
(TNC 2007). Initial reports suggest communities within the 
Wallow Fire perimeter were largely protected by adjacent fuels 
reduction treatments, a testament to the priorities realized by 
the  ASNF over the past 20 years.  
 
The U.S. Forest Service (USFS) utilizes a process for prioritiz-
ing and allocating funding for fuel reduction treatments1. The 
national level process assesses fire hazard (using fire simula-
tion modeling) and combines it with other factors to inform 
national budget allocations for hazardous fuels programs to the 
USFS Regions (Calkin et al. 2010, Finney et al. 2011, FPA 
2011). Mega-fires derive from less than 0.1% of fire starts, and 
as such cannot become a programmatic priority for land man-
agers. Allocation processes at regional and federal forest levels 
incorporate additional local values at risk, both social and eco-
nomic, and prioritization assessments. On-the ground imple-
mentation incorporate national, regional and local prioritiza-
tions to meet the overall strategic objective to protect life, 
property and fire fighter safety.   
 
MANAGEMENT QUESTION 
To address if national priorities reduce impact of mega-fires 
we asked: If nationally developed USFS fuel reduction priori-
ties had been implemented in the ASNF prior to the Wallow 
fire, would wildfire outcomes under large-fire (Wallow-like) 
conditions have different fire severity and probability patterns 
when compared to no implementation (2010 conditions)?  
 
      Fact Sheet:  Fuels Reduction Treatments and Mega-fires                January 2013    
 
Fig. 1. Conditional Flame Length from fire modeling results. Red pixels 
denote high average probability of larger than 6-feet flame lengths (FPA 
2011, Ager et al. 2010, Thompson et al. 2011) and were selected for hypo-
thetical treatment implementation. Treatments were implemented by chang-
ing the fuel and tree canopy data layers in the input data files for the Flam-
Map fire modeling software (Finney et al. 2007).   
1The Department of the Interior, Office of Wildland Fire also has a separate prioritization process not included in this analysis.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
METHODS 
This analysis focused on the effectiveness of the national prioritization process for locating fuel reduction treatments to alter mega-fire severity outcomes. The 
purpose of this assessment is to examine the two spatial input layers to the national prioritization process, fire hazard outputs combined with communities-at-risk, 
as the sole metric for fuels reduction priorities. This work was done within the Wallow Fire perimeter on the ASNF in Region 3. In order to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of treatments for altering  wildfire outcomes the ERI compared simulation modeling of a mega fire within the Wallow  fire perimeter a) in the 2010 land-
scape with no treatment; b) after implementation of treatments designed to protect communities-at-risk (WUI-only treatments); and c) after implementation of 
treatments designed to lower fire risk across the landscape. Communities-at-risk and areas of high fire hazard are a national priority for protection and dominate 
fuel reduction treatment investments. The fire hazard assessment data layers for this analysis were obtained from Fire Program Analysis project staff. The 
Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) boundaries used by ASNF to define communities-at-risk were obtained from Forest Service staff. 
RESULTS  
National priorities as assessed in this analysis are represented by high fire hazard within WUI areas. Maps reflect crown fire potential, the proportion of the land-
scape that would support an Active Crown Fire – the ability to support a fire moving from crown to crown; a Passive Crown Fire – the ability to torch but not 
move crown to crown or a Surface Fire – a fire supported by ground fuels including grasses, flowers and tree litter. Crowning fires in forested landscapes can be 
more costly to suppress and control depending on the values at risk from the fire. Crown potential is shown for three scenarios: a. pre-Wallow Fire conditions; b. 
pre-Wallow Fire conditions with treatments implemented in high fire risk pixels only in designated WUI (red pixels from Fig. 1 within WUI); and c. pre-Wallow 
Fire conditions with treatments implemented in high fire risk pixels across the landscape (all red pixels from Fig. 1). Treatments in the WUI reduced active 
crown fire potential across the entire landscape by 12% and flame lengths (not shown) by 6%. Treatments on all priority areas reduced active crown potential 
across the entire landscape by 40% and flame lengths by 30%. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
1. Fuel reduction treatments are effective at reducing fire behavior where implemented and can successfully reduce 
risk to prioritized values like communities (model results and on-going field research).  
2. Forest restoration treatments that occur at broader scales can break up homogenous, degraded conditions that are at 
higher risk of uncharacteristic fire.   
3. WUI-only treatments result in areas of unchanged crowning potential across the pre-treatment landscape. Continu-
ous fuels in uncharacteristically high loadings continue to support high fire intensities and severities at landscape 
scales with losses to ecological integrity in forests adapted to more frequent fire conditions.  
4. National metrics and assessments, such as fire hazard assessments and residential density, benefit from flexibility in 
finer-scale interpretation. There is no standardized method to scale down to national forests or Forest Service re-
gions because of the inherent variability across the nation in biophysical (vegetation and fuel types) conditions as 
well as socio-economic conditions. Published research in this area shows developing methods to effectively incor-
porate more local values-at-risk at both forest and regional scales with nationally assessed risks (Calkin et al. 2010, 
Ager et al. 2010, Thompson et al. 2011 and references therein).   
 
ONGOING WORK AND LEVERAGE OPPORTUNITIES 
1. Region 3 fire staff have asked ERI to help create a demonstration of a mid-scale, region-wide values assessment and 
risk prioritization system. Local values and updated assessments will be overlaid with national fire risk assessments 
to inform current planning processes.  
2. ERI is working with the LANDFIRE team on an analysis of restoration opportunities. Forest systems (Fire Regime 
I) and stand conditions (closed canopy, mid-successional stage) that are in higher proportion today than found his-
torically will be identified. These systems would benefit from restoration treatments to restore ecosystem resiliency 
and integrity. Restoration treatments in these systems can also reduce the potential of high severity wildfires. Such 
treatments will be modeled to assess change in fire behavior metrics across the landscape.  
 
AUTHOR’S NOTE 
Pixelated fire behavior runs are difficult to translate to treatment units. Planning units on federal lands include areas with 
high, moderate and low predicted fire severity. Treatments that impact only areas of “high fire hazard” pixels across a land-
scape, as done in this assessment, are unrealistic on the ground and make these results conservative. Implemented treat-
ments polygons have more contiguous impact on fire behavior, which can further reduce risks of crowning potential (i.e. 
passive crown potential) and improve suppression opportunities (Ager et al. 2010). 
 
REFERENCES 
Ager, A.A., Valliant, N.M., and Finney, M.A. (2010). A comparison of landscape fuel treatment strategies to mitigate wildland fire risk in the 
urban interface and preserve old forest structure. Forest Ecology and Management, 259(8), 1556-1570. doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2010.01.032  
 
Calkin, D.E., Ager, A.A., and Gilbertson-Day, J. (2010). Wildfire risk and hazard: Procedures for the first approximation. (General Technical 
Report No. GTR-RMRS-235). Ft. Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.  
 
Finney, M.A., McHugh, C.W., Grenfell, I.C., Riley, K.L., and Short, K.C. (2011). A simulation of probabilistic wildfire risk components for the 
continental United States. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, 25(7), 973-1000. doi:10.1007/s00477-011-0462-z 
 
Finney, M.A., Selia, R.C., Mchugh, C.W., Ager, A.A., Bahro, B., and Agee, J.K. (2007). Simulation of long-term landscape-level fuel treatment 
effects on large wildfires. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 16(6), 712-727. doi:10.1071/WF06064.  
 
Fire Planning Analysis. Sept. 22, 2011. FPA Large Fire Module.  Accessed December 2011 and available at: http://www.fpa.nifc.gov/Documents/
Library/papers/WP_Large_fire_overview_20110922.pdf. 
 
National Interagency Fire Center. 2011.  Burning Issue Summer 2011.  Accessed December 2012 and available at: http://www.nifc.gov/aboutNIFC/
about_documents/newsletter/bi_Summer2011.pdf. 
 
Rapid Assessment of Vegetative Condition After Wildfire (RAVG). 2011. Defined at http://www.fs.fed.us/postfirevegcondition/process.shtml and 
accessed from http://www.fs.fed.us/postfirevegcondition/index.shtml November 2011. 
 
Thompson, M.P., Calkin, D.E., Finney, M.A., Ager, A.A., and Gilbertson-Day, J.W. (2011). Integrated national-scale assessment of wildfire risk 
to human and ecological values. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, 25(6), 761-780. doi:10.1007/s00477-011-0461-0  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC). 2007. Historic Range of Variation and State and Transition Modeling of Historic and Current Landscape Condi-
tions for Potential Natural Vegetation Types of the Southwest. Southwest Forest Assessment Project, available at: http://azconservation.org/
projects/southwest_forest_assessment/. 
 
Williams, Jerry. 2011. Mega-fires and the urgency to re-evaluate wildfire protection strategies through a land management prism. Presentation at 
Exploring the Mega-fire Reality Conference, Tallahassee, FL. Nov. 14–18, 2011. 
