The Inﬂuence of 
Restoration Treatments 
on Hydrologic Output  
in Fire-Adapted Forests 
of the Southwest
37
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE 
WORKING PAPER 37
November 2016

Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural 
characteristics, and ecological processes. Te Society for Ecological Restoration International deﬁnes ecological 
restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its 
health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society 
for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-ﬁre forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last 150 years. 
Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and lack their once diverse 
understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing 
ﬁres and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant 
communities.
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and 
monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-ﬁre forests of the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, 
such as low-severity ﬁre, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide 
ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Te Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and policy makers to interact 
and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science used to make management decisions and 
scientists working on the questions managers need answered. Te SWFSC tries to bring together localized eﬀorts to 
develop scientiﬁc information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through an inclusive and open 
process.
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and practitioners in a concise, 
clear, non-technical format. Tese papers provide guidance on management decisions surrounding ecological 
restoration topics. Tis publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service 
and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. Te views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the 
author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States Government. 
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States 
Government or the ERI.
Author: Frances C. O’Donnell, School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, Northern Arizona University 
Reviewers: Jonathon Donald, Peter Z. Fulé, and David W. Huffman
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referencing this working paper:
O’Donnell, F.C. 2016. Te Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in 
Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest. ERI Working Paper No. 37. Ecological Restoration 
Institute and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 14 pp. 
Cover photo: Projects to restore forests surrounding storage reservoirs, like C.C. Cragin in 
Arizona, aim to protect water quality and supplies from the debris and ash that clog streams 
and rivers as a result of high intensity wildﬁres. Photo courtesy of Coconino National Forest, 
USDA Forest Service.

Table of Contents
Introduction .......................................................................................................1
Forest Hydrology in the Southwest ...............................................................1 
Precipitation ..............................................................................................1 
Runoff, Inﬁltration, and Streamﬂow ........................................................2 
Snow and Soil Moisture Storage ............................................................2 
 
Evapotranspiration ....................................................................................2 
 
Groundwater Recharge ............................................................................3 
 
Sediment Yield and Water Quality ..........................................................4 
Restoration Effects on the Forest Water Cycle ...........................................5
 
Runoff and Streamﬂow ............................................................................5
 
Evapotranspiration ....................................................................................7 
Snow and Soil Moisture Storage ............................................................7
 
Groundwater Recharge ............................................................................8
 
Sediment Yield and Water Quality ..........................................................8
Wildﬁre Effects on Hydrology ........................................................................8 
 
Flood Peaks Following Wildﬁre ...............................................................9
 
Sediment Yield and Water Quality Following Wildﬁre ...........................9
Conclusion ........................................................................................................10
References ........................................................................................................11

1
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute
Introduction  
Water is a vital and scarce resource in the  
southwestern U.S. Te sustainability of water  
resources depends on the health of high-elevation 
forests that are the source of most water in 
southwestern streams, rivers, and aquifers (Barr  
et al. 1956; Flerchinger and Cooley 2000; Scanlon 
et al. 2006). Forests support water supplies for cities 
and towns, irrigated agriculture, aquatic and riparian 
ecosystems, recreational opportunities, and sites of 
historical and cultural signiﬁcance. 
Fire suppression, logging, and grazing beginning 
in the late 19th century have led to a decline in the 
health of southwestern forests (Covington et al. 
1997). Before Euro-American settlement, frequent, 
low-intensity ﬁres maintained a sparse distribution 
of trees in ponderosa pine and mixed-conifer forests. 
Te exclusion of ﬁre led to substantial increases in tree 
density and basal area and an increased risk of high-
intensity, stand replacing wildﬁres (Fulé et al. 1997; 
Fulé et al. 2003). Forest restoration seeks to return 
forests to a more natural condition by thinning trees to 
reduce density and conducting prescribed burns in the 
understory or managing natural or human-caused ﬁres 
to restore a low-intensity ﬁre regime (Covington et al. 
1997). Te past and present structure and restoration  
of southwestern forests is described in detail by  
Friederici (2003) and in Ecological Restoration  
Institute working papers no. 22 for ponderosa pine  
and no. 28 for mixed conifer.
 
Te immediate goal of forest restoration is to reduce 
wildﬁre risk, but improved watershed health and 
function is often a secondary goal. Te pace and extent 
of forest restoration has increased since Congress 
established the Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program in 2009, which provides funding  
to science-based ecosystem restoration projects. 
A number of forest restoration projects to protect 
municipal water supplies are planned or underway in 
ﬁre-adapted forests in the Southwest, including the 
Flagstaﬀ Watershed Protection Project, the Upper  
South Platte Watershed Protection and Restoration 
Project near Denver, and the Santa Fe Municipal 
Watershed Project. Forest restoration in the  
Southwest will expand to the landscape scale in  
the coming decades. Te Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative (4FRI) plans to conduct thinning and 
prescribed burning on 2.4 million acres of forest 
in Arizona (USDA 2013). Large-scale restoration 
is also being planned in New Mexico through the 
Rio Grande Water Fund (RGWF 2014). With the 
increase in scale of forest restoration, it is possible that 
restoration treatments will aﬀect major river basins and 
regional aquifers. 
Tis working paper summarizes research relevant  
to understanding the eﬀect of restoration treatments  
on the hydrologic cycle of southwestern forests.  
An overview of forest hydrology in the Southwest  
is presented, followed by discussions of forest  
restoration and wildﬁre eﬀects on water quantity,  
water quality, and hydrologic function.
Forest Hydrology in the 
Southwest
Te forest water cycle is essentially a balance 
between inputs from precipitation and outputs from 
evapotranspiration, runoﬀ, and groundwater recharge 
(Figure 1). Diﬀerences in the timing of inputs and 
outputs result in water storage in snow and soil 
moisture. Te key components of the water cycle in 
southwestern forests are discussed in this section. 
Precipitation 
Precipitation in the Southwest is characterized by wet 
seasons occurring in the summer and winter. Summer 
precipitation is driven by the North American  
monsoon, which draws pulses of moisture from the  
Gulf of California and the eastern Paciﬁc Ocean 
producing localized thunderstorms. Summer 
precipitation accounts for 35–50 percent of annual 
precipitation in forested areas, with the percentage 
generally decreasing with increasing elevation 
(Vivoni et al. 2008). Winter precipitation is fed by 
moisture originating in the northern Paciﬁc Ocean 
and transported eastward by polar and subtropical 
jet streams (Sheppard et al. 2002). Two large oceanic 
temperature cycles, the El Niño Southern Oscillation 
Figure 1. Diagram of the forest water cycle. 
Evapotranspiration is the sum of plant water 
use (transpiration) and direct evaporation to the 
atmosphere. Runoﬀ is partitioned into overland 
ﬂow, which runs oﬀ directly and interﬂow, which 
inﬁltrates the soil and discharges at another location.

2
Ecological Restoration Institute
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
(ENSO) and the Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO), 
have been shown to aﬀect winter precipitation in the 
Southwest (Sheppard et al. 2002). Te ENSO shifts 
between El Niño and La Niña every two to seven years. 
Winter precipitation tends to be higher during El Niño, 
when warm water is pushed eastward in the Paciﬁc. 
Te ENSO interacts with the PDO, another oceanic 
temperature cycle that switches between a warm and 
cool phase every 15–25 years (Mantua et al. 2002). 
Warm PDO phases have coincided with increased 
moisture in the Southwest, while cool phases in the 
PDO have coincided with drier conditions.
 
Since 1996, the forested, high-elevation regions of the 
Southwest have been in an extended drought (Cayan 
et al. 2010) associated with a cool phase of the PDO. 
During the 15-year period between 1997 and 2012, a 
19 percent reduction in total precipitation was observed 
in Flagstaﬀ, Arizona, and a 15 percent reduction was 
observed in Santa Fe, New Mexico, when compared 
to the preceding 15 years (1981–1996) (Cayan et al. 
2010). Summertime precipitation has remained more 
or less consistent through the current drought, but 
winter precipitation has been far more variable and 
total levels of precipitation during these seasons have 
declined. While climate change is not expected to alter 
the total annual precipitation received in the Southwest, 
it may result in a shift toward more frequent and 
intense monsoon storms and less winter precipitation 
(Christensen et al. 2004; Diﬀenbaugh et al. 2008). 
Increases in temperature and the length and severity  
of heat waves are also expected with numerous 
potential impacts on the water cycle (Jardine et al. 
2013). Te implications of these shifts are discussed  
in the following sections.
Management Implications 
• Overall, precipitation in the Southwest is highly 
variable in both the short-term, due to interannual 
variations in the North American monsoon and 
ENSO cycles, and long-term, due to the PDO. 
Terefore, scenarios considered in planning for natural 
resource management should draw from a multi-
decadal record, if possible, to represent the full range 
of climate variability. 
 
• Climate change is expected to result in a shift 
toward more summer precipitation and less winter 
precipitation as well as increased temperatures. 
Resources that depend on seasonal or temperature-
dependent processes, such as snowmelt and 
evaporation, should incorporate climate projections 
into scenario planning.
Runoff, Inﬁltration, and Streamﬂow
Runoﬀ is the portion of incoming precipitation that 
exits a watershed through a stream channel and is 
produced during rainfall events or snowmelt through 
two mechanisms, overland ﬂow and interﬂow (Figure 
1). Overland ﬂow results when high-intensity 
precipitation or rapid snowmelt occurs on a surface 
with a low inﬁltration capacity, forcing water to 
runoﬀ directly into stream channels. Interﬂow occurs 
when water inﬁltrates, travels through the soil and 
discharges into a stream channel. Vegetated surfaces, 
such as those found in forests, promote inﬁltration and 
a larger fraction of interﬂow (Moreno-de las Heras 
et al. 2010). Over a four-year study in a ponderosa 
pine forest, surface runoﬀ was found to account for 
at most 18 percent of annual runoﬀ and only trace 
amounts of surface runoﬀ were measured in two of 
the years. Surface runoﬀ occurred entirely during 
summer monsoon storms with high rainfall intensity 
(Wilcox et al. 1997). A high percentage of interﬂow is 
associated with good water quality and reduced ﬂood 
risk (Neary et al. 2009). 
 
Winter precipitation in high-elevation forests is the 
primary source of streamﬂow in semi-arid watersheds 
(Flerchinger and Cooley 2000). While ponderosa pine 
forests cover only 20 percent of the Salt-Verde River 
watershed, it is estimated that they produce 50 percent 
of the river ﬂow (Barr 1956). If there is a shift toward 
more summer and less winter precipitation, summer 
monsoon storms could make a larger contribution 
to overall streamﬂow and potentially compensate for 
losses from winter precipitation (Hawkins et al. 2015), 
but could also increase overland ﬂow. 
Management Implication
Based on climate projections, managers should be 
prepared for higher ﬂood peaks and erosion rates from 
summer monsoon storms.
Snow and Soil Moisture Storage
Of the winter precipitation occurring as snow,  
around 20 percent is intercepted by the forest  
canopy (Biederman et al. 2014, Broxton et al. 2015).  
Te melting of ground snow pack is the primary  
source of inﬁltration to deep soil layers (Dore et al. 
2012). Deep soil moisture (>12 in depth) is important  
to forest health because it sustains overstory trees  
through the spring dry season when ﬁre risk is  
highest. Summer monsoon storms generally do  
not result in deep inﬁltration, but are an important 
source of water for understory vegetation (Simonin  
et al. 2007).
Evapotranspiration
Te majority of precipitation that enters a semi-
arid forest leaves through evapotranspiration. 
Evapotranspiration is the combination of evaporation 
of rainfall that is intercepted by vegetation, evaporation 
of moisture from the soil, sublimation of snow, and 

3
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute
water use by plants (transpiration). Evapotranspiration 
increases under higher temperatures (Monteith 1965), 
and a number of studies indicate a positive relationship 
between evapotranspiration and vegetation density 
(e.g. Bosch and Hewlett 1982, Sahin and Hall 1996). 
Terefore, climate change and restoration treatments 
may aﬀect evapotranspiration.
Total evapotranspiration can be measured or estimated 
through several methods. Te eddy covariance method 
directly measures the ﬂux of water vapor from an 
ecosystem and is considered the gold standard in 
evapotranspiration measurement. Eddy covariance 
measurements conducted near Flagstaﬀ, Arizona, 
from 2006–2010 found that evapotranspiration 
losses were 80–90 percent of annual precipitation 
for a typical ponderosa pine forest (Dore et al. 
2012). Evapotranspiration can also be determined 
indirectly through the water balance method in 
which evapotranspiration is assumed to be equal 
to the diﬀerence between measured precipitation 
inputs and runoﬀ losses. It does not account for 
water lost to deep drainage, so the method is only 
valid for small catchments and may still overestimate 
evapotranspiration. Water balance methods at 
the Beaver Creek Experimental Watershed in the 
1950s–80s estimated evapotranspiration as 72–85 
percent of precipitation for ponderosa pine forests 
(Baker 1986). Te results are likely lower than 
the eddy covariance measurements because deep 
drainage is not accounted for and ﬁre suppression 
increased vegetation density and evapotranspiration. 
A more recent water balance evapotranspiration 
study in a ponderosa pine forest near Los Alamos, 
New Mexico, estimated evapotranspiration as 95 
percent of precipitation (Brandes and Wilcox 2000). 
Mixed conifer experimental watersheds at Workman 
Creek (Rich and Gottfried 1976) and Castle Creek 
(Gottfried 1991) estimated evapotranspiration as 90 
percent of precipitation through the water balance 
method. However, eddy covariance measurements 
along an elevational gradient in California found that 
evapotranspiration accounted for a higher percent 
of precipitation in ponderosa pine than in higher-
elevation conifer forests (Goulden et al. 2012), 
suggesting that deep drainage plays a larger role in the 
water budgets of mixed conifer systems.
In the absence of measurements, evapotranspiration 
can be estimated from meteorological data, such as 
temperature, humidity, and incoming solar radiation, 
and vegetation characteristics using one of several 
equations (Dingman 2002). Tere are also remote 
sensing-based evapotranspiration estimates available 
that can be used in the absence of measurements 
(Shultz and Engman 2012). Te choice of equation 
depends on the data available and the type of 
ecosystem being considered. Ha et al. (2015) compared 
evapotranspiration equations and evapotranspiration 
estimates from the MODIS satellite to eddy covariance 
measurements for ponderosa pine forests to determine 
the best estimation method. Te Shuttleworth-Wallace 
(Shuttleworth and Wallace 1985) equation provided 
the best estimate, and most equations provided a more 
accurate estimate than the remote sensing product. 
However, a new evapotranspiration estimation based 
on the high-resolution Landsat satellite provides more 
accurate values for the Southwest than the MODIS 
estimate (Singh et al. 2013). When compared to eddy 
covariance measurements, even the best equations and 
remote sensing products can over- or underestimate 
annual ET by as much as 15 percent. Tus, the error in 
ET may be larger than runoﬀ or recharge as a percent 
of precipitation, so estimating runoﬀ or recharge by the 
water balance method is not feasible without a direct 
measurement of ET.
Management Implication
Managers needing to estimate evapotranspiration would 
be best served by an equation such as Shuttleworth-
Wallace or the Landsat product. However, the error in 
these estimates is too large to provide accurate estimates 
of runoﬀ or recharge using the water balance method.
Other methods exist to measure individual components 
of evapotranspiration. Te sap ﬂux method measures 
the water use rate of individual trees, and the data 
can be scaled up to determine the total water use of 
overstory trees in an ecosystem, referred to as overstory 
transpiration. Understory evapotranspiration, which 
is a combination of soil evaporation and water use by 
understory vegetation, can be determined by measuring 
changes in soil water storage in small plots where large 
roots have been excluded. Simonin et al. (2007) used 
these methods to quantify overstory transpiration and 
understory evapotranspiration in ponderosa pine forests. 
Overstory transpiration dominates evapotranspiration 
in the spring, when snowmelt has replenished deep 
soil moisture and most of annual evapotranspiration 
occurs. Te smaller evapotranspiration rates during the 
summer monsoon season are dominated by understory 
evapotranspiration, which consumes most moisture from 
monsoon storms before it inﬁltrates to deep soil layers. 
Because evapotranspiration consumes most summer 
precipitation, winter precipitation is the main source of 
runoﬀ and groundwater recharge. Tus, water resources 
depend on an abundance of winter precipitation.
Groundwater Recharge
Te deep drainage of water below the active root zone 
of an ecosystem to create groundwater recharge is a 
complex process. It depends on both the annual balance 
between precipitation, runoﬀ, and evapotranspiration 
and the physical characteristics of the soil and bedrock. 

4
Ecological Restoration Institute
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Projects to restore forests surrounding storage reservoirs, like C.C. Cragin in Arizona, aim to protect water quality and supplies 
from the debris and ash that clog streams and rivers as a result of high intensity wildfires. Photo courtesy of Coconino National 
Forest, USDA Forest Service
Te morphology of watersheds and stream channels 
also plays a role, as drainage from ephemeral stream 
channels during ﬂow events accounts for a large portion 
of groundwater recharge in the Southwest (Phillips et 
al. 2004). Groundwater recharge can be measured by 
tracking the isotopic composition or concentration of 
naturally occurring trace chemicals in precipitation and 
water extracted from the deep soil (Allison et al. 1994). 
It can also be estimated using a water balance model 
(Kinzelbach et al. 2002). A wide range of groundwater 
recharge values have been estimated for sites in forested 
regions of the Southwest using this method. In New 
Mexico ponderosa pine forests, measured groundwater 
recharge was 20 percent of annual precipitation 
for a sandy soil that drains quickly (Stephens and 
Knowlton et al. 1986) and less than 1 percent of annual 
precipitation for a forest with a deep clay soil layer that 
is nearly impervious to water ﬂow (Newman et al. 2007). 
Analysis of long-term data has shown that groundwater 
recharge rates are closely tied to climate with the 
majority of recharge occurring during years with high 
precipitation (Pool 2005).  
While the high variability of groundwater recharge in 
space and time makes it diﬃcult to reliably estimate it at 
regional scales, there is strong evidence that groundwater 
is being pumped at higher rates than it is being 
recharged. Change in groundwater storage at large scales 
can be estimated through satellite-based measurements 
of the small reductions in gravity that occur when 
groundwater is depleted. Tese estimates show that the 
rate of groundwater depletion in the Colorado River 
basin exceeds the rate of depletion for large storage 
reservoirs such as Lake Mead and Lake Powell, 
indicating that groundwater is being depleted more 
rapidly than surface water resources in the western 
U.S. Te sharpest decline occurred over the past four 
years of severe drought (Castle et al. 2014). 
Management Implication
Te rate of groundwater use in the western U.S.  
is not sustainable. As groundwater is generally used  
to supplement surface water, this underscores the  
need to maintain healthy forested watersheds.
Sediment Yield and Water Quality
Te quality of water emanating from forested lands 
must be of suﬃcient quality to provide for aquatic 
habitat and be of use to human communities. Soil 
erosion within a watershed leads to suspended sediment 
in runoﬀ, which alters water color and clarity, may 
transport contaminants that are bound to the sediment 
particles (Ongley et al. 1992), and settles in reservoirs 
and canals, reducing their capacity and function (Lane 
et al. 1997). Te total mass of sediment leaving a 
watershed per unit area is referred to as the sediment 
yield. Sediment production is driven by overland ﬂow, 
so sediment yield is minimal in undisturbed ponderosa 
(Brown et al. 1974; Heede 1984) and mixed-conifer 
(Heede and King 1990) forests. Forested is perhaps 
the best watershed land cover type for producing clean 
water, but disturbances, especially forest roads, can 
reduce water quality (Neary et al. 2009).

5
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute
Management Implication
Maintaining healthy forested watersheds reduces the 
cost of water treatment and maintenance of water 
storage and delivery infrastructure.
Restoration Effects on the 
Forest Water Cycle
As restoration proceeds from small management  
projects to landscape-scale initiatives such as the  
4FRI, it is possible that restoration treatments will  
aﬀect the water cycle at the scale of large river basins  
and regional aquifers. Paired watershed studies  
to monitor the eﬀect of landscape-scale restoration  
on the water cycle are planned for ponderosa pine  
forests near Flagstaﬀ (Masek Lopez et al. 2013)  
and are underway in mixed-conifer forests near  
Santa Fe (Lewis 2014). Prior to the availability  
of new data from these studies, it is possible to 
 predict the eﬀect of restoration on the water cycle  
based on research on other types of vegetation  
thinning, studies of individual water cycle  
components in small restoration plots, modeling  
studies, and remote sensing-based measurements.  
Tese studies are summarized in this section.
 
Runoff and Streamﬂow
Tere is considerable interest in predicting how forest 
restoration will aﬀect runoﬀ, because it could result in 
additional water resources for downstream users. Te 
eﬀect of commercial forest management techniques 
on runoﬀ was studied extensively in Arizona in the 
1950s to 1980s using paired watershed studies, which 
compare runoﬀ in treatment and control watersheds 
before and after treatment (Baker 1999). Forest 
thinning treatments applied to mixed-conifer forests 
in the watersheds of two of three branches of Workman 
Creek were found to increase runoﬀ in a study conducted 
at the Sierra Ancha Experimental Forest on the Tonto 
National Forest (Rich and Gottfried 1976). To determine 
if the results from Workman Creek could be reproduced, 
the Forest Service’s Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station instrumented and treated three 
more pairs of mixed-conifer and ponderosa pine forests 
on the White Mountain watersheds of Castle, Willow, 
and Tomas Creeks on the Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest. Increased runoﬀ was observed at all of the sites, and 
long-term monitoring at Workman Creek showed that the 
increases persisted through the 21-year observation period 
following thinning (Gottfried and DeBano 1990).
Te most extensive series of paired watershed experiments 
occurred on 20 small watersheds at the Beaver Creek 
Experimental Watershed in ponderosa pine forest and 
piñon-juniper woodland on the Coconino National Forest 
(Brown et al. 1974; Baker 1986). Te objective of the study 
was to evaluate the potential of clearing and silvicultural 
thinning techniques for increasing runoﬀ, water quality, 
and rangeland productivity in the Salt-Verde River basin. 
Te Beaver Creek studies found that both overstory 
removal and strip-cut thinning treatments of ponderosa 
pine forest that removed at least 30 percent of basal area 
resulted in signiﬁcant increases in runoﬀ. For comparison, 
ecological restoration treatments designed to restore 
historical structure and ﬁre regime reduce basal area by 40–
65 percent (Fulé et al. 2002; Waltz et al. 2003). In contrast 
to the Workman Creek Study, streamﬂow in thinned 
Beaver Creek watersheds returned to pre-treatment levels, 
as compared to a control watersheds, four to 10 years after 
treatment. Te recovery is attributed to tree recovery and 
understory regrowth, which is discussed in the following 
section (titled "Evapotranpiration," page 7).
Most of the greater Phoenix area’s water supply comes 
from winter precipitation and runoﬀ from Arizona 
mountains to the north. Snow melts and drains into 
tributaries and is stored in reservoirs on the Salt (pictured) 
and Verde rivers. Forest restoration can improve watershed 
health and function, which has beneﬁts for downstream 
ecosystems and communities. Photo courtesy of Tonto 
National Forest, USDA Forest Service
A paired watershed study monitors streamﬂow to 
measure the eﬀect of restoration on the water cycle.

6
Ecological Restoration Institute
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Management Implications
• Based on historical studies, restoration treatments should 
remove at least 30 percent of basal area to produce 
additional runoﬀ and other hydrologic beneﬁts. 
  
Te forest thinning treatments tested in the  
historical paired watershed studies are not the  
same as restoration treatments, but the basal area 
reduction resulting from restoration is within the 
range of the forest thinning treatments tested. Robles 
et al. (2014) used historical paired watershed data 
to develop an equation that predicts the increase in 
runoﬀ following thinning in ponderosa pine forest. 
Winter precipitation, time since thinning, and basal 
area reduction were the factors that signiﬁcantly 
inﬂuenced runoﬀ increase. Over a range of restoration 
and climate scenarios, runoﬀ was predicted to 
increase by an average of 20 percent over the 10 years 
following restoration. Tis is the increase in ﬂow 
that would be expected in a small headwater stream 
whose watershed is completely covered by recently 
restored forest. In larger river basins, it is only feasible 
to restore a small portion of the forested land in the 
watershed each year, so the increase in annual runoﬀ 
is smaller. When 30-year restoration scenarios for 
the entire Salt-Verde basin are analyzed, the annual 
increase in runoﬀ amounts to less than 2 percent 
of the annual Salt River ﬂow reaching Roosevelt 
Reservoir near Phoenix. 
• Restoration may be a useful tool for increasing ﬂow  
to upland aquatic habitat and water sources, but it is 
unlikely to provide large and reliable increases in ﬂow  
to major rivers.  
 
Another approach to predicting changes in runoﬀ 
due to restoration is process-based modeling. Tese 
models simulate the physical processes in a watershed 
that inﬂuence runoﬀ, such as evapotranspiration and  
snowmelt, and the parameters describing vegetation 
structure in the model can be adjusted to represent a 
restoration treatment. Kaye et al. (1999) ran the MT-
CLIM (Running et al. 1987) and Forest-BGC  
(Running and Coughlan 1988) climate and hydrology 
models for two experimental restoration plots and a 
control site near Flagstaﬀ. Te model predicted annual 
runoﬀ 32-110 percent greater in the restoration than 
control plots. However, data available to calibrate 
and test the hydrology model were limited, so the 
results should be interpreted with caution. Moreno 
et al. (2015) used the tRIBS model (Ivanov et al. 
2004) to predict the eﬀect of 4FRI treatments on 
ﬂow in Tonto Creek, a major tributary in the Salt-
Verde River system with a watershed that is partially 
forested. tRIBS is speciﬁcally designed for modeling 
interactions between vegetation and the water cycle 
and it simulated measured ﬂow in Tonto Creek 
accurately. For a range of restoration scenarios, 
modeled ﬂow in Tonto creek increased 1–4 percent.  
 
Tere are pros and cons to both statistical modeling 
approaches, such as the regression equation used by 
Robles et al. (2014), and the process-based modeling 
approaches used by Kaye et al. (1999) and Moreno 
et al. (2015). Statistical approaches are unable to 
account for diﬀerences between the conditions 
that existed when data was collected and the 
conditions under which predictions will be made. 
For instance, warmer temperatures due to climate 
change may alter the water cycle by increasing 
evapotranspiration and converting precipitation 
from snow to rain, and this would not be accounted 
for in a statistical model. Process-based models 
address this issue by directly simulating processes 
like evapotranspiration and precipitation. However, 
process-based models often require a large number 
of model parameters and data for calibration and 
testing. Uncertainty in parameter values and limited 
calibration data can reduce the reliability of the 
model. Agreement between approaches provides 
evidence that a prediction is reliable. Te conclusion 
that landscape-scale restoration will result in small 
increases in river ﬂow is supported by both statistical 
(<2 percent increase) and robust process-based (1–4 
percent increase) modeling approaches.  
 
While restoration may beneﬁt downstream water 
users by increasing ﬂows, there is also concern 
that the disturbance from restoration will lead 
to increased ﬂood peaks. Te Beaver Creek 
Experimental Watershed experienced an intense 
precipitation event in 1970 shortly after some of 
the logging treatments were performed, providing 
evidence on how thinning aﬀects ﬂood peaks 
(Brown et al. 1974). Sites that were lightly thinned 
(~33 percent basal area reduction) and are most 
similar to restoration treatments experienced small 
increases in ﬂood peak that were not statistically 
signiﬁcant. Watersheds with more intense thinning 
(75 percent basal area reduction to clearcut) did 
experience signiﬁcant ﬂood peak increases of 
88–167 percent above control levels. Data on ﬂood 
peaks following a major storm are not available for 
watersheds thinned at levels similar to restoration 
treatment (40–65 percent basal area reduction). 
However, the data available do suggest that increases 
in ﬂood peaks are possible and should be a focus of 
future research.  
 
If prescribed or managed ﬁre is used as part of 
restoration, it may have additional eﬀects on ﬂood 
peaks. In ponderosa pine forest, prescribed ﬁre 
temporarily reduces the capacity of the soil to 
inﬁltrate water. Te eﬀect is usually reversed by 

7
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute
the freezing and snowpack during the ﬁrst winter 
following burning (Zwolinski 1971). If monsoon 
storms occur after burning but before winter, 
increased overland ﬂow is possible, which should be 
a consideration in ﬂood-prone areas.
• In areas prone to high ﬂoods (e.g. steep slopes, 
impervious soils) or where ﬂoods could endanger 
lives and property, lower-intensity thinning methods 
(<35 percent basal area reduction) should be used 
and prescribed burns should be conducted in the fall 
to allow soils to recover before monsoon rains. 
Evapotranspiration
One potential mechanism driving increased runoﬀ in 
thinned forests is the reduction in evapotranspiration 
that occurs when vegetation is removed. Field studies 
of experimental restoration plots provide evidence that 
this is the case. Te eddy covariance study of stand-
level evapotranspiration in ponderosa pine forests 
near Flagstaﬀ compared a restored and an unmanaged 
forest. Over the ﬁve years following restoration, 
total annual evapotranspiration was reduced by 4 
percent (Dore et al. 2012). Spring evapotranspiration 
following snowmelt was higher in the control site, 
but evapotranspiration during the summer monsoon 
season was higher in the restored site. Measurements 
of individual components of evapotranspiration 
in restored and control plots provide evidence for 
why this occurs (Simonin et al. 2007). Understory 
evapotranspiration, which is the most important 
component of evapotranspiration in the summer, was 
higher in the restored plot because more sunlight 
reaches the understory. Total water use by overstory 
trees, which is the dominant evapotranspiration 
component following snowmelt, was higher in 
the control plot. However, water use by individual 
overstory trees increased as the restoration site recovered 
from thinning (Simonin et al. 2006). Increasing 
evapotranspiration due to vegetation regrowth is often 
cited as a reason that post-thinning runoﬀ increases are 
not permanent (e.g. Baker 1986). 
 
Management Implication
If prescribed or managed ﬁre is used to maintain an 
open condition following restoration, a small increase in 
runoﬀ is possible following burning due to a reduction 
in understory evapotranspiration. Te increase will 
likely be smaller than that observed following thinning 
because water use by individual overstory trees increases 
after restoration.
Snow and Soil Moisture Storage
Te other mechanism by which restoration may increase 
runoﬀ is by decreasing canopy interception of snow, 
leading to deeper snowpacks and greater inﬁltration 
of snowmelt into the soil. Modeling studies predict 
that lower canopy densities produce greater ground 
snowpack (Broxton et al. 2015). However, observations 
of snowpack following mountain pine beetle outbreaks 
(Biederman et al. 2014) and high-severity wildﬁre 
(Harpold et al. 2013) demonstrate that extensive canopy 
removal can reduce inﬁltration to the soil by exposing 
the ground snowpack to sun and wind causing increased 
sublimation. Terefore, snow-water inﬁltration is 
expected to be greatest in forests with intermediate 
canopy density (Musselman et al. 2008; Gustafson et al. 
2010). A meta-analysis of studies that measured snow 
accumulation before and after a change in forest cover 
due to a variety of drivers, such as ﬁre, insect outbreaks, 
logging, and aﬀorestation, found that reductions  
in forest cover were associated  with an increase in 
snowpack (Varhola et al. 2010). While ﬁeld studies 
focusing speciﬁcally on restoration are limited, Sankey 
et al. (2015) analyzed imagery from an unmanned 
aerial vehicle to determine that restored forests with 24 
percent canopy cover had the highest fraction of ground 
covered by snow in the early spring. Te method was 
not able to provide information about snow depth or 
water content, but it does provide preliminary evidence 
that forest restoration increases snowpack. 
Aside from providing reliable water resources, another 
goal of forest restoration is to improve forest health 
by increasing soil moisture. Increased soil moisture 
reduces vegetation stress during dry periods. Studies 
in restored and control plots indicate that restoration 
increases deep (<6 in) soil moisture sourced from 
snowmelt. However, shallow soil moisture from 
monsoon storms is depleted more rapidly in the 
summer in restored forests due to reduced shading 
(Simonin et al. 2007; Dore et al. 2012). Terefore, 
restoration would be expected to reduce stress on 
Prescribed burning, often combined with mechanical 
thinning of excess, small diameter trees, seeks to 
return forest to a more natural condition and restore 
a low-intensity fire regime. Photo by ERI

8
Ecological Restoration Institute
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
overstory trees but increase stress on understory 
vegetation. Tis would support a high-frequency, low-
intensity ﬁre regime.
 
Groundwater Recharge
It is expected that restoration will increase groundwater 
recharge by increasing inﬁltration from snowpack and 
reducing losses from evapotranspiration. Wyatt et al. 
(2015) assumed that the increase in recharge due to 
restoration would be proportional to the expected 
increase in runoﬀ (e.g. if runoﬀ increases 10 percent, 
recharge will increase 10 percent), and used a regional 
groundwater ﬂow model to analyze how the 4FRI 
would inﬂuence regional aquifers. Te model predicted 
a 2.8 percent increase to major aquifers, but the 
increase was small relative to aquifer pumping rates. 
Direct measurements of the eﬀect of forest thinning or 
restoration on groundwater recharge are limited to one 
study. Aldridge (2015) measured groundwater recharge 
for one year in restored and control ponderosa pine 
forest plots. Precipitation during the study period was 
anomalous with strong summer monsoon precipitation 
(23 percent above average). Winter snowpack was 
40 percent below average, but heavy spring rains 
brought the winter precipitation totals to near average. 
Measured recharge was slightly higher in the control 
site, 4.8 percent of precipitation, than the restored 
site, 4.4 percent of precipitation, which went against 
the expected results. More information is needed to 
draw conclusions about the eﬀect of restoration, and 
groundwater recharge measurements are a planned 
component of paired watershed monitoring studies 
(Masek Lopez et al. 2013; Lewis 2014). 
Sediment Yield and Water Quality
Many of the historical paired watershed studies also 
measured sediment. Sediment yield increases following 
light to moderate thinning were minimal in mixed-
conifer forests at Workman Creek (Rich et al. 1961) 
and Tomas Creek (Heede and King 1990) and in 
ponderosa pine at Beaver Creek (Dong 1996). Total 
dissolved solids, a general indicator of water quality, 
were also measured at Beaver Creek and showed a 
small increase following thinning treatments (Brown 
et al. 1974).
Restoration treatments that include prescribed or 
managed ﬁre pose additional concerns for sediment 
yield and water quality. Baker (1990) provides a 
detailed review of prescribed burning eﬀects on 
erosion and water quality. Fire can increase sediment 
erosion by reducing the stabilizing cover of understory 
vegetation and litter. In ponderosa pine, the eﬀects 
of prescribed burns on sediment yield are small or 
undetectable. Observations over two years following 
a prescribed burn in a ponderosa forest in California, 
including slopes of up to 43 percent, found no 
evidence of erosion except around roads and trails 
(Biswell and Schultz 1957). A study in Arizona did 
ﬁnd evidence of erosion one year after prescribed 
burning, but soil loss was small (less than one inch) 
and most was deposited a short distance downslope 
before reaching a stream (Cooper 1961). Many of 
the nutrients contained in plant matter are converted 
by ﬁre to forms that are more easily dissolved and 
washed away, reducing water quality. Prescribed 
burning resulted in a statistically signiﬁcant increase 
in nitrate and ammonium in ponderosa pine forests, 
but the concentrations were still very low during the 
year following burning (Gottfried and DeBano 1990). 
Post-ﬁre nitrate concentrations were all below 0.003 
parts per million, well below the EPA drinking water 
standard of 10 parts per million. Changes in other 
nutrient concentrations, including phosphorus and 
cations, were not detected. Kaye et al. (1999) measured 
nutrient concentrations in soil water in a control and 
two restoration plots, one that included prescribed 
burning and one that did not. Tere was no signiﬁcant 
diﬀerence between the plots.
Management Implication
Reductions in water quality due to restoration 
treatments is generally low but may need to be 
considered if restoration is occurring near a very 
sensitive aquatic habitat or water source.
Wildﬁre Effects on Hydrology
Te main goal of forest restoration is to reduce the 
risk of high-intensity wildﬁre. Te potential negative 
impacts of restoration, increased ﬂood peaks, sediment 
yield, and decreased water quality, must be weighed 
against the potential negative eﬀects of a high-
intensity wildﬁre Hydrologic studies were conducted 
after several of the major wildﬁres that occurred in 
Arizona and New Mexico in the 1990s and 2000s and 
show that these eﬀects can be quite severe.
A larger patch of snowpack is retained with a large 
opening, or meadow, in the forest near Mountainaire, 
Arizona in 2010. Photo courtesy of NAU

9
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute
Flood Peaks Following Wildﬁre
Te sites of several historical paired watershed 
studies were burned by large, high-intensity wildﬁres. 
Instrumentation was reinstalled after the ﬁres to study 
the eﬀects in comparison to historical pre-ﬁre data. 
Neary et al. (2003) provide a detailed review of the 
results. After high-severity ﬁre, the sites experienced 
record ﬂood peaks, 10–100 times pre-ﬁre levels, during 
summer monsoon storms. 
Management Implication
Te potential increase in ﬂood peak from a  
high-intensity wildﬁre is much more severe than the 
potential increase from a restoration treatment. 
Sediment Yield and Water Quality  
Following Wildﬁre
Erosion and sediment transport is commonly observed 
after high-intensity wildﬁre (Gottfried et al. 2003). 
Te 2011 Las Conchas Fire burned a section of the 
Valles Caldera National Preserve in New Mexico, a 
long-term research site for which a high-resolution 
elevation map had been produced using airplane-based 
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) one year 
before the ﬁre. A repeat survey was performed, and 
erosion for any point can be calculated by taking the 
diﬀerence between the pre-ﬁre and post-ﬁre elevation 
maps. Te analysis showed the highest erosion rates 
from steep slopes and areas with high burn severity 
(Figure 2, Pelletier and Orem 2014). 
Erosion has negative consequences for water quality. 
Monitoring before and after the Cerro Grande Fire, 
which burned ponderosa pine and mixed-conifer 
forest in New Mexico, found that post-ﬁre suspended 
sediment concentrations in ephemeral streams were 
more than 100 times higher than pre-ﬁre levels 
(Malmon et al. 2007). Most measures of water quality, 
including concentrations of major ions and nutrients, 
turbidity, and pH, are signiﬁcantly altered by wildﬁre for 
at least four months (Earl and Blinn 2003).
Management Implications
• From an erosion-management and water quality 
perspective, steep slopes should be a priority for  
restoration treatments.
• Te water quality impacts of high-intensity wildﬁre 
are much greater than the impacts of a restoration 
treatment.  
 
Te reductions in water quality associated with 
wildﬁre have a negative impact on aquatic habitat. 
Figure 2. Relationship between slope and 
sediment yield for three Forest Service Burned 
Area Reﬂectance Classiﬁcation (BARC) categories. 
Relationships are from the equation developed by 
Pelletier and Orem (2014) based on LiDAR-derived 
sediment yield data from the 2011 Las Conchas 
Fire. Sediment yield is expressed as ft3 of sediment 
produced per acre2 of contributing area in the year 
following the ﬁre.
Severe erosion and sediment transport was 
observed after the 2010 Schultz Fire, which 
burned more than 15,000 acres of steep slopes 
on the San Francisco Peaks north of Flagstaff, 
Arizona. Photo by ERI

10
Ecological Restoration Institute
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Leonard (2015) conducted a comprehensive review of 
research on high-severity wildﬁre eﬀects on aquatic 
ecosystems in the Southwest. Native ﬁsh species 
have been extirpated from streams following wildﬁre 
(Rinne 1996). Wildﬁre also reduces the abundance 
and diversity of insects, which are an important link in 
the aquatic food web (Vieira et al. 2004). Populations 
recover more quickly when headwater areas of the 
watershed remain unburned, because the headwaters 
provide a source to repopulate burned areas (Vieira et 
al. 2011).  
• Protecting headwaters from high severity ﬁres 
through restoration treatment can increase the 
resilience of aquatic communities.
Conclusion
Forest restoration has the potential to positively aﬀect 
the hydrologic cycle of ﬁre-adapted forests in the 
Southwest by enhancing runoﬀ, soil moisture storage, 
and snowpack. Tere are some potential negative 
eﬀects, including increased sediment yield, reduced 
water quality, and increased ﬂood peaks. Based on 
previous studies, the impacts on sediment and water 
quality will likely be minimal. More information is 
needed on the potential for increased ﬂood peaks. 
Tese small negative impacts must be weighed against 
the catastrophic ﬂoods, erosion, and water quality 
reduction that has been documented following high-
intensity wildﬁre.

References
11
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute
Aldridge, V.J. 2015. Measuring groundwater recharge in 
northern Arizona, using an atmospheric-sourced 
chloride mass balance technique. Master’s Tesis 
Northern Arizona University. 
Allison, G.B., G.W. Gee, and S.W. Tyler. 1994. Vadose-zone 
techniques for estimating groundwater recharge 
in arid and semiarid regions. Soil Science Society of 
America Journal 58 (1): 6–14.  
Anderholm, S.K. 1998. Mountain-front recharge along 
the eastern side of the middle Rio Grande Basin, 
central New Mexico. USGS Water Resources 
Investigations Report 00–4010, 36. 
Baker, M.B. 1999. History of Watershed Research in the Central 
Arizona Highlands. US Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Research Paper RMRS-GTR-29.  
Baker, M.B. 1990. Hydrologic and Water Quality Eﬀects 
of Fire. In: Eﬀects of Fire Management of 
Southwestern Natural Resources. USDA Forest 
Service General Technical Report RM-191.  
Baker, M.B. 1986. Eﬀects of ponderosa pine treatments on 
water yield in Arizona. Water Resources Research 
22(1), 67–73.  
Barr, G.W. 1956. Recovering rainfall. Tucson, AZ: 
Department of Agricultural Economics, University 
of Arizona. 
Biederman, J.A., P. D. Brooks, A.A. Harpold, D.J. Gochis, 
E. Gutmann, D.E. Reed, E. Pendall, and B.E. 
Ewers. 2014. Multiscale observations of snow 
accumulation and peak snowpack following 
widespread, insect-induced lodgepole pine 
mortality. Ecohydrology 7(1), 150–62.  
Biswell, H.H., and A.M. Schultz. 1957. Surface runoﬀ and 
erosion as related to prescribed burning. Journal of 
Forestry 55(5), 372–74. 
Bosch, J. M., and J.D. Hewlett. 1982. A review of catchment 
experiments to determine the eﬀect of vegetation 
changes on water yield and evapotranspiration. 
Journal of Hydrology 55(1), 3-23. 
Brandes, D., and B.P Wilcox. 2000. Evapotranspiration and 
soil moisture dynamics on a semiarid ponderosa 
pine hillslope. Journal of the American Water 
Resources Association 36(5), 965–74.  
Brown, H.E., M.B. Baker, J.J, Rogers, W.P. Clary, J.L. 
Kovner, F.R. Larson, C.C. Avery, and R.E. 
Campbell. 1974. Opportunities for Increasing 
Water Yields and Other Multiple Use Values on 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Lands. U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Research Paper 
RM-129. 
Broxton, P.D., A.A. Harpold, J.A. Biederman, P.A. Troch, N.P. 
Molotch, and P.D. Brooks. 2015. Quantifying the 
eﬀects of vegetation structure on snow accumulation 
and ablation in mixed conifer forests. Ecohydrology 
8(6), 1073-1094. 
Castle, S.L., B.F. Tomas, J.T. Reager, M. Rodell, S.C. 
Swenson, and J.S. Famiglietti. 2014. Groundwater 
depletion during drought threatens future water 
security of the Colorado River Basin. Geophysical 
Research Letters 41(16): GL061055. 
 
Cayan, D.R., T. Das, D.W. Pierce, T.P. Barnett, M. Tyree, and 
A. Gershunov. 2010. Future dryness in the southwest 
U.S. and the hydrology of the early 21st century 
drought. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 107(50), 21271–21276.  
Christensen, N.S., A.W. Wood, N. Voisin, D.P. Lettenmaier, 
and R.N. Palmer. 2004. Te eﬀects of climate 
change on the hydrology and water resources of the 
Colorado River Basin. Climatic Change 62(1-3), 
337–63.  
Cooper, C.F. 1961. Controlled burning and watershed 
condition in the White Mountains of Arizona. 
Journal of Forestry 59(6), 438–42. 
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fule, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. 
Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 
1997. Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine 
forests of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry 95(4), 23. 
Diﬀenbaugh, N.S., F. Giorgi, and J.S. Pal. 2008. Climate 
change hotspots in the United States. Geophysical 
Research Letters 35 (16). 
Dingman, S.L. 2002. Physical Hydrology, 2nd Edn., Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Dong, C. 1996. Eﬀects of vegetative manipulations on 
sediment concentrations in north-central Arizona. 
Master’s Tesis University of Arizona. 
Dore, S., M. Montes-Helu, S.C. Hart, B.A. Hungate, G.W. 
Koch, J.B. Moon, A.J. Finkral, and T.E. Kolb. 2012. 
Recovery of ponderosa pine ecosystem carbon and 
water ﬂuxes from thinning and stand replacing ﬁre. 
Global Change Biology 18(10), 3171-3185. 
Earl, S.R., and D.W. Blinn. 2003. Eﬀects of wildﬁre ash on 
water chemistry and biota in Southwestern U.S.A. 
streams. Freshwater Biology 48(6), 1015–30.  
Flerchinger, G.N, and K.R Cooley. 2000. A ten-year water 
balance of a mountainous semi-arid watershed. 
Journal of Hydrology 237(1–2), 86–99. 
Friederici, P. 2003. Ecological Restoration of Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forests. Vol. 2. Island Press. 

References
12
Ecological Restoration Institute
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Korb., and R. Wu. 2009. Changes in forest 
structure of a mixed conifer forest, southwestern 
Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management
 
258:1200-1210. 
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, H.B. Smith, J.D. Springer, T.A. 
Heinlein, K.D. Huisinga, and M.M. Moore. 2002. 
Comparing ecological restoration alternatives: Grand 
Canyon, Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 
170(1–3), 19–41. 
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 1997. 
Determining reference conditions for ecosystem 
management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Ecological Applications 7(3), 895–908.  
Gottfried, G.J., D.G. Neary, M.B. Baker, and P.F. Ffolliott. 
2003. Impacts of wildﬁres on hydrologic processes in 
forest ecosystems: Two case studies. In: Proceedings, 
1st Interagency Conference on Research in the 
Watersheds. US Department of Agriculture, 
Agricultural Research Service. 
Gottfried, G.J. 1991. Moderate timber harvesting increases 
water yields from an Arizona mixed conifer 
watershed. Journal of the American Water Resources 
Association 27(3), 537–46.  
Gottfried, G.J., and L.F. DeBano. 1990. Streamﬂow and Water 
Quality Responses to Preharvest Prescribed Burning 
in an Undisturbed Ponderosa Pine Watershed. 
In: Eﬀects of Fire Management on Southwestern 
Natural Resources. USDA Forest Service General 
Technical Report RM-191. 
Goulden, M.L., R.G. Anderson, R.C. Bales, A.E. Kelly, 
M. Meadows, and G.C. Winston. 2012. 
Evapotranspiration along an elevation gradient in 
California’s Sierra Nevada. Journal of Geophysical 
Research: Biogeosciences 117(G3), G03028.  
Gustafson, J.R., P. D. Brooks, N.P. Molotch, and W.C. Veatch. 
2010. Estimating snow sublimation using natural 
chemical and isotopic tracers across a gradient of 
solar radiation. Water Resources Research 46(12).  
Ha, W., T.E. Kolb, A.E. Springer, S. Dore, F.C. O’Donnell, R. 
Martinez Morales, S. Masek Lopez, and G.W. Koch. 
2015. Evapotranspiration comparisons between eddy 
covariance measurements and meteorological and 
remote-sensing-based models in disturbed ponderosa 
pine forests. Ecohydrology 8(7): 1335–1350.  
Harpold, A.A., J.A. Biederman, K. Condon, M. Merino, Y. 
Korgaonkar, T. Nan, L.L. Sloat, M. Ross, and P.D. 
Brooks. 2013. Changes in snow accumulation and 
ablation following the Las Conchas forest ﬁre, New 
Mexico, USA. Ecohydrology 7(2), 440-452.  
Hawkins, G.A., E.R. Vivoni, A. Robles-Morua, G. 
Mascaro, E. Rivera, and F. Dominguez. 2015. A 
climate change projection for summer hydrologic 
conditions in a semiarid watershed of Central 
Arizona. Journal of Arid Environments 118, 9–20.  
Heede, B.H., and R.M. King 1990. State-of-the-art timber 
harvest in an Arizona mixed conifer forest has 
a minimal eﬀect on overland ﬂow and erosion. 
Journal des Sciences Hydrologiques. 35, 623-635. 
Heede, B.H. 1984. Overland ﬂow and sediment delivery: an 
experiment with small subdrainage in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests (Colorado, USA). Journal of 
Hydrology 72, 261-273. 
Kaye, J.P., S.C. Hart, R.C. Cobb, and J.E. Stone. 1999. Water 
and nutrient outﬂow following the ecological 
restoration of a ponderosa pine-bunchgrass 
ecosystem. Restoration Ecology 7(3), 252–61.  
Kinzelbach, W., W. Aeschbach, C. Alberich, I.B. Goni, 
U. Beyerle, P. Brunner, W.H. Chiang, J. Rueedi, 
and K. Zoellmann. 2002. A survey of methods 
for groundwater recharge in arid and semi-arid 
regions. Early warning and assessment Report series, 
UNEP/DEWA/RS, 2(2). 
Mantua, N.J., and S.R. Hare. 2002. Te Paciﬁc decadal 
oscillation. Journal of Oceanography 58(1), 35-44. 
 
Lane, L.J., M. Hernandez, and M. Nichols. 1997. Processes 
controlling sediment yield from watersheds as 
functions of spatial scale. Environmental Modelling 
& Software 12(4), 355–69.  
Leonard, J.M. 2015. Fire and Floods: Te Recovery of 
Headwater Streams Following High Severity 
Wildﬁre. Ph.D. Dissertation Northern Arizona 
University.  
Malmon, D.V., S.L. Reneau, D. Katzman, A. Lavine, and J. 
Lyman. 2007. Suspended sediment transport in 
an ephemeral stream following wildﬁre. Journal 
of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface 112(F2): 
F02006.  
Masek Lopez, S., W.W. Covington, A.E. Springer, and D.W. 
Huﬀman. 2013. Paired watershed study to predict 
hydrologic responses to restoration treatments and 
changing climate in the Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative ﬁrst analysis area. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, 96 p. 
Molotch, N.P. 2009. Reconstructing snow water equivalent 
in the Rio Grande headwaters using remotely 
sensed snow cover data and a spatially distributed 
snowmelt model. Hydrological Processes 23(7), 
1076–89.  

References
13
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Ecological Restoration Institute
Monteith, J.L. 1965. Evaporation and environment. Symposia 
of the Society for Experimental Biology 19(205-23). 4. 
Moreno, H.A., H.V. Gupta, D.D. White, and D.A. 
Sampson. 2015. Modeling the distributed eﬀects 
of forest thinning on the long-term water balance 
and stream ﬂow extremes for a semi-arid basin in 
the southwestern U.S. Hydrology and Earth System 
Sciences Discussions 12, 10827–91.  
Moreno-de las Heras, M., J.M. Nicolau, L. Merino-Martín, 
and B.P. Wilcox. 2010. Plot-scale eﬀects on runoﬀ 
and erosion along a slope degradation gradient. 
Water Resources Research 46(4), W04503.  
Musselman, K.N., N.P. Molotch, and P.D. Brooks. 2008. 
Eﬀects of vegetation on snow accumulation and 
ablation in a mid-latitude sub-alpine forest. 
Hydrological Processes 22(15), 2767–76.  
Neary, D.G., G.G. Ice, and C.R. Jackson. 2009. Linkages 
between forest soils and water quality and quantity. 
Forest Ecology and Management, 258(10), 2269–81.  
Neary, D.G., G.J. Gottfried, and P.F. Ffolliott. 2003. 
Post-Wildﬁre Watershed Flood Responses. In: 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Fire Ecology 
Conference, American Meteorological Society. Vol. 
65982.  
Newman, B.D., A.R Campbell, and B.P Wilcox. 1997. 
Tracer-based studies of soil water movement 
in semi-arid forests of New Mexico. Journal of 
Hydrology 196(1–4), 251–70.  
Ongley, E.D., B.G. Krishnappan, I.G. Droppo, S.S. Rao, and 
R.J. Maguire. 1992. Cohesive sediment transport: 
Emerging issues for toxic chemical management. 
In Sediment/Water Interactions, B.T. Hart and P.G. 
Sly, eds. Netherlands: Springer. 
Jardine, A., R. Merideth, M. Black, and S. LeRoy, 2013. 
Assessment of climate change in the southwest 
United States: a report prepared for the National 
Climate Assessment. Island press. 
Pelletier, J.D., and C.A. Orem. 2014. How do sediment 
yields from post-wildﬁre debris-laden ﬂows 
depend on terrain slope, soil burn severity class, 
and drainage basin area? Insights from airborne-
LiDAR change detection. Earth Surface Processes 
and Landforms 39(13), 1822–32.  
Phillips, F. M., J. F. Hogan, and B. R. Scanlon. 2004. 
Groundwater Recharge in a Desert Environment: 
Te Southwestern United States. Water Science 
Applications Series, vol. 9, edited by J. F. Hogan, F. 
M. Phillips, and B. R. Scanlon. Washington, D.C.: 
American Geophysical Union. 
Pool, D.R. 2005. Variations in climate and ephemeral channel 
recharge in southeastern Arizona, United States. 
Water Resources Research 41(11), W11403.  
Rich, L.R., H.G. Reynolds, and J.A. West. 1961. Te 
Workman Creek experimental watershed. USDA 
Forest Service, Station Paper No. 65. 
Rich, L.R., and G.J. Gottfried. 1976. Water yields resulting 
from treatments on the Workman Creek 
experimental watersheds in central Arizona. Water 
Resources Research 12(5), 1053–60.  
Rinne, J.N. 1996. Management briefs: Short-term eﬀects of 
wildﬁre on ﬁshes and aquatic macroinvertebrates 
in the southwestern United States. North American 
Journal of Fisheries Management 16(3), 653–658.  
Robles, M.D., R.M. Marshall, F. O’Donnell, E.B. Smith, 
J.A. Haney, and D.F. Gori. 2014. Eﬀects of 
climate variability and accelerated forest thinning 
on watershed-scale runoﬀ in southwestern USA 
ponderosa pine forests. PLoS ONE 9(10), e111092. 
 
Running, S.W., and J.C. Coughlan. 1988. A general model of 
forest ecosystem processes for regional applications. 
I. Hydrologic balance, canopy gas exchange, and 
primary production processes. Ecological Modelling 
42, 125-154. 
Running, S.W., R.R. Nemani, and R.D. Hungerford. 1987. 
Extrapolation of synoptic meteorological data in 
mountainous terrain and its use for simulating forest 
evapotranspiration and photosynthesis. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research 17, 472-483. 
Sahin, V., and M.J. Hall. 1996. Te eﬀects of aﬀorestation and 
deforestation on water yields. Journal of Hydrology 
178(1), 293-309. 
Sankey, T., J. Donald, J. McVay, M. Ashley, F. O’Donnell, S. 
Masek Lopez, and A. Springer. 2015. Multi-scale 
analysis of snow dynamics at the southern margin of 
the North American continental snow distribution. 
Remote Sensing of Environment 169, 307–19.  
Scanlon, B.R., K.E. Keese, A.L. Flint, L.E. Flint, C.B. Gaye, 
W.M. Edmunds and I. Simmers. 2006. Global 
synthesis of groundwater recharge in semiarid and 
arid regions. Hydrological processes 20(15), 3335-
3370. 
Sheppard, A.C., G.D. Comrie, K.A. Packin, and M.K. 
Hughes. 2002. Te climate of the U.S. Southwest. 
Climate Research 21, 219–238. 
Schultz, G.A., and E.T. Engman, eds., 2012. Remote sensing in 
hydrology and water management. Springer Science & 
Business Media. 

References
14
Ecological Restoration Institute
The Inﬂuence of Restoration Treatments on Hydrologic Output in Fire-Adapted Forests of the Southwest
Shuttleworth W.J., and J.S. Wallace. 1985. Evaporation from 
sparse crops-an energy combination theory. Quarterly 
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 111: 
839–855. 
Simonin, K., T.E. Kolb, M. Montes-Helu, and G.W. Koch. 
2006. Restoration thinning and inﬂuence of tree size 
and leaf area to sapwood area ratio on water relations 
of pinus ponderosa. Tree Physiology 26(4), 493–503.  
Simonin, K., T.E. Kolb, M. Montes-Helu, and G.W. Koch. 
2007. Te inﬂuence of thinning on components of 
stand water balance in a ponderosa pine forest stand 
during and after extreme drought. Agricultural and 
Forest Meteorology 143(3–4): 266–276.  
Singh, R.K., G.B. Senay, N.M. Velpuri, S.Bohms, R.L. Scott, 
and J.P. Verdin. 2013. Actual evapotranspiration 
(water use) assessment of the Colorado River Basin 
at the Landsat resolution using the operational 
simpliﬁed surface energy balance model. Remote 
Sensing 6(1), 233–56.
Varhola, A., N.C. Coops, M. Weiler, and R.D. Moore. 2010. 
Forest canopy eﬀects on snow accumulation and 
ablation: An integrative review of empirical results. 
Journal of Hydrology 392(3), 219-233. 
Vivoni, E.R., H.A. Moreno, G. Mascaro, J.C. Rodriguez, 
C.J. Watts, J. Garatuza-Payan, and R.L. 
Scott. 2008. Observed relation between 
evapotranspiration and soil moisture in the North 
American Monsoon region. Geophysical Research 
Letters 35(22), L22403.  
Waltz, A.E.M., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and M.M. 
Moore. 2003. Diversity in ponderosa pine 
forest structure following ecological restoration 
treatments. Forest Science 49(6), 885–900. 
Wilcox, B.P., B.D. Newman, D. Brandes, D.W. Davenport, 
and K. Reid. 1997. Runoﬀ from a semiarid 
ponderosa pine hillslope in New Mexico. Water 
Resources Research 33(10), 2301–14.  
Wyatt, C.J.W., F.C. O’Donnell, and A.E. Springer. 2015. 
Semi-arid aquifer responses to forest restoration 
treatments and climate change. Groundwater 53(2), 
207-216.  
Zwolinski, M.J. 1971. Eﬀects of Fire on Water Inﬁltration 
Rates in a Ponderosa Pine Stand. Hydrology and 
Water Resources in Arizona and the Southwest 1: 
107-112.


Working Papers in Intermountain West 
Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1. 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains:  Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2. 
Understory Plan Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3. 
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4. 
Fules Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Beneﬁts
5. 
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6. 
Butterﬂies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7. 
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8. 
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9. 
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10. Te Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11. Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12. Restoring Forest Roads
13. Treating Slash after Restoration Tinning
14. Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15. Eﬀects of Forest Tinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16. Snags and Forest Restoration
17. Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18. Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter?
19. Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildﬁre and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20. Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
21. Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-ﬁre Southwestern Forests
22. Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23. Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
25. Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Teir Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and Habitat 
Destruction in the Intermountain West
26. Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27. Fuel Treatment Longevity
28. Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
29. Post-Wildﬁre Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry 
Mixed-Conifer Forests
30. Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
31. Climage CHange Impact on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
32. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Recontstruction Methods
33. Te 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
34. Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest
35. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Eﬀects of Fire and Management
36. Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildﬁre Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in Southwestern Coniferous Forests
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or at nau.edu/eri
Northern Arizona University is an equal opportunity provider.
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating 
on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) To ﬁle a 
complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Ofﬁce of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-5964 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer.
This publication made possible through a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
NAU Printing Services/G1003031

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.ed/eri 
G1003031
