Closing the 
Feedback Loop:
Evaluation and Adaptation in  
Collaborative Resource Management
Ann Moote
May 2013
A Sourcebook for Collaborative Resource Management Groups

Publication date: May 2013
Author: Ann Moote, Mamut Consulting
About the Author 
Ann Moote is an independent contractor providing applied social science research, process design, 
and facilitation services to natural resource management agencies, nonproﬁt organizations, and 
collaborative groups. 
Acknowledgements
The material in this sourcebook draws on the knowledge and experience of several individuals. In 
addition to steering committee members, the author is indebted to the 43 individuals who took 
the time to share with her their experiences with and perspectives on evaluation and adaptive 
management. Thanks also go to Eytan Krasilovsky of Forest Guild for his rapid assessment of the 
Bluewater Collaborative Forest Restoration Project.
Editor
Tayloe Dubay, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University
Steering Committee
Andrea Bedell-Loucks, USDA Forest Service, National Partnership Ofﬁce
Karen DiBari, National Forest Foundation
Nick Goulette, Watershed Research & Training Center
Eytan Krasilovsky, Forest Guild
Amy Waltz, Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University
Peter Williams, USDA Forest Service, Ecosystem Management Coordination
Project Sponsors/Co-publishers:
Cover photos clockwise from left:
Ochoco Forest Restoration Collaborative, Oregon. Photo by Marcus Kauffman
Dinkey Collaborative, California. Photo by Dorian Fougères
Central Oregon Partnership for Wildﬁre Risk Reduction, Oregon. Photo by John Chinnock
Central Oregon Partnership for Wildlife Risk Reduction, Oregon. Photo by John Chinnock
Background cover photo by Dave Egan

Table of Contents
Purpose of this Sourcebook .......................................................................................................3
Using this Sourcebook .............................................................................................................3
Process Strategies and Tools ...........................................................................................4
For More Information .....................................................................................................................4
Effective Evaluation ...................................................................................................................5
Multiparty Learning ...............................................................................................................5
Why Do It .....................................................................................................................5
Collaborative Planning ...................................................................................................5
Joint Fact-ﬁnding ...........................................................................................................5
Evaluation Strategies ......................................................................................................................7
Why Do It .....................................................................................................................8
Utilization-focused Evaluation .......................................................................................8
After-action Review ........................................................................................................8
Periodic Process and Program Reviews ...........................................................................8
Adaptive Management ..........................................................................................................10
Why Do It ...................................................................................................................10
Effectiveness Monitoring ..............................................................................................13
Qualitative Multiparty Monitoring ...............................................................................13
Change Mechanisms ................................................................................................................15
Written Records ............................................................................................................................15
Why Do It ...................................................................................................................15
Meeting Notes and Evaluation Reports ........................................................................15
Formal Recommendations or Requests for Action ........................................................15
Semi-binding Agreements ............................................................................................16
Decision Points in Management Plans and Procedures .................................................16
Working Relationships ..................................................................................................................18
Why Do It ...................................................................................................................18
Regular, Informal Communication ...............................................................................18
Practitioner Networks ..................................................................................................19
Facilitators, Coordinators, and Leaders ........................................................................21
Closing the Feedback Loop ......................................................................................................22
Individual Willingness to Experiment and Learn .........................................................22
Organizational Commitment to Collaboration and Adaptive Management ...................22
Achieving Collaborative Learning and Adaptation .......................................................24
References ...............................................................................................................................25
Appendix I. Conceptual Foundations ........................................................................................27
Appendix II. Closing the Feedback Loop: Case Summaries .......................................................32
Appendix III. Sample Evaluation Tools and Change Mechanisms .............................................44

Left blank on purpose

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  3
Collaborative resource management grew out of a desire to 
overcome gridlock and better address multiple needs and 
concerns. In the last 30 years, collaboration has come a 
long way toward building understanding and trust among 
formerly conﬂicting groups. Multiparty monitoring is 
increasingly common, and collaboration is mandated in new 
resource management programs and policies. Yet for many 
participants, questions remain: How well are we achieving 
our desired outcomes? What’s working, and what could we 
do better? Why haven’t we made changes based on what we 
learned last time? Many collaborative groups lack explicit 
processes for deliberative evaluation and adaptation.
This sourcebook provides answers from the ﬁeld 
— strategies and tools that some collaborative resource 
management groups have used to systematically evaluate 
their work and adapt plans and management actions based 
on what they have learned. The examples described in 
this document are drawn from rapid assessments of nine 
collaborative resource management groups and informed by 
organizational and social learning, evaluation, and adaptive 
management concepts. Rapid assessment cases include:
• 
Allegheny Highlands Fire Learning Network, West 
Virginia
• 
Bankhead Liaison Panel, Alabama
• 
Blackfoot Drought Committee, Montana
• 
Bluewater Collaborative Forest Restoration Project, 
New Mexico
• 
Central Oregon Partnership for Wildfire Risk 
Reduction, Oregon
• 
Dinkey Collaborative, California
• 
Lemhi County Forest Restoration Group, Idaho
• 
Lower Dolores Working Group, Colorado
• 
White Mountains Stewardship Project, Arizona
Using this Sourcebook
This sourcebook has two purposes. The ﬁrst is to provide 
a selection of evaluation tools and change mechanisms for 
collaborative groups to consider and use. The second is to 
stimulate discussion of evaluation and adaptation in collaborative 
resource management. Collaborative resource management and 
adaptive management are not new concepts, but experience has 
not caught up to theory, and there is much to learn from the 
rapidly evolving efforts under way.
This sourcebook is intended as a resource, not a 
manual. Appropriate process strategies and tools are 
context-dependent, and different groups will ﬁnd different 
examples relevant to their situation. Some of the tools 
discussed in this sourcebook require more resources than 
others. Joint fact-ﬁnding, effectiveness monitoring, applied 
research, and developing new plans can each require 
considerable time, funding, and technical expertise. 
Many groups ﬁnd it helpful to begin with less resource-
intensive evaluation methods, such as after-action reviews, 
qualitative multiparty monitoring, and periodic process 
and program reviews. These processes provide rapid 
feedback that can be directly applied to improve resource 
management. They also can bring to light questions that 
warrant more intensive evaluation or research. 
Purpose of this Sourcebook
How do collaborative resource management groups evaluate and adapt their work?
Adaptive Management: Deﬁnition
Adaptive management is an ongoing process of 
defining objectives, taking action, monitoring and 
analyzing outcomes, and applying what was learned 
to the next round of planning and management. 
The basic premise is to treat management actions as 
experiments and embrace desirable and undesirable 
outcomes as important feedback that can inform 
future actions. Because it may address plans and 
policies as well as actions, adaptive management 
involves policymakers, resource managers, and 
other stakeholders in identifying management 
objectives and questions and evaluating results. 
For the purposes of this sourcebook, adaptive 
management refers to any process that begins with 
clearly defined objectives, uses an iterative process 
of learning and action, and draws on people 
with different backgrounds and perspectives to 
collectively evaluate and plan for change (see 
Figure 1).
EVALUATE
• Interpret Monitoring Results
• Review Experiences
ASSESS
• Identify Management 
   Objectives
ADAPT
• Objectives
• Actions
• Monitoring
PLAN
• Develop Monitoring Plan
• Design Actions
ACT
• Implement Actions
• Implement Monitoring Plan
Figure 1: Adaptive Management Cycle

4  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Process Strategies and Tools
The ﬁrst section of the sourcebook, “Effective Evaluation,” 
describes process tools and strategies for engaging 
in deliberative learning and collaborative evaluation, 
including: 
• 
collaborative planning, 
• 
joint fact-finding, 
• 
utilization-focused evaluation,
• 
after-action review, 
• 
process and program reviews,
• 
effectiveness monitoring, and
• 
qualitative multiparty monitoring. 
The second section, “Change Mechanisms,” provides 
strategies and tools for adjusting planning and 
management based on evaluation results. Change 
mechanisms include: 
• 
written records, 
• 
formal recommendations and requests for action, 
• 
semi-binding agreements, 
• 
decision points written into management plans 
and procedures,
• 
regular, informal communication,
• 
practitioner networks, and
• 
facilitators and coordinators.
The third section, “Closing the Feedback Loop,” discusses 
a key lesson from the rapid assessments, which is that the 
two most important factors for successful evaluation and 
adaptation are:
• 
individual willingness to experiment and learn and
• 
organizational commitment to collaboration and 
adaptive management.
For More Information
Appendix I, “Conceptual Foundations,” summarizes the 
theoretical basis for shared learning, adaptive management, 
and collaborative evaluation to improve policy, planning, 
and management. This section summarizes concepts from 
literature on social and organizational learning, adaptive 
management and adaptive governance, and utilization-
based evaluation. 
Appendix II and III provide more details from the 
rapid assessments. Appendix II includes case summaries 
of evaluation and adaptation in three collaborative 
groups, the Bankhead Liaison Panel, Blackfoot Drought 
Committee, and Dinkey Collaborative. Appendix III 
provides worksheets and examples of several of the tools 
discussed in the sourcebook. 
Some collaborative resource management groups are using structured procedures to collectively evaluate their work and adapt their plans and 
management actions. Photo by Marcus Kauffman

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  5
Collaborative group participants can be frustrated by time 
and resources reallocated from on-the-ground work to 
meetings where disputes are raised but often not resolved. 
Groups that have completed collaborative planning and 
monitoring are frustrated further when lessons learned are 
not captured and used to inform ongoing work. Mutual 
learning and evaluation can help address these frustrations 
by reframing disagreements as questions to be answered 
and providing structured methods to address them. 
Disagreements about management needs and practices 
often are based in deeply-held values and different social 
and political views. Such disagreements are not resolved 
through technical analyses and rational planning processes. 
They require mutual understanding of different worldviews 
and political realities as well as the best available scientiﬁc 
and technical information. These value-based differences, 
along with complexity of interrelated ecological, social, 
and economic systems, mean management decisions will 
never be clear-cut. 
Concepts from organizational and social learning, 
adaptive management, and utilization-focused evaluation 
can help groups constructively address planning and 
management questions. Organizational learning provides 
guidelines for purposeful and collective learning from 
practical experience. Social learning emphasizes information 
sharing and deliberation across organizations and among 
people with different experiences and perspectives. Adaptive 
management aims to reduce uncertainty and improve 
management by monitoring programs and projects and 
comparing results to management objectives. A utilization-
focused approach to evaluation produces concrete, 
actionable recommendations that can feed directly into 
policy, planning, or management decisions. Designing and 
conducting evaluation to produce clear recommendations 
helps ensure that results will be used.
Multiparty Learning 
When people with different backgrounds and perspectives 
jointly review information, assess current conditions, raise 
questions about observed and proposed activities, and 
share their experiences and expertise, they build both their 
collective knowledge and their capacity to evaluate their 
individual and collective work. 
Why Do It
• 
Build understanding of different perspectives
• 
Make tacit knowledge explicit 
• 
Identify agreed-upon issues and challenges
• 
Locate and use relevant technical and 
practical information and expertise
• 
Challenge ingrained beliefs and practices
• 
Resolve conflicts
• 
Identify innovative solutions
• 
Build shared knowledge and reduce reliance 
on a few individuals
Multiparty learning and evaluation tools include 
collaborative planning and joint fact-ﬁnding.
Collaborative Planning
Many organizations and agencies use an interdisciplinary 
team approach to planning. However, involving 
external stakeholders throughout the planning process 
is less common. Collaborative processes such as multi-
stakeholder and multidisciplinary landscape and 
watershed assessments help build understanding and 
trust among participants as they collectively evaluate 
conditions and identify management objectives before 
planning begins. Ideally, collaborative groups also 
participate in identifying alternative management actions 
and discussing how best to implement those actions. 
Although ﬁnal decision making authority lies with one or 
a few entities, other stakeholders are more likely to accept 
those decisions if they were substantively involved in the 
discussions that led up to the decision. The process can 
be time consuming, but collaboratively developed plans 
often beneﬁt from the additional expertise and innovations 
brought by people outside the core planning team and 
collaboratively planned projects are less likely to be 
delayed by appeals, objections, or litigation.
Joint Fact-ﬁnding
Joint fact-ﬁnding is a strategy to help stakeholders work 
through disagreements. The goal is to clearly separate 
agreed-upon issues from those still in dispute and report 
ﬁndings in summary documents that can be used to 
inform management or policy decisions. By synthesizing 
Effective Evaluation
How can collaborative groups avoid positional debates and circular discussions? 

6  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
The Blackfoot Drought Committee was established in 2000 to address declining ﬁsheries and water allocation in the Blackfoot river basin 
in western Montana. Photo by Ron Pierce, Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks
The Blackfoot Drought Committee was established 
in 2000 to address declining ﬁsheries and water 
allocation in the Blackfoot River Basin in western 
Montana. The planning process brought together 
private landowners, state and federal agencies, 
and conservation groups to develop a solution 
to the ﬁsheries decline by better managing water 
use during drought years. The Blackfoot Drought 
Response Plan, based on the goal of watershed-wide 
restoration of ﬁshery resources and “shared sacriﬁce” 
among all water users, grew out of these discussions. 
The Drought Response Plan is tiered to more 
than 100 individual drought management plans that 
lay out how and where irrigators will reduce their 
withdrawals. Participating senior water rights holders 
voluntarily reduce their water use when ﬂows at the 
mouth of the river drop below pre-set thresholds. 
Those with rights junior to the state’s instream flow 
right legally can be required to shut down operations, 
but under the Drought Response Plan the state has 
agreed to the individual management plans that 
give users more ﬂexibility in how and where they 
will reduce withdrawals. The Drought Response 
Plan also limits ﬁshing at predetermined low-
ﬂow and high-temperature thresholds. A Drought 
Committee with representatives from the Blackfoot 
Challenge, Trout Unlimited, Montana Fish, Wildlife, 
and Parks [FWP], U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 
the Montana Department of Natural Resources, 
irrigators, and outﬁtters was created to oversee plan 
implementation. 
Drought Committee members point to two 
factors that make the plan effective: users were 
invited to help craft the management plan, and the 
state has always been willing to work with users to 
seek alternatives to shutting down operations. The 
state retains its authority to enforce water rights 
and close areas to ﬁshing, but generally relies on 
the concept of shared sacriﬁce rather than formal 
enforcement to maintain compliance.
Shared Sacriﬁce: Blackfoot Drought Response Plan

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  7
available information, participants avoid the challenge of 
trying to choose between different reference materials or 
“dueling scientists.” The process of developing a summary 
document focuses the group on problem-solving rather 
than debate. 
Process
1. Convene a team of people with different 
perspectives on the issue
2. Agree on the nature of the problem and questions 
that need to be answered
3. Identify and select qualiﬁed experts to assist the 
team
4. Work with the experts to reﬁne the questions and 
agree on methods for answering them
5. Identify and review relevant information, 
including technical and scientiﬁc documents
6. Write a summary report synthesizing what has 
been learned, including any outstanding questions 
or disagreements
It is important to start by clarifying the questions 
that need to be answered, to focus data gathering on 
decision-relevant information and avoid reviewing the 
full range of available information on a topic of interest. 
It is also important to reach agreement on appropriate 
information sources at the outset, so that all participants 
will accept the fact-ﬁnding results. Experts consulted may 
include not only resource specialists with scientiﬁc and 
technical knowledge but also policy decision makers and 
other stakeholders who bring information on political 
constraints and ﬁnancial feasibility into the discussion.
Evaluation Strategies 
Although collaborative groups rarely undertake in-
depth program evaluations, they can use principles 
from utilization-focused evaluation to produce concrete, 
actionable recommendations that feed directly into policy, 
planning, or management decisions. Collaborative groups 
also use rapid review processes to identify lessons learned 
and recommend changes. After-action reviews provide a 
systematic way to quickly capture lessons learned from 
management actions and recommend more effective 
practices. Regularly scheduled program and process 
reviews are used to assess and recommend adaptations to 
broader policies and programs. 
The Lower Dolores Working Group in Colorado 
used joint fact-ﬁnding to address participants’ 
disagreement over the condition of native ﬁsheries 
and minimum ﬂow needs for whitewater boating. 
In an effort they called “A Way Forward,” the 
group hired three ﬁsheries experts to individually 
synthesize and interpret available data on 
native ﬁsh conditions, then collectively develop 
management options for addressing conditions and 
trends. 
The group agreed at the outset that they 
would accept the experts’ collective synthesis of 
the science, but that the scientists’ management 
options would be further evaluated for social, 
economic, and legal feasibility. A subcommittee, 
including agency decision makers and 
county elected ofﬁcials, environmental group 
representatives, and water users, discussed and 
reﬁned the management options in terms of legal 
and ﬁscal feasibility and water users’ needs. The 
group then separated the options into those that 
could be implemented immediately and those that 
would require fundraising or policy changes.
A Way Forward: Lower Dolores Working Group
The Lower Dolores Working Group used joint fact-ﬁnding to address 
disagreement over the condition of native ﬁsheries and minimum 
ﬂow needs for whitewater boating. Photo courtesy of the Lower 
Dolores Working Group

8  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Why Do It
• 
Identify best practices
• 
Correct unintended effects
• 
Improve programs, plans, and management 
practices
• 
Provide concrete, actionable 
recommendations for improved action
• 
Build capacity to reflect on practice and to 
give and receive critical feedback
Utilization-focused Evaluation
The utilization-focused approach to program evaluation 
provides an alternative to punitive performance reviews 
and descriptive reports by focusing on improving planning 
and management. The ﬁrst step in a utilization-focused 
evaluation is to determine how the results will be used. 
This is done by asking key stakeholders, particularly 
the expected end users of the results, to identify how 
and why they would use evaluation results. Involving 
intended users helps ensure that they understand and feel 
ownership in the evaluation process and ﬁndings, which 
makes them more likely to use the results. Once expected 
users and uses have been identiﬁed, stakeholders can 
identify appropriate evaluation questions and methods for 
answering them. 
Questions to Focus Evaluation
• 
What is the activity or decision that we want to 
inﬂuence? 
• 
Why do we care (what’s the issue)?
• 
Who is responsible for making the decision?
• 
Who is responsible for implementing the 
decision?
• 
What data and findings are needed to support 
decision making? 
• 
What other factors will affect the decision 
making? 
• 
How and when will decision makers and 
implementers use the evaluation results?
Answering these questions helps focus the evaluation 
on useful results and change and change mechanisms. 
Methods for answering these questions are selected based 
on their ability to produce useful results.
After-action Review
The after-action review (AAR) is a technique for rapidly 
reviewing management actions in terms of desired 
outcomes and implementation realities. In an AAR, 
people involved in or affected by a management activity 
discuss what happened in terms of intended results 
and unexpected events, isolate key lessons learned, 
and recommend changes to improve effectiveness. In a 
collaborative resource management context, participants 
in the review should be those directly involved in project 
planning, implementation, and monitoring. 
To encourage open sharing, the AAR facilitator 
should begin by establishing that it is not a critique or 
performance evaluation. Discussion should be grounded in 
mutual respect, without judging people or their individual 
actions. Participants should be asked to keep individual 
comments conﬁdential and participate freely, regardless of 
professional hierarchies. While individual input should be 
kept conﬁdential, it is important to have a clear record of 
lessons learned and recommended actions. 
Despite the name, AARs do not have to be performed 
at the end of a project or action. “Before-action reviews” 
can be used to make sure everyone agrees on the 
implementation process and desired outcomes and to 
review lessons learned from past actions. After-action 
reviews can be used periodically during planning or 
project implementation to evaluate progress and discuss 
whether strategies or operations should change.
Questions to Guide an After-action Review
• 
What did we set out to do?
• 
What did we actually achieve?
• 
What unexpected things happened?
• 
How did we respond?
• 
What went well? 
• 
What could have gone better?
• 
What should we do next time?
• 
What additional information do we need?
Periodic Process and Program Reviews
Regularly scheduled multi-stakeholder reviews are 
important for evaluating social and policy structures and 
processes as well as management actions. These reviews 
commonly occur in annual meetings where stakeholders 
revisit program and policy strategies and goals. As with 
AARs, process and program reviews should involve people 
with decision making authority as well as those actively 
involved in implementing decisions. These meetings can 
encourage critical reﬂection on program purposes and 
underlying assumptions as well as effectiveness. 

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  9
Members of the Central Oregon Partnership for Wildlife Risk Reduction 
gather during a ﬁeld trip. The group often conducts multiparty ﬁeld reviews 
to discuss how well the project met desired outcomes and share lessons 
learned to carry forward into future projects. Photo by John Chinnock
The Central Oregon Partnership for Wildﬁre 
Risk Reduction (COPWRR) uses a type of 
after-action review to evaluate implementation 
and outcomes of forest restoration and fuels 
reduction projects. Participants represent 
contracting foresters, environmental groups, 
and resource management agencies, including 
project interdisciplinary team members. The 
group evaluates projects using forms that 
describe the project’s original purpose and 
need, management objectives, silvicultural 
prescriptions, and best management practices. 
Participants visit three to ﬁve treatment 
units and discuss how well the project met 
desired outcomes, what factors arose during 
implementation that affected the process or 
outcomes, what adaptations were made along 
the way, and lessons learned that the group 
would like to see carried forward into future 
projects. Through back-and-forth discussion 
and debate, the group develops a shared project 
evaluation and recommendations for future 
management, which then become part of the 
group’s permanent record.
The Blackfoot Drought Committee implements 
its Drought Response Plan through an iterative 
process of reviewing monitoring indicators, 
communicating with plan participants, 
implementing the plan, and reviewing and 
reﬁning plan implementation. The committee 
meets monthly in winter and early spring and 
weekly in late spring and summer to review 
water temperature and ﬂow data and trends and 
decide when to put the plan into effect. Each 
fall, the committee holds a year-end meeting 
where monitoring indicator data, drought plan 
participation, amount of water conserved, and 
outreach activities are reviewed and possible 
changes discussed. Over time, technical assistance 
has been expanded, trigger response requirements 
have been revised, and additional levels of response 
have been added as a result of the annual reviews.
Multiparty Field Reviews: Central Oregon Partnership for Wildﬁre Risk Reduction
Annual Meetings: Blackfoot Drought Committee

10  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Multiparty evaluation and shared 
learning are necessary to interpret  
results and provide an assessment of  
what works, what needs to change, and 
how it should change.
Adaptive Management
Adaptive management is a structured process of evaluating 
resource management actions and using what is learned 
to adjust future management. The adaptive management 
cycle begins with a clearly defined objective and an 
expectation that a proposed action will lead to that 
objective. The action is then taken, results are monitored 
and evaluated, and a decision is made whether or not 
to change management. Using agreed-upon goals and 
objectives as the basis for evaluating results distinguishes 
adaptive management from simple trial-and-error and ad 
hoc management changes. Adaptations are not arbitrarily 
selected; they are based on the increasing base of 
knowledge from past action and evaluation. 
Adaptive management is an iterative process, not a 
one-time change in response to monitoring results. Each 
time management is changed the cycle begins again, 
with identiﬁcation of expected outcomes of the revised 
management actions followed by monitoring and evaluation. 
Over time, this ongoing process builds understanding of how 
the system works and leads to better management based on 
that improved understanding. 
Why Do It
• 
Build knowledge of system conditions and 
functions
• 
Improve management practices and 
outcomes
• 
Base management recommendations on 
defensible data
• 
Avoid repeating mistakes
• 
Make learning, evaluation, and adaptation 
habitual 
• 
Improve policy and strategic planning
Biennial Charter Review:  
Dinkey Collaborative
The Dinkey Collaborative in 
California was created in 2010, 
when the Sierra National Forest 
was awarded a Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Program 
project. The Dinkey Collaborative’s 
charter includes provisions for 
biennial review and amendment 
of the charter itself. In 2012, 
charter review resulted in several 
recommended clariﬁcations, 
including procedures for 
documenting group agreements and 
disagreements, clearly delineating 
when decision points are reached, 
and distinguishing decisions from 
recommendations.
“
For the Dinkey Collaborative in California, the process of ﬁeld reviews and adjusting 
management is important because it builds trust and allows ongoing management 
improvement. Photo by Dorian Fougères

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  11
Data collected by a multiparty monitoring team 
for the Bluewater Project on the Cibola National 
Forest in New Mexico revealed that prescriptions 
were not meeting their objectives. The Forest 
Service quickly revised its prescription for the 
remaining acres, which ultimately met desired 
densities. Photo courtesy of Forest Guild
Monitoring — periodically and systematically gathering 
and analyzing data to understand trends over time — is 
used to provide feedback for adaptive management. 
Many different methods can be used, as long as they meet 
the standards of providing reliable results, meaning that 
different people using the same method would reach similar 
conclusions. Most often, collaborative resource management 
groups use quantitative (numerical) methods to measure 
changes in speciﬁc conditions before and after management. 
In some cases, particularly when less speciﬁc results are 
needed, qualitative (descriptive) methods may be used.
In highly uncertain or contentious circumstances 
where there is a need to establish more deﬁnitively 
whether observed results are due to management actions, 
experimental research design is used. In general, research-
based monitoring is quite costly in terms of time and 
money, and qualitative methods are the least expensive. 
Balancing desired rigor with available resources and long-
term commitment to monitoring helps groups tailor their 
adaptive management for success. Whether the monitoring 
is research-based or observational, multiparty evaluation 
and shared learning are necessary to interpret results 
and provide an assessment of what works, what needs to 
change, and how it should change.
The Bluewater Project on the Cibola National Forest 
in New Mexico includes meadow enhancement 
treatment areas where goals are to restore 
understory vegetation and historic hydrologic 
function. A multiparty monitoring team uses plots 
and transects to measure canopy cover; tree and 
sapling density, size, and species; and understory 
ground cover before and after treatment. 
After treatments were completed on the initial 
100 acres of a 300 acre project, monitoring data 
showed that the prescriptions were not reaching 
their target outcomes: too many trees were being 
retained to meet the objectives. The multiparty 
monitoring team determined that the contractor 
had met the prescription speciﬁcations, which 
called for cutting trees up to 8 inches in diameter, 
but that this did not achieve the target tree density. 
The monitoring team worked with U.S. Forest 
Service (USFS) staff to identify what size of trees the 
next series of treatments could remove. A review of 
the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) revealed 
that the maximum allowed size tree for removal 
in meadows was 10 inches in diameter. The USFS 
rapidly revised its prescription for the remaining 
200 acres of the project, and the next round of 
monitoring showed that the treatment had met the 
desired density objectives. That year the 
Cibola National Forest secured funds 
to treat the remaining 2,000 acres of 
meadow restoration identiﬁed by the 
EIS. They implemented the revised 
prescription across the larger watershed 
based on the monitoring results.
Quantitative Effectiveness Monitoring: Bluewater Collaborative Forest Restoration Projects

12  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Blending Quantitative and Qualitative Monitoring: White Mountains Stewardship Project 
The White Mountain Stewardship Project (WMSP) 
is a 10-year effort to restore forest health, reduce 
wildﬁre risk to communities, and stimulate the 
wood products industry by implementing vegetation 
management projects on up to 150,000 acres of 
the two-million-acre Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests (ASNF) in Arizona. The WMSP multiparty 
monitoring board has developed and implemented 
an extensive monitoring plan that uses research-
based protocols to measure treatment effects on 
several ecological, economic, and social conditions. 
For instance, they are monitoring tree densities, 
canopy cover, downed woody material, basal area, 
and height to live crown. They then use these data 
to calculate crown bulk density and fuel loading and 
estimate torching and crowning indices with ﬁre 
behavior models.
Monitoring board members also attend annual 
ﬁeld trips to both untreated and treated areas, 
examining project objectives and results. These 
ﬁeld trips are considered part of the monitoring 
process, and participants are encouraged to share 
their observations and recommendations. In early 
years, one major area of feedback from stakeholders 
was a desire for more clumps and openings to 
better reproduce historic ecological conditions and 
improve wildlife habitat. However, the prevailing 
ASNF perspective at that time was that hazardous 
fuels reduction objectives should focus on evenly 
spaced, non-connecting trees and minimal retention 
of downed logs, snags, and other fuel sources. This, 
combined with a 16-inch diameter cap across most 
projects, resulted in a “jail bar” look, i.e., evenly 
spaced trees of similar size. 
Based on the field trip feedback, one district 
siviculturist incorporated a groupy-clumpy 
prescription on the 1000-acre Eagar South 
project to test both fuels reduction and wildlife 
objectives. While basing the prescriptions on 
both pre-settlement tree structure theory and 
northern goshawk management guidelines, he also 
solicited collaborative group input to treatment 
design. The treatment incorporated ecological 
restoration concepts and wildlife habitat as well 
as fuels reduction needs. The prescription lifted 
the diameter cap on tree removal but continued to 
focus on removing smaller-diameter trees. Eagar 
South was treated as a demonstration project, 
and in addition to the existing WMSP monitoring 
protocol, a separate, specialized monitoring plan 
was developed to track goshawk prey populations, 
the number of trees over 16 inches in diameter 
removed, and the difference in tree-marking 
costs between this treatment and traditional fuels 
reduction treatments. 
Economic monitoring showed that despite 
the more complex treatment layout and marking, 
marking costs per acre were similar on both 
the Eagar South project and a traditional fuels 
reduction treatment on a comparable site. Volume 
of material removed was nearly equal to the 
average across all WMSP projects. The number 
of trees removed over 16 inches in diameter 
averaged 0.49 trees per acre, which demonstrated 
to stakeholders that the lack of a diameter cap 
did not result in the excessive removal of large, 
mature trees. Based on the wildlife monitoring 
results, the board recommended a few treatment 
modiﬁcations, such as leaving more downed 
woody debris for small mammal habitat. Of all 
the sites included in the monitoring board’s ﬁre 
behavior analysis, only the Eagar South treatment 
showed statistically signiﬁcant improvement 
in all of the fire variables. Based on initial 
ﬁeld observations, monitoring data, and ﬁre 
behavior models, the ASNF began using similar 
prescriptions on other projects. 
This project marked a turning point for the 
WMSP. The monitoring board had not anticipated 
that their monitoring data would result in 
adaptive management changes until they had 
accumulated multiple years of post-treatment 
data. However, with the ASNF’s rapid response to 
verbal feedback provided in the early phases of 
this project and to the Eagar South demonstration 
results, mid-project treatments were modified to 
reflect a multi-objective focus. One monitoring 
board member observed, “We were successful 
in adapting management, but not in the way we 
planned or intended. Sometimes change takes 
place through conversations, not data collection 
and analysis.”

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  13
Different Types of Monitoring  
Answer Different Questions
Most agencies and businesses conduct implementation 
monitoring, tracking project operations and outputs to 
answer the question, “Did we do what we said we would 
do?” For adaptive management, however, it is necessary to  
use effectiveness monitoring or validation monitoring. 
Effectiveness monitoring measures changes in speciﬁc 
conditions relative to desired outcomes to answer 
the question, “Did we achieve our desired results?” 
Effectiveness monitoring documents how well 
management practices are meeting their intended 
objectives. Validation monitoring, like research, tests 
underlying assumptions to answer the question, “What 
caused the observed changes?” Validation monitoring uses 
careful experimental design to reduce uncertainty about 
the causes of observed changes. 
For example, if a management objective is to 
reduce noxious weeds, implementation monitoring 
might track the number of acres treated to remove the 
weeds, effectiveness monitoring might measure the 
density of weeds in a management area before and after 
management, and validation monitoring might sample 
plots in several managed and unmanaged areas to 
determine if observed changes in weed density are due to 
the management actions or other causes.
We were successful in adapting 
management, but not in the way we  
planned or intended. Sometimes change 
takes place through conversations,  
not data collection and analysis. 
 
              — Stakeholder from 
                            White Mountain 
                                  Stewardship Project
Effectiveness Monitoring
Effectiveness monitoring is commonly used to determine 
how well management practices are meeting their 
intended objectives. Effectiveness monitoring tracks 
change by measuring speciﬁc indicators, such as water 
temperature or user satisfaction, before and after actions 
are taken. Usually, quantitative methods are used to 
measure changes in indicators, but qualitative methods 
such as photographs or interviews may also be used. 
The number and timing of measurements taken will 
depend on the indicator being measured and the level of 
accuracy needed. 
Effectiveness Monitoring Process
1.
Develop monitoring questions based on project 
objectives and potential undesirable effects of 
management actions 
2. Choose indicators and methods to answer the 
questions 
3. Develop a monitoring plan, including where and 
when data will be gathered and how and when it 
will be analyzed
4. Gather data
5. Analyze data and report conclusions
Qualitative Multiparty Monitoring
While quantitative monitoring and research projects 
are designed to reliably determine whether speciﬁc 
changes are occurring and why, they often fail to capture 
changes that are not part of their study design. Because 
they are less focused on speciﬁc indicators of change, 
qualitative methods can surface important information 
missed in indicator-based monitoring. Also, qualitative 
assessments provide immediate feedback that can be used 
to adjust management, while quantitative effectiveness 
monitoring and research often take years to produce 
results. By examining different participants’ observations, 
the multiparty process provides a level of reliability: a 
convergence of opinions suggests that conclusions are 
accurate, while lack of agreement suggests more data 
may be needed. In most cases, qualitative assessments 
cannot determine the cause of observed outcomes. 
However, they often are appropriate for evaluating and 
adapting operations, and can be paired with quantitative 
effectiveness monitoring or research if there is a need to 
test conclusions. 
Qualitative Multiparty Monitoring Process
• 
Involve people representing a wide range of
perspectives, including people responsible for 
project development, implementation, and 
management decisions
• 
Identify initial project goals and objectives
• 
Discuss how well efforts met goals and objectives, 
and why or why not
• 
Record observations, agreements, disagreements, 
and recommended actions
“

14  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
The Bankhead Liaison Panel uses qualitative 
multiparty monitoring to track management 
implementation and effects on approximately 30 
restoration sites on the Bankhead National Forest 
in Alabama. Units were selected to represent 
different desired future conditions and treatments 
types, including hardwood, shortleaf pine, 
and longleaf pine restoration. The monitoring 
team and agency specialists visit each unit pre-
treatment and establish photo points, then revisit 
the site immediately post-treatment and every few 
years thereafter to discuss how well it is moving 
toward desired conditions. 
To guide and structure the discussions, the 
team uses forms developed by Wild South that 
include a checklist of items to be reviewed and 
sections for summary comments, follow-up 
actions, and schedules. If there is no line ofﬁcer 
on the trip, the monitoring team coordinator has 
a follow-up meeting with the district ranger and 
project interdisciplinary team members to review 
the forms and discuss next steps. Reports on 
monitoring tours are also presented at quarterly 
Bankhead Liaison Panel meetings. 
The multiparty ﬁeld reviews and agreed-upon 
actions have resulted in changes to treatment 
prescriptions, particularly marking speciﬁcations. 
Treatments using the new speciﬁcations are 
also monitored to evaluate the effects of new 
management practices.
The Bankhead Liaison Panel’s process of 
iterative multiparty monitoring reviews and 
management adaptations is both informed by and 
informs research. For example, the monitoring 
team observed that prescribed burns were meeting 
acreage targets but were not achieving hardwood 
regeneration goals. Participants hypothesized 
that burns were not hot enough and suggested 
changing from dormant-season burns to growing-
season burns. Although the Bankhead National 
Forest had not used growing-season burns in 
the past, they agreed to experiment with them 
on some sites. Researchers from Alabama A&M 
University set up effectiveness monitoring plots 
on these units so that in the future they will know 
more deﬁnitively whether growing-season burns 
are improving hardwood regeneration.
Qualitative Multiparty Monitoring: Bankhead Liaison Panel
Members of the Bankhead Liaison Panel conduct a ﬁeld 
review to a restoration site on the Bankhead National Forest 
in Alabama. Multiparty ﬁeld reviews and agreed-upon actions 
have resulted in changes to treatment prescriptions. Photo 
courtesy of Wild South

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  15
Change Mechanisms
How can collaborative groups ensure that recommended adaptations get used?
Collaborative groups use a variety of strategies to put 
management recommendations into action. The two factors 
most important to making adaptive change are 1) provide 
clearly stated, speciﬁc, and feasible action recommendations 
and 2) maintain close working relationships with the people 
responsible for making the change.
Written Records 
A written record with speciﬁc, clearly stated agreements 
and action items provides direction for people responsible 
for decision making and management. Ideally, written 
records will include responsible parties and schedules or 
timeline for completion. They also may include rationales 
to help people understand the reasons for the decisions 
and an explanation of the assumptions behind the 
recommendations.
Why Do It
• 
Clearly identify areas of agreement and 
disagreement
• 
Create a record of specific agreements and 
recommended action items
• 
State commitment to follow through on 
agreements
• 
Build trust that agreements will be kept 
• 
Provide a measure of accountability
Types of written records of agreement include 
meeting notes, monitoring and evaluation reports, formal 
recommendations or requests for action, semi-binding 
agreements, and decision points written into management 
plans and procedures.
Meeting Notes and Evaluation Reports
Meeting notes provide an important record of both 
agreements and disagreements. They can be used during 
scheduled reviews to check whether previously identiﬁed 
issues have been addressed and whether agreed-on 
actions are being implemented. They also are useful for 
bringing new partners up to speed on questions that have 
already been answered and decisions that have already 
been made. Evaluation reports that clearly state ﬁndings 
and recommended actions similarly can be drawn on to 
guide future management decisions. 
Record of Agreements, Action Items, and
Responsible Parties: Dinkey Collaborative
The Dinkey Collaborative’s meetings and ﬁeld 
reviews fully capture discussions and also ﬂag 
agreements, action items, and parties responsible for 
each action item. Joint fact-ﬁnding reports describe 
original areas of disagreement, questions answered 
through the joint fact-ﬁnding process, information 
sources, assumptions, recommendations, and  
the level of group agreement with each 
recommendation. Collaborative group members are 
invited to sign on to the recommendations or share 
dissenting views. 
Formal Recommendations or Requests for Action
It is helpful to separate recommendations from background 
material in a shorter document that states agreements, 
expectations, and requests. Because they are more specific 
than meeting minutes and monitoring or evaluation reports, 
action recommendations and requests are more likely to 
receive a response and be used in management decisions. 
Some collaborative groups specifically request a formal 
response from decision makers.
Statements of Support for Speciﬁc Actions:  
Lemhi County Forest Restoration Group  
and Dinkey Collaborative
Both the Lemhi County Forest Restoration 
Group (LCFRG) in Idaho and the Dinkey 
Collaborative provide written letters of support 
explicitly stating the group’s level of agreement 
with specific proposed actions. For example, the 
LCFRG sent the Salmon-Challis National Forest’s 
supervisor a memorandum on the Hughes Creek 
Project that spelled out the group’s consensus 
recommendations regarding the project’s purpose 
and need, priority actions, and preferred standards 
and methods. The Dinkey Collaborative provides 
formal letters of individual member support for 
speciﬁc management actions. 

16  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Agreement on Action Items: 
Bankhead Liaison Panel
The Bankhead Liaison Panel’s multiparty 
monitoring ﬁeld review forms include sections for 
follow-up actions, schedules, and signatures. In 
the panel’s early years, the district ranger signed 
these forms during post-ﬁeld-review meetings. In 
recent years, as the panel has gained trust that the 
agency will implement its recommendations, the 
signature line is less often used. 
Semi-binding Agreements
Formal, signed agreements provide a higher level of 
assurance that agreed-upon actions will be put into 
practice. Signed charters or memoranda of understanding 
can specify procedural agreements, such as when and 
how a collaborative group will participate in planning 
and project review. Some groups develop and sign 
statements of dispute resolution. Signed agreements 
are commonly used when a mediator or an arbitrator is 
engaged to help resolve a disagreement and when the 
agreement is resolving a formal objection or appeal. 
Signed Management Procedures: 
Bankhead Liaison Panel
A disagreement between Bankhead Liaison Panel 
members and Bankhead National Forest staff 
was resolved through joint development of new 
forest restoration marking guidelines. The ﬁnal 
guidelines were signed by the district silviculturist, 
who writes treatment prescriptions; the district 
timber management administrator, who oversees 
marking crews and contractors; and the district 
ranger, who holds decision making authority 
over the project. These three signatures provide 
assurance that the management changes will be 
reﬂected in both treatment prescriptions and 
future project implementation. 
Decision Points in Management Plans  
and Procedures
Speciﬁc management recommendations may be 
incorporated into management plans and agreements 
in the form of best practices, decision making criteria, 
mitigation measures, targets, or trigger points for action. 
A target is a clearly deﬁned or measurable desired 
outcome that can help determine whether or not actions 
are working. A trigger is a predetermined point at which 
a speciﬁc, agreed-upon action will be taken. Targets 
provide feedback on whether or not management needs 
to be changed, while triggers direct that a speciﬁc change 
be made. Incorporating agreed-upon management 
speciﬁcations into management plans provides a high level 
of assurance that they will be used. 
Members from the 
Lemhi County Forest 
Restoration Group 
conduct aspen tree 
monitoring. Photo 
courtesy of Salmon 
Valley Stewardship
Memorandum of Agreement:  
Lemhi County Forest Restoration Group 
The following excerpts from a memorandum of 
agreement between the Salmon-Challis National 
Forest and the Lemhi County Forest Restoration 
Group similarly show a formal commitment to 
collaborate throughout project planning: 
“The U.S. Forest Service shall … work directly 
with LCFRG at all phases of the NEPA process, 
seeking input on: the purpose and need 
statement, alternatives, collection and use of 
data, impact analysis, development of preferred 
alternatives, and/or recommendations regarding 
mitigation of environmental impacts (Council 
on Environmental Quality 2011, p.13).”
“The U.S. Forest Service and the LFRG will 
work together to develop, discuss, evaluate, 
and implement innovative landscape-scale 
planning, project preparation, treatment, 
science integration, monitoring, and adaptive 
management strategies.”

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  17
The Blackfoot Drought Response Plan specifies 
conservation actions to be triggered when 
predetermined river ﬂow and temperature 
thresholds occur. For example: 
• 
If flows in the Blackfoot River fall to 700 
cubic feet per second (cfs) at the mouth of 
the river, the committee notiﬁes irrigators 
and other consumptive water users and 
requests that they implement their voluntary 
drought management plans (this trigger is 
mandatory for some users with junior water 
rights). 
• 
If flows drop below 600 cfs and/or maximum 
daily water temperatures exceed 73 degrees 
Fahrenheit at the mouth of the river, the state 
issues mandatory ﬁshing restrictions from 2 
p.m. to 5 a.m. and makes additional calls for 
water from junior water rights holders. 
• 
If flows in the Blackfoot River fall below 
500 cfs, all junior water users must cease 
withdrawals, the committee works with senior 
water right holders to seek further water 
conservation measures, and the state issues 
mandatory all-day ﬁshing restrictions.
Thresholds and Triggers: Blackfoot Drought Response Plan
As part of their qualitative socioeconomic 
monitoring, the Lemhi County Forest Restoration 
Group (LCFRG) interviewed contractors to 
understand why the objective of hiring locals was 
not met. The group then discussed the results of 
these interviews and determined that the USFS’s 
process for evaluating bids for stewardship 
agreements and contracts did not adequately 
address a purpose of stewardship contracting 
— meeting local and community needs — or 
the best practices authority. To address this, 
the LCFRG worked with the Salmon-Challis 
National Forest to develop best value contract 
bid evaluation criteria that the USFS grants and 
agreements staff now uses to review stewardship 
contracting bids and award contracts. Criteria 
for technical approach, beneﬁts to the local 
economy, experience, and past performance have 
been deﬁned and assigned points that now feed 
into a contractor’s overall bid rating.
Decision Making Criteria: Lemhi County Forest Restoration Group
Several Blackfoot Drought Committee members have been 
working together for decades to develop and implement land and 
water conservation projects in the Blackfoot Basin. Their solid 
understanding of the resources, array of projects, monitoring data, 
and function of the Drought Response Plan enables them to quickly 
coordinate responses to extreme events. Photo by Ron Pierce, 
Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks

18  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Working Relationships
The most common, and arguably most important, 
change mechanism is individual commitment grounded 
in relationship-based accountability. Close working 
relationships characterized by frequent informal 
communication outside of regularly scheduled meetings 
provide a mechanism for maintaining agreements and 
rapidly addressing implementation delays. 
Why Do It
• 
Build capacity for implementing agreements
• 
Build trust that agreements will be met
• 
Provide a mechanism for follow-through
Working relationships are built and maintained 
through regular, informal communication, 
practitioner networks, and facilitators, and 
coordinators.
Regular, Informal Communication
Ongoing informal discussion of new information and 
management practices among people from different 
organizations creates a cadre of individuals that can 
facilitate coordinated action. Often, this communication 
occurs outside of regularly scheduled meetings as 
individuals from different organizations call on each other 
for information and advice. Without explicitly focusing on 
management plans and agreements, these conversations 
provide a vehicle for tracking implementation of agreed-
upon actions and coordinating rapid response to 
unexpected events. 
The most common, and arguably most 
important, change mechanism is  
individual commitment grounded in 
relationship-based accountability.
Daily and Weekly Discussions:  
Alleghany Highlands Fire Learning Network 
The Allegheny Highlands Fire Learning Network 
in West Virginia works to coordinate fuels 
reduction and prescribed burning on a portion of 
the George Washington-Jefferson National Forests, 
state lands, and a private inholding owned by The 
Nature Conservancy (TNC). Their partnership 
started slowly, with the agencies and the TNC 
sharing staff and equipment. After ﬁve years of 
working together on project implementation, 
the group developed a memorandum of 
understanding to share resources and jointly 
monitor their projects. Partners hold after-action 
reviews and annual meetings to review their work, 
but most coordination takes place during weekly 
or even daily discussions among agency and 
TNC project planning and implementation staff, 
who coordinate their work and give each other 
feedback on management plans and practices. 
Long-term Relationships: 
Blackfoot Drought Committee
The Blackfoot Drought Committee has several 
long-standing members who were involved in 
plan development and have remained involved 
by both serving on the committee and working 
with individual water users. Some of them have 
been working together for decades to develop 
and implement other land and water conservation 
projects in the Blackfoot Basin. As a result, each 
of these individuals has a solid understanding of 
the condition of resources in the basin, the array 
of projects under way, monitoring data trends, 
and the ongoing functioning of the Drought 
Response Plan. They can stand in for each other 
when questions are raised, quickly coordinate 
responses to extreme events, and are comfortable 
enough in their collective understanding of water 
management goals and practices in the basin that 
they are not overly concerned by staff turnover in 
any one organization. 
“

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  19
Practitioner Networks
Collaborative groups often adapt tools and strategies 
from other agencies, organizations, and collaborative 
groups for their own use. One way to access these is by 
participating in communities of practice, where people 
working in similar areas share ideas, methods, and mutual 
support. The U.S. National Fire Learning Network (FLN), 
for example, connects leaders in landscape-scale, multi-
stakeholder groups working to restore ﬁre-dependent 
ecosystems. This group’s purpose is not to solve problems 
or build agreements, but to increase individual and 
collective capacity through workshops, ﬁeld learning 
exchanges, and information dissemination. 
The National Forest Foundation’s (NFF) Conservation 
Connect learning network offers web-based peer learning 
sessions focused on collaboration topics. In the sessions, 
members of community-based collaboratives and USFS 
employees share case examples, successful strategies, and 
lessons learned from negative experiences. Other 
communities of practice have developed around the 
USFS’s Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP) 
and Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
(CFLRP). These two programs fund collaboratively 
developed forest restoration projects. The CFRP coordinator 
hosts mandatory annual meetings for all grantees where 
they share lessons learned. Based in part on relationship 
build through Conservation Connect peer learning sessions, 
CFLRP project coordinators have developed their own 
network to focus speciﬁcally on monitoring questions. 
Informal and professional networks and umbrella 
or “bridging” organizations contribute to horizontal 
information transfer among local groups and vertical 
information transfer between local groups and 
policymakers. Knowledge transfer through such networks 
and organizations helps collaborative adaptive management 
move beyond incremental, project-level change to 
incorporate learning into policy and professional practice. 
Discussions among members of the Wood Industries 
Network for the Bluewater Collaborative Forest
Restoration Project have led to changes in contracts
and agreements that have stabilized the local
restoration industry. Photo courtesy of Forest Guild
The Wood Industries Network (WIN) was established 
in 2005 to help develop project-level monitoring 
plans for the Bluewater Collaborative Forest 
Restoration Project in New Mexico. WIN participants 
include Cibola National Forest line officers, project 
administrators, and resource specialists; harvesters; 
end-utilization businesses; and conservation groups. 
Since it was formed, the WIN has met regularly to 
review monitoring data, discuss lessons learned 
during project implementation, and discuss planned 
forest restoration projects on the Cibola National 
Forest. These discussions have led to changes in 
restoration contracts and agreements that have 
stabilized the local restoration industry by making 
management speciﬁcations more cost-effective while 
still meeting restoration objectives on the ground. 
When the Cibola National Forest was awarded 
Collaborative Forest Restoration Landscape funding 
in 2012, they incorporated the WIN into that project 
as well. 
Project Review Meetings: Bluewater Collaborative Forest Restoration Project

20  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Transferring Learning to Other Landscapes: 
Allegheny Highlands Fire Learning Network
The Allegheny Highlands Fire Learning Network is 
part of the Central Appalachian and national Fire 
Learning Networks. Participants attend regional 
and national FLN meetings and ﬁeld trips to learn 
about other group’s projects and practices. For 
instance, based on work they saw in Tennessee, 
the Allegheny Highlands group is changing 
its prescribed burns to better mimic natural 
disturbance patterns on mountain ridges. The 
group also based its monitoring protocol on one 
developed by a FLN group in Arkansas, so they 
could compare data sets.
Accessing Experts:  
Lemhi County Forest Restoration Group
The LCFRG is an active participant in the Rural 
Voices for Conservation Coalition (RVCC), a 
bridging network in the western United States. 
The LCFRG reached out to this network when it 
ran into collaboration challenges. For instance, 
after their socioeconomic monitoring identiﬁed 
undesired outcomes from the agency’s contract bid 
evaluation process, the group asked the USFS to 
use best practices criteria to evaluate bids. They 
also asked to have a collaborative group member 
sit on the technical review team that evaluates bids. 
When the USFS Regional Grants and Agreements 
department raised concerns, the LCFRG reached 
out to a contracting expert in the RVCC network 
who showed the USFS the authorities that allowed 
them to both use the LCFRG’s criteria and put a 
group member on the review team. LCFRG also 
drew on a lawyer in the RVCC network to help 
them negotiate an agreement with the USFS to hold 
a public meeting during National Environmental 
Policy Act planning so they could discuss the 
development of alternatives. 
Informing Policy: Blackfoot Drought Committee
Blackfoot Drought Committee members maintain 
ongoing working relationships with the state 
drought committee, agencies monitoring 
conditions in the basin, and water managers in 
other watersheds in the state. When developing 
the Blackfoot Drought Response Plan, they 
reviewed plans in use in other watersheds 
and adapted and expanded on them. Now the 
Blackfoot plan is being adapted for use in other 
watersheds in the state. The committee also 
receives requests from outside the state to see the 
plan and discuss how it works. The Blackfoot 
Drought Committee also has inﬂuenced state 
policy through its review and modiﬁcation of 
restrictions on anglers. After the committee 
reviewed temperature and ﬁsh stress levels in the 
Blackfoot and revised their plan, the state adopted 
a 2 p.m. instead of noon closure on ﬁshing in 
rivers across the state. 
Cross-generational Learning:  
Bankhead Liaison Panel
The Bankhead Liaison Panel is contributing to 
cross-generational knowledge transfer by involving 
forestry students from Alabama A&M University in 
their meetings and ﬁeld reviews. Several of these 
students have research projects on the Bankhead 
National Forest, and they share their knowledge 
of forest ecosystem processes and management 
responses during multiparty ﬁeld reviews. From 
interacting with stakeholders on the Liaison Panel, 
the students also are learning about different 
management practices and social, political, and 
economic factors that inﬂuence management. This 
learning is carried back into the classroom and 
ultimately into their careers as resource managers 
and scientists.

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  21
The Lemhi County Forest Restoration Group provides 
written letters of support explicitly stating the group’s 
level of agreement with speciﬁc proposed actions. Photo 
courtesy of Salmon Valley Stewardship
Facilitators, Coordinators, and Leaders
Even when strong working relationships exist among 
collaborative partners, it is important to have people 
assigned the tasks of compiling and synthesizing 
information, maintaining communication, mediating 
conﬂicts, and enforcing agreements. Paid coordinators are 
usually necessary to maintain communication and 
institutional memory. Group leaders help effect change 
by modeling willingness to question assumptions and 
experiment with new ways of doing business. Neutral 
facilitators can be most effective at mediating conﬂicts and 
reminding participants of their responsibility to group 
agreements. 
Leadership: 
Lemhi County Forest Restoration Group
When told, “We can’t do that,” the LCFRG 
coordinator can be counted on to ask, 
“Why not?” and then seek new ways to 
meet the group’s goals. For instance, when 
annual contractor interviews identiﬁed a 
paucity of local residents with adequate 
forestry skills, she sought funding for and 
developed a forest worker training program. 
As described above, she also found legal 
ways to for the USFS to allow a collaborative 
group member sit on the technical review 
team evaluating contractor’s bids and to 
share Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) 
development between traditional scoping 
and comment periods. Based on that 
experience, the LCFRG and Salmon-Challis 
National Forest developed memorandum 
of agreement that explicitly calls for 
collaborative group involvement throughout 
NEPA development. 
Paid Staff: Dinkey Collaborative
Dinkey Collaborative participants say having a 
professional facilitator to hold everyone to timelines, 
tasks, and agreements and apply procedural pressure 
when necessary is instrumental to the group’s success. 
Also, the Sierra National Forest and the Wilderness 
Society jointly fund a half-time monitoring coordinator 
who oversees implementation of the Dinkey multiparty 
monitoring plan. These individuals play important 
roles maintaining communication, keeping formal 
records and databases, and ensuring that agreed-upon 
actions are implemented in ways consistent with 
member expectations.

22  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
The previous sections, “Effective Evaluation” and “Change 
Mechanisms” describe strategies and tools that can be 
used to move collaborative adaptive management forward. 
Success depends on more than tools, however. Underlying 
the examples of successful evaluation and adaptation 
discussed above and in Appendix I are a willingness and 
ability to engage in shared learning and adapt management 
based on what has been learned. Ultimately, these are the 
keys that “close the feedback loop.” 
Individual Willingness to  
Experiment and Learn
In addition to committing their time to developing 
and maintaining working relationships, participants in 
collaborative adaptive management need to be willing 
to set aside pre-determined positions and consider new 
approaches to allow the group to evaluate and adapt. All 
participants need a capacity to give and receive criticism, 
which will help them consider different worldviews and 
management approaches. This is particularly important 
when evaluation goes beyond effectiveness monitoring to 
rethinking program or project purposes, rules of operation, 
or underlying assumptions. 
Viewing policies and practices as experiments requires 
a shift in perspective for many people. In resource 
management, mistakes tend to be viewed as failures and 
people want to avoid drawing attention to them. This 
attitude is logical, as regulatory agencies, funders, interest 
Willingness to experiment means 
developing a tolerance for small failures.
groups, and the public all scrutinize resource 
management decisions to guard against negative 
outcomes. Yet it is the direct opposite of the experimental 
attitude espoused for adaptive management, which would 
embrace undesirable outcomes as important feedback 
that can inform future planning and management actions. 
Willingness to experiment means developing a tolerance 
for small failures. 
As the rapid assessment examples have shown, a 
willingness to set aside tried-and-true practices and policies 
and consider something new creates space for rapidly 
identifying and addressing problems and developing more 
effective management solutions. 
Spirit of Experimentation: 
White Mountains Stewardship Project
A member of the White Mountain Stewardship 
Project multiparty monitoring board observed that 
it was important for all partners to have a “spirit of 
experimentation.” The Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests had staff willing to modify treatments 
within NEPA guidelines to demonstrate alternate 
prescriptions. The monitoring board was essential to 
help solicit support from all interested stakeholders 
for experimenting with different treatments on a small 
scale, and to ensure that feedback and monitoring 
would improve future management options.
Organizational Commitment to 
Collaboration and Adaptive Management 
Collaborative adaptation can occur without affecting 
mandates, decision making authorities, or accountability. 
However, it does require that decision makers invite other 
stakeholders into their decision space to help develop and 
evaluate alternative approaches to resource management. 
Collaborative groups expect to play a substantive role 
in crafting management questions and goals, evaluating 
results, and recommending changes. Trust is built through 
decision makers’ ongoing participation in collaborative group 
meetings, willingness to dedicate staff time to the effort, 
and follow through on agreements. In most cases where 
collaborative adaptive management has been successful, 
decision makers have made an explicit commitment to 
seriously consider and, where feasible, use input from 
collaborative group deliberations. Some agency leaders 
include the quantity and quality of their employee’s 
interactions with colleagues in their performance evaluations. 
Programs that provide assured funding and long-term 
commitments, such as a 10-year stewardship contract or 
10-year Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
(CFLRP) awards, help agencies and collaborative groups 
implement agreements. Lack of assured funding is a notorious 
constraint to collaboration, monitoring, and adaptive 
management. Proponents of collaboration and adaptation 
recommend viewing the money invested in these processes as 
an investment in improved resource management, rather than 
an unwelcome drain on limited resources.
Closing the Feedback Loop
What makes or breaks collaborative evaluation and adaptation? 
“

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  23
Dedicated Time and Funding: 
White Mountains Stewardship Project 
A White Mountain Stewardship Project multiparty 
monitoring board member notes that success boils 
down to people who are willing and committed 
to exploring management options and ensuring 
that adequate monitoring occurs. In their case, 
the forest supervisor attended every monitoring 
board meeting and allocated dollars and resource 
specialists’ time to monitoring. 
Management Flexibility:  
Blackfoot Drought Committee
The Blackfoot Drought Response Plan describes 
speciﬁc actions to be triggered when water ﬂow and 
temperature thresholds are reached. In practice, 
however, the multi-stakeholder Drought Committee 
discusses and mutually agrees when the plan should 
be implemented based on their assessment of social 
and economic as well as a range of river conditions. 
Because plan implementation depends on goodwill 
among all participants, effectively maintaining 
ﬂow in drought years in large part depends on 
maintaining positive working relationships among 
all parties, particularly between the Drought 
Committee and senior water rights holders who are 
not subject to mandatory restrictions. Therefore if 
water ﬂows at the mouth of the river drop below 
the trigger point in late summer, the committee 
may decide not to implement the plan because 
they are approaching the fall season when farmers 
irrigate less and temperatures are cooler. Committee 
members emphasize the importance of being 
ﬂexible in the short term to stay on course for the 
long term: what’s important is not rigid application 
of triggered actions, but keeping water in the system 
and restoring ﬁsheries in the long term. 
Commitment to Monitoring and Evaluation: 
Dinkey Collaborative
For the Dinkey Collaborative, a USFS commitment 
to use research and monitoring results in project 
planning and adaptation is requisite for allowing 
management to move forward. This commitment 
reassures members that treatment effects will be 
carefully evaluated and changes will be made if 
there are undesirable outcomes. Experimental 
research and monitoring are important to this 
group because they provide a high level of 
conﬁdence that restoration treatment results are 
due to management actions. The incremental 
process of field reviews and adjusting management 
is equally important, however, because it 
builds trust and allows ongoing management 
improvements without having to wait for long-
term monitoring and research results. 
Proponents of collaboration and  
adaptation recommend viewing the  
money invested in these processes as 
an investment in improved resource 
management, rather than an unwelcome 
drain on limited resources.
“
Photo by Marcus Kauffman

24  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Achieving Collaborative  
Learning and Adaptation
As the examples in this sourcebook demonstrate, 
collaborative resource management groups can and do 
engage in mutual learning and evaluation and improve 
management based on what they have learned. The 
sections above describe several tools and strategies 
collaborative groups can use to evaluate and improve 
their work. Successfully implementing these requires 
individual and organizational capacity for mutual learning, 
experimentation, and change. 
The processes described in this sourcebook were 
drawn from rapid assessments of nine collaborative 
resource management groups and from literature on 
organizational and shared learning, adaptive management, 
and utilization-focused evaluation. Appendix I provides 
an introduction to this literature. More detailed examples 
of strategies and tools are available in Appendix II and 
Appendix III.

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  25
Brown, D.L. 1991. Bridging organizations and sustainable 
development. Human Relations 44(8):807-831.
Brummel, R.F., K.C. Nelson, S.G. Souter, P.J. Jakes, and 
D.R. Williams. 2010. Social learning in a policy-
mandated collaboration: Community wildﬁre 
protection planning in the eastern United States. 
Journal of Environmental Planning and Management. 
(2010):1-19.
Buck, L.E., C.C. Geisler, J. Schelhas, and E. Wollenberg. 
2001. Biological Diversity: Balancing Interests Through 
Adaptive Collaborative Management. New York: CRC Press.
Cheng, A.S., C. Danks, and S.R. Allred. 2011. The role 
of social and policy learning in changing forest 
governance: An examination of community-based 
forestry initiatives in the U.S. Forest Policy and 
Economics 13(2011):89-96.
Collaborative Adaptive Management Network (CAMNet). 
2012. Deﬁning Collaborative Adaptive Management. 
http://www.adaptivemanagement.net/. Accessed 
September 15, 2012. 
Council on Environmental Quality. 2011. Appropriate 
Use of Mitigation and Monitoring and Clarifying the 
Appropriate Use of Mitigated Findings of No Signiﬁcant 
Impact. Memorandum for Heads of Federal 
Departments and Agencies. January 14, 2011.
Cumming, G.S., P. Olsson, F.S. Chapin III, C.S. Holling. 
2012. Resilience, experimentation, and scale 
mismatches in socio-ecological landscapes. Landscape 
Ecology [online]. http://www.lter.uaf.edu/pdf/1612_
Cumming_Olsson_2012.pdf 
Cundill, G., G.S. Cumming, D. Biggs, and C. Fabricius. 
2011. Soft systems thinking and social learning for 
adaptive management. Conservation Biology 26(1):13-20.
Cundill C. and R. Rodela. 2012. A review of assertions 
about the process and outcomes of social learning in 
natural resource management. Journal of Environmental 
Management. 113(2012):7-14.
Darling, M.J. and C.S. Parry. 2002. From Post-Mortem to 
Living Practice: An in-depth Study of the Evolution of the 
After Action Review. New Hampshire: Signet Consulting 
Group.
Folke, C., T. Hahn, P. Olsson, and J. Norberg. 2005. 
Adaptive governance of social-ecological systems. 
Annual Review of Environment and Resources 30:441-473.
Funtowicz, S.O. and J.R. Ravetz. 1993. Science for the 
post-normal age. Futures 25(7):739-755.
Goldstein, B.E. and W.H. Butler. 2010. Expanding 
the scope and impact of collaborative planning: 
Combining multi-stakeholder collaboration and 
communities of practice in a learning network. 
Journal of the American Planning Association 
76(2):238-249.
Hoppe, B. and C. Reinelt. 2010. Social network analysis 
and the evaluation of leadership networks. The 
Leadership Quarterly 21:600–619.
King, W.R. 2001. Strategies for creating a learning 
organization. Information Systems Management Winter 
2001:12-20.
Lawrence, T.B. and C. Hardy. 1999. Building bridges for 
refugees: Toward a typology of bridging organizations. 
The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 35(1):48-70.
Lee, K. 2001. Appraising adaptive management. Pages 
3-26 in Buck, L.E., C.C. Geisler, J. Schelhas, and E. 
Wollenberg, Editors. Biological Diversity: Balancing Interests 
through Adaptive Management. New York: CRC Press.
Margoluis, R., C. Stem, N. Salafsky, and M. Brown. 2009. 
Design alternatives for evaluating the impact of 
conservation projects. New Directions for Evaluation. 
2009(122):85-96. 
Margoluis, R. and N. Salafsky. 1998. Measures of Success: 
Designing, Managing, and Monitoring Conservation and 
Development Projects. Covelo, CA: Island Press.
Nie, M. and C. Schultz. 2012. Decision-making triggers 
in adaptive management. Conservation Biology 
26(6):1137-1144.
Ollila, S. 2000. Creativity and innovativeness through 
reflective project leadership. Creativity and Innovation 
Management 9(3):195-200.
Olsson, P., L.H. Gunderson, S.R. Carpenter, P. Ryan, L. 
Lebel, C. Folke, and C.S. Holling. 2006. Shooting the 
rapids: Navigating transitions to adaptive governance 
of social-ecological systems. Ecology and Society 
11(1):18. [online] http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/
vol11/iss1/art18/
Pahl-Wostl, C. 2009. A conceptual framework for 
analysing adaptive capacity and multi-level learning 
processes in resource governance regimes. Global 
Environmental Change 19 (2009) 354–365.
Patton, M.Q. 2008. Utilization-Focused Evaluation. 4th 
Edition. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
References

26  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Pelling, M., C. High, J. Dearing, and D. Smith. 2008. 
Shadow spaces for social learning: A relational 
understanding of adaptive capacity to climate change 
within organisations. Environment and Planning A, 
40(4):867–884.
Reed, M. S., A. C. Evely, G. Cundill, I. Fazey, J. Glass, A. 
Laing, J. Newig, B. Parrish, C. Prell, C. Raymond, and 
L. C. Stringer. 2010. What is social learning? Ecology 
and Society http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol15/
iss4/resp1/.
Schueller, S.K., S.L. Yaffee, S. J. Higgs, K. Mogelgaard, and 
E. A. DeMattia. 2006. Evaluation Sourcebook: Measures 
of Progress for Ecosystem- and Community-based Projects. 
Ecosystem Management Initiative, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. 
Signet Research & Consulting. 2012. What is Emergent 
Learning? http://www.signetconsulting.com/concepts/
emergent_learning.php. Accessed April 12, 2012.
Stankey, G.H., R.N. Clark, and B.T. Bormann. 2005. 
Adaptive Management of Natural Resources: Theory, 
Concepts, and Management Institutions. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
PNW-GTR-654. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research 
Station. 
Susskind, L., A.E. Camacho, and T. Schenk. 2012. 
A critical assessment of collaborative adaptive 
management in practice. Journal of Applied Ecology 
2012: 47–51.
United National Development Programme. 2007. 
Knowledge Management Toolkit for Crisis Prevention 
and Recovery Practice Area. http://reliefweb.int/
report/world/knowledge-management-toolkit-crisis-
prevention-and-recovery-practice-area. Accessed 
August 15, 2012.
USDA Forest Service, National Partnership Ofﬁce 
and Ecosystem Management Coordination. 2011. 
Empowering Collaborative Stewardship. Washington, DC: 
USDA Forest Service. 
Walters, C. 1997. Challenges in adaptive management of 
riparian and coastal ecosystems. Conservation Ecology 
[online]1(2):1. http://www.consecol.org/vol1/iss2/art1/
Wenger, E. 1998. Communities of Practice: Learning, 
Meaning, and Identity. New York, NY: Cambridge 
University Press.
Williams, P.B. 2006. An Interdisciplinary and Multi-Theoretic 
Strategy for Bridging Theory and Practice of Collaborative 
Public Land Management. Doctoral dissertation. Logan, 
UT: Utah State University.
Zack, M.H. 2003. Rethinking the knowledge-based 
organization. MIT Sloan Management Review. Summer 
2003:67-71. 

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  27
Appendix I. Conceptual Foundations
Table of Contents
Organizational and Social Learning ..........................................................................................28
Intentional Learning ......................................................................................................................28
Modes of Learning .........................................................................................................................28
Learning Strategies ........................................................................................................................29
Adaptive Management ..............................................................................................................29
Treating Actions as Experiments ....................................................................................................29
Methodological Debates .................................................................................................................29
Joint Evaluation .............................................................................................................................30
Adaptive Governance ................................................................................................................30
Informal Networks and Bridging Organizations .............................................................................30
Transformational Leaders ..............................................................................................................30
Utilization-focused Evaluation ..................................................................................................30
Endnotes ...................................................................................................................................31

28  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Organizational and Social Learning 
The goals of organizational learning are to avoid past mis-
takes, improve performance, highlight best practices that 
can be used elsewhere, and inﬂuence strategic thinking and 
policy through lessons learned from practical experience.1 
Organizational learning involves iterative, structured, and 
collective reﬂection on practice to improve performance. 
“Learning organizations” use a variety of approaches to 
encourage their employees to reﬂect on organizational 
objectives and means of achieving them.2 One key strat-
egy is to build knowledge through ongoing discussions 
among individuals with different information, experiences, 
and perspectives. In addition to providing a more robust 
knowledge base, expanding learning beyond a few key 
individuals builds organizational capacity by putting that 
knowledge into many hands.3 Ongoing, practical interac-
tion also helps managers make tacit knowledge explicit: to 
share the things that they know but don’t ordinarily articu-
late, such as where they go for a particular type of informa-
tion or how to complete a particular task.4 
The social learning concept currently popular in col-
laborative resource management literature builds on orga-
nizational learning with concepts from conﬂict resolution. 
Social learning occurs through deliberation and informa-
tion sharing among people with different experiences and 
perspectives.5 According to the social learning literature, 
engaging in repeat interactions that build relationships and 
trust helps participants let go of routine, habitual ways 
of working and develop a collective capacity to reduce 
conﬂict, take risks, challenge individual perceptions, make 
better decisions, and change behavior.6 Because it focuses 
on inter-organizational exchange through informal and 
formal networks, social learning can lead to learning and 
change not only at the individual and organizational levels, 
but also in public policy and professional practice.7
Intentional Learning
Building knowledge to improve processes or programs 
requires more than an ad hoc approach to learning. Most 
adult learning is experiential, meaning it comes not from 
focused study but when work is being implemented.8 
Capturing and applying such learning requires purposeful 
efforts to surface and examine different views, encourage 
deliberation, and test assumptions.9 Employees in learn-
ing organizations are guided to look for opportunities to 
experiment and learn, develop tolerance for small failures, 
and be willing to postpone evaluation until ideas are fully 
formulated.10 Learning organizations also invite people 
from outside of their project teams and outside of their 
organizations to share experiences and information.11 Or-
ganizational and social learning are more than the sum of 
individual learning; they require discussion and debate to 
appraise individual learning and develop recommendations 
for change. 
Modes of Learning
Learning theory differentiates between instrumental learn-
ing — gaining new skills, information, and communicative 
learning — learning about values, intentions, and working 
together.12 Literature on shared learning in collaborative 
resource management posits that both kinds of learning are 
necessary to bring about changes in knowledge and behav-
ior.13 Organizational learning further differentiates between 
single-loop, double-loop, and triple-loop learning14:
 
Single-loop learning is incremental improvement of 
skills and capabilities, often through formal study. In 
essence, single-loop learning is focused on the ques-
tion, ‘Are we doing it right?’ 
Double-loop learning questions the purpose and 
function of work being done by looking at patterns 
and examining cause-effect relationships. In double-
loop learning, the question is, ‘Are we doing the right 
things?’ 
Triple-loop learning, also known as transformational 
learning, involves questioning underlying beliefs, val-
ues, and worldviews, causing participants to critically 
assess their own assumptions.15 Triple-loop learning 
asks, ‘How do we deﬁne right?’ 
Conceptual Foundations 
The strategies and tools described in this sourcebook are supported by concepts from social and organizational 
learning, adaptive management, adaptive governance, and utilization-focused evaluation. Several of these ideas were 
introduced in the body of the sourcebook. The summaries below do not constitute a comprehensive literature review, 
but provide an introduction to sources that describe the concepts more fully.

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  29
In other words, learning that improves management 
involves not only accessing and understanding the best 
available science and management practices. It also re-
quires developing a habit of questioning assumptions and 
a willingness to learn about and from other people’s beliefs 
and opinions. Managers need to develop a capacity for and 
tolerance of constructive criticism, which will help them be 
open to new information and approaches.16 In the collab-
orative resource management context, scientists, managers, 
planners, and the organizations of which they are a part 
must be willing to open their assumptions and their work 
to scrutiny.17
Learning Strategies
Two tools for encouraging learning are communities of 
practice and after-action reviews. A community of prac-
tice is a group of people who share common experiences 
or management objectives and interact regularly to learn 
from each other and improve their work.18 Communities 
of practice provide a “place” for people working on similar 
issues to share problems, strategies, and tools.19 Through 
regular interaction, participants build their individual and 
collective knowledge and capacity to change.20 The after-
action review, a practice developed by the U.S. Army, is a 
tool used to capture experiential learning.21 
Adaptive Management 
Adaptive management is a structured process of evaluat-
ing resource management actions and applying what is 
learned.22 The underlying premise is that there will always 
be some uncertainty about management effects, but proj-
ects can move forward based on what is currently known 
as long as they are monitored to learn whether they are re-
sulting in desired outcomes or having unexpected effects.23 
It requires institutional ﬂexibility so management decisions 
can be adjusted as conditions change and more information 
becomes available.24 
Treating Actions as Experiments
Approaches to adaptive management range from scientiﬁc 
research to a general sense of “learning as you go.” The 
basic process is to treat policies and management actions as 
experiments and embrace undesirable outcomes as impor-
tant feedback that can inform future actions.25 
Adaptive management is an ongoing process of deﬁn-
ing objectives, taking action, monitoring and analyzing out-
comes, and applying what was learned to the next round 
of planning and management.26 Both the learning and the 
action components are necessary. As Stankey et al. (2005) 
put it, “learning involves more than increasing the stock of 
facts: it suggests we know what needs to be done, how to 
do it, whether it worked, and how to apply” it, while “ac-
tion that lacks a base in improved knowledge is little more 
than hopeful activity.”27 
Methodological Debates
Adaptive management depends on monitoring — periodi-
cally and systematically gathering and analyzing data to 
understand trends over time. Many different methods can 
be used, as long as they are reliable, meaning that differ-
ent people using the same method would obtain similar 
results; feasible given available resources; and produce 
useful results.28 
Advocates of a scientiﬁc approach to adaptive manage-
ment insist that management decisions should be treated 
as hypotheses, and monitoring methods should include 
statistically representative sampling designs and controls to 
determine whether observed effects are due to management 
actions.29 As one researcher has written, “An experimental 
approach may be costly and onerous in the near term, but 
it is probably the only way to root out superstitious learn-
ing — erroneous connection between cause and effect.”30 
However, the expense and logistics of implementing such 
research-based management means that it has rarely been 
achieved in practice.31
Others say the expectation that basing management 
adaptations on research is not practicable, and in many 
cases causality will be clear.32 Most practitioners prefer to 
rely on non-experimental monitoring methods rather than 
scientiﬁc experimentation, because the costs of research-
level monitoring are too high and the incentives too low to 
justify investing in it.33 A common quantitative monitoring 
method is to identify indicators of change and measure 
them before and after an action is taken without attempting 
to use randomized sampling or controls. When indicators 
are measured using appropriate protocols and instruments, 
this method provides a relatively high level of conﬁdence 
that observed effects are real and not a reﬂection of expec-
tations or other observer bias.34 
Qualitative monitoring methods include repeat 
photographs at established photo points, interviews, and 
multi-stakeholder evaluation processes such as after-
action reviews.35 Like quantitative methods, qualitative 
methods can use pre-, post-, and time-series measure-
ment to identify relationships between interventions and 
effects. Using a social science research tool, triangulation, 
which cross-examines information from different sources, 
can help overcome observer bias and “superstitious learn-
ing.”36 A convergence of data from different sources or 
gathered using different methods provides a form of qual-
ity control, while lack of agreement suggests more data 
may be needed. 

30  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Joint Evaluation
Multiparty evaluation is important to ensure that monitor-
ing results are accurately interpreted and appropriately 
used. Early adaptive management literature called for 
joint evaluation by scientists, policymakers, and resource 
managers.37 More recent literature calls for including other 
stakeholders in the evaluation process to incorporate social 
values and experiential knowledge in evaluation and deci-
sion making.38 
Adaptive Governance
Adaptive governance focuses on the social structures and 
processes needed to support social and political learn-
ing, innovation, and an ability to rapidly adapt to abrupt 
change. These social structures and processes include rela-
tionships that link individuals, organizations, and agencies 
at multiple levels.39 
To identify innovations and use them to change poli-
cies and practices, adaptive governance, like organizational 
and social learning, requires communication, debate, and 
a willingness to rapidly change course when new oppor-
tunities or problems arise.40 Like adaptive management, 
adaptive governance relies on monitoring and encourages 
experimenting with a diversity of policies and management 
approaches to foster innovation and experimentation.41 The 
communication, coordination, and innovation required for 
adaptive governance are facilitated by informal networks, 
bridging organizations, and transformational leaders.
Informal Networks and Bridging Organizations 
Informal or “shadow” networks are a key aspect of adaptive 
governance systems, because they provide opportunities for 
participants to share information and experiences, identify 
knowledge gaps, strategize creative solutions to resource 
management problems, and create nodes of expertise — all 
outside of the institutional constraints and scrutiny that can 
limit learning in formal networks and organizations.42 On-
going participation in informal networks has been found to 
build a “culture of consultation” among organizations that 
facilitates inter-agency response to unplanned events. 43 
Bridging organizations that engage multiple groups 
and levels of government also help transfer innovations 
and scale up local adaptations.44 These organizations, typi-
cally umbrella groups of non-governmental organizations, 
corporations, and/or government agencies, are indepen-
dent entities with their own missions and goals but seek to 
incorporate the values and knowledge of all of their member 
organizations.45 Bridging organizations facilitate change by 
building horizontal linkages among diverse organizations 
at the local or regional level and vertical linkages between 
grassroots organizations and policy-makers.46 Through these 
linkages, they serve as vehicles for information exchange and 
learning, manage conﬂicts and negotiate cooperation, and 
may engage in advocacy to inﬂuence policy or professional 
standards of practice.47 
Transformational Leaders
Effective leaders for adaptive governance integrate diverse 
ideas and viewpoints, manage conﬂict and build trust 
among people with different perspectives, and model 
and teach reﬂective learning and experimentation.48 Such 
leaders help transform traditional practice by fostering a 
learning environment that helps practitioners and deci-
sion makers critically and creatively examine different 
ideas and practices.49 
Utilization-focused Evaluation
Evaluation reports that simply summarize actions taken 
or critique performance without offering solutions are not 
conducive to improving management decisions. Utiliza-
tion-focused evaluation puts program evaluation in an 
action framework by engaging the expected end-users of 
the results in the evaluation process, making it particularly 
applicable to shared learning and adaptive change. The 
goal of utilization-focused evaluation is to provide concrete, 
actionable results that can feed directly into policy, plan-
ning, or management decisions.50
Criteria for selecting utilization-focused evaluation 
questions and methods are that they be useful, feasible, 
ethical, and accurate. While it is important that the evalu-
ation be data-based and use accepted methods, usefulness 
of the results is more important than methodological rigor 
(experimental designs, quantitative data, and sophisticated 
data analysis).51 Key stakeholders select the questions to 
be answered and appropriate evaluation methods through 
face-to-face discussions. 
Research has shown that one of the most important 
factors in determining whether or not evaluation results are 
used is the “personal factor:” engaging interested, com-
mitted, assertive people, including the primary intended 
users.52 In addition to helping ensure that results are used, 
involving key stakeholders in the evaluation process builds 
their capacity for both evaluative thinking and making 
change. The process itself may result in changes in indi-
vidual assumptions and behavior and in organizational 
procedures and culture.53 

Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management  •  31
Endnotes
1
UNDP 2007.
2
King 2001.
3
Zack 2003.
4
King 2001.
5
Cundill and Rodela 2012. 
6
Cundill and Rodela 2012, Pelling et 
al. 2006, Stankey et al. 2005, Cum-
ming et al. 2012. 
7
Reed et al. 2010, Lee 2001.
8
Stankey et al. 2005, King 2001.
9
Signet Research & Consulting 2012, 
Darling and Parry 2002.
10 King 2001.
11 Zack 2003.
12 Brummel et al. 2010.
13 Brummel et al. 2010.
14 Cheng et al. 2011, Pahl-Wostl 2009. 
15 Stankey et al. 2005.
16 Stankey et al. 2005.
17 Stankey et al. 2005
18 Cundill et al. 2011, Goldstein and
Butler 2010, Hoppe and Reinelt 2010,
Wenger 1998. 
19 Zack 2003.
20 Goldstein and Butler 2010.
21 Signet Research & Consulting 2012; 
Darling and Parry 2002; USDA Forest 
Service 2011.
22 Stankey et al. 2005, Williams and 
Brown 2012.
23 Williams and Brown 2012.
24 Stankey et al. 2005, Williams and 
Brown 2012.
25 Lee 2001, Stankey et al. 2005, Wil-
liams and Brown 2012.
26 Cundill et al 2011, Nie and Schultz 
2012, Stankey et al. 2005, Williams 
and Brown 2012.
27 Stankey et al. 2005.
28 Margoluis and Salafsky 1998.
29 Stankey et al. 2005.
30 Lee 2001.
31 Susskind et al. 2012, Lee 2001, Wal-
ters 1997.
32 Schueller et al. 2006, Cheng et al. 
2011.
33 Cheng et al. 2011, Stankey et al. 
2005, Margoluis et al. 2009. 
34 Margoluis et al. 2009.
35 Darling and Parry 2002, USDA Forest 
Service 2011.
36 Funtowicz and Ravetz 1993, Stankey 
et al. 2005
37 Stankey et al. 2005, Lee 1993
38 Cundill and Rodela 2012, Cum-
ming et al. 2012, Stankey et al. 2005, 
Collaborative Adaptive Management 
Network 2012.
39 Folke et al. 2005, Cumming et al. 
2012, Olsson et al. 2006, Susskind et 
al. 2012, Stankey et al. 2005, Wil-
liams and Brown 2012.
40 Cumming et al. 2012.
41 Cumming et al. 2012.
42 Olsson et al. 2006, Cumming et al. 
2012.
43 Pelling et al. 2008.
44 Cumming et al. 2012.
45 Lawrence and Hardy 1999.
46 Brown 1991.
47 Lawrence and Hardy 1999, Brown 
1991.
48 Olsson et al. 2006.
49 Folke et al. 2005, Pelling et al. 2008, 
Ollila 2000.
50.  Patton 2008.
51.  Patton 2008, Margoluis et al. 2009.
52.  Patton 2008.
53.  Patton 2008.

32  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Appendix II. Closing the Feedback Loop:  
Case Summaries
Table of Contents
Bankhead Liaison Panel ............................................................................................................33
LEARNING AND EVALUATION PROCESSES ...........................................................................33
Qualitative Multiparty Monitoring ................................................................................................33
Research Review ............................................................................................................................33
CHANGE MECHANISMS .........................................................................................................34
Formal Agreements .......................................................................................................................34
Working Relationships ...................................................................................................................34
Appeals and Litigation ...................................................................................................................34
INFORMATION TRANSFER .....................................................................................................35
SOURCES .................................................................................................................................35
Blackfoot Drought Committee ...................................................................................................36
LEARNING AND EVALUATION PROCESSES ...........................................................................36
Committee Process .........................................................................................................................36
Plan Implementation .....................................................................................................................37
Plan Review and Revisions .............................................................................................................37
CHANGE MECHANISMS .........................................................................................................37
Thresholds and Triggers .........................................................................................................37
Monitoring .....................................................................................................................................37
Shared Decision Making ................................................................................................................38
Enforcement ..................................................................................................................................38
INFORMATION TRANSFER .....................................................................................................38
SOURCES .................................................................................................................................38
Dinkey Collaborative .................................................................................................................40
LEARNING AND EVALUATION PROCESSES ...........................................................................40
Monthly Meetings and Qualitative Field Reviews ...........................................................................40
Using Research in Evaluation And Adaptation ...............................................................................40
Joint Fact-ﬁnding ...........................................................................................................................41
Implementation and Effectiveness Monitoring ................................................................................41
CHANGE MECHANISMS .........................................................................................................41
Written Records and Signed Agreements ........................................................................................42
Commitment to Adaptive Management ..........................................................................................42
Relationship-based Accountability .................................................................................................42
Dedicated Staff ..............................................................................................................................42
SOURCES .................................................................................................................................43

Appendix II. Closing the Feedback Loop: Case Summaries  •  33
BANKHEAD LIAISON PANEL
The Bankhead Liaison Panel formed in 2000 to address 
conflicts on the Bankhead National Forest in Alabama and 
provide input to the Bankhead Forest and Restoration Proj-
ect and decision. Panel members include representatives 
from environmental and conservation groups, recreation 
interests, cooperative extension, local tribes, and a research 
university, as well as representatives from other state and 
federal agencies. The group’s long-term goal, and the goal 
of the 2004 Revised Land and Resource Management Plan 
(RLRMP) for National Forests in Alabama, is to restore 
native forest communities, including several types of ﬁre-
adapted forest communities. The panel worked closely with 
Bankhead National Forest line officers and resource special-
ists to develop the 16,500-acre Bankhead Forest Health 
Restoration Project. The group remains involved in project 
implementation and review through quarterly meetings and 
qualitative ﬁeld reviews, which have led to changes in treat-
ment prescriptions and marking guidelines.
Learning and Evaluation Processes
Qualitative Multiparty Monitoring
The restoration monitoring team evaluates silvicultural 
treatments, such as various types of thinning and timber 
stand improvement, prescribed burning, reforestation, and 
ecotype conversion treatments, using photo points and 
qualitative ﬁeld reviews. The ﬁeld reviews are attended 
by a subset of the Liaison Panel, resource specialists from 
the Bankhead National Forest, and sometimes the district 
ranger. Often other researchers, including university profes-
sors and students and U.S. Forest Service (USFS) Southern 
Research Station scientists, also participate. 
The monitoring team tracks approximately 30 resto-
ration sites from the Bankhead Forest Health Restoration 
Project and two subsequent watershed projects. Monitoring 
sites were selected to represent different desired future con-
ditions and treatments types, including hardwood, shortleaf 
pine, and longleaf pine restoration. The monitoring team 
and agency specialists visit each unit pre-treatment and 
establish photo points, then revisit the site immediately 
post-treatment and every few years to discuss how well it is 
moving toward desired conditions. 
To guide and structure the discussions, the team uses 
forms developed by Wild South that include a checklist of 
items to be reviewed and sections for summary comments, 
follow-up actions, and schedules. If there is no line ofﬁcer 
on the trip, the monitoring team coordinator has a follow-
up meeting with the district ranger and project interdisci-
plinary team members to review the forms and discuss next 
steps. Reports on monitoring tours are also presented at 
quarterly Bankhead Liaison Panel meetings. 
The multiparty ﬁeld reviews and agreed-upon actions 
have resulted in changes to treatment prescriptions, par-
ticularly marking speciﬁcations. For example, on early site 
visits the team observed that prescriptions were based on 
old databases and did not reﬂect current species composi-
tion. Now the timber management assistant ground-veriﬁes 
all stands before layout and marking to see if there are 
hardwood inclusions in former pine stands or other fea-
tures that may need special attention. 
On one early treatment where the desired condition 
was open pine woodland restoration, the prescription 
called for removing most understory and mid-story trees. 
When the monitoring team visited the site post-treatment, 
some participants objected to the visual effect of removing 
smaller hardwoods, especially dogwoods and other soft 
mast species. The silviculturist agreed to change future pre-
scriptions to retain all dogwoods greater than four inches 
in diameter and designate clumps of smaller dogwoods 
for retention. These changes have been incorporated into 
the revised marking guidelines that are now applied across 
the Bankhead National Forest. On other units, the team 
thought early treatments were leaving stands overstocked 
and sub-optimal for forbs, grasses, wildlife habitat, and 
carrying wildfire. Based on this observation, marking was 
changed from cut-tree to leave-tree marking and later treat-
ments have better met basal area targets. 
More recently, a disagreement between USFS staff and 
collaborative team members led to joint development of 
new marking guidelines for treatments in loblolly pine 
stands where the desired future condition is hardwood 
forest. The revised marking guidelines were developed over 
the course of several ﬁeld reviews and Liaison Panel meet-
ings and formally adopted by the district. 
On another unit where the goal was to restore the 
oak woodland community by releasing hardwoods, after 
repeated monitoring visits over about eight years the group 
agreed that the treatment was not successful: loblolly pine 
instead of hardwoods were regenerating. After repeated 
visits, the USFS silviculturist suggested that this site was 
probably not suited to hardwoods. The group agreed, and 
the management objectives for this unit were changed to 
longleaf pine restoration.
Research Review
Project planning, implementation, and monitoring are 
informed by ongoing research on the forest and through 
research presentations and discussions at quarterly Liaison 
Panel meetings. Since 2005, Alabama A&M University’s 
Center for Forest Ecosystem Assessment and the USFS 

34  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Southern Research Station have been conducting research 
on the Bankhead National Forest to study effects of an-
thropogenic and natural interventions on forest ecosys-
tems. Although these are long-term studies and results are 
considered preliminary, initial data suggest that several 
forest treatments are moving the ecosystems toward desired 
conditions. A professor from Alabama A&M University sits 
on the Liaison Panel and the monitoring team and often 
brings students to meetings and ﬁeld tours. 
Researcher participation has helped the group reach 
agreement on management changes. Team members 
observe that skeptics are more willing to experiment with 
treatments when they know scientists are assessing the 
outcomes, and managers are more willing to accept the 
group’s recommendations when scientists participated in 
the reviews. In addition, students attending the ﬁeld tours 
have helped with data management by taking GPS coor-
dinates of photo points and creating spreadsheets to track 
evaluations over time. 
The qualitative multiparty monitoring reviews have 
informed research as well. Participants observe that there 
seems to be a merging of qualitative multiparty reviews and 
quantitative research through adaptive management. The 
research projects are designed to reliably determine what 
changes are occurring and why, using specific metrics. By 
taking a much broader focus, the multiparty monitoring 
trips sometimes raise signiﬁcant issues outside of ongoing 
research. For example, the monitoring team observed that 
prescribed burns were meeting acreage targets but were 
not achieving some hardwood regeneration and woodland 
restoration goals. The group hypothesized that burns were 
not hot enough and suggested changing from dormant-
season burns to growing-season burns. Although the USFS 
had not used growing-season burns in the past, they agreed 
to experiment with them on some sites. Researchers from 
Alabama A&M University set up monitoring plots on these 
units so that in the future they will know more deﬁnitively 
whether growing-season burns are more effective. 
Change Mechanisms
In almost all cases, adaptive changes are made based on 
group discussions and verbal agreements made on ﬁeld 
reviews and in panel meetings. Observations and action 
items are written on the monitoring ﬁeld review forms, 
discussed at Liaison Panel meetings, and then implemented 
by the USFS. At times, formal signed agreements have been 
used when the panel felt a need for added accountability. 
Formal Agreements
The district ranger, either in the ﬁeld or in a follow-up 
meeting, verbally agrees to action items written on the 
ﬁeld review forms. The form includes date lines for when 
monitoring team consensus was established and when 
observations were presented to the district ranger, a signa-
ture line for district ranger agreement to follow-up actions 
and schedules, and a return inspection date line. In early 
years, the district ranger signed the forms during post-ﬁeld 
review meetings. In recent years, however, the team has not 
used this formal procedure and changes are implemented 
through mutual verbal agreement. 
When staff turnover resulted in a difference of opinion 
between agency staff and monitoring team members, the 
panel again used a formal agreement to build trust. The 
revised marking guidelines jointly developed by the agency 
and the Liaison Panel were signed by the district silvi-
culturist, who writes treatment prescriptions; the district 
timber management assistant, who oversees marking crews 
and contractors; and the district ranger, who holds decision 
making authority over the project. These three signatures 
provide assurance that the management changes will be 
reﬂected in both treatment prescriptions and implementa-
tion on future projects aiming to restore hardwood forest in 
loblolly stands.
Working Relationships
Through years of working together, the Liaison Panel and 
USFS staff have come to an understanding that verbally 
agreed-upon actions will be made and any deviations 
from planned actions will be discussed with the panel. 
Trust and accountability are based on ongoing working 
relationships. 
When there is staff turnover at the USFS, Liaison Panel 
members meet with the new employees to explain the long-
term goals of the Bankhead Forest Restoration Project and 
the Liaison Panel process and expectations. The USFS has 
worked to ensure that the panel membership reﬂects the 
full range of knowledge and perspectives on forest manage-
ment, as well as community stakeholder interests.
One participant points to the USFS’s willingness to be 
ﬂexible and experiment as a key to successful change. The 
agency modiﬁes treatments to meet different participant’s 
needs as long as they can do so without taking too much 
away from the overall goal. Additionally, the agency works 
with researchers to design experimental treatments. 
Appeals and Litigation
Before the Liaison Panel was created, forest management 
on the Bankhead National Forest was mired in appeals 
and litigation. There have been no appeals or litigation of 
Bankhead Project Environmental Assessments, and par-
ticipants attribute this to the trust built through good-faith 

Appendix II. Closing the Feedback Loop: Case Summaries  •  35
implementation of collaborative agreements. Some Liaison 
Panel members observe that without an effective collabora-
tive process, appeals and litigation could be fallback change 
mechanisms if agreements are not kept. 
Information Transfer
Some Bankhead Liaison Panel members have shared their 
work at professional conferences and meetings and at 
Southern Appalachian Fire Learning Network practitioner 
meetings. Agency staff and panel members have shared the 
group’s work with the USFS Collaboration Cadre. Groups 
like Wild South, who are involved in restoration and col-
laboration efforts throughout the region, help sustain infor-
mal information transfer throughout the South. 
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant way that learning and 
adaptations are disseminated is ongoing student participa-
tion in the monitoring ﬁeld reviews and at Liaison Panel 
meetings. Several Alabama A&M University students have 
research projects on the Bankhead National Forest evaluat-
ing the effects of changing from production-oriented for-
estry to management for ecosystem health and ecosystem 
services. From interacting with stakeholders on the Liaison 
Panel, they are also learning about different perspectives on 
what that means and how to get there. All of this learning 
is carried back into the classroom and ultimately into their 
careers as resource managers and scientists.
Sources
Addison, Blake, Bankhead National Forest. Personal com-
munication, December 14, 2012.
Bankhead Liaison Panel. 2007. Bankhead National 
Forest Liaison Panel Public Meeting Summary, 
March 15, 2007, Double Springs, Alabama. Available 
at www.fs.usda.gov/detail/alabama/about-forest/
districts/?cid=stelprdb5374508
Bankhead Liaison Panel Timber and Thinning Team. 2006. 
Checklist for Site Preparation. Revised October 18, 
2006. Unpublished document.
Bankhead Liaison Panel Timber and Thinning Team. 
Checklist for Timber Thinning Site Evaluations. Re-
vised October 20, 2006. Unpublished document.
Bankhead National Forest. 2010. Marking Instructions for 
Loblolly Pine Stands with a DFC of Hardwood Forest. 
Unpublished document. 
Cochran, Allison, Bankhead National Forest. Personal com-
munication, December 13, 2012.
Kolinsi, Mark. Wild South, Alabama Program. Personal 
communication, November 19, 2012.
Lawson, Daryl. Alabama A&M University. Personal com-
munication, December 14, 2012.
Prater, Ben. Wild South. Personal communication, January 
30, 2013.
USDA Forest Service. 2012. Bankhead Forest Liaison 
Panel. www.fs.usda.gov/detail/alabama/about-forest/
districts/?cid=stelprdb5374508
Wild South, 2012, Long-term Monitoring and Bankhead 
Restoration. Unpublished report.

36  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
BLACKFOOT DROUGHT COMMITTEE
The Blackfoot Drought Committee in Montana’s Blackfoot 
River Basin was established in 2000 to address declining 
ﬁsheries and inequitable distribution of water resources 
during drought periods. The Big Blackfoot Chapter of Trout 
Unlimited; Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks (FWP); the 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s Partners for Fish and Wild-
life; and private landowners had been working together 
for more than 20 years to inventory conditions in the river 
and its tributaries and implement water conservation and 
restoration projects. 
In the late 1990s, there were conﬂicts brewing in the 
state capitol over FWP’s enforcement of its instream ﬂow 
right. This right, known as the Murphy Right, was es-
tablished January 6, 1971 and allows the state to require 
people with “junior” (newer) water rights to reduce or stop 
their water use, including irrigation, when ﬂows are not 
adequate to meet the level of the instream ﬂow water right. 
Prior to 2000, FWP had been enforcing the Murphy Right 
on approximately 12 irrigators in the lowest reach of the 
river. This limited enforcement did not affect water ﬂow 
from the upper reaches that are a primary source of water. 
Also, imposing restrictions on only a subset of 49 junior 
water rights holders in the Murphy Right sections of the 
river placed severe economic strains on those irrigators. 
The Drought Committee was formed through an ef-
fort of FWP, Trout Unlimited’s Montana Water Project, and 
Blackfoot Challenge, a cooperative conservation group made 
up of private landowners, state and federal agencies, and 
non-governmental organizations. Blackfoot Challenge in-
vited local landowners to meet with FWP to help develop a 
solution to the ﬁsheries decline through water management 
in drought years. The Blackfoot Drought Response Plan, 
based on the goal of watershed-wide restoration of ﬁshery 
resources and “shared sacriﬁce” among all water users, grew 
out of these discussions. The Blackfoot Drought Committee, 
with representatives from the Blackfoot Challenge, Trout 
Unlimited, FWP, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the Mon-
tana Department of Natural Resources, irrigators, and outﬁt-
ters, was created to oversee plan implementation.
Under the Blackfoot Drought Response Plan, partici-
pating junior and senior water rights holders voluntarily 
reduce their water use when ﬂows at the mouth of the river 
drop below 700 cubic feet per second (cfs). The Drought 
Response Plan is tiered to more than 100 individual 
drought management plans that lay out how and where 
irrigators will reduce their withdrawals. These individual 
management plans allow irrigators more ﬂexibility than 
simple calls on junior water rights. For instance, an irriga-
tor may choose to reduce their withdrawals by agreeing not 
to run all pivots at one time or by shutting down senior 
instead of junior rights, as long as the net result is reduced 
withdrawal from the river. In a few cases people with junior 
rights but no senior rights trade off with other landown-
ers who have senior rights. Water ﬂow triggers are used to 
determine when irrigators apply their drought response 
measures. The Drought Response Plan also limits angling 
during low-ﬂow and high-temperature periods. 
Learning and Evaluation Processes
Committee Process
The Drought Committee applies the Drought Response Plan 
through an iterative process of reviewing monitoring indica-
tors, communicating with plan participants, implementing 
the plan, and reviewing and reﬁning plan implementation. 
From January through May, the committee meets at 
least monthly to monitor drought indicators, including 
snow pack, soil moisture, and the Surface Water Supply In-
dex. Approximately every two weeks they receive a projec-
tion for that year based on regression analysis of historical 
records and current snowpack and ﬂows at gages. If, based 
on their review of monitoring data, the committee decides 
that signiﬁcant water shortage is expected, they notify ir-
rigators and anglers that the Drought Response Plan may 
be put into effect that year and conduct a variety of public 
outreach activities. One goal of this early outreach is to 
help irrigators plan crop and cattle rotation to reduce eco-
nomic impacts of reduced withdrawals later in the season. 
Throughout the year, the committee identiﬁes and 
pursues opportunities to initiate long-term conservation ac-
tions. The Drought Committee has helped irrigators obtain 
soil moisture sensors, calculate their water ﬂow rates, and 
assess the feasibility of long-term conservation measures 
such as ditch lining and piping; converting ﬂood irrigation 
to sprinklers; installing bypasses to return excess water to 
the river; and installing ﬁsh ladders, screens and diversions. 
Blackfoot Challenge has engaged an irrigation consultant 
to help landowners irrigate more efﬁciently. The irrigation 
specialist works one-on-one with each irrigator and sends 
out weekly reports on current growing conditions and rec-
ommended irrigation strategies. 
From June through September, the committee meets 
approximately weekly to review stream ﬂow, precipitation, 
water temperature, and biotic monitoring data. If the com-
mittee expects drought based on their analysis of the moni-
toring data, water users are contacted to conﬁrm that they 
will participate in the drought response. If pre-determined 
ﬂow thresholds are reached, the committee announces that 
the drought plan is in effect and speciﬁc conservation ac-
tions are triggered.

Appendix II. Closing the Feedback Loop: Case Summaries  •  37
Plan Implementation
Although the plan describes speciﬁc actions to be triggered 
when water ﬂow and temperature thresholds are reached, in 
practice plan implementation is determined through com-
mittee discussions that take into account social and eco-
nomic factors as well as a range of river conditions. Because 
implementation of the Drought Response Plan depends on 
goodwill among all participants, the Drought Committee 
focuses on long-term over short-term goals. For instance, 
if water ﬂows at the mouth of the river drop below 700 cfs 
in late summer, the committee may decide not to engage 
the plan because they are approaching the fall season when 
farmers irrigate less and temperatures are cooler. 
Implementation requires ongoing outreach and com-
munication to maintain participation and bring new 
angling outﬁtters and new irrigators into the plan. For 
instance, one year there were conﬂicts between anglers and 
irrigators over the level of restrictions on different users: 
anglers observed irrigation pumps running when they were 
called off the river, and irrigators who had shut off all ir-
rigation saw anglers in the river. The Drought Committee 
organized angler-irrigator meetings to address these issues 
so everyone understood that plan implementation for some 
irrigators means reducing but not shutting down irrigation, 
and for anglers, ﬁshing restrictions are a function of water 
temperature as well as ﬂow. 
Plan Review and Revisions
Each fall, the Drought Committee holds a year-end meeting 
where monitoring indicator data, drought plan participa-
tion, amount of water conserved, and outreach activities 
are reviewed and possible changes discussed. Over time, 
technical assistance has been expanded, response require-
ments have been revised, and additional levels of response 
have been added. Individual drought management plans 
also are reviewed and revised annually. 
For instance, the Drought Response Plan originally 
allowed ﬁshing only from midnight to noon when the river 
dropped below 700 cfs. When anglers observed that the 
water wasn’t reaching temperature stress levels until later 
in the afternoon and complained that they were losing 
business, the committee reviewed FWP’s monitoring data, 
including the time of day when peak temperatures were 
reached in different parts of the river system. They found 
that peak temperatures were not reached until about 4 
p.m., and so changed the closure to anglers from noon to 
2 p.m. when ﬂows drop below 700 cfs and temperatures 
below 70 degrees Fahrenheit at the mouth of the river. 
Within the next 10 years, a 1904 water right, the Mill-
town right, will likely be transferred to and jointly man-
aged by FWP and the Confederated Kootenay and Salish 
tribes for instream ﬂow. The Milltown Right will affect irri-
gators junior to 1904 in the Clark Fork Basin and in upper 
reaches of the Blackfoot River system. The addition of the 
Milltown right will require additional review and revision 
of the Blackfoot Drought Response Plan.
Change Mechanisms
Thresholds and Triggers
The Drought Response Plan sets out a series of actions that 
will be triggered when ﬂows hit pre-determined thresholds. 
For instance, when ﬂows drop below 700 cfs, the Drought 
Committee will notify participants that the plan is active 
and request that they implement their individual plans. 
Participating senior water rights holders voluntarily re-
duce their water use. FWP and other committee members 
personally contact junior water rights holders and conduct 
field checks to confirm that junior users are participating. If 
ﬂows are below 700 cfs and water temperatures are greater 
than 73 degrees Fahrenheit for three consecutive days, 
mandatory ﬁshing restrictions come into effect. When the 
Blackfoot River falls to very low levels (<500 cfs), all junior 
rights holders are asked to stop irrigation and angling re-
striction are imposed on the river and key tributaries. 
Monitoring 
The drought committee itself does not monitor implemen-
tation beyond observing whether plans are implemented 
and anglers are in compliance. There is considerable 
biophysical monitoring in the basin, however, and drought 
plan implementation and revision are heavily dependent 
on monitoring data. FWP and the Big Blackfoot Chapter of 
Trout Unlimited measure water temperatures, ﬁsh habitats, 
and ﬁsh populations. The State Department of Natural Re-
sources and Conservation and U.S. Geologic Survey moni-
tor snowpack and water ﬂows. FWP and Trout Unlimited 
also track conservation and restoration projects and the 
effectiveness of instream flow enhancement projects. 
The following illustrates the importance of monitoring 
data for effective management. In 2001, ﬂows in the North 
Fork of the Blackfoot dropped so low that bull trout, a fed-
erally threatened ﬁsh, were stranded in pools. The North 
Fork is important to bull trout spawning in the Blackfoot 
Basin, so in an emergency effort, the FWP captured the fish 
and immediately trucked them below the low ﬂow area. 
In 2003, when projections were for equally low flows, the 
FWP, working with the Drought Committee, asked all ir-
rigators on the North Fork for their help. Irrigators agreed 
to let the agency measure ﬂows in every irrigation diversion 
as well as in the river. When the river reached 9 cfs while 
there were 22 cfs running in irrigation diversions, all irriga-

38  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
tors agreed to shut down for one week. After that week, 
river ﬂow had increased to 23 cfs and two radio-tagged ﬁsh 
had migrated out. As a result of that experience, late-season 
ﬂow and diversion monitoring is now part of the Drought 
Committee’s drought analysis. In future, the committee 
may implement diversion monitoring elsewhere in the ba-
sin to determine whether drought plan goals are being met. 
Shared Decision Making
As the previous example illustrates, effectively maintain-
ing ﬂow in drought years in large part depends on main-
taining positive working relationships among all parties, 
particularly between the Drought Committee and irrigators 
not subject to the Murphy Right. The desire to maintain 
goodwill among all cooperators is one reason the Drought 
Committee does not always call on irrigators to implement 
their drought plans when the 700 cfs threshold is reached. 
Committee members emphasize the importance of being 
ﬂexible in the short term to stay on course for the long 
term. What’s important is not rigid application of triggered 
actions, but keeping water in the system and restoring ﬁsh-
eries in the long term. 
Drought Committee members point to two factors that 
make the plan effective: users were invited to help craft the 
management plan and from the start FWP has been willing 
to work with users to seek alternatives to formal calls on 
water to maintain instream ﬂow. 
In recent years there has been increased funding avail-
able for water conservation and restoration projects on pri-
vate lands in the basin. Drought Committee members hope 
that participation in the Drought Response Plan will help 
build and sustain users’ commitment to restoration goals, 
so that conservation efforts are maintained and expanded 
in the future when less funding is available.
Enforcement
Depending on ﬂow and water temperature conditions, the 
state retains its authority to enforce its water right on junior 
rights holders and close areas to ﬁshing, but generally 
relies on the concept of shared sacriﬁce rather than formal 
enforcement to maintain compliance. If they become aware 
of a rogue irrigator or angler, Drought Committee members 
will go talk with them one-on-one. In its effort to maintain 
drought plan participation, the state tries to avoid threat of 
formal call on their water. 
Information Transfer
Drought Committee members maintain ongoing working 
relationships with the state drought committee, agencies 
monitoring conditions in the basin, and water managers in 
other watersheds in the state. When developing the Black-
foot Drought Response Plan, they reviewed plans in use in 
other watersheds and adapted and expanded on them. Now 
the Blackfoot plan is being adapted for use in other water-
sheds in the state. In future, with transfer of the Milltown 
water right, the tribes and the state plan to engage with 
stakeholders in the Clark Fork Basin and develop a drought 
management plan modeled after the Blackfoot Drought 
Response Plan. The committee often receives requests from 
outside the state to see the plan and discuss how it works.
The Drought Committee also has inﬂuenced state 
policy through its review and modiﬁcation of restrictions 
on anglers. After the committee reviewed temperature and 
fish stress levels in the Blackfoot and revised their plan, the 
state adopted the 2 p.m. instead of noon closure on ﬁshing 
in rivers across the state. 
Sources
Blackfoot Drought Committee. 2010. Blackfoot Drought 
Response Plan. Revised April 30, 2010. http://
blackfootchallenge.org/Articles/?p=942.
Blackfoot Drought Committee. 2006. Blackfoot Drought & 
Water Conservation Committee Drought Plan Revisions 
Work Group Meeting. November 7, 2006. Unpub-
lished meeting notes.
Blackfoot Drought Committee. 2004. Drought and Water 
Conservation Committee Meeting Summary Notes — 
October 1, 2004. Unpublished meeting notes.
Blackfoot Drought Committee. 2001. Summary of Black-
foot Drought Response Plan 2001. Revised November 
16, 2001. Unpublished memorandum.
Bradshaw, Stan, Trout Unlimited Western Water Project, 
Personal communication December 21, 2012.
Confederated Salish & Kootenai Tribes, the State of Mon-
tana, and United States of America. 2012. Proposed 
Water Rights Compact. Draft. November 8, 2012.
Lindbergh. Land. Landowner. Personal communication 
January 2, 2012.
McLane, Mike, Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Personal 
communication January 2, 2013.

Appendix II. Closing the Feedback Loop: Case Summaries  •  39
McDonald, Brian. Blackfoot Challenge, Personal communi-
cation, September 14, 2012.
Neudaker, Ryen. Big Blackfoot Chapter of Trout Unlimited, 
Personal communication, December 14, 2012. 
Pierce, Ron. Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Personal 
communication, September 17, 2012 and December 
19, 2012.
Pierce, Ron, Ryen Aasheim and Craig Podner. 2005. An 
Integrated Stream Restoration and Native Fish Conserva-
tion Strategy for the Blackfoot River Basin. A report to 
the stakeholders of the Blackfoot River Fisheries Restora-
tion Initiative. Missoula, MT: Montana Fish, Wildlife and 
Parks. 151 pages.
Pierce, Ron and Craig Podner. 2010. Fisheries Investigation 
in the Big Blackfoot River Basin, 2008–2010. Missoula, 
MT: Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks. 256 pages.
Pierce, Ron, Craig Podner and Kellie Carim. 2013. Re-
sponse of wild trout to stream restoration over two 
decades in the Blackfoot River Basin, Montana. Trans-
actions of the American Fisheries Society. 142:1, 68-81.

40  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
DINKEY COLLABORATIVE 
The Dinkey Collaborative was created in 2010 with the ini-
tiation of the Dinkey Landscape Restoration Project (DLRP) 
on the Sierra National Forest (SNF) in California. The DLRP 
covers 154,000 acres, including approximately 130,000 
acres on the SNF and 20,000 acres of private land owned 
by Southern California Edison. The SNF works with the 
Dinkey Collaborative to implement the DLRP. Collaborative 
group members include representatives from local govern-
ment, forest industry, environmental organizations, Califor-
nia Native American tribes, local landowners, recreational 
organizations, and public resource management agencies.
The collaborative puts a premium on science-based 
adaptive management. Several collaborative group mem-
bers consider all forest management on the DLRP land-
scape to have high risk and a low margin for error because 
of potential impacts on ecosystem health. There is par-
ticular concern about impacts to the Paciﬁc ﬁsher (Martes 
pennanti paciﬁca), whose population viability is in ques-
tion. At the same time, environmental groups that formerly 
appealed and litigated forest management recognize that 
with no management, habitats and populations of concern 
may be lost to ﬁre or beetle kill. Other collaborative group 
members are frustrated by the lack of management in re-
cent years and concerned about maintaining the workforce 
and the infrastructure needed for forest restoration. Thus, 
there is high motivation on the parts of USFS staff and col-
laborative group participants to use research and monitor-
ing data to develop, evaluate, and adapt projects.
Learning and Evaluation Processes
The Dinkey Collaborative and SNF jointly track project 
design and implementation through monthly meetings and 
ﬁeld reviews. Research and quantitative monitoring inform 
these discussions.
Monthly Meetings and Qualitative Field Reviews
At meetings and ﬁeld reviews, participants raise questions 
about planning, project design, and implementation speci-
ﬁcations. Through back-and-forth discussions, which may 
span several meetings, the collaborative and USFS staff re-
view relevant information from research, observation, and 
experience, discuss management options and constraints, 
and sometimes change management speciﬁcations. Dis-
cussions are recorded in detailed meeting summaries that 
identify agreed-upon recommendations and action items. 
USFS staff take the formal input, develop draft proposed 
actions, and then present those actions to the group for 
feedback. 
The collaborative group uses ﬁeld reviews to discuss 
site-speciﬁc issues of concern, such as desired vegetative 
structure and species composition as well as management 
operations. Field reviews are attended by on average 15 
collaborative group members and approximately 10 USFS 
resource specialists, including most project interdisciplinary 
team members. The group held six ﬁeld reviews in 2012.
Discussions are structured around speciﬁc management 
practices and informed by USFS plot data, experience on 
other projects, current research, and current management 
speciﬁcations. If treatments have been marked, the group 
reviews the mark to ensure that key habitats and features 
such as tree clumps, defect trees, unique landforms, and 
hardwoods are being retained. On post-treatment ﬁeld 
trips, the group also compares results to desired conditions. 
Field review notes are discussed and revised in full collab-
orative group meetings. 
This review process has resulted in several changes to 
marking guidelines. For example, after a scientist shared 
his photo record of ﬁsher denning and nesting sites, mark-
ing guidelines were revised to instruct markers to use those 
photos to ﬂag potential denning sites. On a post-treatment 
ﬁeld review, the group observed that although denning site 
retention was good, they needed more resting sites for the 
Paciﬁc ﬁsher. They subsequently revised deﬁnitions of high-
quality, mid-quality, and low-quality resting sites. Marking 
guidelines have also been adjusted to include more tree 
clumps after the group saw that meeting canopy cover and 
basal area speciﬁcations did not result in as much clump 
retention as they expected. The district has adopted these 
changes, trained marking crews in using them, and shared 
them with the neighboring district that is working on simi-
lar issues. Periodically, researchers also go out in the ﬁeld 
with marking crews to explain ﬁsher habitat needs to help 
them interpret and apply the marking guidelines. 
Using Research in Evaluation and Adaptation
The collaborative draws on ecological research when de-
veloping and evaluating planning, monitoring, and man-
agement adaptations. Peer-reviewed published research is 
the primary basis for designing and evaluating treatments. 
The collaborative has also beneﬁted by ongoing research 
on the SNF, notably Pacific fisher projects that started in 
2005. Since then, the SNF and Paciﬁc Southwest Research 
Station (PSWRS) scientists have worked together to reﬁne 
ﬁsher marking guidelines and coordinate management and 
research. Researchers now have considerable data on ﬁsher 
populations and habitat conditions that the collaborative is 
using to deﬁne desired conditions and provide a baseline 
for monitoring. 
The Dinkey Collaborative is using research-based  

Appendix II. Closing the Feedback Loop: Case Summaries  •  41
scenario modeling to evaluate project outcomes and 
compare projected long-term effects of different treatment 
options. USFS project design is based in part on vegetation 
and fuel model projections. Using USFS post-treatment 
plot data, the collaborative reviews how closely on-the-
ground results match model projections. The group is also 
using a model developed by a PSWRS scientist that projects 
changes in desired ﬁsher habitat attributes 10, 20, and 50 
years post-treatment. The model takes pre-treatment stand 
exam data and prescriptions as input, uses USFS vegetation 
growth models to project future conditions, and compares 
results to desired habitat characteristics based on condi-
tions in areas currently supporting healthy ﬁsher popula-
tions. The collaborative is using this model to compare the 
relative risk to ﬁsher populations from different treatments 
on planned project sites. USFS resource specialists partici-
pate in the discussion and provide input on possible treat-
ment impacts to other resources.
PSWRS scientists also participate in meetings, ﬁeld 
reviews, and on the Monitoring Work Group. Researchers 
have encouraged project implementation so that treat-
ment effects can be studied. They also emphasize that it is 
important to tier new management actions off of previous 
work to further learning and avoid arbitrary management 
experiments.
Joint Fact-ﬁnding
The Dinkey Collaborative periodically uses a joint fact-
finding process to address disagreements during project 
planning. Once the collaborative has determined that 
more information is needed to address a concern raised 
in group discussions, it forms a work group to gather and 
review relevant information and make recommendations. 
Importantly, joint fact-finding work groups are designed 
to include people with differing backgrounds to encourage 
thorough discussion of different perspectives and mutual 
learning. The group brings information from research, 
management, and ﬁeld visits into their discussions. Final 
reports describe the initial areas of disagreement, ques-
tions addressed through joint fact-finding, information 
sources, assumptions, recommendations, and the level of 
agreement with each recommendation. Collaborative group 
members are invited to sign on to the recommendations or 
share dissenting views. The group is an advisory body, so if 
recommendations are not unanimously accepted, the USFS 
ultimately decides which recommendation it will adopt. 
For example, in 2012 the Dinkey Collaborative initiated 
a joint fact-finding process to address questions about lad-
der fuels management. Work group members wanted treat-
ment speciﬁcations to take into consideration Paciﬁc ﬁsher 
and spotted owl buffers as well as desired changes to ﬁre 
intensity or severity. Their ﬁnal report provides guidelines 
for addressing ladder fuels in ﬁsher and spotted owl habitat.
Implementation and Effectiveness Monitoring
As part of local USFS inventory programs and contract 
administration, the Sierra National Forest gathers data on 
watershed, fuels, and vegetation conditions and conducts 
pre- and post-treatment stand exams. In addition, the 
agency has set up monitoring plots to directly measure 
some variables, such as canopy closure and basal area, on 
DLRP treatment units. Data from these sources are used 
to monitor project implementation (did we do what we 
said we would do?) and effectiveness (did we achieve our 
desired outcomes?) at the unit level. 
Recognizing that treatment effects are uncertain, the 
collaborative also is developing a more sophisticated 
multiparty ecological monitoring plan using experimen-
tal design that includes, where possible, statistical design 
using randomization, replication, and controls. The plan 
will be used to evaluate treatment effects on species or 
ecological processes of concern at a landscape scale and 
provide a higher level of certainty that treatments are meet-
ing the group’s forest restoration objectives. A Monitoring 
Work Group, co-chaired by a USFS representative and a 
non-agency participant, is developing the plan. Over the 
course of two years the work group identiﬁed, reﬁned, and 
prioritized monitoring questions; selected indicators and 
measurement methods; identiﬁed desired conditions; and 
established trigger points at which undesirable results will 
prompt action. A half-time monitoring coordinator has 
been hired to facilitate monitoring plan implementation. 
The collaborative plans to take advantage of existing data 
from the SNF and research scientists wherever possible, 
and the monitoring coordinator is reviewing existing USFS 
databases to cull information that can be used as baseline 
monitoring data. 
Change Mechanisms
Semi-binding documents such as the Dinkey Collabora-
tive Charter and SNF’s Fisher Marking Guidelines clearly 
set out expectations for and agreements on speciﬁc man-
agement adaptations. Regular follow-up discussions and 
ongoing working relationships help ensure that agreed-
upon changes are made. A commitment to adaptive man-
agement also helps ensure that recommended changes are 
made, because it deters objections, appeals, and litigation 
by reassuring members that actions resulting in undesirable 
outcomes will not be repeated. 

42  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Written Records and Signed Agreements
The Dinkey Collaborative Charter, which was signed by 
the Sierra National Forest Supervisor and interested par-
ties who wanted to become formal group members, sets 
expectations for collaborative group involvement in project 
planning, evaluation, and adaptation. Although it is not a 
legally binding document, the charter clearly states that the 
collaborative will be directly involved in planning, evalu-
ating, and adapting project treatments. For instance, the 
section on multiparty monitoring states: 
“Dinkey Collaborative helps to develop monitoring 
plans, which include performance measures for assessing 
the positive or negative ecological, social, and economic 
effects of implemented projects; … 
“as part of Planning, Dinkey Collaborative revisits 
stand-level desired conditions and develops proposed ac-
tions based on previous years’ monitoring…; [and]
“SNF and Dinkey Collaborative co-host an indepen-
dent science panel in 2015 and 2020 to interpret trends 
and adapt restoration efforts as needed.” 
Similarly, the charter states that the collaborative will 
work with USFS technical staff during pre-NEPA plan-
ning to “develop specific proposals for projects, including 
desired conditions and proposed actions to achieve strategy 
goals and objectives through the consensus process.” 
The charter also includes provisions for review and 
amendment of the charter itself. Every two years the col-
laborative reviews the charter, makes changes if necessary, 
revisits membership, and renews its commitment to the 
charter. In 2012, charter review resulted in several recom-
mended clariﬁcations, including procedures for document-
ing group agreements and disagreements, clearly delineat-
ing when decision points are reached, and distinguishing 
decisions from recommendations. Even before formal 
charter revision, the collaborative has changed its meeting 
records based on this review. All meeting and ﬁeld reviews 
now speciﬁcally identify consensus decisions. 
Formal letters of individual member support for 
speciﬁc management actions also provide a record of the 
group’s recommendations to the SNF. All meetings and 
ﬁeld review notes clearly state action items and individuals 
responsible for each item as well as consensus agreements 
of the collaborative. 
Commitment to Adaptive Management
For the Dinkey Collaborative, a USFS commitment to use 
research and monitoring results in project planning and 
adaptation is requisite for allowing management to move 
forward. This commitment reassures members that treat-
ment effects will be carefully evaluated and changes will 
be made if there are undesirable outcomes. Experimental 
research and monitoring are important because they pro-
vide a high level of conﬁdence that restoration treatment 
results are due to management actions, but the incremental 
process of field reviews and adjusting management allows 
ongoing management improvements without having to 
wait for long-term monitoring and research results. Partici-
pants say the long-term scientiﬁc monitoring and near-term 
participatory ﬁeld reviews are complementary, and both are 
important to project evaluation.
Relationship-based Accountability 
Although the SNF is not required to adopt any of the col-
laborative’s requests and recommendations, in practice 
there is an understanding that the collaborative’s input will 
be carefully considered, and used where possible. This 
is particularly true when the group reaches a consensus 
recommendation or decision, given that its membership 
includes the range of major stakeholders.
The collaborative’s experience with ﬁeld reviews and 
revisions to the Fisher Marking Guidelines has built par-
ticipants’ trust that they will have opportunity to address 
specific components of project implementation, which in 
turn has allowed project planning to move forward where 
in the past it would have been appealed or litigated. Field 
reviews and USFS plot data are used to provide account-
ability that treatments are implemented as the group 
expected. Over time, as more projects are implemented 
and shown to be consistent with member expectations, 
it is likely that the group’s capacity to work through the 
most complex issues and achieve landscape restoration 
will increase.
Dedicated Staff 
Collaborative group participants say having a professional 
facilitator to hold everyone to timelines, tasks, and agree-
ments and apply procedural pressure when necessary is 
instrumental to success. In addition to hiring a facilitator, 
the SNF has added a full-time position, the High Sierra 
Deputy District Ranger, whose position was created in part 
to support the Dinkey Collaborative. The USFS and The 
Wilderness Society are jointly funding a half-time moni-
toring coordinator who oversees implementation of the 
Dinkey multiparty monitoring plan. These individuals play 
important roles maintaining communication, keeping for-
mal records and databases, and ensuring that agreed-upon 
actions are implemented in ways consistent with member 
expectations.

Appendix II. Closing the Feedback Loop: Case Summaries  •  43
Sources
Bagley, Rich, Southern California Edison. Personal commu-
nication, January 3, 2013.
Dinkey Collaborative. Technical Field Visit Summary – 
Fisher Marking Guidelines. July 16, 2012.
Dinkey Collaborative. Comments on Fisher Marking 
Guidelines. August 20, 2012.
Dinkey Collaborative. Meeting Summary, Dinkey Collab-
orative Full Group. November 15, 2012.
Dinkey Collaborative. Meeting Summary, Dinkey Col-
laborative Full Group, Dinkey Landscape Restoration 
Project, Sierra National Forest. December 6, 2012.
Dinkey Collaborative. Dinkey Collaborative Charter. April 
21, 2011.
DLRP Dinkey Collaborative Joint Fact-Finding Work Group 
on Ladder Fuels. Strategy Brief: Joint Fact-Finding 
Regarding Ladder Fuel Treatments in Fisher Den Buf-
fers and Spotted Owl Protected Activity Centers in the 
Soaproot Project. Prepared by Dorian Fougères, Facili-
tator. Version 3 – Final. September 15, 2011.
Duysen, Kent, Sierra Forest Products. Personal communi-
cation, January 3, 2013.
Duysen, Larry, Sierra Forest Products. Personal communi-
cation, January 3, 2013.
Fougères, Dorian, Center for Collaborative Policy, Califor-
nia State University, Sacramento. Personal communica-
tion, November 29, 2012 and January 6, 2013. 
Fougères, Dorian. Dinkey Strategy Brief #2: Joint Fact-
Finding regarding Ladder Fuels. Version 1, May 31, 
2011
Jones-Yellin, Mosé, Sierra National Forest. Personal com-
munication, December 7, 2012. 
Rojas, Ramiro, Sierra National Forest. Personal communi-
cation, January 8, 2013.
Thomas, Craig, Sierra Legacy. Personal communication, 
December 18, 2012. 
Thompson, Craig, USDA Forest Service Paciﬁc Southwest 
Research Station. Personal communication, January 11, 
2013.
Van Velsor, Stan, The Wilderness Society. Personal commu-
nication, November 6, 2012 and November 29, 2012. 

44  •  Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management
Appendix III. Sample Evaluation Tools and  
Change Mechanisms
This appendix provides examples of several tools and strategies for evaluating and adapting collaborative 
resource management discussed in the “Closing the Feedback Loop” sourcebook. It is available online at 
http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2013002.dir/doc.pdf.

Tank you to the following Sponsors:
