 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Govern-
ment Accountability Office (GAO) and the United States 
Congress have repeatedly asked the Office of Wildland 
Fire in the Department of Interior (DOI) and the United 
States Forest Service (USFS) to critically examine and 
demonstrate the role and effectiveness of fuel reduction 
treatments for addressing the increasing severity and cost 
of wildland fire. Federal budget analysts want to know if 
and when investments in fuel reduction treatments will 
reduce federal wildland fire suppression costs, decrease 
fire risk to communities, and avert resource damage.  
 
PERSISTENT QUESTIONS 
 
In order to answer persistent questions related to wildfire 
economics and fuel treatment effectiveness, the Office of 
Wildland Fire contracted with the Ecological Restoration 
Institute at Northern Arizona University to conduct a neu-
tral, third party analysis. The research and analysis team 
included university-affiliated and independent economists. 
The key findings for five persistent questions are summa-
rized below. 
 
1.  Have the past 10 years of hazardous fuel reduction 
treatments made a difference? Have fuel reduction 
treatments reduced fire risk to communities? 
 
 Using an evidence-based approach to objectively eval-
uate the relevant literature, we found that for the forest 
ecosystems that were examined, the evidence suggests 
that restoration treatments can reduce fire severity and 
tree mortality in the face of wildfire, and also increase 
carbon storage over the long-term. 
 Studies that use the avoided cost approach to examine 
the cost of fire demonstrate that treatments result in 
suppression cost savings. 
 Modeling studies that evaluate the effectiveness of 
fuels treatments in terms of changes in wildland fire 
size, burn probabilities, and fire behavior demonstrate 
that fuel treatments applied at the proper scale can 
influence the risk, size, and behavior of fire therefore 
reducing suppression cost. 
Fact Sheet:  Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments: A rapid assessment of the economic  
and ecologic consequences of alternative hazardous fuel treatments  
     
 Modeling demonstrates that fuel reduction treatments 
are effective at reducing fire behavior (severity) where 
implemented, and can successfully reduce fire risk to 
communities. However, it also shows that fuel reduc-
tion treatments that occur at broader scales would 
have bigger impacts on the overall reduction of crown 
fire. Perhaps most importantly, the results show that 
WUI-only treatments result in areas of unchanged 
crown fire potential across the untreated landscape, 
therefore leaving it vulnerable to large, severe, and 
expensive (mega) landscape-scale fire. 
 Although few studies exist on the topic, fuel reduction 
treatments significantly enhance the price of adjacent 
real estate, whereas homes in close proximity to a 
wildfire experience lower property values. 
 
2.  What are the rel-
ative values of treat-
ment programs at 
the landscape scale? 
(Reframing Fire 
Regime Condition 
Class (FRCC) as an 
economic model.) 
 
 A marginal analy-
sis of benefit can be 
used to compare the 
relative value of al-
ternative fire man-
agement strategies on 
a complex landscape 
instead of calculating 
actual dollar values. 
This approach allows 
managers to compare 
different treatment alternatives and assess which is 
economically more efficient without the need to cal-
culate the total cost. 
 Using a Colorado study site, it is possible to demon-
strate that high level treatments (approximately 30% 
of the study site) will improve landscape condition by 
almost 20% over the current condition. 
 
A firefighter works through the night to 
fight the 2011 Wallow Fire in eastern 
Arizona. Photo courtesy of ERI. 
May 2013 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
3.  How can we improve current and future economic 
returns to restoration-based hazardous fuels re-
duction treatments? 
 
 In the two ecosystems studied (ponderosa pine and 
mountain big sagebrush) it is more cost effective to 
treat degraded systems before they significantly de-
part from natural conditions. 
 When short time horizons are used, such as 10 or 20 
years, to evaluate the expected economic return from 
treatments, the value can appear to be negative.  
When the time horizon is lengthened to be consistent 
with the duration of expected effects of the treatment, 
the returns may be positive. 
 The economic return on treatments is influenced by 
the ability to offset costs through sale of byproducts 
and/or biomass. 
 
4.  What are the fuel treatment, Wildland Urban Inter-
face, and climate change effects on future suppres-
sion costs? 
 
 Based on the analysis conducted for this project, the 
number of acres burned and total suppression cost 
increase with the amount of land classified as WUI 
intermix. Similar but smaller and statistically weaker 
effects are estimated for WUI interface. 
 Extrapolations of WUI growth and weather variables 
suggest that if trends in these variables continue as 
they did in this analysis, wildfire acreage and suppres-
sion costs will increase in the future. 
 
5.  In conclusion: When or will investments in fuel re-
duction treatments lead to a reduction in suppres-
sion costs?  
 
 Assessing the value of restoration and hazardous fuel 
treatments only in terms of reducing suppression costs 
is an inadequate analysis for understanding the full 
economic and ecologic value of treatments. 
 Treatments designed to reduce severe fire behavior 
may contribute to a reduction in fire suppression 
costs. 
 Proximity to the WUI and fire size are correlated with 
increases in suppression expenditures. A growing 
body of evidence demonstrates that WUI treatments 
are effective for reducing damage to communities. 
However, modeling shows that by failing to invest in 
treatments in the greater landscape, severe, landscape-
scale fire will persist. 
 By delaying restoration, the cost of treatments and the 
return on investment will be lower. It is more cost ef-
fective to restore systems before they depart signifi-
cantly from desired conditions. 
 If the current trends of development in the WUI and 
weather conditions consistent with the last 10 years 
continue, the cost of suppression and number of acres 
burned will likely increase. Addressing growth in the 
WUI and fire risk is essential to reducing suppression 
costs. 
CHALLENGES  
 
Understanding the ecologic and economic effectiveness 
of hazardous fuel and restoration treatments at the na-
tional level poses challenges that prevent simple answers 
to these questions. Complicating factors include:  
 
 Scale. Geography, fuels, forest types, and fire regimes 
vary nationally and therefore do not lend themselves 
to an easy comparison for analysis. 
 Time and treatment effectiveness. The relationship 
of a treatment to long-term risk reduction is contin-
gent on the quality of the treatment at the start, vege-
tation type, maintenance, and additional factors such 
as climate change. 
 Fire is inevitable and the choices made to suppress 
a fire will influence fire cost. Numerous analyses 
have concluded that the most expensive fires occur 
under extreme weather conditions and that these fires 
are a small percentage of the entire ignitions that oc-
cur in the country. 
 Although federal budget analysts are most inter-
ested in investments in treatments and how they 
may influence suppression costs at the federal lev-
el, the damage caused by fire is externalized across 
multiple levels of government and the private sec-
tor. Analyzing the costs and benefits only in terms of 
federal programs is inadequate for understanding the 
full value of restoration treatments, wildfire suppres-
sion cost, and losses avoided. In addition, it will under 
estimate the total cost of inaction. 
 From a theoretical standpoint, the economic rela-
tionship between investments in treatments and a 
reduction in suppression costs is complicated. The 
analysis cannot be reduced to the simple formula of X 
dollars invested in treatments will yield Y dollars of 
savings in suppression. 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Ecological Restoration Institute. 2013. Efficacy of hazardous fuel treatments: A rapid assessment of the economic and ecologic consequences of alternative 
hazardous fuel treatments: A summary document for policy makers. Northern Arizona University. 28 pp.  http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/
assoc/D2013004.dir/doc.pdf  
