USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
167
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest
Restoration Projects
Dennis L. Lynch1 and Kurt Mackes1
Abstract—The costs to either mechanically remove or mechanically treat forest fuels
are examined for various Colorado sites. In the ponderosa pine and mixed conifer
zones, no ideal treatment system exists yet for forest restoration through fuel reduction.
Each site requires its own ecological analysis. Costs for forest restoration varies by
ecological prescription, forest and terrain conditions, and market availability for
potential products. In most cases, it may cost too much to remove material or treat
areas. Logging may be the most economical method if markets for products exist and
processing facilities are nearby.
Introduction
W
hat does it cost to reduce fuels in forest restoration projects in
Colorado? Our research discusses such costs at several locations across
the state. A key objective of forest restoration is the reduction of the number
of trees and other fuels on the site. An ecological prescription, written by a
professional other than the authors, was used to direct each project studied
and was specific to the forest type and fuel conditions on the site. In most
cases, fuel materials in the form of logs, posts, poles, pulpwood, and chips
were removed from the site to reduce fuel loading and achieve desired restor-
ative effects. In a few cases, fuel arrangement was more of a problem than fuel
loading and vegetation was mechanically processed and left on the site. A
variety of equipment was used for these mechanical treatments. Equipment
varied by owner-operator and the type of treatment required.
This paper focuses on costs to mechanically remove fuels from each site or
to mechanically treat fuels on a site. It does not include costs associated with
wildlife habitat or watershed improvement, for example, which may be a part
of a forest restoration program. It does not, therefore, attempt to distribute
costs to multiple benefits associated with forest restoration or fuels reduction,
a problem reported on by others, such as Gonzalez-Caban and McKetta (1986).
In most cases, mechanical removals for forest restoration are followed by the
use of prescribed fire to reduce fuel loading on the site. This paper does not
report on costs associated with the use of prescribed fire. The following is a
summary of project studies we have completed through 2001.
Projects Where Fuels Were Removed From
the Site
In the following projects, trees were cut and products were removed from
the site to reduce fuel loading and achieve restoration objectives. The types of
products varied depending on the markets available at that time.
1Department of Forest, Rangeland and
Watershed Stewardship, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO.

168
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
 Ponderosa Pine Partnership Project
This study has been extensively reported in several publications (Preston
and Garrison 1999, Richard and Burns 1999, Lynch, Romme and Floyd 2000,
Lynch 2001). It was the first forest restoration project in Colorado, located
on the Dolores District of the San Juan National Forest near Cortez, Colorado.
Since it was an experimental project, it was sold as an administrative research
timber sale to Montezuma County who subcontracted removal of trees to
local loggers. The County was concerned that the area was at substantial risk
to insect attack and catastrophic fire that could threaten lives, property, and
livelihood of county residents. Major data collection efforts occurred during
1996 to 1998 although project development preceded and monitoring
followed those dates. Dr. William Romme, who also conducted follow-up
ecological monitoring, wrote the ecological prescription for this ponderosa
pine forest (Lynch, Romme, and Floyd 2000).  This prescription called for
reducing the number of trees per acre. Prior to the project there were 280 to
390 trees per acre versus 40 to 50 trees per acre in the 1900 pre-European
settlement forest (Romme, Grissino-Mayer, Floyd, Hanna 1999). The key
objective of this project was the reduction of trees per acre toward the lower
1900 density to reduce fuel loading and improve fuel arrangement. The larg-
est trees on each site were retained. Those trees were used to identify clumps
that varied from a group of six trees up to as much as one-third acre in size.
Openings of varying sizes were created between clumps. Snags were retained
for wildlife. Phil Kemp, USDA Forest Service, designed silvicutural techniques
and marking guides to carry out Dr. Romme’s prescription. Dr. Dennis Lynch
conducted economic data collection and financial analysis. Mechanical removal
of trees was accomplished by Ragland and Sons Logging of Dolores, Colorado.
Trees were cut using chainsaws and a JD 743 harvester. Logs were skidded
using either a JD 540 or a CAT 518 rubber tired skidder. Logs were loaded
on conventional log trucks using a knuckle boom loader for transportation
from the forest to several mills producing a variety of finished products.
Lynch (2001) reported very detailed cost information associated with
mechanical removal for the 492.6 acres treated in this project. Costs included
equipment use, fuel, fluids, workers’ wages, administration, insurance, book-
keeping, and fees paid by the logger. All trees that were cut and removed were
counted by diameter class. All products removed were weighed and all
revenues paid to the logger by mills and other buyers were recorded. Table 1
summarizes the percent of material removed by diameter class in each unit,
tons removed per acre, number of acres per unit, and treatment cost per acre
for each unit.
The average per acre treatment cost for all units in this project was $869.24.
Products such as sawlogs, waferwood logs, posts, poles, and pulpwood were
removed from this area and revenues were generated from their sale. The
Table 1--Ponderosa pine project removals, acres, and cost per unit. 
Unit
Acres
Species
3" to 4.9"
5" to 7.9"
8" to 11.9"
12" +
Tons/acre
Cost/acre
Unit 1
125
Ponderosa
No data
50.1%
39.2%
10.7%
29.6
893.22
$        
Unit 4
95
Ponderosa
No data
48.4%
41.1%
10.5%
33.3
1,173.35
$     
Unit 5B
108
Ponderosa
No data
40.9%
51.8%
7.3%
35.0
985.96
$        
Unit 5E
65
Ponderosa
No data
44.3%
51.4%
4.2%
23.5
794.77
$        
Joyce 
100
Ponderosa
No data
22.0%
26.0%
52.0%
21.7
497.26
$        
Percent removal by diameter class
Lynch and Mackes
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest Restoration Projects

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
169
average revenue from such sales was $882.35 per acre. Therefore, the logger
who conducted the work had an average profit of $13.11 per acre with a total
for the entire sale of $3,852.36 before taxes. This was less than 1% profit
(0.8%) before taxes on revenues. However, the USDA Forest Service received
stumpage payments (a part of the costs reported above) for the material
removed that resulted in a return of $79.08 per acre. These payments in-
cluded fees for the trees removed, rock replacement for the road, and a collec-
tion for slash disposal which was used to assist with prescribed burning.
Mixed Conifer Project
This project followed the Ponderosa Pine Project but has received relatively
little publicity. Lynch and Jones (1998) published detailed information on the
ecological prescription, costs, and revenues in their summary report. Dr. Wayne
Shepperd, Rocky Mountain Research Station, and Bruce Short, current USDA
Forest Service Region 2 Silviculturalist, designed the ecological prescription
for this mixed conifer forest. The project was located in the Gordon Creek
drainage of the Pagosa Springs District of the San Juan National Forest. The
untreated forest consisted of an overstory of large ponderosa pine and Douglas-
fir with a dense understory of small white fir and scattered clumps of aspen.
The prescription called for retaining large overstory trees and removing all
white fir within 100 feet of any ponderosa pine or Douglas-fir overstory tree
as well as cutting aspen clumps to induce sprouting. Rue Logging, Inc. of
South Fork, Colorado, did the mechanical treatment during October and
November of 1998. Chainsaws were used to cut trees and logs were skidded
with a JD 648 and two JD 650 skidders. A JD 550 skidder was used to clean
the large volume of slash created from the white fir trees. A Prentice 410C
knuckle boom loader loaded logs on conventional log trucks for transporta-
tion to local mills. All trees cut were counted by diameter classes (table 2). All
harvesting costs, including administration and fees paid, were collected in
cooperation with the logger and converted to an average per acre cost (table
2). The white fir material that was salvageable was taken to the stud mill at
South Fork, Colorado where the logger was paid on a per ton basis. The aspen
logs were taken either to the excelsior plant in Mancos or the paneling plant
near Dolores, Colorado, where revenues were paid on a per ton basis.
In this project, revenue from white fir logs for studs, aspen logs for panel-
ing, and aspen logs for excelsior were used to offset costs. Revenues realized
from the sale of white fir and aspen products were converted to an average per
acre revenue of $1,272.16 resulting in a profit to the logger of $62.97 per
acre before taxes. This was a 4.95% profit before taxes on revenue. The USDA
Forest Service charged stumpage fees for the material removed that resulted
in a return to the agency of $217.86 per acre. These fees included charges for
the trees removed, rock replacement for the road, and a collection for slash
disposal, which was used for prescribed burning.
Table 2--Mixed conifer removals, acres, and costs.
Unit
Acres
Species
3" to 4.9"
5" to 7.9"
8" to 11.9"
12" +
Tons/acre
Cost/acre
Gordon
White fir
49.1%
15.1%
17.5%
18.3%
36.1
Creek
Aspen
 --
30.2%
69.8%
 --
10.7
$1,209.19
75
Percent removal by diameter class
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest Restoration Projects
Lynch and Mackes

170
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
Fox Run Regional Park Project
The Fox Run Project was the first attempt at forest restoration on the Front
Range of Colorado.  This project was located in the Black Forest near Colorado
Springs.  It was a cooperative venture between El Paso County Parks and the
Woodland Park District of the Colorado State Forest Service.  To return the
Park’s forest to a more natural condition, forest restoration research from the
southwest was modified by Chuck Kosteka and Dave Root of the Colorado
State Forest Service into an ecological prescription that also met Park objec-
tives.  Specific management objectives were:
1. Restore the health and vigor of the forest by selective thinning of trees.
2. Reduce the severe fire hazard and improve insect and disease resistance.
3. Enhance the esthetics and recreational enjoyment of the park.
4. Reduce the uniformity of the stand to enhance the number and variety of
wildlife species.
5. Provide a demonstration area with interpretive signs.
6. Retain enough trees around the picnic area to provide screening
between the tables.
The ponderosa pine forest contained 548 trees per acre with a basal area of
128 square feet and a spacing of approximately 6 feet between trees. The
average dbh of the stand was 6.5 inches and the average height was 42 feet.
Fire hazard was rated as severe. The prescription called for reducing the basal
area of the stand to 80 square feet per acre with a spacing of approximately
13 feet between larger trees retained in the stand.
There were 24 acres in this forest area that contained approximately 162
cords to be removed. We estimated that this amounted to approximately
18 tons per acre. There was no established market for the material removed
and it was the responsibility of the company doing the work to remove all
material 4" in diameter or larger. Since an established market for the wood to
be removed did not exist, the project was offered for bids in July 1998. An
urban tree removal company was the low bidder for the project and was paid
$779.17 per acre to complete the work. The bidder used chainsaws and hand
skidding to perform the work. He reportedly intended to attempt marketing
the material removed for firewood. We do not have direct information on his
success, but anecdotal reports suggest he had difficulty with sales.
The Cheesman Reservoir – Trumbull Project
Following the disastrous impacts to Denver’s water supply from the cata-
strophic Buffalo Creek fire, the Denver Water Board hired a forester from the
Colorado State Forest Service and began a forest restoration and fuel break
program on its lands. A 158.6 acre thinning project was conducted during
May into July 2000 on three ponderosa pine forest areas near Cheesman
Reservoir and the village of Trumbull on the South Platte River near Deckers,
Colorado. The objectives of the project were to reduce fire hazard on these
properties and restore forest health and diversity. The project was experimental
and followed an ecological prescription based on the work of Dr. Merrill
Kaufmann (Kaufmann et al. 2001).
Chuck Dennis, forester for the Denver Water Board, translated the pre-
scription into silvicultural marking guides for the units. The thinning was
accomplished by Brandt Logging, Inc. of Lazear, Colorado, using a Timbco
feller-buncher with sawhead, a JD 650 tracked skidder, a Kobelco loader, and
conventional log trucks. All material removed was transported to the Louisiana-
Pacific oriented strand board plant in Olathe, Colorado, a haul distance of
Lynch and Mackes
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest Restoration Projects

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
171
approximately 255 miles. The logger was paid for delivered material on a per
ton basis.
Table 3 summarizes the results of the detailed cost study conducted by
Don Rogers and Dr. Dennis Lynch (2000). The average cost per acre was
$970.61. However, revenue per acre was only $479.60 resulting in an average
loss per acre of $491.01. The total project loss was $77,873.15, which was
absorbed by the logger. The agency did not charge any stumpage fee for the
material removed.
Air Force Academy Project
Following an outbreak of mountain pine beetles coupled with mortality
from dwarf mistletoe, Air Force Academy forester Jim McDermott planned a
ponderosa pine beetle tree salvage removal and forest restoration project cov-
ering 136 acres of Academy lands. For the most part, the project involved
treating small volumes per acre. Justin Anderson and Dr. Dennis L. Lynch
collected data and analyzed results from three units of this project. Two of the
units reflect beetle tree salvage removal and one unit reflects a forest restora-
tion portion of the project. McDermott, using research reported by Dr, Merrill
Kaufmann et al. (2000), developed an ecological prescription for the restora-
tion unit. The material in the area to be treated was of low value and generally
of poor quality, the Academy did not have labor and equipment to treat the
area, and businesses to process such material are lacking in the area adjacent to
the Academy. Therefore, the project was prepared for bid. The bidder had the
option to remove trees that might make useable products from the site with-
out a stumpage fee. The low bid to do the mechanical treatment was $679 per
acre submitted by Morgan Timber Products of La Porte, Colorado.
Table 4 summarizes the removals and acres for the three units. The Sample
unit data came from a 10.7 acre sample of the 76 acre forest restoration unit.
The diameter classes shown in the sample data from the 76 acre unit are un-
characteristically skewed, for restoration projects, toward larger trees. This is
due to the nature of the stand treated, the prevalence of beetle attack in the
area, and the restoration prescription.
Table 3--Cheesman-Trumbull removals, acres, and costs.
Unit
Acres
Species
3 to 4.9"
5 to 7.9"
8 to 11.9"
12" +
Tons/acre
Cost/acre
Cheesman
83
Ponderosa
No data
56.5%
31.8%
11.7%
14.5
$1,084.74
Trumbull #5
42
Ponderosa
No data
57.1%
32.9%
10.0%
9.9
$727.77
Trumbull #6
33
Ponderosa
No data
62.0%
28.4%
9.6%
14.8
$995.38
Percent removal by diameter class
Table 4--Air Force Academy removals and acres.
Unit
Acres
Species
3 to 4.9"
5 to 7.9"
8 to 11.9"
12" +
Tons/acre
Ridge
11.2
Ponderosa
7.7%
38.6%
44.3%
9.3%
5.0
House
2.2
Ponderosa
23.6%
49.7%
22.7%
4.0%
6.0
Sample
10.7
Ponderosa
15.5%
17.8%
29.0%
37.8%
12.8
Percent removal by diameter class
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest Restoration Projects
Lynch and Mackes

172
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
The bidder reported that his bid was influenced by what he perceived as an
opportunity to utilize some products from the restoration unit. The restora-
tion unit yielded a total of 14 loads of long logs hauled to Longmont, Colorado,
5 1/2 loads of short logs (8' bolts) hauled to La Porte, Colorado, and 19 loads
of wood chips hauled to Florence, Colorado. A sawmill for lumber and
dimensional products utilized the long logs, the short logs were either sawn
into dimensional timbers or used in an experimental roundwood building
project, and the wood chips were stockpiled for a biomass energy test. Vol-
umes per load and revenues for these products are not available to us. No
additional products were realized by the bidder from the beetle tree salvage
units in this project.
Projects Where Fuels Were Left on the Site
On some forest sites, fuel loading may be quite low or sites may actually
need more organic material on the soil surface. South-facing Pikes Peak gran-
ite soils, for example, are often characterized by such conditions. Pinyon-juniper
woodland sites may also contain examples of limited surface organic material.
In such forested areas, fuel arrangement or crown closure may be of primary
concern in fire hazard mitigation planning. Under such conditions, fuels may
be removed from the overstory and distributed over the surface of the ground
without detrimental fuel loading. We conducted cost studies on several sites
with such conditions. The following is a summary of projects where data have
been collected.
Flickenstein Gulch Project
This project occurred during March 2001 in a 9.8 acre stand of mixed
ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir near Deckers, Colorado, on Denver Water
Board property. The project was an understory removal of ladder fuels.  Chuck
Dennis, forester for the Denver Water Board, designed, contracted, and su-
pervised the project. The prescription, based on research by Dr. Merrill
Kaufmann (Kaufmann et al. 2001), called for thinning from below those trees
less than 8 inches dbh. A total of 1,683 trees were cut in the unit. No material
was salvageable for products. Slash from cut trees were treated by lopping and
scattering to a depth of not greater than 18 inches. The project took 6 hours
and 15 minutes to accomplish by two men using chainsaws. The total pay-
ment for the work amounted to $990 or a cost of $100.70 per acre or $0.58
per tree. Table 5 displays the trees cut by diameter class. The forester in charge
of this project was pleased with the results.
Table 5--Trees cut by diameter class (dbh) during Flickenstein Gulch project.
< 1"
1 to 2.9"
3 to 4.9"
5 to 7.9"
8 to 11.9"
12" +
22.7%
37.6%
27.4%
10.9%
1.4%
0.1%
Percent removal by diameter class
Hydro-Ax Projects
Another way of accomplishing mechanical thinning of stands and leaving
the residues on the site is by using a Hydro-Ax machine. This machine is
Lynch and Mackes
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest Restoration Projects

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
173
basically a large front-end loader mounted with a massive rotary cutting head
similar to a rotary type lawn mower. The machine lifts the rotary head to a
position above the tree or shrub, achieves maximum speed with the rotating
cutting head, and then lowers the head onto the stem. The stem is then pul-
verized into numerous pieces of varying size depending on the material being
cut. The pieces are spread over the surrounding terrain by the force of the
cutting head. We studied this machine in the three following situations.
The first study, near Durango, Colorado, was conducted in a 37.7 acre
pinyon-juniper woodland, which included clumps of oakbrush. In this unit,
the crowns of the trees were essentially touching and very little diversity of
ground cover existed. The Hydro-ax was used to cut and pulverize trees and
oakbrush clumps to open the vegetative canopy, create vegetative diversity,
and improve fuel arrangement. The project area was on relatively flat terrain.
The bid cost for this work was $223.34 per acre.
In the second study, decadent mountain mahogany thickets near Cheesman
Reservoir were mowed with the Hydro-Ax to re-create openings within the
adjacent forest, increase sprouting and stem regeneration. The terrain was
rolling with slopes up to 30%. A total of 191.4 acres were mechanically treated
at a cost of $124.69 per acre.
In the third study, small dense ponderosa pine stands were mechanically
treated to create openings, improve fuel arrangement, and increase diversity
on 23.4 acres near Foxton, Colorado. In this case, the bid cost was $203.85
per acre.
Hydro-ax treatments may be acceptable where vegetative conditions
require fuel reductions to meet ecological prescriptions and where terrain is
such that the machine can operate safely and efficiently. The pinyon-juniper
treatment was more time consuming, caused increased wear on the machine,
and was more expensive than essentially mowing mountain mahogany
shrublands.
Summary and Conclusion
We conclude that there is no single optimal treatment system for forest
restoration fuel reduction on forest sites encountered in the ponderosa pine
and mixed conifer zones of Colorado. Each site will require individual analysis
to determine the proper ecological prescription and treatment. This will then
lead to a determination of the most effective mechanical equipment.
Costs for forest restoration will vary by ecological prescription, forest and
terrain conditions, and the availability of markets for potential products. To
date, it is clear that the material being removed from these sites is of low
quality and low or negative value.  In most cases, it will cost too much to
remove material or treat areas. For these reasons, we wish to stress the point
that this material is a liability from a fuel hazard standpoint as well as from a
financial standpoint.
A well-designed timber sale may be the most economical method for an
agency to use for fuels removal if markets for products exist and processing
facilities are nearby. This was demonstrated by results of the Ponderosa Pine
Partnership and Mixed Conifer Projects, where the loggers received very low
profit margins per acre. However, in those cases the Forest Service received
stumpage payments, approximating $79 per acre and $218 per acre respec-
tively. If the agency had chosen not to require stumpage payments for the
trees, profit margins for the loggers could have increased and made these
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest Restoration Projects
Lynch and Mackes

174
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
restoration projects financially more attractive. Unfortunately, after these
projects were completed, the primary processing businesses for small diameter
material were forced to close due to lack of consistent supply and high re-
source costs. Therefore, it is unlikely these projects could be repeated today
given this critical loss of industry.
Low profit margins and loss of industry quickly translates into non-market
alternatives where taxpayer dollars must be used to pay for fuel reduction. The
increasing size and costs of catastrophic fires leave us with nagging questions
about what to do with excess fuels from small diameter trees in Colorado.
The Front Range, Fox Run Park, Cheesman-Trumbull, and Air Force
Academy projects underscore the costs associated with fuel reduction where
markets for small diameter material are limited or lacking. In those cases, agency
costs ranged from $679 per acre to $1085 per acre to treat fuels where at least
some outlets for a portion of the small diameter material existed. What will
future costs be if such material has to be landfilled or disposed of in some
other expensive manner?
In forest areas where fuels can be left on site without adding to the hazard,
agency costs to treat ranged between $101 and $225 per acre. Certainly such
sites are limited in number and very dependent on specific forest and soil
conditions.
Continuing research in product development is crucial to a market solution
of this problem. Research to develop more efficient harvesting systems, new
wood products, and market access may help provide revenue streams that will
ultimately offset treatment costs. We believe that valued-added product de-
velopment potential is likely to be highest in the utilization of the 8" to 11.9"
material found on these sites. This material, and the 12"+ diameter class
material, may be able to offset costs of cutting, handling, processing, and
transporting the low value chip material found in the 3" to 7.9" diameter
classes.
The non-market alternative is to pay millions of taxpayer dollars to restore
forests, reduce fuels, and mitigate catastrophic fire conditions while simulta-
neously waging very expensive and dangerous battles against large, destructive
forest fires that result in severely damaged ecosystems that must be rehabili-
tated, often with limited success.
Literature Cited
Gonzalez-Caban, A. and C.W. Mcketta. 1986. Analyzing fuel management cost.
Western Journal of Applied Forestry 1(4):116-121.
Kaufmann, M. R., P.J. Fornwalt, L.S. Huckaby, and J.M. Stoker 2001. Cheesman
Lake—a historical ponderosa pine landscape guiding restoration in the South Platte
watershed of the Colorado Front Range. Conference Proceedings RMRS-P-22,
pg. 9-18 Rocky Mountain Research Station. USDA Forest Service. Ft. Collins,
CO.
Kaufmann, M.R., C.M. Regan, and P.M. Brown. 2000. Heterogeneity in ponderosa
pine/Douglas-fir forests: age and size structure in unlogged and logged landscapes
of central Colorado. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 30: 698-711.
Lynch, D.L. 2001. Financial results of ponderosa pine forest restoration in
Southwestern Colorado. Conference Proceedings RMRS-P-22.  Ft. Collins, CO:
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station:
141-148.
Lynch and Mackes
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest Restoration Projects

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
175
Lynch, D. L. 2000. Summary report of the forest restoration thinning project on
Denver Water Board property at Cheesman Reservoir and Trumbull sites. Dept. of
Forest Sciences. Colorado State University. Ft. Collins, CO.
Lynch, D.L., W.H. Romme, and M.L. Floyd. 2000. Forest restoration in southwestern
ponderosa pine. Journal of Forestry 98(8): 17.
Lynch, D. and C. Jones. 1998. Summary report of the mixed conifer demonstration
project. Dept. of Forest Sciences. Colorado State University. Ft. Collins, CO.
Preston, M. and C. Garrison. 1999. The ponderosa pine forest partnership: community
stewardship in Southwestern Colorado.  Montezuma Federal Lands Program.
Montezuma County, Cortez, CO.
Richard, T. and S. Burns. 1999. The ponderosa pine partnership. Office of Community
Services, Ft. Lewis College, Durango, CO.
Romme, W.H., H.D. Grissino-Mayer, M.L. Floyd, and D. Hanna. 1999.  Landscape
condition analysis for the South Central Highlands section: Ponderosa pine forests.
Unpublished final report to the San Juan National Forest, Durango, CO.
Costs for Reducing Fuels in Colorado Forest Restoration Projects
Lynch and Mackes

176
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-29.  2003.
