36
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
In: Vance, Regina K.; Edminster, Carleton B.; Covington, W. Wallace;
Blake, Julie A. comps. 2001. Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and
conservation: steps toward stewardship; 2000 April 25–27; Flagstaff, AZ.
Proceedings RMRS-P-22. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
G. Alan Kaufmann, MS, Ecological Restoration Institute; W. Wallace
Covington is Regent’s Professor, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona Uni-
versity, P.O. Box 15018 Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5018.
Abstract—Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) trees established
before Euro-American settlement are becoming rare on the land-
scape. Prescribed fire is the prime tool used to restore ponderosa
pine ecosystems, but can cause high mortality in presettlement
ponderosa pines. This study uses retrospective techniques to esti-
mate mortality from prescribed burns within Grand Canyon Na-
tional Park (GCNP). Live and recently dead presettlement ponde-
rosa pines were sampled in four prescribed burns and three adjacent
unburned areas. Presettlement ponderosa pine mortality (not in-
cluding areas of crownfire) was higher than that of control sites in
all four burns, although control areas showed elevated mortality
rates compared to presettlement times. The highest mortality (23
percent) was found on a prescribed natural fire converted to a
wildfire, the second highest (17 percent) on a site with extremely
heavy mistletoe, the lowest (10 percent) on a spring burn. Bole
scorch height and bole char severity were higher on dead trees than
live trees, and may be useful in predicting postfire mortality. GCNP
management objectives for overstory mortality are probably being
met, but these guidelines do not account for the possibility of
mortality delayed more than 5 years.
Introduction ____________________
Prescribed fire has become the primary tool in attempting
to reverse the degradation of fire-adapted ecosystems due to
past fire exclusion and other management activities. How-
ever, some researchers have raised doubts about reintroduc-
ing fire without otherwise treating the area (Bonnicksen and
Stone 1985; Covington and others 1997; Fiedler and others
1996; Sackett and Haase 1998). Of special concern are high
mortality rates in presettlement-aged, “old-growth” trees
(hereafter presettlement trees). These trees harbor centu-
ries of genetic diversity, provide important wildlife habitat
(Thomas 1979), and are an important aesthetic feature
(Brown and Daniel 1984). Past logging has dramatically
reduced the presettlement ponderosa pine population over
the landscape, and surviving trees are more susceptible to
pathogens, drought, and injury because of increased stress
due to competition from high densities of postsettlement
trees (Covington and others 1994; Feeney and others 1998;
Effect of Prescribed Burning on Mortality of
Presettlement Ponderosa Pines in Grand
Canyon National Park
G. Alan Kaufmann
W. Wallace Covington
Sackett and others 1996; Mast and others 1999). Because
they would take longer to replace than any other living
feature of the ecosystem (200–400 years), preserving a
healthy population of these trees should be an important
long-term management objective (Moore and others 1999;
Mast and others 1999).
Some studies focusing on prescribed fire effects on pre-
settlement pines have found substantial mortality (20–40
percent), some of which can be delayed for a decade or more
(Sackett and Haase 1998; Swezy and Agee 1991; Thomas
and Agee 1986). A major cause of this type of mortality is
thought to be the extended smoldering of the thick duff layer
that has accumulated around large trees in the absence of
fire. Some researchers and managers now recommend rak-
ing this duff away from the bases of the presettlement trees
before burning (Covington and others 1997; Sackett and
Haase 1998; Taylor 1996). Many fire managers regard such
intensive preburn mechanical treatment as impractical to
apply over large areas (A. Farnsworth, Prescribed Fire
Specialist, Coconino National Forest, K. Kerr, Prescribed
Fire Manager, Grand Canyon National Park, personal com-
munications). They argue that basal damage can be con-
trolled by adjusting the burn prescription and that the few
documented cases of unacceptably high mortality were due
to extenuating factors.
Grand Canyon National Park (GCNP) encompasses one of
the largest areas of unlogged ponderosa pine forests remain-
ing in the Southwest. Fire managers have been conducting
prescribed burns in GCNP since 1971 (GCNP, unpublished
data). Over the past few years, fire managers have greatly
increased the area treated with prescribed fire (K. Kerr,
Prescribed Fire Manager, GCNP, personal communication).
More surveys of postburn mortality are needed to deter-
mine if high levels of mortality in presettlement trees are
widespread or limited to special circumstances. Because full
mortality may take a decade or more to be expressed,
conventional fire effects monitoring studies may not provide
information in time to be relevant. This study uses retro-
spective techniques to estimate long-term mortality of pre-
settlement trees on prescribed burn sites within GCNP, and
to relate high mortality to site, burn, and/or tree character-
istics. The merits and limitations of this type of study and
management implications of results are discussed.
Methods _______________________
Study Area
This study examined four prescribed burns (and adjacent
unburned control areas) in three distinct areas of Grand

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
37
Effect of Prescribed Burning on Mortality of Presettlement Ponderosa Pines in Grand Canyon National Park
Kaufmann and Covington
Canyon National Park in Arizona (fig. 1; table 1). Informa-
tion on the burning conditions and fire behavior during
these burns was not available. All sites are within 4 km of
the rim of the Grand Canyon and average 2,200 m in
elevation. Terrain is dominated by karst topography, mostly
level or rolling but deeply dissected by drainages. Most of the
soils in this area belong to the Soldier series (Bennett 1974).
Figure 1—Study areas in Grand Canyon National Park, AZ.
Table 1—Prescribed burns sampled in Grand Canyon National
Park. All information comes from the Grand Canyon
National Park fire history database and prescribed fire
program summary reports. Sites are named for the name
of the burn or, for controls, the burn unit in which they are
found. Sizes are not given for control areas because only
portions of these areas were sampled. PNF = prescribed
natural fire; MIPF = management-ignited prescribed fire;
CTRL = unburned control area.
Ignition
Sampling
Site
Type
Size
date
date
ha
Grandview area:
Grapevine
MIPF
293
5/95
7/99
Hance
MIPF
267
8/95
7/99
Grandview
CTRL
—
—
7/99
Walhalla Plateau:
Matthes
PNF
400*
7/95
8/98
Walhalla
CTRL
—
—
8/98
Swamp Ridge area:
Northwest I/II
MIPF
92
9/92
7/99
Northwest V
CTRL
—
—
7/99
*Area burned before conversion to wildfire.
Average annual precipitation is 57.9 cm on the North Rim
and 36.8 cm on the South Rim (GCNP, unpublished data).
Precipitation is bimodal, divided between winter snow and
late summer rain, with a distinct dry period in May and
June.
Although ponderosa pine is the dominant overstory spe-
cies at all three sites, the associated species differ. At Swamp
Ridge, white fir (Abies concolor), Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga
menziesii), and aspen (Populus tremuloides) are present,
and Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii) dominates north
facing slopes. White fir and aspen also are present on the
south end of the Walhalla Plateau, but are confined to mesic
sites—remaining areas are mostly pure ponderosa pine. In
the Grandview area, ponderosa pine-Gambel oak (Quercus
gambelii) forests grade into piñon pine (Pinus edulis)-Utah
juniper (Juniperus osteosperma) woodlands. Big sagebrush
(Artemesia tridentata) and cliffrose (Cowania neomexicana)
are common in openings.
The earliest evidence of human presence in this area is
3,000 to 4,000 years old, with further evidence indicating
more or less continuous habitation through the present
(Altschul and Fairley 1989). The historic fire regime was
disrupted by heavy livestock grazing associated with Euro-
American settlement (Altschul and Fairley 1989). Fire re-
gime disruption dates are 1879 for the western North Rim
and 1887 at Grandview (Fulé and others, in review). Fire
regime disruption was found to be less abrupt on the Walhalla
Plateau, with mean fire intervals not lengthening signifi-
cantly until the early 1900s (Wolf and Mast 1998). Active fire
suppression began with the designations of the Grand Can-
yon Forest Reserve in 1893 and Grand Canyon National
Park 1919. Livestock were fenced out of GCNP by about 1938
(Fulé and others, in review; Verkamp 1940). Most of GCNP
has never been logged.

38
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Kaufmann and Covington
Effect of Prescribed Burning on Mortality of Presettlement Ponderosa Pines in Grand Canyon National Park
Field Methods
Burns greater than 40 ha in size and 3–7 years old were
selected for this study. A minimum time since fire of 3 years
was necessary because trees injured by fire often take
several years to die (Sackett and Haase 1996; Wagener
1961). The maximum time of 7 years increased the probabil-
ity that outer ring dates could be obtained from increment
cores for most of the trees that died since the fire. Unburned
areas nearby were sampled as controls to determine back-
ground mortality rates (in other words, mortality from old age).
Within a selected site, sampling was limited to areas
dominated by ponderosa pine and showing no evidence of
logging or widespread crown damage from fire. The sites on
the Walhalla Plateau were sampled in 1998 and all other
sites were sampled in 1999. Minor changes in methods
between field seasons are noted. Sites were sampled with
belt transects arranged to capture as much spatial variation
as possible. Transects were 40 m wide. At least 12 ha in each
burn and each control area were surveyed.
Presettlement ponderosa pines judged to have been alive
at the time of the burn were tallied in three categories: green
trees, snags that torched or were severely scorched in the
burn, and recent snags that did not torch. Presettlement
trees were identified in the field using characteristics devel-
oped by Keen (1943) and modified for use in the Southwest
(Covington and Moore 1994; White 1985). Characteristics
included bark characteristics (large plates, light color) and
crown architecture (large, drooping branches, columnar
crown). At each site, several borderline presettlement trees
(in other words, trees whose age was questionable) were
cored and ring-counted in the field to calibrate these charac-
teristics. Additional borderline trees found on the transects
were cored and cross-dated in the lab to evaluate the accu-
racy of this technique.
Tallied trees were randomly sampled at varying rates (2–
20 percent of green trees and 50 or 100 percent of recent
snags), depending on relative densities of green trees and
snags, to optimize transect length and number of trees sampled.
Nominal sampling percentages were held constant for each
transect, but actual percentages varied due to the random
number generator. The total number of green trees and the
total number of recent snags in each transect were recorded.
For each sampled green tree, samples of cambium from
four quadrants (uphill, downhill, and both sides at 40 cm
above the forest floor) were extracted to determine cambium
condition (Ryan 1983). Cambium sampling was initiated in
response to ambiguous data from the 1998 season, and
therefore was not conducted at Walhalla Plateau sites.
Increment cores were taken at 40 cm above the forest floor
and through bark plates instead of through furrows (Ryan
1983). Unless the first core taken from a recent snag was
completely sound, a second core was taken. The following
measurements were made for each cored tree:
• Diameter of the tree or snag at height of core to the
nearest cm.
• Condition class according to a tree, snag and log classi-
fication system based on that of Thomas and others
(1979) and used widely in ponderosa pine forests of the
Southwest (Cunningham and others 1980; Fulé and
others 1997). Green trees were further classified accord-
ing to relative health and vigor (Thompson 1940). This
system has five vigor classes, which are determined by
live crown ratios (LCRs) as follows: AA (“wolf” trees),
LCR 70 percent or more; A (full vigor), LCR 55–70
percent; B (good to fair vigor), LCR 35–55 percent; C (fair
to poor vigor), LCR 20–25 percent; and D (very poor
vigor), LCR less than 20 percent. Recent snags (except
those on the Walhalla Plateau sites) were further clas-
sified as to needle and fine branch retention as follows:
A (retains most needles); B (retains some needles); C (no
needles but retains most fine branches); and D (no
needles but retains some fine branches). Snags lacking
fine branches or having loose bark were assumed to
have died before the fire and were not tallied or sampled.
• Obvious damage and tree abnormalities were recorded
(for example, dwarf-mistletoe, insect attack, lightning
strike, fire scar, fork top, and so forth).
The following measurements were made only on burn sites:
• Bole scorch height (from ground level to the highest point
of scorched bark) was measured to the nearest 0.25 m.
• Basal char severity was quantified using the follow-
ing categories (after Ryan 1983): 0 = no visible char-
ring of bark; 1 = some blackening around base; 2 =
bark plate surface uniformly blackened; 3 = some
depth of char; 4 = deep char.
Dendrochronology
Cores were mounted, sanded, and crossdated (Stokes and
Smiley 1968) using chronologies established for nearby
areas (Fulé and others, in review). A systematic subsample
of 40 percent of the cores was selected for analysis (all cores
from the Walhalla sites were analyzed). Inner ring dates
(IRD, just outside the pith) and outer ring dates (ORD, just
inside the cambium) and were determined. IRD is an esti-
mate of the year of tree establishment. ORD is an estimate
of the year of growth cessation (in other words, imminent
death). If crossdating was adequate for more than 100
rings but then became undatable, rings were counted to
establish the IRD. For cores in which pith was not included
(more than 90 percent of the cores), the IRD was estimated
using a pith locator consisting of concentric rings printed on
a transparency. IRDs were grouped by 25 year age classes
(Mast and others 1999). Undatable cores were classified
according to the reason they could not be dated.
Mortality Estimates
Two types of mortality estimates were made: a “field”
estimate and a “lab” estimate. The field estimate was made
using the tallies of live and recently dead trees on the
transects and the visually determined snag decay classes.
All trees with green needles were assumed alive, and all
snags retaining at least some needles and with tight bark
were assumed to have died within the past 5 years
(Cunningham and others 1981). Trees that torched in the
fire are included in this estimate.
Because this method estimates mortality over approxi-
mately the past 5 years, it may slightly underestimate
mortality for the 7-year-old NW I/II burn and slightly over-
estimate mortality for the other (4-year-old) burns. Because
condition classes of dead trees and numbers of torched trees

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
39
Effect of Prescribed Burning on Mortality of Presettlement Ponderosa Pines in Grand Canyon National Park
Kaufmann and Covington
were not recorded in the first field season, field estimates
using all tallied dead trees (but not including torched trees)
are substituted for the Walhalla sites. These numbers over-
estimate mortality by including many snags that died before
the prescribed burn.
“Lab” estimates were based on dendrochronological data.
Green trees were assumed alive if the ORD was equal to or
1 year less than the date of sampling. They were assumed
dead or dying after the burn if the core showed no growth for
2 years or more before the date of sampling, but were still
growing in the year of the burn. It is well established that
ponderosa pines showing no basal area growth for 2 years or
more have little chance of survival (Rogers and others 1981;
Mast and Veblen 1994). Recent snags were assumed to
have died after the fire if their ORD was in or after the year
of the burn. Snags with earlier ORDs were assumed dead or
dying at the time of the burn.
The field estimates are expressed as the percentage of
the trees that were alive at the time of the burn but had died
by the date of sampling. The lab estimates include some
near-future mortality. Neither type of estimate can be
directly compared among sites because of the variation in
time lags between the burn dates and the sampling dates
(3 to 7 years—table 1).
Other Data Analyses
Mean tree diameters were compared between live and
dead trees for each site with Bonferroni-corrected approxi-
mate two-tailed t-tests for independent samples with unequal
variances (corrected p = 0.0071; Ott 1993). Mean bole scorch
heights were compared similarly for each burn (corrected
p = 0.0125).
Bole char severity distributions for live and dead trees on
each burn site (excepting Matthes, which was discarded
from this analysis due to inconsistent data collection
methods) were analyzed using a Bonferroni-corrected Chi-
squared contingency test (corrected p = 0.0167, df = 4; Ott
1993). Vigor class distributions for live and dead trees were
also compared with this test, but results were grouped for all
sites (p = 0.05, df = 3). Due to the small number of “AA” trees,
this category was combined with “A.”
Results and Discussion __________
Sampling
Several issues about the way trees were sampled may
influence the conclusions from the data. First, because
different proportions of trees were sampled in different
transects, some sampled trees represent a greater propor-
tion of the tree population than others do. Second, the
crossdating of cores from borderline presettlement trees
revealed that most unsampled borderline trees in the
Grandview area were in fact of presettlement age. No pre-
settlement trees sampled in 1999 were found to be of
postsettlement age. Additionally, few trees tallied in the
transects were under 41 cm diameter at 1.37 m, the cutoff for
what GCNP fire managers consider overstory trees (K. Kerr,
Prescribed Fire Manager, GCNP, personal communication).
Presettlement trees smaller than this were almost all highly
suppressed members of old-growth clumps. Taken together,
these factors suggest that the tree population examined in
this study is comparable to the population specified in the
GCNP overstory mortality objective. However, the youngest
class of presettlement trees (120–150 years old) might be
relatively underrepresented, and the highly suppressed
presettlement trees relatively overrepresented.
The total number of cores for which an ORD could be
determined varied from 31 to 67 per site. The number of
cores from green trees varied from 22 to 64. The number of
cores from dead trees whose ORD was in or after the year of
the fire ranged from 11 to 21 for burned sites and only three
to five for unburned control sites. The Grandview sites have
smaller numbers of useable cores than the North Rim sites.
For many cores, especially those from dead trees, the ORD
could not be determined due to breakage, rot, extreme
suppression, or other reasons. These cores are hereafter
referred to as “unusable.” The proportion of unusable cores
from recent snags ranged from 17 percent to 72 percent, and
tended to be higher in control areas. Because of the relatively
small numbers of dead trees found on these sites, older
classes of snags were more likely to be sampled. The number
of broken and rotten cores increased along the xeric-mesic
gradient between sites (most broken cores were also due to
rot). The average proportion of unreadable dead cores is
comparable to that reported by Mast and Veblen (1994). The
sometimes high proportion of unusable cores may bias lab
estimates due to the undersampling of rot-infected trees.
Estimates of Presettlement Tree Mortality
One GCNP fire management objective is to keep overstory
mortality, as measured 5 years postburn, below 20 percent
over the entire vegetation type in the Park (K. Kerr, Pre-
scribed Fire Manager, GCNP, personal communication).
Because the main purpose of this study was to document
mortality due to factors other than crown damage, mortality
due to widespread crown damage was not documented,
although estimates do include trees that torched individu-
ally. Therefore, landscape level mortality is higher than
numbers reported here.
Field estimates show mortality of presettlement trees in
all burned areas is many times greater than in respective
controls (table 2). This result supports the idea that noncrown
damage from prescribed fires can lead to increased mortality
of presettlement trees. The Swamp Ridge area control site
estimate may be artificially low due to faster rates of snag
decay at this more mesic site. The other control area esti-
mates show mortality rates somewhat lower (0.5–0.75 per-
cent/year) than other studies measuring contemporary back-
ground mortality in mature ponderosa pine (1–2 percent/
year—Avery and others 1976; Hamilton and Edwards 1976;
Mast and others 1999). However, these rates are still much
higher than estimates of mortality rates in presettlement
times (Mast and others 1999).
The field estimate shows 27 percent mortality on the
Hance burn, more than twice that of any other site. This site
has very high levels of dwarf-mistletoe infection (70 percent
of the trees on transects were infected, compared to 40
percent on the Grandview control area and 20 percent on the
Grapevine burn). Infected trees are more likely to torch due
to low witches’ brooms and have reduced vigor (Harrington

40
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Kaufmann and Covington
Effect of Prescribed Burning on Mortality of Presettlement Ponderosa Pines in Grand Canyon National Park
increasing fire intensity and a lack of resources. The second-
highest mortality was found on the dwarf-mistletoe-infested
Hance burn. The Grapevine burn, which had the lowest lab
mortality estimate (comparable to the rates in control areas)
was a spring burn. This suggests that burning in the spring,
when forest floor moisture is high, might reduce basal
damage. However, spring burning may have other undesir-
able consequences. For the burns in the Grandview and
Swamp Ridge Areas, these lab estimates translate to the
death of approximately five presettlement pines/ha. The
Matthes burn, occurring in the study area with the highest
density of mature pines, had a much higher per-unit-area
rate. According to the lab estimate for that burn, approxi-
mately 20 presettlement pines/ha died.
If these mortality estimates are accurate, and mortality
due to crown damage is not widespread, GCNP manage-
ment objectives (less than 20 percent overstory mortality 5
years postburn) are probably being met. However, the
GCNP management objective does not address the possi-
bility of significant mortality after 5 years. Sackett and
Haase (1998), studying presettlement ponderosa pine mor-
tality at the Chimney Spring site in northern Arizona,
found that mortality may take more than a decade to be
fully expressed. Five years after the initial burns at Chim-
ney Spring, “old-growth” mortality averaged approximately
28 percent in the burned areas. Eighteen years after the
burns, the overall old-growth mortality had almost doubled
to 50 percent, and old-growth trees were still dying at
higher rates than those in the unburned control area were.
However, the severe drought in 1996 (the year after most
of the sites in this study were burned) probably was a
contributing factor in the deaths of many trees. Trees were
killed that otherwise may have lingered for years in a
weakened state. It is therefore likely that these mortality
estimates account for a high proportion of the fire-induced
mortality on the burn sites.
Tree, Site, and Burn Characteristics
No statistically significant differences were found in com-
parisons of diameter or age between live and dead trees on
burn sites. Vigor was lower for trees in burned areas than for
trees in control areas, but this was not statistically signifi-
cant, either.
Although not statistically significant, mean bole scorch
height (excluding values above 10 m) was higher for dead
trees than for live trees for all burns. Basal char severity was
higher on recently dead trees on all three burns analyzed.
These results support the hypothesis that basal and/or root
damage is a contributing factor to postburn mortality. Mea-
sures of fire intensity at the bases of trees must be consid-
ered in addition to crown scorch when predicting postfire
mortality of large trees (Ryan 1983; Regelbrugge and Conard
1993). The failure to identify more significant differences in
tree and burn characteristics may be due to the relatively
small sample sizes of recent dead trees from some sites.
Conclusions____________________
Estimates show that mortality levels of presettlement
ponderosa pines in Grand Canyon National Park are higher
Table 2—Presettlement ponderosa pine mortality estimates. These
numbers represent the proportion of trees alive at the
time of the prescribed burn that died between the burn
date and time of sampling. The field mortality estimate
counts all snags retaining needles as dead since the
burns. The estimates in parentheses include snags with
no needles but most fine branches due to the older age
of the NW I/II burn. Because of different data collection
methods, the field estimates for Walhalla sites (in italics)
include all recent snags retaining needles and/or fine
branches. For the lab estimates, a tree is considered
dead/dying if its core shows that it has not put on a growth
ring for 2 years or more. This estimate can be thought of
as including some near-future mortality. All South Rim
sites were sampled 4 years postburn. NW sites were
sampled 7 years postburn, and WP sites 3 years
postburn.
Site
Field estimate
Lab estimate
- - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - -
Grandview area:
Grapevine
10
12
Hance
27
17
Grandview (control)
2
10
Walhalla Plateau:
Matthes
13
23
Walhalla (control)
3
5
Swamp Ridge area:
Northwest I/II
2 (12)
15
Northwest V (control)
1 (2)
5
and Hawksworth 1991) making them more susceptible to
other damage. The field estimate for this site may be inflated
because of the tendency for witches’ brooms to stay alive
many years after most of the tree canopy has died (Mathiasen
1996). This could cause many trees that were effectively
dead before the prescribed burn to retain needles until the
date of sampling.
The Grapevine and Matthes burns show intermediate
mortality rates around 10 percent, while the field estimate
for the Northwest I/II burn is extremely low (2 percent), even
lower than some estimates of background mortality. If snags
of condition class C are included, the estimate is 12 percent.
True mortality on this site is probably somewhere between
these numbers.
The lab estimates, which count trees with cores showing
zero growth for 2 years or more as dead or dying, include
some near-future mortality. They show background mortal-
ity rates roughly comparable to those in other studies (about
1–2 percent/year—Avery and others 1976; Hamilton and
Edwards 1976; Mast and others 1999). These numbers
translate to the death of approximately 2–7 presettlement
pines/ha/decade, depending on the presettlement tree densi-
ties at the different sites. The Grandview control site shows
a higher mortality rate than the two North Rim control sites,
possibly because of higher stress levels of on the former,
more xeric site.
The lab estimates show the highest mortality (23 percent)
for the Matthes burn, which was a prescribed natural fire
that was converted to wildfire status and suppressed due to

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
41
Effect of Prescribed Burning on Mortality of Presettlement Ponderosa Pines in Grand Canyon National Park
Kaufmann and Covington
in areas treated with prescribed fire compared to unburned
areas, even when discounting mortality due to crown dam-
age. Higher mortality is associated with high infection levels
of dwarf-mistletoe on one site, and prescribed natural fire
that was converted to wildfire on another site. The lowest
postburn mortality rate (little higher than control area
mortality) occurred on a spring burn, possibly because higher
forest floor and soil moisture levels reduced basal damage.
Because of the small sample size (four burns), it is not
possible to generalize these associations between height-
ened mortality and other factors. More postburn mortality
surveys are needed.
Postburn mortality as measured on these four prescribed
burns is probably within management objectives of the
GCNP fire program. Because of the 1996 drought, future
mortality on these burns is predicted to be relatively low.
However, the reduced vigor of trees in the burns in this
study, as well as results from other studies, suggest that
mortality rates can remain abnormally high long after 5
years postburn in some cases. Methods of predicting future
mortality (for example, from annual growth increment data)
should be used to supplement studies such as this one.
Mortality estimates based on dendrochronological data in
unburned control areas agreed closely with background
mortality estimates from other studies. These may be much
higher than historical rates, probably because of increased
competitive stresses due to higher tree densities in contem-
porary forests. The 1996 drought might also have elevated
the mortality rates in the control areas. The unburned area
surveyed on the xeric South Rim shows especially high
mortality (more than 2 percent/year). These figures high-
light the need to reinvigorate presettlement trees as well as
merely protecting them.
This study could not identify tree characteristics associ-
ated with increased risk of postfire mortality. Studies mea-
suring tree characteristics both before and after burns are
probably better suited than retrospective surveys to gather
this type of information. Measures of basal fire intensity
were higher on dead trees than live trees in all burns. This
agrees with results from other studies and argues that these
measures can be important in predicting postburn mortality
of mature trees.
References _____________________
Altschul, J. H. and Fairley, H. C. 1989. Man, models and man-
agement: an overview of the archaeology of the Arizona Strip
and the management of its cultural resources. USDA Forest
Service and USDI Bureau of Land Management. Report contract
# 53-8371-6-0054.
Avery, Charles C.; Larson, Frederic R., and Schubert, Gilbert H.
1976. Fifty-year records of virgin stand development in south-
western ponderosa pine. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service.
GTR-RM-22. 71 p.
Bennett, P. S. The fire ecology of the ponderosa pine ecosystem of the
North Rim forests, Grand Canyon National Park; 1974; Report on
file at Grand Canyon National Park, AZ.
Bonnicksen, Thomas M. and Stone, Edward C. 1985. Restoring
naturalness to natural parks. Environmental Management.
9(6):479–486.
Brown, T. C. and Daniel, Terry C. 1984. Modeling ponderosa pine
scenic beauty: concepts and application to ponderosa pine. Fort
Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service. Research Paper RM-256. 35 p.
Covington, W. W.; Fulé, Peter Z.; Moore, Margaret. M.; Hart,
Stephen C.; Kolb, Thomas E.; Mast, Joy N.; Sackett, Stephen S.,
and Wagner, Michael R. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in
ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of Forestry.
95(4):23–29.
Covington, W. Wallace; Everett, Richard L.; Steele, Robert;
Irwin, Larry L.; Daer, Tom A, and Auclair, Allan N. D. 1994.
Historical and anticipated changes in forest ecosystems of the
Inland West of the United States. Journal of Sustainable
Forestry. 2(1/2):13–63.
Covington, W. Wallace and Moore, Margaret M. 1994. Postsettlement
changes in natural fire regimes and forest structure: Ecological
restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine forests. Journal of
Sustainable Forestry. 2(1/2):153–181.
Cunningham, James B.; Balda, Russel P, and Gaud, William S.
1980. Selection and use of snags by secondary cavity-nesting
birds of the ponderosa pine forest. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest
Service. Research Paper RM-222. 15 p.
Feeney, Shelley R.; Kolb, Thomas E.; Covington, W. Wallace, and
Wagner, Michael R. 1998. Influence of thinning and burning
restoration treatments on presettlement ponderosa pines at the
Gus Pearson Natural Area. Canadian Journal of Forest Re-
search. 28:1295–1306.
Fiedler, Carl E.; Arno, Stephen F., and Harrington, Michael G.
Flexible silvicultural and prescribed burning approaches for
improving health of ponderosa pine forests. In: Covington, W.
Wallace and Wagner, Pamela K., technical coordinators. Confer-
ence on adaptive ecosystem restoration and management: resto-
ration of Cordilleran conifer landscapes of North America; Flag-
staff, AZ. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service: 69–74.
Fulé, Peter Z.; Heinlein, Thomas A.; Covington, W. Wallace, and
Moore, Margaret M. [In review]. Fire regimes on an environmen-
tal gradient in Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, USA.
Hamilton, D. A. and Edwards, B. M. 1976. Modeling the probability
of individual tree mortality. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service.
Research Paper INT-185.
Harrington, Michael G. and Hawksworth, Frank G. 1990. Interac-
tions of fire and mistletoe on mortality of southwestern ponderosa
pine. In: Conference on the effects of fire in management of
southwestern natural resources; Tucson, AZ: 234–240.
Keen, F. P. 1943. Ponderosa pine tree classes redefined. Journal of
Forestry. 41:241–253.
Mast, Joy Nystrom; Fulé, P. Z.; Moore, Margaret M.; Covington, W.
Wallace, and Waltz, Amy E. M. 1999. Restoration of presettle-
ment age structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ecologi-
cal Applications. 9(1):228–239.
Mast, Joy Nystrom and Veblen, Thomas T. 1994. A dendrochrono-
logical method of studying tree mortality patterns. Physical
Geography. 15(6):529–542.
Mathiasen, Robert L. 1996. Dwarf mistletoes in forest canopies.
Northwest Science. 70:61–71.
Moore, Margaret M.; Covington, W. Wallace, and Fulé, Peter Z.
1999. Reference conditions and ecological restoration: a south-
western ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological Applications.
9(4):1266–1277.
Ott, R. Lyman. 1993. An Introduction to statistical methods and
data analysis. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company.
Regelbrugge, Jon C. and Conard, Susan G. 1993. Modeling tree
mortality following wildfire in Pinus ponderosa forests in the
central Sierra Nevada of California. International Journal of
Wildland Fire. 3(3):139–148.
Rogers, James J.; Prosser, Joseph M.; Garret, Lawrence D., and
Ryan, Michael G. 1984. ECOSIM: A system for projecting
multiresource outputs under alternative management regimes.
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service.
Ryan, Kevin C. 1983. Techniques for assessing fire damage to trees.
In: Lotan, James E., editor. Proceedings of the symposium: fire-
its field effects; Jackson, WY. Missoula, MT and Pierre, SD:
published jointly by The Intermountain Fire Council and The
Rocky Mountain Fire Council: 2–10.
Sackett, Stephen S. and Haase, Sally M. 1998. Two case histories
for using prescribed fire to restore ponderosa pine ecosystems
in northern Arizona. In: Pruden, Teresa L. and Brennan,
Leonard A., editors. Fire in ecosystem management: shifting
the paradigm from suppression to prescription. Tall Timbers
Fire Ecology Conference Proceedings, No. 20; Tallahassee, FL.
Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research Station: 380–389.

42
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Kaufmann and Covington
Effect of Prescribed Burning on Mortality of Presettlement Ponderosa Pines in Grand Canyon National Park
Sackett, Stephen S.; Haase, Sally M., and Harrington, Michael G.
1996. Lessons learned from fire use for restoring southwestern
ponderosa pine ecosystems. In: Covington, W. Wallace and Wagner,
Pamela K., technical coordinators. Conference on adaptive eco-
system restoration and management: restoration of Cordilleran
conifer landscapes of North America; Flagstaff, AZ. Fort Collins,
CO: USDA Forest Service: 54–61.
Stokes, M. A. and Smiley, T. L. 1968. Introduction to Tree Ring Data.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Swezy, D. M. and Agee, J. K. 1991. Prescribed-fire effects on fine-
root and tree mortality in old-growth ponderosa pine. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research. 21:626–634.
Taylor, Roger. 1996. Mt. Trumbull Ecosystem Restoration Project.
In: Covington, William Wallace and Wagner, Pamela K., techni-
cal coordinators. Conference on adaptive ecosystem restoration
and management: restoration of Cordilleran conifer landscapes
of North America; Flagstaff, AZ. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest
Service: 75–79.
Thomas, J. W.; Anderson, R. G.; Maser, C., and Bull, E. L. 1979.
Snags in wildlife habitats in managed forests, the Blue Moun-
tains of Oregon and Washington. Agriculture Handbook no. 553.
Corvallis, OR: USDA Forest Service: 60–77.
Thomas, Terri L. and Agee, James K. 1986. Prescribed fire effects on
mixed conifer forest structure at Crater Lake, Oregon. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research. 16:1082–1087.
Thompson, W. G. 1940. A growth rate classification system of
southwestern ponderosa pine. Journal of Forestry. 38:547–553.
Verkamp, M. M. 1940. History of Grand Canyon National Park
[M.A. Thesis]. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona (reprinted by
Grand Canyon Pioneers Society, Flagstaff, AZ).
Wagener, W. W. 1961. Guidelines for estimating the survival of
fire-damaged trees in California. Berkeley, CA: USDA Forest
Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. Miscellaneous
Paper 60. 11 p.
White, A. S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a south-
western ponderosa pine stand. Ecology. 66:589–594.
Wolf, Joy J. and Mast, Joy Nystrom. 1998. Fire history of mixed-
conifer forests on the North Rim, Grand Canyon National Park,
Arizona. Physical Geography. 19(1):1–14.
