Dry Lake, Bar-T-Bar, Fort Valley get funding 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
10/06/2000 
 
Millions of dollars for forest restoration, land preservation and protection of 
archeological sites in northern Arizona received final congressional approval Thursday in 
a landmark $18.8 billion Interior Department bill expected to be signed this weekend by 
President Clinton.  
The local campaign to save the Dry Lake volcanic caldera southwest of Flagstaff 
received an unexpected $750,000 while the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern 
Arizona University landed $8.8 million to move forward with research and forest 
thinning projects like the one proposed for Fort Valley.  
The Interior appropriations bill also includes $3 million to purchase the Bradshaw Ranch 
in the Coconino National Forest in Sedona's Red Rock Country. The ranch contains 
numerous archeological and cultural sites more than 8,000 years old.  
More than $3 million was also approved to complete the purchase of the 6,500-acre Bar-
T-Bar Ranch and Tremaine Lake in the Coconino National Forest southeast of Flagstaff.  
NAU President Clara Lovett said the multimillion-dollar appropriation from Congress is 
a "tribute" to Ecological Restoration Institute Director Wallace Covington and his staff of 
researchers and scientists.  
"It is also a splendid example of cooperation among political leaders in the interest of 
addressing critical regional and national issues," added Lovett.<  
After a wildfire season that saw nearly 7 million acres consumed across the West, a 
bipartisan group of congressional officials forged support for massive increases in the 
Interior and Agriculture Department's firefighting, prevention and forest thinning 
budgets. The NAU Institute, recognized as a national leader in ecological restoration, was 
a prime beneficiary of congressional concern about congested forests and threat of 
catastrophic wildfires.  
"National attitudes and polices are being influenced by the timely and critical work being 
done at the Institute, including restoration-based fuels treatment, community education 
and outreach and forest by-product market research," said U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz.  
Kyl was praised today by Grand Canyon Trust President Geoff Barnard for his work 
securing funds for northern Arizona and the campaign to acquire 247 acres of rare 

wetland at Dry Lake. After developer Bob Semple and others agreed to sell the property 
to Grand Canyon Trust for $3 million, federal officials indicated that receiving funding 
for the preservation effort would be nearly impossible this year.  
"Sen. Kyl deserves a lot of kudos for this," said Barnard, "We were very late getting into 
this fiscal year's funding cycle ... Sen. Kyl worked very hard and I want to give him a lot 
of credit for this."  
Barnard is hopeful that the infusion of $750,000 plus community pledges of $750,000 
will convince Semple to sign closing papers to transfer the land to Grand Canyon Trust. 
Semple was supposed to close on the Dry Lake property in June, but has failed to do so, 
said Barnard.  
"All along he's been skeptical that the community could get together and buy this 
property," said Barnard, adding, "We think the money on the table will help with that."  
Barnard said Kyl is also trying to secure extra land preservation funds that have been 
budgeted this year. If so, the effort to acquire Dry Lake will get an added boost, he said.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at 556-2251 or by e-mail at gghioto@azdailysun.com.  
 
