 
 
Forest restoration partners play hardball 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
12/25/1999 
After seeing its bold program to log ponderosa pine forests around Flagstaff derailed in 
1999 by a New Mexican environmental group, a coalition of conservationists, 
government and industry officials has responded with threats of legal action and a 
campaign to slash the opposition's private funding.  
The 18-member Grand Canyon Forests Partnership, which includes Grand Canyon Trust, 
Northern Arizona University, the city of Flagstaff and the Forest Service, says the 
100,000-acre restoration project will improve forest health and reduce the risk of 
catastrophic wildfires.  
From its small office in Santa Fe staffed by a few modestly paid employees, Forest 
Guardians appealed the project, claiming the Forest Service failed to assess the long-term 
impact of the "massive logging project" on wildlife, tourism and the environment.  
Two weeks ago, Regional Forester Eleanor Towns rejected the Guardians' argument and 
authorized the first stage of the plan, the 10,000-acre Fort Valley Forest Ecosystem 
Restoration Project.  
The victory came too late for the Partnership to begin work in Fort Valley this year, and 
officials don't expect logging operations to begin until spring.  
As the Guardians mull filing a lawsuit challenging Towns' decision, the Partnership is on 
the offensive:  
* At recent meetings, Partnership officials have discussed the merits of having the city 
file a lawsuit against Forest Guardians for jeopardizing public safety.  
* During one session, an adviser to the coalition suggested members contact the FBI 
"regarding the possible terrorist links" between Forest Guardians and the militant 
environmental group, Earth First!.  
* The Ponderosa Fire Advisory Council, a member of the partnership representing nine 
area fire departments, contacted five nonprofit foundations that provide Forest Guardians 
with funding to operate its Santa Fe office.  

"Their obstructionist tactics, including deliberate misrepresentation of science, project 
goals, and operational procedures, is an immediate danger to our forests. Their group is 
anything but a 'guardian,'" wrote the fire council to the Tides Foundation, Pew Charitable 
Trusts, Ruth Mott Fund Grants, Nathan Cummings Foundation and the Schumann 
Foundation.  
"As benefactors of Forest Guardians, we ask you to fully examine the manner in which 
funding you provide is utilized. Consider the negative impact this group is having on the 
people and environment of this area. Utilize your influence to curtail their destructive 
pattern," concluded the PFAC letter.  
In a Partnership news release written last summer included in the PFAC letter, Brett 
KenCairn, former executive director of the Grand Canyon Forests Foundation, which 
administers the Partnership, blasted Forest Guardians for appealing the project.  
KenCairn accused the group of ignoring the "forest health crisis" in northern Arizona and 
refusing to offer any substantive alternative to thinning forests to prevent wildfires.  
"We have traveled to Santa Fe twice in six months to brief the Guardians on the project 
and invite their participation. It seems a bit disingenuous to offer a series of boilerplate 
criticisms of a project they have spent less than a week reviewing," said KenCairn.  
The news release also accused the Guardians of "promoting a dangerous misconception" 
by delaying the project.  
'SLANDEROUS' LETTER  
To Sam Hitt, executive director of Forest Guardians, the PFAC letter and the 
Partnership's statements to the foundations are "misleading and slanderous" and clearly 
aimed at pulling the plug on his funding sources.  
Hitt added that his organization has a moral obligation and the legal right to challenge 
"one of the largest logging operations in the West."  
"First they trash democracy, then they clearcut the forest," said Hitt, giving his take on 
the Partnership strategy against the Guardians.  
"It just shows how far some are willing to go to impose their logging agenda. That's why 
it's important for citizens who care about forests to resist being silenced." he added.  
But James Wheeler, a Flagstaff fire official and PFAC member, defended the letter to the 
foundations.  
One of the project's goals is to reduce the chances of catastrophic fire by removing 
clusters of trees and congested vegetation. The project is a serious undertaking with 
consequences for firefighters, landowners and public safety, he said.  

"Our number one duty to the community" is to protect property and lives, said Wheeler.  
"But we have a moral obligation to our firefighters, who put themselves in harm's way, to 
try and lessen the impact of a wildfire," he said.  
Unlike other conservation and environmental groups, only the Guardians have refused to 
join the partnership and help shape the restoration project, noted Wheeler.  
For example, the Southwest Center for Biological Diversity expressed concerns about 
preserving old growth and the Partnership agreed to limit thinning to only trees less than 
16 inches in diameter.  
"Forest Guardians, despite repeated attempts to involve them, chose to remain uninvolved 
during the search for solutions and consensus-building. Instead, they appealed the Forest 
Service decision to proceed with the project. In so doing, they closed their eyes to the 
condition of our area, closed their ears to the demands of the local populace, and closed 
their minds to reaching scientifically based, publicly supported solutions," wrote PFAC to 
the foundations.  
"Meanwhile, the community stays at risk. So when a group refuses to come to the table to 
be part of the process and only wants to be obstructionist, then we have a moral 
imperative to point that out," said Wheeler in an interview.  
According to Wheeler, PFAC did receive some response from the letters, including one 
foundation that "indicated they would be looking into the information and appreciated the 
information."  
Hitt said that the Guardians have participated in the process by filing appeals that 
examine deficiencies in the restoration effort. Until the Forest Service adequately 
assesses the impact posed by logging on 100,000 acres, the Guardians will raise 
objections, he said.  
Hitt also added that he met with KenCairn and discussed restoration issues.  
Before KenCairn resigned from the Foundation, Hitt said he recommended that state 
Trust Lands be included in the restoration project and leased by the partnership to ensure 
their preservation.  
PURSUE A LAWSUIT?  
Besides the letters to the foundations, some Partnership members suggested the city of 
Flagstaff pursue a lawsuit against the Guardians.  
"The city has not ruled out a ... suit on the Guardians, based upon diminishing safety to 
the public," said statements attributed to Wheeler, according to Partnership meeting 
minutes of Nov. 9.  

City officials, including Mayor Christopher Bavasi and City Manager David Wilcox, said 
the talk about filing a lawsuit was just that: talk.  
The danger posed to the community by wildfire was taken very seriously and fueled 
discussion about a suit to hold the Guardians responsible for their actions, said Bavasi.  
A lawsuit was an option under discussion, but it has since been dropped, said Wilcox.  
Hitt said he resents the notion fostered by city officials that the Guardians are not 
concerned over fire danger.  
"Good research" shows that taking preventive measures such as clearing around 
structures can protect property and save lives in a fire "instead of clearcutting thousands 
of acres," said Hitt.  
Bradley L. Ack, director of conservation field programs for Grand Canyon Trust, said he 
opposed the writing of letters to Guardian funders and the lawsuit option being 
considered by the city.  
He stressed that the Partnership knew nothing about the letters and has not supported the 
lawsuit option. Members of the Partnership are free to pursue the courses best for them, 
he said.  
But speaking for the Grand Canyon Trust, Ack supported the Guardians' right to appeal 
the project.  
"We believe very strongly in the right of public interest groups to pursue all means at 
their disposal to see that the law is obeyed and the public interest is met. The Guardians 
are only doing things that are laid out in administrative law ... we are firmly and 
vigorously opposed to any attempt to chill or stifle that participation," said Ack.  
APOLOGY SOUGHT  
The Guardians have asked Grand Canyon Trust officials to apologize to the funders 
contacted by PFAC. The Trust says it had nothing to do with the letters sent by PFAC.  
Meanwhile, Hitt said the Guardians will continue to mull their option to challenge the 
restoration project in U.S. District Court.  
Though none of the foundations contacted by PFAC has pulled their funding or chastised 
the group, Hitt said he is taking the threat of a lawsuit filed by the city of Flagstaff 
seriously.  
The Guardians may have a high profile, as evidenced by its activism in grazing, logging 
and other environmental issues, but it's a small outfit. Hitt said he has about six 
employees and the highest salary barely tops $24,000 annually.  

Overall, Hitt said the encounter with the Partnership has been disappointing.  
But it's been that kind of year for the Guardians, he noted.  
This past year somebody put a pipe bomb in the group's mailbox. Luckily it did not 
detonate.  
"It was powerful enough to blow a car over ...," said Hitt.  
The Guardians are currently being sued by loggers in Minnesota for $600,000 in damages 
after filing an appeal to the Forest Service to block a timber sale.  
"I don't know what else could happen. We've been kind of hammered lately," said Hitt.  
