United States
Department of
Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range
Experiment Station
Fort Collins,
Colorado 80526
General Technical
Report RM-246
An Ecological Basis for
Ecosystem Management

Preface
This report was prepared by the Southwestern Regional Ecosystem Management
Study Team composed of management and research biologists. The USDA Forest
Service Southwestern Region’s Regional Forester, Larry Henson, and the Rocky
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station Director, Denver Burns, chartered
this team to recommend an ecological basis for ecosystem management. This report
is not intended to provide details on all aspects of ecosystem management; it simply
provides information and makes recommendations for an ecological basis for
ecosystem management. The report is not a decision document. It does not allocate
resources on public lands nor does it make recommendations to that effect.
The report of this Study Team may be relied upon as input in processes initiated
under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), National Forest Management
Act (NFMA), Endangered Species Act (ESA), Administrative Procedures Act
(APA), and other applicable laws. The information contained in this report is general
in nature, rather than site specific. Implementation of ecosystem management and
allocation of resources on Forest Service administered lands is the responsibility of
the National Forest System in partnership with Forest Service Research and State and
Private Forestry. Implementation is done through Forest and project plans that are
subject to the NEPA process of disclosing the effects of proposed actions and
affording the opportunity for public comment. The Southwestern Region follows a
planning process for projects called Integrated Resource Management (IRM).
The opinions expressed by the authors do not necessarily represent the policy or
position of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Forest Service, The Nature
Conservancy, or the Arizona Game and Fish Department.
The Study Team acknowledges the valuable input of more than 50 individuals
from various agencies, universities, professional organizations, and other groups
who provided thoughtful comments of an earlier draft of this document. Some of their
comments are included in Appendix 3.
(Upper left) Road expansion to accommodate increased traffic in forested areas. Photo from
Bev Driver.
(Upper right) Cypripedium calceolus, a rare species found on the Santa Fe National Forest,
New Mexico. Fine filter analyses help protect uncommon species. Photo by Reggie Fletcher.
(Lower) Small openings in a ponderosa pine forest created by hotspots in a low-intensity
fire. Photo by Ron Moody.

An Ecological Basis for
Ecosystem Management
Merrill R. Kaufmann,1 Russell T. Graham, Douglas A. Boyce Jr.,
William H. Moir, Lee Perry, Richard T. Reynolds,
Richard L. Bassett, Patricia Mehlhop, Carleton B. Edminster,
William M. Block, and Paul Stephen Corn
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station and
Southwestern Region, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture2
May 1994
USDA Forest Service
General Technical Report RM 246
1Author affiliations are listed in Appendix 1.
2The Rocky Mountain Station is headquartered in Fort Collins. Colorado, in cooperation with
Colorado State University; the Southwestern Region is headquartered in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Contents
Page
A NEED FOR CHANGE .............................................................................................. 1
THE HUMAN DIMENSION IN ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT ........................... 1
GUIDING PRINCIPLES .............................................................................................. 3
APPROACH.................................................................................................................. 5
Analysis Framework.................................................................................................. 5
A System for Ecosystem Needs Assessment ............................................................ 6
INTEGRATING ECOSYSTEMS AND HUMAN NEEDS......................................... 11
ADMINISTERING ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT ................................................ 11
Analysis Responsibilities and Coordination ............................................................. 11
Implementation .......................................................................................................... 12
RESEARCH NEEDS .................................................................................................... 12
LITERATURE CITED ................................................................................................. 13
GLOSSARY .................................................................................................................. 16
APPENDIX 1: Members of the Southwestern Regional Ecosystem
Management Study Team .......................................................................................... 18
APPENDIX 2: Charter of the Southwestern Regional Ecosystem
Management Study Team .......................................................................................... 19
APPENDIX 3: Sampling of Reviewers’ Comments .................................................... 20

1
A NEED FOR CHANGE
“When our rifles were empty, the old wolf was down.
. . .We reached the old wolf in time to watch a fierce green
fire dying in her eyes. I realized then, and have known
ever since, that there was something new to me in those
eyes — something known only to her and to the  moun-
tain. I was young then, and full of trigger itch; I thought
that because fewer wolves meant more deer, that no
wolves would mean hunters’ paradise. But after seeing
the green fire die, I sensed that neither the wolf nor the
mountain agreed with such a view.”
— Aldo Leopold (1949).
Aldo Leopold recognized the concept and need for
ecosystem management decades ago. Deputy Chief James
C. Overbay (1992) stated in a landmark Forest Service
policy speech that “it is time to embrace the concept of
managing ecosystems to sustain both their diversity and
productivity and to chart a course for making this concept
the foundation for sound multiple-use and sustained
An Ecological Basis for Ecosystem Management
Merrill R. Kaufmann, Russell T. Graham, Douglas A. Boyce Jr.,
William H. Moir, Lee Perry, Richard T. Reynolds,
Richard L. Bassett, Patricia Mehlhop, Carleton B. Edminster,
William M. Block, and Paul Stephen Corn
yield management.” To further emphasize this change, F.
Dale Robertson, former Chief of the USDA Forest Service,
directed each Regional Forester to develop guidelines for
using an ecological approach to manage the National
Forests and Grasslands (Robertson 1992). Shortly after his
announcement, the Chief stated that “the Forest Service is
committed to using an ecological approach in the future
management of the National Forests and Grasslands . . . .
By ecosystem management, we mean an ecological
approach will be used to achieve the multiple use
management of our National Forests and Grasslands. It
means that we must blend the needs of people and
environmental values in such a way that the National
Forests and Grasslands represent diverse, healthy,
productive and sustainable ecosystems.”
Because of these needs and in accord with the Chief’s
directive, the Southwestern Regional Forester and the
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station
Director developed a strategy to guide the
implementation of ecology based multiple use
management in the Southwestern Region (Henson and
Montrey 1992). The Southwestern Regional Ecosystem
Management Study Team (see Appendix 1) was
established to assist in this implementation. This report
completes the Study Team’s charter (see Appendix 2) and
represents the Team’s consensus regarding an ecological
approach for ecosystem management. The Southwestern
Region also established two other groups: a Human
Dimensions Study Group to examine integration of social
and biophysical information into ecosystem management,
and an Ecosystem Management Interdisciplinary Team
to address the actual implementation of ecosystem
management on National Forest lands.
THE HUMAN DIMENSION IN
ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT
Humans influence and are influenced by ecosystems.
Thus, humans are an integral part of today’s ecosystems
and fully depend on ecosystems for their well being. Yet
as fundamental as this concept is, there is considerable
tension regarding the role humans have in ecosystems
and the latitude the human race should assume for
manipulating ecosystems for its own purposes. Part of
this tension comes from mixing short term and longterm
aspects of human/ecosystem interaction. In the short run,
ecosystems provide goods and services, including
livelihood, for many people. In the long run, ecosystems
must persist if they are to provide the same opportunities

2
Figure 1. — (Left) Relationship between ecosystem capabilities and
social and economic needs; (Right) Relationship between ecosystem
capabilities and social and economic needs with greater
convergence, resulting in improved ecosystem sustainability.
Because the physical and biological capabilities of ecosystems are
limited in flexibility, convergence requires shifts in social and
economic needs to comply more with ecosystem capabilities.
Heavily used foot trail resulting in extensive soil erosion and
damaged root systems. Photo from Bev Driver.
for later generations. The central goal and problem of
ecosystem management is to balance the short term de-
mands for products and services with the long term need
for persistence.
Society has become concerned about the human
condition and its relationship with ecosystems. We have
learned that we cannot have a wise relationship with our
environment by looking at it piecemeal or by ignoring the
long term effects of our actions. As a species, we have
outdistanced our predators, drastically increased our
numbers, and dominated many of our ecosystems, often
using highly developed technology. Clearly, a number of
global examples exist where ecosystems have been
destroyed or severely damaged, leaving behind societies
that struggle for subsistence. In the United States, the per
capita rate of use of natural resources is one of the highest in
the world. While natural resource utilization has benefited
the economies of local communities, these benefits are offset
by reductions in many important habitats and plant and
animal species they support. Furthermore, we often have
favored certain wildlife species such as elk and deer without
thoroughly understanding the consequences to other
species. These losses are a major reason the Forest Service
and other important land management agencies, as well as
a number of professional and special-interest groups and
organizations, are moving purposefully toward a more
holistic form of managing ecosystems for long term
sustainability.
The task is daunting, reaching far beyond rates of tree
harvest. It includes difficult issues such as air and water
pollution and incompatible conterminous land use for
which mitigation procedures are difficult at best. In many
cases, humans not only depend on ecosystems, they also
are the dominant stress to ecosystems. Much of the human
stress to ecosystems stems from economic philosophy
emphasizing a short term profit motive and from simple
increases in population density, both of which impact
resources and seriously challenge the concept of
sustainability. When advanced technology is factored in,
humans have exhibited great capacity to disrupt
ecosystem processes.
While our study focuses on ecological characteristics
rather than social and economic considerations, clearly
the closer that ecological, social, and economic consider-
ations are in agreement, the greater is the likelihood that
both ecosystems and society will be sustainable (fig. 1).
Much past human impact lies outside the physical and
biological capability of sustainable ecosystems. Much of
this impact may have resulted from human wants far
exceeding needs, and the result has been a significant
deterioration in many ecosystems.
Ecosystem management is a logical step in the
evolution of society’s thinking and understanding about
natural resource management. Ecosystem management
involves a shift in focus from sustaining production of
goods and services to sustaining the viability of
ecological, social, and economic systems now and into the
future. This is brought about by bringing ecosystem
capabilities and social and economic needs into closer
alignment (fig. 1 right). But ecosystems function
sustainably only when they remain within normal bounds
of their physical and biological environment. Thus
ecosystem management will be successful only when
management decisions reflect understanding and
awareness of ecological principles related to sustainability.
It is important to recognize that the human interest is
served if long term ecosystem sustainability is assured,
even if this requires altering certain human activities to
stay within the physical and biological capabilities of
ecosystems. Jack Ward Thomas, current Chief of the USDA
Forest Service, stated: “I share a land ethic put forward by
an early Forest Service employee named Aldo Leopold,
and I quote, ‘A thing is right when it tends to preserve the
integrity, stability, and beauty of the biotic community.’
This ethic accepts short term constraints on human
treatment of land so as to ensure long term preservation
of the integrity, stability, and beauty of the biotic
community. I believe that human activity that is

3
3Grumbine (1992, pp 184 185) presented four main ecosystem management goals or
conservation biology criteria:
1. To protect enough habitat for viable populations of all native species in a given
region.
2. To manage at regional scales large enough to accommodate natural disturbances
(fire,wind, climate change, etc.).
3. To plan over a period of centuries so that species and ecosystems may continue to
evolve.
4. To allow for human use and occupancy at levels that do not result in significant
ecological degradation.
4For example, Kay (1991) examined a range of characteristics associated with
‘ecosystem integrity.” These characteristics include terms often used to describe aspects
of ecosystem dimensions and behavior such as vulnerability, elasticity, inertia, resiliency,
stability, constancy, and persistence. Managing ecosystems to achieve all these charac-
teristics of complex natural systems is not only beyond the scope of this paper, it probably
also is beyond the scope of our understanding of ecosystem behavior and our capacity to
manage.
5“Conservative” management means giving the benefit of doubt to the resource rather
than to its extraction or development. This principle has been elaborated formally as the
“precautionay principle.” The principle applies when there is uncertainty about possible
cumulative effects, irreversible changes, adverse interaction, or negative long term
effects. For a discussion, see Bella and Overton (1972) and Perrings (1991).
consistent with this ethic is properly within the realm of
resource management options. Activity which would not
be consistent with the long term preservation of the biotic
community should be resisted for all but the most
compelling reasons” (Thomas 1994).
Ecosystem management may require new approaches
such as less dependence on raw fiber, better utilization of
existing natural resources, and reduced human demands.
Whether or not society has the capacity or fortitude to
sustain ecosystems, efforts toward this goal probably will
reduce the magnitude of long term social problems
associated with ecosystem abuse. In a later section
(Integrating Ecosystems and Human Needs), we examine
how human aspects of human/ecosystem interaction
might be addressed.
A way to approach ecosystem management is to
identify underlying principles that apply uniformly
regardless of the types of ecosystems being considered.
The following section addresses principles for managing
ecosystem resources.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
In examining ecological aspects of ecosystem manage-
ment, the Study Team formulated guiding principles
based upon the fundamentals of conservation biology.
These principles address portions of the ecosystem
management principles outlined at a USDA Forest
Service (1992a) workshop in Salt Lake City, Utah. The
principles presented here, however, focus primarily on
the ecological aspects of ecosystem management and are
not intended to address all issues of managing ecosystems
at the same level of detail. The guiding principles
presented below are very similar to Grumbine’s (1992)
ecosystem management goals.3 While not all principles
are universally accepted and may be found inadequate in
certain cases,4 the Study Team concluded that the guiding
principles outlined below address most of the biological
problems associated with assuring ecosystem persistence
for future generations, and we hope that the principles
will guide certain aspects of ecosystem management.
Principles of ecosystem management apply regardless of
the degree of past or present human influence on the
ecosystem. The basic idea is to view every action or change
as an effect in a complex system of processes and to evaluate
actions or changes from the perspective of the whole.
Our working assumption is that naturally evolving
ecosystems (minimally influenced by humans) were
diverse and resilient, and that within the framework
of competition, evolutionary pressures, and changing
climates, these ecosystems were sustainable in a broad
sense. Many present ecosystems modified by modern
industrial civilizations do not have all these
characteristics. Our guiding premise for sustaining
ecosystems and protecting biodiversity now and into
the future is to manage ecosystems such that
structure, composition, and function of all elements,
including their frequency, distribution, and natural
extinction, are conserved.5 Conservation focuses on
maintaining and restoring suitable amounts of
representative habitats over the landscape and
through time.
The following guiding principles expand our
premise and provide an ecological basis for analysis
and decisionmaking:
(1) humans are an integral part of today’s
ecosystems and depend on natural ecosystems for
survival and welfare; ecosystems must be sustained
for the longterm well being of humans and other
forms of life;
(2) in ecosystems, the potential exists for all biotic
and abiotic elements to be present with sufficient
redundancy at appropriate spatial and temporal scales
across the landscape;
(3) across adequately large areas, ecosystem
processes (such as disturbance, succession,
evolution, natural extinction, recolonization, fluxes
of materials, and other stochastic, deterministic, and
chaotic events) that characterize the variability found
in natural ecosystems should he present and
functioning;
(4) human intervention should not impact
ecosystem sustainability by destroying or significantly
degrading components that affect ecosystem
capabilities;
(5) the cumulative effects of human influences,
including the production of commodities and
services, should maintain resilient ecosystems
capable of returning to the natural range of
variability if left alone; and
(6) management activities should conserve or
restore natural ecosystem disturbance patterns.
These principles involve an evolutionary change in the
USDA Forest Service’s approach to implementing the
Multiple Use, Sustained Yield Act on National Forest
System lands (Jensen and Everett 1993). Ecosystem
management applies to all ecosystems, ranging from those
having minimal human influence to those severely
impacted by human activity. Ecosystem management
should involve consideration of not only goods and
services but also the viability of ecological, social, and

4
Vegetation mosaic in the landscape near Martinez Creek, San Juan
National Forest, Colorado. Photo from Merrill R. Kaufmann.
economic systems now and in the future. Achieving this
goal will require that ecosystem conditions, natural
processes, natural disturbance patterns, and productive
capabilities be incorporated into decisionmaking
processes so that human needs are considered in relation
to the sustainable capacity of the system. The principles
reflect a need to embrace a land ethic that strives above all
to sustain biological diversity and productive potentials
of ecosystems. Furthermore, the principles may further
encourage the distinction between human needs and
human wants. High rates of consumption of natural
resources stem in part from satisfying human wants and
may not be sustainable.
Ecosystem management should maintain all natural
ecosystems from alpine tundra to deserts, including their
associated riparian and aquatic environments.
Scientifically, the most sound basis for ecosystem
management is to assure that the variation characterizing
ecosystems includes the range of conditions that are
expected at various scales in ecosystems uninfluenced by
humans. Natural conditions are not static; rather, change
is the norm. There is no “balance of nature” (Botkin 1990).
Ecosystems are dynamic entities whose basic patterns
and processes were and are shaped and sustained on the
landscape not only by natural successional processes, but
also by natural abiotic disturbances such as fire, drought,
and wind. These forces often appear to operate
unpredictably both in space and time (frequently
resulting in insect and disease outbreaks), thereby
maintaining a mosaic of successional stages of forest
communities. Collectively, these features influence the
range of natural variability of ecosystem structure,
composition, and function.
Natural resource management based on our guiding
principles would emphasize restoring or maintaining
conditions found in constantly changing natural systems.
This approach would generally preserve all components
of natural ecosystems, but it is not intended to revert all
lands to a natural state. It does mean that management
activities for ecosystems, regardless of the degree of
human impact, must be within the physical and biological
capabilities of the land, based upon an understanding of
ecosystem function. It means saving all the components of
ecosystems, including the structure, composition
(including genetic diversity), and processes that
characterize natural ecosystems. It means protecting and
restoring the pieces of the landscape made uncommon by
human activities, carefully reviewing existing impacts of
nonnative species, and preventing the introduction of
new ones.
Maintaining viable populations of all native animal
and plant species is a central theme of ecosystem
management, although major scientific knowledge gaps
exist. For example, there is limited information
identifying what minimum viable populations are.
Ecosystem management also conserves soils, aquatic and
riparian systems, and water resources. Ecosystem
management cannot assure that rare animals and plants
will reproduce and thrive, even though the protection of
such species is a clear goal in many ecosystems.
Ecosystem management is intended to allow normal
fluctuations in populations that could have occurred
naturally. It should promote biological diversity and
provide for habitat complexity and functions necessary
for diversity to prosper. It should not be a goal to maintain
all present levels of animal populations or to maximize
biodiversity.
Tools for maintaining viable species populations are
likely to be focused on providing habitats in an
appropriate spatial and temporal arrangement. Thus,

5
Using prescribed fire to reduce fuel as a step toward restoring
natural fire disturbance patterns. Photo from Mountainair Ranger
District, Cibola National Forest, New Mexico.
Figure 2. — Approach for ecosystem needs assessment using
ecological principles at appropriate spatial and temporal scales.
vegetation management continues to be a major tool not
only for commodity production, but also for maintaining
and restoring biodiversity and for using habitat manage-
ment to achieve delisting or to avoid listing of threatened
and endangered species. However, management of other
activities such as recreational use and management of
exotic species may also be required (see U.S. Congress
Office of Technology Assessment 1993 for an assessment
of nonindigenous species). Restoration of severely
degraded ecosystems may be impossible, particularly
where native species have been extirpated or where soil
damage is extensive. In such cases restoration may be
partial at best, and it may involve naturalized plants or
animals that have been introduced. Clearly ecosystem
management requires agreement on overarching
principles and extensive cooperation among
stakeholders, including landowners and relevant
administrative bodies.
Ecosystem management includes the production of
goods and services from natural resource systems.
However, it is Iikely to change the amount, types, and
ways that goods and services are provided, and
undoubtedly will require new approaches to managing
human influences. With an emphasis on sustaining
ecosystems, resource managers must evaluate activities
in the context of sustaining natural ecosystem features.
Fire suppression and other activities have changed
ecosystems dramatically. Therefore, considerable
vegetation management activities, such as prescribed fire,
may be desirable to restore the effects of both catastrophic
and low-intensity fires and create conditions that favor
species relying on past disturbance patterns in the
landscape. Tree removal may be desirable to restore stand
structure and composition to levels expected from natural
disturbances. Where these ecological needs are great, the
production of goods and services may occur in the context
of reproducing or restoring former patterns of natural
disturbances. This may entail restricting certain uses on
some lands to assure that ecosystem features are
protected or restored, and selecting other lands, if
available, that are not important for maintaining the same
ecosystem values as places where other societal needs can
be met. In the following section, an approach is discussed
for using the guiding principles listed above in deciding
what actions are needed to conserve ecosystem features.
APPROACH
Analysis Framework
The guiding principles outlined above emphasize the
importance of ecosystem integrity in natural resource
management. Ecological integrity involves consideration
of 
complex, 
multidimensional, 
multiscaled
characteristics (Kay 1991). An approach is recommended
below as a systematic framework through which
ecosystems may be defined and ecological needs can be
evaluated and incorporated into the decisionmaking
process. Other aspects of ecosystem management, such as
integrating humans and ecosystems, are discussed in a
later section. There are several methods of classifying
ecosystems (Aldrich 1963, Bailey 1980, Bourgeron 1993,
Kuchler 1964), and methodology has been presented for
designing urban landscapes (McHarg 1971), but only
recently are models or methods being addressed for
analyzing ecosystem structure and function in relation to
current biodiversity issues (Turner and Gardner1991a;
also see a series of articles on ecosystem management in
the journal Ecological Applications, August 1992, Vol. 2,
No. 3). The hierarchical approach of landscape ecology
provides an approach for applying the guiding principles
and seems appropriate for most natural resource
applications (Jensen and Bourgeron 1993, Turner and
Gardner 1991b).
A useful tool in ecosystem management is an
ecosystem needs assessment (fig. 2). This assessment
provides decisionmakers with information on
characteristics that need to be maintained or created to
ensure healthy, diverse, and sustainable ecosystems. To
manage natural resources effectively, managers need a
means to (1) characterize ecosystems at different
hierarchical spatial and temporal scales, (2) identify

6
patterns and processes important at different scales, and
(3) compare these patterns and processes to a set of
reference conditions using a coarse- and fine-filter
process. This includes selecting an appropriate-sized
ecological unit for analysis. The selection of an ecological
unit should be made in relation to surrounding
landscapes and be based on vegetation, soils, geology,
and geomorphology. This frequently will focus on
watersheds (see the Forest Ecosystem Management
Assessment Team report for a discussion of watershed
analysis in ecosystem management and planning) (FEMAT
1993).
A System for Ecosystem Needs Assessment
Hierarchy
Interactions among the biological and physical
components of ecosystems and environmental conditions
occur at various spatial and temporal scales (Allen and
Hoekstra 1992, Allen and Starr 1982). Small ecosystems
are found within larger ecosystems, individuals occur
within communities, and short-term processes are nested
within longer-term processes. Consequently, ecosystem
processes and functions must be viewed in the context of
a hierarchy of scales in both space and time.
Hierarchically organized systems can be divided into
discrete functional components operating at different
scales of space and time (Simon 1962).
A hierarchical approach provides a framework for
analyzing the temporal and spatial characteristics of
ecosystems (Norton and Ulanowicz 1992, Turner et al.
1993, Urban et al. 1987) (table 1). When the hierarchical
approach is applied to landscape ecology, it provides
methods for defining the functional components of a
system and defines interrelationships among components
at different scales (Urban et al. 1987). A difficulty that
must be overcome in ecosystem analysis and
management, however, is that it is much easier to grasp
spatial scales than temporal scales. We can directly
observe ecosystems at one point in time, yet change with
time is a fundamental characteristic of natural systems.
The temporal aspects of ecosystem behavior must be
included in ecosystem management.
A national hierarchical framework of ecological units
has been developed and is expected to provide guidance
for selection of spatial scales (ECOMAP 1993; see
headings in table 1 and fig. 4). This hierarchy is consistent
with Forest Service planning levels and many maps and
data systems presently in use. The hierarchy also is
consistent with those used by the USDI Fish and Wildlife
Service, Environmental Protection Agency, and other
resource management agencies.
This hierarchy could be used to emphasize ecological
aspects of analyses rather than administrative divisions of
Table 1. — Analysis scales (ECOMAP 1993) and relationship to a partial listing of features of ecological units.
Asteriks (*) indicate spatial scale of applicability for the listed features.

7
Comparison of a pure stand with a stand having ingrowth of
conifers. In the Southwestern Region, roughly half of aspen stands
have experienced significant ingrowth during the last 25 years.
Photos by Wayne Shepperd.
ecosystems. Within this hierarchy, several elements of
ecosystem function and description are defined that could
be used for analysis and decisionmaking (Table 1). The
hierarchy of scale and the elements of ecosystems can then
be used to analyze the function and sustainability of these
ecosystems to compare existing and reference conditions
(discussed in the next subsection).
Reference Conditions
Ecosystem complexity is extremely important
biologically, but it makes the understanding of
ecosystems difficult. Evaluating the status of existing
ecosystems requires a standard or set of reference points
that characterize sustainable ecosystems. Past conditions
may be used as a reference point to predict potential
future conditions. Ecosystems developed over geological
time under the influence of dynamic climatic conditions,
deterministic and stochastic events, and the evolution
and adaptation of associated plants and animals,
including humans. Ecosystems are complex because they
include a number of different elements (plants, animals,
soils, etc.).
Interactions and dependencies among these elements
(ecosystem function) have evolved into a hierarchical
arrangement having a range of spatial and temporal scales
across which the elements and interactions vary. Natural
events characterized by chaos theory at times make
ecosystems less resilient and productive and in some
cases even unsustainable. Clearly any attempt to manage
for volcanic activity or comet collisions with the earth is
beyond ecosystem management, and in that sense
ecosystem management deals with a subset of all natural
variability.
For reference conditions, ideally we would like to have
undisturbed ecosystems available for direct evaluation of
natural ecosystem structure, composition, and function.
In reality, however, most ecosystems have been impacted
and modified by modern or aboriginal humans, and few
ecosystems are available to study in “pure” form (Swanson
et al. 1993). Furthermore, shifts in environmental
conditions in recent centuries range from slight
(temperature and precipitation patterns) to large (40%
higher CO2 concentration than a century ago). The effects
of these shifts are not known, and knowledge of
presettlement ecosystem conditions may be incomplete
as a point of reference. We can, however, obtain much
information from a variety of sources about earlier
ecosystems and environmental conditions (table 2).
Furthermore, we know or can measure present
environmental conditions. Although limited in various
ways, models for forest succession, biogeochemical
processes, and climate change are increasingly available
for assessing ecosystem behavior.
Given that all ecosystems have been impacted directly
or indirectly by human activity, as well as by natural
phenomena, ecosystems are in transition and will
continue to be. Conditions that facilitated the
development of ecosystems in the past may or may not be
available for or conducive to attaining historic natural
conditions in the future. Furthermore, changes in
environment, whether natural or anthropic, may cause
bifurcations in ecosystem development that completely
change the course of ecosystem behavior (Kay 1991).
Nonetheless, knowledge of past conditions combined
with the best and most current biological knowledge of
existing conditions are tools that should be helpful for
conserving as many natural features of ecosystems as
possible.
Reference conditions characterize the variability
associated with biotic communities and native species
diversity. They provide insights to important questions
such as the natural frequency, intensity, and scale of forest
disturbances; the age-class distribution of forest trees;
and the abundance or rareness of plant or animal species
within an ecosystem (Reynolds et al. 1992). Thus,
reference conditions can be used to define target
conditions for sustainability or as reference states to
estimate how current ecosystems differ from historical
ecosystems (Covington and Moore 1992). Depending on
their completeness and accuracy, reference conditions
also may provide an understanding of the ecological
consequences of not returning, or returning only
partially, to the natural state.
Unfortunately, the amount and quality of specific
information on most historical ecosystems prior to
modern disturbance is highly variable. Ecosystem
analysis should involve improved methods to
characterize the reference conditions that provide an
estimate of historical variability (table 2; see also Swanson
et al. 1993). Historical variability must be examined
cautiously, however — changes in atmospheric
conditions since the industrial revolution add uncertainty
regarding how historical variability should be used for
today’s ecosystems. In the interim, the process of
historical characterization of ecosystems and landscapes
lacking heavy human influence may be a sound approach.

8
This historical review also will aid in regional level
analysis by aggregating historic observations to coarser
spatial scales. Temporal (successional) variability within
landscapes may be characterized through mapping of
vegetation types over time to develop an understanding
of the dynamics of vegetation. Long-term modeling will
be needed to elucidate and refine this approach.
Ideally, historical documents and inventories should
provide a significant portion of the data base for
understanding reference conditions, including the range
of variability. Historical references and reconstructions
are generally quite limited, however (Maser 1990).
Historical inventories rarely provide all of the
information needed to reconstruct an adequate
delineation of ecosystems with minimal human impact.
This limitation can be lessened by using as many reference
sites and sources as can be found and through the use of
models. While reference conditions may characterize the
status of ecosystems before significant human
disturbance, they are not necessarily the desired outcome
conditions determined in the ecosystem needs assessment.
Using pre-1870 conditions for reference as
“pre-industrial” is often appropriate for many western
Forest Service lands. Higher mountain areas in the West
have been least impacted by humans. Many of them have
been removed from heavy human impact for decades
through Wilderness, Research Natural Area, and other
protective designations. Some of these areas have been
relatively free from postsettlement activities and may be
very appropriate for defining reference conditions, though
few of them have been studied extensively.
Existing Conditions
There are several sources available for describing
existing conditions in an ecosystem needs assessment. In
the Southwestern Region (Region 3), site-specific data for
existing vegetation are available for many Forest Service
lands in the Rocky Mountain Resource Information
Systems (RMRIS) (USDA Forest Service 1992b) data base.
Potential vegetation may be estimated by using physical
characteristics and plant associations (table 3). In the
Southwestern Region, the Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey
(TES6) Ecosystem Classification System (USDA Forest
Service 1985, 1989) identifies potential natural vegetation
across landscapes. The TES process uses climate to
Table 2. — Examples of analyses and approches for defining reference conditions.

9
Mexican spotted owl, a threatened species found in the Southwestern
Region. Photo by Joe Ganey.
understand the relationship of soil, vegetation, lithology,
and landform by evaluating these components
collectively and simultaneously. The entire Southwestern
Region is presently mapped using the TES system at the
1:250,000 scale; approximately two-thirds of the Region is
mapped at the 1:24,000 scale, and mapping at this scale is
expected to be completed by the end of the decade. In the
Rocky Mountain Region (Region 2), an Integrated
Resource Inventory system is being developed (USDA
Forest Service 1993a) along with a District Production
Database and an Intra-Agency Common Survey
Data Project. It is important that in these data systems
disturbance patterns and mixes of various successional
stages of natural vegetation are considered at the larger
spatial scales and over long periods of time.
Habitat type (plant association) classification methods
developed in the late 1970’s and early 1980’s estimate
potential vegetation at reduced spatial scales. Three
habitat type classifications in the Southwestern Region
were developed and mapping started in the mid–1980’s
(Bassett et al. 1987, Larson and Moir 1986, Larson et al.
1987). The classifications include associated plant
information, references lo TES, a range of productivity,
and limited information on implications for vegetation
management in each habitat type. These classifications
can be used as a basis for developing successional
pathways and to develop broader vegetation maps by
grouping of habitat types where appropriate.
Additionally, other sources of existing vegetation data are
available from aerial photographs, LANDSAT imagery, and
other remote sensing data. The appropriateness of these and
other data bases for evaluating ecosystem conditions needs
critical examination (see section on Research Needs).
Coarse-Filter and Fine-Filter Evaluation
The coarse-filter approach is a strategy for maintaining
the components of aggregates by managing for the
presence of the aggregates in a given area (Bourgeron and
Jensen 1993, Hunter 1990). The concept assumes that a
representative array of communities will contain the
majority of species and that an array of cover types in an
ecoregion will include the appropriate vegetation mosaic.
The Nature Conservancy has estimated that 85–90% of the
species might be saved by using the coarse-filter approach
(Hunter 1990). While the concept has not been thoroughly
tested and validated, it has considerable appeal, and it
may be possible to apply and test the approach
simultaneously (see discussion of adaptive management
in a later section on Analysis Responsibilities and
Coordination). The advantage of the strategy is that it can
operate with relatively little information, if one has enough
knowledge to define the larger aggregate meaningfully.
In addition, the coarse-filter approach is efficient, and it
maintains the integrity of whole ecosystems. A limitation
of the coarse-filter approach is that some smaller scale
elements will fall outside its purview and require
fine-filter strategies. Fine-filters operate at a smaller scale
and can be used to identify species, seral stages, or habitat
types that “slip through” the coarse-filter. Fine-filter
analyses require an examination of the smallest-scale
elements of concern for the coarse-filter analysis under
6TES in this document refers only to Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey and not to threatened,
endangered, or sensitive species.
Table 3. — The availability of vegetation information in relation to
planning and analysis scale.

10
Maps showing general and terrestrial ecosystem information for a portion of the Santa Fe
National Forest. Smalled scaled maps incorporate increasingly detailed information. Maps
provided by Wayne Robbie.

11
Figure 3. — Integration of ecological, economic, and social needs
into a decision analysis model. Economic and social needs are
tested against an ecosystem principles filter (illustrated in inset) to
determine courses of action having the most desirable outcome for
biological integrity and simultaneous ecological, economic, and
social sustainability.
consideration. They should be limited to a small number
of carefully selected elements (Hunter 1990).
A coarse-filter strategy should not be based solely on
communities. It should consider both communities and
the physical environments that they occupy–— in other
words an “ecosystem-based” strategy (Hunter 1991). Scale
is an important issue. A single ecosystem is typically too
small to maintain viable populations of all its species,
especially the larger predators. Therefore, the
coarse-filter approach is best applied on assemblages of
ecosystems (in a hierarchy) that form natural landscape
units, such as watersheds and mountain ranges, and
connect landscape units with habitat corridors (Hunter
1991; Noss 1983, 1987).
Collectively, the information gathered by examining
reference and existing conditions and conducting coarse-
and fine-filter analyses can be used with the guiding
principles to identify ecological needs at appropriate scales.
INTEGRATING ECOSYSTEMS AND HUMAN NEEDS
Knowledge of ecosystem conditions, natural
disturbance patterns and processes, and productive
capabilities must be integrated into the decisionmaking
process before we can compare human demands with the
sustainable capacity of the system. Just as ecological
principles aid in determining ecological needs for
ecosystems, there also are economic and social principles
that aid in defining human needs. Interactions of humans
and natural ecosystems can be assessed with a decision
analysis model that examines the benefits and costs of
alternative courses of action and the risks associated with
each action (fig. 3). Various approaches are being
developed for assisting the decisionmaking process. An
example is the Terrestrial Ecosystem Regional Research
and Analysis (TERRA) decision analysis methodology
(Woodmansee and Riebsame 1993). Slocombe (1993)
outlines additional aspects linking ecosystems and
management and provides examples of regional
planning and management to accomplish ecosystem
management goals. The decision process utilizes
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) procedures
and also other methods for assessing multiple effects of
alternatives (Region 3 Integrated Resource Management
Process, USDA Forest Service 1993b).
Many past natural resource management decisions
have been based primarily on social and economic
considerations (Kennedy and Quigley 1993) and frequently
have involved relatively independent management
schemes to accommodate species or habitat needs (FEMAT
1993). The significant difference brought about by
ecosystem management is that ecosystem needs must be
addressed to a greater extent than in the past. To
accomplish this, the decision analysis model should
include an “ecosystem principles filter” by which all
courses of action are compared with the ecosystem
guiding principles discussed earlier (fig. 3). This filter, not
related to the coarse and fine filters discussed earlier,
helps determine which economic and social needs can be
met while sustaining ecosystems (corresponding to the
shaded areas in fig. 1). Those that stay within the guiding
principles (i.e., pass through the ecosystem principles
filter) will preserve biological integrity and will lead to
ecological, economic, and social sustainability. Those
failing to pass the ecosystem principles filter may
contribute to species loss, degradation of environments,
economic instability, social dissatisfaction, litigation, etc.
ADMINISTERING ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT
Analysis Responsibilities and Coordination
Hierarchical analysis is scale-dependent and requires
coordination and information flow among agencies and
other stakeholders and across administrative levels (see
Jensen and Bourgeron 1993 for examples of analysis across
planning scales). Various administrative levels within the
Forest Service and its partner agencies will have

12
Figure 4. — Relationship of ecosystems needs assessment for
various spatial scales of ecological units to Forest Service
administrative structure.
responsibilities in ecosystem needs assessment.
Administrative activities must be structured to address
ecosystem needs over large spatial and temporal ranges.
Information must flow across the full range of
administrative levels (fig. 4), and this information flow
must include both data and the results of analyses. In
many cases information is limited, and managers must
work closely with research scientists to incorporate new
in- formation as it becomes available.
Adaptive management procedures are being
developed to accommodate changes in knowledge in
management activities (FEMAT 1993). Everett et al. (1993)
noted the following features of adaptive management: (1)
it is based on the concept of management as an
experiment, (2) it accepts uncertainties, (3) it requires
quantification of objectives, (4) it emphasizes a stated
understanding of system operation, and (5) it provides a
rapid feedback and evaluation loop for redirection of the
experiment. These features are important in keeping
ecosystem management aligned with the best knowledge
available while coping with information gaps. The
treatment of management activities as experiments ments
is critical because it provides an avenue to test unproven
concepts believed intuitively to be correct, and it provides
focus for monitoring the results of these activities.
Ecosystem boundaries generally do not follow
administrative boundaries. Therefore, good ecosystem
management should involve all land ownerships. To do
this, managers should interact with all administrative
units, including federal, state, and local agencies
responsible for land or resource management, and private
landowners. Furthermore, expertise for ecosystem
management may be found not only within the Forest
Service (experiment stations and regional and Forest
offices), but also in other agencies, universities, natural
history museums, nongovernmental organizations, and
the private sector.
Implementation
The following recommendations may be considered in
implementing ecosystem management within the Forest
Service.
1. As part of the current efforts on re-inventing the Forest
Service, review administrative and budgeting structures
and staffing to best implement ecosystem management.
Present structures may not work effectively for
accomplishing ecosystem management objectives.
2. For each application of ecosystem management, follow
adaptive management procedures by outlining steps
for scientifically evaluating the consequences of the
management activities.
3. Integrate ecosystem management into the Land
Management Planning process and Forest Plan revisions.
4. Create a Regional Implementation Review Team that
meets monthly to review National Forest ecosystem
management projects. This team should include
scientists as members. This Review Team would assure
consistent application of the guiding principles in
National Forest management.
5. Encourage the use of ecosystem management
principles in all initiatives involving forest management,
such as the forest health and pinyon-juniper initiatives.
6. Determine appropriate analysis responsibilities at
interregional, regional, forest, and district levels to
address temporal and spatial scaling issues. Establish
the teams to accomplish the analysis.
7. Coordinate data collection and data management
methodology among western regions to assure that data
sets for larger spatial scales can be integrated for analyses.
8. Develop effective methods for helping all agencies,
publics, and other clients become aware of ecosystem
management principles and of the limitations of
ecosystems to preserve and/or produce commodities.
9. Use adaptive management in all phases of
implementing ecosystem management, from staff
involvement to technology transfer.
RESEARCH NEEDS
Coordinated research conducted by various agencies
and organizations would address important knowledge
gaps in implementing ecosystem management. The
following list includes some of the topics requiring re-
search attention.
1. Develop a methodology for determining reference
conditions and/or historical conditions.
2. Determine appropriate inventory data bases for present
conditions and develop procedures for data analyses
for monitoring ecosystem changes. This may include
evaluation of the suitability of TES, RMRIS, ECODATA,
etc.

13
3. Develop ecological risk assessment models and data
bases for assessing the likely ecological consequences
of various management options.
4. Develop and evaluate appropriate ecological process
models for forest succession and for natural
disturbances that examine the likely consequences of
human disturbance on future conditions.
5. Develop validation procedures for models in use or
considered for use.
6. Study the ecological implications and consequences of
exotic species and of mitigation measures.
7. Study species extirpation, including monitoring
techniques, ecological consequences, and mitigation
measures.
8. Study the consequences of ecosystem changes on
biogeochemical cycles.
9. 9. Formulate regional conservation strategies
including land allocations, analysis procedures, and
management prescription designs at subregional scales.
LITERATURE CITED
Aldrich, J. W. 1963. Life areas of North America. Journal
of Wildlife Management 27: 530-531.
Allen, T. F. H. and Hoekstra, T. W. 1992. Toward a unified
ecology. Columbia University Press, New York, NY.
384 p.
Allen, T. F. H. and Starr, T. B. 1982. Hierarchy: perspectives
for ecological complexity. University of Chicago Press,
IL.
Bailey R. G. 1980. Description of the ecoregions of the
United States. USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC.
Misc. Publ. 1391. 77 p.
Bailey, R. G. 1989. Ecoregions of the continents. Supplement
to Environmental Conservation 16(4): 1 map.
Bailey, R. G., Avers, P., King, T., and McNab, W. H. 1993.
Description of the eco-subregions (sections) of the United
States. USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC. (In press.)
Baisan, C. H. and Swetnam, T. W. 1990. Fire history on a
desert mountain range: Rincon Mountain Wilderness,
Arizona, USA. Canadian Journal of Forest Re- search 20:
1559–1569.
Bartlett, J. H. 1854. Personal narrative of the explorations
and incidents in Texas, New Mexico, California, Sonora,
and Chihuahua, connected with the United States and
Mexico boundary commission during the years 1850,
’51, ’52 and ’53. D. Appleton & Co, New York.
Bassett, D., Larson, M., Moir, W. H., Fletcher, R., Ahuja, S.,
Muldabin, E., and William, M. 1987. Forest and
woodland habitat types (plant associations) of Arizona
south of the Mogollon Rim and Southwestern New
Mexico, Edition 2. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern
Region, Albuquerque, NM.
Bella, D. A. and Overton, W. S. 1972. Environmental
planning and ecological possibilities. Journal of
Sanitary Engineering Division, American Society of
Civil Engineers 98: 579-592.
Betancourt, J. L. and Van Devender, T. R. 1981. Holocene
vegetation in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. Science 214:
656-658.
Betancourt, J. L., Van Devender, T. R., and Martin, P. S.
(eds.) 1990. Packrat middens, the last 40,000 years of
biotic change. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ,
468 p.
Bourgeron, P. S. 1993. The Nature Conservancy, Boulder,
CO. Personal communication, January.
Botkin, D. B. 1990. Discordant harmonies, a new ecology
for the Twenty-First Century. Oxford University Press,
New York. 241 p.
Bourgeron, P. S. and Jensen, M. E. 1993. An overview of
ecological principles for ecosystem management. In
Jensen, M. E. and Bourgeron, P. S., Eastside forest
ecosystem health assessment, Vol. 11, Ecosystem
management: principles and applications. USDA Forest
Ser- vice, Northern Region, Missoula, MT. p. 49-60.
Bradley, A. F., Coste, N. V., and Fischer, W. C. 1992. Fire
ecology of forests and woodlands in Utah. USDA Forest
Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station, Ogden, UT. General Technical Report INT-287,
128 p.
Brewer, D. G., Jorrgensen, R. K., Munk, L. P., Robbie, W.
A., and Travis, J. L. 1991. Terrestrial ecosystems survey
of the Kaibab National Forest. USDA Forest Service,
Southwestern Region. 319 p. plus maps.
Carleton, J. O., Robbie, W. A., Robertson, G. T., Spann, C.
L., Brown, H. G., 111, Gass, J., Shaw, D. W., Robison, T.,
Moir, W. H., Potter, D., Fletcher, R. A., Galeano-Popp,
R., and Miller, G. J. 1991. General ecosystem survey.
USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region. 188 p. plus
maps.
Covington, W. W. and M. M. Moore. 1992. Postsettlement
changes in natural fire regimes: implications for
restoration of old-growth ponderosa pine forests. In
Kaufmann, M. R., Moir, W. H., and Bassett, R. L. (tech.
coord.), Old-growth forests in the Southwest and Rocky
Mountain Regions — Proceedings of a workshop. USDA
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. General Technical
Report RM-213, p. 81-99.
Dick-Peddie, W. A. 1993a. Reconstruction of past
vegetation. Chapter 2 in: New Mexico vegetation, past,
present, and future. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque, NM. p. 9-26.
Dick-Peddie, W. A. 1993b. The future of New Mexico
vegetation. Chapter 12 in: New Mexico vegetation, past,
present, and future. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque, NM. p. 225-235.
Dick-Peddie, W. A. 1993c. New Mexico vegetation, past,
present, and future. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque, NM. 244 p.
Dye, A. J. and Moir, W. H. 1977. Spruce-fir forest at its
southern distribution in the Rocky Mountains. American
Midland Naturalist 97: 133-146.
ECOMAP. 1993. National hierarchical framework of
ecological units. USDA Forest Service, Washington,
DC. (In press).

14
Edwards, M., Miller, G., Redders, J., Stein, R., and Dunstan,
K. 1987. Terrestrial ecosystems survey of the Carson
National Forest. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern
Region. 552 p. plus maps.
Elson, J. 1993. History of change in the Pecos Wilderness,
New Mexico during the last 100 years. Unpublished
manuscript, Santa Fe National Forest, Santa Fe, NM.
Emory, W. H. 1857. Report on the United States and
Mexico boundary survey. 34th Congress, 1st Session,
House Exec. Doc. 135.
Everett, R., Oliver, C., Saveland, J., Hessburg, P., Diaz, N.,
and Irwin, L. 1993. Adaptive ecosystem management.
In Jensen, M. E. and Bourgeron, P. S., Eastside forest
ecosystem health assessment, Vol. 11, Ecosystem
management: principles and applications. USDA Forest
Service, Northern Region, Missoula, MT. p. 351-364.
FEMAT. 1993. Forest ecosystem management: an
ecological, economic, and social assessment. Report of
the Forest Ecosystem Management Assessment Team.
USDA Forest Service and USDI Bureau of Land
Management. 9 chapters.
Foreman F. K., Clisby, H., and Sears, P. B. 1959. Plio-
Pleistocene sediments and climates of the San Augustine
Plains, New Mexico. New Mexico Geological Society
10th Field Conference, Bureau of Mines & Mineral
Resources, Socorro, NM. p. 117-120.
Freeman, C. E. 1972. Pollen study of some Holocene
alluvial deposits in Dona Ana County, southern New
Mexico. Texas Journal of Science 24: 203-220.
Gardner, J. L. 1951. Vegetation of the creosotebush area of
the Rio Grande Valley of New Mexico. Ecological
Monographs 21: 379-403.
Grumbine, R. E. 1992. Ghost bears: Exploring the biodiversity
crisis. Island Press. Washington, D. C. 290 p.
Hastings, J. R. and Turner, R. M. 1965. The changing mile:
an ecological study of vegetation change with time in
the lower mile of an arid and semiarid region. University
of Arizona Press, Tucson, 317 p.
Henson, L. and Montrey, H. M. 1992. Ecology based
multiple-use management. USDA Forest Service,
Southwestern Region, Albuquerque, NM. 7 p.
Hunter, M. L., Jr. 1990. Wildlife, forests, and forestry:
Principles of managing forests for biological diversity.
Prentice-Hall. New Jersey. 370 p.
Hunter, M. L., Jr. 1991. Coping with ignorance: the coarse-
filter strategy for maintaining biodiversity. In Kohm, K.
A. (ed.), Balancing on the brink of extinction. The
Endangered Species Act and lessons for the future.
Island Press, Covelo, CA. p. 266-281.
Jameson, D. A. and Williams, J. A. 1962. Vegetation and
soils of Fishtail Mesa, Arizona. Ecology 43: 403-410.
Jensen, M. E. and Bourgeron, P. S. 1993. Eastside forest
ecosystem health assessment, Vol. 11, Ecosystem
management: principles and applications. USDA Forest
Service, Northern Region, Missoula, MT. 388 p.
Jensen, M. E. and Everett, R. 1993. An overview of
ecosystem management principles. In Jensen, M. E. and
Bourgeron, P. S., Eastside forest ecosystem health
assessment, Vol. 11, Ecosystem management: principles
and applications. USDA Forest Service, Northern Region,
Missoula, MT. p. 7-15.
Kay, J. J. 1991. A nonequilibrium thermodynamic
framework for discussing ecosystem integrity.
Environmental Management 15: 483-495.
Kennedy, J. J. and Quigley, T. M. 1993. Evolution of Forest
Service organizational culture and adaptation issues in
embracing ecosystem management. In Jensen, M. E. and
Bourgeron, P. S., Eastside forest ecosystem health
assessment, Vol. 11, Ecosystem management: principles
and applications. USDA Forest Service, Northern Region,
Missoula, MT. p. 17-28.
Kuchler, A. W. 1964. Potential natural vegetation of the
conterminous United States. American Geographic
Society Special Publication 36. 166 p. plus map.
Laing, L., Ambos, N., Subrige, T., McDonald, C., Nelson,
C., and Robbie, W. A. 1986. Terrestrial ecosystems of the
Apache-Sitgraves National Forests. USDA Forest
Service, Southwestern Region. 453 p. plus maps.
Larson, M. and Moir, W. H. 1986. Forest and woodland
habitat types (plant associations) of southern New
Mexico and central Arizona (north of the Mogollon
Rim), Edition 2. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern
Region, Albuquerque, NM.
Larson, M., Moir, W. H., and Fletcher, R. 1987. Forest and
woodland habitat types (plant associations) of northern
New Mexico and northern Arizona, Edition 2 . USDA
Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Albuquerque, NM.
Leopold, A. 1949. A Sand County almanac. Oxford
University Press.
Leopold, L. B. 1951. Pleistocene climates in New Mexico.
American Journal of Science 249: 152-168.
Martin, P. S. 1963. The last 10,000 years: a fossil pollen
record of the American Southwest. University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.
Maser, C. 1990. On the naturalness of natural areas: a
perspective for the future. Natural Areas Journal 10:
129-133.
McHarg, I. L. 1971. Design with nature. American Museum
of Natural History, Doubleday/Natural History Press.
198 p.
Miller, G., Redders, J., Stein, R., Edwards, M., Phillips, J.,
Andrews, V., Sebring, S., Vaandrager, C., and Benally,
E. K., Jr. 1993. Terrestrial ecosystems survey of the Santa
Fe National Forest. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern
Region. 563 p. plus maps.
Miller, G., Boness, P., Scalzone, K., Steinke, R., and
Robertson, G. 1994. Terrestrial ecosystems survey of the
Coconino National Forest. USDA Forest Service,
Southwestern Region. 575 p. plus maps. (In press).
Muldavin, E., Ronco, F., Jr., and Aldon, E. F. 1990.
Consolidated stand tables and biodiversity data base
for Southwestern forest habitat types. USDA Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station, Fort Collins, CO. General Technical Report RM-
190. 51 p.
Norton, B. C. and Ulanowicz, R. E. 1992. Scale and
biodiversity policy: a hierarchical approach. AMBIO 21:
244-249.
Noss, R. F. 1983. A regional landscape approach to maintain
diversity. BioScience 33: 700-706.
Noss, R. F. 1987. Protecting natural areas in fragmented
landscapes. Natural Areas Journal 7: 2-13.

15
Overbay, J. C. 1992. Ecosystem management. Speech
delivered at the National workshop on taking an
ecological approach to management. USDA Forest
Service, Washington, DC. Salt Lake City, UT, April 27,
1992.
Perrings, C. 1991. Reserved rationality and the
precautionary principle: technological change, time and
uncertainty in environmental decision making. In
Costanza, R. (ed.), Ecological economics: the science
and management of sustainability. Columbia University
Press, New York. p. 153-166.
Potter, L. D. and Rowley, J. 1960. Pollen, rain, and
vegetation, San Augustine Plains, New Mexico. Botanical
Gazette 122: 1-25.
Reynolds, R. T., Graham, R. T., Reiser, M. H., Bassett, R. L.,
Kennedy, P. L., Boyce, D. A., Jr., Goodwin, G., Smith, R.,
and Fisher, E. L. 1992. Management recommendations
for the northern goshawk in the southwestern United
States. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest
and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. General
Technical Report RM-217, 90 p.
Robertson, F. D. 1992. Ecosystem management of the
national forests and grasslands. USDA Forest Service,
Washington, DC. 1330-1 policy letter, June 4, 1992.
Sallach, B. K. 1986. Vegetation changes in New Mexico
documented by repeat photography. M.S. thesis, New
Mexico State University, Las Cruces.
Savage, M. and Swetnam, T. W. 1990. Early 19th century
fire decline following sheep pasturing in a Navajo
ponderosa pine forest. Ecology 71: 2374-2378.
Simon, H. A. 1962. The architecture of complexity.
Proceedings of the American Philosophic Society 107:
467-482.
Slocombe, D. S. 1993. Implementing ecosystem-based
management — development of theory, practice, and
research for planning and managing a region. BioScience
43: 612-622.
Swanson, F. J., Jones, J. A., Wallin, D. A,, and Cissel, J. H.
1993. Natural variability—— implications for ecosystem
management. In Jensen, M. E. and Bourgeron, P. S.,
Eastside forest ecosystem health assessment, Vol. 11,
Ecosystem management: principles and applications.
USDA Forest Service, Northern Region, Missoula, MT.
p. 85-99.
Swetnarn, T. W. 1990. Fire history and climate in the
southwestern United States. In Krammes J. S. (tech.
coord.), Effects of fire management of southwestern
natural resources. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO.
General Technical Report RM-191, p. 6-17.
Swetnam, T. W. and Betancourt, J. L. 1990. Fire - southern
oscillation relations in the southwestern United States.
Science 249: 1017-1020.
Swetnam, T. W. and Lynch, A. M. 1989. A tree-ring
reconstruction of western spruce budworm history in
the southwestern Rocky Mountains. Forest Science 35:
962-986.
Swetnam, T. W. and Lynch, A. M. 1993. Multi-century,
regional-scale patterns of western spruce budworm
outbreaks. Ecological Monographs 63: 399-424.
Thomas, J. W. 1994. New directions for the Forest Service.
USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC. Statement before
the Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests and Public
Lands and the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, Committee on Natural Resources, U.S.
House of Representatives, February 3, 1994.
Turner, M. G. and R. H. Gardner. 1991a. Quantitative
methods in landscape ecology. Springer-Verlag, New
York, NY. 530 p.
Turner, M. G. and Gardner, R. H. 1991b. Quantitative
methods in landscape ecology: an introduction. In
Turner, M. G., and Gardner, R. H. (eds.), Quantitative
methods in landscape ecology. Springer-Verlag, New
York. p. 3-14.
Turner, M. G., Gardner, R. H., O’Neill, R. V., and Pearson,
S. M. 1993. Multiscale organization of landscape
heterogeneity. In Jensen, M. E. and Bourgeron, P. S.,
Eastside forest ecosystem health assessment, Vol. 11,
Ecosystem management: principles and applications.
USDA Forest Service, Northern Region, Missoula, MT.
p. 77-83.
Urban, D. L., O’Neill, R. V., and Shugart, H. H., Jr. 1987.
Landscape ecology — a hierarchical perspective can
help scientists understand spatial patterns. BioScience
37: 119-127.
U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment. 1993.
Harmful non-indigenous species in the United States.
Washington, DC. OTA-F-565, 391 p.
USDA Forest Service. 1985. Terrestrial ecosystem survey
handbook. R3 FSH2509.18, 8 Chapters. USDA Forest
Service, Southwestern Region, Albuquerque, NM.
USDA Forest Service. 1989. Terrestrial ecosystems survey.
USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region,
Albuquerque, NM. Various pages and updates.
USDA Forest Service. 1992a. Taking an ecological approach
to management. Proceedings of a workshop, Salt Lake
City, UT, April 27-30, 1992.
USDA Forest Service. 1992b. RMRIS data dictionary. USDA
Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Albuquerque, NM.
RMRIS Oracle User Guide.
USDA Forest Service. 1993a. Integrated resource inventory
training guide. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Region, Lakewood, CO. (May 1993 draft).
USDA Forest Service. 1993b. Project implementation
process for integrated resource management, fourth
edition. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region,
Albuquerque, NM. (in press)
U.S. Geological Survey. 1899. Twentieth annual report of
the United States Geological Survey, 1898-99. Part V.
Pikes Peak, Plum Creek, and South Platt Forest Reserves,
1900. By J. C. Jack. p. 39-115.
Van Hurst, R. 1992. From population dynamics to
community dynamics: modelling succession as a species
replacement process. Chapter 5 In Glenn-Lewin, D. C.,
Peet, R. K., and Veblen T. T. (eds.), Plant succession:
theory and prediction. Chapman & Hall, Lon- don. p.
188-214.

16
Woodmansee, R. G. and Riebsame, W. E. 1993. Evaluating
the effects of climate changes on grasslands. Proc. 17th
International Grassland Congress. (In press).
Wright, H. E., Jr., Bent, A. M., Hensen, B. S., and Maher, L.
H., Jr. 1973. Present and past vegetation of the Chuska
Mountains, northwestern New Mexico. Geological
Society of America Bulletin 84: 1155-1180 plus map.
GLOSSARY
Asterisk ( * ) indicates definition was taken from draft
ecosystem management keywords and definitions in
the Interim Directive (USDA Forest Service,
Washington Office, 1994).
Double asterisk ( * * ) indicates definition was taken or
adapted from the glossary in Jensen and Bourgeron
(1993). In some cases, definitions were taken from
slightly different but related terms.
*Adaptive management: implementing policy decisions
as an ongoing process that requires monitoring the
results. It applies scientific principles and methods to
improve 
resource 
management 
activities
incrementally as the managers and scientists learn
from experience and new scientific findings and adapt
to social changes and demands.
**Biological diversity (biodiversity): the variety of life
and its processes, including the variety in genes,
species, ecosystems, and the ecological processes that
connect everything in ecosystems.
**Classification: the assignment of points, or sample
units, to a finite number of discrete types, usually
based on an analysis of many variables (e.g.. vegetation
classification, soil classification).
Coarse-filter analysis: an analysis of aggregates of
elements such as cover type or plant community.
Commodity output: the supply of goods or services taken
from or supplied by a resource area.
**Conservation: the careful protection, utilization, and
planned management of living organisms and their
vital processes to prevent their depletion, exploitation,
destruction, or waste.
**Cumulative effect: the effect on the environment that
results from the incremental impact of a proposed
action when added to other past, present, and
reasonably foreseeable future actions.
**Decision analysis model: an organized system that
policymakers and managers can use to select a course
of action, often but not necessarily a formal model.
*Disturbance: a discrete event, either natural or human
induced, that causes a change in the existing condition
of an ecological system.
Disturbance pattern: arrangement of disturbances over
space and time.
*Ecological approach: natural resource planning and
management activities that assure consideration of the
relationship among all organisms (including humans)
and their environment.
*Ecological classification: a multifactor approach to
categorizing and delineating, at different levels of
resolution, areas of land and water having similar
characteristic combinations of the physical environment
(such as climate, geomorphic processes, geology, soil,
and hydrologic function), biological communities (such
as plants, animals, microorganisms, and potential natural
communities), and the human dimension (such as social,
economic, cultural, and infrastructure).
Ecological principles: the biological basis for sound
ecosystem management through which ecosystem
sustainability is ensured.
*Ecological process: the actions or events that link
organisms (including humans) and their environment
such as disturbance, successional development, nutrient
cycling, carbon sequestration, productivity, and decay.
Ecological unit: an assessment area based on vegetation,
soils, geology, and geomorphology.
*Ecoregion: a continuous geographic area over which the
macroclimate is sufficiently uniform to permit
development of similar ecosystems on sites with
similar properties. Ecoregions contain multiple landscapes
with different spatial patterns of ecosystems.
*Ecosystem: living organisms interacting with each other
and with their physical environment, usually described
as an area for which it is meaningful to address these
interrelationships.
Ecosystem composition: the constituent elements of an
ecosystem.
Ecosystem function: the processes through which the
constituent living and nonliving elements of
ecosystems change and interact, including
biogeochemical processes and succession.
*Ecosystem management: the use of an ecological
approach that blends social, physical, economic, and
biological needs and values to assure productive,
healthy ecosystems.
Ecosystem need: an action required to ensure that an
ecosystem is sustainable.
Ecosystem restoration: returning an ecosystem from a
nonsustainable to a sustainable condition.
Ecosystem structure: the spatial arrangement of the
living and nonliving elements of an ecosystem.
**Ecosystem sustainability: the ability to sustain
diversity, productivity, resilience to stress, health,
renewability, and/or yields of desired values, resource
uses, products, or services from an ecosystem while
maintaining the integrity of the ecosystem over time.

17
Element: an identifiable component, process, or
condition of an ecosystem.
Exotic species: see Nonnative species.
Fine-filter analysis: an analysis of components of
aggregates such as plant communities in a cover type
or species in a plant community.
Genetic diversity: the genetic variation within and among
individuals in a species.
Habitat type: plant association based on a climax
overstory species and an indicator understory species.
*Healthy ecosystem: an ecosystem in which structure
and functions allow the maintenance of the desired
condition of biological diversity, biotic integrity, and
ecological processes over time.
Hierarchical approach: an analysis approach accounting
for differences in space and time.
**Hierarchy: a sequence of sets composed of smaller
subsets.
Historical ecosystem: an ecosystem at a specified
previous time.
**Historical variation: range of the spatial, structural,
compositional, and temporal characteristics of
ecosystem elements during a period specified to
represent “natural” conditions.
*Human dimension: an integral component of ecosystem
management that recognizes people are part of
ecosystems, that people’s pursuits of past, present, and
future desires, needs, and values (including
perceptions, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors) have
and will continue to influence ecosystems and that
ecosystem management must include consideration of
the physical, emotional, mental, spiritual, social,
cultural, and economic well-being of people and
communities.
Human impact or influence: a disturbance or change in
ecosystem composition, structure, or function caused
by humans.
*Landscape: an area composed of interacting ecosystems
that are repeated because of geology, land form, soils,
climate, biota, and human influences throughout the
area. Landscapes are generally of a size, shape and
pattern which is determined by interacting ecosystems.
Natural disturbance: periodic impact of natural events
such as fire, severe drought, insect or disease attack, or
wind.
Natural ecosystem: an ecosystem that is minimally
influenced by humans and that is, in the larger sense,
diverse, resilient, and sustainable.
**Natural variation: see Range of variability.
Nonnative species: a species introduced into an
ecosystem through human activities.
**Plant association: a kind of plant community
represented by stands occurring in places where
environments are so closely similar that there is a high
degree of floristic uniformity in all layers.
**Potential vegetation: vegetation that would develop if
all successional sequences were completed under
present site conditions (e.g., habitat type).
*Productive: the ability of an area to provide goods and
services and to sustain ecological values.
*Range of variability: the spectrum of conditions
possible in ecosystem composition, structure, and
function considering both temporal and spatial factors.
Reference conditions: conditions characterizing
ecosystem composition, structure, and function and
their variability.
*Resilience: the ability of an ecosystem to maintain the
desired condition of diversity, integrity, and ecological
processes following disturbance.
*Restoration: actions taken to modify an ecosystem in
whole or in part to achieve a desired condition.
*Scale: the degree of resolution at which ecological
processes, structures, and changes across space and
time are observed and measured.
Southwest: the states of Arizona and New Mexico.
Spatial scale: the level of resolution in space perceived or
considered.
*Stewardship: caring for land and associated resources
and passing healthy ecosystems to future generations.
**Succession: a directional composition change in an
ecosystem as the available organisms modify and
respond to changes in the environment.
*Sustainability: the ability of an ecosystem to maintain
ecological processes and functions, biological
diversity, and productivity over time.
Temporal scale: the level of resolution in time perceived
or considered.
Undisturbed ecosystem: an ecosystem that has not been
influenced by human activity.
*Watershed: an area of land with a characteristic
drain- age network that contributes surface or ground
water to the flow at that point; a drainage basin or a
major subdivision of a drainage basin.

18
APPENDIX 1
Members of the Southwestern Regional Ecosystem
Management Study Team
Richard L. Bassett
Regional Silviculturist
USDA Forest Service
Southwestern Region
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87102
William M. Block
Research Wildlife Biologist
USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station
Flagstaff, Arizona 86001
Douglas A. Boyce, Jr. (Team Chair)
Regional Wildlife Biologist
USDA Forest Service
Southwestern Region
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87102
Paul Stephen Corn
Zoologist
USDI National Biological Survey
National Ecology Research Center
Fort Collins, Colorado 80525
Carleton B. Edminster
Research Forester
USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station
Fort Collins, Colorado 80526
Russell T. Graham
Research Forester
USDA Forest Service
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station
Moscow, Idaho 83843
Merrill R. Kaufmann
Research Physiologist
USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station
Fort Collins, Colorado 80526
Patricia Mehlhop
Director, NM Heritage Program
The Nature Conservancy
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131
William H. Moir
Research Ecologist
USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station
Fort Collins, Colorado 80526
Lee Perry
Assistant Director
Arizona Game and Fish Department
Phoenix, Arizona 85023
Richard T. Reynolds
Research Wildlife Biologist
USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station
Fort Collins, Colorado 80526

19
APPENDIX 2
Charter of the Southwestern Regional Ecosystem
Management Study Team
Former Chief F. Dale Robertson of the USDA Forest
Service directed on June 4,1992, that regional foresters
submit strategies for implementing ecosystem
management. The Southwestern Regional Forester, Larry
Henson, and the Rocky Mountain Station Director,
Denver Burns, established the Southwestern Regional
Ecosystem Management Study Team in December 1992 to
describe an ecological basis for implementing ecosystem
management. Regional Forester Henson also established
an Ecosystem Management Interdisciplinary Team to
coordinate ecosystem management in the Southwestern
Region. The Interdisciplinary Team may use this report
when preparing its recommendations for the regional
forester. When the work of the Social and Economic Study
Team is completed, the Ecosystem Management Study
Team may review its own work to determine if any
revisions or changes are required.
The Team’s charter has three parts:
1. Evaluate existing approaches to ecosystem
management used in other areas of the United States
and world for their applicability to sustain ecosystems
in the southwestern United States.
2. Describe the principles and rationale used for
developing ecosystem management recommendations
that will sustain healthy southwestern ecosystems.
3. List assumptions, further research needs, management
recommendations, and the implications of applying
the recommendations.
Following this charter, our procedure was to evaluate
existing ecosystem management approaches and to
discuss our collective knowledge, invite expert speakers
to discuss their knowledge, review the literature, and
finally discuss concepts as a group. We met for one-week
periods during December 1992, January 1993, February
1993, March 1993, April 1993, August 1993, September
1993, and December 1993.
Invited speakers and their topics included R. G. Bailey
(biotic provinces), Patrick Bourgeron (overview of
ecological thinking in industrial countries), Ann Hooker
(Forest Service Washington Office ecosystem
management efforts), Mark Jensen (ecosystem efforts in
the Forest Service Regions 1 and 6), Esteban Muldavin
(GIs approach for classifying vegetative communities),
and Roger Soles (UNESCO Man and Biosphere program).
The literature we considered is partially referenced in the
Literature Cited section of this report. Discussions on a
wide range of topics dealing with ecosystem management
led to the development of our “Guiding Principles.” We
developed the content of this report in a group setting.

20
APPENDIX 3
Sampling of Reviewers’ Comments on the
September 1993 Draft
The following comments were selected from
reviewers’ correspondence to illustrate the reactions to a
draft of this document circulated in November 1993. The
primary difference between the reviewed and final draft
is that the earlier draft provided less detail about the
human dimension. The comments included a number of
valuable observations and are provided here to help the
reader obtain a sense of the range of issues held to be
important in addressing ecosystem management and the
acceptability of this document.
“In general, the Department supports the concepts
presented in the document. If implemented, we believe
this document can provide guidance toward achieving
sustainable natural systems and an even flow of products
and services from National Forest lands. The Department
recognizes that consideration of social and economic
factors is a political reality. However, we hope that the
scientific team’s input will not be further diluted by
incorporating socio-economic factors within its report. In
our opinion, these considerations are necessary but should
not be part of the scientific team’s discussion.” — Duane
L. Shroufe, Director, Arizona Game and Fish Department,
Phoenix, AZ.
“The draft document provides general guidance for
development of ecosystem management on National
Forest lands. It is disappointing that it does not go further
in helping the manager to decide how to implement
ecosystem management, although this seems to have
been beyond the team’s charter. The recommendations
for administering ecosystem management call for
cooperation with all land managers in a given ecosystem.
This should tie in well with the Fish and Wildlife Service’s
Partners for Natural Resource Conservation Strategy. ...
“The concepts are inarguably the state-of-the-art
thinking for ecosystem management and we support the
premise of the document, particularly concerning the
value of managing to ensure the viability of ecosystems
now and into the future.
“We support the efforts to implement a management
strategy that has as its first priority the stability and
diversity of ecosystems as functional units. However,
additional work needs to be done to bring the concepts
developed in this document to fruition as an
implementation plan.” — John Rogers, Regional Director,
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, Albuquerque, NM.
“This draft report represents a good first step in
implementing ecosystem management ‘on the ground.’
The report deals in generalities, which is probably
appropriate at this stage. It recognizes that significant
deterioration has occurred in many ecosystems and that
past natural resource management decisions have been
based primarily on social and economic considerations. It
also recognizes that ecosystem needs must be addressed
over large spatial and temporal ranges, and that
information flow must occur across the full range of
administrative levels. These are important concepts, and
the Department commends the study team for these
insights.” — Bill Montoya, Director, New Mexico
Department of Game and Fish, Santa Fe, NM.
“Overall, I found the manuscript to be well-written and
a nice general discussion of what ecosystem management
entails as I see it. In fact, I think that it would be acceptable
for publication in Ecological Applications. Your team has
put a lot of thought into this topic that should be shared
through the journal literature as well as a station report. ...
“It may not be possible to assure sustainability ‘while
meeting social and economic needs.’ ... Here readers will
get the impression that ecosystem management can be
everything to everyone. I suspect that ecosystem
management often will not mean drastic socio-economic
changes, but that will not always be the case.
“I liked your section on guiding principles. It’s true that
there is a lot we don’t know about whether or not our
current managed ecosystems continue to be resilient,
diverse, self-sustaining, and productive, but I think that
we know enough to adopt the guidelines that you iden-
tify. Critics of this report may not be happy with some of
them, but I think they are defensible.” — Dennis H.
Knight, Department of Botany, University of Wyoming,
Laramie, WY.
“This paper presents a conceptual framework for
ecosystem management based on up to date ecological
principles such as hierarchical structure, sustainability
and landscape ecology. Although the authors present a
progressive framework for management and the reviewer
agrees that such a framework is appropriate, the
document may not be specific enough to guide the
implementation of the principles or, perhaps more
importantly, state the principles in ways that can be
evaluated. ...
“Humans have managed to perpetuate, for millennia,
economic and ecological systems involving various levels
of interaction between humans and ‘nature’. Tim Allen
said recently that the spatial patterns of farms in ancient
times were the emergent properties of human-
ecosystems designed to be ‘sustainable’ given certain
constraints. Systems theorists believe that humans are
simply maximizing entropy creation by dissipating
energy most efficiently. This idea is difficult to escape and
suggests that even the process the Forest Service is going
through with the creation of this document and others like
it will lead to new system configurations that will prevent
the system from collapsing (as we believe it would if we
simply removed all the timber) so that it may continue to
dissipate energy into the future.
“Unfortunately, the idea of sustainability and the idea
that the human system is continually reorganizing to
maximize energy flow are difficult to test and difficult to

21
falsify. It seems that before goals to achieve sustainability
and hierarchical ecosystem structure are implemented it
would be worthwhile specifying how to test the ideas so
that sustainable systems can be detected if they should
happen to be created by management.” — Bruce T. Milne,
Department of Biology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM.
“I want to applaud your team for moving quickly to
address a very complex issue — that of determining what
‘ecosystem management’ is, and, what is more important,
how you as an agency will attempt to implement the plan.
At this point, for the most part, discussions of ecosystem
management have been a lot like discussions of the
weather—— everybody talks about it, but nobody is
doing anything about it. The concept of ecosystem
management is relatively easy to understand, and it is
certainly how we should approach forest resource
management. However, the implementation of
ecosystem management will be the most complex thing
we have ever attempted to do.
“Your team has a very difficult task. I believe you have
done a very commendable job of introducing the concept
of ecosystem management and then discussing the
general approach that will be used to integrate ecosystem
management concepts into the management of National
Forest and Rangelands of the Southwest.” — David Wm.
Smith, College of Forestry and Wildlife Resources,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, VA.
“Overall, I believe that you have the makings of an
excellent paper, one that will not only serve your agency,
but others as well, in helping to reorient thinking and
establish new approaches to ecosystem management. The
paper very clearly addresses many of the concepts that I
and, I believe, others have been thinking of. ...
“Fundamentally, 
I 
believe 
that 
ecosystem
management is just as much a social challenge as it is a
scientific challenge, perhaps even more. The complexities
on the social side are far too broad for me to attempt to
address here. But, basically, they might be characterized
as a maze of values, attitudes, and customs represented by
a host of competing institutions coming to bear against
each other through planning, judicial, and political
processes. In short, there must be a better way of doing
business. I believe that ecosystem management may
provide such an opportunity if characterized and
approached properly. In this context, I don’t believe that
our current planning processes are entirely suitable
vehicles for doing so.
“What is needed are new ways of engaging publics and
science through a process of evaluating social, economic,
and environmental objectives, achieving common goals
and objectives based upon sustaining ecological and other
landscape functions (such as watershed and hydrology),
and pursuing those objectives through adaptive
management.
‘’Thank you for the opportunity to review the
document. It is certainly one of the best that I have read on
the subject, and one that will be most useful once
completed.” – Gary McVicker, USDI Bureau of Land
Management, Lakewood, CO.
“Not only are humans dependent upon functioning
ecosystems, but in many or most cases they are the
dominant stress ecosystems. By that I mean we generally
impose chronic stress on ecosystems against which there
have evolved few protective mechanisms. Economic
philosophy leads directly to much of this stress, and
economics and ecology can not be separated especially on
issues as sustainability. . . .
“Many, perhaps most, scientists believe virtually all
ecosystems are now under anthropic stress. Atmospheric
contaminant inputs occur globally to varying degrees.
This is the most extensive chronic stress imposed on
ecosystems. Since ecosystems have not evolved defensive
mechanisms for chronic stress, it is likely most, if not all, are
under varying degrees of alteration due to anthropic derived
stress. I personally doubt ecosystem restoration, beyond the
‘kinder, gentler silviculture’, etc., is feasible particularly for
any lands not suitable for intensive management. The only
solution in this instance is mitigation of the anthropic
derived stress, i.e., air pollution, water pollution,
incompatible conterminous land use. . . .
“With global population soaring and individual
standard of living declining, we do not have time to
develop a full understanding of ecosystem structure and
function before taking steps to mitigate anthropic-
derived stress. For many ecosystems in the west, I think
we are quickly approaching the point where we can make
good educated guesses as to the effect of present stress on
ecosystem function and structure, and even biodiversity.
“Interesting document and a good first step. I hope all
realize that this is a long-term effort, not a flash in the pan
as are most national initiatives.” — Robert Stottlemyer,
USDI National Biological Survey, Fort Collins, CO.
“The report does a proficient job of achieving its goal of
providing an ecological basis for ecosystem
management. It is truly a formidable task. My primary
concern is that ‘business as usual’ may still occur, but
under the guise of an ecologically based approach.
Because of the broad nature of this topic there is
considerable room for interpretation of this document.
Factions that are politically or strictly economically
motivated could easily exploit that ‘wiggle room’. ... In
general, I recommend more precise operational
definitions of some terms, and clarification of the
approach to be taken when there is conflict between
economics and ecology. . . .
“Human needs are very different from human wants.
Many economic arguments for continued harvesting have
been based on ‘wants’ rather than needs. A sentence or two
could be added to make this distinction, perhaps
acknowledging that the US is leading the world in rates of
consumption of natural resources. Those rates do not always
reflect ‘need’ and may not be sustainable.” — Susan K.
Skagen, USDI National Biological Survey, Fort Collins, CO.

22
“Ecosystems don’t evolve. They assemble or
disassemble as species are added or disappear. Managing
ecosystems so that all elements are conserved is
impossible, or at least counterproductive; ecosystems are
dynamic by their nature. Ecosystems should be managed
so that they preserve their functional integrity and so that
the species within them retain their evolutionary
potential. . . .
“It is very true that ecosystem management cannot
ensure that rare animals will persist. However, the ‘coarse
filter’ approach is a cop-out that does not follow the
guidelines in the NFMA to manage for viable populations
of all vertebrates. I would guess that about 5% of the
species in a given management unit are vertebrates — are
these the ones you will allow to go extinct? This is my
major quarrel with ‘ecosystem management’. A better
approach is ‘biodiversity management’ that includes
ecosystem management plus pays attention to species
management and genetic management as well.” —Peter
Brussard, Biodiversity Research Center, University of
Nevada, Reno, NV.
“The limited time for review precluded me from
sharing the document with other members of the
American Ornithologists’ Union. Therefore you should
regard the comments as mine, rather than as being
representative of the organization.
“Overall the document lays out the basis for ecosystem
management and provides a reasonable approach to
implement it. There are a few aspects that cause me
concern however.
“1) I agree with the premise that natural ecosystems
have the characteristics that one should be managing
for— in particular, resiliency and persistence. However,
you ignore the history of thousands of years of human
habitation of North America that has clearly shaped the
landscape. Although Native Americans did not practice
large scale logging and thus had fairly minimal direct
impact on forest ecosystems, they had particular and
often acute impacts on open environments. In addition,
the impacts of fire and of hunting may have also affected
forested ecosystems. I’m not sure how you can deal with
this in your paper and in your management, but it at least
needs to be recognized.
“2) One implication of the historical impact of humans
is to think of ecosystem management not as trying to
restore ‘natural conditions’, but rather to manage
prospectively for self-sustaining ecosystems whose
composition is based on the physical characteristics of the
landscape. In other words, the goal should not be to
recreate, but rather to create a situation where ecological
and evolutionary processes will lead to plant and animal
conditions that are stable for that particular site at that
particular time.” — David Blockstein, The American
Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, DC.
“I find the document to be very exciting and almost
revolutionary in its implications. This is the sort of
thinking that all of us have been trying to urge upon
society for the past two decades, once we recognized that
the Endangered Species Act and Smokey Bear gimmicks
were not going to save the world as we wanted it. I
congratulate you and your colleagues, several of whom
are well known to me, for your good work on this project,
and I hope that the document emerges from the review
process relatively unscathed.
“I particularly like the so-called ‘Guiding Principles,’
since there is a clear recognition that ‘nature thrives on
perturbation.’ . . . We should be in the business of
preserving the integrity of natural processes in order to
save what we categorize as ecosystems. . . .
“We cannot go back in ecological time, . . . and we must
play the hand that the smokestack society era dealt us. It
is my conviction that if we emphasize the restoration of
natural processes, rather than dwelling on the particular
species-level components of ever-dynamic ecosystems,
we will probably do more good in the long run. This is the
main reason I like your document.” — Lloyd Kiff, Direc-
tor, Western Foundation of Vertebrate Zoology, Camarillo,
CA.
“The Region’s guiding principles are based on the
wrong premise — that ‘natural’ ecosystems evolved with
minimal or no influence from humans. In fact, Native
Americans had a profound influence on the forest and
rangelands through the use of fire. . . .
“The American Forest & Paper Association has adopted
six key principles for ecosystem management that
address the more practical needs of federal land managers
in defining ecosystem management goals. These include
(in abridged form): (1) humans are parts of ecosystems; (2)
healthy ecosystems are essential to the health and
sustainability of human societies and the quality of
human life; (3) ecosystems are dynamic, resilient and
subject to disturbances; (4) active resource management is
an important (often essential) component of ecosystem
management; (5) ecosystems are adaptable to change, and
identifying the ‘best’ management option is both a social
and biological issue; and (6) management outcomes
cannot be predicted with complete precision, but
adaptive management will help to limit risk.
“The Southwest Regional Ecosystem Management
Study Team should consider AFPA’s principles as a
more suitable approach for providing ‘an ecological
basis for analysis and decision-making.’ By contrast,
the principles and assumptions developed by the team
indicate that the team misunderstood the Chief’s June
1992 direction on ecosystem management. Unlike the
Chief’s direction, the team has established a set of
principles based on non-human intervention in the
ecosystem.” — Anonymous review from the American
Forest & Paper Association, forwarded to the Study
Team by Donald K. Olson, President, Kaibab Forest
Products Company, Phoenix, AZ.

Kaufmann, M. R., Graham, R. T., Boyce, D. A., Jr., Moir, W. H., Perry, L.,
Reynolds, R. T., Bassett, R. L., Mehlhop, P., Edminster, C. B., Block, W. M.,
and Corn, P. S. 1994. An ecological basis for ecosystem management. Gen.
Tech. Rep. RM 246. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 22 p.
Guiding principles based on conservation biology are applied in assessing
ecosystem needs. Ecosystem, economic, and social needs are integrated in a
decision model in which the guiding principles are used as a primary filter for
evaluating proposed actions. Management practices consistent with the guiding
principles are likely to lead to ecological, economic, and social well being, while
those practices that are not consistent with the guiding principles risk species loss,
degraded environments, and long term social problems.
Keywords: Ecosystem management concepts, guiding principles, conservation
biology, ecosystem needs, human dimension, hierarchy, reference conditions,
coarse filter and fine filter analyses, decision model.
USDA policy prohibits discrimination because of race, color, national origin, sex,
age, religion, or handicapping condition. Any person who believes he or she has
been discriminated against in any USDA related activity should immediately
contact the Secretary of Agriculture, Washington, DC 20250.

U.S. Department of Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Forest and
Range Experiment Station
The Rocky Mountain Station is one of eight regional
experiment stations, plus the Forest Products
Laboratory and the Washington Office Staff, that make
up the Forest Service research organization.
RESEARCH FOCUS
Research programs at the Rocky Mountain Station are
coordinated with area universities and with other
institutions. Many studies are conducted on a
cooperative basis to accelerate solutions to problems
involving range, water, wildlife and fish habitat, human
and community development, timber, recreation,
protection, and multiresource evaluation.
RESEARCH LOCATIONS
Research Work Units of the Rocky Mountain Station
are operated in cooperation with universities in the
following cities:
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Flagstaff, Arizona
Fort Collins, Colorado
Laramie, Wyoming
Lincoln, Nebraska
Rapid City, South Dakota
Rocky
Mountains
Southwest
Great
Plains
*Station Headquarters: 240 W. Prospect Rd., Fort Collins,CO 80526
