1
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
v
v
Rocky Mountain Research Station
Research Note
Citation:
Abella, Scott R.; Denton, Charles W.; Brewer, David G.; Robbie, 
Wayne A.; Steinke, Rory W.; Covington, W. Wallace. 2011. Using 
a terrestrial ecosystem survey to estimate the historical density of 
ponderosa pine trees. Res. Note. RMRS-RN-45. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 9 p.
Authors:
Scott R. Abella, Associate Research Professor, School of 
Environmental and Public Affairs, University of Nevada Las 
Vegas.
Charles W. Denton, Program Coordinator, Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
David G. Brewer, Program Coordinator, Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Wayne A. Robbie, Supervisory Soil Scientist, U.S. Forest Service, 
Southwestern Region, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Rory W. Steinke, Watershed Program Manager, Coconino National 
Forest, Flagstaff, Arizona.
W. Wallace Covington, Regents’ Professor and Executive Director, 
School of Forestry and Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
United States Department of Agriculture
Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Research Station
Research Note RMRS-RN-45
June 2011
Using a Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey to Estimate the 
Historical Density of Ponderosa Pine Trees
Scott R. Abella, Charles W. Denton, David G. Brewer, Wayne A. Robbie,  
Rory W. Steinke, and W. Wallace Covington
Abstract: Maps of historical tree densities for project areas and land-
scapes may be useful for a variety of management purposes such as 
determining site capabilities and planning forest thinning treatments. 
We used the U.S. Forest Service Region 3 terrestrial ecosystem sur-
vey in a novel way to determine if the ecosystem classification is a 
useful a guide for estimating historical (1880) ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) tree densities on a northern Arizona landscape. Based on 
sampling 53 sites spanning 9 ecosystem types, we grouped the types 
into low and high density categories. Tree density was less than 24/
acre on 91 percent (21 of 23) of sites in cinder, dry limestone, and clay 
basalt ecosystems. In contrast, 70 percent (21 of 30) of sites that con-
tained densities exceeding 24 trees/acre were in basalt, mixed igneous, 
and moist limestone ecosystems.
Introduction
The study of historical forest structure has revealed the dra-
matic changes that have occurred in ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) forests since the late 1800s following fire exclusion 
and irruptions of tree density (Covington and Moore 1994). 
In northern Arizona, for instance, Fulé and others (1997) used 
forest reconstruction methods to determine that ponderosa 
pine density rose more than 11-fold from 26 trees/acre in 
1883 (the year of the last surface fire prior to fire exclusion) to 
291 trees/acre in 1995. The persistence of dead wood (stumps, 
fallen logs, and snags) in the semi-arid climate of pondero-
sa pine forests, combined with fire exclusion preventing the 
wood from burning, facilitates reconstructing where historical 
trees were located (fig. 1). To complete the reconstruction of 
historical density, currently living old trees also are recorded 
(Harrod and others 1999). The accuracy of this reconstruction 
method has been assessed by re-measuring 15 stem-mapped 
plots established by the U.S. Forest Service’s Southwestern 
Region (Region 3) from 1909 to 1913 (Moore and others 
2004). This assessment confirmed that dead wood that was 
mapped in 1909 was still present in 1999. The reconstructed 
density was within 9 percent of the densities recorded in the 
early 1900s.
As a result of the known deviance of present forest condi-
tions from historical conditions, there is interest in decreasing 
the probability of severe wildfires by thinning ponderosa 

2
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
pine forests. The goal of thinning is not necessarily to repli-
cate historical conditions (prior to late 1800s Euro-American 
settlement), but rather to reduce tree densities to levels that 
support surface fires instead of crown fires (Covington 2003). 
As a result, knowledge of the historical forest structure can 
help with the planning of thinning projects by providing es-
timates of tree densities that were sustainable through at least 
several generations of trees (Allen and others 2002).
A map of historical tree density for project areas and land-
scapes could be valuable for several management purposes 
(Harrod and others 1999). First, it would help managers un-
derstand spatial variation in tree structure and factors (such as 
soils) that may have been associated with the variation, there-
by helping managers understand long-term site capability for 
supporting trees. Second, historical tree densities could be 
compared to present forest inventories to identify areas of the 
landscape that have experienced the greatest or least change 
in tree density, thus helping prioritize areas for management 
(Bell and others 2009). Third, the historical densities, in com-
bination with other management considerations, can provide 
rough density targets for forest thinning projects when con-
sidering past reference conditions in management planning.
The terrestrial ecosystem survey (TES) in the Southwestern 
Region maps ecosystems across landscapes based on climate, 
geology, soils, and late-successional vegetation (U.S. Forest 
Service 1986). This system is similar to other ecological land 
classification and mapping initiatives such as the terrestrial eco-
logical unit inventory (also a Forest Service program), USDA 
Natural Resources Conservation Service ecological site types, 
and ecosystem classifications developed in individual research 
projects (Abella and Covington 2006). The major concept un-
derpinning these systems is that climate, geology, soils, and 
vegetation are interrelated and form repeating combinations 
across the landscape that can be classified and mapped (Robbie 
1992). We used the TES in a novel way to determine if it could 
help estimate historical ponderosa pine tree densities across the 
landscape. We hypothesized that dry ecosystems, where pine 
establishment may be limited, contained lower densities than 
moist ecosystems. We anticipated that the TES would capture 
this variation.
Figure 1. Examples of stumps (foreground, and to the left of the large tree), indicative of historical tree locations, and a live tree of 
pre-settlement origin (left-center). Photo by S.R. Abella in 2009, Forest Road 3E, Coconino National Forest, northern Arizona (UTM: 
440,918 m E, 3,885,850 m N, North American Datum 1983).

3
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
Methods
Study Area
We conducted this study within a 250,000-acre area in 
northern Arizona on the northern half of the Coconino 
National Forest and on the Northern Arizona University 
Centennial Forest surrounding the city of Flagstaff (fig. 2). 
Study sites ranged in elevation from 6300 to 8410 ft and were 
located in ponderosa pine forests. Half of the annual precipi-
tation occurs in winter as snow and much of the rest occurs 
in July through September as monsoonal storms. Slope gra-
dients are typically less than 10 percent, but cinder cones, 
ravines, and undulating hills of greater slope gradient are 
present. These forests historically experienced frequent sur-
face fires, with fire intervals of two to five years based on five 
fire-history studies (Van Horne and Fulé 2006). Understories 
were and are dominated by grasses and sedges such as blue 
grama (Bouteloua gracilis), White Mountain sedge (Carex 
geophila), squirreltail (Elymus elymoides), Arizona fescue 
(Festuca arizonica), and mountain muhly (Muhlenbergia mon-
tana) (Pearson 1942).
The study area is covered by the Coconino National Forest 
TES (http://alic.arid.arizona.edu/tes/tes.html) that maps 
ecosystem types at a 1:24,000 scale with a minimum map-
ping unit of 40 acres (Miller and others 1995). Ecosystem 
Figure 2. Location of 53 sample 
sites on a northern Arizona 
landscape. Sizes of points 
for sites are scaled to reflect 
ponderosa pine tree density 
reconstructed for 1880 forests. 
Shading depicts gradients in 
annual precipitation estimated 
from sample site values using 
the PRISM model (Daly and 
others 2008). Coordinates are 
UTM, North American Datum 
1983.

4
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
types were primarily classified and delineated based on soil 
parent material, landform, climate, and secondarily by domi-
nant overstory trees and understory species (Robbie 1992). 
The TES identified ecosystem types by a numerical code. 
In this paper, we name the ecosystems based on soil parent 
material and moisture status and provide the corresponding 
numerical codes in table 1.
Site Selection and Sampling
With a digital map of the TES for the study area (Miller 
and others 1995), we randomly selected a Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinate for a sample lo-
cation within each of five to seven mapping units of nine 
ecosystem types. This resulted in 53 independent sites rep-
licated across the landscape (fig. 2). The slight variation in 
the number of sites among ecosystems resulted from rejecting 
mapping units for sampling if a post-settlement fire or other 
disturbance destroyed evidence of historical trees. The nine 
ecosystem types encompass a range of soil parent materials, 
including basalt, benmorite, limestone, and volcanic cinders 
(Miller and others 1995). Four soil orders are represented 
in the ecosystems, including the predominant subgroups of 
Typic and Udic Argiborolls, Typic and Mollic Eutroboralfs, 
Typic Ustorthents, and Vitrandic Ustochrepts. Soils ranged 
from sandy, dry, nitrogen-poor volcanic cinders in the black 
cinder ecosystem to silt loam and nitrogen-rich in the moist 
basalt ecosystem. Soil, climate, and other characteristics of all 
nine ecosystems are summarized in table 1.
We established a 328-ft × 328-ft, 2.5-acre plot at the 
randomly selected UTM coordinate at each site. Using the 
methods of Fulé and others (1997), we counted the number 
of evidences of pre-settlement trees based on the presence of 
dead wood and living, old trees. We selected the year 1880 
as the forest reconstruction year because the start of fire ex-
clusion associated with Euro-American settlement has been 
dated between 1876 and 1883 in the study area (Van Horne 
and Fulé 2006). We identified pre-settlement-origin live trees 
based on the observation that ponderosa pine develops or-
ange, platy bark by about 100 years of age (White 1985). To 
ensure the accuracy of this observation, we cored trees of un-
certain status (typically 10 percent of the total live trees) and 
counted rings in the field to classify these trees as pre- or post-
settlement. We did not attempt to reconstruct stem diameters 
that evidence would have had in 1880. Reconstruction of stem 
diameters is more complicated than that of density, requiring 
information on year of death and decomposition models for 
the dead wood and cross-dated tree cores, and bark thickness 
for currently live trees (Fulé and others 1997). Tree size and 
basal area data could be useful to obtain in future research 
for understanding potential variation in tree growth rates and 
biomass among ecosystems.
Analysis
We compared the mean tree density among TES types 
with a one-way analysis of variance followed by Fisher’s pro-
tected least significant difference for multiple comparisons 
(SAS Institute 1999). Data were analyzed on a transformed 
scale (square root) to improve equality of variance and nor-
mality. Medians, with confidence intervals at the 95 percent 
level determined through bootstrapping (1000 samples), 
Table 1. Characteristics of terrestrial ecosystem survey types sampled in ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona. Ecosystem types are 
arranged in order of increasing tree density classes according to table 2.
Ecosystem typea	
Mean ± SDb	
Median (CI)c	
Precipitationd	
Descriptione
Clay basalt (523)	
2 ± 3 d	
1 (0 to 4)	
22	
Basalt, clay loam soils with large cracks and clay subsoils
Red cinder (513)	
23 ± 25 bcf	
15 (10 to 16)	
19	
Dry, red volcanic cinders, sandy loam
Dry limestone (500)	
16 ± 7 c	
16 (12 to 21)	
20	
Climatically dry, sandy loam limestone
Black cinder (558)	
22 ± 5 bc	
19 (18 to 26)	
18	
Dry, nitrogen-poor, sand-gravel, black volcanic cinders
Benmorite (570)	
34 ± 19 ab	
27 (19 to 48)	
23	
Benmoritic, loam, sometimes rocky, clay subsoils
Mixed igneous (551)	
23 ± 9 abc	
25 (15 to 29)	
24	
Mixed igenous, loam soils around the San Francisco Peaks
Rocky basalt (585)	
29 ± 8 abc	
28 (25 to 35)	
27	
Rocky basalt, loam surface soils with clay loam subsoils
Moist limestone (536)	
28 ± 4 abc	
27 (25 to 31)	
25	
Moist, sandy loam limestone, productive understories
Moist basalt (582)	
40 ± 19 a	
46 (27 to 53)	
25	
Basalt, silt loam, widespread type, productive understories
a Numbers in parentheses are the ecosystem unit identification number in the ecosystem survey manual (Miller and others 1995).
b Historical tree density (stems/acre) reconstructed for the year 1880. Values are mean ± standard deviation. Means without shared letters differ 
at P<0.05.
c Median historical tree density (stems/acre) with lower and upper bounds of 95 percent confidence intervals for medians in parentheses.
d Average precipitation in inches/year estimated from sample site values using the PRISM model (Daly and others 2008).
e Soil parent material and 0- to 6-inch soil texture, unless specified as corresponding to 6- to 20-inch subsoils. Data from Miller and others 
(1995) and Abella and Covington (2006).
f The red cinder ecosystem had a site with an unusually high density of 74 trees/acre, which was 16 trees/acre greater than any of the other 52 
sites and 4.4-fold greater than the next highest density (17 trees/acre) within this ecosystem. If the site with 74 trees/acre is excluded, the 
mean tree density of the red cinder ecosystem falls to 13 ± 4 trees/acre and the pattern of significant differences among ecosystems is (by 
ecosystem unit number): 523d, 513c, 500c, 558bc, 570ab, 551bc, 585ab, 536ab, and 582a.

5
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
were also calculated. We further grouped densities into five 
categories ranging from low to high (<10, 10 to 17, 18 to 
23, 24 to 29, and ≥30 trees/acre) and assessed the number 
of sites of each ecosystem type that fell into the categories. 
These density categories were based on natural breaks in the 
data and contained approximately equal numbers of total 
sites. These categories were also anticipated to have ecological 
significance by representing a gradient from extremely low to 
high densities.
To help formulate hypotheses about possible causes of 
variation in density within and among ecosystems, we used 
data on understory vegetation and soil collected in 2003 dur-
ing previous research at the study sites (Abella and Covington 
2006). We examined Pearson correlation coefficients for as-
sociations between tree density and understory grass cover; 
percent sand, silt, and clay; volumetric nitrogen and organic 
carbon content of the 0- to 6-inch soil layer; and average an-
nual precipitation estimated for each site using the PRISM 
model (Daly and others 2008). For grass cover, we are not 
implying that understory vegetation is necessarily the same in 
contemporary forests as in historical forests, but rather that 
variation in current understories across the landscape corre-
sponds to variation in the productivity of ecosystems reported 
in the TES (Miller and others 1995; Abella and Covington 
2006). We further subjected the environmental variables 
(soil and climate only) to a principal components analysis 
(cross-products matrix derived from correlation coefficients) 
using the software PC-ORD (McCune and Mefford 1999) to 
evaluate whether tree density was correlated with multivariate 
combinations of variables as synthesized by principal compo-
nents. Using Pearson coefficients, we related tree density to 
plot scores of the first principal component (no additional 
component accounted for ≥18 percent of the variance).
Results
The density of historical trees differed significantly among 
ecosystem types (F8,44 statistic = 8.14; P<0.0001). Means 
varied 20-fold, ranging from 2 trees/acre in a clay basalt to 
40 trees/acre in a moist basalt ecosystem (table 1). Medians 
similarly ranged from 1 to 46 trees/acre across ecosystems. 
Patterns also emerged when partitioning density into classes, 
with the clay basalt, red cinder, and dry limestone ecosystems 
containing the most sites in the low and low-medium density 
classes (table 2). The black cinder ecosystem had the most 
medium density sites. Mixed igneous, basalt, benmorite, and 
moist limestone ecosystems possessed the most medium-high 
and high density sites. Four of the six sample sites of the 
moist basalt ecosystem were in the highest density class (≥30 
trees/acre)—the largest proportion of any ecosystem.
Variation in density among ecosystems became even more 
pronounced when simply dividing ecosystems into low (<24 
trees/acre) and high (≥24 trees/acre) density categories (ta-
ble 3). This classification accurately portrayed 42 of the 53 
(79 percent) sample sites by ecosystem type.
In examining continuous variation, density was not 
strongly correlated with any single variable or principal 
component. Correlations (r) of density with understory and 
environmental variables were as follows: -0.25 (grass cover), 
-0.17 (sand), 0.35 (silt), -0.14 (clay), -0.23 (nitrogen), 0.07 
(organic carbon), and 0.24 (average annual precipitation). In 
principal components analysis, the first principal component 
accounted for 60 percent of the variation in the environmen-
tal variables. This component had a positive loading (0.92) 
for sand and negative loadings (-0.68 to -0.84) for the other 
variables. However, density was not strongly correlated (r = 
0.05) with this component.
Table 2. Distribution of density classes of ponderosa pine trees reconstructed 
for historical, 1880 forests on 53 sites of 9 terrestrial ecosystem survey 
types in northern Arizona. Ecosystems are arranged in general order of 
low to high tree density.
	
Trees/acre
Ecosystem type	
<10	
10 to 17	
18 to 23	
24 to 29	
≥30	
Total
	
––––––––––––––– Number of sites ––––––––––––––––
Clay basalt	
6	
	
	
	
	
6
Red cinder	
1	
4	
	
	
1	
6
Dry limestone	
1	
3	
2	
	
	
6
Black cinder	
	
1	
3	
1	
	
5
Benmorite	
	
1	
1	
1	
2	
5
Mixed igneous	
1	
	
1	
3	
1	
6
Rocky basalt	
	
	
2	
4	
1	
7
Moist limestone	
	
	
1	
4	
1	
6
Moist basalt	
	
1	
1	
	
4	
6
Total	
9	
10	
11	
13	
10	
53
Table 3. Grouping of terrestrial ecosystem survey types into low and 
high density classes of ponderosa pine trees reconstructed for 
historical, 1880 forests on 53 sites in northern Arizona.
	
Trees/acre
Ecosystem types	
<24	
≥24	
Total
	
–––– Number of sites ––––
Clay basalt, red cinder, dry 	
21	
2	
23 
  limestone, black cinder
Benmorite, mixed igneous, 	
9	
21	
30 
  rocky basalt, moist  
  limestone, moist basalt
Total	
30	
23	
53

6
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
Discussion
Variation in overall historical density of ponderosa pine 
trees across the landscape was well-captured by the TES frame-
work. The TES was especially useful for identifying where low 
and high density sites occurred (table 3). Since the TES already 
is in map form, managers could use the TES to anticipate den-
sity ranges for mapping units in project areas. These expected 
densities should be checked by site-specific field surveys, since 
21 percent of sites were exceptions that did not fit the typical 
low or high density classification of ecosystem types.
Our hypothesis that dry ecosystems contained the lowest 
tree densities was only partially supported by the data. The 
four ecosystems that received the least precipitation did have 
the lowest densities (table 1). However, within this group, the 
black cinder ecosystem had 18 percent less precipitation, but 
possessed 11-fold greater mean density, than the clay basalt 
ecosystem. These findings were consistent with the relatively 
weak correlation (0.24) of density with precipitation. Density 
was likely influenced across the landscape by multivariate in-
teractions with moisture and other factors such as soil clay 
content affecting frost-heaving (Haasis 1923), species-specific 
competition with perennial grasses and sedges (Pearson 1942), 
fire regimes shaping availability of safe sites for seedling estab-
lishment and survival (White 1985), and possibly rock cover 
providing protection for seedlings in some ecosystems. The 
TES may have captured variation in these factors, explaining 
why specific ecosystem types within the TES were more closely 
related to density than was moisture alone.
Variability within the broad dry and moist ecosystem type 
groupings and within specific ecosystem types could be related 
to several factors. For example, the TES mapping units contain 
variability in soils and vegetation, which is inherent in any eco-
logical mapping effort that breaks continuous variation into 
discrete mapping units (Miller and others 1995). Competition 
with understory vegetation could have influenced tree densities 
within ecosystems (Pearson 1942). The two sites, for instance, 
in the moist basalt ecosystem that contained the lowest densi-
ties (table 2) exhibited 25 percent more plant species/10.8 ft2 
in the understory at the sites in 2003 (Abella and Covington 
2006). Whether or not understory vegetation has changed 
since historical times, we can say that contemporary sites with 
especially species-rich and productive understories did not sup-
port the highest historical tree densities. While no quantitative 
data are available on variation of historical understory vegeta-
tion across the landscape, future research that examines effects 
of soil influences mediated through understory vegetation on 
tree densities in contemporary forests could help assess under-
story effects on trees within the TES framework. Fire regimes 
were not part of TES development, and while it is unclear how 
variable fire regimes were across the landscape given that five 
investigations in the study area have reported a tight range of 
two- to five-year fire return intervals (Van Horne and Fulé 
2006), the possibility that fire regimes influenced tree densities 
within ecosystem types cannot be dismissed. Other factors that 
were not part of the TES could have influenced density, such as 
wildlife, insects/disease, local disturbances, or patterns of pine 
seed dispersal.
In the following sections, we describe density patterns with-
in each ecosystem type.
Clay Basalt
None of the six sample sites of this ecosystem had greater 
than 8 ponderosa pine trees/acre and four of six sites contained 
less than 1 tree/acre, making this the least dense among the 
nine ecosystem types examined. Study sites were situated on 
Anderson Mesa and southwest of Slate Mountain, at an average 
elevation (7167 ft) identical to the average of all 53 sites, and 
with medium modeled precipitation (table 1). Based on the 
high average 0- to 6-inch soil clay concentration (31 percent), 
we suspect that clayey soils limited density in this ecosystem. 
Large cracks in the soil, sometimes a foot wide and several feet 
deep, suggest that soil expansion/contraction (frost-heaving or 
drought-related) could have reduced seedling survival (Haasis 
1923). Ponding of water on the clay surface in spring also may 
have influenced survival. The few ponderosa pine trees occur-
ring on sample sites were often associated with rocky outcrops. 
A study by Gascho Landis and Bailey (2005) on Anderson 
Mesa in this ecosystem indicated that densities of Utah juniper 
(Juniperus osteosperma) and two-needle pinyon pine (Pinus edu-
lis) were much greater than ponderosa pine. These data suggest 
that this ecosystem historically was a juniper-pinyon woodland 
with only scattered ponderosa pine.
Red Cinder
Density of five of the six sites was in the range of 7 to 
17 trees/acre, among the lowest of all ecosystems. Low pre-
cipitation combined with gravelly, sandy textured soils low in 
moisture probably limited seedling establishment. However, 
the sixth site of this ecosystem contained 74 trees/acre, 4.4 
times greater than the next densest site of this ecosystem and 16 
trees/acre greater than the second densest site (58 trees/acre) of 
all 53 sample sites. This unusually dense site in this ecosystem 
is perplexing because the site’s soil textural class (sandy loam) 
is the same as the average for this ecosystem, and there were 
no readily apparent soil or topographic differences with sites 
that possessed lower densities. There was a high incidence of 

7
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
fire-scarred trees at this site (Abella 2008), although this could 
simply have been related to the high density of trees available 
for recording fires.
Dry Limestone
Density was 14 to 24 trees/acre at five of the six sites, placing 
this type in the low half among ecosystems. Tree establishment 
was likely limited by dry climates and sandy soils low in avail-
able water. The site with an unusually low density (6 trees/acre) 
for this ecosystem had sandy loam-loamy sand surface soils like 
the other sites. Precipitation and topography also were com-
parable. However, similar to the clay basalt ecosystem, more 
juniper (Juniperus spp.) trees were present at this site, possibly 
indicating a marginal site for ponderosa pine or greater inter-
specific competition.
Black Cinder
This ecosystem contained the least understory vegetation of 
all sampled ecosystems, with soil patches of 0.025 acres com-
monly having no plants at all. Therefore, competition with 
understory plants likely minimally affected pine establish-
ment in this ecosystem. The same dry, surficial layer of gravelly 
cinders limiting understory vegetation would be expected to re-
duce tree establishment (Hanks and others 1983). Apparently, 
however, pine had the ability to root through the cinders to 
finer textured bands below (Abella and Covington 2006) be-
cause density was medium in this ecosystem. The site with the 
highest density of trees in this ecosystem (30 trees/acre, 8 trees/
acre greater than the next highest site) had a slight increase in 
silt in the surface layer making it a loamy sand (rather than 
a sand). We hypothesize that tree density increases when the 
thickness of the surficial layer of cinders declines or as the silt 
content increases.
Benmorite
This ecosystem could benefit from additional sampling as 
three sites contained densities of 16 to 27 trees/acre, while the 
remaining two sites had particularly high densities of 52 and 
57 trees/acre. All sites exhibited loam textures for the 0- to 
6-inch layer and 23 to 24 inches of precipitation/year. The two 
sites with elevated densities contained 1.7 times more total ni-
trogen on average than the three low density sites.
Mixed Igneous
Density was between 24 and 29 trees/acre at four of the 
six sites, but it was comparatively low at 6 and 20 trees/acre at 
the other two sites. These two sites were northwest and north 
of the San Francisco Peaks and had the highest precipitation, 
soil total nitrogen, and cover of understory grasses and sedges 
within this ecosystem. Arizona fescue, the dominant grass, is 
considered the strongest competitor with pine among peren-
nial grasses (Pearson 1942). We hypothesize that understory 
competition especially limited pine establishment on these 
sites that otherwise had climates and soils favorable for sup-
porting high pine densities.
Rocky Basalt
Six of the seven sites had a tight range of 21 to 29 trees/
acre, while the seventh site contained 46 trees/acre. This site 
had loam surface textures typical of the other sites within this 
ecosystem, only 54 percent of the average soil nitrogen, slope 
gradients less than 8 percent like the other sites, and within an 
inch of the ecosystem’s average precipitation. Further work is 
needed to resolve why these types of rare exceptions occurred 
to the typical densities in this ecosystem.
Moist Limestone
This ecosystem exhibited the most consistent density among 
the TES types, ranging from 22 to 34 trees/acre with four of 
six sites differing by fewer than 3 trees/acre. Although soils are 
derived from limestone, pH from a 0- to 20-inch depth aver-
aged 6.1 to 6.4, similar to the basalt and benmorite ecosystems 
(Abella and Covington 2006). Precipitation also was similar. 
Soil texture from 0 to 6 inches was sandier (sandy loam) in this 
ecosystem than in the basalt-benmorite types (loam-silt loam). 
This sandier texture may have constrained the ability of this 
ecosystem to support the particularly high densities that some 
sites of the basalt-benmorite ecosystems did. On the other 
hand, this ecosystem did not have the low density sites that the 
basalt-benmorite ecosystems contained.
Moist Basalt
This ecosystem had four (39 to 58 trees/acre) of the seven 
densest sites among the 53 sample sites. The other two sites in 
this ecosystem, however, contained only 16 and 18 trees/acre. 
Surface textures on these sites were loams rather than silt loams 
as in the other sites of this ecosystem. Still, silt + clay content 
differed little (62 percent on the low density versus 69 per-
cent on the high density sites). Precipitation actually averaged 
3 inches greater on the low density than on the high density 
sites, and all plots had similar topography (slope gradients <5 
percent). These sites illustrate that chance or factors (for ex-
ample, fire regimes) other than those that we measured may be 
important in explaining exceptions to typical density patterns.
Collectively, patterns of tree density among the individual 
ecosystems suggest that the TES effectively corresponded with 

8
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
generalized variation in tree density classes across the land-
scape. Managers should be aware, however, that exceptions 
to the typical density patterns within an ecosystem did occur. 
Reasons for these exceptions are poorly understood and could 
be related to variation within the TES (such as soil inclusions 
that are not typical of the rest of the mapping units), factors 
like fire regimes that are not part of the TES, or continuous 
variation in factors (for example, rock cover) or combinations 
of factors constraining tree densities. Further research on the 
potential relationships of these factors with historical density 
could be useful to advance our understanding of the use of the 
TES for estimating tree density. 
Management Implications
• The TES is useful for understanding variation in the 
historical density of ponderosa pine trees across the 
landscape. The TES correctly categorized 79 percent of 53 
sample sites as low (<24 trees/acre) or high (≥24 trees/acre) 
density.
• The TES is available as a map (Miller and others 1995); 
therefore, managers can identify ranges of anticipated 
historical densities for TES mapping units within project 
areas.
• Having these density estimates facilitates an understanding 
of the tree densities that different ecosystems supported in 
the past. These densities may be useful for assessing site 
capability, evaluating the degree to which forest structure 
has changed, and preparing tree thinning prescriptions.
• Future research could refine anticipated densities among 
the TES types through further sampling and could seek to 
understand exceptions within ecosystems to their typical 
densities.
Acknowledgments
Funding was provided by the U.S. Forest Service and 
the Ecological Restoration Institute for fieldwork and the 
Ecological Restoration Institute for the preparation of the 
manuscript. We thank the Coconino National Forest and 
the Northern Arizona University Centennial Forest for access 
to study sites; Matt Tuten, Mike Stoddard, Dave Passovoy, 
Kristen Pearson, and students with the Ecological Restoration 
Institute for help mapping six of the sites; Judy Springer for 
providing logistical support for fieldwork; Brian Zimmer for 
performing soil carbon and nitrogen analyses; Joe Crouse for 
conducting PRISM GIS analyses and preparing fig. 1; Sharon 
Altman for formatting the figures; and David Bell (Duke 
University) and Gerald Gottfried, L. Scott Baggett, and Lindy 
Myers of the Rocky Mountain Research Station for reviewing 
the manuscript.
References
Abella, Scott R.; Covington, W. Wallace. 2006. Forest ecosys-
tems of an Arizona Pinus ponderosa landscape: multifactor 
classification and implications for ecological restoration. 
Journal of Biogeography. 33:1368-1383.
Abella, Scott R. 2008. A unique old-growth ponderosa pine 
forest in northern Arizona. Journal of the Arizona-Nevada 
Academy of Science. 40:1-11.
Allen, Craig D.; Savage, Melissa; Falk, Donald A.; Suckling, 
Kieran F.; Swetnam, Thomas W.; Schulke, Todd; Stacey, 
Peter B.; Morgan, Penelope; Hoffman, Martos; Klingel, 
Jon T. 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern pon-
derosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological 
Applications. 12:1418-1433.
Bell, David M.; Parysow, Pablo F.; Moore, Margaret M. 2009. 
Assessing the representativeness of the oldest permanent in-
ventory plots in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. 
Restoration Ecology. 17:369-377.
Covington, W. Wallace; Moore, Margaret M. 1994. 
Southwestern ponderosa forest structure: changes since 
Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry. 92:39-47.
Covington, William Wallace. 2003. Restoring ecosystem health 
in frequent-fire forests of the American West. Ecological 
Restoration. 21:7-11.
Daly, Christopher; Halbleid, Michael; Smith, Joseph I.; 
Gibson, Wayne P.; Doggett, Matthew K.; Taylor, George 
H.; Curtis, Jan; Pasteris, Phillip P. 2008. Physiographically 
sensitive mapping of climatological temperature and precip-
itation across the conterminous United States. International 
Journal of Climatology. 28:2031-2064.
Fulé, Peter Z.; Covington, W. Wallace; Moore, Margaret 
M. 1997. Determining reference conditions for ecosys-
tem management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Ecological Applications. 7:895-908.
Gascho 
Landis, 
Andrew; 
Bailey, 
John 
Duff. 
2005. 
Reconstruction of age structure and spatial arrangement 
of piñon-juniper woodlands and savannas of Anderson 
Mesa, northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management. 
204:221-236.

9
Research Note RMRS-RN-45.  2011
Haasis, Ferdinand W. 1923. Frost heaving of western yellow 
pine seedlings. Ecology. 4:378-390.
Hanks, Jess P.; Fitzhugh, E. Lee; Hanks, Sharon R. 1983. A 
habitat type classification system for ponderosa pine for-
ests of northern Arizona. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-97. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station. 22 p.
Harrod, Richy J.; McRae, Bradner H.; Hartl, William E. 1999. 
Historical stand reconstruction in ponderosa pine forests 
to guide silvicultural prescriptions. Forest Ecology and 
Management. 114:433-446.
McCune, B.; Mefford, M.J. 1999. PC-ORD: multivariate 
analysis of ecological data. Version 4 user’s guide. Gleneden 
Beach, OR: MjM Software Design. 237 p.
Miller, Greg; Ambos, Norm; Boness, Pat; Reyher, Deanna; 
Robertson, George; Scalzone, Ken; Steinke, Rory; Subirge, 
Tom. 1995. Terrestrial ecosystems survey of the Coconino 
National Forest. U.S Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Southwestern Region. 405 p.
Moore, Margaret M.; Huffman, David W.; Fulé, Peter 
Z.; Covington, W. Wallace; Crouse, Joseph E. 2004. 
Comparison of historical and contemporary forest structure 
and composition on permanent plots in southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests. Forest Science. 50:162-176.
Pearson, G.A. 1942. Herbaceous vegetation as a factor in 
natural regeneration of ponderosa pine in the Southwest. 
Ecological Monographs. 12:315-338.
Robbie, Wayne A. 1992. Terrestrial ecosystem survey of 
National Forest System lands in the Southwest. In: 
Proceedings of the national workshop: taking an ecologi-
cal approach to management; 1992 April 27-30; Salt Lake 
City, UT. Proceedings. WO-WSA-3. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service: 114-118.
SAS Institute. 1999. SAS/STAT user’s guide. Cary, NC: SAS 
Institute, Inc. 3864 p.
U.S. Forest Service. 1986. Terrestrial ecosystem survey hand-
book. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Region 3.
Van Horne, Megan L.; Fulé, Peter Z. 2006. Comparing 
methods of reconstructing fire history using fire scars in a 
southwestern United States ponderosa pine forest. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research. 36:855-867.
White, Alan S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a 
southwestern ponderosa pine stand. Ecology. 66:589-594.


You may order additional copies of this publication by sending your 
mailing information in label form through one of the following media. 
Please specify the publication title and series number.
Publishing Services
	
Telephone	
(970) 498-1392
	
FAX	
(970) 498-1122
	
E-mail	
rschneider@fs.fed.us
	
Web site	
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/publications
	
Mailing address	
Publications Distribution
	
	
Rocky Mountain Research Station
	
	
240 West Prospect Road
	
	
Fort Collins, CO 80526

Federal Recycling Program
Printed on Recycled Paper
Rocky
   Mountain
       Research Station
The Rocky Mountain Research Station develops scientific information 
and technology to improve management, protection, and use of the 
forests and rangelands. Research is designed to meet the needs of 
the National Forest managers, Federal and State agencies, public and 
private organizations, academic institutions, industry, and individuals. 
Studies accelerate solutions to problems involving ecosystems, range, 
forests, water, recreation, fire, resource inventory, land reclamation, 
community sustainability, forest engineering technology, multiple use 
economics, wildlife and fish habitat, and forest insects and diseases. 
Studies are conducted cooperatively, and applications may be found 
worldwide.
Station Headquarters
Rocky Mountain Research Station 
240 W Prospect Road
Fort Collins, CO 80526 
(970) 498-1100
Research Locations
Reno, Nevada
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Rapid City, South Dakota
Logan, Utah
Ogden, Utah
Provo, Utah
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its 
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, 
and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, 
sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all 
or part of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who 
require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, 
large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 
720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, 
Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, 
DC 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA 
is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
Flagstaff, Arizona
Fort Collins, Colorado
Boise, Idaho
Moscow, Idaho
Bozeman, Montana
Missoula, Montana
