USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
67
In: Vance, Regina K.; Edminster, Carleton B.; Covington, W. Wallace;
Blake, Julie A. comps. 2001. Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and
conservation: steps toward stewardship; 2000 April 25–27; Flagstaff, AZ.
Proceedings RMRS-P-22. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Judith D. Springer and Amy E. M. Waltz are Research Specialists,
Ecological Restoration Institute; Margaret M. Moore is a Professor and Peter
Z. Fulé is an Assistant Research Professor, School of Forestry; W. Wallace
Covington  is a Regent’s Professor, School of Forestry, and Director, Ecologi-
cal Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, P.O. Box 15018,
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5018.
Seeding Versus Natural Regeneration: A
Comparison of Vegetation Change Following
Thinning and Burning in Ponderosa Pine
Judith D. Springer
Amy E. M. Waltz
Peter Z. Fulé
Margaret M. Moore
W. Wallace Covington
Abstract—The decision whether to seed with native species follow-
ing restoration treatments should be based on existing vegetation,
species present in or absent from the soil seed bank, past manage-
ment history, microclimate conditions and soils. We installed three
permanent monitoring plots in two areas (total 18.6 ha) at Mt.
Trumbull, AZ. Trees were thinned and the sites burned in 1996 and
1997. A 5 ha area was seeded with native shrub, grass and forb
species; the remaining 13.6 ha were unseeded. Pretreatment spe-
cies richness ranged from none to five species per plot. We recorded
13 graminoid and eight shrub species in the seeded area, and four
graminoid and four shrub species in the unseeded area. The greatest
increase in species richness in both seeded and unseeded plots
occurred approximately 1.8 years posttreatment. Perennial native
species dominated plant cover by 2.8 years, although annual native
forbs dominate the soil seed bank. Perennial grasses are nearly
absent from the seed bank. The seeded area had the highest
diversity, but it also had twice as many nonnative species (14 versus
7 in the unseeded plots). By August 1999, maximum species rich-
ness reached 51 species on the seeded plot. Of these species, 80
percent were native. Although seeding increases diversity, it may
also have the long-term tradeoff of introducing new genotypes and
species, both native and nonnative.
Introduction ____________________
Human-induced changes that have impacted herbaceous
forbs, grass and shrub species over approximately the last
150 years in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests have been
attributed primarily to domestic livestock overgrazing, ac-
tive fire suppression, increased ponderosa pine density, and
climate changes (Arnold 1950; Weaver 1951; Cooper 1960;
Covington and Moore 1994; Touchan and others 1995;
Covington and others 1997). Attempts to restore the herba-
ceous and shrub species in Southwestern ponderosa pine
forests are hampered by both ecological and social consider-
ations. The scale of ecological restoration projects in the
Southwest may be on the order of thousands of hectares. In
addition to tree thinning and prescribed burning, restora-
tion of these areas sometimes requires seeding large amounts
of native seed. Seeding with native species poses many
challenges: seed may be prohibitively expensive, unavail-
able in the quantities necessary, or collected from an area
that is geographically or climatologically dissimilar to the
area undergoing restoration. Even if these seeds are avail-
able and applied to a site, seed or seedling mortality may
occur from competition (by both native and nonnative spe-
cies), disease, herbivory, lack of mycorrhizal inoculants,
inclement weather, or unfulfilled germination requirements
or cues. Written historic records and photographs may be
unavailable, further hampering efforts to define past plant
communities and conditions. Other considerations are a
lack of communication between and within government
agencies and other organizations, past management prac-
tices (such as logging and road building), and a lack of
understanding or interest by the general public. Some of
these factors may be corrected or improved in order to
establish vegetation on restored sites. Others cannot be
overcome due to limited resources or permanent landscape
changes and must be considered in order to achieve manage-
ment goals for restoration.
Recent historic herbaceous and shrub species composition
and abundance are largely unknown for Southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests, and thus restoration targets must be
determined without the benefit of this information. Knowl-
edge of historic herbaceous plant communities is limited due
to a reduced capacity for preservation of nonwoody vegeta-
tion in the soil, and limited historical records. A variety of
methods, techniques, and tools have been used to determine
historical species composition and abundance. These meth-
ods and tools include historical records and photographs,
packrat middens, palynology, relict sites (Kaufmann and
others 1994), diaries, surveys, military expeditions (Dick-
Peddie 1993) and opal phytoliths (Fisher and others 1995;
Kerns 1999).
The main objective of this study was to compare a seeded
and an unseeded area to collect material for further data
exploration and generation of hypotheses. This information
can then be used to make seeding decisions in areas of
ponderosa pine forest undergoing ecological restoration.

68
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Springer, Waltz, Fulé, Moore, and Covington
Seeding Versus Natural Regeneration: A Comparison of Vegetation Change Following Thinning and Burning…
Study Area _____________________
The study area lies within the Grand Canyon–Parashant
National Monument, in northwestern Arizona, between the
Mt. Logan and Mt. Trumbull Wilderness areas and approxi-
mately 95 km southwest of Fredonia, AZ. The study area is
of primarily the ponderosa pine forest type with inter-
mingled patches of New Mexico locust (Robinia neomexicana),
Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii), and big sagebrush (Artemi-
sia tridentata). Precipitation occurs annually in a bimodal
distribution pattern and annual precipitation varies be-
tween 38–64 cm (USDI BLM 1990). Fire scars collected from
individual ponderosa pine trees indicate that fires occurred
every 4 to 6 years prior to Euro-American settlement (Fulé
1997 and unpublished data).
The Southwestern Ecological Restoration Project is a
cooperative study among the Bureau of Land Management,
Northern Arizona University, and the Arizona Game and
Fish Department. The area is managed by the BLM and
encompasses approximately 18,500 ha. Specifically, the data
for this study were collected in two units, one 5.3 ha in size,
which was seeded with a mixture of native grasses, forbs,
and shrubs. The other unit (13.4 ha) was not artificially
seeded and relied on natural regeneration by propagules
already onsite or dispersed onto the site by wind, water,
animals, or some other mechanism. The objective of the
seeding was to increase species richness and diversity and to
decrease soil erosion following ecological restoration treat-
ments of tree thinning and prescribed burning.
Methods and Materials ___________
Modified National Park Service fire monitoring protocols
(NPS 1992) were used for the plot installation and long-term
vegetation monitoring across the entire 18,500 ha project
area. The point line-intercept method was used for vegeta-
tion monitoring. We installed two 50 m transects per plot,
and inventoried these lines every 30 cm for a total of 332
points per plot. Species that were not intercepted by the
transects were recorded within a 5 m belt on either side of the
transects (hereafter referred to as “belt transects”). Three of
these monitoring plots fell within the immediate study area:
one in the seeded unit and two in the unseeded unit.
Although many more plots were established across the
landscape over several years, only data from these three
plots will be discussed in this paper due to the longer period
over which these plots have been monitored and their use as
“demonstration” plots.
We conducted pretreatment inventories in the fall of 1995
in the unit to be seeded and in the spring of 1996 in the
unseeded unit. The area was thinned of postsettlement trees
in the summer of 1996 and burned in the fall of 1996. The 5.3
ha unit was broadcast seeded in December of 1996 and
reseeded the following year using a chain pulled behind an
all terrain vehicle (ATV) to cover seed with soil. Both units
were fenced to exclude cattle, but deer were able to access the
area. The plots were reinventoried in August 1997, 1998 and
1999. Species that were seeded are listed in table 1. The cost
of seeding was estimated to be approximately $214 per acre
(1996 dollars), with additional money spent on reseeding in
1998 ($26 per acre). Seed was certified “weed free,” but
germination testing was not conducted by the authors.
Nomenclature in this paper was adopted from the USDA
Plants Database (2000), Utah Flora (Welsh and others1993),
and Intermountain Flora (Cronquist and others 1972, 1977,
1984, 1989, 1994 and 1997).
Results ________________________
Percent Ground Cover
Percentages of substrates and plant cover are shown in
figure 1. Prior to ecological restoration treatments, 86 per-
cent of the ground cover in the seeded unit consisted of litter
(primarily pine needles), and plant cover was less than 1
percent. In the unseeded unit, litter averaged 47 percent
prior to treatment and fell to 23 percent the year following
ecological restoration treatments. By 1999 (the third year
following treatments), litter had increased to 44 percent in
this unit, while in the seeded unit, litter increased to 24
percent. Plant cover in the unseeded unit rose from 6 percent
(pretreatment) to a high of 50 percent in 1998 due primarily
to the occurrence of early successional annuals and short-
lived perennials, such as lambsquarters (Chenopodium spp.),
spreading groundsmoke (Gayophytum diffusum) and silver
lupine (Lupinus argenteus). Plant cover leveled off in 1999 to
25 percent in this unit. However, in the seeded unit, plant
cover continued to increase in 1999 to 44 percent. Soil cover
dramatically increased in the seeded unit following treat-
ments: 5 percent pretreatment and 58 percent in 1997. It has
continued to decrease in both units as other types of cover
begin to predominate.
Species Composition
The only two plant families represented in the seeded unit
in 1997, the first year following restoration treatments, were
the Chenopodiaceae (goosefoot family) and the Poaceae
(grass family) (table 2). In 1998, 11 families were repre-
sented. The Chenopodiaceae family was most common (23
percent of the ground cover). There were 15 families in 1999.
The most common families were the Scrophulariaceae,
Asteraceae, and Chenopodiaceae.
The most numerous species in the seeded unit in 1997
were Chenopodium leptophyllum (narrowleaf goosefoot),
Agropyron sp. (wheatgrass), Bouteloua gracilis (blue grama),
and Elymus elymoides (squirreltail). By 1999, perennial
Table 1—List of species seeded at Mt. Trumbull in 5 ha area.
Grasses
Purshia tridentate
Achnatherum hymenoides
Rhus trilobata
Bouteloua gracilis
Ribes cereum
Bromus marginatus
Sambucus cerulea
Elymus elymoides
Symphoricarpos oreophilus
Elymus trachycaulus
Forbs
Koeleria macrantha
Eriogonum umbellatuma
Pascopyrum smithii
Linum lewisiia
Schizachyrium scoparius
Penstemon barbatus
Shrubs
Penstemon palmeri
Mahonia repens
aSpecies seeded in 1997, but not in 1996.

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
69
Seeding Versus Natural Regeneration: A Comparison of Vegetation Change Following Thinning and Burning…
Springer, Waltz, Fulé, Moore, and Covington
grasses and forbs were beginning to dominate this site. The
five most numerous species were Agropyron (Pascopyrum)
smithii (western wheatgrass), Bromus carinatus (mountain
brome), Conyza canadensis (Canadian horseweed),
Thinopyrum intermedium (intermediate wheatgrass) and
Chenopodium album (lambsquarters).
In the unseeded unit, pretreatment family representation
was limited to Poaceae, Asteraceae, Fabaceae, and
Scrophulariaceae (table 2). In 1997, there were eight fami-
lies represented in this unit. The most common families
were the Fabaceae, Asteraceae, Polygonaceae, Poaceae, and
Scrophulariaceae. The number of families was highest in
1998 (11). The number of families decreased in 1999 to eight
as some of the early-successional species began to disappear
from the aboveground vegetation. Families included Poaceae,
Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Onagraceae, Scrophulariaceae,
Polygonaceae, Fagaceae and Chenopodiaceae.
The most numerous species in the unseeded unit in 1997
were Artemisia tridentata (big sagebrush), Lupinus argenteus
(silver lupine), Polygonum douglasii (Johnston’s knotweed),
and Elymus elymoides (squirreltail). The most common
species in 1999 were the same four with the addition of
Senecio multilobatus (lobeleaf groundsel) and Bromus
tectorum (cheatgrass).
In the seeded unit, the percent cover of annuals peaked in
1998, 2 years following restoration treatments, at approxi-
mately 29 percent of the ground cover. Perennials continued
to increase and composed 31 percent of the ground cover in
1999. In the unseeded unit, both annuals and perennials
peaked in 1998. Annuals composed 20 percent and perenni-
als approximately 40 percent of the ground cover. By 1999,
annuals had decreased to 7 percent and perennials to
20 percent of the ground cover. Biennials remained at less
than 5 percent of the ground cover in all years and in both
treatments.
Nonnative Species
The number of nonnative species was higher in the seeded
unit. Eight species were intercepted by the transects: Agropy-
ron cristatum (crested wheatgrass), Bromus inermis (smooth
brome), Bromus tectorum (cheatgrass), Lappula occidentalis
var. occidentalis (stickseed), Marrubium vulgare (hore-
hound), Salsola tragus (Russian thistle), Thinopyrum
intermedium (intermediate wheatgrass) and Verbascum
thapsus (common mullein). In addition, Bromus commutatus
(hairy chess), Bromus japonicus (Japanese brome), Convol-
vulus arvensis (field bindweed), Lactuca serriola (prickly
Seeded
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
BOLE
DUFF
LITTER
PLANT
ROCK
SOIL
WOOD
Percent
PRE
1997
1998
1999
Unseeded
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
BOLE
DUFF
LITTER
PLANT
ROCK
SCAT
SOIL
WOOD
Percent
PRE
1997
1998
1999
Figure 1—Percent ground cover of plants and substrates in the seeded and
unseeded units at Mt. Trumbull.

70
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Springer, Waltz, Fulé, Moore, and Covington
Seeding Versus Natural Regeneration: A Comparison of Vegetation Change Following Thinning and Burning…
lettuce), Poa pratensis (Kentucky bluegrass) and Tragopogon
dubius (salsify) were encountered within the 20 m wide belt
transect. Percentages of native and nonnative species are
given in table 3. There was an increasing trend of nonnatives
in the seeded unit, from less than 1 percent of the vegetative
cover in 1997 to approximately 24 percent of the vegetative
cover in 1999. In the unseeded unit, nonnatives showed an
increasing trend as well, from 5 percent in 1996 to 13 percent
in 1999. Cheatgrass and field bindweed, both inventoried in
this study, are listed in Arizona as noxious weeds
Only three nonnative species were captured by the
transects in the unseeded unit: B. tectorum (cheatgrass), L.
serriola (prickly lettuce) and V. thapsus (common mullein).
Four additional species were inventoried in the belt transects:
Polygonum aviculare (prostrate knotweed), Polygonum con-
volvulus (black bindweed), P. pratensis (Kentucky blue-
grass), and T. dubius (salsify).
Reasons for the larger number of nonnatives in the seeded
unit could be due to: (1) their presence in the soil seed bank;
(2) as contaminants in the seed mix; (3) increased foot traffic
in this unit because of its use as a demonstration site,
however, the unseeded unit is also used for that purpose; or
(4) through colonization from offsite by dispersal mecha-
nisms. The seeded unit is in close proximity to a meadow.
Grasses
Ten species of grasses were inventoried in the seeded unit.
These species were Achnatherum hymenoides (Indian rice-
grass), A. cristatum, Agropyron (Pascopyrum) smithii (west-
ern wheatgrass), Bouteloua gracilis (blue grama), Bromus
carinatus (mountain brome), B. inermis, B. tectorum, Elymus
elymoides (squirreltail), Koeleria cristatum (junegrass), and
T. intermedium. In addition, the belt transect contained
B. commutatus, B. japonicus, and P. pratensis. Schizachyrium
scoparium (little bluestem) was seeded, but was not re-
corded in the monitoring plots prior to 2000.
Only four species of grasses were present in the plots in the
unseeded unit and thus most likely regenerated from the soil
seed bank or were carried in from the area surrounding the
site. These species were Bouteloua gracilis, Bromus tectorum,
Elymus elymoides, and Poa fendleriana. Poa pratensis was
also captured by the belt transect.
Table  2—Percent frequency of plant families over time in a seeded and
an unseeded unit at Mt. Trumbull, AZ.
Unit and year
Plant families
Percent
Seeded unit
Pretreatment
No species present
1997
Chenopodiaceae
2.1
Poaceae
1.5
1998
Chenopodiaceae
24
Scrophulariaceae
3.0
Onagraceae
2.7
Polygonaceae
1.5
Poaceae
1.5
Fumiariaceae
0.9
Boraginaceae
0.9
Papaveraceae
0.6
Lamiaceae
0.3
Asteraceae
0.3
Solanaceae
0.3
1999
Poaceae
25
Scrophulariaceae
7.5
Asteraceae
5.1
Chenopodiaceae
4.8
Boraginaceae
2.4
Onagraceae
1.8
Polygonaceae
1.5
Lamiaceae
1.5
Amaranthaceae
1.2
Solanaceae
1.2
Nyctaginaceae
0.6
Verbenaceae
0.6
Linaceae
0.3
Fabaceae
0.3
Brassicaceae
0.3
Unseeded unit
Pretreatment
Poaceae
2.6
Asteraceae
2.4
Fabaceae
0.8
Scrophulariaceae
0.5
1997
Fabaceae
10
Asteraceae
5.1
Poaceae
3.0
Polygonaceae
2.3
Scrophulariaceae
1.7
Euphorbiaceae
0.6
Chenopodiaceae
0.2
Rhamnaceae
0.2
1998
Fabaceae
22
Asteraceae
11
Poaceae
6.9
Onagraceae
6.9
Scrophulariaceae
5.6
Polygonaceae
4.8
Chenopodiaceae
2.9
Euphorbiaceae
1.2
Fagaceae
1.1
Polemoniaceae
0.5
Brassicaceae
0.2
1999
Poaceae
9.9
Asteraceae
8.7
Fabaceae
5.0
Onagraceae
1.7
Polygonaceae
1.2
Scrophulariaceae
1.1
Fagaceae
0.5
Chenopodiaceae
0.3
Table 3—Percentages of native and nonnative species in the seeded
and unseeded units at Mt. Trumbull.
Plot
Year
Native
Nonnative
Unknown
- - - - - - - - percent - - - - - - - - - - 
Seeded
1995
—
—
—
1997
75
—
25
1998
92
6
2
1999
74
24
2
Unseeded
1996
86
15
—
1997
95
5
—
1998
92
9
—
1999
87
13
—

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
71
Seeding Versus Natural Regeneration: A Comparison of Vegetation Change Following Thinning and Burning…
Springer, Waltz, Fulé, Moore, and Covington
Shrubs
Eight species of shrubs were present in the seeded unit.
These species were Amelanchier utahensis (Utah service-
berry), Arctostaphylos pungens (pointleaf manzanita), Garrya
flavescens (ashy silktassel), Purshia tridentata (antelope
bitterbrush), Rhus trilobata (skunkbush sumac), Ribes
cereum (wax currant), and Symphoricarpos oreophilus
(whortleleaf snowberry). Bitterbrush, sumac, currant, and
snowberry were seeded, so it is difficult to ascertain whether
the species monitored on the plots came from natural regen-
eration or from seeding. However, seeding with shrub spe-
cies appeared to be effective with the exception of Mahonia
repens (Oregon-grape). No specimens of this taxa were found
in the seeded unit. Sambucus cerulea (blue elderberry) was
not captured by the monitoring plots, although it was ob-
served nearby.
In the unseeded unit, four species were inventoried on the
plots: A. pungens, Artemisia tridentata, A. utahensis, and
R. cereum. Species that were observed in the unit, but not
captured by the monitoring plots, included G. flavescens,
A. pungens and Ceanothus fendleri (buckbrush). These spe-
cies presumably sprouted after fire. With the exception of big
sagebrush (A. tridentata), shrubs were not detected in the
soil seed bank (or propagule bank) from samples taken at
Mt. Trumbull (Springer 1999). However, some species ap-
parently are still present in the form of underground rhi-
zomes or buds and will regenerate following fire. Nearly all
shrub species in these units were heavily browsed, most
likely by deer or rabbits, since elk are not present at Mt.
Trumbull and cattle were excluded from the study area
(personal observations).
Legumes
No species of legumes (Fabaceae or pea family) were
manually seeded in either unit and no species of legumes
were captured by the line transects in the seeded unit. The
only occurrence of legumes in this unit was one record of
Lotus utahensis (Utah birdsfoot trefoil) from the belt transects
in 1998.
In the unseeded unit, Lupinus argenteus (silver lupine)
was recorded on the line transects prior to treatment. Silver
lupine was recorded in all years in both plots in this unit. Its
frequency was highest in 1998, the year following thinning
and burning (an average of 16 percent of the ground cover).
Other legumes recorded in the unseeded unit were Lotus
spp. (Lotus plebius, Lotus wrightii, Lotus sp.) in 1997, 1998,
and 1999 and Lupinus kingii (King’s lupine) in 1998 on a belt
transect.
Simpson’s Index and Species Richness
Pretreatment species richness was very low (less than five
species) on the line transects on all plots (fig. 2). In 1998, it
peaked in the unseeded unit (17 species), but continued to
increase in the seeded unit in 1999 (28 species). The total
number of species in the seeded unit, including species
captured on the belt transects, was 51. The average number
of species per plot in the unseeded unit was 36. The Simpson’s
diversity index showed a similar trend to species richness in
the seeded unit (fig. 3), increasing from 0 in the pretreat-
ment inventory to 14 in 1999. In the unseeded unit, it peaked
at 10 in one plot in 1998, but continued to increase slightly
in the other plot through 1999 (fig. 3).
Discussion _____________________
Seeding is a complex issue, and the positive and negative
aspects must be weighed before making any type of manage-
ment decision relating to ecological restoration in South-
western ponderosa pine forests. Seeding has many advan-
tages including decreased soil erosion (Beyers and others
1998) and increased vegetative ground cover (Williamson
1984; Tyser and others 1998). It also produces an increase in
the amount of available seed stock for colonizing nearby
areas (Jacobson and others 1994) and, if successful, it will
increase species richness and diversity (Grant and others
1997). However, seeding also has disadvantages, such as
high cost and lack of locally-adapted genetic material for
most areas (Dunne 1999; Roundy 1999). Also, increased
species diversity can be a major disadvantage if this increase
is due to nonnative species. This study, though exploratory,
seems to indicate that although seeding increased the spe-
cies richness and diversity, these increases were due in part
to increases in nonnative species that were possibly brought
onsite by the seed mixture. The percentage of nonnatives in
the seeded unit continued to increase in 1999 and will be
monitored to determine if this trend continues.
There is presently a dearth of native perennial grasses,
legumes, and shrubs in the ponderosa pine forests of the Mt.
Trumbull area, based on this study, on previous soil seed
bank studies (Springer 1999), and on data from other areas
of ponderosa pine forest in northern Arizona. Rasmussen
(1941), in one of the few historical publications from the
Arizona Strip containing information on species frequency,
mentions that by the time of his publication, certain legumes
had entirely disappeared from the Kaibab Plateau (about
45 km to the east) due in part to severe overgrazing by wild
Figure 2—Species richness in the seeded and unseeded units
at Mt. Trumbull following ecological restoration treatments.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Pretreatment
1997
1998
1999
Species Richness
Seeded
Unseeded

72
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
Springer, Waltz, Fulé, Moore, and Covington
Seeding Versus Natural Regeneration: A Comparison of Vegetation Change Following Thinning and Burning…
deer populations and/or domestic livestock in the late 1800s
and early 1900s. Native shrub species also were decimated
from much of the Plateau, presumably by fluctuations in the
deer population. The Mt. Trumbull area has populations of
deer but no elk, and it has a history of grazing by domestic
cattle (Altschul and Fairley 1989). Seeding can return extir-
pated species to a site, although information is necessary to
ascertain if these species were historically present. If species
have been decimated from a site, then the genetic material
from species adapted to that site is likely no longer available.
Nonnative species, particularly cheatgrass and common
mullein, increased following restoration treatments in the
study area at Mt. Trumbull. Common mullein is considered
to be an early-successional species and is expected eventu-
ally to be replaced by native species in the treated areas, but
cheatgrass has been known to change the species composi-
tion and fire cycle of areas where it has become dominant
(Sheley and Petroff 1999). If the goal of management efforts
is to decrease the amount of cheatgrass in the restored areas,
then these areas should be heavily seeded with early succes-
sional native grass species able to compete with the cheat-
grass, such as squirreltail (Jones 1998). Early successional
species made up a large percentage of species in the soil seed
bank in the study area (Springer 1999). Their decline after
the first few years was expected because many of these
species are annuals or biennials, rely on disturbance to
maintain their populations, and use the soil seed bank to
store genotypes for future environmental variability
(Springer 1999). However, the low frequency of perennial
species in the unseeded unit is of some concern if this pattern
is indicative of the entire study area.
Species richness and diversity began to drop off in the
unseeded unit in the third year following restoration
treatments, and few new species were recorded. This trend
could be attributable to weather or to a slowdown in the rate
of successional response after treatment. Both units should
continue to be monitored to observe trends. As additional
units across the entire project area are treated with overstory
tree thinning and prescribed burning, more data will be
available to assist with management decisions.
This study points to the need to conduct seeding trials to
determine which seeds are germinating, and how long it
takes for these species to become established. Seeding trials
can also be used to pinpoint the origin of nonnative species
appearing onsite, whether through dispersal mechanisms or
in seed mixtures. There is also a need to conduct studies to
determine the effects of prescribed burning on leguminous
species in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests, as well as
the inputs of nitrogen by these species, for their role in
nitrogen cycling is just beginning to be quantified (Hendricks
and others 1999).
When considering whether and with what species a site
should be seeded, each area needs to be treated individually
and blanket treatments should not be applied to huge areas
of the landscape. Factors to take into account are existing
vegetation, species in the soil seed bank, past management
history, microclimate conditions and soils. Soil seed bank
samples taken prior to ecological restoration treatments can
give an idea of the species that will colonize a site following
these treatments (Springer 1999). As the demand for native
seed increases across the West, we hope that supply will
grow to meet demand and eventually costs will decline;
however, there is a tradeoff of cost versus maintaining seed
mixtures that are weed-free. Further effort should be made
to collect seeds in areas undergoing restoration to maintain
the genetic material adapted to that area.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Pretreatment
1997
1998
1999
Simpson's Diversity Index
Seeded
Unseeded
Figure 3—Simpson’s diversity index (SI) in the seeded and
unseeded units at Mt. Trumbull following ecological restora-
tion treatments.

USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-22. 2001
73
Seeding Versus Natural Regeneration: A Comparison of Vegetation Change Following Thinning and Burning…
Springer, Waltz, Fulé, Moore, and Covington
Acknowledgments ______________
Funding for this study was provided by the United States
Department of the Interior and the BLM Arizona Strip
District Office. We would also like to thank Dr. Tina Ayers,
Dr. Randy Scott, Dr. Mike Kearsley, Dr. David Hammond,
Nancy Brian, Lee Hughes, and John Anderson for their
assistance with plant identification, the staff and students
of the Northern Arizona University Ecological Restoration
Institute and the staff of the BLM Arizona Strip District
Office, particularly Greg Taylor, Ken Moore, and Roger
Taylor.
References _____________________
Altschul, J.H., and Fairley, H.C. 1989. Man, models and manage-
ment: an overview of the archaeology of the Arizona Strip and the
management of its cultural resources. Prepared for USDA Forest
Service and USDI Bureau of Land Management. Submitted by
Statistical Research, Plateau Archaeology, Dames and Moore,
Inc.
Arnold, J.F. 1950. Changes in ponderosa pine bunchgrass ranges in
northern Arizona resulting from pine regeneration and grazing.
Journal of Forestry. 48:118–126
Beyers, J.L., Wohlgemuth, P.M., Wakeman, C.D. and Conard, S.G.
1998. Does ryegrass seeding control postfire erosion in chaparral?
Fire Management Notes. 58(3):30–34.
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of
southwest ponderosa pine forests since white settlement. Eco-
logical Monographs. 30:129–164.
Covington, W.W. and Moore, M.M. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa
forest structure: changes since Euro-American settlement. Jour-
nal of Forestry. 92:39–47.
Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Hart, S.C., Kolb, T.E.,
Mast, J.N., Sackett, S.S., and Wagner, M.R. 1997. Restoring
ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest.
Journal of Forestry. 95:23–29.
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A.H., Holmgren, N.H., and Reveal, J.L.
1972. Intermountain flora: vascular plants of the Intermountain
West, USA. Volume 1: geological and botanical history of the
region, its plant geography and a glossary. The vascular crypto-
grams and the gymnosperms. Hafner Publishing Co., New York,
NY.
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A.H., Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, J.L., and
Holmgren, P.K.1977. Intermountain flora: vascular plants of the
Intermountain West, USA.Volume 6: the monocotyledons. Co-
lumbia University Press, New York, NY.
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A.H., Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, J.L., and
Holmgren, P.K. 1984. Intermountain flora: vascular plants of the
Intermountain West, USA. Volume 4: Asteridae (except
Asteraceae). The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY.
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A.H., Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, J.L.,
Holmgren, P.K., and Barneby, R.C. 1989. Intermountain flora:
vascular plants of the Intermountain West, USA. Volume 3, Part
B: Fabales. The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY.
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A.H, Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, J.L., and
Holmgren, P.K. 1994. Intermountain flora: vascular plants of the
Intermountain West, USA. Volume 5: Asterales. The New York
Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY.
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, N.H., and Holmgren, P.K. 1997. Inter-
mountain flora: vascular plants of the Intermountain West, USA.
Volume 3, Part A: Subclass Rosidae (except Fabales). The New
York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY.
Dick-Peddie, W. 1993. New Mexico vegetation: past, present and
future. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, NM.
Dunne, R. 1999. Common difficulties encountered in collecting
native seed. In: Holzworth, Larry K.; Brown, Ray W., comps.
Revegetation with native species: proceedings, 1997 Society for
Ecological Restoration annual meeting; 1997 November 12–15;
Ft. Lauderdale, FL. Proc. RMRS-P-8. Ogden, UT: U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station. 43 p.
Fisher, R.F., Bourn, C.N., and Fisher, W.F. 1995. Opal phytoliths as
an indicator of the floristics of prehistoric grasslands. Geoderma.
68:243–255.
Grant, C.D., Loneragan, W.A., Koch, J.M., and Bell, D.T. 1997. The
effect of burning, soil scarification and seeding on the understorey
composition of 12-year-old rehabilitated bauxite mines in West-
ern Australia. Australian Forestry. 60(1):16–23.
Hendricks, J.J., Boring, L. R. 1999. N2-fixation by native herba-
ceous legumes in burned pine ecosystems of the southeastern
United States. Forest Ecology and Management. 113:167–177.
Jacobson, E.T., Wark, D.B., Arnott, R.G., Haas, R.J., and Tober,
D.A. 1994. Sculptured seeding: An ecological approach to reveg-
etation. Restoration and Management Notes. 12(1):46–50.
Jones, T.A. 1998. The present status and future prospects of
squirreltail research. Journal of Range Management. 51(3):
326–331.
Kaufmann, M.R., Graham, R.T., Boyce, Jr., D.A., Moir, W.H., Perry,
L., Reynolds, R.T., Bassett, R.L., Mehlhop, P., Edminster, C.B.,
Block, W.M., and Corn, P.S. 1994. An ecological basis for ecosys-
tem management. USDA Forest Service, GTR-RM-246.
Kerns, B.K. 1999. Phytolith assemblages and soil characteristics
from a Southwestern ponderosa pine forest. Ph.D. dissertation.
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ.
Rasmussen, D.I. 1941. Biotic communities of Kaibab Plateau,
Arizona. Ecological Monographs. 11:229–275.
Roundy, B. 1999. Lessons from historical rangeland revegetation
for today’s restoration. In: Holzworth, Larry K.; Brown, Ray W.,
comps. Revegetation with native species: proceedings, 1997 Soci-
ety for Ecological Restoration annual meeting; 1997 November
12–15; Ft. Lauderdale, FL. Proc. RMRS-P-8. Ogden, UT: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station. 43 p.
Sheley, R.L. and Petroff, J.K. 1999. Biology and Management of
Noxious Rangeland Weeds. Oregon State University Press,
Corvallis, OR.
Springer, J.D. 1999. Soil seed bank in Southwestern ponderosa
pine: implications for ecological restoration. M.S. thesis, North-
ern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ.
Touchan, R., Swetnam, T.W. and Grissino-Mayer, H.D. 1995. Ef-
fects of livestock grazing on presettlement fire regimes in New
Mexico. Proceedings of a symposium; 1993 March 30–April 1;
Missoula, MT. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-320. Ogden, UT: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Re-
search Station. 283 p.
Tyser, R.W., Asebrook, J.M., Potter, R.W. and Kurth, L.L. 1998.
Roadside revegetation in Glacier National Park, USA: Effects of
herbicide and seeding treatments. Restoration Ecology. 6(2):
197–206.
United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conser-
vation Service. 2000. Plants Database. URL http://plants.usda.gov/.
United States Department of the Interior Bureau of Land Manage-
ment. 1990. Proposed Arizona Strip District resource manage-
ment plan and final environmental impact statement. USDI
BLM Arizona Strip District, St. George, UT.
United States Department of the Interior National Park Service.
1992. Western Region Fire Monitoring Handbook. USDI Na-
tional Park Service, Western Region, San Francisco, CA.
Weaver, H.1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the Southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Journal of Forestry. 49:93–98.
Williamson, R.L. 1984. Re-establishing North Dakota grasslands
after mining with emphasis on seasonality and use of native
species. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation. 39(6):387–390.
