7
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Establishing Reference
Conditions for Southwestern
Ponderosa Pine Forests
April 2004 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
These forests have been significantly altered through more than a century of fire suppression,
livestock grazing, logging, and other ecosystem changes. As a result, ecological and recreational
values of these forests have decreased, while the threat of large-scale fires has increased
dramatically. The ERI is helping to restore these forests in collaboration with numerous public
agencies. By allowing natural processes such as fire to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to
reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational
opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and
management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner
organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without significant staff contributions and funding
from the Bureau of Land Management. The views and conclusions contained in this document are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the
U.S. Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their
endorsement by the U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests a
What Are Reference Conditions, and Why Do They Matter?
Restoring southwestern ponderosa pine forests revolves around reintroducing a
regime of frequent, low-intensity fires like those that historically maintained forest
structure and function. Such fires were rare in the twentieth century, due to livestock
grazing and widespread fire exclusion. The resulting buildup of woody fuels has
caused a widespread crisis in forest health, the effects of which include huge and
unnaturally severe crown fires, bark beetle outbreaks, and declining biodiversity.
Restoration treatments that include prescribed burning, often preceded by thinning
to reduce fuel loads, have the potential to improve the ecological health of these
forests. In order to wisely set the goals that underlie these treatments, it is useful for
us to know as much as possible about past forest conditions, especially the “reference
conditions” that existed before forest structure and function were altered by Euro-
American settlers. Such conditions were not unchanging, but they sustained
themselves across what has been called a “natural range of variability” (Falk 1990;
Landres et al. 1999). They formed the “evolutionary environment” of southwestern
ponderosa pine trees––a fairly stable environment, in other words, in which this tree
species and many other plants and animals evolved and adapted. Restoring
conditions similar to those of the evolutionary environment is not a matter of trying
to return to the past; rather, it is the only way to assure the long-term health of these
forests into the future.
This publication provides ideas about how to determine some reference conditions
for southwestern ponderosa pine forests, using both physical and cultural evidence.
For more detailed information about finding and determining reference conditions
for a variety of ecosystems, consult Dave Egan and Evelyn Howell’s book The
Historical Ecology Handbook (2001), upon which this publication draws heavily.
Limitations of Reference Conditions 
Reference conditions can serve as an important guide for future management, but it
is important to emphasize that reference conditions are not the same as restoration
goals. Some types of reference information, such as detailed data about understory
vegetation, small trees, wildlife, and the degree to which native peoples burned
forested areas, are simply not available for most periods in the past. Even where
reference conditions are known, it is often not possible to fully re-create the
conditions present before Euro-American settlement, as climate change, extirpation
of native species, habitat fragmentation, and the introduction of nonnative species
have irreversibly changed contemporary conditions. In many cases, it might not be
desirable to return to presettlement conditions, due to considerations of wildlife
management, recreation, aesthetics, and other modern needs. For example, dense
thickets of small trees can provide cover for wildlife and visual screening along roads
or near houses. Above all, each restoration treatment needs to be site specific.
1

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
a
Reference conditions will never provide a recipe for forest management, but they can
help set restoration and management goals. They can “help (1) define what the
original or preferred condition (composition, structure, processes, function) was
compared to the present; (2) determine what factors caused the degradation; (3)
define what needs to be done to restore the ecosystem; and (4) develop criteria for
measuring the success of restoration treatments or experiments” (Egan and Howell
2001). Clues about reference conditions are a particularly powerful tool when
multiple lines of evidence are used to create a fuller picture than one type of evidence
alone could.
Physical Evidence
Some of the best clues about what forests were once like occur in the forests
themselves, in the form of contemporary forest structure and old trees, alive or dead,
that indicate how that structure has changed.
Old Forest Remnants
One of the best ways to understand what a given forest area might look like under a
restored fire regime is to analyze nearby areas that are less degraded and therefore
more closely resemble what presettlement forests looked like. Parts of the North Rim
of the Grand Canyon, for example, have never been logged, have not been grazed by
livestock for many years, if ever, and have experienced wildfires on a regular basis.
Some other large protected areas, such as parts of the Gila Wilderness and El Malpais
National Monument in New Mexico and Zion National Park in Utah, have also been
examined for important clues to the past of southwestern forests. Small remnant sites
that can help illustrate what forest structures were once like may also exist elsewhere,
such as on or near steep slopes where topography made logging or grazing
impossible.
Comparing nearby forest stands to those sites can help quantify the changes in forest
structure that have resulted from modern management practices. It is important not
to extrapolate too much from such sites, though, as forest structure and fire regimes
can vary a great deal in a small area, especially where topography or other ecological
conditions are varied.
Physical Remains of Old Trees
Trees present before Euro-American settlement are an obvious source of information
about forest structure at an earlier time. While many of the trees standing at that
time have either been logged or died naturally, their remains often persist for many
decades in the arid climate of the Southwest. Searching for these remains can help
establish some of the most accurate records of past forest structure.
2

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
3
Living trees. The bark of ponderosa pine trees generally begins
to turn yellow at about a hundred years of age (White 1985).
For that reason, it is often possible at a glance to gain a rough
idea of a stand’s age. Most restoration treatments being
implemented in the Southwest call for retaining and protecting
all yellow-barked pines, since these old trees are among the
rarest resources in southwestern forests. Though no such guide
exists for the Southwest, two useful publications that are
available online detail how to determine the age of ponderosa
pines in the Colorado Front Range (Huckaby et al. 2003a and
2003b).
The growth forms of ponderosa pines can also aid in
reconstructing past forest structure. For example, trees grown
in open conditions typically have full, rounded crowns and
relatively long, thick branches (Figure 1), while trees grown in
a closed forest more often appear long and narrow. These
appearances persist even if stand conditions later change. A
few old, open-grown pines surrounded by a sea of smaller,
younger trees likely indicates that forest structure was once
more open than it is now.
“Catfaces” or visible fire scars on old trees can provide valuable
insights into the past fire history of forest stands (Figure 2).
Such scars often preserve evidence of many fire events, which
can be dated using the dendrochronological techniques
described below.
A comparison of the species represented by old and young
trees can also be telling. Near Flagstaff, for example, a study
took place in ponderosa pine forest in which presettlement
remains of fire-intolerant white fir (Abies concolor) were quite
rare, yet the modern forest supports many young white firs
(Fulé et al. 1997)––supporting the hypothesis that a lack of
frequent fires in the twentieth century has changed both forest
composition and structure.
Snags. Dead trees can stand for many years in the Southwest,
particularly if they are large (Figure 3). They provide
important wildlife habitat for such species as bats and cavity-
nesting birds. Their size, age, and growth form provide the
same sorts of clues to forest structure as living trees.
Figure 1. The thick, horizontal
limbs of this old pine show that it
grew in the open.
Figure 2. “Catfaces” such as this
preserve records of past fires.
a

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
a
Downed logs. Especially where fire has long been absent, fallen logs can persist for
decades on the forest floor (Figure 4). They can indicate the position, size, and age of
old trees. In some parts of the Southwest it is possible to find stumps 16 or 32 feet
away from remnants of tree tops, indicating that early loggers removed only the
commercially valuable lower sections of trunk wood.
Stumps. Most of the Southwest’s large ponderosa pines were cut during the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, but in many places their stumps still persist
(Figure 5). Their size gives an idea of the size and species of the trees removed; their
rings can be cross-dated to establish their age and growth rates; their spatial
arrangement reflects forest structure before logging. The size of stumps can also
reflect more modern forest history. Stumps cut before the introduction of chainsaws
(generally in the first half of the twentieth century) are often chest-high, much
higher than modern ones, as they were generally cut by loggers using handheld saws.
Stump holes. Where fires have passed or decay has occurred, the locations of large
trees are often recorded for some time by the presence of stump holes (Figure 6) that
show where trunks and roots grew.
Taken together, these records of old trees can be extremely valuable in reconstructing
what was present at a time when frequent surface fires remained the primary
architect of forest structure. In practice, field observations have often been combined
Figure 3. Like a living tree, this snag
records growth forms that shows how
it grew.
Figure 4. Downed logs can remain on the forest
floor for many decades, providing clues about old
forest patterns.
4

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests a
with dendrochronological dating of tree rings (see below). Even without that level of
detail, modern-day observers of forest conditions can reconstruct a number of
important aspects of historic forest structure, including tree density and size and to
what extent trees grew in clumps.
Dendrochronology
In dry southwestern forests, trees often grow at differing rates in wet and dry years. A
study of the growth rings preserved in their wood can provide a detailed look at past
climate, fire regimes, and forest structure (Figure 7; Kipfmueller and Swetnam 2001).
Dendrochronological techniques have been used to gain an increased understanding
of past forest conditions at many sites in the Southwest (Swetnam and Baisan 1996).
By combining field observations of tree remains with dendrochronological cross-
dating techniques, researchers have been able to reconstruct past stand conditions at
a number of sites in southwestern ponderosa pine forests, including along the
Mogollon Rim in central Arizona (Covington and Moore 1994), near Flagstaff (Fulé
et al. 1997; Menzel and Covington 1997; Mast et al. 1999), at the Grand Canyon (Fulé
et al. 2002), in the Uinkaret Mountains in far northern Arizona (Waltz et al. 2003), in
the San Juan Mountains of southwestern Colorado (Romme et al. 2003), and in the
Jemez Mountains in New Mexico (Allen 1998). Two excellent general guides to
dendrochronology are Schweingruber (1988) and Stokes and Smiley (1996); there are
also several good online guides, including
http://web.utk.edu/~grissino/default.html,
http://www.plantbio.ohiou.edu/epb/instruct/ecology/dendro.htm, and
http://www.ltrr.arizona.edu/dendrochronology.html.
Figure 5. Stumps record the locations of now-vanished
trees, and their growth rings can provide data similar
to those of standing trees.
Figure 6. Holes where stumps
burned or decayed can persist for
many years.
5

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
a
Cultural Evidence
Written, photographic, and oral history evidence can provide significant insights into
past conditions. Records of southwestern ecosystems are fairly accurate compared to
those of many other parts of North America, since most of the Southwest was not
explored or settled by Euro-Americans until the nineteenth century. As a result, many
types of records can help indicate what southwestern forest conditions were like
before the onset of heavy livestock grazing, logging, and fire exclusion.
Early Written Records
Various types of written records abound in libraries and archives, including records
of early Spanish explorations, nineteenth-century survey expeditions, local histories,
and the journals of early settlers. To find them, enquire at local or university libraries.
Local historical societies may also be able to provide pointers about where to find
resources for your area. Two bibliographic guides specific to the Southwest are
Kaminkow (1975) and Rittenhouse (1971); look for them at a university library.
Many early written records are quite detailed and present a good description of what
the landscape looked like. For example, Vernon Bailey wrote this account of the
Jemez Mountains in northern New Mexico in 1904: “. . . generally an open park like
forest with well spaced trees and clean grama turf beneath. The trees are large and
symmetrical, often 5 feet in diameter and 80 to 100 feet high with beautifully smooth
trunks” (quoted in Allen 2002). Such a description can be helpful in setting
Figure 7. Pine fire scars from Durango,
Mexico (left), and Mount Trumbull in
the Uinkaret Mountains of northern
Arizona (right). Arrows indicate rings
with fire scarring; outermost dates
indicate when the fire scars were
collected. In Mexico, fires continued at
regular intervals through the twentieth
century. In northern Arizona regular fires
ceased with the onset of large-scale
livestock grazing, with the last fire
occurring in 1869. Photograph by Dan
Boone/Northern Arizona University.
6

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
restoration goals. However, it is important to note that this is a qualitative rather than
a quantitative description. It does not present any measurements of forest structure.
It does not record the number of trees per acre, nor whether the trees are clumped or
evenly spaced. It does not indicate what other plants besides ponderosa pines and
grasses were present. In other words, it is not an exact description, and it is certainly
not an exact restoration prescription.
It is also important to remember that historical accounts may utilize different species
names than we know today; for example, ponderosa pine may be referred to either as
yellow pine or western white pine.
General Land Office Surveys
Surveys of most lands in the Southwest were conducted in the nineteenth century by
the federal General Land Office, the precursor of the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM). These surveys identified and marked section corners and resulted in the
recording of extensive data about the vegetation of areas surveyed, as surveyors were
required to record basic descriptions of the vegetation they traversed along section
lines. This information can be valuable in assessing how the structure or composition
of forests and woodlands may have changed in the intervening decades. As an
example, Arundel (2000) used GLO records from 1878 and 1879 to assess the
distribution of forest stands and meadows, the percentage of various tree species, tree
densities, and tree diameters in an area near Flagstaff—information that could be
useful in setting restoration goals.
Copies of surveys for the southwestern states are generally available at state BLM
offices. For an overview of the use of GLO data, see a helpful chapter by Whitney and
DeCant (2001). Galatowitsch (1990) writes specifically about using GLO records in
western landscapes.
Forest Service Records
After the establishment of the Forest Service in the early twentieth century, the new
agency commissioned timber surveys of new national forests in the Southwest and
elsewhere. The surveys were intended primarily to quantify how much usable timber
was available. Some of them include considerable detail about the tree species
present, the density and size of stands, and other forest conditions. Long-term plots
set up by early Forest Service researchers on some southwestern national forests are a
particularly rich source of data (Moore et al. in press).
To locate such inventories, contact the supervisor’s office of the national forest in
your area. The Forest Service report Timeless Heritage (Baker et al. 1988) has an
extensive bibliography of early agency publications; so does the Web site of the
National Archives at http://www.archives.gov. The online archive of the Forest
History Society at http://www.lib.duke.edu/forest/archmain.html is also a valuable
resource.
a
7

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
a
Oral Histories
A great deal of information about ecological conditions exists in the minds and
memories of people who have not recorded their experiences in written form. Native
Americans, ranchers, and other local residents often have long traditions of use and
observation of the land that do not exist in writing, but may be of great relevance to
contemporary management. Oral histories can, for example, reveal what sorts of land
management practices were used in the past, and may give an idea of how ecological
conditions have changed over time.
Local libraries and historical societies often have collections of transcribed interviews
conducted in the past. The recording of formal oral histories properly requires a
protocol, described by Fogerty (2001). When seeking oral history information from
any informants, it is important to remember that it may take a good deal of time to
build the trust necessary for a useful interview. Cultural sensitivity is key; for
example, in some Native American communities certain stories are told only at
certain times of year. It’s also good etiquette to give something back, for example by
making oral histories available to the community in which they were acquired.
8
Figure 8. Photographs of the same forest stand before and after it was changed by modern
land-management practices can help quantify changes over time, and can aid in setting
restoration goals. Walker Lake, Coconino National Forest, Arizona, in the 1870s and 2003;
2003 photo courtesy of Dennis Lund and Neil Weintraub.

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests a
9
Photographs
Historic photographs are among the most useful of records in understanding
changing forest conditions. Photographs from the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries can show what conditions existed before significant ecological changes took
place. It can be particularly valuable to rephotograph the same landscape shown in a
historic view; for example, images of Walker Lake on the Coconino National Forest
show a greatly increased density of ponderosa pine between the 1870s and 2003
(Figure 8). Some researchers have also used aerial photographs taken in different
decades to assess changes in forest density over time.
When looking at historic photographs it is important to consider the land uses that
went on before the photos were taken. A photograph of a forest that was selectively
logged or heavily grazed will not accurately represent what the forest structure was
like before those land uses were instituted. Differences in photographic technology
may also make scenes in historic photographs appear different than they do in
today’s photos; for example, many old film types were unable to record wide
differences in exposures, with the result that areas that appear light-colored in a
contemporary photo may be entirely washed out in an old one.
To find historic photographs, contact libraries, historical societies, and local offices of
the Forest Service, BLM, or other federal, state, or tribal land management agencies.
Two useful Forest Service Web sites with archival photos are
http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/about/history/photo.shtml and
http://www.rmrs.nau.edu/imagedb/index.shtml.
Conclusion
A variety of opportunities exist for uncovering reference conditions for southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. By using several of the techniques described above,
researchers and managers can develop converging lines of evidence. For example,
written records may be lacking for a given area, but an examination of both historic
photographs and contemporary forest structure can provide insights into historic
conditions. Whatever is learned about reference conditions will not provide an easy
recipe for restoration or management. It will, though, help establish how a forest area
once sustained itself, which is an important step in deciding how to make forest
conditions more sustainable once again.

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
a
References
Allen, C. D. 1998. A ponderosa pine natural area reveals its secrets. Pp. 551–552 in
Status and trends of the nation’s biological resources, vol. 2, ed. M. J. Mac et al. Reston,
Va.: U.S. Geological Survey. http://biology.usgs.gov/s+t/SNT/noframe/sw153.htm.
Allen, C. D. 2002. Lots of lightning and plenty of people: An ecological history of fire
in the upland Southwest. Pp. 143–193 in Fire, native peoples, and the natural
landscape, ed. T. R. Vale. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Arundel, T. R. 2000. Using General Land Office survey records to determine pre-
settlement forest conditions in north-central Arizona, 1878–1879. M. A. thesis,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Baker, R. D., R. S. Maxwell, V. H. Treat, and H. C. Dethloff. 1988. Timeless heritage: A
history of the Forest Service in the Southwest. FS-409. Washington, D.C.: USDA Forest
Service.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa pine forest
structure: Changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92(1):39–47.
Egan, D., and E. A. Howell, eds. 2001. The historical ecology handbook: A
restorationist’s guide to reference ecosystems. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Falk, D. A. 1990. Discovering the past, creating the future. Restoration & Management
Notes 8(2):71–72.
Fogerty, J. E. 2001. Oral history: A guide to its creation and use. Pp. 101–120 in The
historical ecology handbook: A restorationist’s guide to reference ecosystems, ed. D. Egan
and E. A. Howell. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Fulé, P. Z., W. W. Covington, and M. M. Moore. 1997. Determining reference
conditions for ecosystem management of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Ecological Applications 7:895–908.
Fulé, P. Z., W. W. Covington, H. B. Smith, J. D. Springer, T. A. Heinlein, K. D.
Huisinga, and M. M. Moore. 2002. Comparing ecological restoration alternatives:
Grand Canyon, Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 170:19–41.
Galatowitsch, S. M. 1990. Using the original Land Survey notes to reconstruct
presettlement landscapes in the American West. Great Basin Naturalist
50(2):181–191.
10

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests a
11
Huckaby, L. S., M. R. Kaufmann, P. J. Fornwalt, J. M. Stoker, and C. Dennis. 2003a.
Field guide to old ponderosa pines in the Colorado Front Range. General technical
report RMRS-GTR-109. Fort Collins, Colo.: USDA Forest Service.
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr109.html.
Huckaby, L. S., M. R. Kaufmann, P. J. Fornwalt, J. M. Stoker, and C. Dennis. 2003b.
Identification and ecology of old ponderosa pine trees in the Colorado Front Range.
General technical report RMRS-GTR-110. Fort Collins, Colo.: USDA Forest Service.
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr110.html.
Kaminkow, M. J. 1975. United States local histories in the Library of Congress: A
bibliography. Baltimore: Magna Carta.
Kipfmueller, K. F., and T. W. Swetnam. 2001. Using dendrochronology to reconstruct
the history of forest and woodland ecosystems. Pp. 199–228 in The historical ecology
handbook: A restorationist’s guide to reference ecosystems, ed. D. Egan and E. A. Howell.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Landres, P. B., P. Morgan, and F. J. Swanson. 1999. Overview of the use of natural
variability concepts in managing ecological systems. Ecological Applications
9:1179–1188.
Mast, J. N., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, W. W. Covington, and A. Waltz. 1999.
Restoration of presettlement age structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest.
Ecological Applications 9:228–239.
Menzel, J. P., and W. W. Covington. 1997. Changes from 1876 to 1994 in a forest
ecosystem near Walnut Canyon, northern Arizona. Pp. 151–172 in Proceedings of the
Third Biennial Conference of Research on the Colorado Plateau, ed. C. van Riper III
and E. T. Deshler. National Park Service transactions and proceedings series
NPS/NRNAU/NRTP-97/12. Washington, D.C.: USDI National Park Service.
Moore, M. M., D. W. Huffman, P. Z. Fulé, W. W. Covington, and J. E. Crouse. In press.
Comparison of historical and contemporary forest structure and composition on
permanent plots in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Forest Science.
Rittenhouse, J. D. 1971. The Santa Fe Trail: A historical bibliography. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press.

Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
a
12
Romme, W. H., M. Preston, D. L. Lynch, P. Kemp, M. L. Floyd, D. D. Hanna, and S.
Burns. 2003. The Ponderosa Pine Forest Partnership: Ecology, economics, and
community involvement in forest restoration. Pp. 99–125 in Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. Peter Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island
Press.
Schweingruber, F. H. 1988. Tree rings: Basics and applications of dendrochronology.
Dordrecht, the Netherlands: D. Reidel.
Stokes, M. A., and T. L. Smiley. 1996. An introduction to tree-ring dating. Tucson:
University of Arizona Press.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime patterns in the
southwestern United States since AD 1700. Pp. 11–32 in Fire effects in southwestern
forests: Proceedings of the Second La Mesa Fire Symposium, ed. C. D. Allen. General
technical report RM-286. Fort Collins, Colo.: USDA Forest Service.
Waltz, A. E. M., P. Z. Fulé, W. W. Covington, and M. M. Moore. 2003. Diversity in
ponderosa pine forest structure following ecological restoration treatments. Forest
Science 49(6): 885–900.
White, A. S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa
pine stand. Ecology 66:589–594.
Whitney, G. G., and J. P. DeCant. 2001. Government Land Office surveys and other
early land surveys. Pp. 147–172 in The historical ecology handbook: A restorationist’s
guide to reference ecosystems, ed. D. Egan and E. A. Howell. Washington, D.C.: Island
Press.

For More Information
Read more about reference conditions and forest restoration at www.eri.nau.edu,
or call 928-523-7182.
Written by Peter Friederici
Reviewed by Steve Buckley, Hanna J. Cortner, W. Wallace Covington, Dave Egan, Don Falk,
Peter Z. Fulé, Margaret M. Moore, Susan Olberding, and Diane Vosick
Series Editor Peter Friederici
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Creative Communications/A53901/1M/04-04

Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
2ERI 35AE
NON-PROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
NORTHERN
ARIZONA
UNIVERSITY
