A Landscape Perspective for Forest Restoration
Thomas D. Sisk, Melissa Savage, Donald A. Falk, Craig D. Allen,
Esteban Muldavin, and Patrick McCarthy
Forest managers throughout the West
are anxiously seeking solutions to the prob-
lem of “large crown ﬁres”—destructive
blazes atypical of many forest types in the
region. These wildﬁres have created a crisis
mentality in management that has focused
on rigid prescriptions for fuels reduction,
rather than the restoration of diverse, resil-
ient, and self-regulating forest ecosystems.
Now, as we shape our responses to the threat
of larger and more frequent crown ﬁres, we
are in danger of missing the forest for the
trees.
If we are to solve the problem of de-
structive crown ﬁres, we will need to think
big. The path toward solutions begins with a
landscape perspective. This view considers
variability within and between forest types,
and recognizes that all ecological processes
and management actions take place in par-
ticular spatial contexts that deﬁne interac-
tions and inﬂuence outcomes. Ecosystems
are hierarchical—changing conditions at
one level arise from processes occurring at
lower levels, and are constrained, in turn, by
higher levels. The landscape perspective cap-
tures these complex relationships linking re-
sources and processes to the larger forest eco-
system.
The increasing scale of wildﬁre forces us
to scale up our thinking, our analysis, and
our planning. Several recent ﬁres have ap-
proached a half-million acres, yet manage-
ment planning still focuses on stands of a
few hundred or a thousand acres. We can no
longer constrain our thinking to hundreds
of small, independent fuel-reduction pro-
jects. We need coordinated, strategic efforts
linking individual projects to the larger ob-
jective of managing landscapes.
An Example from Southwestern Pon-
derosa Pine Forests. Southwestern pon-
derosapineforestshavechangedtremendously
over the past century. Fire exclusion in these
forests has led to a huge buildup of surface and
ladder fuels. Prior to the 1940s, most ﬁres in
southwestern ponderosa pine forests were of
low severity, burning in the forest understory,
consuming dead fuels and small trees, while
leaving most ﬁre-resistant adult trees alive and
healthy. Crown ﬁres, once small and rare, are
now many times larger and threaten human
communities and entire ecosystems. Forest
health and community protection will depend
ontherestorationofappropriateandsafetypes
of ﬁre to these forests.
Big crown ﬁres now dwarf the common
scale of analysis and planning in the South-
west. Focusing on speciﬁc forest treatments
has led too often to adopting “one-size-ﬁts-
all” management practices, not easily trans-
lated to other forest types. For example, ap-
plying management prescriptions designed
to restore southwestern ponderosa pine for-
ests is inappropriate in forest types where
mixed or high severity ﬁre is natural. By
“zooming out” to manage “ﬁresheds,” path-
ways of ﬁre spread on the landscape, forest-
ers can create conditions that support natu-
ral ﬁre regimes and discourage crown ﬁres.
Thinking with a Landscape Perspec-
tive. Such holistic thinking may seem difﬁ-
cult initially, even impractical. But unless we
expand our thinking beyond units of a few
thousand acres, we cannot hope to restore
landscapes of a million acres or more. One
answer lies in adopting new approaches for
landscape assessment and using new tools
for planning. Thanks to the efforts of ecolo-
gists, geographers, and computer scientists,
we now have versatile tools to help us think,
plan, and act at larger spatial scales. Geo-
graphic information systems (GIS) can bet-
ter map large areas. Ecological models of ﬁre
behavior, wildlife habitat, and other vari-
ables permit us to extrapolate intelligently
from well-studied to less well-known loca-
tions. Prioritizing treatment areas allows the
consideration of landscape-scale patterns of
vegetation change, fuel continuity, and po-
tential ﬁre spread.
Deeper understanding and appropriate
tools can contribute to better forest manage-
ment, but are themselves insufﬁcient. A
democratic process must contribute to any
overarching plan where diverse values drive
decisions. We need to bring communities,
forest scientists, resource managers, and
elected ofﬁcials together in the decisionmak-
ing process. We can more efﬁciently plan
when we are able to cross jurisdictional
boundaries and coordinate management ac-
tivities with neighbors.
The democratic process and landscape
perspective are alive and well across the
West, where agencies, private landowners,
and collaborative management groups ex-
periment with forest planning. In the Gila
Wilderness of New Mexico, the Forest Ser-
vice has managed the landscape with ﬁre for
decades, and cooperation among agencies,
landowners, and conservation organizations
is well advanced. The Southwestern Fire
Learning Network, a Nature Conservancy
project, is bringing a landscape perspective
to ﬁre management across the Southwest.
And the Forest Ecosystem Restoration Anal-
ysis (ForestERA) Project at Northern Ari-
zona University has empowered diverse
groups to participate in landscape-level res-
toration planning over several million acres
in Arizona and New Mexico.
Now Is the Time. We have reason for
optimism, but not complacency. As human
communities spread into forests, the option
of managing for natural ﬁre regimes recedes,
to be replaced with costly, ineffective sup-
pression strategies. We now have a wealth of
forest management experience, sound eco-
logical
understanding,
and
increasingly
powerful tools for landscape planning. Col-
laborative efforts, supported by rigorous sci-
perspective
Journal of Forestry • September 2005
319

ence, are emerging across the West, but they
will not grow without a willingness to exper-
iment, monitor outcomes, and learn from
successes and failures. Now is the time to act,
because the window of opportunity for big
thinking is closing as our communities ex-
pand into forests, and ﬁre is used as a scape-
goat for management failures.
Thomas D. Sisk (Thomas.Sisk@nau.edu) is
professor of ecology, Center for Environmental
Sciences and Education, Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5694. Me-
lissa Savage (forests@ucla.edu) is associate pro-
fessor, emerita, Department of Geography,
University of California Los Angeles, Los An-
geles, CA 90095. Donald A. Falk (dafalk@u.
arizona.edu) is adjunct assistant professor,
Laboratory of Tree Ring Research, University
of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721. Craig D.
Allen (craig_allen@usgs.gov) is research ecolo-
gist, US Geological Survey, Jemez Mountains
Field Station, Los Alamos, NM 87544. Es-
teban Muldavin (muldavin@sevilleta.unm.
edu) is research associate professor, Department
of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albu-
querque, NM 87131. Patrick McCarthy
(pmccarthy@tnc.org) is director of conserva-
tion programs, The Nature Conservancy in
New Mexico, Santa Fe, NM 87501.
letters
(Continued from page 273)
Selling Timber
Thayer’s comments (p. 162, June
2005) on the ﬂaw in the Scribner rule are
correct. However cubic, metric, or ton mea-
sures won’t ﬁt every situation.
Loggers want a measure that pays them
a fair wage. An “International Rule” or cubic
foot rule may work for them. Truckers deal
in weight so a ton rule would beneﬁt them.
There are several types of mills ranging from
pole or stud mills to ones that saw, slice, or
peel logs. Quality is important to mills that
make lumber or veneer. They would want a
rule that meets their test.
The seller, whether public or private,
has no way to gauge what a bidder is willing
to pay for a tract. His best bet is to use what-
ever measure he decides approximates the
yield and use it to set a lump sum price. If he
then uses a sealed bid, he has his best chance
to get a bid that he can accept.
Oral bidding carries with it the risk that
it create an uneven bidding table for some
bidders. Furthermore, if the asking price is
below what it ought to be, when there is a
single bidder he may not get the true value.
It is the terms of the sale, number of
trees by species and diameter, and the re-
quirements on how the sale area is to be left
after logging that are important to the land-
owner. The number of trees by species and
diameter provides a way to be sure that only
the marked trees are cut. A logarithmic scale
of charges for taking trees to be left can dis-
courage theft. Either payment in advance of
any cutting or a schedule of payments that
results in the ﬁnal payment before the last
10% of the timber is cut are sound protec-
tions. A bond is also essential.
Selling timber isn’t rocket science. For
an owner, private or public, there are readily
available actions that protect the owner and
properly reward the buyer with a sale he
ﬁnds attractive. BLM on the O&C lands,
the Forest Service in Regions 8&9, and sev-
eral states have used lump sum sales for
years. Until the mid-1950s, BLM and the
Forest Service used sealed bids exclusively, as
do several states.
Robert E. Wolf
St. Leonard, MD
320
Journal of Forestry • September 2005
