28
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 28
Southwestern 
Mixed-Conifer Forests: 
Evaluating Reference 
Conditions to Guide 
Ecological Restoration 
Treatments
October 2013

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-ﬁre Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecologi-
cal Restoration International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and 
sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Soci-
ety for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in research-
ing, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of the 
Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume self-
sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, 
wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
 
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from 
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff 
recognizes that every restoration project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information 
provided in the Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
 
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Ser-
vice and the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions contained in 
this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial 
products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Cover Photo: A cool/moist mixed-conifer stand structure indicative of past high-severity fire (Jemez 
Mountains, NM).  The emergent Douglas-fir in the foreground is the only tree that survived the last 
fire (in 1861).  Charred bark, elevated crown, and a growth change in the tree-rings of the Douglas-fir 
helped confirm the dating of this high-severity fire.  
Photo credit: E.Q. Margolis

1
Ecological Restoration Institute
SOUTHWESTERN MIXED-CONIFER FORESTS
Table of Contents
Introduction .............................................................................................................................. 2
Natural Fire Regimes ............................................................................................................... 2
Warm/Dry Mixed Conifer ................................................................................................ 2
Cool/Moist Mixed Conifer ............................................................................................... 3
High-Severity Fire Patch Size ........................................................................................... 4
Historical and Contemporary Forest Structure and Composition .................................... 4
Warm/Dry Mixed Conifer ................................................................................................ 4
Cool/Moist Mixed Conifer ............................................................................................... 5
Stand Structure ............................................................................................................ 5
Species Composition ................................................................................................... 5
Guidance for Land Managers: Determining Local Mixed-Conifer 
     Subtypes and Natural Range of Variability ...................................................................... 6
Implications for Ecological Restoration of Southwest Mixed-Conifer Forests ................ 6
Warm/Dry Mixed Conifer ................................................................................................ 6
Cool/Moist Mixed Conifer ............................................................................................... 7
Landscape Structure .......................................................................................................... 7
Summary ................................................................................................................................... 7
Acknowledgments .................................................................................................................... 8
References .................................................................................................................................. 8

2
Ecological Restoration Institute
SOUTHWESTERN MIXED-CONIFER FORESTS
Introduction
Mixed-conifer forests of the Southwest are variable 
and complex, covering approximately 2.5-million 
acres scattered across the region (Dieterich 1983, Korb 
et al. 2013; Figure 1). Mixed-conifer forests contain 
a diverse mix of tree species (Table 1) and typically 
occur between, but do not include, the lower-elevation 
warmer, drier ponderosa pine forests and the highest-
elevation cooler, wetter spruce-fir forests. Because 
mixed-conifer forests have diverse stand structures, 
forest composition and disturbance regimes, it is 
often difficult to generalize about reference conditions 
and historical fire regimes that can be used to guide 
management for specific locations. In this working 
paper, we 1) describe the current knowledge of 
mixed-conifer historical reference conditions for fire 
regimes, stand structure, and species composition in 
the Southwest (Arizona, New Mexico and adjacent 
areas); 2) provide field diagnostics to assess reference 
conditions; and 3) offer land managers restoration-
related guidance to promote resilient mixed-conifer 
forests in the Southwest. 
We emphasize that mixed-conifer forests are 
found along a gradient of environmental conditions 
that results in a wide range of species compositions, 
fuels characteristics, and natural disturbance regimes. 
Historical fire regimes in mixed-conifer varied along 
this gradient from frequent, low-severity fires, to 
less frequent fires that may be mixed in severity, to 
infrequent, high-severity fires. However, for the sake of 
description and to inform restoration-related activities, 
we feel it is beneficial to divide mixed-conifer into two 
groups: 1) warm/dry mixed-conifer, where ponderosa 
pine is present and low-severity fire regimes were 
dominant historically, and 2) cool/moist mixed-conifer, 
where ponderosa pine is generally absent and high-
severity fire regimes were typical historically (Romme et 
al. 2009). 
Natural Fire Regimes
A fire regime can be defined by the severity, fire (patch) 
size, seasonality, and frequency of fires through time 
(Agee 1993). Although other disturbances occur 
in mixed-conifer forests (e.g., insect outbreaks, 
drought, fungal pathogens, wind disturbance), fire 
was historically a major influence on forest structure 
and composition throughout the region (Romme et al. 
2009). Historical fire regime parameters differ between 
warm/dry (i.e., frequent-fire) and cool/moist (i.e., 
infrequent-fire) mixed-conifer subtypes. Not only are 
there differences in fire behavior and effects between 
the mixed-conifer types, there are also differences in 
the methodologies available for reconstructing the fire 
regimes. For example, researchers may analyze dates of 
fire scars on trees to determine fire-return intervals for 
low-severity fires, whereas analysis of stand ages and 
landscape patterns may provide information concerning 
fire patch size, fire extent, and connectivity for high-
severity fire regimes where fire scars are rare or absent. 
Here we summarize the current state of knowledge 
concerning fire regime parameters in warm/dry and 
cool/moist subtypes of mixed-conifer forests in the 
Southwest. 
Warm/Dry Mixed Conifer 
Compared with other dry forest types (e.g., ponderosa 
pine forests), less is known about the historical fire 
regimes of Southwest mixed conifer. Fire history 
reconstructions based on dendroecological analysis 
of fire-scarred trees indicate that prior to the late 
1800s, fires in warm/dry mixed-conifer forests of the 
Southwest were relatively frequent and low severity. 
For example, Swetnam and Baisan (1996) provided a 
summary of tree-ring studies conducted at 24 mixed-
conifer sites in Arizona and New Mexico, and reported 
historical mean fire intervals (i.e., of spreading fires 
that scarred more than 10% of recording trees) that 
Figure 1. Distribution of mixed-conifer 
ecosystems in the Southwest.
Common name
Scientific name
Aspen
Populus tremuloides
Blue spruce
Picea pungens
Douglas-fir
Pseudotsuga menziesii
Engelmann spruce
Picea engelmannii
Gambel oak
Quercus gambelii
Limber pine
Pinus flexilis
Ponderosa pine
Pinus ponderosa
Southwestern white pine
Pinus strobiformis
Subalpine fir
Abies lasiocarpa
White fir
Abies concolor
Table 1. Tree species typically found in 
southwestern mixed-conifer forests.

3
Ecological Restoration Institute
SOUTHWESTERN MIXED-CONIFER FORESTS
ranged from about 4 to 15 years for mixed-conifer sites 
dominated by ponderosa pine. Alternatively, they found 
fire-return intervals from about 8 to 26 years on sites 
with a more even mix of mixed-conifer tree species, but 
still containing ponderosa pine. Elevation at the sites 
ranged from 5,920 to 9,620 feet for pine-dominated 
mixed-conifer forests, and from 7,546 to 10,080 feet for 
more mixed forests (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). Longer 
mean fire-return intervals (19-30 years) were reported 
by Grissino-Mayer et al. (2004) for three mixed-conifer 
sites containing ponderosa pine in southern Colorado. 
Other researchers have documented historical fire-
return intervals at sites in New Mexico, northern 
Arizona, and southern Colorado within this range (4-30 
years) (Brown et al. 2001, Heinlein et al. 2005, Fulé et al. 
2003, Fulé et al. 2009, Margolis and Balmat 2009, Bigio 
et al. 2010). 
The range of fire intervals in warm/dry mixed 
conifer exemplifies the diversity of this forest type and 
likely reflects interactions between climate, fuels, and 
topography. Longer fire-return intervals can result from 
a heterogeneous landscape structure that restricts fire 
spread (Iniguez et al. 2009) or long periods between 
climate conditions favorable for fire (Margolis and 
Swetnam 2013). Across the region, fire-return interval 
has also been shown to increase with increasing elevation. 
However, more work is needed to develop predictable 
models to support this concept (Swetnam and Baisan 
1996, Wolf and Mast 1998, Brown et al. 2001). 
High-severity fires that create large patches of 
tree mortality can be identified by even-aged stands 
of trees, patches of sprouting species, such as aspen or 
oak, and numerous charred snags or logs. Such patches 
may be intermixed with evidence of low-severity fire 
and appear to occur more frequently with increasing 
microsite moisture and cooler temperatures (Fulé et 
al. 2003). Even in a frequent, low-severity fire regime 
there certainly will be some amount of tree mortality. 
The available data for warm/dry mixed conifer in 
the Southwest indicate that small, high-severity 
patches occurred on rare occasions. This suggests that 
large patches of high-severity fire were historically 
uncommon in this mixed-conifer subtype.
Fire scar records indicate that the frequent, 
low-severity fire regime in warm/dry mixed-conifer 
prevailed for more than four centuries prior to 1900 
(Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Margolis and Balmat 
2009). Conversely, most studies of warm/dry mixed-
conifer forests report very few fire scars after 1900. 
This disruption of the long-term historical regime 
of frequent surface fires was a result of the onset of 
intensive land uses, particularly livestock grazing, 
associated with Euro-American settlement of the region 
(Swetnam and Baisan 1996, Fulé et al. 2009). Because 
frequent fire was a key ecological process operating 
over very long time periods, elimination of fire led to 
critical changes in ecosystem structure and function 
that now require restoration. Additionally, tree-ring 
fire scars indicate that fires in warm/dry mixed-conifer 
historically occurred in the spring or summer, and were 
rare in the autumn (e.g., Heinlein et al. 2005, Margolis 
and Balmat 2009). This is important to consider when 
determining the timing of prescribed or managed fires. 
Cool/Moist Mixed Conifer 
Compared to warm/dry mixed-conifer, there is relatively 
little research on the high-severity fire regimes of cool/
moist mixed-conifer forests of the Southwest. We use 
the term “high severity” to broadly characterize fire 
regimes that were historically dominated by high-severity 
patches (i.e., near complete overstory mortality) that 
left a persistent and identifiable legacy in terms of stand 
structure or composition on the landscape today (e.g., 
Figure 2). Existing studies do indicate that cool/moist 
mixed-conifer forests historically burned with large 
patches (more than 250 acres) of high-severity fire (Fulé 
et al. 2003; Margolis et al. 2007, 2011), which differentiate 
them from the warm/dry mixed-conifer and ponderosa 
pine forests (Swetnam and Baisan 1996). Similar to the 
warm/dry mixed-conifer, historical fires predominately 
occurred in the spring or summer in the Gila Wilderness 
in southwest New Mexico (e.g., Abolt 1997), whereas on 
the North Rim of the Grand Canyon, Arizona, historical 
Figure 2.  A cool/moist mixed-conifer stand structure 
indicative of past high-severity fire (Jemez Mountains, 
NM).  The emergent Douglas-fir in the foreground 
is the only tree that survived the last fire (in 1861).  
Charred bark, elevated crown, and a growth change 
in the tree-rings of the Douglas-fir helped confirm the 
dating of this high-severity fire.  High tree density 
in the surrounding stand is likely part of natural 
succession following high-severity fire and does not 
need restoration. Photo credit: E.Q. Margolis

4
Ecological Restoration Institute
SOUTHWESTERN MIXED-CONIFER FORESTS
high-elevation fire occurrence was later in the summer 
(i.e., evidenced by middle earlywood to latewood fire 
scars, July – Sept, Fulé et al. 2003). The differences may 
reflect sub-regional variability in the timing of snowmelt 
and the summer monsoon. 
The best estimates of fire-return intervals in cool/
moist mixed-conifer in the Southwest range from 
multiple decades to centuries (Abolt 1997, Fulé et al. 
2003, Margolis et al. 2007, Romme et al. 2009). The 
longer fire-return intervals have important implications 
for fire severity and forest structure. High-elevation, 
cool/moist mixed-conifer forests are generally thought 
to have sufficient fuels to carry fire, but require extreme 
regional drought to dry the fuels so they can burn 
(Margolis et al. 2007). The rarity of such climatic events 
is a primary determinant for the long fire intervals in 
cool/moist mixed-conifer forests. During these long 
fire-free intervals, shade-tolerant, fire-intolerant tree 
species (e.g., true firs) naturally establish and high 
fuels loads accumulate in cool/moist mixed-conifer 
stands. This results in naturally dense, multi-aged forest 
structure and high fire severity.
High-Severity Fire Patch Size
High-severity fire patch size is a key determinant of post-
fire vegetation composition and structure (Agee 1993). 
Historical high-severity fire patch size estimates are 
necessary to determine if current high-severity fire patch 
sizes are outside the natural range of variability (NRV; 
Landres et al. 1999) and to guide ecological restoration, 
if deemed necessary. The only data on high-severity 
patch sizes in warm/dry mixed conifer is from the Santa 
Fe Watershed in New Mexico. There, Margolis and 
Balmat (2009) reconstructed  relatively small (less than 
250 acres), high-severity fire patches in a Douglas-fir, 
ponderosa pine, and southwestern white pine warm/dry 
mixed-conifer forest from nineteenth-century fires using 
conifer age structure, tree death dates, and fire scars. 
There is more evidence of historical high-severity 
fire patches in cool/moist mixed-conifer forests, which 
includes patches greater than 2,470 acres in size. In 
cool/moist mixed-conifer forests on the North Rim 
of the Grand Canyon, Fulé et al. (2003) identified 
fire-initiated stands at the plot (0.25-acre) scale, but 
did not estimate high-severity patch sizes. However, 
historical observations referencing fire on the North 
Rim by Lang and Stewart (1910) include, “vast denuded 
areas, charred stubs, and fallen trunks”, confirming 
the presence of nineteenth-century, high-severity 
fire reconstructed by Fulé et al. (2003) in these high-
elevation forests (some of which were likely cool/moist 
mixed-conifer). Using quaking aspen patches embedded 
in cool/moist mixed-conifer forests throughout the 
Southwest, Margolis et al. (2007, 2011) used tree rings to 
reconstruct historical high-severity patch sizes ranging 
from 74 acres to more than 2,471 acres. Comparisons of 
historical (pre-1905), high-severity patch size estimates 
with contemporary (1984-2010) patch sizes from 
mixed-conifer/aspen forests of the Mogollon Plateau 
and Sky Islands suggest that high-severity fire patches 
from recent fires may be larger than those created by 
fires in the past (Margolis et al. 2011). 
More research is needed to test these findings and 
develop local estimates of historical high-severity fire 
patch sizes as well as finding answers to questions about 
contemporary high-severity patch size variability, the 
effects of climate and other variables on patch size, 
and comparisons of patch sizes of recent wildfires and 
historic fires. 
Historical and Contemporary Forest 
Composition and Structure 
Historical forest structure and composition is important 
to guide forest restoration (Egan and Howell 2001). To 
gain the clearest understanding of historical conditions 
to guide restoration, as many lines of evidence should be 
gathered as possible, although certain types of evidence 
and certain combinations of evidence are stronger than 
others. For example, dendroecological reconstruction 
using increment cores and models for individual trees can 
provide precise information concerning stand density, 
species composition, tree sizes, and spatial patterns 
(Fulé et al. 1997, Mast et al. 1999, Huffman et al. 2001, 
Bakker et al. 2008). In addition, historical photographs, 
written accounts, and other cultural types of evidence 
may provide general insight concerning stand structure 
and composition, albeit less precise and possibly prone to 
greater bias than tree-ring studies. As with reconstructing 
historical fire regimes, different methodologies lend 
themselves to assessing forest structure and composition 
of warm/dry and cool/moist mixed-conifer forests. 
Warm/Dry Mixed Conifer 
Data from dendroecological stand reconstructions and 
historical inventories of southwestern warm/dry mixed-
conifer forests are limited compared to other forest 
types. However, studies to date indicate that tree density 
of warm/dry mixed-conifer forests ranged from about 
21 to 99 trees per acre while basal area varied from 34 
to 124 ft2 per acre, prior to Euro-American settlement 
of the region (Stoddard 2011). Low-severity surface 
fires, burning at intervals of 4 to 30 years, limited 
establishment of tree seedlings, and many forests were 
more open than today. Although information about 
tree spatial patterns in mixed-conifer is very limited, 
frequent fire in dry forest types of western North 
America is thought to promote fine-scale heterogeneity 
characterized by mosaics of openings, single trees, 
and groups of trees with interlocking crowns (Larson 
and Churchill 2012). In the absence of repeated fires, 
openings fill-in with regenerating trees and stands 
increase in spatial homogeneity. For example, at a 
warm/dry mixed-conifer site in southern Colorado, 

5
Ecological Restoration Institute
SOUTHWESTERN MIXED-CONIFER FORESTS
Fulé et al. (2009) found that tree density increased by 
a factor of nearly five and stand basal area more than 
doubled from the time of fire regime disruption in 1870 
to the time of study in 2003. Similar changes were found 
by Cocke et al. (2005) in the mixed-conifer zone on the 
San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona. Heinlein et al. 
(2005) studied smaller sites on the San Francisco Peaks 
and found that tree density and basal area had increased 
since fire-regime disruption by factors of up to 31 and 4, 
respectively. Fulé et al. (2003) identified substantial, yet 
smaller, changes in tree density and basal area following 
fire-regime disruption at a mixed-conifer site on the 
North Rim of Grand Canyon National Park. 
Although the density of nearly all mixed-conifer 
tree species has been reported as increasing since fire-
regime disruption, proportional increases have been 
greatest for shade-tolerant and fire-intolerant species, 
such as white fir (Heinlein et al. 2005, Fulé et al. 2003, 
Fulé et al. 2009, Iniguez et al. 2009). For example, at a 
warm/dry mixed-conifer site in southern Colorado, 
Fule et al. (2009) reported that, prior to fire regime 
disruption, ponderosa pine trees comprised 42-54% 
of the tree density and 54-68% of the stand basal area, 
whereas in 2003 ponderosa pine was reduced to only 
4-16% of tree density and 27-46% basal area. At the same 
site, prior to fire-regime disruption, white fir comprised 
14-28% of the tree density and 12-22% of the basal area, 
whereas in 2003 white fir had increased to 43-75% of the 
tree density and 29-46% of the stand basal area (Fulé et 
al. 2009). In contrast, species that are shade intolerant 
and re-sprout following fire, such as aspen, may have 
declined (Fulé et al. 2003, Huffman unpublished data) or 
have a dramatically altered stand structure on some sites 
(Margolis et al. 2011). 
It is also important to note that many forests that 
today are dominated by warm/dry mixed-conifer 
species may not have historically been mixed-conifer 
forests, but have in-filled with fire-intolerant mixed-
conifer species (e.g., white fir) following fire exclusion 
or were altered by harvesting of selected species (e.g., 
ponderosa pine) (Moore et al. 2004). Increases in stand 
density and corresponding changes in structure and 
species composition have altered potential fire behavior 
on many warm/dry mixed-conifer sites, shifting fire 
potential from low-severity surface fire toward high-
severity crown fire. 
Cool/Moist Mixed Conifer 
Cool/moist mixed-conifer stand structures and 
compositions varied in space and time depending on 
1) the pre-fire stand composition, 2) the severity of the 
last fire, and 3) the time since the last fire (Romme et al. 
2009). For instance, aspen will often re-sprout following 
high-severity fire in cool/moist mixed-conifer forests, 
but shade-tolerant species will regenerate and eventually 
overtop the aspen, and dominate the stand until the next 
fire (Jones 1974, Margolis et al. 2007). Hence, while in-
filling by shade-tolerant species is considered outside 
the NRV in warm/dry mixed-conifer forests, such 
successional trajectories are within the NRV in cool/
moist mixed-conifer forests and provide an important 
distinction between these two mixed-conifer subtypes.
Reconstructing the stand structure and species 
composition of forests that historically burned with 
high severity is difficult because the fire-killed forest 
is often no longer present on the landscape due to 
high decomposition rates in these mesic locations or 
subsequent fires that consume the fire-killed trees. 
Where data exists, the interpretations can be challenging. 
This is particularly the case when there has been 
increased tree densities and changing forest composition 
following the last fire, but no direct evidence of historical 
fire severity. It is important to remember that change is 
not inherently negative and must always be considered 
in the context of the NRV. 
Stand Structure
Cool/moist, aspen/mixed-conifer stands can follow a 
relatively predictable successional pathway after a high-
severity fire--starting with aspen regeneration, then 
to shade-tolerant conifer regeneration and, eventually, 
forming an aspen/mixed conifer forest. In such a case, 
historical stand structure could be estimated based 
on adjacent existing stands with a similar estimated 
time-since-fire (or stand age). The loss of evidence 
of historical stand structure through the processes 
described above is, perhaps, most problematic for 
stands where some unknown portion of the trees were 
killed during historical mixed-severity fires (compared 
to stands that burned with complete mortality). Given 
these limitations, there is limited data about specific 
historical stand structures, although the following 
general statements apply and differentiate cool/moist 
mixed-conifer from warm/dry mixed-conifer or 
ponderosa pine (Jones 1974):
• Irregular structures are common (at stand to 
landscape scales) in cool/moist mixed-conifer 
stands due to patches of high-severity fire. Even-
aged stands may regenerate post-fire, but will de-
teriorate through time as the oldest cohort dies 
and subsequent regeneration occurs.
• Stands in cool/moist mixed-conifer forests were 
likely multi-storied, due to the shade tolerance of 
mixed-conifer tree species and infrequent, high-
severity fires that would not have the effect of 
“thinning from below.”
Species Composition
Species composition is likely to change through time 
in cool/moist mixed conifer stands due to the subtype's 
successional tendencies following a high-severity fire 
and the shade tolerance of many cool/moist mixed-
conifer species. At the landscape-scale, there is likely to 
be a mosaic of stands dominated by a variety of conifer 

6
Ecological Restoration Institute
SOUTHWESTERN MIXED-CONIFER FORESTS
species as well as aspen/conifer-dominated stands 
(Romme et al. 2009). Multiple tree-ring reconstructions 
of age structure and species composition in cool/
moist mixed-conifer forests dominated by Douglas-
fir indicate an increase in density of shade-tolerant 
and fire-intolerant species during the last century. For 
example, the high-elevation, mixed-conifer forests 
on the south slope of the San Francisco Peaks were 
historically dominated by Douglas-fir and limber pine 
(with about 10% ponderosa pine) but have exhibited an 
increase in density of Engelmann spruce, white fir, and 
corkbark fir since the late 1800s (Cocke et al. 2005). 
Another example, from the Gila Wilderness, indicates 
that stands historically dominated by Douglas-fir, and 
historically subject to both high- and low-severity fires, 
now have understories dominated by fire-intolerant 
spruce and fir (Abolt 1997). In this case, where there is 
evidence of a mixed-severity fire regime, it is likely that 
some portion of the species composition change and 
increased density is natural post-fire succession, and 
that some portion may be an artifact of fire exclusion. 
In summary, although there is limited data for cool/
moist mixed-conifer forests of the Southwest, historical 
species composition was likely spatially variable and 
changed through time in any particular stand. Therefore, 
unlike ponderosa pine or warm/dry mixed-conifer 
forests, changes in cool/moist mixed-conifer stand 
structure and composition may be within the NRV and 
do not necessarily indicate the need for restoration.
Guidance for Land Managers: Determining 
Local Mixed-Conifer Subtypes and Natural 
Range of Variability 
Given what forest researchers have discovered about 
Southwest mixed-conifer forests, land managers can use 
the structural and composition clues provided in Table 2 
to determine the mixed-conifer subtype and coarse-scale 
disturbance regime of their local mixed-conifer forest. 
We suggest managers use multiple indicators (see also 
Swetnam et al. 1999, Egan and Howell 2001).
Additional evidence may be used to support field 
diagnostics and determine the NRV, and could include:
• Historical photos of stand structure or fire
• Written accounts of forest characteristics  
• Local knowledge
• Habitat types or ecosystem surveys.
Implications for Ecological Restoration of 
Southwest Mixed-Conifer Forests
Ecological restoration is the “process of assisting the 
recovery of an ecosystem that has been degraded, 
damaged, or destroyed” (SER 2004). This process 
makes use of reference conditions to help determine 
the NRV for ecosystem dynamics, structure, and 
function. Understanding these reference conditions 
allows restoration practitioners to measure the degree 
of degradation (departure), set goals, and measure 
success. For forest systems, information about natural 
disturbance regimes, forest structure, and species 
compositions forms the foundation for developing 
sound ecological restoration and conservation strategies 
(Moore et al. 1999).
Warm/Dry Mixed Conifer 
Fire managers in the Southwest realize that due to 
changes in fire regime, forest structure and composition, 
warm/dry mixed-conifer forest are at high risk of 
unnaturally large, high-severity fires and have begun 
ecological restoration efforts using a number of different 
tools, including mechanical treatments, prescribed fire, 
and managed natural fire (Evans et al. 2011). This risk 
of wildfire is especially pronounced and critical for the 
many mixed-conifer forests in Arizona and New Mexico 
that are small and isolated (Figure 1). Furthermore, 
mixed-conifer forests provide unique habitat for rare 
species, such as the Mexican spotted owl (MSO) and the 
Jemez Mountains salamander. 
At the stand level, restoration approaches for warm/
dry mixed-conifer forests should strive to reduce the 
risk of high-severity fire and re-establish structural 
characteristics and spatial patterns similar to the site’s 
NRV. Thinning small and young trees to reduce stand 
densities and ladder fuels, combined with application 
of low-intensity fire, is intended to restore structure, 
Fire-scarred or charred 
living trees
Presence of ponderosa pine
Surface fuels
Dead and down logs 
showing char and 
evidence of past 
lethal fire
Stand structure
Quaking aspen
Warm, dry 
mixed-conifer 
subtype
“Cat-face” fire scars with 
multiple entries
Ponderosa pine present; old 
trees, logs, snags, stumps 
suggesting historical dominance
Abundant tall grass;
Loosely compacted, 
long needle, 1-hr 
surface fuels
Scattered and not 
abundant
Low density of pre-
settlement trees; No large, 
dense patches of even-age 
pre-settlement trees
Multiple pre-
settlement age classes 
mixed with pre-
settlement conifers
Cool, moist 
mixed-conifer 
subtype
Lack of living trees with 
charred bark or scars, or 
scattered trees with single 
scars and no “cat-face” 
wounds
Ponderosa pine absent; old 
tree, snags, logs, stump of fire 
intolerant species (e.g., true fir 
or spruce) suggesting long-term 
presence
Tightly compacted, 
short needle, 1-hr 
surface fuels
Abundant in larger 
patches
Dense stands of pre-
settlement trees.  Even 
aged pre-settlement trees 
(including aspen)
Large, even-age 
patches embedded 
within a mixed-conifer 
forest
Table 2. Field diagnostics for determining Southwest mixed-conifer forest subtypes.

7
Ecological Restoration Institute
SOUTHWESTERN MIXED-CONIFER FORESTS
species composition, and resilience to near reference 
conditions (Fulé et al. 2006, Korb et al. 2012). Thinning 
prescriptions are based on the NRV and ideally on local 
field assessment of pre-disruption structural conditions, 
which includes identification of old trees, snags, logs, 
and cut stumps by species. Mechanical thinning 
treatments can be expensive, however, and their use 
may be constrained by other management goals and 
objectives, such as designated Wilderness management 
or MSO habitat. Application of low-intensity fire alone 
is less selective than mechanical thinning and may not 
immediately reduce stand density to reference levels 
(Fulé et al. 2006, Korb et al. 2012). Higher-intensity fire 
may restore approximate structural characteristics and 
stimulate increases in understory vegetation (Fulé et 
al. 2004, Huisinga et al. 2005, Fulé and Laughlin 2007, 
Laughlin et al 2011). However, by allowing fires to burn 
more actively, land managers incur a higher level of risk 
that includes escaped fire effects as well as undesirable 
consequences such as large patches of high-severity fire 
damage. In remote areas, managing naturally ignited 
fires may help restore mixed-conifer forests across larger 
landscapes. 
Although the efficacy of some treatments is 
uncertain and needs to be assessed, ecological 
restoration is necessary in areas determined to have 
departed from the NRV and a where a no-action policy 
can have negative consequences. More work is needed 
to test long-term restoration alternatives for warm/dry 
mixed-conifer forests in the Southwest. In particular, 
studies are needed that examine ecological responses 
beyond forest structure. For instance, little is known 
about responses of key wildlife species and invertebrates. 
Similarly, more research is needed to describe long-
term effects of restoration treatments on understory 
communities, particularly changes in populations of 
invasive, exotic species.
Cool/Moist Mixed Conifer 
Many cool/moist mixed-conifer forest stands may not 
be outside of their NRV in terms of forest structure, 
composition or fire regime and, therefore, may not need 
restoration (Schoennagel and Nelson 2011; but see below 
regarding landscape-scale structure). Techniques used 
to restore frequent, low-severity fire regimes should not 
be used in these cool/moist forest types that historically 
burned with high severity, unless there is another 
management goal (e.g., protection of wildland-urban 
interface assests or infrastructure). Even so, mimicking 
the natural disturbance structure (i.e., high-severity fire 
patches) would be more ecologically sound than trying 
to create an open, park-like cool/moist mixed-conifer 
stand. We also recognize that other anthropogenic land 
uses (e.g., logging or intensive livestock grazing) could 
also necessitate restoration. This may be particularly true 
for mixed-conifer stands that were high-grade logged for 
Douglas-fir or Engelmann spruce. 
Landscape Structure 
Although much of our knowledge and restoration focus 
is at the stand level, there should also be a greater focus 
on assessing the NRV of landscape-scale forest patch 
structure. Cool/moist mixed-conifer stands are often 
intermixed with warm/dry mixed-conifer stands (and 
other forest types). For example, in many landscapes 
adjacent cool/moist and warm/dry mixed-conifer 
stands historically formed a mosaic of discontinuous 
crown fuels, but they have since filled-in following fire 
exclusion and now form a homogenous canopy fuel 
layer that can support larger areas of high-severity fire 
(e.g., Santa Fe Watershed, NM, Margolis and Balmat 
2009; Grand Canyon, AZ, White and Vankat 1993). For 
instance, preliminary analysis of the 2012 Whitewater-
Baldy Fire suggests that recent patch sizes in the mixed-
conifer forests may be larger than historical conditions, 
because after a century without fire much of the warm/
dry mixed-conifer can now support crown fire (in 
addition to the naturally dense, cool/moist mixed-
conifer). This increased homogeneity is leading to 
potentially anomalous, large stand-replacing fire patches. 
Therefore, restoring more open warm/dry mixed-conifer 
forests will begin to restore the landscape heterogeneity 
of the forests and reduce the potential size of future 
high-severity patches. 
In this paper, we focus on the historical fire regimes 
and reference conditions of mixed-conifer forests. 
However, it is important to remember that historically 
these forests were, and still are, connected and 
influenced by the fire regime and forest (fuel) structure 
of adjacent forests. Therefore, a landscape-scale approach 
is increasingly important when assessing areas for 
management and ecological restoration.
Summary
• For the sake of description and to inform 
restoration-related activities, it is beneficial to 
divide mixed-conifer forests into two groups: 1) 
warm/dry mixed-conifer, where ponderosa pine 
is present and low-severity fire regimes were 
dominant historically, and 2) cool/moist mixed-
conifer, where ponderosa pine is generally absent 
and high-severity fire regimes were typical his-
torically (Romme et al. 2009).
• Understanding an ecosystem’s reference condi-
tions allows restoration practitioners to measure 
the degree of degradation (departure), set goals, 
and measure success. For forest ecosystems, 
information about natural disturbance regimes, 
forest structure, and species compositions forms 
the foundation for developing sound ecological 
restoration and conservation strategies (Moore 
et al. 1999).
• At the stand level, restoration approaches for 
warm/dry mixed-conifer forests should strive to 
reduce the risk of high-severity fire and re-estab-

8
Ecological Restoration Institute
SOUTHWESTERN MIXED-CONIFER FORESTS
References
Abolt, R.A. 1997. Fire histories of upper elevation forests in the Gila Wilderness, 
New Mexico via fire scar analysis and stand age structure analysis. M.S. 
Thesis University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
Agee J.K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Pacific Northwest Forests. Washington, D.C.: Island 
Press.
Bakker, J.D., A.J. Sánchez Meador, P.Z. Fulé, D.W. Huffman, and M.M. Moore. 
2008. “Growing trees backwards”: Description of a stand reconstruction 
model. Pp. 136-147 in S.D. Olberding and M.M. Moore, tech coords., Fort 
Valley Experimental Forest–A Century of Research 1908-2008. Conference 
Proceedings; August 7-9, 2008; Flagstaff, AZ. Proceedings RMRS-P-53CD. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. 
Bigio, E. and T.W. Swetnam. 2010. A comparison and integration of tree-ring 
and alluvial records of fire history at the Missionary Ridge Fire, Durango, 
Colorado, USA. Holocene 20:1047-1061.
Brown, P.M., M.W. Kaye, L.S. Huckaby, and C.H. Baisan. 2001. Fire history 
alon environmental gradients in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico: 
Influences of local patterns and regional processes. Ecoscience 8:115-126.
Cocke, A.E., P.Z. Fule, and J.E. Crouse. 2005. Forest change on a steep mountain 
gradient after extended fire exclusion: San Francisco Peaks, Arizona, USA. 
Journal of Applied Ecology 42:814-823.
Dieterich, J.H. 1983. Fire history of southwestern mixed-conifer - a case-study. 
Forest Ecology and Management 6:13-31.
Egan, D. and E. A. Howell. 2001. The historical ecology handbook: A restorationist,s 
guide to reference ecosystems. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Evans, A.M., R.G. Everett, S.L. Stephens, and J.A. Youtz,J.A. 2011. Comprehensive 
fuels treatment practices guide for mixed conifer forests: California, Central 
and Southern Rockies, and the Southwest. Santa Fe, NM: The Forest Guild.
Fulé, P.Z., A.E. Cocke, T.A. Heinlein, and W.W. Covington. 2004. Effects of an 
intense prescribed forest fire: Is it restoration? Restoration Ecology 12:220-
230.
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 1997. Determining reference 
conditions for ecosystem management of southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. Ecological Applications 7:895-908.
Fulé, P.Z., W.W. Covington, M.T. Stoddard, and D. Bertolette. 2006. “Minimal-
impact” restoration treatments have limited effects on forest structure and 
fuels at Grand Canyon, USA. Restoration Ecology 14:357-368.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, T.A. Heinlein, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and G. 
Verkamp. 2003. Mixed-severity fire regime in a high-elevation forest of 
Grand Canyon, Arizona, USA. Landscape Ecology 18:465-485.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Korb., and R. Wu. 2009. Changes in forest structure of a mixed-
conifer forest, southwestern Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 
258:1200-1210.
Fulé, P.Z. and D.C. Laughlin. 2007. Wildland fire effects on forest structure 
over an altitudinal gradient, Grand Canyon National Park, USA. Journal of 
Applied Ecology 44:136-146.
Grissino-Mayer, H.D., W.H. Romme, M.L. Floyd, and D.D. Hanna. 2004. 
Climatic and human influences on fire regimes of the southern San Juan 
Mountains, Colorado, USA. Ecology 85:1708-1724.
Heinlein , T.A., M.M. Moore, P.Z. Fulé, and W.W. Covinton. 2005. Fire history 
and stand structure of two ponderosa pine-mixed-conifer sites: San 
Francisco Peaks, Arizona, USA. International Journal of Wildland Fire 
14:307-320.
Huffman, D.W., M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, J.E. Crouse, and P.Z. Fulé. 2001. 
Ponderosa pine forest reconstruction: comparisons with historical data. Pp. 
3-8 in R.K. Vance, C.B. Edminster, W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake, comps., 
Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems Restoration and Conservation: Steps Toward 
Stewardship. US Forest Service RMRS-P-22.
Huisinga, K.D., D.C. Laughlin, P.Z. Fule, J.D. Springer, and C.M. McGlone. 2005. 
Effects of an intense prescribed fire on understory vegetation in a mixed-
conifer forest. The Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society 132:590-601.
Iniguez, J.M., T.W. Swetnam, and C.H. Baisan. 2009. Spatially and temporally 
variable fire regime on Rincon Peak, Arizona, USA. Fire Ecology 5:3-21.
Jones J.R. Silviculture of southwestern mixed-conifers and aspen: The status of 
our knowledge. 1974. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Experiment Station. 
Korb, J.E., P.Z Fulé, and M.T. Stoddard. 2012. Forest restoration in a surface 
fire-dependent ecosystem: An example from a mixed-conifer forest, 
southwestern Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 269:10-18.
Korb, J.E., P.Z Fulé, and R. Wu. 2013. Variability of warm/dry mixed-conifer 
forests in southwestern Colorado, USA: Implications for ecological 
restoration. Forest Ecology and Management 304: 182-191.
Landres, P.B., P. Morgan, and F.J. Swanson. 1999. Overview of the use of natural 
variability concepts in managing ecological systems. Ecological Applications 
9:1179-1188.
Larson, A.J. and D. Churchill. 2012. Tree spatial patterns in frequent fire forests 
of western North America, including mechanisms of pattern formation and 
implications for designing fuel reduction and restoration treatments. Forest 
Ecology and Management 267:74-92.
Laughlin, D.C., J.P. Roccaforte, and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. Effects of a second-entry 
prescribed fire in a mixed-conifer forest. Western North American Naturalist 
71:557-562.
Margolis, E.Q. and J. Balmat. 2009. Fire history and fire-climate relationships 
along a fire regime gradient in the Santa Fe Municipal Watershed, NM, USA. 
Forest Ecology and Management 258:2416-2430.
Margolis, E.Q. and T.W. Swetnam. 2013. Historical fire-climate relationships 
of upper elevation fire regimes in the south-western United States. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 22(5):588-598.
Margolis, E.Q., T.W. Swetnam, and C.D. Allen. 2011. Historical stand-replacing 
fire in upper montane forests of the Madrean Sky Islands and Mogollon 
Plateau, southwestern USA. Fire Ecology 7:88-107.
Margolis, E.Q., T.W. Swetnam, and C.D. Allen. 2007. A stand-replacing fire 
history in upper montane forests of the Southern Rocky Mountains. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 37:2227-2241.
Mast, J., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A.E.M. Waltz. 1999. 
Restoration of presettlement age structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine 
forest. Ecological Applications 9:228-239.
Moore, M.M., D.W. Huffman, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and J.E. Crouse. 
2004. Comparison of historical and contemporary forest structure and 
composition on permanent plots in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Forest Science 50: 162-176. 
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 1999. Reference conditions and 
ecological restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Ecological 
Applications 9:1266-1277.
Romme, W.H., M.L. Floyd, and D. Hanna. 2009. Historical range of variability 
and current landscape condition analysis: South Central Highlands Section, 
southwestern Colorado and Northwestern New Mexico. Fort Collins, CO: 
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University. 
Schoennagel, T. and C.R. Nelson. 2011. Restoration relevance of recent National 
Fire Plan treatments in forests of the western United States. Frontiers in 
Ecology and the Environment 9:271-277.
SER (Society for Ecological Restoration, International). 2004. The SER 
International Primer on Ecological Restoration. Washington, D.C.: Society for 
Ecological Restoration. 
Stoddard, M.T. 2011. Compilation of historical forest structural characteristics 
across the southern Colorado Plateau. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 
Swetnam, T.W., C.D. Allen, and J.L. Betancourt. 1999. Applied historical ecology: 
Using the past to manage for the future. Ecological Applications 9:1189-1206.
Swetnam T.W. and C.H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime patterns in the 
southwestern United States since AD 1700. Pp. 11-32 in C.D. Allen, ed., Fire 
Effects in Southwestern Forests. Fort Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. USDA Forest Service. RM-GTR-286. Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa 
Fire Symposium, March 29-31, 1994, Los Alamos, New Mexico. Allen, C. D. 
White, M.A. and J.L. Vankat. 1993. Middle and high-elevation coniferous forest 
communities of the North Rim Region of Grand-Canyon National-Park, 
Arizona, USA. Vegetatio 109:161-174. 
lish structural characteristics and spatial patterns 
similar to the site’s NRV.
• Many cool/moist mixed-conifer forest stands 
may not be outside of their NRV in terms of for-
est structure, composition or fire regime and, 
therefore, may not need restoration (Schoenna-
gel and Nelson 2011).
•  It is important to remember that historically 
these forests were, and still are, connected and 
influenced by the fire regime and forest (fuel) 
structure of adjacent forests. Therefore, a land-
scape-scale approach is increasingly important 
when assessing areas for management and eco-
logical restoration.
Acknowledgments
Support was provided by the Southwest Fire Science 
Consortium and the ERI. This work was funded in 
part by a grant from the USDA Forest Service. The 
manuscript was improved by comments from reviewers: 
Barb Satink Wolfson (Northern Arizona University), 
Dave Lawrence (Santa Fe National Forest), Larissa 
Yocom (Northern Arizona University), Andrew 
Stevenson (Coconino National Forest), and Zander 
Evans (Forest Guild).

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management  
 
Practices
2:  
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:  
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:  
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5:  
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:  
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:  
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:  
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:  
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10:  The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11:  Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12:  Restoring Forest Roads
13:  Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14:  Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15:  Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16:  Snags and Forest Restoration  
17:  Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18:  Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency   
 
Matter? 
19:  Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological   
 
Restoration Treatments
20:  Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21:  Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
22:  Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23:  Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of   
 
Northern Arizona
24:  Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: 
Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of 
 
Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West
26: 
Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: 
 
Implications for Restoration
27:  Fuel Treatment Longevity
Authors: E.Q. Margolis, D.W. Huffman, and J.M. Iñiguez
Reviewers: Barb Satink Wolfson, Dave Lawrence, Larissa Yocom, Andrew Stevenson, 
and Zander Evans 
Series Editor: Dave Egan
For more information about forest restoration, 
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
 NAU Printing Services/74375/300/02-13

Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
eri.nau.edu
1000372
