 
FACT SHEET: ACCOUNTING FOR WATERSHED AND OTHER 
RESOURCE VALUES – CONSIDERATION IN THE NEPA ANALYSIS 
 
Prepared by:  Dave Brewer, Ecological Restoration Institute 
 
 
The value of the wood products and the costs to administer, prepare, and complete the 
work are typically the sole economic factors studied in a NEPA analysis of forest 
restoration proposals or fuels reduction projects. Normally, watershed protection or 
restoration is part of the purpose and need for action and as such necessitates some level 
of disclosure in NEPA documentation. In some cases, such as a municipal watershed, 
water yield can be an extremely important attribute to carry through the analysis. The 
goals of this fact sheet are to 1) provide practitioners with some scientific literature they 
can use as a reference in their NEPA analysis on watershed outputs, 2) show some 
methods to determine watershed and other resource outputs, and 3) identify some basic 
technique that practitioners may consider to value these variables.  
Much of the research used in this report comes from long-term experiments 
conducted in the Central Arizona Highlands (Table 1). These include sites on the Sierra 
Ancha Experimental Forest; Three-Bar Experimental watershed, the Whitespar, Mingus, 
and Battle Flat Experimental watersheds; Beaver Creek; and the White Mountain 
watersheds (Castle Creek, Willow Creek, Thomas Creek, and Seven Springs). 
Information has also been used from an unpublished data set collected on Burro Creek-- 
another mixed conifer watershed in the White Mountains. Most of the studies began in 
the early1950s and were discontinued by the 1980s in response to a shift in research 
priorities.1 
  
Table 1. Central Arizona Highlands Long-term Study Sites 
Study Site 
Terrestrial 
Ecosystem 
Study Objectives 
Sierra Ancha 
Chaparral, Riparian, 
Ponderosa Pine, and 
Mixed Conifer 
Three study areas were established with the research focusing 
on water use by native plants, grazing impacts, soil 
erosion/sedimentation, and water yield. 
Three-Bar 
Chaparral 
Determine effects of chaparral-to-grass conversion in terms of 
increasing water yields, dissolved chemicals, and sediment. The 
effects of fire/herbicide applications to control shrub re-growth. 
Whitespar 
Chaparral and 
Riparian 
Water yield and sedimentation. 
Mingus 
Chaparral 
Water yield, soil erosion and sedimentation. 
Battle Flat 
Chaparral 
Nutrient cycling, wildlife habitat, and fuels reduction. 
Beaver Creek 
Ponderosa Pine and 
Pinyon-Juniper 
Water yield, soil erosion/sedimentation, wildlife habitat, and 
forage responses. 
White 
Mountains 
Ponderosa Pine and 
Mixed Conifer 
Water yield, soil erosion, wildlife impacts, and snow fall 
accumulation in cutting units. 
                                                 
1 Baker, Jr., M.B., compiler. 1999. History of watershed research in the Central Arizona Highlands. 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-29. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. 56p. 
March 2008 
Ecological Restoration Institute/NAU 
1 

Study Site 
Terrestrial 
Ecosystem 
Study Objectives 
Burro Creek 
Mixed Conifer 
Water yield and understory forage responses 
 
The results of these studies indicate that increased water-yield will occur in most 
Central Arizona Highlands ecosystems, although the overall amounts and length of 
residence time will vary. For the most part, the ponderosa pine type had water yield 
values that ranged from a low of 0.5 inches at Castle Creek to a high of between 1 and 2 
inches for Beaver Creek. However, one watershed associated with Beaver Creek had a 
water yield response of 5.6 inches or 103 percent the first year after treatment.2   
Not surprisingly, the highest values were associated with large basal area and 
canopy cover reductions and the lower values with more conservative overstory 
removals. When other multiple use concerns are factored in, an increase of 0.6 inch is 
possible on the more productive sites. The length of time these increases manifested 
themselves for the ponderosa pine type in Sierra Ancha, Beaver Creek, and Castle Creek 
were 21, 13 years, and 10 years, respectively.  
Three-Bar and Whitespar, both chaparral ecosystems, had reported water yield 
increases of 5.8 inches and 5.0 inches, respectively (this represents the high end of the 
reported values for the Whitespar with the range going from a low of 1.5 inches to a high 
of 5.0 inches). The Mingus study area noted water yield values going from 0.3 inches for 
those portions burned to 0.2 inches for herbicide-treated areas. Studies conducted at 
Sierra Ancha reported a 22-percent increase, or 0.4 inches, with herbicide treatments. The 
length of time these water yield increases could be expected were reported from a low of  
seven years for Whitespar to a high of 11 years at Three-Bar. 
The reason for this wide variation of reported water yields was tied to the amount 
of existing canopy cover prior to treatment. Those sites that were inventoried with 
moderately high (40 to 60 percent) to high (more than 60 percent) canopy cover also had 
the highest water yield increases, whereas those sites with less than 40 percent cover had 
the lower values. The higher crown cover densities are also associated with annual 
precipitation in excess of 18 inches.  
The mixed conifer ecosystems also demonstrated water yield gains following 
treatments. Both Willow and Thomas Creeks reported a 3.8 and 2.0 inch increase. 
Although the length of time these increases manifested themselves was not reported, it 
would appear that if the average annual runoff found by Rich and Thompson (1974)3 is 
correct (4.7 inches), then the increases in the mixed conifer type would last about ten 
years. This is based on the calculated decline of .08 area inches per year determined for 
Burro Creek during the 25-year record. 
Researchers determined that mechanical methods (cabling and felling) in the 
pinyon-juniper woodland community cannot be expected to increase water yield, 
although the herbicide treatments did demonstrate a water yield increase of 0.6 inches per 
                                                 
2 Brown, H.E., M.B. Baker, Jr., J.J. Rogers, W.P. Clary, J.L. Kovner, F.R. Larson, C.C. Avery, and R.E. 
Campbell. 1974. Opportunities for increasing water yield and other multiple use values on ponderosa pine 
forest lands. USDA Forest Service Research Paper RM-129. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range and 
Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 36 p. 
3 Rich, L.R. and J.R. Thompson. 1974. Watershed management in Arizona’s mixed conifer forests:  The 
status of our knowledge. USDA Forest Service Research Paper RM-130. Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range and Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO. 15p.  
March 2008 
Ecological Restoration Institute/NAU 
2 

acre. Once the dead overstory trees were removed, however, streamflow was reduced to 
pretreatment levels.  
Effects on other watershed variables, such as erosion and water quality, were also 
studied although a tie between increased erosion/sedimentation and declines in site 
productivity or water quality are not made. For example, even though a five-fold increase 
in soil erosion occurred on the heavily grazed plots within Sierra Ancha in the chaparral, 
the study did not identify soil erosion that surpassed any threshold loss. Researchers did 
note that sediment-free water invariably results from areas with good grass cover and soil 
erosion is highest where vegetation densities are decreased. The same can be said for the 
studies at Three-Bar, Whitespar and Battle Flat, where the authors reported increases in 
nitrate nitrogen, soil erosion and sediment, but did not relate those findings to exceeding 
any soil or water quality standard or declines in site quality. 
Results from ponderosa pine and mixed conifer sites in Sierra Ancha, Beaver 
Creek, and Thomas Creek indicate that sediment delivery increases after harvesting were 
low with no meaningful changes in total sediment yield as a result of the treatments 
applied. 
Forage/herbage production increases were noted at Three-Bar (chaparral), Beaver 
Creek (ponderosa pine and pinyon-juniper woodland4), and Burro Creek (mixed conifer). 
These increases range from a low of 300 pounds per acre (Beaver Creek, ponderosa pine) 
to a high of 1,400 pounds per acre (Beaver Creek, pinyon-juniper woodlands). 
What can practitioners conclude from these studies that will help them when 
creating their NEPA effects analysis? 
 
• Moderate to high levels of overstory removal (40 percent or more) in ponderosa 
pine or mixed conifer will lead to a water yield increase that averages between 1 
to 3 inches per acre per year, and can possibly last up to ten years after treatment. 
Within the dense mixed chaparral, water yield increases could be as high as 5 
inches per acre per year, although the average is probably closer to 3 inches. The 
longevity of treatments in this vegetation type, as with the ponderosa pine/mixed 
conifer, is roughly ten years. Neither low-density chaparral nor pinyon-juniper has 
any substantial water yield potential. 
• Except for clearcutting, none of the other treatments (manual or mechanical) 
within the pinyon-juniper, ponderosa pine, or mixed conifer had any substantial 
influence on increased soil erosion or sedimentation. However, the use of 
herbicides within chaparral ecosystems may lead to elevated concentrations of 
nitrate nitrogen. 
• Forage and herbage production will increase with reductions in overstory canopy. 
 
MacDonald (2003)5 noted several other resource considerations that land 
managers need to be aware of concerning water yield including: 
 
                                                 
4 Brown, H.E. 1971. The Beaver Creek Evaluation Project. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest 
and Range and Experiment Station. Flagstaff, AZ. 126p.  
5 MacDonald, L.H. 2003. Effects of forest harvesting on water yields in water resources of the Lower Pecos 
Region, New Mexico. Decision Makers Field Conference. New Mexico Bureau of Geology and Mines. 
Santa Fe, NM. 5p. 
March 2008 
Ecological Restoration Institute/NAU 
3 

March 2008 
Ecological Restoration Institute/NAU 
4 
                                                
1. In snowmelt-dominated watersheds (ponderosa pine, mixed conifer, and 
spruce/fir), summer precipitation has little effect on summer stream flows. 
2. Little or no water yield increases can be expected in areas where annual 
precipitation is less than 18 inches. 
3. The greatest potential for increased water yield is in higher-elevation fir and 
spruce. 
4. At least 15 to 20 percent of a watershed must be treated in order to detect any 
change in runoff. 
5. Most of this increase will occur in the winter or spring. 
 
Using some of the outputs reported in the research above, it is possible to 
demonstrate what practitioners might consider when disclosing restoration effects on 
watershed variables. Take the following scenario, for example: 
 
In this situation, one thousand acres of ponderosa pine are treated with a strict 
restoration prescription on 60 percent of the area or 600 acres. This results in an 
increase of 600 acre-inches (one inch increase per acre) or 50 acre-feet (600 acre 
inches ÷ 12) per year. Assuming this increase will last for ten years, the resulting 
water yield will be 500 acre-feet and, using a value of $250 per acre-foot (Snider 
unpublished literature review),6 will result in a total increased value of $125,000. 
If either mixed conifer or chaparral are found within the watershed, then water yield 
values of 2 acre-inches or 3 acre-inches per acre would be appropriate based on the 
amount of acres treated and the level of overstory removal in those vegetation types. 
 
Another example that practitioners could considered is the value of forage 
increases. Using the same example, if the anticipated increase is 500 pounds per acre (air 
dried biomass), then an increase of 1,000 animal unit months over the 10-year planning 
horizon could be realized (500 lbs/acre * 600 acres * 10 years * .30 [allowable use factor] 
÷ 900 lbs [forage requirement per AUM] = 1,000 AUMs). Bartlett et al. (2002)7 
concluded that the value of an AUM was $9.30. Multiplying this amount by the AUMs 
produced in this example results in a value of $9,300.  
This is not an all inclusive list of value considerations. Others could be analyzed 
and used (e.g., losses of property or wildlife values) but only if federal land managers can 
support these values and costs with credible scientific and documentary evidence. 
Using information like that displayed in the example above, practitioners will be 
able to demonstrate that there is a positive relationship between ecological restoration 
activities/expenditures and the provision of ecosystem services valued by society.  
 
 
Reviewers: Charlie Denton, Geneen Granger, Bruce Higgins 
Editor: Dave Egan 
             
 
 
6 Water value from unpublished literature review by G.B. Snider. Value estimate for good and services by 
stream/riparian systems. Northern Arizona University. This table uses a $250 per acre-foot, which is the 
mid-range estimate. 
7 Bartlett, E.T., L.A. Torell, N.R. Rimbey, L.W. Van Tassel, and D.W. McCollum. 2002. Valuing grazing 
use on public land. Journal of Range Management 55(5):426-438.  
