Ecological Restoration 
Institute 
Fact Sheet: Lessons Learned from the Wallow Fire    September  2011 
 
Lesson #1 - We need to act at the pace and scale of the prob-
lem NOW—or be prepared to bear the cost of fires at the 
scale of 100,000 acres and larger.   
The size of unnatural crown fires has increased exponentially in the last 
fifty years. In the 1960s, a fire of several thousand acres was considered 
large, during the last two decades fire size has increased to hundreds of 
thousands of acres in extent. The Wallow Fire, for example, was re-
ported in both acres and square miles.   
 
Lesson #2 - Unnatural crown fire is destroying critical wildlife 
habitat, such as old growth. The Wallow Fire reinforces the 
conclusion of the Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan that 
fire is the biggest threat to owls’ long-term survival.   
Twenty years ago logging was the biggest threat to the habitat of the 
Mexican spotted owl, but in 2011 it is uncharacteristic crown fire. Esti-
mates vary, but somewhere between 60 and 80 Mexican spotted owl 
PACs (Protected Activity Centers) were degraded or destroyed by the three major fires in Arizona this year. 
 
Lesson #3 - The WUI fuelbreak treatments worked as designed.  
The treatments caused the devastating crown fire to transition to a more controllable sur-
face fire, which is what was expected when the treatments were implemented. While sur-
face fire was responsible for the loss of some structures, those losses were most likely the 
re-
sult of the homeowner not removing  surface fuels from around structures in order to pro-
tect them.  
 
Lesson #4 - Relatively small treatments embedded in an overstocked land-
scape can survive a high-impact fire.  
The 150-acre ERI treatment, known as “Eagar South,” as well as several other relatively 
small U.S. Forest service treatments survived the severe fire behavior of the Wallow Fire. These promising results sug-
gest there is an urgent need for larger, contiguous forest restoration treatments at the landscape scale to reduce the 
risk of a catastrophic wildfires like the Wallow Fire.     
 
Lesson #5 - Comprehensive restoration requires action in mixed  
conifer forests.   
Continuous, unnatural fuel loads across the Mogollon Rim are creating stand-
replacing fire conditions in all forest types. This is a critical problem in less  
common forest types, such as dry mixed conifer and wet mixed conifer. We need to  
experiment with treatments that will restore these systems and return fire to its  
natural role.  
 
Lesson #6 - High-impact fires are expensive to suppress and astro-
nomically expensive to society and the environment when all costs 
are calculated.   
Based on analyses of recent high-impact fires, the full-cost accounting for the Wallow Fire will approach $1 billion dol-
lars. According to an analysis prepared by the Forest Guild, the average cost of treatment for the White Mountain Stew-
ardship Contract is $538/acre. With that cost in mind, we could have treated every acre in the Wallow Fire perimeter for 
slightly less than $300,000,000 and saved ourselves $700,000,000!  We would have saved even more if the wood was 
utilized and treatments were strategically placed to maximize effectiveness.  
Wallow Fire burned 840 square miles 
Greer, AZ 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
  
Mixed Conifer 
