 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests:  
Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management  
By Tyson L. Swetnam and Donald A. Falk, University of Arizona School of Natural Resources and Environment  
Introduction 
Forest death from extreme drought and wildfires are reducing regional carbon reservoirs and overall forest 
sequestration capacity. At the same time, land use practices and development have increased the vulnerabil-
ity of some forests during extreme droughts. The intent of this fact sheet is to explain the basics of the car-
bon cycle in southwestern forests. It also summarizes how carbon cycling patterns are most likely to change 
in the coming years to decades in the Southwest. 
 
Key Points 
1. Drought and wildfire activity continues to 
increase in area, frequency, and severity. 
 
Globally the ten hottest years on record have all 
occurred since 1998. The southwestern U.S. 
experienced a major drought in the first decade 
of the 21th century, which was the largest in at 
least 150 years. Since 2002, Arizona and New 
Mexico have both set new records for the larg-
est fires in state history. As climate change pro-
gresses, the impacts of deeper droughts and 
longer fire seasons represent a multi-pronged 
threat to forest health and carbon sequestration 
potential.  
 
2.  Forests sequester less carbon following a 
high severity wildfire or severe drought.  
 
The loss of older larger trees greatly reduces 
the total carbon sequestration capacity of a for-
est. Coupled with the decomposition of woody debris, a severely burned or drought/insect killed forest 
can act as a net carbon emitter for many years before the balance shifts back to that of a carbon sink 
(Figure 1). Conifers suffering from drought can take several years to regain their growth and carbon se-
questration potential relative to trees in a healthier state.  
 
3.  A reorganization of all southwestern forest ecosystems is predicted in coming decades.  
 
As ecosystems are replaced following high severity disturbances, the new systems that reestablish in a 
warmer climate may not resemble those that developed during the cooler and wetter 19th and 20th centu-
ries. Existing biome locations are predicted to synchronously move north or up in elevation to maintain 
viability in their climate envelope (Figure 2, p. 2).   
Fact Sheet: Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes,  
and the Effects of Fire and Management  
October 2015 
Figure 1. Wind driven crown fires consume surface detritus, needles and 
fine branches but leave heavier woody fuels intact. Above, the Las Conchas 
Fire incinerated more than 30,000 acres of timber in a single burning period 
near Cochiti Mesa, Santa Fe National Forest, in summer 2011. Photo by 
T.W. Swetnam  

 
4.  Southwestern forests will sequester less carbon because of global warming. 
Increased temperatures make plants work harder to photosynthesize. This reduction in efficiency results in less 
growth, greater stress, and higher likelihood of mortality. Climate models predict an increase in temperatures, 
and decreased or level precipitation, for most of the Southwest in the future. This will likely result in a net de-
cline in production across almost all southwestern forest ecosystems.   
 
5.  Bigger and older trees do not slow their total carbon uptake over time.  
In some cases, an individual large diameter tree can contain the majority (>50%) of the carbon in an entire for-
est stand. Contrary to the belief that mature forests are “senescent” or less productive, the value and importance 
of old growth trees should be reconsidered. A single old growth southwestern USA conifer tree can contain as 
much as 16 tons of carbon in aboveground biomass alone. 
 
6.  Carbon reservoirs change size with elevation, aspect, and topographic position. 
Carbon pools are not equally distributed across landscapes. Complex topography redistributes precipitation to 
lower hillslope positions and erosion results in deeper soils near valley bottoms. Lower topographic positions 
contain a vast majority of carbon in (1) larger and taller trees and (2) deeper soils, relative to those of ridges and 
hillslopes. This combination of deeper soils and access to groundwater results in trees that can hold up to ten 
times more carbon in valley bottoms than on steep and exposed ridges and hillslopes.  
 
Conclusions and Management Implications 
Future climate scenarios predict a potential for fast ecosystem shifts due to either high severity fire, insect attack, 
or extreme drought. This loss of mature forests, which developed over centuries, represents the starkest outcome 
for forests in the Southwest. Prioritization efforts to increase and preserve existing carbon storage generally run 
parallel to other traditional management objectives that involve continued access to clean water, protecting threat-
ened and endangered species, ensuring sustainable yields for timbering, improvement of grazing forage and wild-
life habitat, and reducing fire risk. Restoration toward historical conditions has the benefit of both increasing car-
bon storage and decreasing the probability of ecosystem collapse due to high severity wildfire or inter-tree stress 
for water during periods of exceptional drought and insect attack.  
 
Contact 
Tyson Swetnam, tswetnam@email.arizona.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
Figure 2. Expected 
shifts in ecosystems 
by (1) vegetation type 
(in bold), (2) carbon 
reservoirs, (3) se-
questration (flux) 
rates, and (4) fire 
frequency in the com-
ing years for com-
mon southwestern 
forest ecosystems.  
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Swetnam, T.L. and D.A. Falk. 2015. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and 
Management. ERI Working Paper No. 35. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Sci-
ence Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 15 p. 
