 
 
Forest thinning stalled again 
By MARY TOLAN  
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
08/05/1999 
A 1,700-acre forest thinning and forest restoration project off North Fort Valley Road has 
been delayed again. 
An appeal to postpone the project -- aimed at reducing fire danger in the Flagstaff region 
-- was upheld at least temporarily Wednesday by U.S. Regional Forester Eleanor Towns, 
who agreed with environmental groups that had appealed the project. The Regional 
Forest Service Office agreed with two of the environmentalists' eight points, saying that 
the Coconino National Forest had not fully documented the effects on cultural resources, 
and that the cumulative effects analysis on future projects in the Flagstaff area may have 
been insufficient. 
The ruling directed the Coconino National Forest to take a second look at the project in 
light of those two points.  
The project was initially postponed when the appeal was filed just days before the project 
was to begin in late June. 
John Horning, of Forest Guardians, the lead environmental group in the appeal, said he 
was delighted with the decision. 
"We're thrilled about the fact that the regional forester agreed with the merits of our 
appeals," Horning said. "Our major belief all along is that the Forest Service has ... this 
thinly veiled commercial logging program and that restoration aspect to the sale is 
suspect at best."  
But one person who's been behind the planning of the Fort Valley project disagrees. 
"I'm not a happy camper. I'm not a happy forest dweller," said Brett KenCairn, executive 
director for the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership, who estimated that answering the 
Regional Forest Office's questions would take about four months.  
That delay will likely push the project back until spring.  
"Guardians has set us up for a train wreck that would be far more devastating than what 
they think they are protecting us from," KenCairn said. 

He said that by stalling the thinning project, the Guardians are just increasing the problem 
of too many tiny trees in a tinderbox forest that is only safe because of recent rains. He 
said that if it weren't for those rains, Congress would have ordered millions of dollars for 
logging project across the West because of fire danger concerns. And those projects 
would not be aimed at restoration.  
"If that kind of thing comes about, I personally will hold Guardians partially responsible 
for that," KenCairn said. "They have not let us develop positive alternatives that could 
show a new direction for forest management." 
Horning, however, said it was a matter of perspective. 
"It comes down to a difference in how you interpret what's best for the land. There are 
other ways to go about restoring the land, like small control burns, that don't entail 
pulling out a chain saw." 
In fact, the logging is just one aspect of the forest restoration project that includes 
controlled burns and other techniques. 
Brad Ack, of the Grand Canyon Trust, said that while he was disappointed in the 
decision, the good news was that the bulk of the project was upheld. 
"The science was upheld, the substance was upheld," he said, adding that in a complex 
project such as this one, some of the details can be overlooked. 
"There's no other forest restoration project that I know of that have the level of scientific 
involvement, the level of broad interest involved and the carefulness of detail. If this is 
not acceptable as an experimental project, there's probably nothing that will be 
acceptable. You have to wonder what's acceptable for stewarding our public lands." 
Paul Summerfelt, fuels management officer for the Flagstaff Fire Department, was not 
happy with the decision. 
"I am very upset," he said. "Our forests are unhealthy, overcrowded and fire prone. What 
the Partnership has proposed is our best chance at averting a real catastrophe both 
ecologically and for the safety of our community. Every day that we delay, we put our 
forests and our community at greater risk. Summerfelt added, however, that the city 
remained committed to the project and "we are confident that it will occur." 
