Diameter Caps for Thinning
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine
Forests: Viewpoints, Effects, and
Tradeoffs
Scott R. Abella, Peter Z. Fule´, and W. Wallace Covington
Upper size limits of trees allowed to be cut, termed diameter caps, have resulted in polarization,
litigation, and delays and alterations to thinning projects in many western forests. Using southwestern
ponderosa pine forests as an example, we summarize viewpoints on caps, simulate effects of caps on
thinning prescriptions, and provide examples of ecosystem-level tradeoffs of leaving extra trees during
thinning projects. The importance placed on trees versus other ecosystem components primarily
differentiates those who support caps and those who do not. We conclude that diameter caps may
enhance some ecosystem components, such as densities of large trees, but they negatively impact many
nontree components.
Keywords: ecological restoration, treatment prescription, fuel reduction, ecosystem management
T
ree densities have increased sharply
in many western frequent-ﬁre for-
ests since the late 1800s because of
ﬁre exclusion and other factors (Lynch et al.
2000, Allen et al. 2002). In southwestern
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests, for
example, there is widespread agreement that
mechanical tree thinning is necessary to re-
store ecosystem health, reduce crown ﬁre
hazards, and make human habitations safer
(Covington et al. 1997, Allen et al. 2002,
Nowicki and George 2004). There also is
agreement that, regardless of their size, old
trees that were established before Euro-
American settlement (“presettlement”) in
the late 1800s generally should be con-
served. Consensus disintegrates, however,
when attention turns to thinning young,
postsettlement trees of relatively large diam-
eter (often deﬁned as 16 in.). Some indi-
viduals believe that thinning these large,
young trees is sometimes necessary to en-
hance ecosystem health (Coughlan 2003),
whereas others argue that large trees, regard-
less of age, generally should be retained
(Allen et al. 2002, Nowicki and George
2004). To retain all large trees, some people
support a policy of diameter caps, deﬁned as
upper size limits of trees allowed to be cut.
Sizes of caps in ponderosa pine forests have
ranged from as small as 5 in. to greater than
18 in. (Coughlan 2003, Fule´ et al. 2006).
Caps are imposed frequently by the US For-
est Service, National Park Service, and other
organizations, partly to show that fuel re-
duction and restoration thinning projects
are not simply logging operations in an at-
tempt to gain support for these projects
(Larson and Mirth 2001, Coughlan 2003).
Nevertheless, dissent about diameter caps
has resulted in delays and modiﬁcations of
numerous fuel reduction and ecological res-
toration
projects
in
western
forests
(Coughlan 2003).
Peer-reviewed scientiﬁc publications on
diameter caps are rare (Larson and Mirth
2001, Coughlan 2003). We suggest that dis-
agreements about caps are frequently based
on personal opinion and may be concen-
trated on trees at the expense of other impor-
tant ecosystem components. In this article,
using southwestern ponderosa pine forests as
an example, we ﬁrst provide an overview of
the viewpoints on diameter caps. Next, we
use stem maps from a ﬁeld study in northern
Arizona to assess effects of caps on pine den-
sities and patterns in a simulated thinning
prescription. Finally, we summarize antici-
pated tradeoffs of diameter caps for several
ecosystem
components
and
economics
based on peer-reviewed literature. Our focus
is on 16-in. caps, because this cap size has
been widely proposed in the Southwest, al-
though similar analyses could be applied to
caps of any size. We hope that these analyses
will broaden thinking on diameter caps to
more fully include ecosystem considerations
beyond the trees themselves. In addition,
these analyses may be useful to stakeholders
and policy makers concerned with imple-
menting urgently needed thinning projects.
Viewpoints
Viewpoints on 16-in.-diameter caps
generally fall into three categories: support-
ive, neutral, or opposed (Table 1). Depend-
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
407
A B S T R A C T
policy

ing on the individual, advocates of these
viewpoints cite one or several reasons to sup-
port their views. Supporters believe that
large trees have decreased in density because
of past logging, so all extant large trees re-
gardless of age should be retained during for-
est thinning (Nowicki and George 2004).
Supporters also believe that these large trees
represent the next cohort of old trees, are
important habitat features, will result in
snag formation important for wildlife, and
do not need to be removed to reduce crown
ﬁre hazards. In addition, underlying support
for caps is the concern that without caps,
forest thinning under veils of restoration or
fuel reduction might be motivated by eco-
nomics rather than ecology. This concern
likely emanates from distrust of public land-
management agencies (Coughlan 2003).
Neutral viewpoints reﬂect the perspec-
tive that because many sites contain few
young, large trees, retaining these trees has
little immediate ecological or economic ef-
fect (Table 1). Holders of this viewpoint also
Table 1. Summary of viewpoints about
diameter caps and commonly used
arguments to support the viewpoints.a
Supportive
Large trees are rare so they should be retained
regardless of age or location
Large trees are ecologically valuable, such as for
snag formation
Large trees are ﬁre resistant so their removal is not
needed for fuel reduction
Selling large trees should not pay restoration
project costs
Economics should not drive restoration and fuel
reduction projects
Neutral
Because often there are few young, large trees,
they may as well be retained
Leaving a few extra large trees probably has little
ecological effect
Diameter caps may allow projects to avoid
litigation
Opposed
Removing young, large trees is sometimes
necessary to restore openings
Retaining too many excess trees compromises
other ecosystem components
Trees are inﬂexibly retained even if the stands that
result fail to achieve objectives
Leaving excess trees necessitates future heavy
thinnings and multiple entries
Residual trees grow rapidly after thinning so large
trees accrue quickly
Selling young, large trees offsets project costs and
funds follow-up management
Selling young, large trees may allow contracts and
projects to proceed
a Viewpoints and reasons cited in support of the viewpoints are
based primarily on Allen et al. (2002), Coughlan (2003), Fie-
dler et al. (1999), Fule´ et al. (2006), Larson and Mirth (2001),
Lynch et al. (2000), and Nowicki and George (2004).
Figure 1. The large tree in the bottom center of the top photo is 23 in. in diameter but only
approximately 95 years old. The nearest presettlement evidence is 34 ft away from this
postsettlement tree, indicating that the tree likely invaded a historical meadow opening.
This young tree would be retained in thinning projects with 16-in.-diameter caps. The
bottom photo shows presettlement evidence (gray stump) surrounded by small postsettle-
ment trees. These photos illustrate a tradeoff of diameter caps: retaining the large post-
settlement tree in the top photo provides immediate large-tree structure, yet precludes
restoration of a historical opening. Retaining the small trees around the presettlement stump
in the photo at the bottom would maintain historical locations of trees and openings, but the
small trees will take longer to develop large-tree characteristics. It should be recognized,
however, that on this site with high densities of postsettlement >16-in. trees (42/ac), large
openings probably cannot be reestablished under any thinning prescription with a 16-in.
cap (Figure 2a). (Photos by S.R. Abella, Jan. 17, 2006, Coconino National Forest, northern
Arizona [351550 N, 1114040 W]).
408
Journal of Forestry • December 2006

believe that caps are beneﬁcial if they pre-
vent thinning projects from being delayed
by litigation.
However, opponents of diameter caps
also have several reasons they believe that
caps should not be imposed (Table 1). For
example, they believe that large, young trees
sometimes need to be removed to restore
canopy openings (Figure 1). Large, young
trees also may need to be cut if these trees
sharply exceed presettlement densities, re-
sulting in unsustainable stands still suscepti-
ble to crown ﬁre after thinning. In addition,
opponents believe that residual trees grow
rapidly after restoration thinning, which is
supported by published research (Skov et al.
2005), so that caps may not greatly beneﬁt
the development of large trees. Another ar-
gument used against caps is that harvesting
some large, young trees can offset the ﬁnan-
cial costs of restoration and fuel reduction
projects, allowing these projects to proceed
more quickly and encompass greater area.
Simulating Effects
To understand effects of 16-in.-diame-
ter caps on a thinning prescription, we stem-
mapped a 2.47-ac (1 ha), 328  328 ft plot
in 2004 on each of eight sites studied as part
of previous research (Abella and Covington
2006). Plots were located in ponderosa pine
forests in the Coconino National Forest and
Northern Arizona University Centennial
Forest near the City of Flagstaff in northern
Arizona. These plots were not intended to
encompass a complete array of stand condi-
tions in this region, but plots did cover a
representative range of stand densities (12–
412 live pine/ac) and structures (Abella and
Covington 2006). Using tapes laid out to
create 100, 0.025-ac (33  33 ft) cells on
each plot, we mapped all live trees and evi-
dence
of
presettlement
tree
locations
(stumps, stump holes, logs, and snags) to the
nearest 0.3 ft in an x,y-coordinate system.
We identiﬁed presettlement evidence fol-
lowing methods in Fule´ et al. (1997). We
chose the year 1880 to represent settlement
and ﬁre-regime disruption on these plots,
based on previous research in the study area
that has recorded disruption dates ranging
from the mid-1870s to the mid-1880s (Cov-
ington et al. 1997, Fule´ et al. 1997).
We used the maps to simulate a resto-
ration thinning prescription with and with-
out a 16-in.-diameter cap. This prescription
is designed to reduce tree densities to within
an approximate range of historical variabil-
ity, while reestablishing presettlement tree
patterns (Fule´ et al. 2001). In our simula-
tions, 1.5 postsettlement trees 16 in. were
retained within 30 ft of each dead presettle-
ment tree, or three postsettlement trees 16
in. were retained if larger trees were not
available. This replacement ratio is intended
to account for possible tree mortality from
treatment operations (Covington et al.
1997, Fule´ et al. 2001). All living presettle-
ment trees were retained.
We found that diameter caps affected
postthinning stand conditions the most on
plots containing many 16-in. postsettle-
ment trees and where these trees were not
located close enough to presettlement evi-
dence to be used as replacements. Thinning
simulation results are illustrated in Figure 2
for two plots exemplifying different levels of
cap inﬂuences. On a plot containing a high
density (42/ac) of postsettlement trees 16-
in., for example, the cap resulted in the re-
tention of an extra 28 trees/ac 16 in. com-
pared with cap-free thinning. Because the
cap-free thinning grouped retained trees
around presettlement evidence, inevitably
the cap led to the retention of additional
trees within groups or the retention of trees
occurring in openings away from presettle-
ment evidence. These extra trees limited the
reestablishment of historical openings or any
openings (Figure 2a). In addition to higher
densities, residual basal area also was sharply
higher in the cap-constrained prescription
(87 ft2/ac) than in the cap-free prescription
(39 ft2/ac). Another plot provided an exam-
ple where 16-in. caps had little effect because
only nine postsettlement 16-in. trees/acre
occurred on this plot. All but one of these
trees could be used to replace dead presettle-
ment trees (Figures 2b and 3).
The restoration prescription based on
presettlement tree locations illustrated in
this article (Figure 2) is only one of many
possible thinning prescriptions that could be
used, with or without diameter caps. For ex-
ample, Allen et al. (2002) suggested using
existing structure, rather than presettlement
tree locations, to guide thinning and rapidly
reestablish groups of large trees. The pre-
scription based on presettlement tree loca-
tions differs from this structural approach
only by emphasizing the retention of trees
near presettlement evidence and the reestab-
lishment of historical locations of canopy
openings (Figure 1). However, neither of
these approaches, when constrained by a di-
ameter cap, could establish canopy openings
on sites containing high densities of 16-in.
trees (Figure 2). Caps may similarly affect
other fuel reduction and thinning prescrip-
tions, such as those based on meeting target
basal areas. In cap-constrained basal area
cutting, the basal area of 16-in. trees sets
the minimum level of basal area remaining
after thinning, whether or not that level
meets management objectives.
Our simulations illustrate that inﬂu-
ences of caps likely change across the land-
scape with variations in abiotic site factors,
disturbance history, and past management
that affect tree size, density, and pattern
within stands to be thinned. The next sec-
tion
provides
examples
of
long-term
tradeoffs for multiple ecosystem compo-
nents of imposing or not imposing diameter
caps on southwestern ponderosa pine thin-
ning projects.
Ecosystem and Economic
Tradeoffs
Canopy Openings. Canopy openings
and meadows are key habitat for many or-
ganisms in ponderosa pine forests, but these
habitats have been severely reduced during
the 1900s by invasion of postsettlement
trees (Moore and Huffman 2004). Caps af-
fect canopy openings by precluding their re-
establishment altogether or by causing the
spatial locations of openings to shift away
from their historical locations (Table 2).
There is some evidence that openings con-
tain soils that differ from those below trees,
reﬂecting long-term vegetation inﬂuences
on soil development (White 1985, Kerns et
al. 2003). Switching the locations of these
patches in current forests may have unfore-
seen inﬂuences on herbaceous productivity
or other variables.
Understory Vegetation. Much of the
species diversity in ponderosa pine forests is
contained in understory vegetation, which
also provides forage for herbivores (Moore et
al. 1999). Understory biomass can be 10
times higher in remnant and restored open-
ings than even under sparse ponderosa pine
canopy cover (Clary 1975). These overstory-
understory relationships illustrate a tradeoff:
retaining extra trees because of diameter caps
decreases understory productivity and diver-
sity (Table 2).
Large Pine and Snags. Large pine and
snags are important habitat features for
many wildlife species (Ganey and Vojta
2004). Diameter caps may increase or main-
tain densities of large pine and snags, at least
in the short term, after thinning (Table 2).
However, consideration also needs to be
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
409

Figure 2. Stem maps showing distributions of ponderosa pine in 2004 (current) and after a simulated 1.5–3 restoration thinning
prescription with and without a 16-in.-diameter cap. (a) High densities (42/ac) of >16-in. postsettlement trees limit reestablishment of
meadows under any thinning prescription with a 16-in. cap. (b) Sixteen-in. caps have little inﬂuence on postthinning structure because the
site contains few >16-in. trees. Plots were mapped on the Coconino National Forest, northern Arizona (panel a: 351550 N, 1114042
W; panel b: 350230 N, 1113833 W).
410
Journal of Forestry • December 2006

given to how limiting snag densities are to
wildlife populations and what species may
be limited by snag availability. For example,
Brawn and Balda (1988) concluded that
only three of six cavity-nesting bird species
they studied in northern Arizona ponderosa
pine forests were limited by nest-site avail-
ability in snags. Food and foraging substrate,
which often decrease with increasing pine
densities (Clary 1975, Waltz and Covington
2004), may more strongly limit bird densi-
ties on some sites.
Wildlife Habitat. Diameter caps may
inﬂuence wildlife by affecting stand struc-
ture and other variables impacted by this
structure such as understory vegetation and
mast-producing Gambel oak (Quercus gam-
belii). Caps probably will promote wildlife
species beneﬁting from higher pine densi-
ties, while negatively impacting species de-
pendent on open forests. For example,
Dodd et al. (2003) found that tassel-eared
squirrels (Sciurus aberti) in northern Arizona
ponderosa pine forests were more abundant
in stands with high densities of interlocking
canopy trees. On the other hand, these
stands constitute poor habitat for species de-
pendent on open-forest features, such as
high solar radiation and understory produc-
tivity. Maintaining open stands is consistent
both with ecosystem-based (rather than sin-
gle species) management and the evolution-
ary environments many wildlife species en-
countered in historical ponderosa pine
forests (Moore et al. 1999).
Pine Autecology. Diameter caps could
have no effect, negative effects, or positive
effects on pine variables such as genetics and
regeneration (Table 2). Thinning reduces
tree population sizes, which may decrease
genetic
diversity.
However,
Kolanoski
(2002) found that much of the genetic di-
versity of ponderosa pine at a northern Ari-
zona site was related to differences in tree
ages and establishment periods. Many post-
settlement 16-in. trees are similar age and
originated under similar conditions shortly
after Euro-American settlement. It is possi-
ble that thinning these 16-in. trees to create
regeneration opportunities for new cohorts
would increase genetic diversity for estab-
lishment in current environmental condi-
tions. However, different ﬁndings in other
regions suggest that additional research is
needed for clariﬁcation (Linhart et al. 1981).
Another consideration is whether the epi-
sodic timing of natural regeneration of pon-
derosa pine can meet desired levels in post-
thinning forests. Bailey and Covington
(2002) evaluated regeneration rates after
several tree thinning and prescribed burning
projects in northern Arizona and concluded
that regeneration rates were sufﬁcient or ex-
ceeded those needed to maintain presettle-
ment tree densities. It is unclear if regenera-
tion might be more or less prominent in
other regions. In areas where regeneration is
deﬁcient, caps might be used to increase seed
sources, but they also may decrease densities
of regeneration microsites if litter accumu-
lates in the absence of burning. Many addi-
tional factors warrant consideration, such as
potential impacts of caps on density-depen-
dent tree-damaging agents such as insect
outbreaks.
Timber Production. Although diame-
ter caps decrease timber production in the
short term, they probably increase the grow-
ing stock in the long term. Caps can result in
evenly spaced stands of young, rapidly grow-
ing trees (Figure 2a). Skov et al. (2005)
found that growth of 80-year-old residual
ponderosa pines increased within 1 year af-
ter thinning in northern Arizona, suggesting
that 16-in. trees left by caps grow quickly.
Ironically, a major reason cited to support
caps is that timber production and eco-
Figure 3. Tree densities corresponding with stem maps in Figure 2. Total trees per acre is
shown at the top of each bar. The presettlement category represents tree densities at the
time of ﬁre exclusion after Euro-American settlement in approximately 1880. (a) A 16-in.-
diameter cap nearly doubled the tree density remaining after a simulated restoration
thinning prescription. (b) In contrast, a cap altered residual density by only one tree per acre
because the plot contained few >16-in. postsettlement trees (nine per acre). There were no
living presettlement-origin trees in panel a, while panel b contained two live presettlement
trees per acre, which were >16 in. in diameter.
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
411

nomic returns from selling large postsettle-
ment trees should not drive restoration and
fuel reduction projects (Table 1). On some
sites, caps may necessitate major sawtimber
harvests in the future to again reduce wild-
ﬁre risks and improve ecosystem health (e.g.,
Figure 2a). However, depending on residual
stand density and stem spacing, caps also
could result in increased competition and
slowed growth of both young and old trees
(Skov et al. 2005).
Gambel Oak Vigor. As one of only a
few deciduous trees in ponderosa pine for-
ests, Gambel oak constitutes an important
habitat feature for many wildlife species by
providing acorns and cavities (Reynolds et
al. 1970). Large-diameter oaks have unique
values, and pine thinning may increase oak
growth to speed the recruitment of large
oaks (Onkonburi 1999). However, diameter
caps may constrain thinning postsettlement
pine around oaks, slowing oak growth and
hastening declines of old oaks (Onkonburi
1999).
Soil Nutrient Cycling and Microor-
ganisms. Kaye and Hart (1998) found that
canopy openings had annual net N mineral-
ization rates twice as high as those below re-
tained postsettlement trees 2 years after thin-
ning in northern Arizona. Similarly, Boyle et
al. (2005) reported that during dry periods,
soil respiration rates were 33% greater in
canopy openings than below postsettlement
trees. These studies suggest that maintaining
stands of high tree density may slow soil nu-
trient cycling and microbial activity, possi-
bly decreasing long-term soil productivity
(Boyle et al. 2005).
Invertebrates. In northern Arizona,
Waltz and Covington (2004) found that
butterﬂy richness and abundance were two
to three times greater in restoration (thinned
 burned) units than in paired control units
2 years after treatment. These increases pri-
marily resulted from increased sunlight,
which can affect butterﬂy ﬂight durations
and patterns (Waltz and Covington 2004).
Retaining additional trees because of diam-
eter caps consistently reduces solar radiation
reaching the ground. However, habitat re-
quirements of invertebrate species vary
widely and some species using pine litter or
otherwise strongly associated with pine may
beneﬁt from diameter caps. As a result, caps
may have positive, negative, or no effects on
invertebrate species, and it remains unclear
how caps may affect the invertebrate com-
munity as a whole.
Water Relations. On the Beaver Creek
watershed in Arizona, Brown et al. (1974)
monitored streamﬂow for 4 years after a
thinning using group selection removed
75% of basal area. Thinning increased
streamﬂow on average 22% per year, while a
grazing treatment (60% use of perennial
grasses) increased streamﬂow only 8%. Re-
ducing tree densities, therefore, enhanced
streamﬂow more sharply than reducing her-
baceous vegetation. Correspondingly, it is
unlikely that diameter caps will increase
streamﬂow, and they may decrease ﬂow be-
cause of increased tree canopy interception
and water use.
Fire Behavior. We estimated foliar
biomass following Kaye et al. (2005) for the
mapped plots in Figure 2. Fine-canopy fuels,
especially foliage, comprise the fuel that car-
ries crown ﬁre. Although the vertical and
horizontal arrangement of these fuels is also
important, foliar biomass is directly linked
to canopy bulk density and crown ﬁre be-
havior (Cruz et al. 2003). On a plot contain-
ing a high density of 16-in. trees (Figure
2a), only 21% of foliar biomass remained
after simulated restoration thinning without
a cap, compared with 51% remaining after
cap-constrained thinning. In contrast, resid-
ual foliar biomass was only 4% greater with a
cap than without a cap after simulated thin-
ning on a plot containing few 16-in. trees
(Figure 2b). Because reducing crown ﬁre
hazard is currently a part of management
plans for many thinning projects in western
forests, careful consideration should be
given to whether this objective is met with a
diameter cap. Focus should not be restricted
to stand conditions immediately after thin-
ning and should include the potential for
canopy ingrowth.
Economics. Small-diameter ponderosa
pine logs have little economic value, and
economics is one of the major factors limit-
ing the implementation of thinning projects
(Lynch et al. 2000, Larson and Mirth 2001).
Larson and Mirth (2001) modeled the eco-
nomic effects of 16-in. caps on a northern
Arizona thinning project. Caps reduced net
proﬁts of thinning contractors by a pro-
jected 22–176%, which resulted in net
losses to contractors in some units. While
markets for 16-in.-diameter logs vary geo-
graphically and through time, caps likely
negatively impact contractor availability and
the economics of thinning projects by re-
ducing the size of logs produced (Larson and
Mirth 2001). Furthermore, selling some
postsettlement 16-in. trees might generate
forest products and funds that could be used
for postthinning management, such as ex-
otic species control, seeding native species,
and prescribed burning (Fiedler et al. 1999).
In summarizing tradeoffs of caps, a cen-
tral tenet in ecology is that resources are lim-
ited in ecosystems. Retaining additional
trees inevitably decreases resources available
to many other organisms. Most modern
ponderosa pine forests are vulnerable to cat-
astrophic change precisely because ecosys-
tem biomass dramatically shifted toward
ponderosa pine after tree density irruptions
in the late 1800s (Covington et al. 1997,
Allen et al. 2002). Diameter caps appear
most useful for maintaining high densities of
young, large trees immediately after thin-
ning, creating habitat for speciﬁc species
(e.g., tassel-eared squirrels) favored by high
tree densities and sustaining a large timber
base (Table 2). Based on published research,
diameter caps will not improve and will
likely negatively impact canopy openings,
understory productivity, Gambel oak vigor,
Table 2. Anticipated effects of diameter caps on several ecosystem components and
economics in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Effects can be chieﬂy positive (),
neutral (0), or negative ().
Variable
Effect
Example reference
Canopy openings

Moore and Huffman 2004
Understory vegetation

Clary 1975
Large pine and snags
 or 0
Ganey and Vojta 2004
Wildlife habitat
, 0, or 
Dodd et al. 2003
Pine autecology
, 0, or 
Kolanoski 2002
Timber production
 or 0
Skov et al. 2005
Gambel oak vigor

Onkonburi 1999
Soil microorganisms

Boyle et al. 2005
Nutrient cycling

Kaye and Hart 1998
Invertebrates
, 0, or 
Waltz and Covington 2004
Water relations

Brown et al. 1974
Fire behavior
0 or 
Fulé et al. 2001
Economics

Larson and Mirth 2004
412
Journal of Forestry • December 2006

soil
microorganisms,
nutrient
cycling,
streamﬂow, ﬁre behavior, and the econom-
ics of thinning projects.
Conclusions
Our analysis revealed the following six
major considerations about the use of 16-
in.-diameter caps in thinning projects. First,
prethinning densities of 16-in. trees deter-
mine the magnitude of the effects that caps
have on postthinning tree structure and eco-
system components affected by trees. Sec-
ond, caps can result in switching the loca-
tions of tree and meadow patches from their
historical locations. However, caps may be
useful to take advantage of existing tree
structure to rapidly reestablish groups of
large trees, if maintaining meadow locations
is not an objective (Allen et al. 2002). On
the other hand, caps may result in slowed
tree growth, depending on residual stand
density and stem spacing. Third, caps are a
one-size-ﬁts-all policy, which seems at odds
with the diversities of sites and management
objectives in western forests. This observa-
tion underscores that informed policies
about caps should consider desired future
stand conditions deﬁned by management
objectives and whether or not these condi-
tions are best met with cap-free or cap-con-
strained thinning.
Fourth, maintaining high tree densities
means fewer resources are available for eco-
system components dependent on open
stand structures, which characterized most
evolutionary environments in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests (Moore et al. 1999).
Fifth, evaluations of diameter caps should
not be restricted to conditions immediately
after thinning. Trees grow, and effects of fu-
ture canopy ingrowth should be considered.
Sixth, we suggest that a reasonable evalua-
tion of the tradeoffs of diameter caps include
whether or not a cap-constrained thinning
project on a speciﬁc site establishes canopy
openings and reduces crown ﬁre hazards. If
these key objectives are not met, thinning
projects may have limited beneﬁt for ecosys-
tem health or for the safety of human settle-
ments in ﬁre-prone western forests. Caps
can affect the trajectory and the magnitude
of ecosystem change after thinning, with re-
sulting ecosystem characteristics sometimes
differing substantially between thinning
with or without caps (Fule´ et al. 2006). Al-
though our analysis focused on southwest-
ern ponderosa pine forests, similar assess-
ments of the tradeoffs of diameter caps may
be applicable in other forest types for mak-
ing informed policy and management deci-
sions.
Literature Cited
ABELLA, S.R., AND W.W. COVINGTON. 2006.
Forest ecosystems of an Arizona Pinus pon-
derosa landscape: Multifactor classiﬁcation and
implications for ecological restoration. J. Bio-
geogr. 33(8):1368–1383.
ALLEN, C.D., M. SAVAGE, D.A. FALK, K.F. SUCK-
LING, T.W. SWETNAM, T. SHULKE, P.B. STA-
CEY, P. MORGAN, M. HOFFMAN, AND J.T.
KLINGEL. 2002. Ecological restoration of south-
western ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad per-
spective. Ecol. Applic. 12(5):1418–1433.
BAILEY, J.D., AND W.W. COVINGTON. 2002.
Evaluating regeneration rates following eco-
logical restoration treatments in northern Ari-
zona, USA. For. Ecol. Manage. 155(1-3):271–
278.
BOYLE, S.I., S.C. HART, J.P. KAYE, AND M.P
WALDROP. 2005. Restoration and canopy type
inﬂuence soil microﬂora in a ponderosa pine
forest. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 69(5):1627–1638.
BRAWN, J.D., AND R.P. BALDA. 1988. Population
biology of cavity nesters in northern Arizona:
Do nest sites limit breeding densities? Condor
90(1):61–71.
BROWN, H.E., M.B. BAKER, J.J. ROGERS, W.P.
CLARY, J.L. KOVNER, F.R. LARSON, C.C.
AVERY, AND R.E. CAMPBELL. 1974. Opportuni-
ties for increasing water yields and other multiple
use values on ponderosa pine forest lands. USDA
For. Serv. Res. Pap. RM-129. 36 p.
CLARY, W.P. 1975. Range management and its
ecological basis in the ponderosa pine type of Ar-
izona: The status of our knowledge. USDA For.
Serv. Res. Pap. RM-158. 35 p.
COUGHLAN, M.R. 2003. Large diameter trees and
the political culture of “restoration”: A case
study with the Grand Canyon Forest Partner-
ship, Flagstaff, Arizona. Ariz. Anthropol. 15:
48–71.
COVINGTON, W.W., P.Z. FULE´, M.M. MOORE,
S.C. HART, T.E. KOLB, J.N. MAST, S.S. SACK-
ETT, AND M.R. WAGNER. 1997. Restoring eco-
system health in ponderosa pine forests of the
Southwest. J. For. 95(4):23–29.
CRUZ, M.G., M.E. ALEXANDER, AND R.H. WAKI-
MOTO. 2003. Assessing canopy fuel stratum
characteristics in crown ﬁre prone fuel types in
western North America. Int. J. Wildland Fire
12(1):39–50.
DODD, N.L., J.S. STATES, AND S.S. ROSENSTOCK.
2003. Tassel-eared squirrel population, habi-
tat condition, and dietary relationships in
north-central Arizona. J. Wildlife Manage. 67:
(3)622–633.
FIEDLER, C.E., C.E. KEEGAN, D.P. WICHMAN,
AND S.F. ARNO. 1999. Product and economic
implications of ecological restoration. Forest
Prod. J. 49(2):19–23.
FULE´, P.Z., W.W. COVINGTON,
AND M.M.
MOORE. 1997. Determining reference condi-
tions for ecosystem management of southwest-
ern ponderosa pine forests. Ecol. Applic. 7(3):
895–908.
FULE´, P.Z., C. MCHUGH, T.A. HEINLEIN, AND
W.W. COVINGTON. 2001. Potential ﬁre be-
havior is reduced following forest restoration
treatments. P. 28–35 in Ponderosa pine ecosys-
tems restoration and conservation: Steps toward
stewardship, Vance, R.K., C.B. Edminster,
W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake (comps.).
Ogden, UT: USDA For. Serv. Proc. RMRS-
P-22. 188 p.
FULE´, P.Z., W.W. COVINGTON, M.T. STOD-
DARD, AND D. BERTOLETTE. 2006. “Minimal-
impact” restoration treatments have limited ef-
fects on forest structure and fuels at Grand
Canyon, USA. Restor. Ecol. 14:(3):357–368.
GANEY, J.L., AND S.C. VOJTA. 2004. Characteris-
tics of snags containing excavated cavities in
northern Arizona mixed-conifer and pon-
derosa pine forests. For. Ecol. Manage. 199(2-
3):323–332.
KAYE, J.P., AND S.C. HART. 1998. Ecological res-
toration alters nitrogen transformations in a
ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Ecol.
Applic. 8(4):1052–1060.
KAYE, J.P., S.C. HART, P.Z. FULE´, W.W. COV-
INGTON, M.M. MOORE, AND M.W. KAYE.
2005. Initial carbon, nitrogen, and phospho-
rus ﬂuxes following ponderosa pine restoration
treatments. Ecol. Applic. 15(5):1581–1593.
KERNS, B.K., M.M. MOORE, M.E. TIMPSON, AND
S.C. HART. 2003. Soil properties associated
with vegetation patches in a Pinus ponderosa-
bunchgrass mosaic. West. N. Am. Naturalist
63(4):452–462.
KOLANOSKI, K.M. 2002. Genetic variation of pon-
derosa pine in northern Arizona: Implications for
restoration. MSc thesis, Northern Arizona
Univ., Flagstaff, AZ. 148 p.
LARSON, D., AND R. MIRTH. 2001. Projected eco-
nomic impacts of a 16-inch tree cutting cap for
ponderosa pine forests within the greater Flag-
staff urban-wildlands. P. 154–160 in Pon-
derosa pine ecosystems restoration and conserva-
tion: Steps toward stewardship, Vance, R.K.,
C.B. Edminster, W.W. Covington, and J.A.
Blake (comps.). Ogden, UT: USDA For. Serv.
Proc. RMRS-P-22. 188 p.
LINHART, Y.B., J.B. MITTON, K.B. STURGEON,
AND M.L. DAVIS. 1981. Genetic variation in
space and time in a population of ponderosa
pine. Heredity 46(3):407–426.
LYNCH, D.L., W.H. ROMME, AND M.L. FLOYD.
2000. Forest restoration in southwestern pon-
derosa pine. J. For. 98(8):17–24.
MOORE, M.M., W.W. COVINGTON, AND P.Z.
FULE´. 1999. Reference conditions and ecolog-
ical restoration: A southwestern ponderosa
pine
perspective.
Ecol.
Applic.
9(4):
1266–1277.
MOORE, M.M., AND D.W. HUFFMAN. 2004. Tree
encroachment on meadows in Grand Canyon
National Park, Arizona, USA. Arct. Antarct.
Alp. Res. 36(4):474–483.
NOWICKI, B., AND R. GEORGE. 2004. A scientiﬁc
critique of the myths and misconceptions of log-
ging old growth and large diameter ponderosa
pine in the Southwest. Southwest Forest Alli-
ance, Flagstaff, AZ. 9 p.
ONKONBURI, J. 1999. Growth response of Gambel
oak to thinning and burning: Implications for
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
413

ecological restoration. PhD dissertation, North-
ern Arizona Univ., Flagstaff, AZ. 129 p.
REYNOLDS, H.G., W.P. CLARY, AND P.F. FFOL-
LIOTT. 1970. Gambel oak for southwestern
wildlife. J. For. 68(9):545–547.
SKOV, K.R., T.E. KOLB, AND K.F. WALLIN. 2005.
Difference in radial growth response to resto-
ration thinning and burning treatments be-
tween young and old ponderosa pine in Ari-
zona. West. J. Appl. For. 20(1):36–43.
WALTZ, A.E.M., AND W.W. COVINGTON. 2004.
Ecological restoration treatments increase but-
terﬂy richness and abundance: Mechanisms of
response. Restor. Ecol. 12(1):85–96.
WHITE, A.S. 1985. Presettlement regeneration
patterns in a southwestern ponderosa pine
stand. Ecology 66(2):589–594.
Scott R. Abella (scott.abella@unlv.edu) is as-
sistant research professor, Public Lands Insti-
tute and Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas,
NV 89154-2040. Peter Z. Fule´ (pete.fule@
nau.edu) is associate director and associate pro-
fessor, and W. Wallace Covington (wally.
covington@nau.edu) is director and regents’
professor of forest ecology, Ecological Restora-
tion Institute and School of Forestry, Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-
5017. The authors thank Charlie Denton,
John Bedell, Judy Springer, Diane Vosick, and
four anonymous reviewers for providing help-
ful comments on earlier drafts of this work.
414
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
