USbA 
z 
United States 
Department 
of Agriculture 
Forest Service 
Intermountain 
Research Station 
General Technical 
Report INT-GTR -349 
May 1997 
Using Lightning Location 
in the Wildland Fire 
Assessment System 
Don Latham 
Robert Burgan 
Carolyn Chase 
Larry Bradshaw 

The Authors 
Don Latham received his B.A. degree in physics from Pomona 
College in 1960. In 1964 and 1967, he received the M.S. and 
Ph.D. degrees in earth science, specializing in atmospheric 
electricity and weather radar. He subsequently taught these 
and other subjects in atmospheric science in the Rosenteil 
School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences of the University 
of Miami, FL. While there, he held grants from the National 
Science Foundation and the U.S. Air Force. In 1976, he moved 
to the Northern Forest Fire Laboratory of the USDA Forest 
Service's Intermountain Research Station where he began 
work on ignition of forest fuels by lightning discharges and the 
location of lightning discharges. He has.Ior the past 10 years, 
also been working in the field of artificial intelligence, particu­
larly as applied to fire sciences and related fields. Heiscurrently 
studying wind-fire interaction. 
Robert Burgan received his bachelor's degree in forest engi­
neering in 1963 and his master's degree in forest fire control in 
1966 from the University of Montana. From 1963 to 1969, he 
served on the timber management staff of the Union and Bear­
Sleds Districts, Wallowa-Whitman National Forest. From 1969 
to 1975,he was a Research Forester on the staff of the Institute 
of Pacific Islands Forestry, Honolulu, HI. From 1975to 1987, he 
was at the Intermountain Fires Sciences Laboratory , Missoula, 
MT, first as a member of the National Fire-Danger Rating 
Research Work Unit, and then as a Research Forester in the 
Fire Behavior Research Work Unit. From 1987to 1989 he was 
in Macon, GA, at the Forest Meteorology and Eastern Fire 
Management Research Work Unit, a part of the Southeastern 
Forest Experiment Station. In 1989, he returned to the Fire 
Behavior Research Work Unit in Missoula. 
Carolyn Chase is a mathematician stationed at the Intermoun­
tain Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, MT. She received 
her B.A. degree in mathematics from the University of Montana 
in 1969. Chase began working at the Fire Laboratory in 1978; 
she is a member of the systems development and application 
team in the Fire Behavior Research Work Unit. Her currentwork 
includes integration of Geographic Information System tech ­
nology for the next generation of fire danger and fire behavior 
prediction systems. 
Larry Bradshaw has been a meteorologist for the Fire Behav­
ior Research Work Unit since 1992. Prior to that he was with 
Systems for Environmental Management where he was princi­
pal investigator of more than 15 research agreements with the 
USDA Forest Service. He has specialized in the development 
and applications of climatology to fire management problems 
and has authored several nationally available computer pro­
grams in the field. His current work focus is the continued 
development and implementation of higher resolution meteo­
rology products in the Wildland Fire Assessment System. 
Research Summary 
Location of the ground position of lightning discharges has 
been possible for several years. A technique for using ignition 
probability calculations together with lightning location data 
results in maps that are useful to fire managers in making 
decisions on timescales from historical to real-time. These 
maps, part of the Wildland Fire Assessment System, will aid fire 
managers in assessing the potential that lightning will result in 
reportable fires. The maps are generated using ignition prob­
ability based on duff depth, fuel moisture, and fuel type. To 
match fire potential classes, ignition probabilities are classified 
into ignition potential classes of low. medium, high, very high, 
and extreme. Possible benefits are savings in time, fire sup­
pression costs, and perhaps even lives. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank the members of the ad-hoc lightning location task 
force for their time, and the Northern Region, especially Walter 
Tomascak and Charles Rogers, for buying lightning location 
data for our use. Our special thanks to Howard Roose of the 
Lolo National Forest for helping us Get Going. 
The use of trade or firm names in this publication is for reader information and does not 
imply endorsement by the U. S. Department of Agriculture of any product or service. 
You may order additional copies of this publication by sending your 
mailing information in label form through one of the following media. 
Please specify the publication title and General Technical Report 
number. 
Telephone 
(801) 625-5437  
DG message 
Pubs:S22A  
FAX 
(801) 625-5129, Attn: Publications  
E-mail 
/s-pubs/ou 1=s22a@mhs-fswa.altmail.com  
Mailing address 
Publications Distribution  
Intermountain Research Station 
324 25th Street 
Ogden, UT 84401 
Intermountain Research Station  
324 25th Street  
Ogden, UT 84401  

Using Lightning Location in 
the Wildland Fire Assessment 
System 
Don Latham 
Robert Burgan 
Carolyn Chase 
Larry Bradshaw 
Introduction 
_ 
Understanding how lightning turns into wildland 
fire can lead to saving time, fire suppression costs, and 
perhaps even lives. A product to help gain that under­
standing, the Wildland Fire Assessment System 
(WFAS) (Bradshaw and Burgan 1996), is an inte­
grated fire danger and fire behavior system. Phase 10f 
that system, WFAS-MAPS, includes two new maps: 
lightning strike locations superimposed on lightning 
ignition potential and fire danger. 
Lightning location-determining the place light­
ning flashes hit the ground - has been generally avail­
able in the Western United States since the early 
1980's. Used by the Bureau of Land Management in 
the Initial Attack Management System (IAMS), light­
ning location data have also been used by other agen­
cies on a sporadic basis, but have not been a part of 
their formal operational systems for fire danger rat­
ing. Present use by the Weather Service is limited to 
determining when thunderstorms start and where 
they are. 
The lightning ignition potential and lightning on 
fire danger maps are designed to eventually replace 
three elements of the present National Fire Danger 
Rating System (NFDRS) ( Deeming and others 1977): 
Lightning Risk, Lightning Activity Level (LAL), and 
the Lightning Occurrence Index (LOD. These ele­
ments of the present NFDRS are little used, except to 
note the possibility of high cloud base dry thunder­
storm days (LAL 6). There is no place for real-time or 
archival use oflightninglocation in the present NFDRS' 
because it was designed before practical lightning 
location techniques were fully ready to use. 
Application oflightning location to fire dispatch was 
tried in 1983 (Latham 1983) using then-available 
ignition probability calculations (Fuquay and others 
1979). Crude maps, designed to be used with page-size 
overlays to estimate probable fire occurrence, were 
made available by modem (300 baudl). Lightning data 
were obtained with a research-operated two-station 
LLP (Lightning Location and Protection, Inc.) array. 
The application worked but was not successful. Con­
stant monitoring of three linked small computers was 
necessary, and data other than lightning locations had 
to be entered by hand. Maintenance of the remote 
location station was difficult; in fact, the cables were 
once cut, raked, and baled. 
Both generation and use of the lightning ignition 
probability information were too difficult to be practi­
cal, and the application was shelved while ignition 
probability calculations, data gathering, and trans­
mission capabilities improved. These needed improve­
ments for lightning location use are now here. 
The current data environment is far easier to work 
with. Fuel moisture data are gathered automatically 
from the Forest Service's Weather Information Man­
agement System (WIMS). Weather Service atmo­
spheric sounding information is available from many 
sources. Reliable lightning locations are available 
from the Bureau of Land Management network and 
from Global Atmospherics, Inc. (a private company 
that sells lightning location data), and we now have 
lightningignition probability algorithms (Latham and 
Schlieter 1989). 
Use of Lightning Location Data __ 
Lightning location data displayed by themselves on 
a simple map are beneficial to positioning firefighting 
resources and for requesting additional resources with 
a small, but potentially significant, lead time. Addi­
tional uses have been determined by personnel from 
the Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, and 
Weather Service, as seen in table 1, which combines 
lightning location data with other information. The 
existing National Fire Danger RatingSystem (NFDRS) 
(Deeming and others 1977), for example, allows rough 
estimation of fuel state and type over wide areas for 
such activities as prepositioning firefighting resources 
and scheduling detection flights. With detection flight 
costs at approximately $200 per hour, knowing when 
not to look can be highly cost effective. 

Table 1-Uses forlightning location data. Ddenotes adesired 
use, P a present use, -
does notapply. 
Thunderstorm 
Tlmeframe 
Short 
Historical  
Use 
Real time 
(2-24 h) 
(>24 h) 
~  
Safety 
D 
D 
Prescribed natural 
fire decision 
D 
Prepositioning 
P 
P 
D 
Detection flights 
P 
P 
Holdover estimation 
D 
D 
Cause determination 
P 
D 
D 
Scenario generation 
D 
D 
D 
Contingency manning 
P 
D 
Ecosystem management 
P 
NFMAS planning 
D 
To carry out the activities listed in table 1, and to 
provide forecasting for lightning-specific events such 
as fires, value must be added to the lightning location 
data and presented to users in an easily compre­
h~nded, task-specific format, Knowledge of the light­
nmg fire ignition process is used to add this value. 
How Lightning Fires Happen 
_ 
Figure 1 shows the sequence of events leading to a 
lightning-caused wildfire (Latham 1979). Ignition is 
caused by lightning strokes with a continuing current 
c~mponent (Fuquay and others 1972). The lightning 
discharge must terminate in a receptive fuel-that is, 
a fine dead fuel such as dry grass, punky wood, tree 
litter, duff, or the rotted center of a standing snag. The 
fuel must be dry enough or packed enough to ignite. 
Some fuels, such as duff, ignite by lightning even 
though they are not in the "l-hour" fuel moisture 
category. Some fuels, such as peat, ignite even though 
they may be very wet. 
After ignition, three things could happen. First, the 
fire could go out.This will happen ifthe fuel conditions 
cannot maintain the fire from a propagation stand­
point, even if an ignition is possible. Second, the fire 
could spread for some time, until either rain or burn­
ing into an unsuitable fuel extinguishes it. Third, the 
fire could continue to grow until it becomes large 
enough to be seen. It then becomes a reportable fire. 
.The part offigure 1 between the cloud-ground light­
nmg and the reportable fire is not amenable to field 
study except after the fact. Statistics can, ofcourse, be 
established for the connection between lightning 
flashes and fire . These statistics must be conditioned 
on the fuel type, the present and immediate future of 
the moisture content of the fuels (rainfall), and the 
Continuing  
lightning  
Cloud-ground 
current c;J 
Ignition 
~ 
;J 
•  
Growth! 
decay
B Y 
Reportable fire 
Figure 1- The lightning-caused fire process. 
characteristics of the continuing current. The rela­
tionships necessary were developed by Latham and 
Schlieter (1989) based on laboratory studies of arc 
ignition of actual fuels . 
The ignition studies yielded some surprising results 
for lightning ignition. First, only the duration of the 
continuing current (CC) has an effect on the ignition 
probability. The current flow in the CC is not signifi­
cant in the ignition process. Simply put, the CC arc 
gasifies the fuels through which it passes, generating 
(mostly) carbon dioxide. Heat passes to the fuel out­
side the boundary of the discharge by radiation and 
convection, withconvective heating predominant. What 
is left is a cylinder of glowing and flaming combustion 
that mayor may not spread to become a fire. The 
cylinder is about 1 to 2 ern in diameter. Because of the 
destruction of fuel in the core of the discharge, and 
because the temperature structure of the arc does not 
depend on the current (Latham 1986), the duration of 
the discharge determines the energy transferred to 
the fuel. This relationship between duration of dis­
charge and ignition was found for all fuels tested. In 
addition, there was no difference in ignition probabili­
ties between negative and positive laboratory arcs. 
The second surprise result from the ignition experi­
ments was that for some fuels, moisture content is not 
significant for ignition. Duff from evergreen species 
with short to medium needles, such as Douglas-fir and 
2 
h 

---
lodgepole pine, ignites as a function of the depth of the 
duff layer and duration of discharge, with moisture 
playing a negligible role, at least up to 40 percentofdry 
weight. Ignition probability for forests composed pre­
dominantlyofthese species can be set in advance ofthe 
fire season. Growth to a reportable fire, and the progress 
of glowing combustion leading to long time delay 
(holdover) fires, are, however, subject to moisture 
constraints. This may also be true of the rotten hearts 
of standing snags. Work remains to be done to prove 
this. 
. 
Laboratory tests, then, give the probability of igni­
tion as a function of a lightning characteristic, fuel 
state, duff depth, or combination. Lightning location 
data do not currently have continuing current dura­
tion as an output characteristic. There are, however, 
some measurements of CC characteristics that can 
help surmount this difficulty. The CC components of 
lightning strokes in Northern Rocky Mountain thun­
derstorms have duration distributions, for both posi­
tive and negative strokes, that are well fit by a Weibull 
distribution. Since a distribution function is known, 
the marginal distribution of ignition probability per 
CCoccurrence can be calculated(Latham andSchlieter 
1989). An example is given in figure 2. Marginal 
probabilities for positive and negative strokes differ 
because the duration statistics of the two differ. Not 
every flash, either positive or negative, has a CC. In 
the Northern Rocky Mountains, where the data were 
taken, 20 percent ofthe negative flashes to ground and 
97 percent ofthe positive flashes contained CC's. With 
this information, a probability of ignition for each 
flash in the lightning location data can be determined 
if the fuel state is known. 
Fuel Type and Moisture 
Precise fuel type and moisture are not realistically 
available for the terminus oflightning discharges that 
strike in the forest. Rocks and bare patches, rotten logs 
and "atypical" fuels in every patch of forest preclude 
that possibility. So every flash probably cannot be 
assigned a probability. There is, however, a fuel type 
map that has resolution matching lightning location 
accuracies quite well. The fuel map was derived from 
a national land cover characteristics map produced by 
the Earth Resources (EROS) Data Center (Loveland 
and others 1991). Because the classification is well 
defined, the fuel type map can be used for ignition 
probability estimation, including duff depth (Brown 
and See 1981). Fuel moisture is also available from 
WIMS. Because the moisture timelag for the fuels that 
ignite by lightning is on the order of 20 to 100 hours 
(Latham and Schlieter 1989), a lightning ignition 
probability map can be formed that will be useable for 
at least 1 day. 
.Y 
/ , 
,/'" 
, 
/ 
/ 
/1 
._0­-~ -: 
, 
- "1--'" ._-­
....._ .~ 
pineg 
; 0.036
1:'::
i 
117
pineg 
~ !U!;! § 
, 0.442 
LQ]'?~ 
10 : :g:gg21
o 
o  
10  
pineg = 1I(1 + exp(3 .64--0_61)))  
(, 
pipos 
o 
: 0.006' 
1 
i 0 .011 
, 
,, 
,., / 
, 
1 
V 
,
--_ . 
._--­
i
; 
T'-' 
.__._
1 
/
r 
i 
Y 
- v 
, 
­
pipos 
j 0.Q!!.1 
, 
47 
0.253 
L.Q.L..j 
' 
.566 
i 
7 
10 
i 0.835 
~ 
o 
o
s 
10 
pipos = 1/(1 + exp(5.13-Q.68Ii)) 
Figure 2-Examp/es of ignition probability 
curves (after Latham and Schlieter 1989; fig. 7). 
These are the marginal ignition probabilities for 
lodgepole pine duff. The top curve shows the 
probability of negative discharges; the bottom 
curve, positive discharges . 
Additional data are required to estimate fuel mois­
ture effects. Rain that accompanies most thunder­
storms can act to reduce the probability that a light­
ning-ignited fire will sustain to reportability. This 
effect was accounted for in an early ignition predictor 
(Fuquay andothers 1979; Latham 1983). Although the 
ignition probability estimated by this model was not 
good, the rain effects were accounted for and could be 
used in newer systems until radar rainfall estimates 
are readily available. The present lightning ignition 
maps do not include rainfall effects. 
We should note a limitation of the lightning location 
system. We have not accounted for the patchiness of 
fuels in the probability of ignition. We assumed a 
homogeneous fuel within each square kilometer. A 
uniform duff depth (25 cm maximum) was chosen for 
each squarekilometerofshort-needled species, whereas 
in reality duff depth is variable. Fuel rnoistures are 
limited to 40 percent of dry weight as a maximum. 
Combining negative and positive flash probabilities 
assumes that the statistics for the relative numbers of 
flashes is well known. Finally, the breakpoints for 
3 

high, extreme, and so forth, are assumed at this time. 
While these shortcomings are not trivial, we have 
dealt with them appropriately. Ongoing research and 
feedback from users will further the product's utility 
and accuracy. 
Application 
_ 
A lightning ignition potential map is generated for 
an area according to the flow diagram of figure 3. In 
this diagram, the marginal ignition probability is used 
in "ignition probability per cloud to ground (cg) flash." 
100-hour  
fuel moisture  
r--­
",P 
.
"liP 
... 
Positive flash 
probability 
... 
map pixel 
Lightning 
probability 
fuel type 
Duff depth 
map pixel 
t-­
,. 
... 
Negative flash 
probability 
... 
...r 
Combined probability of ignition 
~  
Classify probability 
+  
Ignition potential 
map pixel 
Figure 3-The ignition potential map 
generation process . 
4 
Because we will produce only one probability map, not 
separate maps for positive and negative flashes, the 
probabilities for positive and negative flashes are 
combined into an ignition probability per flash. 
Ignition potential maps are generated according to 
the physical process as outlined in the previous sec­
tion, "How Lightning Fires Happen." The potential 
map is independent of whether or not lightning is 
present; it shows the probabilityofignition iflightning 
does happen. To produce the map, we need the NFDRS 
lOO-hour fuel moisture, the fuel type, and the duff 
depth (the duff depth is inferred by fuel type). These 
data need to be spatially connected. For now, interpo­
lated fuel moisture data are used, along with a special­
ized ignition fuel map, Because we cannot assign a 
probability of ignition to each flash, we are superim­
posing lightninglocation data on the ignition potential 
map as an experimental product to be available in the 
near future. 
Data will be ingested at the National Interagency 
Fire Center, and an ignition potential map generated 
daily. Lightning data will be superimposed on several 
ignition potential and fire potential maps at various 
scales of space and time. A successful prototype of 
this display was carried out during 1996. The maps 
are available on the Forest Service home page 
(http://nww.fs.fed.us/land/wfasl)(Caring for the Land, 
WFAS-MAPS). The GIF maps of l-hour and 3-hour 
lightning location summaries superimposed on light­
ning ignition potential and fire danger are supplied 
each hour to the Northern Region of the USDA Forest 
Service (western Montana, Idaho, and parts ofWyoming 
and North Dakota). The GIF viewers can be used to 
display these maps (fig. 4). 
Ignition potential maps are one component ofa suite 
of maps and other fire management tools. The NFDRS 
tools such as Energy Release Component or Burning 
Index should be used to help assess the consequences 
of an ignition. Local rainfall data, ifavailable, can aid 
in determining the possibility that an ignition will not 
propagate, or ifit does , will go out. For example, a fire 
that started in duff or litter near a tree will reach the 
dripline and may not survive. 
Values at riskcan be used with daily fire potential to 
plan staffing or to find potential understaffed areas. 
Forecast thunderstorm activity can also be applied. 
A pilot program to begin implementation of value­
added knowledge to lightning location is under way in 
a cooperative effort with the Northern Region of the 
Forest Service. Experience with the pilot Wildland 
Fire Assessment System and the lightning location 
component will lead to improvements in this wildland 
fire prediction and firefighting tool. We are presently 
studying the question of survivability of ignitions. 

--------------
3 Hour str ikes On Lightn ing Ignit ion Potent ia I (LIP)  
End ing 1600 MT: 14-Aug-96 
1) LCNI < 5 % 
2) Med 5-10 % 
·:n Hi 11-"15 % 
4) V Ht5-20 % 
5) Ex >20 % 
6) Water 
7)1-hr Strike 
B) 3--h r S Ir ik.e
FIRE BEHAV KJR RESEARCH 
t.4 ISSJULA.. t.4T 
Figure 4-An ignition potential map with superimposed lightning discharges. 
References 
Bradshaw, Larry S.; Burgan. Robert E. 1996.Weather needs for the 
wildland fire assessment system. 12th conference on biometeo­
rology and aerobiology. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology with 
Symposium of Fire and Forest Meteorology: 325-328. 
Brown. J . K.;See, T. E. 1981 Downed dead woody fuel and biomass 
in the Northern Rocky Mountains. Gen. Tech . Rep. INT-117. 
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station. 48 p 
Deeming, J . E.; Burgan, R E.; Cohen, J . D. 1977. The national fire­
danger rating system-1978. Gen. Tech . Rep. INT-39 . Ogden, 
UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermoun­
tain Research Station. 63 p. 
Fuquay, D. M.; Baughman, R G.; Latham, D. J. 1979. A model for 
predicting lightning-fire ignition in wildland fuels. Res. Pap. 
INT-217 . Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station. 22 p. 
Fuquay, D. M.;Taylor, A. R ; Hawe, R G.; Schmidt, C. W., Jr. 1972. 
Lightning discharges that caused forest fires. Journal of Gee­
physical Research. 77(12): 2156-2158. 
Latham., D. J . 1983. LLAFFS-a lightning locating and fire-fore ­
castingsystem. Res. Pap. INT-315. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 
44 p. 
Latham, D.J. 1986. Anode column behavior oflong vertical air arcs 
at atmospheric pressure. IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science. 
PS-14: 220-227 . 
Latham, D. J .; Schlieter, J . A. 1989. Ignition probabilities of wild­
land fuels based on simulated lightning discharges. Res. Pap. 
INT-411. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Intermountain Research Station. 16 p. 
Latham, Don J . 1979. Progress toward locating lightning fires. Res . 
Note INT-2.69. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 6 p. 
Loveland, T. R; Merchant, J . W.; Ohlen, D.O.; Brown, J. F. 1991. 
Development of a land-cover characteristics database for the 
conterminous U.S. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote 
Sensing. 57(11): 1453-1463. 
Additional Reading 
Andrews, P. L.; Bradshaw, L. S.; Burgan, R E.; Chase, C. H.; 
Hartford, R A. 1995. WFAS: wildland fire assessment system­
status 1995. Proceedings, Interior West fire council annual meet­
ing. 1995 November 1-3. St. George. UT. 
5 

, . 
Latham, Don; Burgan, Robert; Chase, Carolyn; Bradshaw, Larry. 1997. Using lightning 
location in the Wildland Fire Assessment System. Gen. Tech. Rep.INT-GTR-349. Ogden, 
UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. 5 p. 
Lightni.nglocation data are superimposed on lightning ignition potential and on fire danger 
as expenmental phase 1 map products of the Wildland Fire Assessment System. As pilot 
components of this next generation fire danger/fire behavior system, the maps are designed 
to help fire managers assess the occurrence of lightning and its potential to result in 
reportable fires. Possible benefits are savings in time, fire suppression costs, and perhaps 
even lives. 
Keywords: fire probability, fuel moisture, lightning fires, WFAS, fire potential, fire danger 
INTERMOUNTAIN 
RESEARCH STATION 
The Intermountain Research Station provides scientific knowledge and technology to 
improve management, protection, and use of the forests and rangelands of the Intermountain 
West. Research is designed to meet the needs of National Forest managers, Federal and 
State agencies, industry, academic institutions, public and private organizations, and 
individuals. Results of research are made available through publications, symposia, 
workshops, training sessions, and personal contacts. 
The Intermountain Research Station territory includes Montana, Idaho, Utah, Nevada. and 
western Wyoming. Eighty-five percent of the lands in the Station area, about 231 million acres, 
are classified as forest or rangeland. They include grasslands, deserts, shrublands , alpine 
areas, and forests. They provide fiber for forest industries, minerals and fossil fuels for energy 
and industrial development, water for domestic and industrial consumption, forage for 
livestock and wildlife, and recreation opportunities for millions of visitors. 
Several Station units conduct research in additional western States, or have missions that 
are national or international in scope. 
The United StatesDepartmentofAgriculture(USDA)prohibitsdiscriminationinitsprograms on 
the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, and marital 
or familial status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who 
require alternative means of communication of program information (braille, large print, 
audiotape, etc.) should contact the USDA Office of Communications at (202) 720-2791. 
To file a complaint, write the Secretary of Agriculture, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Washington. DC 20250, or caI/1-800-245-6340 (voice) or (202) 720-1127 (TOO). USDA is 
an equal employment opportunity employer. 
Federal Recycling programG Printed on Recycled Paper 
