Am . MidI. Nal. 149:268-281
Geographic Distribution and Dispersal Mechanisms
of Bouteloua curtipendula in the Appalachian Mountains
DANIEL C. LAUGHLIN}
Interdepartmental Graduate DegreeProgram in Ecology, The Pennsylvania State University,
208 Mueller Laboratory, University Park 16802
AllsTRAcr.-The distribution of Bouteloua curtipendula in
the eastern United States is
generally limited to small and isolated populations on limestone-derived valley soils within
the Ridge and Valley Physiographic Province in the Appalachian Mountains. In Pennsylvania,
populations are < 0.3 ha in extent and at least >16 krn apart, Bouteloua curtipendula is found
on extremely xeric sites: shallow, rocky, slightly alkaline, clay loams on south-southwest facing
slopes. Diaspores of B. curtipendula can only travel at most a few meters on the wind and seeds
are destroyed in the rumens of grazing ungulates; therefore, the long-distance dispersal
mechanism is primarily by adhesion to animal fur. Two experiments tested the adhesion of B.
curtipendula diaspores to eight mammal furs: coyote, red fox, rabbit, white-tailed deer, elk,
bison, cattle and horse. A new index, the Dispersal Index (the product of"% diaspores that
attached" and "% diaspores that remained after shaking") , was generated to represent the
percentage of all diaspores that came into contact with the furs that remained attached. Bison
and elk furs scored the highest on the Dispersal Index, suggesting that these two wild
ungulates were important for B. curtipendula dispersal. However, both ungulates have been
extirpated from most of their presettlement ranges in the Appalachians. According to
herbarium records and modem field data, population numbers have declined by 48% during
the past century, mostly due to agriculture, development and woody plant invasion due to fire
suppression. Due to the absence of long-distance dispersers and the scattered distribution of
suitable edaphic conditions, B. curtipendula is "trapped" on small sites that are shrinking due
to woody plant invasion.
INTRODUCTION
The distribution of rare prairie species in the eastern United States and the dispersal of
prairie plant propagules have fascinated plant ecologists for decades (Gleason, 1923;
Rabinowitz and Rapp, 1981; Willson and Traveset, 2000), but the link between the two
phenomena is little understood. Many plants have diaspores with morphologies that
strongly suggest a dependency on animal fur for long-distance dispersal (van der Pijl, 1972;
Sorenson, 1986). Animal dispersed plants in North America undoubtedly benefited from
the plethora of large mammals that inhabited and migrated through the Plains during the
Pleistocene Epoch, but the great extinctions likely severed hundreds of relationships
between the dispersers and the dispersed. Severed obligate mutualisms between animals
and plants have been a topic of great debate (Witmer and Cheke, 1991). It has been
demonstrated that the number of dispersed seeds and the dispersal distance is greater for
plants when high densities of animal dispersers are present (Bleher and Bohning-Gaese,
2001) . What happens to the distribution of a plant species when its major dispersers are
driven to extinction?
Bouteloua curtipendula var. curtipendula (Michx.) Torr. is a C4 perennial grass characteristic
of dry upland prairies in the midgrass region of North America (Bazzaz and Parrish, 1982),
1 Present address: Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, P.O . Box 15017,
Flagstaff, A2 86011; e-mail: DanieI.Laughlin@nau.edu
268

270
THE AMERICAN MIDLAND NATURALIST
149(2)
FIG. l.-Geographic distribution of Bouteloua curtipendula in the eastern United States. Darkened
areas represent counties from which voucher specimens were collected; light gray areas represent
unpublished accounts or dubious vouchers. The dark line delineates the general boundary of the Ridge
and Valley Physiographic Province (Fenneman, 1928) .

272
THE AMERICAN MIDLAND NATURAUSf
149(2)
central awn
.. glumes
5mm
FIG. 2.-Morphology of the diaspore of Bouteloua curtipendula:
rugose and is slightly 3-toothed at the apex. The palea is slightly shorter than the lemma and
has a similar texture. The elaborately modified rudimentary floret is variable but often con-
sists of a 3-awned lemma and the conspicuous central awn can be up to 7 mm long (Fig. 2).
The elliptical caryopsis is 3.5 mm long and is contained within these structures (Griffiths,
1912; Gould and Kapadia, 1964; Gould, 1975, 1978, 1979; Clark and Pohl, 1996; Kucera,
1998; Rhoads and Block, 2000).
Cheplick (1998) notes that the adaptive features of grasses associated with epizoochory
are "sterile spikelets or inflorescence branches with bristles." Though caution is warranted
when speculating about dispersal agents (Jurado et al., 1991), the morphology of the
Bouteloua curtipendula diaspore strongly suggests that adhesion to animal fur is the primary
means of dispersal. Moreover, adhesive diaspores have greater potential to travel long
distances than non-adhesive diaspores (Sorenson, 1986) .

274
THE AMERICAN MIDLAND NATURAUST
149(2)
70
60
50
- 40
c
III
ULo
III
r=.. 30
20
10
a
Glumes up
Glumes down
On the side
FIG. 3.-Mean percent of diaspores falling from 70 cm height that land with their glumes facing up,
down , or to the side (n = 20) . Data were arcsin-transformed prior to analysis.
experiments were arcsin-transformed using the Freeman and Tukey method to normalize
the data for analysis (Zar, 1999) . Data was statistically analyzed using one-way ANaVA and
Fisher's LSD multiple comparisons test
A new index, here named the Dispersal Index, was developed to combine the data from
both parts of each experiment It is the product of "% diaspores that attached" and "%
diaspores that remained after shaking." This index represents the percentage of all the
diaspores that carne into contact with the fur that remained attached to the furs and
indicates which animal species have
the highest capacity for dispersing
Bouteloua
curtipendula.
Bouteloua curtipendula may also utilize wind as a means of dispersal. To determine the seed
shadow after being dispersed by wind 100 diaspores were released 70 cm above the ground
during wind speeds of 8-15 kmph. The distance traveled was recorded.
REsULTS
The proportions of diaspores on the ground that attached were significantly different
among the animal furs tested (one-way ANaVA, df = 7, P < 0.01). Approximately 30-35%
of the diaspores on the ground attached to bison, elk and deer furs and about 20% attached
to cattle and fox fur (Fig. 4a). Significantly lower percentages (-10%) attached to horse,
coyote , and rabbit fur (Fisher's LSD, P < 0.01). Diaspores on the stem had much less success
attaching to the furs (Fig. 4a) and differences were slight, yet significant, among animal furs
tested (one-way ANaVA, df = 6, P < 0.01) . The proportions of diaspores on the stem that
attached to bison and horse fur were significantly higher than the proportions that attached
to coyote and rabbit fur (Fisher's LSD, P < 0.05).
The proportions of diaspores on the ground that remained attached were significantly
different among the animal furs tested (one-way ANaVA, df = 7, P < 0.01) . Approximately
60% of the diaspores from each experiment remained attached to the bison fur (Fig. 4b),

276
THE AMERICAN MIDLAND NATURALIST
149(2)
20
15
5
o
I
111.1
I
I
65
45
25
5
85
105
125
145
165
185
200
Distance (em)
FiG. 5.-Seed shadow of Bouteloua curtipendula during wind speeds of 8-15 kmph (n = 100).
diaspores that attached to both bison and elk, 60% remained on the bison and only 30%
remained on the elk (therefore, the Dispersal Indices were 0.18 and 0.10 for bison and elk,
respectively). The probability of initial attachment is an important part of the dispersal
process, but certain furs dropped diaspores easier than others. For example, diaspores that
were on the ground attached well to white-tailed deer fur (-35%), but they slipped off very
easily (only about 8% remained) (Figs. 4a, b) . Diaspores attached poorly to horse tails (only
-12%) (Fig. 4a) , but those that did attach were retained well (-35% remained) (Fig.4b) .
Beefcattle and horses scored similar dispersal indices and the canids, deer and rabbit scored
very low (Fig. 4c) .
Diaspores on the stem attached and remained attached most adhesively to bison, which
scored the highest on the Dispersal Index (Fig. 4c). No more than 10% of any of the
diaspores still on the stems attached to any fur types (Fig. 4a), but bison fur retained almost
60% of those that attached (Fig. 4b) . Elk hides, deer hides and the horse tail retained 27%,
31%, and 12%, respectively (Fig. 4b) ; however, all scored similarlow indices (Fig. 4c). Cattle,
coyote, red fox and rabbit were unable to retain any diaspores (Fig. 4b), and hence, scored
zeros on the Dispersal Index (Fig. 4c) .
When subjected to wind speeds of 8-15 kmph, the diaspores traveled a mean distance of
75 em and were carried no farther than 2 m (Fig. 5) . The leptokurtic distribution of the seed
shadow is common for most plants (Willson and Traveset, 2000) .
DISCUSSION
Bouteloua curtipendula can utilize adhesion to animal fur and wind to disperse its seeds
away from parent plants. However, it cannot disperse its seeds long-distances when carried

278
THE AMERICAN MIDLAND NATURALISf
149(2)
ungulate dispersers are currently absent from their presettlement ranges, which included
central Pennsylvania (Murie, 1951; Roe, 1970; Mitchell, 1982; Thomas and Toweill, 1982;
Belue, 1996). Horse tails and cattle fur demonstrated mediocre capacity for dispersing B.
curtipendula, but these animals were not abundant in presettlement times. Moreover, horses
and cattle, which are known to collect weed seeds in their hair or fur, respectively, tend to be
retained within fences, so their probability of dispersing this historically rare grass is low.
Dispersal of B. curtipendula diaspores by adhesion to ungulates may provide an example of
"directed dispersal" (Howe and Smallwood, 1982), which is dispersal to favorable habitats,
since ungulates often spend time in similar environments. However, more evidence is
needed to make this conclusion since very few examples demonstrate adhesive diaspores
that achieve directed dispersal (Sorenson, 1986).
Since Bouteloua curtipendula's key long-distance dispersal vectors are now locally extinct
(though elk have recently been re-introduced on the Appalachian Plateau in Pennsylvania),
wind is its only available agent of dispersal. But since wind can only carry the diaspores very
short distances, B. curtipendula cannot establish populations outside of its current locations
because suitable habitat is scattered and too far distant. Consequently, B. curtipendula is
"trapped" on small sites that are shrinking due to woody plant invasion (Laughlin, 2002).
Indeed, B. curtipendula populations have declined since the beginning of this century.
Twenty-one voucher specimens record the presence of B. curtipendula in the Ridge and
Valley of Pennsylvania (Rhoads and Klein, 1993) but, to the best of my knowledge, only 11
populations still exist (48% decline; Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory, pers. comm.),
and no new populations have been discovered. This decline is mostly due to agriculture,
development, and woody plant invasion due to fire suppression, but B. curtipendula's
chances oflong-term survival in the context of the modem landscape are lowered if its long-
distance dispersal mechanism is compromised.
Xeric limestone prairies are dependent on natural and anthropogenic disturbances (e.g.,
fire) for ·their maintenance (Baskin and Baskin, 2000; Laughlin, 2002) and Bouteloua
curtipendula is apparently dependent on extirpated ungulates for its primary dispersal.
Reid's Paradox assumes that the only plausible method of long-distance dispersal of plants
with limited dispersal ability is via animal dispersal (Clark et al., 1998). This raises some
doubt as to whether presettlement plant associations can ever be
restored to fully
functioning communities without the reintroduction of a native fauna. New populations
cannot be established unless large areas of land within the Ridge and Valley Province are
reserved and native fauna and disturbance events are re-introduced. Otherwise, humans will
need to manually distribute B. curtipendula seed to suitable sites.
Acknawledgments.-I thank Christopher Uhl for his guidance throughout this project, and I th ank
Mark Schulze, Nitin Rai, Eric Post and Claude de Parnpbilis for their thoughtful comments on early
drafts of this manuscript I am grateful to the following botanists who provided voucher specimen data
for the distribution map: Julian Campbell of The Nature Conservancy, Steve Ginzbarg from the
University ofAlabama, Dan Spaulding from the Anniston Museum of Natural History, Robert R Haynes
fro m the University of Alabama, Cynthia Morton from Auburn University, Paul Davison from th e
University of North Alabama, John R. MacDonald from Mississippi State University, Lucille McCook
from the University of Mississippi and Ronald Wieland of the Mississippi Natural Heritage Program.
LITERATURE CITED
ABI. 2001 . New Jersey rare species and natural community lists by county. in, http:/ /www.abi.org/nhp/
us/njlcounty.html.
ANGELO, R
AND D. E. BOUFFORD. 2001. Atlas of the flora of New England. in, http:/ /www.herbaria.
harvard.edu/-rangeio/NeatlasO/WebIntro.html.

280
THE AMERICAN MIDLAND NATURAliST
149(2)
HAINEs, A. 1998. Flora of Maine: a manual for identifying native and naturalized plants of Maine. Y.F.
Thomas Co.
HARPER,]. L. 1977. Population biology of plants. Academic Press, Inc. , New York, New York.
HARVILL, A M., Jr. T. R BRADLEY, C. E. STEVENS, T. F.WlEBOLDT, D. M. E. WAJI.E, D.W. OGLE, G. W. RAMsEY AND
G. P. F!..EMING. 1992. Atlas of the Virginia flora III. Virginia Botanical Associates, Burkeville, Virginia.
HITCHCOCK, A. S. 1951. Manual of the grasses of the United States (revised by A. Chase). Dover
Publications, New York.
HOUGH, M. Y. 1983 et seq. New Jersey wild plants. Harmony Press , Harmony, New Jersey.
HOWE, F. F. AND]' SMAllWOOD. 1982. Ecology of seed dispersal. Ann. Rev. £COL Syst., 13:201-228.
ISB. 2001. Institute for Systematic Botany: atlas of Florida vascular plants, in, http:/ /www.plantatlas.
usf.edu/ maps.asp?plantID=151 .
JANZEN, D. H. 1982 . Dispersal of small seeds by big herbivores: foliage is the fruit. Am. Nat., 123:338-353.
JURADO, E., M. WESTOBY AND D. NELSON. 1991. Diaspore weight., dispersal, growth form and perennality of
central Australian plants. J EcoL 79:811-830.
KLOTZ, L. H. AND]' L. WALCK. 1993. Rare vascular plants associated with limestone in southwestern
Franklin County, Pennsylvania. Bartonia 57 (Supplement):l6-41.
KNAPP, A K.,]. M. BUJR,]. M. BRIGGS, S. L. COll.lNS, D. C. HARTNETI, L. C.JOHNSON AND E. G. TOWNE. 1999.
The keystone role of bison in North American tallgrass prairie. Bioscience, 49:39-50.
KoHLER, C. D. 1986. Soil survey of Lycoming County, Pennsylvania. USDA/
SCS (now NRCS) /
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania.
KRAKow, G. 2001. The Georgia Natural Heritage Program Database, in, http:/ /www.dnr.state.ga.us/dnr/
wild/natural/gnhpds.htm.
KUCERA, C. L. 1998. The grasses of Missouri, Rev. edition. University of Missouri Press , Columbia.
LARTER, N. C. AND C. C. GATES. 1994. Home-range size of wood bison: effects of age, size, and forage
availability. J of Mammalogy, 75:142-149.
l..AUGffi.IN, D. C. 2002. Limestone prairies and the threatened grass, Bouteloua curtipendula, in
Pennsylvania. M.S. Thesis in Ecology from The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania. xi + 119 pp.
LIPSCOMB, G. H. AND W. H. FARLEY. 1981. Soil survey ofJuniata County, Pennsylvania. USDA/ SCS (now
NRCS)/Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania.
LONG,R. S. 1975. Soil survey of Franklin County, Pennsylvania. USDA/ SCS (now NRCS) / Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, Pennsylvania.
MAGEE, D. W. AND H. E. AHLEs. 1999. Flora of the northeast: a manual of the vascular flora of New
England and adjacent New York. University of Massachusetts Press , Amherst, Massachusetts.
MITCHELL, B. 1982. Pennsylvania's elk herd. Pennsylvania Game Nf!IJ)s, 53:14-18.
MURIE, 0 .]. 1951. The elk of North America. The Stackpole Co. and Wildlife Management Institute,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
NYFA 1990. Preliminary vouchered atlas of the New York state flora. The New York State Museum
Institute, Albany, New York.
NYNHP. 2001. New York Natural Heritage Program-plant information. in, http:/ /www.dec.state.ny.us/
website/dfwmr/heritage/plants.htm.
OCUMPAUGH, W. R. AND D. H. D. SWAKON. 1993. Simulating grass seed passage through the digestive
system of cattle: a laboratory technique. Crop Sci., 33:1084-1090.
PEART, M. H. 1981. Further experiments on the biological significance of the morphology of seed-
dispersal units in grasses. J EcoL, 69:425-436.
QUARTERMAN, E., M. P. BURBANCK AND D. ]. SHURE. 1993 . Rock outcrop communities: limestone,
sandstone, and granite. In : W. H. Martin, S. G. Boyce and A. C. Echternacht (eds.) . Biodiversity
of the Southeastern United States: Upland Terrestrial Communities. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
.RABINOWITZ, D. AND]' K. RAFp. 1981. Dispersal abilities of seven sparse and common grasses from
a Missouri prairie. Amer.J Bot., 68:616-624.
RADFORD, A. E., H. E. AHLEs AND C. R. BELL. 1965. Atlas of the vascular flora of the Carolinas. Technical
Bulletin No. 165. Department of Botany, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill , North Carolina.
