 
 
Governor takes get-tough approach to fire 
By SETH MULLER 
Sun Staff Reporter 
02/10/2004 
Gov. Janet Napolitano hopes to put Arizona 
on the map when it comes to taking an 
aggressive approach to forest health and 
restoration.  
That includes a tough new state code 
requiring fire-resistant homes and a 
"defensible space" near forests, although 
enforcement would be left to the localities.  
Napolitano announced in Flagstaff Monday 
a draft list of 31 recommendations she'll 
advocate to help promote forest health 
initiatives. Her goal is to do everything 
possible to prevent destructive wildfires like 
the Show Low area Rodeo-Chediski fire in 
2002 and last year's Aspen Fire near Tucson.  
 
 
Janet Napolitano commends Coconino High School 
artists on their new multicultural mural on Monday 
during her visit to Flagstaff. The mural was designed 
and painted by English language learners. Josh 
Biggs/Arizona Daily Sun To order this photo, go to 
http://photos.azdailysun.com  
 
"I remain committed to doing everything we can at the state level to restore our forests 
and protect our communities," Napolitano said during the conference, where more than a 
100 people gathered to hear the announcement.  
With a snow-covered pine forest in the background, Napolitano spoke along a newly 
developed residential street for the Pine Canyon development. She chose the site to make 
the announcement because John Beerling, the developer of Pine Canyon, is creating a 
"defensible space" -- or thinned perimeter of forests to protect the homes from 
catastrophic wildfire.  
Last summer, the governor assembled an advisory and oversight council to address forest 
health. Weighted with forest health scientists and advocates from Flagstaff and northern 
Arizona, the two councils handed down a series of recommendations for initiatives, 
directives and funding.  
The oversight council -- led by state Rep. Tom O'Halleran, R-Sedona, and the Ecological 
Restoration Institute's Diane Vosick of Flagstaff -- handed the 31 recommendations to the 
governor. In collaboration, O'Halleran introduced a House bill Monday to address healthy 
forests issues at the state legislative level.  
O'Halleran attended Napolitano's press conference on Monday as well. Among the 31 
recommendations, O'Halleran cited the importance of expanding the state foresters role, 
developing teamwork among the various stake-holders and agencies and educating the 
public on what they can do as key components.  

Napolitano also used the press conference to call for more action at the federal level, 
mainly in the form of better funding for forest health restoration.  
"Last year Congress passed the Healthy Forest Restoration Act of 2003. It was a step, 
unfortunately a relatively small step without funding," Napolitano said. "As I have said 
from the start, you can make all the procedural changes in the world, but it won't make a 
bit of difference without funding. The council recommends I urge for full funding of the 
act, which authorized $760 million a year in new funding for hazardous fuel reductions."  
The governor further criticized President Bush for the significant lack of funding his 
administration provided for forest restoration.  
"I was frustrated by the Bush Administration's recently-released budget request for forest 
health -- a mere $58 million in new funding for hazardous fuel reduction," she said. 
"That's $58 million for the entire nation -- just a fraction of what Arizona needs, much 
less the other western states."  
As for the recommendations, which include suggested actions for local, state and federal 
land agencies as well as private land owners, the governor conceded that 31 
recommendations put forth extensive goals, and she noted that it would probably take 
about six to 10 years to fully address and implement them.  
Taylor McKinnon of the Grand Canyon Trust, who co-chairs the governor's advisory 
council, said that Arizona appears as if it's taking the lead nationally on forest health 
issues. But he noted that now "the ball is in the court of the state legislature," as he and 
others await how representatives will take O'Halleran's sponsored bill.  
Napolitano urged those in attendance to support the state legislation, dubbed the Arizona 
Forest Health and Safety Act.  
The recommendations laid out by the governor's council included: The requirement of 
creating a defensible space around homes in the urban-wildland interface. Council 
members want the new code in place "as soon as possible," with enforcement left up to 
localities. The expansion of county planning authority to better manage growth of 
communities subject to fires. A provision that gives local communities the authority to 
order property owners to remove vegetation near their buildings. The requirement that 
home sellers to disclose the dangers of wildfire to buyers. The expansion of the role of 
Arizona's state forester.  
However, the definition of urban-wildland interface, which plays into various 
recommendations, was not specified by the council members. Instead, the committee 
opted to make how that term is defined a local decision.  
The two councils will continue to meet in perpetuity, even with the release of the 
recommendations, according to oversight council member Rob Smith, a Southwest 
representative for the Sierra Club.  
"We are scheduled for several more meetings, and we're working on developing 
educational materials for homeowners" with homes adjacent to forests, according to 
Smith.  

Reporter Seth Muller can be reached at 913-8607 or by e-mailing him at 
smuller@azdailysun.com  
 
Additional photos for this story:  
 
Arizona Governor Janet Napolitano speaks about a new 
forest action plan to a crowd including Flagstaff mayor 
Joe Donaldson at Pine Canyon Country Club on 
Monday. Josh Biggs/Arizona Daily Sun To order this 
photo, go to http://photos.azdailysun.com  
   
 
Gov. Janet Napolitano makes rounds to meet officials, 
firefighters and conservationists at Pine Canyon 
Country Club in Flagstaff, where she announced her 
new forest plan. Josh Biggs/Arizona Daily Sun To order 
this photo, go to http://photos.azdailysun.com  
 
