 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Ecology of Rusby’s Milkvetch (Astrgulus rusbyi), a Rare Endemic of  
Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forests 
 
By Judith Springer, ERI Research Specialist, Sr.  
INTRODUCTION 
Astragalus rusbyi (Rusby’s milkvetch) grows primarily in ponderosa pine 
forests and in aspen groves, but it also may be found in mixed-conifer for-
ests. Populations are mainly concentrated on basaltic soils in two areas in 
northern Arizona: around the San Francisco Peaks (primarily on the south-
ern and western sides of the Peaks) and also in the vicinity of Kendrick 
Mountain. It is ranked “vulnerable” (G3) by NatureServe, a non-profit con-
servation organization, and is on the U.S. Forest Service sensitive species 
list for Region 3 (Southwestern Region). Some of its habitat has been sub-
jected to large wildfires over the last few decades. Other areas have under-
gone ecological restoration treatments (tree thinning and prescribed burn-
ing), and much of its range is slated to undergo such treatments in the near 
future. This fact sheet summarizes findings from previous research conduct-
ed within its habitat and range.  
 
 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
Fisher and Fulé (2004) found A. rus-
byi to be an indicator species for pon-
derosa pine forest. Six of the 14 pon-
derosa pine indicator species were 
nitrogen fixers, including A. rusbyi.  
 
Laughlin and others (2008) found A. 
rusbyi to be an indicator species of 
both thinned treatments and treat-
ments that involved thinning plus 
burning, meaning that it exhibited a 
positive response to either type of 
treatment.  
 
A. rusbyi was also found to be an in-
dicator species of remnant grass 
patches (small open areas consisting 
of native grasses and forbs) (Laughlin 
et al. 2008).  
 
          Fact Sheet: Ecology of Rusby’s Milkvetch (Astragulus rusbyi), a Rare Endemic of Northern Arizona  
 
                Ponderosa Pine Forests  
 
 
 
  
 
February 2014 
Astragulus rusbyi (Rusby’s milkvetch). Photo 
by Max Licher, Southwest Environmental 
Information Network 
Figure 1. Proportion of permanent monitoring plots through time containing A. rusbyi at an 
ecological restoration study area near Flagstaff, AZ. Treatments were randomly assigned 
within each block and include a) no thinning, no burning (control), b) high-intensity thinning, 
c) medium-intensity thinning, and d) low-intensity thinning. All treatment units were thinned 
in 1999 and subsequently treated with prescribed fire in spring 2000 and spring 2001. 

 
 
 Stoddard (in Springer et al. 2012) observed no significant effects, either positive or negative, with 
various levels of tree thinning combined with prescribed burning treatments, and there was no corre-
lation found between the presence of A. rusbyi and trees per acre, pine basal area, or canopy cover. 
Although there was no significant effect on plant density from the ecological restoration treatments, 
there was a sharp decline in 2002, a year of extreme drought (Figure 1).  
 
 Surveys conducted in 2008 within an area of A. rusbyi habitat northwest of the San Francisco Peaks 
slated for fuels reduction treatments revealed high levels of tree mortality, especially quaking aspen 
(Populus tremuloides), and numerous populations of A. rusbyi, varying in size from a few to several 
hundred plants, were noted in these areas (Coconino National Forest, unpublished data). 
 
 Laughlin et al. (2010) found that, on average, A. rusbyi has relatively high specific leaf area, and high 
nitrogen and phosphorous concentrations in foliar tissue (4.4% and 0.18%, respectively). Correspond-
ingly, it has a relatively high net photosynthetic rate. On average, it also has lower leaf dry matter 
content and foliar C:N mass ratio (11). The combined trait data place it in the category of a competi-
tive ruderal species. 
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
Rigorous long-term demographic monitoring will be valuable in determining population baselines and is 
essential for understanding the ecology and conservation and habitat needs of this species. Such monitoring 
can also reveal patterns that relate to precipitation fluctuations. Current knowledge indicates that A. rusbyi 
appears to show positive to neutral responses to tree thinning and prescribed burning.  
 
REFERENCES 
Fisher, M.A. and P.Z. Fulé. 2004. Changes in forest vegetation and arbuscular mycorrhizae along a steep 
elevation gradient in Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management, 200: 293–311. 
Laughlin, D.C., J.D. Bakker, M.L. Daniels, M.M. Moore, C.A. Casey, J.D. Springer. 2008. Restoring plant 
species diversity and community composition in a ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Plant Ecolo-
gy, 197:139-151. 
Laughlin, D.C., J.J. Leppert, M.M. Moore, and C.H. Sieg. 2010. A multi-trait test of the leaf-height-seed 
plant strategy scheme with 133 species from a pine forest flora. Functional Ecology, 24:493-501. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Contact 
Judith Springer, Judy.Springer@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Springer, J.D., M.T. Stoddard, D.C. Laughlin, D.L. Crisp, and B.G. Phillips. 2012. Ecology of 
Rusby’s milkvetch (Astragalus rusbyi), a rare endemic of northern Arizona ponderosa 
pine forests. Calochortiana, 1:157-163. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/
index/assoc/HASH4af7.dir/doc.pdf 
