Invited Synthesis Paper
Historical and Modern Disturbance Regimes, Stand Structures, and Landscape
Dynamics in Pin˜on–Juniper Vegetation of the Western United States
William H. Romme,1 Craig D. Allen,2 John D. Bailey,3 William L. Baker,4 Brandon T. Bestelmeyer,5
Peter M. Brown,1,6 Karen S. Eisenhart,7 M. Lisa Floyd,8 David W. Huffman,9 Brian F. Jacobs,1,10
Richard F. Miller,11 Esteban H. Muldavin,12 Thomas W. Swetnam,13
Robin J. Tausch,14 and Peter J. Weisberg15
Authors are 1Professor, Department of Forest, Rangeland, and Watershed Stewardship, and Graduate Degree Program in Ecology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA; 2Research Ecologist, US Geological Survey, Jemez Mountains Field Station, Los Alamos, NM 87544, USA;
3Associate Professor, Department of Forest Engineering, Resources and Management, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA; 4Professor,
Ecology Program and Department of Geography, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA; 5Research Ecologist, US Department of
Agriculture–Agricultural Research Service, Jornada Experimental Range, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA; 6Director, Rocky
Mountain Tree-Ring Research, Fort Collins, CO 80526, USA; 7Assistant Professor, Department of Geosciences, Edinboro University of Pennsylvania,
Edinboro, PA 16444, USA; 8Professor and Chair, Environmental Studies Program, Prescott College, Prescott, AZ 86303, USA; 9Research Associate,
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA; 10Vegetation Specialist, Bandelier National Monument,
National Park Service, Los Alamos, NM 87544, USA; 11Professor, Department of Range Ecology and Management, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR 97331, USA; 12Research Associate Professor, Natural Heritage New Mexico, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA; 13Director
and Professor, Laboratory of Tree Ring Research, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA; 14Supervisory Range Scientist, US Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Reno, NV 89512, USA; and 15Assistant Professor, Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Science, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89512, USA.
Abstract
Pin˜on–juniper is a major vegetation type in western North America. Effective management of these ecosystems has been
hindered by inadequate understanding of 1) the variability in ecosystem structure and ecological processes that exists among the
diverse combinations of pin˜ons, junipers, and associated shrubs, herbs, and soil organisms; 2) the prehistoric and historic
disturbance regimes; and 3) the mechanisms driving changes in vegetation structure and composition during the past 150 yr.
This article summarizes what we know (and don’t know) about three fundamentally different kinds of pin˜on–juniper
vegetation. Persistent woodlands are found where local soils, climate, and disturbance regimes are favorable for pin˜on, juniper,
or a mix of both; fires have always been infrequent in these woodlands. Pin˜on–juniper savannas are found where local soils and
climate are suitable for both trees and grasses; it is logical that low-severity fires may have maintained low tree densities before
disruption of fire regimes following Euro-American settlement, but information is insufficient to support any confident
statements about historical disturbance regimes in these savannas. Wooded shrublands are found where local soils and climate
support a shrub community, but trees can increase during moist climatic conditions and periods without disturbance and
decrease during droughts and following disturbance. Dramatic increases in tree density have occurred in portions of all three
types of pin˜on–juniper vegetation, although equally dramatic mortality events have also occurred in some areas. The potential
mechanisms driving increases in tree density—such as recovery from past disturbance, natural range expansion, livestock
grazing, fire exclusion, climatic variability, and CO2 fertilization—generally have not received enough empirical or
experimental investigation to predict which is most important in any given location. The intent of this synthesis is 1) to
provide a source of information for managers and policy makers; and 2) to stimulate researchers to address the most important
unanswered questions.
Resumen
La vegetacio´n de Pin˜on-junı´pero es un tipo de vegetacio´n muy importante en el Oeste de Norte Ame´rica. El manejo efectivo
de estos ecosistemas se ha obstaculizado por el inadecuado entendimiento de 1) la variabilidad en la estructura del ecosistema
y los procesos ecolo´gicos que existen entre las diversas combinaciones de pinos, junı´peros, arbustos, hierbas, y los
organismos asociados del suelo; 2) regı´menes prehisto´ricos e histo´ricos del disturbio, y 3) mecanismos que conducen cambios
en estructura y composicio´n de la vegetacio´n durante los u´ltimos 150 an˜os. Este publicacio´n hace un resumen de lo que
sabemos (y no sabemos) acerca de tres clases fundamentales de vegetacio´n del pin˜on–junipero. Arbolados persistentes se
Correspondence: Dr William H. Romme, Dept of Forest, Rangeland, and Watershed Stewardship, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80524, USA. Email: romme@warnercnr.colostate.edu
Manuscript received 16 September 2008; manuscript accepted 4 March 2009.
The research that forms the basis of this article has been supported by the authors’ home institutions and by many other sources, including the Bureau of Land Management, the US Dept of
Defense, the US Joint Fire Sciences Program, the US National Park Service, the Uncompahgre Plateau Partnership, the US Forest Service, and the US Geological Survey, among others. The workshop
in which we developed the article was funded by The Nature Conservancy and the Colorado Forest Restoration Institute of Colorado State University (CSU). CSU and Universite´ Laval (Que´bec, QC)
provided time and resources for writing the article via a sabbatical leave for W.H.R. in 2007–2008.
Rangeland Ecol Manage 62:203–222 | May 2009
RANGELAND ECOLOGY & MANAGEMENT 62(3) May 2009
203

encuentran donde los suelos locales, el clima, y los regı´menes del disturbio son favorables para el pin˜o´n, el junı´pero, o una
mezcla de ambos; los fuegos han sido siempre infrecuentes en estas a´reas. Las sabanas del Pin˜on–junipero se encuentran
donde los suelos locales y el clima son apropiados tanto para a´rboles y gramı´neas; es lo´gico que los fuegos de baja-intensidad
pueden haber mantenido densidades bajas de a´rboles antes de que se interrumpio´ los regı´menes del fuego despue´s del
establecimiento Euro-Americano, pero existe poca informacio´n para apoyar cualquier afirmacio´n afirmativa sobre los
regı´menes histo´ricos del disturbio en estas sabanas. Los matorrales se localizan donde los suelos locales y el clima apoyan a
comunidad de arbustos, pero los a´rboles pueden aumentar durante condiciones clima´ticas y perı´odos hu´medos sin disturbio,
y disminuyen durante sequı´as y despue´s del disturbio. Los aumentos drama´ticos en la densidad de los a´rboles han ocurrido en
las porciones de los tres tipos de vegetacio´n del pin˜on–junipero, aunque eventos igualmente drama´ticos de mortalidad han
ocurrido tambie´n en algunas a´reas. Los mecanismos potenciales que conducen aumentos en densidad de a´rboles, la
recuperacio´n del u´ltimo disturbio, la extensio´n natural del pastizal, el pastoreo del ganado, la exclusio´n del fuego, la
variabilidad clima´tica, y la fertilizacio´n-general del CO2 no han recibido suficiente investigacio´n empı´rica o experimental
para predecir cua´l de estos factores puede ser el ma´s importante en cualquiera de los sitios. El intento de esta sı´ntesis es 1)
proporcionar una fuente de informacio´n para los manejadores y los regidores, y 2) estimular a investigadores para dirigir las
preguntas ma´s importantes que aun esta´n sin contestar.
Key Words:
climate, CO2, drought, fire, grazing, tree infill, tree invasion, range expansion
INTRODUCTION
Pin˜on–juniper vegetation covers some 40 million ha (100
million acres) in the western United States, where it provides
economic
products,
ecosystem
services,
biodiversity,
and
aesthetic beauty in some of the most scenic landscapes of
North
America.
There
are
concerns,
however,
that
the
ecological dynamics of pin˜on–juniper woodlands have changed
since Euro-American settlement, that stands are growing
unnaturally dense, and that woodlands are encroaching into
former grasslands and shrublands. Yet, despite a considerable
amount of research in pin˜on–juniper vegetation, our under-
standing of historical conditions and of both historical and
current ecological processes is often inadequate to answer the
management questions now being posed.
Uncertainties about historical stand structures and distur-
bance regimes in pin˜on–juniper vegetation create a serious
conundrum for land managers and policy makers who are
charged with overseeing the semiarid landscapes of the West.
Vegetation treatments are often justified, in part, by asserting
that a particular treatment (e.g., tree thinning or prescribed
burning) will contribute to restoration of historical conditions,
i.e., those conditions that prevailed before the changes wrought
by Euro-American settlers. However, in the absence of site-
specific information about historical disturbance regimes and
landscape dynamics, ‘‘one-size-fits-all’’ treatments are likely to
be ineffective, and some well-meaning ‘‘restoration’’ efforts
may actually move pin˜on–juniper ecosystems further from their
historical condition. Some kinds of vegetation treatments may
even reorganize ecosystems in such a way that restoration of
historical patterns and processes becomes more difficult.
The purpose of this article is to summarize our current
understanding
of
historical
stand
structures,
disturbance
regimes, and landscape dynamics in pin˜on–juniper vegetation
throughout the western United States and to highlight areas in
which significant gaps in our knowledge exist. The authors
gathered for a workshop in Boulder, Colorado, on 22–24
August 2006, to develop the information presented here. All
the authors have conducted research in pin˜on–juniper vegeta-
tion and together they have experience with a wide diversity of
pin˜on–juniper ecosystems, from New Mexico and Colorado to
Nevada and Oregon.
The article is organized in three parts. In section I, we present
a brief overview of the variability in dominant species, climate,
stand structure, and potential fire behavior of pin˜on–juniper
vegetation across the West to emphasize one of our key points—
that pin˜on–juniper is a diverse vegetation type for which a simple
model of historical structure and dynamics is inadequate. In
section II, we summarize what we know about past and present
conditions in three contrasting kinds of pin˜on–juniper ecosystems
in the form of a series of concise statements followed by more
detailed explanations of each statement. The explanations
include the level of confidence that we have in the statement,
the kinds of evidence that support the statement, and the
generality of the statement, i.e., whether it applies to all pin˜on–
juniper ecosystems or only to a subset of these ecosystems (see
next paragraph). By ‘‘past conditions,’’ we mean the three to four
centuries before the sweeping changes introduced by Euro-
American settlers in the mid- to late-1800s. In section III, we
evaluate possible mechanisms driving one of the most conspic-
uous features of pin˜on–juniper vegetation in many areas—the
increase in tree density that has been observed during the past
100–150 yr. We distinguish two somewhat different processes
leading to higher tree density: 1) infill, or increasing tree density
within existing woodlands that were previously of lower density;
and 2) expansion, i.e., establishment of trees in places that were
formerly nonwoodland (e.g., grassland or shrubland).
In section II, statements of high confidence generally are
supported by some combination of 1) rigorous paleoecological
studies
that
include
adequate
sampling
and
appropriate
analysis of, e.g., cross-dated fire-scars, tree age structures,
and macrofossils; 2) experimental tests of mechanisms that
incorporate adequate replication and appropriate scope of
inference; and 3) systematic observations of recent wildfires,
prescribed fires, or other disturbances (e.g., insect outbreaks),
either planned before the event and documented by experi-
enced, objective observers, or based on rigorous postdistur-
bance analyses using adequate and spatially explicit data.
Statements of moderate or low confidence generally are
supported by 1) correlative studies that identify statistically
significant associations between two variables but do not prove
a cause–effect relationship; 2) anecdotal observations of recent
fires, i.e., opportunistic observations of wildfires or prescribed
fires by experienced, objective observers but that were not
204
Rangeland Ecology & Management

conducted in a systematic manner; and 3) logical inference, i.e.,
deductive inferences from related empirical or experimental
studies that are logical but have not yet been tested empirically.
Depending on the details, other kinds of evidence may support
high, moderate, or low confidence: 1) comparison of historic
and recent photographs of the same scene, which documents
changes in pattern or structure, but says little about the
mechanism(s) causing the changes; and 2) written historical
documentation in the form of reports, articles, letters, and
other accounts by reliable observers.
We intentionally refrain from making specific policy or
management recommendations in this article. Instead, our
objective is to provide consensus among researchers of what we
know (and don’t know) about the science. Although our
synthesis gives much attention to historical conditions and
disturbance processes in pin˜on–juniper vegetation, we recog-
nize (and agree) that restoration of pre-1900 characteristics is
not the only, or the most appropriate, management goal in
many situations, especially in the face of climate and land-use
changes (e.g., Millar et al. 2007). Nevertheless, we also believe
that nearly all management goals, including those other than
restoration per se, will be accomplished more successfully and
economically if those goals and the techniques used to achieve
them are informed by an understanding of how a particular
landscape came to be the way it is today (Swetnam et al. 1999).
This article identifies major differences in historical condi-
tions and drivers of recent changes in pin˜on–juniper vegetation
and emphasizes that many gaps remain in our understanding of
these ecosystems. We, therefore, recommend that land manag-
ers, practitioners, and policy makers rely primarily on the
statements of high confidence and broad applicability in
formulating management plans and priorities, and we encour-
age researchers to conduct new studies to critically test the
statements of moderate or low confidence and to rigorously
investigate the generality of these statements. In particular, we
encourage
collaboration
between
research
scientists
and
managers in current and upcoming pin˜on–juniper treatments.
By adding a well-designed research and monitoring component
to a practical management-oriented project, not only is it
possible to evaluate the efficacy of a given project but also it
can improve our understanding of the more general ecological
processes at work in pin˜on–juniper vegetation.
I. PIN˜ ON–JUNIPER: A DIVERSE AND
VARIABLE VEGETATION TYPE
Woodlands dominated by various combinations of pin˜on and
juniper species represent some of the most extensive and diverse
vegetation types in western North America. For example, the
Southwestern Regional GAP land-cover maps (http://earth.gis.
usu.edu/swgap/) show ca. 15% of the land area in New
Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, Utah, and Nevada as covered by
vegetation of this kind. NatureServe, an international database
of
species
and
communities
(http://www.natureserve.org/
explorer/servlet/NatureServe?init5Ecol) lists 77 plant associa-
tions in the West in which a pin˜on is the dominant species (with
or without junipers) and 71 associations in which junipers
dominate (typically without pin˜on or with pin˜on as a minor
component). Pin˜on and juniper associations are found in
almost every western state of the United States from California,
Oregon,
and
Washington
to
North
and
South
Dakota,
Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Texas. Pin˜on and juniper associa-
tions also are widespread in Mexico, and juniper species extend
north into Canada and east to Virginia. Although the catch-all
term pin˜on–juniper is typically applied to all of this diverse
vegetation, it is important to note that one can find pure stands
of juniper (very commonly) and of pin˜on (less commonly) as
well as mixed stands.
This article focuses primarily on pin˜on and juniper vegeta-
tion in the Intermountain West, the Southwest, the Southern
Rocky Mountains, and the western edge of the Great Plains,
including primarily the states of Oregon, Nevada, Idaho, Utah,
Arizona, Wyoming, Colorado, and New Mexico. Throughout
this extensive region, woodlands of pin˜on or juniper or a mix of
both are found on almost all landforms, including ridges, hill
and mountain slopes, terraces, tablelands, alluvial fans, broad
basins, and valley floors. Soils are similarly variable, ranging
from relatively deep soils often high in clay or sand content, to
shallow rocky soils, to rock outcrops where no soil is present,
but the trees are rooted in deep cracks of the bedrock.
Woodlands of pin˜on or juniper or both occupy a broad zone
of intermediate moisture and temperature conditions between
the hot arid deserts of lower elevations and the cool mesic
forests of higher elevations. Accordingly, soil temperature
regimes range from mesic to frigid, and soil moisture regimes
include aridic, xeric, and ustic (e.g., Gedney et al. 1999;
Ramsey 2003; Miller et al. 2005).
There is a striking northwest-to-southeast gradient in the
seasonality of precipitation (Figs. 1a and 1b). Winter–spring
precipitation predominates in the northwest, notably in the
Great Basin, shifting to a bimodal winter–summer pattern on
the Colorado Plateau, and a summer monsoonal regime in the
southeastern portion of the region, including southern Arizona
and
New
Mexico
(Mitchell
1976;
Jacobs
2008).
Total
precipitation across most of the range of Juniperus occidentalis
Hook. in the northwestern Great Basin varies between 25 cm
and 40 cm annually, falling mostly during winter and spring
storms, although this tree species can grow in areas receiving as
little as 18 cm (usually on sandy soils) or exceeding 50 cm
(Gedney et al. 1999). Annual precipitation amounts are similar
where Juniperus monosperma (Engelm.) Sarg. grows in south–
central New Mexico, but in this latter region, 60% or more falls
between April and September, particularly during the late summer
‘‘monsoon.’’ The Colorado Plateau (especially the southern
portion), lying near the midpoint of this gradient, receives small
peaks of precipitation in both winter and summer (http://www.
cpluhna.nau.edu/Change/modern_climatic_conditions.htm).
Species composition and vegetation structure vary along the
same northwest-to-southeast gradient (Figs. 1a and 1b), and
the various pin˜on and juniper species exhibit subtle, but
ecologically significant, physiological differences both among
and within species along regional and elevational gradients
(Moore et al. 1999; Nowak et al. 1999). J. occidentalis is the
major woodland tree species in extreme northwestern Nevada,
northeastern California, and eastern Oregon; Pinus mono-
phylla Torr. & Fre´m. and Juniperus osteosperma (Torr.) Little
dominate woodlands elsewhere in the Great Basin; Pinus edulis
Engelm. and J. osteosperma are the dominant woodland species
across most of the Colorado Plateau and southern Rocky
62(3) May 2009
205

Mountains west of the Continental Divide; and P. edulis and J.
monosperma characterize the summer monsoon regions of
New Mexico, east–central Arizona, and the southern Rockies,
east of the Continental Divide. Juniperus scopulorum Sarg. is
common at higher elevations on much of the Colorado Plateau
and in the southern Rockies, and Juniperus deppeana Steud.
becomes dominant in areas of southern New Mexico and
Arizona where warmer temperatures and stronger monsoonal
patterns prevail. In the western and northern regions, where
precipitation is winter-dominated, the trees are typically
associated
with
a
major
shrub
component,
notably
big
sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata Nutt.) and other Artemisia L.
spp., Purshia tridentata (Pursh) DC., Chrysothamnus Nutt.
spp., Ericameria Nutt. spp., and Cercocarpus Kunth spp.
Perennial tussock grasses may also be common associates, e.g.,
Festuca idahoensis Elmer, Pseudoroegneria spicata (Pursh) A.
Lo¨ve, Achnatherum P. Beauv. spp., Poa secunda J. Presl, and
Poa fendleriana (Steud.) Vasey. In eastern and southern
regions, where the precipitation pattern is summer-dominated,
pin˜on and juniper woodlands often support an understory of
warm-season grasses, e.g., Bouteloua gracilis (Willd. ex Kunth)
Lag. ex Griffiths, Bouteloua curtipendula (Michx.) Torr.,
Bouteloua hirsuta Lag., Bouteloua eriopoda (Torr.) Torr.,
Muhlenbergia pauciflora Buckley, and Muhlenbergia setifolia
Vasey, and woodlands may occur as patches within a grassland
matrix. A diverse and highly variable mix of montane shrubs
Figure 1. a, Distribution of four dominant juniper species in relation to seasonal precipitation patterns. We modified coverage based on Little
(1971) using information from Southwest Regional Gap Analysis Project (SWReGAP; http://earth.gis.usu.edu/swgap/landcover.html), Springfield
(1976), Jacobs (2008), and Forest Inventory Analysis data interpreted by Kristen Ironside (personal communication, 2006) to minimize overlap and
clarify dominant overstory species and relationships with regional moisture patterns. Specifically, we modified the Little (1971) species distributions
by 1) highlighting dominance of Juniperus monosperma in central Arizona and along the Arizona–New Mexico border, J. osteosperma in
northwestern New Mexico, and J. deppeana in south-central Arizona; and 2) deleting J. monosperma in portions of central Colorado and south-
central New Mexico. Distribution of a fifth important, but wide-ranging, juniper species (J. scopulorum) is shown in Figure 1b. Distribution of
Juniperus coahuilensis (Martin˜ez) Gaussen ex R. P. Adams (sensu ,Juniperus erythrocarpa Cory var. coahuilensis Martinez) is not shown but is
largely coincident with J. deppeana in southeastern Arizona. Juniper species with ranges largely to the east, such as Juniperus pinchotii Sudw.,
Juniperus ashei J. Buchholz, and Juniperus virginiana L., are also not shown. Monsoon Index represents July to September precipitation as a
percentage of annual total (calculated from 800-m PRISM data) and highlights a pronounced northwest to southeast moisture seasonality gradient
from winter to summer moisture dominance. b, Distribution of three dominant pin˜on species (and J. scopulorum) in relation to seasonal precipitation
patterns. Scattered areas of J. scopulorum that overlap with Pinus edulis and P. monophylla in eastern Nevada, south-central Utah, northern Arizona,
and central New Mexico are not shown to improve clarity. Distribution of Pinus quadrifolia Parl. ex Sudw. is not shown. Monsoon Index represents
July to September precipitation as a percentage of annual total (calculated from 800-m PRISM data) and highlights a pronounced northwest to
southeast moisture seasonality gradient from winter to summer moisture dominance.
206
Rangeland Ecology & Management

and chaparral species (e.g., Quercus gambelii Nutt., Quercus
pauciloba Rydb. [Pro sp.], and other Quercus L. spp.;
Cercocarpus montanus Raf.; Amelanchier utahensis Koehne;
and P. tridentata) is an important component of pin˜on–juniper
vegetation at higher elevations, notably in the southern Rockies
and Colorado Plateau.
Three General Kinds of Pin˜on–Juniper Vegetation
We identify three fundamentally different kinds of pin˜on–
juniper vegetation, based primarily on canopy structure,
understory characteristics, and historical disturbance regimes.
The three kinds—persistent pin˜on–juniper woodlands, pin˜on–
juniper savannas, and wooded shrublands—are summarized in
Table 1, and their general structure and distribution in relation
to precipitation gradients is depicted in Figure 2. There is great
diversity within each of these general types with respect to
species composition and stand structure, but this classification
represents much of the variability in pin˜on–juniper vegetation
across the western United States. Research is underway to link
these vegetation types to specific environmental characteristics
that would allow for reliable prediction and mapping across
large landscapes and regions, but at present, we can identify
only some very general environmental correlates. Because
historical stand structures, disturbance regimes, and landscape
dynamics were significantly different among these three basic
types of pin˜on–juniper vegetation, we are careful to distinguish
among the types in sections II and III below.
Potential Fire Behavior
In all three kinds of pin˜ on–juniper vegetation (Table 1), there
are important interactions among canopy fuel structure,
understory
fuel
structure,
and
fire
weather
conditions
(Fig. 3). Continuity of canopy aerial fuels (the horizontal
axis in Fig. 3) is key in determining crown fire behavior,
especially in woodlands where understory shrubs are rela-
tively sparse. Canopy fuel continuity is influenced most
directly by total tree stem density, crown width, and crown
fullness and continuity between individuals (often related to
tree age and total stand age). Understory vegetation is
relatively lacking in very dense woodlands, creating empty
cells in Figure 3; however, in other woodlands, the understory
may provide continuity among tree stems and ladder fuels
under trees, especially where tall shrubs are present. Where
Artemisia tridentata or a similar large shrub is a dominant
shrub species, the shrub stratum is likely more important than
the trees in carrying fire, especially if the trees are widely
spaced. Also fundamental to fire behavior is total surface-fuel
loading (the vertical axis in Fig. 3), influenced most directly
by total biomass of small trees that provide litter fall, but
most importantly by shrubs and other understory vegetation
as well. Pin˜on and juniper are able to become established and
persist in very dry sites with widely spaced trees and a range
of understory conditions. These often-complex arrangements
of overstory and understory factors form a matrix of likely
fire behavior, which would vary between modal (e.g., 80th
percentile) and extreme (e.g., 95th percentile) fire weather
conditions across all three pin˜on–juniper types (Fig. 3). This,
in turn, affects residual structure, composition, and function
over time.
Actual fire weather is critical in most combinations of tree,
shrub, and understory cover types (Fig. 3); weather conditions
determine the amount of tree mortality and the dynamics of fire
spread, both within a stand and across a landscape in all three
types
of
pin˜on–juniper
vegetation.
However, stands
with
scattered trees among sparse understories of low shrubs and
herbs almost always exhibit limited fire activity, given the general
lack of fuel, and the trees growing in such a stand are relatively
protected from fire. Conversely, dense woodland conditions
become highly flammable with time (i.e., fuel accumulation over
decades or centuries) regardless of fine fuel conditions; the
probability of ignition and duration of the fire season define the
actual fire return intervals for these ecosystems in which fire is
typically stand-replacing. It is also important to distinguish
between passive crown fires (torching of individual trees) versus
active crown fires (running through the crowns of most trees); the
probability of passive or active crown fire is related to overstory
and understory fuel arrangements as well as extreme versus
modal fire weather in all three pin˜on–juniper types (Fig. 3). If
overstory and understory densities are relatively low, as in many
very dry or rocky sites, even under the most extreme weather
conditions there simply may not be enough fuel for either active
or passive crown fires to occur; the fire may simply go out before
traveling through a stand.
II. WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT PIN˜ ON–
JUNIPER ECOSYSTEMS
Statement 1: Spreading, Low-Intensity, Surface Fires
Spreading, low-intensity, surface fires had a very limited role in
molding stand structure and dynamics of many or most pin˜on
Figure 2. A general framework for the distribution of three broad types
of western pin˜on and juniper woodlands (persistent woodland, savanna,
and wooded shrubland; Table 1). These types are commonly situated in
relation to the gradients of soil moisture that is available for trees and the
regional seasonality of precipitation. However, at any local site,
conditions such as substrate, landscape position, and disturbance
regimes may support any of the three types, even where one type is
generally more prevalent at the regional scale.
62(3) May 2009
207

and juniper woodlands in the historical landscape. Historical
fires generally did not thin from below, i.e., they did not kill
predominantly small trees. Instead, the dominant fire effect was
to kill most or all trees and to top-kill most or all shrubs within
the burned area, regardless of tree or shrub size. This statement
is also true of most ecologically significant fires today.
Applicability and Confidence. This statement is well supported
by empirical research in persistent woodlands and wooded
shrublands, and we state it with high confidence for these types
(persistent woodlands and wooded shrublands). Pre-1900
disturbance regimes in pin˜on–juniper savannas are not well
understood; consequently, we have only low or moderate
confidence that this applies to savannas.
Explanation.
Spreading,
low-intensity,
surface
fires
(as
opposed to stand-replacing fires) have been observed only
rarely in pin˜on–juniper vegetation during the recent period
since Euro-American settlement (Baker and Shinneman 2004).
Apparently, such fire behavior was also rare in persistent
woodlands and wooded shrublands before Euro-American
settlement. Definitive fire-history evidence of a spreading,
low-intensity, surface fire would include cross-dated fire scars
at two or more locations along with intervening age-structure
evidence that trees generally survived the fire (Baker and
Shinneman 2004). However, few places provide such evidence.
On the contrary, fire scars are conspicuously absent or rare in
most pin˜on–juniper stands (Baker and Shinneman 2004; but see
Burkhardt and Tisdale 1976; Wilkinson 1997; Brown et al.
2001; and Camp et al. 2006 for examples of studies where
some fire scars were found).
Even when one finds fire-scarred trees, that evidence, by
itself, does not necessarily confirm a history of low-severity,
Table 1. Three general types of pin˜on and juniper vegetation. A field key to the three types is provided in Romme et al. (2007). Broad-scale
structural and climatic patterns are depicted in Figure 2.
Vegetation type and characteristics
Description
Persistent pin˜on–juniper woodlands
Canopy
Ranging from sparse stands of scattered, small trees growing on poor substrates to relatively dense stands of
large trees on more productive sites. The canopy may be dominated by either pin˜on or juniper or both and
may include any of the species depicted in Figures 1a and 1b.
Understory
Variable cover of shrubs, subshrubs, forbs, and grasses, but often sparse, with extensive areas of litter
(beneath canopies) and bare soil or rock (intercanopy).
Site conditions
Associated with a wide variety of substrates and topographic settings but most commonly found on rugged
uplands with shallow, coarse-textured, and often rocky soils that support relatively sparse herbaceous cover;
site conditions (soils and climate) and disturbance regimes (notably infrequent fire) are inherently favorable
for tree growth.
Regional distribution
Found in appropriate upland locations throughout the West. Persistent woodlands appear to be especially
prevalent on portions of the Colorado Plateau, where precipitation is bimodal, with small peaks in winter and
summer.
Pin˜on–juniper savannas
Canopy
Low to moderate density and cover of pin˜on or juniper or both; the most common dominants are P. edulis, J.
monosperma, and J. deppeana.
Understory
Well-developed and nearly continuous grass (with forb) cover; shrubs may be present but are usually only a
minor component.
Site conditions
Typically found on moderately deep, coarse to fine-textured soils in gentle upland and transitional valley
settings or where local conditions are inherently favorable for grasses.
Regional distribution
Especially prevalent in basins and foothills of New Mexico and Arizona, where a large proportion of annual
precipitation comes during the growing season.
Wooded shrublands
Canopy
Variable tree component that may range from very sparse to relatively dense and may include any of the pin˜on
and juniper species depicted in Figures 1a and 1b; however, J. monosperma and J. deppeana are more
commonly associated with persistent woodlands and savannas.
Understory
Well-developed shrub stratum with variable grass–forb cover and composition; shrubs constitute the
underlying biotic community in these ecosystems.
Site conditions
Associated with a wide variety of substrates and topographic settings, including shallow, rocky soils on
mountain slopes to deep soils of intermontane valleys; site conditions are inherently favorable for shrub
growth; thus, the tree component naturally waxes and wanes over time in response to a variety of climatic
and disturbance factors (‘‘areas of potential expansion and contraction’’ in Romme et al. 2007).
Regional distribution
Especially prevalent in the Great Basin, where the precipitation pattern is winter dominated and A. tridentata is
a dominant shrub species; however, wooded shrublands can be found throughout the West, where local
substrates favor shrub dominance.
208
Rangeland Ecology & Management

spreading fire in pin˜on–juniper woodlands. For example, at the
upper ecotone between pin˜on–juniper and ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa Douglas ex Lawson & C. Lawson) forest, at
a site in northern New Mexico, two studies dated fire scars on
ponderosa pine trees and documented 10–13 spreading fires
during ca. 250 yr (Allen 1989, Morino et al. 1998). Evidence
on tree survival among the fire-scarred trees was not collected,
however, so it is not clear whether the fire actually burned the
entire area or spread primarily through ponderosa pine
stringers and around the islands of pin˜on–juniper that may
have lacked sufficient fine fuels to support low-intensity,
surface fires. Fire scars were also found on pin˜on trees at the
ecotone between an open ponderosa pine forest and a pin˜on–
juniper woodland in south–central New Mexico (Muldavin et
al. 2003); again, however, tree-age data were not sufficient to
confidently reconstruct the spatial patterns of fire spread
within the pin˜on–juniper woodland. Huffman et al. (2008)
recently sampled fire scars and ages of all tree species
throughout two study sites located at ecotones between
pin˜on–juniper and ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona
and New Mexico; they concluded that the historical fires
documented in the ponderosa pine forests generally did not
spread through the adjacent pin˜on–juniper portions of the
study areas.
A major reason why low-severity fires apparently are
unimportant in most pin˜on and juniper vegetation is that the
fuel structure, especially in persistent woodlands and in
wooded shrublands, is not typically conducive to a spreading,
low-severity fire that would spread via fine fuels without
killing the dominant trees or shrubs. Fine fuels are usually
discontinuous (Floyd et al. 2000, Baker and Shinneman
2004), and the major fuel components are the crowns of live
shrubs and trees, which, if ignited, tend to burn completely
with considerable heat release (Baker 2006; R. Tausch,
personal observations). Thus, fires typically kill all of the
trees and top-kill all the shrubs and herbs within the areas
that burn; usually, the only surviving plants are those in
patches that do not burn.
Figure 3. Probable fire behavior following a single ignition event in pin˜on and juniper vegetation with respect to variability in tree density (horizontal
axis) and understory fuel characteristics (vertical axis). Split cells reflect variable fire behavior, spread dynamics, and tree mortality under modal
(80th percentile fire weather) in the unshaded upper left vs. extreme (95th percentile) fire weather conditions in the shaded lower right.
62(3) May 2009
209

Logically, it would seem that the fuel structure of pin˜on and
juniper savannas could support spreading, low-severity fire
because of the grass component and that the climate in regions
having extensive savanna could be conducive to widespread fire
during dry seasons. This idea is depicted in Figure 3 as a
possible exception to our statement that low-severity fires are
generally
unimportant
in
pin˜on
and
juniper
vegetation.
However, rigorous empirical information on historical distur-
bance regimes in these ecosystems is lacking. Consequently, we
were unable to develop any confident statements about the
frequency or importance of fire, insect, disease, or climatic
variability in the dynamics of pin˜on and juniper savannas in the
historical landscape. As emphasized in the section on research
priorities in Romme et al. (2008), obtaining this information
should be a high priority for researchers.
A major problem in assessing the historical role (or lack of a
role) of low-severity, surface fires in pin˜on and juniper
woodlands is that we do not know how often the trees scar
when surface fires burn in their vicinity (Romme et al. 2008).
Nevertheless, available evidence indicates that low-severity
fires
were
generally
absent
in
most
pin˜on
and
juniper
woodlands, and if they did occur, they were likely patchy and
of small extent (Baker and Shinneman 2004).
In contrast to the lack of evidence for spreading, low-severity
fires, there is abundant evidence that fires in pin˜on and juniper
woodlands, since Euro-American settlement, have been pre-
dominantly high-severity fires, commonly killing all the trees
and top-killing the shrubs and herbs within the fire perimeter
but often leaving some unburned islands of woodland (Baker
and Shinneman 2004). Fire-history studies and historical
evidence also document high-severity fires in multiple locations
around the West during the pre–Euro-American era (Eisenhart
2004; Floyd et al. 2004, 2008; Bauer 2006; Shinneman and
Baker 2009). Limited evidence suggests that fires could,
occasionally, have been variable in severity, resulting in some
low-severity areas on the margins of large, high-severity fires,
or in small islands not burned at high severity (Baker and
Shinneman 2004). Nevertheless, high-severity fire was likely
the dominant type of fire in these woodlands in both historical
and modern eras.
Two major reasons why fires tend to burn with high severity
in pin˜on and juniper vegetation are 1) the usual fuel structure,
as explained above; and 2) that almost all pin˜ons and junipers
are relatively intolerant to fire because of their thin barks and
typically low crowns. Unlike ponderosa pine, which self-prunes
lower branches and develops thick bark with age, pin˜ons and
most juniper species are usually killed by fire, even when
mature. We note, however, that older pin˜ons can have bark . 2
cm thick, and it is unknown how these trees may have
responded to historical, surface fires, if they occurred. Mature
J. deppeana trees can also survive fire, and they commonly
resprout if top-killed by fire.
The extent and spatial pattern of high-severity fire varies in
time and space from very small (, 0.1 ha) and fine grained to
very large and coarse grained (hundreds to thousands of
hectares) as a function of fuel structure and fire weather
(Fig. 3). Although we know that high-severity fires occurred in
the past, we have little specific data on fire sizes and spatial
patterns during the pre–Euro-American period (but see Floyd et
al. 2004, 2008; Huffman et al. 2008). Nevertheless, the
dominant effect observed in recent fires in pin˜on–juniper
vegetation has been complete or nearly complete tree mortality
throughout the area burned, and the effect was likely similar in
historical fires.
Statement 2: Disturbances Other Than Fire
In many pin˜on and juniper woodlands, stand dynamics are
driven more by climatic fluctuation, insects, and disease than
by fire. Although increases in pin˜on and juniper density have
received much attention in many areas (see statement 5 below),
loss of pin˜on and juniper (especially from marginal sites) has
also occurred recently and in the past. For example, a
widespread and severe pin˜on mortality event occurred in
2002–2004 in the Four Corners region (Colorado, Arizona,
New
Mexico,
and
Utah)
as
a
result
of
drought,
high
temperatures, and bark beetle outbreaks.
Applicability and Confidence. This statement is well supported
by empirical research in persistent woodlands, and we state it
with high confidence for this type (persistent woodlands). The
historical role of climatic fluctuation, insects, and disease is less
well known for wooded shrublands and is almost unknown for
savannas; consequently, we make this statement with moderate
and low confidence, respectively, for these two types (wooded
shrublands and savannas).
Explanation.
Scientists
and
managers
have
traditionally
placed greater emphasis on wildfire as a shaper of pin˜on and
juniper ecosystems than on other types of natural disturbance.
Increasingly, however, there is awareness that the dynamics in
many pin˜on and juniper woodlands are driven more by drought
stress and its accompanying suite of diseases, insects, and
parasites than by fire. Indeed, studies of old pin˜on and juniper
woodlands often reveal an accumulation of coarse wood in the
understory from trees that were killed by agents other than fire
and have persisted because of the absence of fire (Betancourt et
al. 1993; Waichler et al. 2001; Floyd et al. 2003; Eisenhart
2004).
Chronic, low-level tree mortality results from local insect
and disease processes, e.g., native black stain root disease
(Leptographium wageneri [W.B. Kendr.] M.J. Wingf.) on P.
edulis in southwestern Colorado (Kearns and Jacobi 2005).
Stand dynamics are also punctuated more dramatically by
episodic mortality or by recruitment events that occur in
response to extreme weather patterns and insect outbreaks
(Betancourt et al. 1993; Swetnam and Betancourt 1998;
Knapp
and
Soule´
1999;
Soule´
and
Knapp
2007).
For
example, substantial P. edulis mortality occurred in many
parts of New Mexico during the severe, regional drought of
the 1950s (Swetnam et al. 1999). More recently, drought and
high temperatures in 2002–2004 caused high mortality of P.
edulis throughout the Four Corners region (Breshears et al.
2005; Shaw et al. 2005; Greenwood and Weisberg 2008) and
shifted canopy dominance of some stands from pin˜on to
juniper (Mueller et al. 2005). Mortality data from this recent
drought event indicate that trees of cone-bearing age were
more likely to die (Mueller et al. 2005; Selby 2005; C. D.
Allen, unpublished data, 2008; M. L. Floyd, unpublished
data, 2008), which will likely influence the trajectory of
recovery for decades. (We note, however, that abundant
210
Rangeland Ecology & Management

pin˜on reproduction is now present in at least some affected
stands; B. Jacobs, unpublished data, 2008).
Climatic reconstructions based on tree rings from throughout
the West demonstrate that the recent Four Corners drought is
not unprecedented and that droughts of similar or greater
magnitude have occurred many times in the past (Betancourt et
al. 1993; Ni et al. 2002; Gray et al. 2003). For example,
widespread tree mortality during a very severe megadrought in
the late 1500s may explain the rarity of pin˜on older than 400 yr
in the Southwest (Swetnam and Brown 1992; Betancourt et al.
1993; Swetnam and Betancourt 1998). Studies in the Southwest
also demonstrate that recovery from drought may occur as a
pulse of tree establishment and recruitment during the first wet
period that follows the drought (Swetnam et al. 1999; Gray et
al. 2006; Shinneman and Baker 2009). In some areas, in fact,
recovery since the late 1500s megadrought may be responsible
for recent and ongoing increases in tree density (see section III
below).
Although recent woodland expansion has received much
attention (see statement 5), contraction of woodlands has also
been documented. For example, some of the 20th century
expansion of woodland trees into sagebrush on the Uncom-
pahgre Plateau in western Colorado appears now to be
undergoing reversal as young trees have died in recent
droughts (K. Eisenhart, unpublished data, 2008). Thus, for
thousands of years, tree expansion and contraction may have
been a normal part of climatically driven fluctuations in
woodland densities, perhaps especially at the ecotones with
sagebrush, grasslands, and other nonwoodland vegetation.
Savannas and wooded shrublands, in particular, are probably
dominated by trees during periods of moist climatic condi-
tions or infrequent fires, but by grasses or shrubs during
droughts or periods with more frequent fires or insect
outbreaks. It follows that the recently observed woodland
infill and expansion may be reversed by future contractions of
woodland in at least some areas.
Statement 3: Fire Intervals and Rotations
Historical fire rotations (i.e., the time required for the
cumulative area burned to equal the size of the entire area of
interest) and fire intervals, at the stand level, varied from place
to place in pin˜on and juniper woodlands but, in many places,
were very long (generally measured in centuries). Indeed, some
pin˜on and juniper woodlands have been stable for hundreds of
years without fire, other than isolated lightning ignitions that
burned only single trees or small patches and produced no
significant changes in stand structure. Many pin˜on and juniper
woodlands today show no evidence of past widespread fire,
although they may have burned extensively in the very remote
past (many hundreds or thousands of years ago).
Applicability and Confidence. This statement is well supported
by empirical research in persistent woodlands, and we state it
with high confidence for this type (persistent woodlands). We
have little quantitative information on fire history in wooded
shrublands and consequently we have only moderate confi-
dence in this statement for this type (wooded shrublands). Fire
intervals may have been substantially shorter in pin˜on–juniper
savannas than in the other two types (persistent woodlands and
wooded shrublands), but we have almost no empirical data on
pre-1900 fire regimes in savannas and therefore we have low
confidence in our statements about this type (savannas).
Explanation. Only a few rigorous estimates of historical fire
rotation for pin˜on–juniper woodlands have been made on the
basis of adequate empirical data, but these studies all report
very long rotations. Examples include 410 yr or 427 yr
(depending on the method of calculation) in Barrett Canyon of
central Nevada (Bauer 2006), 480 yr in southern California
(Wangler and Minnich 1996), 400–600+ yr on the Uncompah-
gre Plateau in western Colorado (Shinneman and Baker 2009),
and 400+ yr on Mesa Verde in southwestern Colorado and on
the Kaiparowits Plateau of southern Utah (Floyd et al. 2004,
2008). Huffman et al. (2008) estimated shorter rotations of 340
yr and 290 yr at two sites in northern Arizona and New
Mexico, respectively, but these sites represented ecotones
between pin˜on–juniper woodlands and ponderosa pine forests.
Note that fire rotation is a different concept and metric than
mean composite fire interval. Because the latter metric may be
influenced strongly by sampling intensity and scale (Hardy
2005; Reed 2006), we emphasize here the fire rotation concept,
which is roughly equivalent to the average fire interval at a
small point on the ground. We emphasize that that historical
fire rotations and point intervals were much longer than is
often assumed for pin˜on or juniper vegetation in general (e.g.,
Schmidt et al. 2002). We also note that modern fire intervals
may be getting shorter, as explained in statement 4 below.
Consistent with the idea of very long fire rotations, many
persistent woodlands exhibit little to no evidence that they ever
sustained widespread fires during the period that the trees in
the stand have been alive. Living trees in these stands are
typically very old (300–1 000 yr) and exhibit multiaged
structure, often reflecting episodic tree recruitment events
(see, e.g., Waichler et al. 2001; Floyd et al. 2003, 2004,
2008; Eisenhart 2004; Shinneman and Baker 2009). It is
difficult to accurately gauge the time since the last major
disturbance from living trees alone in such stands because they
typically contain even older logs or snags that overlap the time
spans of the living trees (i.e., they were not killed in a past
stand-opening event). Charred snags and logs are either absent
or extremely sparse. There may be individual charred boles or
small patches of charred boles, which apparently represent
lightning ignitions in the past that failed to spread, but no
extensive or continuous evidence of past fire.
Ancient, persistent woodlands are often located on rocky or
unproductive sites with widely scattered trees, where under-
stories are mainly bare ground with sparse vegetative cover.
However, they also include some higher-density woodlands
growing on more productive sites (see, e.g., Floyd et al. 2004,
2008), and they may cover extremely large portions of some
areas, such as the mesas, plateaus, and bajadas in southern
Utah, western Colorado, northern Arizona, and northwestern
New Mexico. Examples of locations where tree-ring data
document old trees and a lack of widespread fire include
pumice–sandy soils in central Oregon (Waichler et al. 2001);
near the northeastern edge of the Uinta Range in Utah (Gray et
al. 2006); the Tavaputs Plateau and several of the bajada
communities on the fringes of the southern Utah mountain
ranges (E. K. Heyerdahl, P. M. Brown, and S. T. Kitchen,
unpublished data, 2009); the Kaiparowits Plateau in Utah
62(3) May 2009
211

(Floyd et al. 2008); Mesa Verde, the Uncompahgre Plateau, and
Black
Canyon
of
the
Gunnison
in
western
Colorado
(Eisenhart 2004; Floyd et al. 2004; Shinneman and Baker
2009); and the margins of the Chihuahuan Desert in central
and southern New Mexico (Swetnam and Betancourt 1998;
Muldavin et al. 2003; E. Muldavin, C. Baisan, T. W.
Swetnam, L. DeLay, and K. Morino, unpublished data,
2008; T. W. Swetnam and J. L. Betancourt, unpublished
data, 2008). Persistent woodlands of this kind are especially
prevalent in portions of the Colorado Plateau and Great
Basin. They also probably occur throughout the range of
pin˜on and juniper vegetation, although they may be less
common in regions having monsoon-dominated precipitation
patterns, such as southern New Mexico (Fuchs 2002; E. C.
Fuchs, personal communication, March 2007).
Statement 4: Recent and Historic Stand-Replacing Fires
Recent, large, severe (stand-replacing) fires in pin˜on and
juniper woodlands are, for the most part, similar to fires that
occurred historically.
Applicability and Confidence. This statement is best supported
by empirical research in persistent woodlands, where some
large, severe, pre-1900 fires have been documented. However,
it is unclear whether the very large size of some recent, stand-
replacing fires is exceptional (because of changing climate or
fuels conditions) or represents a kind of infrequent, but
nevertheless natural, event in this vegetation type (persistent
woodlands). Consequently, we make this statement with
moderate confidence for persistent woodlands. Historical fire
size and severity are less well documented for wooded
shrublands and very poorly documented for savannas; conse-
quently, we make this statement with low confidence for these
two types (wooded shrublands and savannas).
Explanation. An upsurge of large fires (. 400 ha) in forested
landscapes throughout much of the western United States
began in the mid-1980s (Westerling et al. 2006). Increasing
trends in large fire frequency and total area burned are
particularly
noticeable in some
regions having extensive
pin˜on–juniper woodlands (e.g., the Southwest and the northern
Great Basin). For example, a greater proportion of the pin˜on–
juniper woodland on Mesa Verde, Colorado, burned in the
decade between 1995 and 2005 than had burned throughout
the previous 200 yr (Floyd et al. 2004).
We know that large, severe fires occurred in pin˜on–juniper
woodlands in the past, although we have little information on
extents or spatial patterns of those fires. Truncated age
structures of live pin˜on trees and abundant, charred juniper
snags document the occurrence of large fires (at least hundreds
of hectares in extent) in the 1700s on Mesa Verde in western
Colorado and in the 1700s or 1800s on the Kaiparowits
Plateau of southern Utah (Floyd et al. 2004, 2008). In south–
central New Mexico, an extensive shrubland patch embedded
within otherwise continuous pin˜on–juniper woodlands of the
Oscura Mountains is suggestive of a high-severity fire in the
1800s, although the tree-ring studies needed to confirm this
hypothesis have not yet been conducted (Muldavin et al. 2003).
Thus, it follows that the recent occurrence of high-severity fires
in pin˜on and juniper woodlands is not unprecedented; however,
we have inadequate historical information with which to
confidently evaluate how the frequency and extent of recent
high-severity fires in this vegetation type compare with
historical fire events.
Changes in fuel structure have probably contributed to the
recent increase in large fires in some parts of the West. For
example, fire exclusion in some ponderosa pine and dry,
mixed-conifer forests has allowed fuel mass and vertical
continuity to increase (Allen et al. 2002; Hessburg and Agee
2003), although recovery from 19th-century fires, logging, and
livestock grazing, rather than fire exclusion, are likely the
principal mechanisms of this change in other ponderosa pine
forests (Baker et al. 2007). Invasion by highly flammable
annual grasses (e.g., cheatgrass, Bromus tectorum L.) has
increased horizontal fuel continuity and likelihood of extensive
fire spread in many semiarid vegetation types, including pin˜on–
juniper woodlands and shrublands of the Great Basin and
Colorado Plateau (Whisenant 1990; Knapp 1996).
However, frequency of large fires also has increased in other
forest types, where changes in fuel conditions are probably far
less important, e.g., in high-elevation forests of the northern
Rocky Mountains (Schoennagel et al. 2004), leading Wester-
ling et al. (2006) to suggest that an equal or more important
mechanism may involve the warmer temperatures, longer fire
seasons, and high amplitude of wet/dry years in recent decades.
A trend of lower frequency and later onset of midlatitude
summer cyclones (which bring cool or moist conditions to
interior North America) may also contribute to the recent
upsurge in large fires (Knapp and Soule´ 2007). A similar
increase
in
the
frequency
of
large
fires
has
also
been
documented in portions of Canada, where changes in forest
conditions due to land use are minimal, again suggesting a
primarily climatic mechanism (Gillet et al. 2004; Girardin
2007). It should be noted that although increases in numbers of
large fires and area burned are striking in some regions and in
broad composite data from the western United States and
Canada, some subregions show little or no clear evidence of
major changes in fire activity in recent decades (Westerling et
al. 2006).
Given the very long fire rotations that naturally characterize
pin˜on and juniper woodlands, especially persistent woodlands
(see statement 3), we cannot yet determine whether the recent
increase in frequency of large fires occurring in this vegetation
type represents genuine directional change related to changing
climate or fuel conditions or is simply a temporary episode of
increased fire activity, comparable to similar episodes in the
past. In any event, the suite of current and upcoming broad-
scale environmental changes—warming temperatures, increas-
ing tree densities in some areas (see statement 5), and expansion
of fire-promoting species, such as cheatgrass—may all interact
to dramatically increase the amount of burning in pin˜on–
juniper and other vegetation types over the next century.
Statement 5: Tree Density and Canopy Cover
Tree density and canopy coverage have increased substantially
during the past 150 yr in many pin˜on and juniper woodlands
but have not changed or have declined in others. Former
grasslands and shrublands in some regions have also been
converted to savanna or woodland as trees have expanded into
212
Rangeland Ecology & Management

previously nonwoodland sites, but expansion has been less
common or nearly lacking in other regions.
Applicability and Confidence. This statement is well supported
by photographic evidence and age-structure data from many
different locations across the West, where an increase or a
decrease or no change is apparent in persistent woodlands,
wooded shrublands, and savannas. Consequently, we state it
with high confidence for all three types of pin˜on and juniper
vegetation.
Explanation. Infill of previously existing pin˜on and juniper
woodlands and expansion of pin˜on and juniper into former
grasslands and shrublands during the past 150 yr have been
well documented in many parts of the western United States
(examples below). However, the pattern of infill and expansion
is
not
uniform
throughout
the
region.
For
example,
a
comparison of aerial photographs from 1937, 1965–1967,
and 1994 on the Uncompahgre Plateau in western Colorado
revealed minimal net change in density or extent of pin˜on–
juniper woodlands (Manier et al. 2005). Sallach (1986)
documented increasing tree densities in many locations in
New Mexico but also declines in the abundance of pin˜on and
juniper in other places; similarly, B. Bestelmeyer (unpublished
data, 2008) recorded both local density increases and decreases
(from tree harvest) since the 1930s in a central New Mexico
study area. Therefore, one cannot necessarily assume that
pin˜on and juniper are increasing in density in any particular
portion of their range without local data.
Infill and expansion have occurred over extensive portions of
the Great Basin. For example, tree age structures in old
persistent
woodlands
of
central
Nevada
show
dramatic
increases in establishment of new trees beginning in ca. 1880
(Bauer
2006).
On
tablelands
of
southeast
Oregon
and
southwest Idaho, where low sagebrush (Artemisia arbuscula
Nutt.) is the predominant woody layer, but scattered J.
occidentalis trees are also present, sampling of live and dead
trees revealed a gradual increase in tree densities since the late
1800s in many areas (Johnson and Miller 2006). In some
places, however, the magnitude of infill has been relatively
small. For example, in central Oregon, just east of the Cascade
Mountains, . 67% of the trees . 1 m in height became
established before 1870, and most individuals , 1 m in height
were growing slowly with very narrow rings—demonstrating
that small trees actually may be relatively old, especially on
sites with poor growing conditions (Waichler et al. 2001). In a
dense, old, persistent woodland occupying . 1 000 ha in
southeast Oregon, infill is occurring in the outer edges of the
stand, but little infill has occurred in much of the main core
where understory trees of 0.5 m and 1.0 m in height are 100–
250 yr old (R. F. Miller, unpublished data, 2008).
Impressive infill and expansion of trees has also occurred in
wooded shrublands and sagebrush–grasslands of the Great
Basin, where woodland area may have increased by an order of
magnitude since the mid-19th century (Miller and Tausch
2001). For example, in stand reconstructions across an
extensive area in northwest Utah, central Nevada, southwest
Idaho, and southeast Oregon, extant and dead trees dating to
the period before 1860 were found in only 16–67% of current
woodland stands, suggesting that the current area occupied by
trees has increased 150–625% since 1860 (Miller et al. 2008).
In that study, old trees (. 140 yr) were usually scattered in low
densities across the landscape with no evidence that pre-1860
stands were as dense as many stands today. In another study,
old trees (. 140 yr) accounted for , 10% (usually , 2%) of
the individuals that were . 30 cm in height (Johnson and
Miller 2007). Similarly, Gedney et al. (1999) compared US
Forest Service surveys conducted in 1938 and 1988 across
eastern Oregon and reported a 600% increase in area occupied
by J. occidentalis. Rates of increase in tree cover are very fast in
some areas, e.g., ca. 10% ? decade21 (Weisberg et al. 2007) or
even a doubling every 30 yr (Soule´ et al. 2004). Bauer (2006)
observed a sharp increase in the rate of tree establishment
beginning in ca. 1880, when the stem-density doubling interval
decreased from 85 yr to 45 yr. Expansion of trees into former
shrublands is occurring extensively on more productive, mesic
sites, along with infill of old woodlands on less-productive,
drier sites (Weisberg et al. 2007). However, there is geographic
variability in the initiation and rate of increase in density: for
example, across six woodland stands in the northern portion of
the Great Basin, tree age structures revealed a gradual shift
from substantial increases in pin˜on and junipers through the
middle 20th century to relatively limited establishment at the
end of the century (Miller et al. 2008).
Moving to the Colorado Plateau, age reconstructions in
northern Arizona document infill of persistent woodlands on
three common soil types (Landis and Bailey 2005). Infill of
persistent woodlands and wooded shrublands and expansion
of pin˜on and juniper into shrublands is also occurring locally
on portions of the Uncompahgre Plateau and Mesa Verde in
southwestern Colorado (Eisenhart 2004; Floyd et al. 2004;
Shinneman and Baker 2009). Most of the infill on the
Uncompahgre Plateau is by P. edulis (Shinneman and Baker
2009). Despite the local occurrence of infill and expansion in
this region, net change in tree density and coverage at a broad
landscape level has been minimal (Manier et al. 2005).
Further
evidence
that
the
actual
change
in
vegetation
structure in this region has been relatively minor overall
comes from photographs of Mesa Verde taken in the late
1800s (e.g., Chapin 1892), which show dense woodlands
similar in appearance to those of today, and descriptions of
dense tree cover in written reports from the early 20th
century—e.g., Cary (1911):
A very dense growth of pinyon covers the Mesa Verde and practically
all the broken country from Montezuma County north to Mesa
County. A heavy and continuous belt is found on the lowest flanks of
all the mountains from the San Juans north to the Book Cliffs…. (p.
216)
Extensive infill of former savannas and expansion of trees
(especially J. monosperma) into former grasslands are well
documented in New Mexico and Arizona by written and oral
accounts (Leopold 1924, 1951), by aerial and ground-based
repeat photography (e.g., Sallach 1986; Miller 1999; Fuchs
2002), and by tree age structure analyses (Jacobs et al. 2008).
For example, a comparison of aerial photos of a southwestern
New Mexico study area revealed that former grasslands and
juniper savannas had been largely replaced by relatively dense
stands of J. deppeana, such that forests and woodlands
having . 40% tree canopy cover comprised , 50% of the
62(3) May 2009
213

landscape in 1935 but had risen to . 80% by 1991 (Miller
1999).
An
important
management
question
is
whether
any
particular woodland on the landscape today has long been
occupied by trees—either as persistent woodland or savanna
or wooded shrubland—or represents a former grassland or
shrubland that has been converted to woodland via tree
expansion during the past 150 yr. A variety of methods is
available for answering this question, although each method
has
inherent
limitations. Aerial-based
and ground-based
repeat photography is a powerful tool if available, but we
lack historic photo coverage for much of the West. Visual and
rephotographic sources also have limited ability to distinguish
among changes in tree density, tree size, and canopy cover.
For instance, resampling of permanent plots showed that a
visually apparent increase in tree cover did not represent a
substantial density increase, but primarily reflected enlarging
of tree canopies as trees age (Ffolliott and Gottfried 2002).
Age structure analysis based on tree rings also provides
powerful insights into stand history, although this method is
expensive and time-intensive. An age structure composed
entirely of young trees, coupled with an absence of large dead
boles, stumps, or other evidence of past disturbance by fire or
wood harvest, indicates that a site was not wooded for at least
a few centuries before the establishment of the extant trees
(Jacobs et al. 2008).
Data from both photos and tree rings are limited to only the
past one to several centuries because of the availability of the
technology and the gradual loss of older trees over time (the
‘‘fading record’’; Swetnam et al. 1999). A longer-term view of
vegetation change over centuries or millennia can be obtained
from pack rat (Neotoma spp. Say and Ord, 1825) middens,
which often contain plant materials collected and preserved
through millennia. It must be recognized, however, that midden
data indicate only the presence or absence of plant species; they
do not tell us much about abundance (Lyford et al. 2004).
Moreover, pack rats tend to collect vegetation in the rocky
areas around their nests, so middens may not reflect changes
occurring in areas far away from the rocks where some of the
most dramatic recent tree expansion appears in photographic
comparisons (Swetnam et al. 1999). One of the strongest forms
of evidence that a local area was persistently occupied by
grassland, shrub-grassland, or low-density savanna in the past
is the presence of a mollic epipedon, which typically develops
where grasses are a dominant vegetation component over long
periods. However, in some areas the upper soil horizons have
been entirely lost through previous erosion (sometimes as a
consequence of poor grazing practices), thus complicating
accurate soils interpretations (Romme et al. 2008).
A novel indicator of former sagebrush communities is the
presence of sage-grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus Bonaparte,
1827) leks. Some areas of current woodland are documented to
have supported sage-grouse populations in the late 1800s and
early 1900s. Sage-grouse hens renest in the same general
sagebrush-dominated areas year after year, and their mature
offspring do the same; colonization of new areas is slow (Dunn
and Braun 1985; Hanf et al. 1994; Connelly et al. 2004;
Schroeder and Robb 2004). Thus, documented past use by
sage-grouse in a woodland today is evidence that the woodland
has developed within a former sagebrush community.
Statement 6: Mechanisms for Increasing Density and Expansion
The mechanisms underlying increasing tree density in existing
pin˜on and juniper woodlands and the expansion of pin˜on and
juniper into grasslands and shrublands are not well understood
in most situations. Possible mechanisms include recovery from
past, severe disturbance; natural, ongoing, Holocene range
expansion; livestock grazing; fire exclusion; and effects of
climatic variability and rising atmospheric CO2. Fire exclusion
cannot be the principal mechanism in persistent woodlands
because fires were never frequent in these ecosystems, but in
general, there is much uncertainty about the ecological
processes driving tree-density increases in any particular
location. The evidence for and against each of these potential
mechanisms is evaluated in section III of this article.
Applicability and Confidence. The major ecological processes
that underlie documented increases in tree density probably
vary among geographic locations and types of pin˜on and
juniper vegetation and may also have varied during the course
of the past 150 yr. Although local ecological history and
mechanisms of change have been well documented in some
areas, for most locations the relative importance of the
potential drivers of increasing tree density is unknown.
Rigorous testing of the potential mechanisms discussed in
section III of this article should be a high-priority topic for
research.
III: EVALUATING THE MECHANISMS OF
INFILL AND EXPANSION
A pattern of increasing tree density in many persistent
woodlands, savannas, and wooded shrublands and of tree
expansion into many former grasslands and shrublands, is
well documented (statement 5 in section II, above). However,
the mechanisms driving these changes are unclear. This is an
important issue, because infill and expansion are often
attributed primarily to effects of fire exclusion; consequently
vegetation treatments designed to reduce or eliminate pin˜ons
and junipers are often justified in part by the assumption that
past and present land uses have produced ‘‘unnatural’’
increases
in
tree
density.
Although
this
assumption
is
probably correct in some situations, clearly, it is not correct
in all. For example, exclusion of low-severity surface fires
during the 20th century cannot be the primary reason for
infill of persistent woodlands, because low-severity fire was
never
frequent
in
these
ecosystems,
even
before
Euro-
American settlement (statement 1). Furthermore, in many
places, we can explain increasing tree density as recovery
from severe fire or anthropogenic clearing in the past or as
natural range expansion near the biogeographical limits of a
tree species. Therefore, we begin this section by reviewing
these two ‘‘normal’’ and relatively well-understood mecha-
nisms for increases in local tree density or extent (i.e.,
recovery from past severe disturbance and natural range
expansion).
But what is driving the infill of persistent woodlands,
savannas, and wooded shrublands, and expansion of pin˜on
and juniper into former grasslands and shrublands, in the many
places across the West, where there is no evidence of earlier
214
Rangeland Ecology & Management

severe fire or clearing and where infill and expansion are
occurring near the center of the species’ biogeographical
distributions? In the sections below, we evaluate the three
most cogent explanations that have been offered for these
patterns: 1) direct and indirect effects of livestock grazing, 2)
fire exclusion, and 3) effects of climatic variability and rising
atmospheric CO2. Surprisingly little empirical or experimental
evidence is available to support or refute any of these
hypotheses; most interpretations are based on logical inference.
Consequently, we cannot now come to any firm conclusions
about the mechanisms driving infill and expansion of pin˜on and
juniper in many locations. Nevertheless, we review existing
evidence and data gaps for each of these three hypotheses, and
we stress that this question is a high-priority research topic for
pin˜on–juniper vegetation in general.
Recovery From Past Severe Disturbance
Although fires are infrequent in most pin˜on and juniper
woodlands, large, severe fires do occur under some weather
conditions (Fig. 3), and recovery of the former woodland
structure requires many decades to centuries (e.g., Erdman
1970; Floyd et al. 2000, 2004). Evidence of a stand-replacing
fire will remain conspicuous for many decades or centuries in
the form of charred snags and downed wood. Thus, a stand of
young pin˜ons or junipers growing amidst charred juniper snags
and other forms of partially burned wood is not testimony to
undesirable effects of fire exclusion but simply represents
recovery from a past high-severity fire.
Similarly, many areas that were chained in the 1950s and
1960s now support dense stands of young pin˜ons or junipers
that can give the appearance of expansion into grasslands or
shrublands (e.g., Paulson and Baker 2006:143–146); however,
closer inspection often reveals windrows of large, dead tree
boles that were piled up during the chaining operation, along
with stumps and seeded nonnative grasses. Such a stand of
young trees does not represent abnormal expansion of trees
into nonwoodland habitats but is another example of natural
recovery from severe disturbance. Widespread harvest also
occurred during the Euro-American settlement era to provide
materials for fence posts, firewood, construction materials, and
charcoal to support the mining industry, e.g., in the Nevada
Great Basin, (Young and Budy 1979) and in territorial New
Mexico (Scurlock 1998:128–129). Sallach (1986) interpreted
20th century increases in tree density in many places in New
Mexico as recovery of preexisting woodlands following severe
human disturbance (wood-cutting and clearing for pasture
improvement) rather than infill or invasion of previously sparse
woodlands and grasslands. In some portions of the Southwest,
woodlands may still be recovering from centuries of defores-
tation and other land uses by prehistoric and historic Puebloan
peoples (Wyckoff 1977; Samuels and Betancourt 1982; Kohler
and Matthews 1988; Allen et al. 1998; Allen 2004:64–66;
Briggs et al. 2007).
Unfortunately, the extent, intensity, and specific locations of
historic and prehistoric fire, harvest, and clearing are not
generally well known. Nevertheless, particularly if a burned or
cleared stand was a persistent woodland, then local site
conditions are inherently favorable for trees, and we should
expect trees to reestablish naturally on the disturbed site.
Natural Range Expansion
The presence of young pin˜on and juniper trees near the species’
current geographical range limits may represent natural, long-
term change in biogeographical extent, rather than unnatural
expansion into nonwoodland habitats. Studies of subfossil
pollen deposits and pack rat middens reveal that many low-
elevation conifer species, including junipers, pin˜ons, and
ponderosa pine, have been expanding their ranges throughout
the Holocene (the past ,12 000 yr) from glacial refugia in the
Southwest and in northern Mexico. In response to increasing
temperatures and perhaps aided by moist periods, pin˜ons
expanded rapidly into the central and northern parts of the
western United States at the end of the Pleistocene (Betancourt
1987; Nowak et al. 1994; Swetnam et al. 1999; Wigand and
Rhode 2002), whereas junipers may have expanded with
increasing temperatures but during drier periods (Lyford et al.
2003).
This natural range expansion continues today. For example,
the northernmost P. edulis population in eastern Colorado,
near Fort Collins, has been present for only about 400–500 yr,
and pin˜on continues to increase and expand into adjacent shrub
and grassland communities (Betancourt et al. 1991). Similarly,
the northernmost outlier of P. edulis in northeastern Utah, at
Dutch John Mountain, was colonized as recently as the 1200s
(Gray et al. 2006). J. osteosperma has also been expanding its
range in Wyoming and in adjacent sites in Utah and Montana
for the past several thousand years, both at a regional scale by
moving into new mountain ranges and at local scales by
expanding populations where it was already established. In
fact, juniper populations in some parts of Wyoming may
represent the first generation of trees in these areas (Lyford et
al. 2003). In addition to latitudinal range expansions following
the Pleistocene, pin˜ons and junipers have moved to higher or
lower elevations in response to the climate changes that have
occurred during the Holocene; for example, woodlands in the
Great Basin have alternately expanded across large areas of the
landscape during favorable climatic periods and retreated to
smaller refuge areas during less-favorable periods (Miller and
Wigand 1994). Thus, some expansions (and contractions) of
pin˜ons and junipers represent the species’ responses to natural
processes, such as climate change, rather than a consequence of
land use or other human activities.
Unfortunately, not all of the specific locations where natural
biogeographic range expansion is occurring have been mapped.
Nevertheless, this mechanism should be considered in local site
evaluations, especially where a site is located near the margins
of the species’ range.
Direct Effects of Livestock Grazing
Extensive livestock grazing began in the late 1800s in many
parts of the western United States (Wooton 1908; Oliphant
1968; Dahms and Geils 1997; Scurlock 1998; Allen et al. 2002;
Hessburg and Agee 2003), and extensive infill and expansion of
pin˜on and juniper began at the same time in many areas (e.g.,
Miller and Rose 1999; Fuchs 2002; Landis and Bailey 2005;
C. D. Allen, unpublished data, 2008). The coincidence in time
between the onset of grazing and the increasing of tree density
suggests a direct cause–effect relationship. Two mechanisms
may be involved. First, heavy grazing may reduce herbaceous
62(3) May 2009
215

competition with tree seedlings and thereby enhance seedling
survival. Support for this mechanism comes from the Johnsen
(1962) report of markedly better growth of juvenile J.
monosperma in places where grass had been removed. Second,
heavy grazing often leads to an increase in density and cover of
shrubs, which may serve as ‘‘nurse plants’’ for tree seedlings
(Floyd 1982; Soule´ et al. 2004).
However, empirical evidence for or against the grazing
mechanism is sparse and mixed. Density of tree seedlings and
saplings (mostly P. edulis) was nearly three times greater in
grazed areas than in ungrazed reference sites on the Uncom-
pahgre Plateau in western Colorado (Shinneman and Baker
2009). In contrast, Harris et al. (2003) reported comparable
20th
century
increases
in
density
of
P.
edulis
and
J.
osteosperma in both grazed and ungrazed areas in a southern
Utah study site, and Burkhardt and Tisdale (1976) found no
relationship between range condition (reflecting past grazing
intensity) and rate of expansion by J. occidentalis in south-
western Idaho. A comparison of four minimally grazed sites
with nearby heavily grazed sites in central Oregon revealed
dramatic increases in canopy cover of J. occidentalis between
the 1960s and the 1990s in both the grazed and ungrazed areas.
Although the increase was greater in the grazed sites, the
dramatic rate of young tree establishment in long-ungrazed
sites led to the conclusion that grazing was not the major driver
for tree infill and expansion in the region (Knapp and Soule´
1996; Soule´ and Knapp 1999, 2000; Soule´ et al. 2003).
Observers often note anecdotally that lightly grazed areas
appear to contain as many young trees as heavily grazed areas,
e.g., in the northern Great Basin (R. F. Miller, personal
observation) and in south-central New Mexico (E. H. Fuchs,
personal communication, March 2007).
It is well known that grazing effects can be extremely
variable across different soil types within the same climatic
zone. For example, McAuliffe (2003) noted that grazed soil
types with shallow argillic horizons are much more resistant to
woody plant encroachment than are sites that promote deeper
infiltration, and Burkhardt and Tisdale (1976:481) commented
that physical soil characteristics appeared to influence juniper
establishment and growth more than vegetational characteris-
tics influenced by grazing. Moreover, the mechanistic relation-
ship
between
herbaceous
competition
and
tree
seedling
establishment has received little experimental testing beyond
the early Johnsen (1962) study.
Thus, we simply lack adequate empirical or experimental
information with which to confidently evaluate the importance
(or lack of importance) of the direct effects of livestock grazing
as a key mechanism driving tree infill and expansion during the
past 150 yr. However, the indirect effect of livestock grazing
may also have been important because sustained heavy grazing
reduces grasses and other herbaceous fuels, thus reducing fire
spread under both modal and extreme fire weather conditions
(Fig. 3). In some western ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer
forests, exclusion of low-severity fires has been a principal
mechanism driving tree density increases during the 20th
century (e.g., Allen et al. 2002; Hessburg and Agee 2003),
although, in other western ponderosa pine forests, the principal
mechanisms were 19th century fires, logging, and livestock
grazing, rather than fire exclusion (Baker et al. 2007). Thus, the
importance of this indirect effect of grazing hinges on the
importance of fire exclusion in driving infill and expansion of
pin˜ons and junipers (next section below).
Fire Exclusion
Fire exclusion cannot be the principal mechanism responsible
for infill of persistent woodlands because fires were never
frequent in these ecosystems (statements 1–3 in section II
above). However, a logical argument can be made that fire
exclusion since the mid-1800s is a primary cause of pin˜on and
juniper infill in savannas and wooded shrublands and of tree
expansion into former grasslands and shrublands. Southwest-
ern savannas and grasslands, in particular, often produce
continuous fine fuels conducive to frequent and wide-spreading
fires, and they occur in regions where wet/dry climatic cycles
are common. Thus, it is logical to hypothesize that historical
fires in these ecosystems were frequent enough to kill most of
the fire-intolerant pin˜ons and junipers that continually became
established among the fire-tolerant grasses. Fire behavior and
effects in wooded shrublands (especially those with tall shrubs)
differ from fire in savannas in that the shrub fuels typically
support higher flame lengths, greater heat release, and greater
likelihood of extensive tree mortality (Fig. 3), and postfire
recovery of the shrubs is often slower than recovery of burned
grasses. Nevertheless, in both kinds of ecosystems recurrent
fires may have maintained tree densities well below what could
potentially be supported by local climate and soils; higher-
density stands may have persisted only in relatively fire-safe
sites, such as on rocky outcrops or in rocky draws, where fire
spread or high-severity fire was inhibited. Support for the fire-
exclusion hypothesis comes from the extensive infill and
expansion that began to occur in many places in the late 19th
century, coincident with the onset of livestock grazing and the
resulting reduction in the frequency of extensive surface fires.
Grazing intensity was greatly reduced in most of the West after
1930, but effective governmental fire suppression began to be
more effective at about that time (Pyne 1982), and additional
land use changes—notably those resulting in fragmentation of
landscapes, including roads, buildings, and cleared fields—have
generally precluded the extensive fires that may have burned
before the late 19th century in many areas.
Although this interpretation is logical, it has a major
empirical shortcoming—namely, that the assumption of fre-
quent historical fires is unproven (even untested) in many areas.
In the relatively few fire history studies that have been
conducted in pin˜on and juniper vegetation, fire-scarred trees
(perhaps the most conclusive direct evidence of past fires) are
typically rare or absent (Baker and Shinneman 2004). There are
questions about how to interpret the paucity of fire-scarred
pin˜ons and junipers (see the research priorities section in
Romme et al. 2008), but a general lack of fire scars is consistent
with the idea that fires were actually infrequent in all or most
kinds of pin˜on and juniper vegetation in the past. If fire was in
fact infrequent in pin˜on and juniper vegetation before the late
1800s, then fire exclusion cannot be the major driver of tree
infill and expansion during the last 150 yr. Thus, we see that
two logical, but contradictory, interpretations can be made
about the historical role (or lack of a role) of fire in limiting
pin˜on and juniper infill and expansion. To critically evaluate
both interpretations, we need more spatially extensive empir-
216
Rangeland Ecology & Management

ical data on pin˜on–juniper fire history, especially in pin˜on and
juniper savannas where the hypothesis of historically frequent
fire is perhaps most compelling based on fuel structure and
climate.
In the absence of adequate empirical data, interpretations of
fire history are often based instead on anecdotal observations
and logical inference. There is also a tendency to import
observations from areas of very different biophysical conditions
and treat them as generalities when data are sparse. For
example, late 19th century fires in some desert grasslands of
southeastern Arizona are documented from newspaper ac-
counts (Bahre 1991:138–141), and it is also logically inferred
that fires must have been relatively frequent to prevent shrub
encroachment of some desert grasslands (McPherson 1995).
One might assume from this evidence that fire played a similar
role in desert grasslands, pin˜on and juniper savannas, and open
woodlands that have grassy understories, throughout much of
the Southwest. However, desert grasslands in Arizona differ in
composition and climate from those in New Mexico, and
grasslands at the edge of the Great Plains in eastern New
Mexico differ yet again. Moreover, Wright (1980:16) states
that the pre-1900 role of fire in grasslands of southern Arizona
and New Mexico is simply unknown and that fire was possibly
unimportant ecologically in at least some kinds of desert
grassland, e.g., black grama (Bouteloua eriopoda [Torr.] Torr.)
communities. We have a similarly inadequate understanding of
the (probably complex) ecological role of fire in pin˜on and
juniper savannas of Arizona and New Mexico.
A similar paucity of empirical fire history data plagues our
efforts to understand what is driving tree infill and expansion in
sagebrush-dominated communities and associated wooded
shrublands of the Great Basin and Colorado Plateau. Weisberg
et al. (2008) tested the hypothesis that old-growth woodlands
(predating the mid-1800s) in central Nevada were generally
absent from topographic sites having high probabilities of
burning and were largely restricted to sites with low probability
of burning. If true, this pattern would be consistent with the
idea that fire formerly limited trees to fire-safe locations and
that fire exclusion was a major driver of tree expansion into
nonwoodland vegetation types that formerly remained treeless
because of frequent fires. Although Weisberg et al. (2008)
found that old-growth stands were indeed more likely to occur
on sites determined to be of low fire risk, the relationships were
weak overall, and many old-growth stands were located on
sites of relatively high fire risk from a topographic perspective.
Thus, the study provided only somewhat ambiguous support
for the fire-exclusion hypothesis.
Following
another
line
of
investigation,
historical
fire
rotations (time required for cumulative area burned to equal
the size of the entire area of interest) in Wyoming big sagebrush
(Artemisia tridentata Nutt. subsp. wyomingensis Beetle &
Young) and little sagebrush (Artemisia arbuscula Nutt.), which
formed the matrix within which many of the woodland
communities existed, are estimated to have been 100–450 yr
(Baker 2006). With such long rotations, it would seem that fire
was not frequent enough historically to prevent extensive tree
establishment and that the long fire intervals observed during
the 20th century are not far outside the historical range of fire
intervals—all implying that fire exclusion cannot be the major
driver of pin˜on and juniper infill and expansion. However, the
sagebrush community is very heterogeneous, and a single,
broad characterization of historical fire rotations cannot
adequately convey the complex historical role of fire in these
ecosystems. For example, historical fire rotations were sub-
stantially shorter in the more mesic mountain big sagebrush
(Artemisia tridentata Nutt. subsp. vaseyana [Rydb.] Beetle)
communities than in the more xeric Wyoming big sagebrush
and little sagebrush communities (Miller and Rose 1999; Baker
2006), and conversion of shrubland to woodland can also
occur more rapidly (within only several decades) in the more
mesic habitats (Miller and Rose 1999; Johnson and Miller
2006)—suggesting
that
the
late
19th-
and
20th-century
reduction in fire frequency was in fact a major cause of tree
expansion in at least some shrublands.
In sum, we simply do not have adequate empirical data on
historical
fire
regimes
to
determine
how
important
(or
unimportant) fire exclusion has been in allowing infill and
expansion of pin˜on and juniper trees in savannas and wooded
shrublands across the West. Obtaining additional fire history
data is, therefore, a high research priority (Romme et al. 2008).
Effects of Climatic Variability and Rising CO2
The onset of extensive infill and expansion of pin˜on and juniper
in the late 19th century in many areas coincided not only with
the beginning of grazing and fire exclusion but also with a
significant climatic event, namely, the end of the Little Ice Age
and the beginning of a general warming trend with changes in
precipitation patterns that continued through the 20th century.
Many years in the early 1900s were notably wet throughout the
Southwest, and the last four decades of the 20th century were
among the wettest in the period of record (Gray et al. 2004).
Occupying, as they do, the transition zone between mesic
forests at higher elevations and environments too dry for trees
at
lower
elevations,
pin˜on–juniper
communities
may
be
especially sensitive to even subtle changes in temperature and
precipitation.
It is possible that some, or even much, of the infill and
expansion of pin˜on and juniper that has occurred during the
past 150 yr is a natural response to short-term and long-term
climatic fluctuation. Two long-term 20th century data sets
from desert and semidesert areas of southern New Mexico and
Arizona
reveal
that
relatively
high
winter
precipitation
generally favors woody plants over herbaceous species and
that specific periods of extensive shrub establishment coincided
with periods of wet winters (Neilson 1986; Brown et al. 1997).
These two studies focused primarily on expansion of shrubs,
not trees, but other studies demonstrate that recovery of
woodlands from drought may occur as a pulse of P. edulis
recruitment during the first wet period that follows the drought
(Swetnam et al. 1999; Gray et al. 2006; Shinneman and Baker
2009). For example, in two study areas on the Uncompahgre
Plateau in western Colorado, pin˜on abundance began increas-
ing in the late 1700s during a wet period that followed a long
dry period (Eisenhart 2004; Shinneman and Baker 2009). Tree
infill and expansion in this area thus began more than half a
century before arrival of Euro-American settlers and associated
effects of livestock grazing and fire exclusion. In the 20th
century, there were two very wet periods in the Southwest—
during the first two decades of the century and the period from
62(3) May 2009
217

the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s (Swetnam and Betancourt
1998). These are both periods when many pin˜on trees became
established in the region (e.g., Floyd et al. 2004).
Additional support for the climate hypothesis comes from
observations of recent contraction, as well as expansion, of
pin˜on and juniper woodlands. Although much of the 20th
century was apparently favorable for tree establishment and
survival,
extensive
P.
edulis
mortality
occurred
in
the
Southwest during severe droughts of the 1950s and from the
mid-1990s through the early 2000s (statement 2 in section II
above).
Extensive recruitment of J. occidentalis that began in Oregon
during the late 1800s and early 1900s also coincided with a
climatically favorable period of relatively high winter precip-
itation (Soule´ et al. 2004). Tree density and cover have
continued to increase throughout the 20th century in this
region, both on grazed and ungrazed sites (Soule´ et al. 2003,
2004). During the late 20th and early 21st centuries, however,
radial growth rates of J. occidentalis have increased more than
would
be
predicted
from
climate
variables
alone,
with
exceptional growth rates during both wet and dry periods
(Knapp et al. 2001). Predictions of ring growth during the past
100 yr were improved in regression models that included global
atmospheric CO2 concentration in addition to precipitation
and temperature (Knapp and Soule´ 2008). These results are
consistent with a CO2 fertilization effect that may be enhancing
the processes of tree infill and expansion throughout the West.
Elevated
CO2
in
experimental
settings
often
results
in
proliferation of fine roots, increased instantaneous transpira-
tion efficiency and water use efficiency, and decreased stomatal
conductance, all of which potentially could make plants more
resistant to drought and enhance growth rates under dry
conditions (Wullschleger et al. 2002).
A major shortcoming of the climate hypothesis is that the
evidence is mostly correlative, with limited experimental data
with which to evaluate the specific mechanisms by which
pin˜ons and junipers respond to specific climatic changes.
Although research to date has demonstrated some important
physiological differences among the major pin˜on and juniper
species (e.g., Moore et al. 1999; Nowak et al. 1999), we have
barely begun to assess the species’ ecophysiology within the
context of climate change and rising CO2. For example,
Wullschleger et al. (2002) emphasize that there is much
uncertainty about the mechanisms by which increased atmo-
spheric CO2 might alter water relations and growth and about
the significance of these changes for total plant growth and
survival. We also have a poor understanding of how climatic
variability influences growth and abundance of the herbaceous
component of pin˜on and juniper vegetation, notably grasses,
which in turn influence fuel structure and potential fire
behavior.
Summary of Potential Mechanisms Driving Tree Infill
and Expansion
It is widely assumed that infill and expansion of pin˜on and
juniper represent primarily an ‘‘unnatural’’ consequence of
human land use, in particular the effects of fire exclusion. It is
important to stress, however, that human land use in the
western United States since the mid to late 1800s has occurred
against a backdrop of climatic and natural disturbance-driven
fluctuations in tree establishment and survival. All of these
processes interact, and the relative importance of each (e.g.,
direct grazing impacts vs. fire exclusion vs. climatic fluctuation
vs. CO2 fertilization) probably varies spatially and temporally
across
the
vast
expanse
of
heterogeneous
environments
occupied by pin˜on and juniper vegetation. Soule´ et al. (2004)
suggest that the early pulse of J. occidentalis establishment in
Oregon during the late 19th and early 20th centuries was
driven primarily by favorable climatic conditions, grazing
effects, and fire exclusion, whereas the late 20th century
increase in tree cover and density has been primarily a response
to elevated atmospheric CO2 and biological inertia (the
increase in seed production as trees that established earlier in
the century reach reproductive age and greater size). Similar
changes over time in the dominant mechanisms may be
important in other regions and for other pin˜on and juniper
species. The upshot is that simplistic and overgeneralized
explanations of the processes driving infill and expansion
should be avoided, and new research is urgently needed to
disentangle the relative effects of the various mechanisms
underlying pin˜on and juniper infill and expansion in different
ecoregions throughout the western United States during various
segments of the past 150 yr (Romme et al. 2008).
IMPLICATIONS
Effective management of pin˜on and juniper vegetation has been
hindered by inadequate understanding of the basic ecology of
these ecosystems, notably 1) the variability in ecosystem
structure and processes that exists among the diverse combi-
nations of pin˜ons, junipers, and associated shrubs, herbs, and
soil organisms throughout this extensive vegetation type; 2)
prehistoric and historic disturbance regimes; and 3) mecha-
nisms driving recent changes in vegetation structure and
composition. This article summarizes what we currently know
(and don’t know) about three fundamentally different kinds of
pin˜on–juniper
vegetation—persistent
woodlands,
savannas,
and wooded shrublands. Historical structure and disturbance
regimes are perhaps best understood for persistent woodlands,
although the geographic distribution of such woodlands is
uncertain, especially in New Mexico and Arizona. In contrast,
historical disturbance regimes in pin˜on–juniper savannas are
the least well understood of the three pin˜on–juniper types.
Dramatic tree expansion and infill have occurred during the
past 150 yr in portions of all three types of pin˜on–juniper
vegetation, although equally dramatic mortality events have
also occurred recently in some areas. The potential mechanisms
driving increases in tree density—notably recovery from past
disturbance, natural range expansion, livestock grazing, fire
exclusion, climatic variability, and elevated atmospheric CO2—
generally have not received enough empirical or experimental
investigation to predict which is most important in any given
location. We recommend that land managers, practitioners,
and policy makers rely primarily on this article’s statements of
high
confidence
and
broad
applicability
in
formulating
management plans and priorities, and we encourage researchers
to conduct new studies to critically test the statements of
moderate or low confidence and generality. In particular, we
218
Rangeland Ecology & Management

encourage
collaboration
between
research
scientists
and
managers in current and upcoming pin˜on–juniper treatments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We appreciate the encouragement and advice given by Ayn Shlisky, Mike
Babler, Anne Bradley, and Lynn Decker of The Nature Conservancy and by
Dan Binkley of Colorado Forest Restoration Institute throughout the
process of preparing the article. We also appreciate the field trips and
discussions about New Mexico’s pin˜on–juniper vegetation with Hollis
Fuchs, Sid Goodloe, and Steven Yanoff.
LITERATURE CITED
ALLEN, C. D. 1989. Changes in the landscape of the Jemez Mountains, New Mexico.
[dissertation]. Berkeley, CA, USA: University of California. 346 p.
ALLEN, C. D. 2004. Ecological patterns and environmental change in the Bandelier
landscape. In: T. A. Kohler [ED.]. Village formation on the Pajarito Plateau, New
Mexico: archaeology of Bandelier National Monument. Albuquerque, NM,
USA: University of New Mexico Press. p. 19–68.
ALLEN, C. D., J. L. BETANCOURT, AND T. W. SWETNAM. 1998. Landscape changes in the
southwestern United States: techniques, long-term data sets, and trends. In:
T.
D.
Sisk
[ED.].
Perspectives
on
the
land
use
history
of
North
America: a context for understanding our changing environment. Reston,
VA, USA: US Geological Survey, Biological Science Report USGS/BRD/BSR-
1998-0003. p. 71–84.
ALLEN, C. D., M. SAVAGE, D. A. FALK, K. F. SUCKLING, T. W. SWETNAM, T. SCHULKE,
P. B. STACEY, P. MORGAN, M. HOFFMAN, AND J. T. KLINGEL. 2002. Ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective.
Ecological Applications 12:1418–1433.
BAHRE, C. J. 1991. A legacy of change: historic human impact on vegetation in the
Arizona Borderlands. Tucson, AZ, USA: University of Arizona Press. 231 p.
BAKER, W. L. 2006. Fire and restoration of sagebrush ecosystems. Wildlife Society
Bulletin 34:177–186.
BAKER, W. L., AND D. J. SHINNEMAN. 2004. Fire and restoration of pinyon-juniper
woodlands in the western United States: a review. Forest Ecology and
Management 189:1–21.
BAKER, W. L., T. T. VEBLEN, AND R. L. SHERRIFF. 2007. Fire, fuels and restoration of
ponderosa pine—Douglas fir forests in the Rocky Mountains, USA. Journal of
Biogeography 34:251–269.
BAUER, J. 2006. Fire history and stand structure of a central Nevada pinyon-juniper
woodland [thesis]. Reno, NV, USA: University of Nevada, Reno. 143 p.
BETANCOURT, J. L. 1987. Paleoecology of pinyon-juniper woodlands: summary. In:
R. L. Everett [ED.]. Proceedings—Pinyon-Juniper Conference; 13–16 January 1986;
Reno, NV, USA. Ogden, UT, USA: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Intermountain Research Station, General Technical Report INT-215. p. 129–139.
BETANCOURT, J. L., E. A. PIERSON, K. AASEN-RYLANDER, J. A. FAIRCHILD-PARKS, AND
J. S. DEAN. 1993. Influence of history and climate on New Mexico pinyon-
juniper woodlands. In: E. F. Aldron and D. W. Shaw [EDS.]. Managing pinyon-
juniper ecosystems for sustainability and social needs: proceedings of the
symposium; 26–30 April 1993; Santa Fe, NM, USA. Washington, DC, USA: US
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, General Technical Report RM-236.
p. 42–62.
BETANCOURT, J. L., W. S. SCHUSTER, J. B. MITTON, AND R. S. ANDERSON. 1991. Fossil and
genetic history of a pinyon pine (Pinus edulis) isolate. Ecology 72:1685–1697.
BRESHEARS, D. D., N. S. COBB, P. M. RICH, K. P. PRICE, C. D. ALLEN, R. G. BALICE,
W. H. ROMME, J. H. KASTENS, M. L. FLOYD, J. BELNAP, J. J. ANDERSON, O. B. MYERS,
AND C. W. MEYER. 2005. Regional vegetation die-off in response to global-
change-type drought. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
102(42):15144–15148.
BRIGGS, J. M., H. SCHAAFSMA, AND D. TRENKOV. 2007. Woody vegetation expansion in a
desert grassland: prehistoric human impact? Journal of Arid Environments
69:458–472.
BROWN, J. H., T. J. VALONE, AND C. G. CURTIN. 1997. Reorganization of an arid
ecosystem in response to recent climate change. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 94(18):9729–9733.
BROWN, P. M., M. W. KAYE, L. S. HUCKABY, AND C. H. BAISAN. 2001. Fire history
along
environmental
gradients
in
the
Sacramento
Mountains,
New
Mexico: influences of local patterns and regional processes. Ecoscience
8:115–126.
BURKHARDT, J. T.,
AND E. W. TISDALE. 1976. Causes of juniper invasion in
southwestern Idaho. Ecology 57:472–484.
CAMP, A., H. M. POULOS, R. GATEWOOD, J. SIROTNAK, AND J. KARGES. 2006. Assessment
of top down and bottom up controls on fire regimes and vegetation abundance
and distribution patterns in the Chihuahuan Desert Borderlands: a hierarchical
approach—unpublished final report to the Joint Fire Sciences Program,
Project 03-3-3-13. New Haven, CT, USA: Yale University. 77 p.
CARY, M. 1911. A biological survey of Colorado. Washington. DC, USA: US
Department of Agriculture Bureau of Biological Survey, North American Fauna
Series 33. 256 p.
CHAPIN, F. H. 1892. The land of the cliff-dwellers. Boston, MA, USA: W.B. Clark and
Co. for Appalachian Mountain Club, Reprinted in 1988. Tucson, AZ, USA:
University of Arizona Press. 188 p.
CONNELLY, J. W., S. T. KNICK, M. A. SCHROEDER, AND S. J. STIVER. 2004. Conservation
assessment of the great sage-grouse and sagebrush habitats. Cheyenne, WY,
USA: Western Association of Western Wildlife Agencies. 610 p. Available at:
http://gf.state.wy.us/downloads/pdf/GreaterSGConservationAssessment.pdf.
Accessed 12 April 2009.
DAHMS, C. W., AND B. W. GEILS (TECH EDS.). 1997. An assessment of forest ecosystem
health in the Southwest. Washington, DC, USA: US Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, General. 2002. Technical Report RM-GTR-295. 97 p.
DUNN, P. O., AND C. E. BRAUN. 1985. Natal dispersal and lek fidelity of sage grouse.
Auk 102:621–627.
EISENHART, K. S. 2004. Historic range of variability and stand development in
pin˜on–juniper woodlands of western Colorado [dissertation]. Boulder, CO,
USA: University of Colorado, Boulder. 255 p.
ERDMAN, J. A. 1970. Pinyon-juniper succession after natural fires on residual soils
of Mesa Verde, Colorado. Brigham Young University Science Bulletin.
Biological Series 11(2):1–26.
FFOLLIOTT, P. F., AND G. J. GOTTFRI Dynamics of a pinyon-juniper stand in northern
Arizona: a half-century history. Fort Collins, CO, USA: US Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Research
Paper RMRS-RP-35. 12 p.
FLOYD, M. E. 1982. Interaction of pin˜on pine and Quercus gambelii in succession
near Dolores, Colorado. Southwestern Naturalist 27:143–147.
FLOYD, M. L., M. COLYER, D. D. HANNA, AND W. H. ROMME. 2003. Gnarly old trees:
canopy characteristics of old-growth pin˜on–juniper woodlands. In: M. L. Floyd
[ED.]. Ancient pin˜on–juniper woodlands. Boulder, CO, USA: University Press of
Colorado. p. 11–30.
FLOYD, M. L., D. D. HANNA, AND W. H. ROMME. 2004. Historical and recent fire
regimes in pin˜on–juniper woodlands on Mesa Verde, Colorado, USA. Forest
Ecology and Management 198:269–289.
FLOYD, M. L., W. H. ROMME, AND D. HANNA. 2000. Fire history and vegetation pattern
in Mesa Verde National Park. Ecological Applications 10:1666–1680.
FLOYD, M. L., W. H. ROMME, D. D. HANNA, M. WINTEROWD, D. HANNA, AND J. SPENCE.
2008. Fire history of pin˜on–juniper woodlands on Navajo Point, Glen Canyon
National Recreation Area. Natural Areas Journal 28(1):26–36.
FUCHS, E. H. 2002. Historic increases in woody vegetation in Lincoln County, New
Mexico. Albuquerque, NM, USA: Vanguard Printing Company. 115 p.
GEDNEY, D. R., D. L. AZUMA, C. L. BOLSINGER, AND N. MCKAY. 1999. Western juniper in
eastern Oregon. Portland, OR, USA: US Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, General Technical Report NW-GTR-464. 53 p.
GILLET, N. P., A. J. WEAVER, F. W. ZWIERS, AND M. D. FLANNIGAN. 2004. Detecting the
effect of climate change on Canadian forest fires. Geophysical Research
Letters 31(18):L18211, doi:10.1029/2004GL020876.
GIRARDIN, M. P. 2007. Interannual to decadal changes in area burned in Canada
from 1781–1982 and
the
relationship
to Northern Hemisphere land
temperatures. Global Ecology and Biogeography 16:557–566.
62(3) May 2009
219

GRAY, S. T., J. L. BETANCOURT, C. L. FASTIE, AND S. T. JACKSON. 2003. Patterns and
sources of multidecadal oscillations in drought-sensitive tree-ring records
from the central and southern Rocky Mountains. Geophysical Research
Letters 30(6):1316; 49-1–4.
GRAY, S. T., J. L. BETANCOURT, S. T. JACKSON, AND R. G. EDDY. 2006. Role of
multidecadal climate variability in a range extension of pinyon pine. Ecology
87:1124–1130.
GRAY, S. T., S. T. JACKSON,
AND J. L. BETANCOURT. 2004. Tree-ring based
reconstructions of interannual to decadal scale precipitation variability for
northeastern Utah since 1226 A.D. Journal of the American Water Resources
Association 40:947–960.
GREENWOOD, D. L., AND P. J. WEISBERG. 2008. Density-dependent tree mortality in
pinyon-juniper woodlands. Forest Ecology and Management 255:2129–2137.
HANF, J. M., P. A. SCHMIDT, AND E. B. GROSHENS. 1994. Sage grouse in the high desert
of central Oregon: results of a study, 1988–1993. Portland, OR, USA: US
Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, Prineville District.
67 p.
HARDY, C. C. 2005. Wildland fire hazard and risk: problems, definitions, and
context. Forest Ecology and Management 211:73–82.
HARRIS, A. T., G. P. ASNER, AND M. E. MILLER. 2003. Changes in vegetation structure
after long-term grazing in pinyon-juniper ecosystems: integrating imagery
spectroscopy and field studies. Ecosystems 6:368–383.
HESSBURG, P. F., AND J. K. AGEE. 2003. An environmental narrative of inland
northwest United States forests, 1800–2000. Forest Ecology and Management
178:23–59.
HUFFMAN, D. W., P. Z. FULE´, K. M. PEARSON, AND J. E. CROUSE. 2008. Fire history of
pinyon-juniper woodlands at upper ecotones with ponderosa pine forests
in
Arizona
and
New
Mexico.
Canadian
Journal
of
Forest
Research
38:2097–2108.
JACOBS, B. F. 2008. Southwestern US juniper savanna and pin˜on–juniper woodland
communities: ecological history and natural range of variability. In: G. J.
Gottfried, J. D. Shaw, and P. L. Ford [COMPS.]. Ecology, management, and
restoration of pinyon-juniper and ponderosa pine ecosystems: combined
proceedings of the 2005 St. George, Utah, and 2006 Albuquerque, New
Mexico, Workshops. Fort Collins, CO, USA: US Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Proceedings RMRS-P-51 p. 11–19.
JACOBS, B. F., W. H. ROMME, AND C. D. ALLEN. 2008. Mapping old versus young
pin˜on–juniper stands with a predictive topo-climatic model in north-central
New Mexico, USA. Ecological Applications 18:1627–1641.
JOHNSEN, T. N. 1962. One-seed juniper invasion of northern Arizona grasslands.
Ecological Monographs 32:187–207.
JOHNSON, D. D., AND R. F. MILLER. 2006. Structure and development of expanding
western juniper woodlands as influenced by two topographic variables. Forest
Ecology and Management 229:7–15.
JOHNSON, D. D., AND R. F. MILLER. 2007. Old-growth juniper: distribution, abundance,
and influence on post settlement expansion. Rangeland Ecology and
Management 61:82–92.
KEARNS, H. S. J., AND W. R. JACOBI. 2005. Impacts of black stain root disease in
recently formed mortality centers in the pin˜on–juniper woodlands of
southwestern Colorado. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35:461–471.
KNAPP, P. A. 1996. Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum L.) dominance in the Great Basin
desert: history, persistence, and influences of human activities. Global
Environmental Change 6:37–52.
KNAPP, P. A., AND P. T. SOULE´. 1996. Vegetation change and the role of atmospheric
CO2 enrichment on a relict site in central Oregon: 1960–1994. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers 86:387–411.
KNAPP, P. A., AND P. T. SOULE´. 1999. Geographical distribution of an 18th-century
heart rot outbreak in western juniper (Juniperus occidentalis var. occidentalis
Hook.). Journal of Arid Environments 41:247–256.
KNAPP, P. A., AND P. T. SOULE´. 2007. Trends in mid-latitude cyclone frequency and
occurrence during fire season in the Northern Rockies: 1900–2004.
Geophysical Research Letters 34:L20707, doi:10.1029/2007GL031216.
KNAPP, P. A., AND P. T. SOULE´. 2008. Use of atmospheric CO2-sensitive trees may
influence dendroclimatic reconstructions. Geophysical Research Letters
35:L24703, doi:10.1029/2008GL035664.
KNAPP, P. A., P. T. SOULE´, AND H. D. GRISSINO-MAYER. 2001. Detecting potential
regional effects of increased atmospheric CO2 on growth rates of western
juniper. Global Change Biology 7:903–917.
KOHLER, T. A., AND M. A. MATTHEWS. 1988. Long-term Anasazi land use and forest
reduction: a case study from southwest Colorado. American Antiquity
53:537–564.
LANDIS, A. G., AND J. D. BAILEY. 2005. Reconstruction of age structure and spatial
arrangement of pin˜on–juniper woodlands and savannas of Anderson Mesa,
northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 204:221–236.
LEOPOLD, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and fire in southern Arizona. Journal of
Forestry 22:2–10.
LEOPOLD, L. 1951. Vegetation of southwestern watersheds in the nineteenth
century. Geographical Review 41(2):295–316.
LITTLE, E. L., JR. 1971. Atlas of United States trees, conifers and important
hardwoods—volume 1: conifers and important hardwoods. Washington, DC,
USA: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Miscellaneous Publica-
tions 1146. 400 p.
LYFORD, M. E., S. T. JACKSON, J. L. BETANCOURT, AND S. T. GRAY. 2003. Influence of
landscape structure and climate variability on a late Holocene plant migration.
Ecological Monographs 73:567–583.
LYFORD, M. E., S. T. JACKSON, S. T. GRAY, AND R. G. EDDY. 2004. Validating the use of
woodrat (Neotoma) middens for documenting natural invasions. Journal of
Biogeography 31:333–342.
MANIER, D. J., N. T. HOBBS, D. M. THEOBOLD, R. M. REICH, M. A. KALKHAN, AND M. R. CAMPBELL.
2005. Canopy dynamics and human caused disturbance on a semi-arid landscape
in the Rocky Mountains, USA. Landscape Ecology 20:1–17.
MCAULIFFE, J. R. 2003. The interface between precipitation and vegetation: the
importance of soils in arid and semiarid environments. In: J. F. Weltzin and
G. R. McPherson
[EDS.]. Changing precipitation regimes and terrestrial
ecosystems: a North American perspective. Tucson, AZ, USA: University of
Arizona Press. p. 9–27.
MCPHERSON, G. R. 1995. The role of fire. In: M. P. McClaran and T. R. Van Devender
[EDS.]. The desert grassland. Tucson, AZ, USA: University of Arizona Press. p.
130–151.
MILLAR, C. I., N. L. STEPHENSON, AND S. L. STEPHENS. 2007. Climate change and forests
of the future: managing in the face of uncertainty. Ecological Applications
17:2145–2151.
MILLER, M. E. 1999. Use of historic aerial photography to study vegetation change
in the Negrito Creek watershed, southwestern New Mexico. Southwestern
Naturalist 44:121–131.
MILLER, R. F., J. D. BATES, T. J. SVEJCAR, F. B. PIERSON, AND L. E. EDDLEMAN. 2005. Biology,
ecology, and management of western juniper. Corvallis, OR, USA: Oregon State
University, Agricultural Experiment Station, Technical Bulletin 152. 77 p.
MILLER, R. F., AND J. A. ROSE. 1999. Fire history and western juniper encroachment
in sagebrush steppe. Journal of Range Management 52:550–559.
MILLER, R. F., AND R. J. TAUSCH. 2001. The role of fire in juniper and pinyon
woodlands: a descriptive analysis. In: K. M. Galley and T. P. Wilson [EDS.].
Proceedings of the Invasive Species Workshop: the role of fire in the control
and spread of invasive species—Fire Conference 2000: The First National
Congress on Fire Ecology, Prevention, and Management; 27 November–1
December 2000; San Diego, CA, USA. Tallahassee, FL, USA: Tall Timbers
Research Station, Miscellaneous Publication 11. p. 15–30.
MILLER, R. F., R. J. TAUSCH, E. D. MCARTHUR, D. J. JOHNSON, AND S. C. SANDERSON.
2008. Age structure and expansion of pin˜on–juniper woodlands: a regional
perspective in the Intermountain West. Fort Collins, CO, USA: US Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Research
Paper RMRS-RP-69. 15 p.
MILLER, R. F., AND P. E. WIGAND. 1994. Holocene changes in semiarid pinyon-juniper
woodlands. BioScience 44:465–476.
MITCHELL, V. 1976. The regionalization of climate in the western United States.
Journal of Applied Meteorology 15:920–927.
MOORE, D. J., R. S. NOWAK, AND R. J. TAUSCH. 1999. Gas exchange and carbon
isotope discrimination of Juniperus osteosperma and Juniperus occidentalis
across environmental gradients in the Great Basin of western North America.
Tree Physiology 19:421–433.
220
Rangeland Ecology & Management

MORINO, K., C. H. BAISAN, AND T. W. SWETNAM. 1998. Expanded fire regime studies in
the Jemez Mountains, New Mexico. Los Alamos, NM, USA: National Biological
Service, Bandelier National Monument, Final Report. 94 p. (Unpublished
report on file at US Geological Survey.)
MUELLER, R. C., C. M. SCUDDER, M. E. PORTER, R. T. TROTTER, III, C. A. GEHRING, AND
T. G. WHITHAM. 2005. Differential tree mortality in response to severe drought:
evidence for long-term vegetation shifts. Journal of Ecology 93:1365–
2745.
MULDAVIN, E., C. BAISAN, T. SWETNAM, L. DELAY, AND K. MORINO. 2003. Woodland fire
history studies in the Oscura and northern San Andres Mountains, White
Sands Missile Range, New Mexico: final report to White Sands Missile Range.
White Sands Missile Range, NM, USA: WSMR Document 92F018. 35 p.
NEILSON, R. P. 1986. High-resolution climatic analysis and southwest biogeogra-
phy. Science 232(4746):27–34.
NI, F., T. CAVAZOS, M. K. HUGHES, A. C. COMRIE, AND G. FUNKHOUSER. 2002. Cool-season
precipitation in the southwestern USA since AD 1000: comparison of linear
and
nonlinear techniques for
reconstruction. International
Journal of
Climatology 22:1645–1662.
NOWAK, C. L., R. S. NOWAK, R. J. TAUSCH, AND P. E. WIGAND. 1994. Tree and shrub
dynamics in northwestern Great Basin woodland and shrub steppe during the
Late-Pleistocene and Holocene. American Journal of Botany 81:265–277.
NOWAK, R. S., D. J. MOORE, AND R. J. TAUSCH. 1999. Ecophysiological patterns of
pinyon and juniper. In: S. B. Monsen, R. Stevens, R. J. Tausch, R. Miller, and
S. Goodrich [EDS.]. Proceedings of Ecology and Management of Pinyon-
Juniper Communities within the Interior West; 15–18 September 1997; Provo,
UT, USA. Ogden, UT, USA: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.
Proceedings RMRS-P-9. p. 35–46.
OLIPHANT, J. O. 1968. On the cattle ranges of the Oregon country. Seattle, WA, USA:
University of Washington Press. 372 p.
PAULSON, D. D., AND W. L. BAKER. 2006. The nature of southwestern Colorado.
Boulder, CO, USA: University Press of Colorado. 386 p.
PYNE, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: a cultural history of wildland and rural fire.
Princeton, NJ. USA: Princeton University Press. 654 p.
RAMSEY, D. 2003. Soils of Mesa Verde country. In: M. L. Floyd [ED.]. Ancient pin˜on–
juniper woodlands. Boulder, CO, USA: University Press of Colorado. p.
213–222.
REED, J. R. 2006. A note on fire frequency and definitions. Canadian Journal of
Forest Research 36:1884–1888.
ROMME, W., C. ALLEN, J. BAILEY, W. BAKER, B. BESTELMEYER, P. BROWN, K. EISENHART,
L. FLOYD-HANNA, D. HUFFMAN, B. JACOBS, R. MILLER, E. MULDAVIN, T. SWETNAM,
R. TAUSCH, AND P. WEISBERG. 2007. Historical and modern disturbance regimes
of pin˜on–juniper vegetation in the western US. Tallahassee, FL, USA: Nature
Conservancy, Fire Learning Network. 13 p. [a short version of Romme et al.
2008]
ROMME, W., C. ALLEN, J. BAILEY, W. BAKER, B. BESTELMEYER, P. BROWN, K. EISENHART,
L. FLOYD-HANNA, D. HUFFMAN, B. JACOBS, R. MILLER, E. MULDAVIN, T. SWETNAM,
R. TAUSCH, AND P. WEISBERG. 2008. Historical and modern disturbance regimes
of pin˜on–juniper vegetation in the western US. Fort Collins, CO, USA: Colorado
Forest Restoration Institute, Colorado State University. 27 p. Available at:
http://www.cfri.colostate.edu/.
SALLACH, B. K. 1986. Vegetation changes in New Mexico documented by repeat
photography [thesis]. Las Cruces, NM, USA: New Mexico State University.
68 p.
SAMUELS, M. L., AND J. L. BETANCOURT. 1982. Modeling the long-term effects of
fuelwood harvests on pinyon-juniper woodlands. Environmental Management
6:505–515.
SCHMIDT, K. M., J. P. MENAKIS, C. C. HARDY, W. J. HANN, AND D. L. BUNNELL. 2002.
Development of coarse-scale spatial data for wildland fire and fuel
management. Washington, DC, USA: US Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, General Technical Report RMRS-87. 41 p.
SCHOENNAGEL, T., T. T. VEBLEN, AND W. H. ROMME. 2004. The interaction of fire, fuels,
and climate across Rocky Mountain forests. BioScience 54:661–676.
SCHROEDER, M. A.,
AND L. A. ROBB. 2004. Fidelity of greater sage-grouse
Centrocercus urophasianus to breeding areas in a fragmented landscape.
Wildlife Biology 9:291–299.
SCURLOCK, D. 1998. From the Rio to the Sierra: an environmental history of
the Middle Rio Grande Basin. Washington, DC, USA: US Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-5. 440 p.
SELBY, D. 2005. Assessing pinyon pine mortality on the Uncompahgre Plateau in
western Colorado, USA [thesis]. Fort Collins, CO, USA: Colorado State
University. 79 p.
SHAW, J. D., B. E. STEED, AND L. T. DEBLANDER. 2005. Forest inventory and analysis
(FIA) annual inventory answers the question: what is happening to pinyon-
juniper woodlands? Journal of Forestry 103(6):280–285.
SHINNEMAN, D. J., AND W. L. BAKER. 2009. Historical fire and multidecadal drought as
context for pin˜on–juniper woodland restoration in western Colorado.
Ecological Applications (in press).
SOULE´,
P.
T.,
AND
P.
A.
KNAPP.
1999.
Western
juniper
expansion
on
adjacent disturbed and near-relict sites. Journal of Range Management
52:525–533.
SOULE´, P. T., AND P. A. KNAPP. 2000. Juniperus occidentalis (western juniper)
establishment history on two minimally disturbed research natural areas in
central Oregon. Western North American Naturalist 60:26–33.
SOULE´, P. T., AND P. A. KNAPP. 2007. Topoedaphic and morphological complexity of
foliar damage and mortality within western juniper (Juniperus occidentalis var.
occidentalis) woodlands following an extreme meteorological event. Journal
of Biogeography 34:1927–1937.
SOULE´, P. T., P. A. KNAPP, AND H. D. GRISSINO-MAYER. 2003. Comparative rates of
western juniper afforestation in south-central Oregon and the role of
anthropogenic disturbance. Professional Geographer 55:43–55.
SOULE´, P. T., P. A. KNAPP,
AND H. D. GRISSINO-MAYER. 2004. Human agency,
environmental drivers, and western juniper establishment during the late
Holocene. Ecological Applications 14:96–112.
SPRINGFIELD, H. W. 1976. Characteristics and management of southwestern
pinyon-juniper ranges: the status of our knowledge. Fort Collins, CO, USA:
US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Research Paper RM-160.
SWETNAM, T. W., C. D. ALLEN,
AND J. L. BETANCOURT. 1999. Applied historical
ecology: using the past to manage for the future. Ecological Applications
9:1189–1206.
SWETNAM, T. W., AND J. L. BETANCOURT. 1998. Mesoscale disturbance and ecological
response to decadal climatic variability in the American southwest. Journal of
Climate 11:3128–3147.
SWETNAM, T. W., AND P. M. BROWN. 1992. Oldest known conifers in the Southwestern
United States: temporal and spatial patterns of maximum age. In: M. R.
Kaufmann, W. H. Moir, and R. L. Basset [TECH. EDS.]. Old-growth forests in the
Southwest and Rocky Mountain regions, proceedings of a workshop; 9–11
March 1992; Portal, AZ, USA. Fort Collins, CO, USA: US Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, GTR-RM-213. p. 24–38.
WAICHLER, W. S., R. F. MILLER, AND P. S. DOESCHER. 2001. Community characteristics
of old-growth western juniper woodlands in the pumice zone of central
Oregon. Journal of Range Management 54:518–527.
WANGLER, M. J., AND R. A. MINNICH. 1996. Fire and succession in pinyon-juniper
woodlands
of
the
San
Bernardino
Mountains,
California.
Madron˜o
43:493–514.
WEISBERG, P. J., D. KO, C. PY, AND J. M. BAUER. 2008. Modeling fire and landform
influences on the distribution of old-growth pinyon-juniper woodland.
Landscape Ecology 23:931–943.
WEISBERG, P. J., E. LINGUA, AND R. B. PILLAI. 2007. Spatial patterns of pinyon-juniper
expansion
in
central
Nevada.
Rangeland
Ecology
and
Management
60:115–124.
WESTERLING, A. L., H. D. HIDALGO, D. R. CAYAN, AND T. W. SWETNAM. 2006. Warming
and earlier spring increase western US forest wildfire activity. Science
313:940–943.
WHISENANT, S. G. 1990. Changing fire frequencies on Idaho’s Snake River Plains:
ecological and management implications. In: E. D. McArthur, E. M. Romney,
S. D. Smith, and P. T. Tueller [COMPS.]. Proceedings of the Symposium on
Cheatgrass Invasion, Shrub Die-Off, and Other Aspects of Shrub Biology and
Management; 5–7 April 1989; Las Vegas, NV, USA. Ogden, UT, USA: US
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station,
General Technical Report INT-276. p. 4–10.
62(3) May 2009
221

WIGAND, P. E., AND D. RHODE. 2002. Great basin vegetation history and aquatic
systems: the last 150,000 years. In: R. Hershler, D. B. Madsen, and D. R. Currey
[EDS.]. Great Basin aquatic systems history. Washington, DC, USA: Smithsonian
Institution Press, Smithsonian contributions to earth sciences 33. p. 309–367.
WILKINSON, M. C. 1997. Reconstruction of historical fire regimes along an elevation
and vegetation gradient in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico. [thesis].
Tucson: AZ, USA: University of Arizona. 128 p.
WOOTON, E. O. 1908. The range problem in New Mexico. Las Cruces, NM, USA:
College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts (New Mexico State University),
Agriculture Experiment Station Bulletin 66. 46 p.
WRIGHT, H. A. 1980. The role and use of fire in the semidesert grassland type.
Ogden, UT, USA: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, General
Technical Report INT-85. 24 p.
WULLSCHLEGER, S. D., T. J. TSCHAPLINSKI, AND R. J. NORBY. 2002. Plant water relations
at elevated CO2—implications for water-limited environments. Plant, Cell and
Environment 25:319–331.
WYCKOFF, D. G. 1977. Secondary forest succession following abandonment of
Mesa Verde. Kiva 42(3–4):215–231.
YOUNG, J. A., AND J. D. BUDY. 1979. Historical use of Nevada’s pinyon-juniper
woodlands. Journal of Forest History 23:112–121.
222
Rangeland Ecology & Management
