The Irrationality of Continued Fire
Suppression: An Avoided Cost
Analysis of Fire Hazard Reduction
Treatments Versus No Treatment
Gary Snider, P.J. Daugherty, and D. Wood
Without large-scale implementation of ﬁre hazard reduction treatments, the costs of uncharacteristic
crown ﬁres in southwest forests will continue to increase. Federal policy continues to allocate vastly more
funds to suppression than to preﬁre hazard reduction. We examined the economic rationality of
continuing this policy of emphasizing ﬁre suppression activities over restoration-based ﬁre hazard
reduction treatments. We compared treatment plus ﬁre suppression costs to the cost of ﬁre suppression
without treatments over 40 years for southwestern forests. This avoided-cost analysis estimates the
amount one could invest in treatments to avoid the future cost of ﬁre suppression. Using conservative
economic values, we found that avoided future costs justiﬁes spending $238–601/ac for hazard
reduction treatments in the southwest. We conclude that the policy of underfunding hazard reduction
treatments does not represent rational economic behavior, because funding hazard reduction would pay
for itself by lowering future ﬁre suppression costs.
Keywords: economics, restoration, avoided cost, ﬁre, ﬁre hazard reduction
T
he history and culture of forest
ﬁres in the United States has been
chronicled and described by Pyne
(1982), Pyne et al. (1996), and Arno and
Allison-Bunnell (2002). In 1905, the Bu-
reau of Forestry became the USDA Forest
Service with the responsibility of protect-
ing newly designated forest reserves. A
critical part of its charge was the preven-
tion and control of ﬁres. In 1908, Con-
gress set up a system, “like an open check-
book,” that essentially authorizes deﬁcit,
unlimited expenditures for ﬁre suppres-
sion (Pyne et al. 1996, Arno and Allison-
Bunnell 2002). Subsequent to the ﬁres of
1910 the Forest Service embarked on a
campaign to “battle ﬁre to death” (Pyne
2004). Since that time the ﬁre suppression
checkbook has never run out of blank
checks and remains open to this day.
Although it has become increasingly
apparent that an ounce of presuppression ac-
tivity is worth a pound of suppression funds
(Pyne et al. 1996, Daugherty and Snider
2003) federal land-management agencies
continue to allocate vastly more funds to
suppression activities than to preﬁre hazard
reduction. To a large degree, the history and
institutional culture of management agen-
cies and a long-conditioned public have per-
petuated this policy of investing in the fur-
ther disruption of ﬁre cycles and the
continued depreciation of forest values. In
this article we examine the economic ratio-
nality of continuing this policy.
Historical practices starting with Euro-
pean settlers (e.g., overgrazing in the late
1800s, selective harvesting of large trees, and
ﬁre exclusion) have created vast areas of un-
healthy forest ecosystems in the southwest-
ern United States (Covington and Moore
1994). These practices have caused signiﬁ-
cant structural and functional changes in
southwestern ponderosa pine (PP) and dry
mixed-conifer (DMC) forests that include
unprecedented tree densities and fuel load-
ings and anomalous ﬁre regimes that are in-
consistent with the region’s evolutionary
history
(Covington
and
Moore
1994,
Dahms and Geils 1997). The overly dense
conditions, exacerbated by drought, have in-
creased bark beetle mortality and the size
and frequency of stand-replacing crown
ﬁres. These interconnected symptoms warn
society of the jeopardy of losing these forest
ecosystems. To avoid this loss, we must im-
plement large-scale restoration-based thin-
ning treatments designed to signiﬁcantly re-
duce tree densities, improve the cover,
composition and production of the herba-
ceous understory, and reintroduce ﬁre to its
normal disturbance regime (Fule et al.
2002), sooner rather than later.
Rieman et al. (2003) argued that we
need additional study as to the effects of res-
toration-based thinning treatments and the
use of ﬁre in management on organisms,
habitats, watersheds, and ecosystem pro-
cesses. Continued study and research is nec-
essary if we are to truly implement adaptive
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
431
A B S T R A C T
economics

management (AM); however, the tired
“more research is needed” mantra should
not be used as an excuse to forego large-scale
restoration-based fuel treatments. Hardy
(2005) notes that there is no possible single
metric capable of integrating all that must be
considered with respect to ﬁre hazard, and
Finney (2005) states that the calculations re-
quired to determine burn probabilities and
ﬁre behavior are computationally and prac-
tically impossible because of the nearly inﬁ-
nite sequences of weather and ignition tim-
ing and location.
The signiﬁcant gaps in our understand-
ing of probabilities and effects are not lim-
ited to ﬁre ecology and management. An
analogous situation exists in ﬁre economics.
Fairbrother and Turnley (2005) have argued
that without an understanding of the type,
likelihood, and magnitude of changes that
will result from ﬁre (uncharacteristic or con-
trolled burns) or conversely from the lack of
ﬁre, one can not quantify the risks, costs,
and beneﬁts associated with ﬁre manage-
ment activities. Kline (2004) describes the
typical steps in determining the expected
value of present net beneﬁts and the infor-
mation that would be required to make these
calculations. First, one must know the prob-
ability of an uncharacteristic wildﬁre occur-
ring at any given point in space and time
with and without treatment. This informa-
tion is not going to be available any time
soon. He further states that any attempt to
evaluate the net beneﬁts of fuel treatments
via cost-beneﬁt analysis would require such
information on everything from potential
changes in ﬁre severity and suppression costs
to effects on forest conditions and ecological
functions. This information must be sufﬁ-
cient to meet prevailing demands for scien-
tiﬁc quality in forest management and poli-
cymaking. He concludes that currently there
is insufﬁcient information and analysis to
determine whether or not investment in haz-
ardous fuel treatments represents a rational
economic choice. Conversely, the same lack
of information and analysis could have been
used to argue that we can not determine that
continuing the current policy represents a
rational choice, implying that a change in
policy requires rationality, while continua-
tion does not.
Although empirical precision and theo-
retical rigor improve the accuracy of cost-
beneﬁt analysis, obviously unattainable pre-
cision is unnecessary for policymaking.
Given the current conditions of PP and
DMC forests of the arid southwest and the
inevitability of future uncharacteristic large-
scale crown ﬁres, simple and relevant is pref-
erable to elegant and inexpedient. Although
we understand that the issue is not a simple
dichotomy between ﬁre suppression and
treatment, we argue that waiting for a com-
plete understanding of the social and ecolog-
ical complexities before taking signiﬁcant
action is folly.
A number of recent studies have asked
the question, How much are ﬁre hazard re-
duction treatments going to cost and can so-
ciety afford to pay for restoration-based
treatments? These studies examined the ﬁ-
nancial feasibility of implementing these
types of treatments (Lynch et al. 2000, Fied-
ler et al. 2002, Larson and Mirth 2004). In
general, these studies found it difﬁcult to
justify treatment expenditures based on the
value of the wood ﬁber removed by the treat-
ments. This conclusion suggests that resto-
ration-based fuel treatments must be consid-
ered an investment and would need to be
justiﬁed by the marginal beneﬁts/value pro-
vided by a healthy ecosystem. However, it is
possible we have been asking the wrong
question. Perhaps the question we should be
asking is, Can we afford not to implement res-
toration-based hazardous fuel reduction/thin-
ning treatment? In other words, will continu-
ing the current policy of emphasizing ﬁre
suppression cost society more than the alter-
native of investing in hazard reduction.
The ever-increasing cost of not doing
restoration-based hazard reduction treat-
ments suggests an approach for determining
the level of investment that avoids the afore-
mentioned described difﬁculties with cost-
beneﬁt analysis. One can set a conservative
lower bound on the amount to be invested
by setting hazard reduction funding at least
equal to the direct costs, such as ﬁre suppres-
sion, that would be avoided by invest-
ing—in other words, each dollar invested in
restoration-based hazard reduction would
save at least a dollar in suppression. This
study presents results of an economic analy-
sis comparing the cost of implementing res-
toration-based hazard reduction treatments
to no treatment for areas identiﬁed at high
risk for crown ﬁre. The with- and without-
treatment comparison focuses on PP and
DMC forest ecosystems in Arizona and New
Mexico (Forest Service Region 3). The anal-
ysis provides a conservative estimate of the
potential economic losses due to a continu-
ation of policies that emphasize suppression
over proactive restoration-based hazard re-
duction treatments.
Methods
We developed a relatively simple eco-
nomic analysis that compares the costs of
restoration-based hazard reduction treat-
ments to the costs of ﬁre suppression and
rehabilitation expected without treatment.
This avoided-cost approach answers the
question of how much can we invest in pre-
vention to avoid the continued cost of ﬁre
suppression and rehabilitation. The ap-
proach assumes that the cost avoided (ﬁre
suppression) by investment is otherwise un-
avoidable, which is clearly the case with
wildﬁre in the wildland-urban interface.
We used a 40-year time horizon for an-
alyzing costs and a 4% discount rate for con-
verting costs to PV. Annual suppression and
rehabilitation costs were discounted to the
present and summed to yield the present
value (PV) of costs without treatments. Haz-
ard reduction treatments were assumed to
have an initial cost (e.g., restoration thin-
ning and burning) plus maintenance costs
(e.g., prescribed ﬁre) that occurred every 10
years after the initial treatment. The with-
treatment PV was calculated as the sum of
the discounted costs of initial and mainte-
nance treatments and the discounted costs
of reduced ﬁre suppression and rehabilita-
tion. The net PV (NPV) of treatment was
determined using a “with” minus “without”
procedure: the PV without restoration-
based treatments was subtracted from the
PV with treatment to calculate the net value
of the treatment. This difference (NPV) be-
tween projected with- and without-treat-
ment costs represents a partial measure of
the economic value of these treatments, i.e.,
the net avoided cost due to treatment. We
determined break-even values by raising or
lowering the initial treatment cost per acre
until the NPV equaled zero. The break-even
value indicates the dollar per acre that could
be spent on treatment such that the PV of
the treatment costs is just covered by the PV
of avoided ﬁre suppression and rehabilita-
tion costs.
Study Area. The PP and DMC forests
of Arizona and New Mexico provide a good
application area for the analysis. These for-
ests have undergone important changes,
with two of the most important being sim-
pliﬁcation in structure and unprecedented
increased tree densities (from about 50
trees/ac to upward of a 1,000 trees/ac).
These conditions have resulted in increased
fuel and the existence of a continuous fuel
ladder. In 2002, there were 9,887,181 ac of
432
Journal of Forestry • December 2006

PP and DMC forests in Arizona and New
Mexico (Table 1). Over 90% of these forests
are at high (condition 3) or moderate (con-
dition class 2) risk of losing key ecosystem
components (Schmidt et al. 2002). It is not
possible to know exactly when, where, or the
size of a future ﬁre. We do know that given
the current condition of the PP and DMC
forests of the arid southwest, those areas at
high risk are going to burn.
Data and Model Assumptions. We set
the initial expected acres burned per year
without treatment at 443,307 ac. This ﬁgure
was based on the average annual ﬁre acreage
for ﬁres greater than 100 ac on state and
federal lands in Arizona and New Mexico
during the period 1993–2002 (National In-
teragency Fire Center [NIFC] 2003). The
443,307 ac represent approximately 4.5% of
the total acreage of PP and DMC forests in
Arizona and New Mexico. We assumed that
future ﬁre occurrence will be similar to that
experienced during that decade.
We computed the costs for suppres-
sion and rehabilitation as the average per
acre expenditure for large ﬁres (greater
than 100 ac) on public lands for which the
Forest Service provided suppression sup-
port during the period 1993–2002 (Ge-
bert 2003). All costs were converted into
2002 dollars. We only included variable
costs directly associated with large ﬁres.
We did not include ﬁxed costs of pre-
paredness. During this period Forest Ser-
vice Region 3 spent an average of $377/ac
per year on suppression for large ﬁres. The
$377/ac ﬁre suppression cost is slightly
less than the $387/ac ﬁgure reported by
Donovan and Noordijk (2005). They
spent an additional $22/ac per year on
emergency rehabilitation, which only cov-
ers emergency measures to control ero-
sion/sedimentation and only occurs on a
limited number of acres. Rehabilitation
does not include reforestation activities.
This approach assumes that Forest Service
costs are adequate estimators of costs on
all public lands.
We assumed that restoration-based
ﬁre hazard reduction treatments can even-
tually eliminate large-scale, uncharacteris-
tic crown ﬁres and associated variable costs
of large-ﬁre suppression and rehabilitation
incurred in the recent past. We assumed
that a given amount of acres required
treatment and that the number of large-
ﬁre acres would diminish in proportion to
the amount of required acreage shifted
from high or moderate risk to low risk. We
assumed that the restoration-based hazard
reduction treatment would shift forest-
land to low risk. We also assumed that
large ﬁres also shifted forestland to low
risk. The reduction in large-ﬁre acreage
was assumed to occur for both causes of
shifts to low risk. In other words, both the
with- and without-treatment scenarios re-
sults in reduction of large ﬁres, with the
difference being that treatment can accel-
erate the reduction in large ﬁres. As large-
scale, uncharacteristic crown ﬁres are di-
minished, the associated variable costs of
ﬁre suppression and rehabilitation will di-
minish also.
We kept the model simple by only in-
cluding direct costs in the comparison of
treatment versus no treatment. We did not
account for losses and damages to structures,
private land value, and other infrastructure
associated with the wildland-urban inter-
face. We also did not include nonmarket val-
ues associated with ecological goods and ser-
vices. These nonmarket values include
recreation, wildlife habitat, watershed con-
dition, and water quality. These values gen-
erally are considered to be improved by res-
toration-based fuel treatments (Mason et al.
2006). Finally, we did not include lost tim-
ber harvest values. These values could be
substantial, or not, depending on the resolu-
tion of such issues as the imposition of di-
ameter caps and the successful development
of a private sector smallwood utilization in-
dustry. Given that the only beneﬁts ac-
counted for in this analysis are the ﬁre sup-
pression and rehabilitation costs avoided,
the total economic value of the restoration-
based fuel treatments are signiﬁcantly un-
derestimated.
Analytical Scenarios. We developed
analytical scenarios by varying the required
number of acres to be treated and the rate at
which they are treated (Table 2). We ini-
tially set the required number of acres to be
treated at either 33 or 50% of the total acre-
age of PP and DMC forests in Arizona and
New Mexico (3,262,770 or 4,943,590 ac).
We used three treatment rates: treating 5,
10, and 15% of the required acres per year.
We set the initial treatment cost to $200/ac,
and used $50/ac for the maintenance treat-
ments that occur every 10 years after initial
treatment. We then varied the initial treat-
ment costs to determine the break-even val-
ues. For these scenarios, we applied the as-
sumption
that
reduction
in
large-ﬁre
occurrence would be proportional to the
amount of required acres treated.
To test the sensitivity of results to the
amount of acres requiring treatment, we
conducted a series of sensitivity analyses
(SEN) that varied the required amount from
30 to 65% of the forest (2,966,154 to
6,426,667 ac). For these scenarios we used
annual treatment rates of 5 and 15% of re-
quired acres.
To test the sensitivity of the analysis to
the proportional reduction assumption, we
developed an additional scenario that incor-
porates a time lag before reductions in ﬁre
suppression and rehabilitation costs occur.
This lag scenario (LAG) addresses the con-
cept that a certain amount of strategically
located treatment must occur before gaining
any signiﬁcant reduction in large-ﬁre occur-
rence and associated ﬁre suppression costs.
The LAG scenario assumed no reductions in
ﬁre suppression and rehabilitation costs un-
til treatment had occurred on 35% of the
required acreage. We conducted the LAG
scenario using 33% required treatment acre-
age and a 5% annual treatment rate.
Results
With an initial treatment cost of $200/
ac, all treatment scenarios had positive
NPVs and break-even values (Table 3). The
no-treatment scenario’s (A) costs for large-
ﬁre suppression and rehabilitation resulted
in a PV of negative $2.0 billion. Treatment
scenario costs resulted in PVs from $1.1
billion to $1.9 billion. The NPV of treat-
ment scenarios ranged from $128 to 894
million. Break-even values for treatment sce-
narios ranged from $238 to 601/ac.
Table 1. Acres and percentage of Ponderosa pine (PP) and dry mixed-conifer (DMC) by
ﬁre regime condition class for Arizona and New Mexico combined.
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Total
PP
475,184
5,805,000
3,190,625
9,470,808
DMC
246,858
6,425
163,090
416,373
Total
722,042
5,811,424
3,353,714
9,887,181
Class percent
7.3
58.8
33.9
100.0
Source: Based on data from Schmidt et al. (2002).
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
433

With-treatment NPV increased with
increases in the annual rate of treatment and
decreased with increases in the required
amount of treatment. The increase in NPV
with faster treatment rates occurs because
the faster treatment rate results in a faster
decrease in acres of large ﬁres and associated
costs. The earlier decreases in these costs off-
set the higher up-front treatment cost asso-
ciated with faster rates. Although the NPVs
increase with treatment rate, the break-even
values show virtually no change. The faster
treatment rate restores more acres and the
increase in treated acres keeps the per-acre
break-even values constant even though
NPV increases. With the required treatment
level at 33%, the 10% treatment rate (sce-
nario C) treats 16% more acres than the 5%
rate (scenario B). The 5% increase in treat-
ment rate results in a larger percent increase
in treatment acres, because the faster treat-
ment rate also reduces the number of acres
burned, making these acres available for
treatment. The faster treatment rate also sig-
niﬁcantly decreases the annual amount of
acres burned. Figure 1 illustrates this effect
using scenarios B and C. The greater the
number of acres treated per year, the fewer
the number of acres burned by wildﬁre.
Increasing the number of acres requir-
ing treatment signiﬁcantly lowers the NPVs
and break-even values. Increasing the re-
quired acres from 33 to 50% decreased the
NPVs by 40% and break-even values by
38%. Figure 2 illustrates the result of the
sensitivity analysis (scenarios SEN) on the
effect of increasing acres requiring treatment
on break-even values. Break-even values
range from $601/ac if 30% of acres require
Table 2. Scenario variables—area requiring treatment and rate of treatment.
Scenario
(code)
Scenario variables
Area requiring treatment
Rate of treatment
(% total ac)
(ac)
(%/yr)
(ac/yr)
A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
B
33
3,262,770
5
163,138
C
33
3,262,770
10
326,277
D
33
3,262,770
15
489,416
E
50
4,943,590
5
247,180
F
50
4,943,590
10
494,359
G
50
4,943,590
15
741,539
SEN
30–65
2,966,154–6,426,667
5, 15
148,305–964,000
LAG
33
3,262,770
5
163,138
Table 3. Results of analytical scenarios—NPVs, with minus without values and break-even values.
Scenario
Treatment variables
Results
Required
(% ac)
Rate
(%/yr)
Rate
(ac/yr)
PV costs
($billion)
NPV*
($million)
Break-even
($/ac)
A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.0
N/A
N/A
B
33
5
163,138
1.4
604
530
C
33
10
326,277
1.2
797
535
D
33
15
489,416
1.1
894
538
E
50
5
247,180
1.7
351
326
F
50
10
494,359
1.6
464
329
G
50
15
741,539
1.5
524
331
SEN
30–65
5, 15
Variable
1.4 to 1.9
649–128
601–238
LAG
33
5
163,138
1.7
344
388
*NPV calculated as difference between PV of with-treatment scenarios (B through LAG) minus PV of without-treatment scenarios (A).
Figure 1. The effect of annual treatment rates on the amount of acres burned over time.
434
Journal of Forestry • December 2006

treatment to $238/ac if 65% of acres need
treatment. The rate of decrease in break-
even values slows as the acres requiring treat-
ment increases. Even if 100% of the forest
needs treatment (not shown), the break-
even value remains positive at $93/ac.
The LAG scenario tested the effect of a
delay in large-ﬁre reduction and suppression
costs, using a 33% required treatment and a
5% treatment rate. The LAG assumption of
no reduction in ﬁre suppression or rehabili-
tation costs until 35% of required treatment
has been accomplished signiﬁcantly lowers
the NPV and break-even value. When com-
pared with its no LAG equivalent (scenario
B), the LAG scenario’s NPV drops by 43%
to $344 million, and the break-even value
drops by 27% to $388/ac.
Discussion
The results of all scenarios suggest that
continuing the current policy of favoring ﬁre
suppression over prevention does not repre-
sent a rational economic choice. All with-
treatment scenarios had lower PV of costs
than the no-treatment alternative. The
amount that could be invested in restora-
tion-based
hazard
reduction
treatments
ranged from $238 to 601/ac.
We believe these scenario results are
very conservative for several reasons. Our es-
timates of future ﬁre occurrence use the av-
erage acres burned from 1992 to 2002.
Given the worsening forest conditions, the
assumption of no increase in large ﬁres over
the average of 10-year period is conservative.
Our estimates of per-acre ﬁre suppression
cost did not include all charges for national
contracts, such as many aviation or catering
services. These costs averaged $96/ac for the
period of 1993–2002 (Gebert 2003). The
analysis only included variable ﬁre suppres-
sion costs. Presuppression and other ﬁxed
costs are likely to decline as the occurrence of
large ﬁres declines. We assumed that treat-
ment costs are net of any value recovered
from the fuel treatment. If the treatment
generated $200/ac in wood products, the to-
tal break-even investment value increases by
this amount. We did not include losses and
damages associated with structures, private
land value, and other infrastructure associ-
ated with the wildland-urban interface in
the avoided costs. We did not include
changes in ecological and social values asso-
ciated with restoration-based treatments. Al-
though not market valued, the changes gen-
erally are considered to be positive and
signiﬁcant in magnitude. We essentially as-
sumed that there is no difference between
the value of a burned and restored forest.
The analysis supports the idea that the
current pace and scale of implementation of
restoration-based treatments that would be-
gin healing degraded forests and reduce the
threat of unnatural wildﬁre remains woe-
fully inadequate. Inadequate federal funding
for restoration-based fuel treatments and the
reprogramming of treatment dollars to sup-
pression activities perpetuates the problem.
Although society demands suppression of
ﬁres, it is extremely expensive and fails to
solve the underlying problem leading to
ﬁres. By underfunding restoration-based
hazard reduction treatments, we ensure the
continued need for suppression by under-
mining the rational approach to solving the
wildﬁre problem.
The results indicate that the amount of
acres requiring treatment signiﬁcantly de-
creases NPVs and break-even values. This
ﬁnding points out the importance of efﬁ-
cient spatial strategies and fuel treatment de-
sign that produce genuine reductions in the
probability of uncharacteristic crown ﬁre.
Random or arbitrary fuel treatment patterns
will likely be ineffective and increase the to-
tal number of acres requiring treatment thus
reducing the economically rational expendi-
ture level.
There are several forces that prevent im-
plementation
of
large-scale
restoration-
based fuel treatments in the forests of the
arid southwest. Given current forest condi-
tions we can not simply cease ﬁre suppres-
sion efforts, especially in the wildland-urban
interface. Thus, in the short run, costs will
increase as we will be paying for both sup-
pression and restoration. Elections are al-
ways just around the corner and the federal
and private wildland ﬁre industrial complex
is heavily vested, politically and ﬁnancially,
in perpetuating the annual war on wildﬁre.
Revenues are increasingly scarce and restora-
tion of the health and resilience of the for-
ested ecosystems of the arid southwest does
not appear to be very high on the priority
list. This situation is analogous to other
funding paradoxes, e.g., funding emergency
over preventative health care, funding ﬂood
disaster
relief
over
levee
maintenance.
Clearly, it will be challenging to generate the
long-term ﬁnancial and managerial commit-
ment for an activity for which ecological and
economic beneﬁts may not be evident for a
number of years into the future—beyond
the next election, budget crisis, or tenure of a
forest supervisor.
Another signiﬁcant force limiting im-
plementation has been the near demise of
the region’s wood harvesting and utilization
infrastructure over the past 10–15 years.
This loss stands as a critical impediment to
the implementation of restoration-based
fuel reduction treatments. Although there
are initial signs of emerging small-scale op-
erations, the development of a competitive
Figure 2. Effect of amount of acres requiring treatment on break-even values.
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
435

market for the wood ﬁber removed by resto-
ration-based
treatment
remains
elusive.
Commercial use of the wood ﬁber removed,
especially small-diameter logs, could reduce
treatment costs that will otherwise be borne
by taxpayers; but the current limited scale of
ﬁre hazard reduction work in the Southwest
presents a barrier to market development.
Manufacturing ﬁrms want a reasonable ex-
pectation of a raw material supply through-
out their planning horizon. Currently, the
reasonable expectation is that the supply of
wood ﬁber from southwestern restoration
projects will remain intermittent and vari-
able, because of litigation or the threat of
litigation by groups skeptical of the inﬂu-
ence that a proﬁt-driven economic system
can have on ecological systems. This con-
cern that for-proﬁt enterprises will corrupt
or distort restoration-based treatment activ-
ities is perhaps the most vexing socioeco-
nomic issue in the restoration of southwest-
ern
ponderosa
pine
forests.
Although
genuine, this concern prevents innovation
by local entrepreneurs, who could create
new uses for the raw materials (Daugherty
and Snider 2003).
The latest management paradigm pro-
moted by federal land-management agencies
was ecosystem management, which has since
evolved into AM, or learning by doing. We
suspect that all the ecological and economic
arguments for the implementation of land-
scape-scale restoration-based fuel treatments
will avail us little for many of the same rea-
sons given for our failure to implement AM.
These include strong opposition to experi-
mental policies and management strategies
by persons protecting various self-interests;
management agencies trapped by cumber-
some, inﬂexible, formalized processes and
narrow interpretations of legal mandates;
and demands by various organizations and
interest
groups
for
spurious
certitude
(Walters 1997, Gunderson 1999). The fact
that we will continue to learn is a given. The
fact that we will do so intentionally and in
time to avoid the odious and in some cases
irreversible (Savage and Mast 2005) conse-
quences
of
anomalous
stand-replacing
crown ﬁres is not.
Conclusions
There are no risk-free management ac-
tions. Indeed, under present forest condi-
tions, the no-action or go-slow alternative
may very well be the most risky of all. As
pointed out by Dombeck et al. (2004), to
avoid risk in wildﬁre management today is
to advocate even larger uncharacteristic
wildﬁres and destruction of property and
ecosystems. Our results indicate that the ev-
er-increasing ecological and economic costs
resulting from high-severity, ecosystem-
scale ﬁres in the ponderosa pine and dry
mixed-conifer forests of the southwest far
exceed the cost to society of proactive resto-
ration-based thinning treatments. The cur-
rent sociopolitical condition of continuing
to spend dollars on ﬁre suppression while
implementing limited treatment of high-
risk forest areas represents an irrational eco-
logical and economic decision.
We no longer face the question of
whether society will spend the money or not.
We are going to pay, one way or another,
unless we make the unlikely choice to no
longer spend money trying to ﬁght and con-
tain unnatural crown ﬁres. We now face the
choice of how we are going to spend the
money and what are we likely to obtain from
that expenditure. If we invest in restoration-
based hazardous fuel treatments, we invest
in the future; we invest in healthy, sustain-
able ecosystems for our children and grand-
children. By not investing in restoration-
based fuel treatments, we continue the
depreciation of our forests, increasing the
risk of radical shifts in their structure and
function because of uncharacteristic crown
ﬁre. Given these choices, it makes a great
deal of economic sense to conduct forest res-
toration on a large scale today to retain fu-
ture ecological and economic values. Our
analysis shows that the ﬁre suppression costs
that can be avoided in the future are sufﬁ-
ciently large by themselves to justify restora-
tion-based fuel treatment expenditures to-
day.
Literature Cited
ARNO, S.F., AND S. ALLISON-BUNNELL. 2002.
Flames in our forest. Island Press, Washington,
DC. 227 p.
COVINGTON, W.W., AND M.M. MOORE. 1994.
Southwestern ponderosa forest structure and
resource conditions: Changes since Euro-
American settlement. Forestry 92(1):39–47.
DAHMS, C.W., AND B.W. GEILS. 1997. An assess-
ment of forest ecosystem health in the Southwest.
USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR-
295, Fort Collins, CO. 97 p.
DAUGHERTY, P.J., AND G.B. SNIDER. 2003. Eco-
logical and market economics. P. 58–69 in
Ecological restoration of ponderosa pine forests,
Friederici, P. (ed.). Island Press, Washington,
DC. 561 p.
DOMBECK, M.P., J.E. WILLIAMS,
AND C.A.
WOOD. 2004. Wildﬁre policy and public
lands: Scientiﬁc understanding with social
concerns across landscapes. Conserv. Biol.
18(4):883–889.
DONOVAN, G.H., AND P. NOORDIJK. 2005. As-
sessing the accuracy of wildland ﬁre situation
analysis (WFSA) ﬁre size and suppression
costs. J. For. 103(1):10–13.
FAIRBROTHER, A., AND J.G. TURNLEY. 2005. Pre-
dicting risks of uncharacteristic wildﬁres: Ap-
plication of the risk assessment process. For.
Ecol. Manage. 211(1–2):28–35.
FIEDLER, C.E., C.E. KEEGAN, S.H. ROBERTSON,
T.A. MORGAN, C.W. WOODALL, AND J.T.
CHMELIK. 2002. Strategic assessment of ﬁre haz-
ard in New Mexico. USDA For. Serv. Final
Rep. to the Joint Fire Sciences Program,
PNW, Portland, OR. 27 p.
FINNEY, M.A. 2005. The challenge of quantita-
tive risk analysis for wildland ﬁres. For. Ecol.
Manage. 211(1-2):97–108.
FULE, P.Z., W.W. COVINGTON, H.B. SMITH,
J.D. SPRINGER, T.A. HEINLEIN, K.D. HUIS-
INGA, AND M.M. MOORE. 2002. Comparing
ecological restoration alternatives: Grand Can-
yon, Arizona. For. Ecol. Manage. 170(2002):
19–41.
GEBERT, K. 2003. Data provided by USDA
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sci-
ence Lab, Missoula, MT. Data provided in Ex-
cel spreadsheet on ﬁle with authors.
GUNDERSON, L.H. 1999. Resilience, ﬂexibility,
and adaptive management—antidotes for spu-
rious certitude. Conserv. Ecol. 3(1):7. [Avail-
able online at www.conseol.org/vol3/iss1/art7;
last accessed Oct 1, 2003.]
HARDY, C.C. 2005 Wildland ﬁre hazard and risk:
Problems, deﬁnitions, and context. For. Ecol.
Manage. 211(1–2):73–82.
KLINE, J.D. 2004. Issues in evaluating the costs and
beneﬁts of fuel treatments to reduce wildﬁre in the
Nation’s forests. USDA For. Serv. PNW-RN-
542. 48 p.
LARSON, D., AND R. MIRTH. 2004. A case study
on the economics of thinning in the wildland
urban interface. West. J. Appl. For. 19(1):60–
65.
LYNCH, D.L., W.H. ROMME, AND M.L. FLOYD.
2000. Forest restoration is southwestern pon-
derosa pine. J. For. 98(8):17–24.
MASON, C.L., B.R. LIPPKE, K.W. ZOBRIST, T.D.
BLAXTON JR., K.R. CEDER, J.M. COMNICK, J.B.
MCCARTER, AND H.K. ROGERS. 2006. Invest-
ments in fuel removals to avoid forest ﬁres result
in substantial beneﬁts. J. For. 104(1):27–31.
NATIONAL INTERAGENCY FIRE CENTER (NIFC).
2003. The Southwest Area (SWA) web site, sec-
tion on historical ﬁre data. Available online at
www.fs.fed.us/r3/ﬁre/swapredictive/; last ac-
cessed Mar. 10, 2003 and Oct. 1, 2003.
PYNE, S.J. 1982. Fire in America: A cultural history
of wildland and rural ﬁre. University of Wash-
ington Press, Seattle. 654 p.
PYNE, S.J. 2004. Pyromancy: Reading stories in
the ﬂames. Conserv. Biol. .18(4):874–877.
PYNE, S.J., P.L. ANDREWS, AND R.D. LAVEN.
1996. Introduction to wildland ﬁre. John Wiley
and Sons, Inc., New York, NY. 769 p.
RIEMAN, B.E., R.E. GRESSWELL, M.K. YOUNG, AND
C.H. LUCE. 2003. Introduction to the effects of
436
Journal of Forestry • December 2006

wildland ﬁre on aquatic ecosystems in the West-
ern USA. For. Ecol. Manage. 178(1–2):1–3.
SAVAGE, M., AND J. MAST. 2005. How resilient
are southwestern ponderosa pine forests after
crown ﬁres? Can. J. For. Res. 35:967–977.
SCHMIDT, K.M., J.P. MENAKIS, C.C. HARDY,
W.J. HANN, AND D.L. BUNNELL. 2002. Devel-
opment of coarse-scale spatial data for wildland
ﬁre and fuel management. USDA For. Serv.
Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-87. 41 p.  CD.
WALTERS, C. 1997. Challenges in adaptive man-
agement of riparian and coastal ecosystems.
Conserv.Ecol.1(2):1.[Availableonlineatwww.
consecol.org/vol1/iss2/art1/; last accessed Oct.
1, 2003.]
Gary Snider (Gary.Snider@nau.edu) is doc-
toral
candidate,
P.J.
Daugherty
(P.J.
Daugherty@nau.edu) is associate professor,
and D.B. Wood (Brent.Wood@nau.edu) is
professor emeritus (retired), Northern Ari-
zona University, School of Forestry, Box
15018, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. This research
was supported by the Ecological Restoration
Institute at Northern Arizona University.
The authors are grateful to the Journal of
Forestry editor and three anonymous review-
ers for their thoughtful and helpful sugges-
tions on earlier versions of this article.
Journal of Forestry • December 2006
437
