http://www.eri.nau.edu
Is this email not displaying correctly?
View it in your browser.
ERI Publications ~ Spring 2012
White Paper
Combrink, T., W. Fox, and J. Petersen. 2012. Workforce Needs of the Four Forest
Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern
Arizona University. ERI–Issues in Forest Restoration, 19p.
 
This ERI white paper examines the size, skill sets, and current capacity of the public and
private workforce needed to implement the restoration work envisioned for the 750,000-
acre Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) Project.  Using information from the U.S.
Forest Service and private sector sources, researchers from the Arizona Rural Policy
Institute (ARPI) reached a number of conclusions. In terms of the public sector, which will
be made up of U.S. Forest Service personnel, there will be a need for roughly 69
individuals who will perform a variety of functions related to treatment preparation and
administration. For the most part, the required positions are already in place and the
existing personnel are generally adequate to meet the annual needs of the 4FRI.
Meanwhile, the private sector workforce will fill the on-site and labor needs of the project –
mobilizing, cutting, skidding, delimbing, slashing, loading, and other jobs. These jobs can
be filled by numerous local, regional, and, in some cases, out-of-state employers. The
results of the ARPI research indicate that 422 full-time equivalent (FTE) employees, of
which 300 FTEs will be new FTEs, to meet the annual treatment goals. Follow this link to
a complementary ERI fact sheet.
Ecological Research
Abella, S.A., E.C. Engel, J.D. Springer, and W.W. Covington. 2012. Relationships of
Exotic Plant Communities with Native Vegetation, Environmental Factors, Disturbance,
and Landscape Ecosystems of Pinus Ponderosa Forests, USA. Forest Ecology and
Management 271:65-74.
 
The research objectives for this study were to: 1) assess relationships between native and
 

exotic species richness and cover; 2) evaluate relationships of environmental,
disturbance, and native vegetation variables with exotic plant community distributions
across the landscape; and 3) compare exotic species richness, cover, and composition
among landscape ecosystems. To do so, these researchers studied plant communities in
ten ecosystem types occurring within ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests. These
types included black and red cinders; clay, mesic, rocky, and xeric basalt; and mesic and
xeric limestone as well as aspen (Populus tremuloides) and park-like systems across a
271,816-acre forested landscape in northern Arizona. They found that exotic species
richness, cover, and community composition were strongly related to the ecosystem
classification. They also found that moist ecosystems were more likely to be invaded by
exotics than drier, less productive ecosystems. There was a stronger relationship between
exotic species and disturbance than with native vegetation and environmental factors.
 
Bickford, I.N, P.Z. Fulé, and T.E. Kolb. 2011. Growth Sensitivity to Drought of Co-
occurring Pinus spp. along an Elevation Gradient in Northern Mexico. Western North
American Naturalist, 71(3):338-348.
 
Working in the mountains of Chihuahua, Mexico, these researchers conducted
comparisons of Apache pine (Pinus engelmannii) and Lumholtz pine (P. lumholtzii) to
understand whether their growth is sensitive to drought and temperature variation, and
how sensitivity differs between these tree species and elevations. Their results suggest
that the increasing frequency and severity of drought predicted for this region in the
coming decades will reduce the growth of both species, with greater impacts on low-
elevation populations and on Apache pine.
 
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012. Do Thinning and/or
Burning Treatments in Western USA Ponderosa or Jeffrey Pine-Dominated Forests Help
Restore Natural Fire Behavior? Forest Ecology and Management 269:68-81.
 
These researchers carried out a systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of
forest thinning and burning treatments on restoring fire behavior attributes in frequent-fire
pine forests dominated by either ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) or Jeffrey pine (P.
jeffreyi), and co-occurring species. They found 54 studies with quantitative data suitable
for meta-analysis. After reviewing the findings of these studies, the researchers found that
combined treatments  (thinning + burning) tended to have the greatest effect on reducing
surface fuels and stand density, and raising modeled crowning and torching indices, as
compared to burning or thinning alone. While there are a number of qualifications to the
findings, overall, the meta-analysis of the literature reviewed strongly indicates that
thinning and/or burning treatments do have effects consistent with the restoration of low-
severity fire behavior. Follow this link to a complementary ERI fact sheet.
 
Huffman, D.W., J.E. Crouse, W.W. Chancellor, and P.Z. Fulé. 2012. Influence of Time
Since Fire on Pinyon-Juniper Woodland Structure. Forest Ecology and Management

274:29-37.
 
In this study, ERI and NAU researchers used a chronosequence of fire sites to examine
the development and long-term changes in tree density, seedlings, snags, logs, and
shrubs after stand-replacing wildfire in pinyon-juniper woodlands. Although these
individual features showed different long-term patterns, the researchers found that
woodlands tended to increase in overall structural complexity with time. Using information
from this study, managers can evaluate current characteristics of woodland sites and
predict possible future trends in development. In addition, management treatments can be
formulated to accomplish various goals (e.g., reducing hazardous fuel loads, enhancing
wildlife habitat, or restoring degraded woodland sites) while better emulating the effects of
natural disturbance in terms of important structural qualities.
Hurteau, M.D., M.T. Stoddard, and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. The Carbon Costs of Mitigating High-
severity Wildfire in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine. Global Change Biology 17:1516-1521.
The goals of this study were to 1) determine if current aboveground forest carbon stocks
in fire-excluded southwestern ponderosa pine forest are higher than pre-fire exclusion
carbon stocks reconstructed from 1876, 2) quantify the carbon costs of thinning
treatments to reduce high-severity wildfire risk, and 3) compare post-treatment (thinning
and burning) carbon stocks with reconstructed 1876 carbon stocks. These researchers
found that the current fire-excluded forest structure contained, on average, 2.3 times as
much live tree carbon as pre-fire exclusion forests. However, they also note that that fire-
excluded forests are increasingly prone to carbon losses due to wildfire and that
managers will have to have to consider the trade-offs between carbon stock size and
carbon stock stability when they review their forest management plans. Follow this link to
a complementary ERI fact sheet.
 
Kalies, E.L., B.G. Dickson, C.L. Chambers, and W.W. Covington. 2012. Community
Occupancy Responses of Small Mammals to Restoration Treatments in Ponderosa Pine
Forests, Northern Arizona, USA. Ecological Applications 22(1):204–217.
 
From 2006 through 2009, these researchers trapped eight small mammal species at 294
sites in northern Arizona and used occupancy modeling to determine their responses to
thinning and habitat features. The researchers found that understory vegetation cover,
large snags, and treatment were the most important variables for predicting small mammal
occupancy. They identified two generalist species at relatively high occupancy rates
across all sites, four open-forest species that responded positively to treatment, and two
dense-forest species that responded negatively to treatment unless specific habitat
features (e.g., snags, large trees) were retained. Their results indicate that all eight small
mammal species can benefit from restoration treatments, particularly if aspects of their
evolutionary environment (e.g., large trees, snags, woody debris) are restored. Finally,
they recommend using the occupancy model approach when assessing the impacts of
treatments or habitat alteration on wildlife species. Follow this link to a complementary ERI
working paper.

 
 
Korb, J.E., P.Z. Fulé, and M.L. Stoddard. 2012. Forest Restoration in a Surface Fire-
Dependent Ecosystem: An Example from a Mixed Conifer Forest, Southwestern Colorado,
USA. Forest Ecology and Management 269:10-18.
 
These researchers conducted a replicated plot experiment to test the effects of restoration
treatments (thin/burn, burn only, control) on forest structure in the warm/dry mixed conifer
forests of southwestern Colorado. They found no significant changes in the control and
burn only treatments for tree density, basal area, canopy cover, and tree regeneration.
Meanwhile, the thin/burn treatment produced significant changes in terms of decreased
tree density, principally white fir (Abies concolor) and Douglas-fir (Psuedotsuga menziesii);
lower tree canopy cover; diminished basal area, primarily from white fir; increased aspen
(Populus tremuloides) tree regeneration; and decreased white fir regeneration. Overstory
trees that died tended to be younger, shorter, and/or smaller in diameter. Thin/burn
treatments moved warm/dry mixed conifer forests rapidly along the trajectory toward
historical reference conditions by altering forest composition and structure. Burn only
treatments were less effective, but also less costly.
Laughlin, D.C., J.P. Roccaforte and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. Effects of a Second-entry Prescribed
Fire in a Mixed Conifer Forest. Western North American Naturalist 71(4):557-562.
At Grand Canyon National Park, these researchers analyzed the effects of a second-entry
prescribed fire in a mixed conifer forest. They found that the surface fire had little effect on
large ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa), Douglas-fir (Psuedotsuga menziesii) and white
fir (Abies concolor) trees, and did not change total tree density or basal area. The fire
reduced the overall density of small (< 12”) conifer seedlings by 87%, but had a smaller
effect on taller seedlings and on sapling density. The fire reduced litter depths by 33%,
duff depths by 23%, fine woody debris by 21%, and coarse woody debris by 44%. These
effects were generally consistent with the park managers’ restoration goals in mixed
conifer forests and continue to move this forest toward reference conditions.
Laughlin, D.C., P.Z. Fule, D.W. Huffman, J. Crouse, and E. Laliberte. 2011. Climatic
Constraints on Trait-based Forest Assembly. Journal of Ecology 99(6):1489-1499.
Predicted changes in climate will likely affect future plant community assemblages. These
researchers evaluated the usefulness of the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) model for
assessing changes in forest communities occurring along a 53.6 degree F gradient of
mean annual temperature. They then used independent cross-validation to evaluate
model predictions from sites where trait constraints are predicted from environmental
conditions. They found that the model performs moderately well in predicting forest
community structure using empirical trait–environment relationships. However, they also
noted that it required many traits to achieve good fits, and three orthogonal axes of trait
variation performed poorly as predictors of community structure. To be useful predictors,

traits must vary strongly among species and community-weighted mean traits must vary
predictably along environmental gradients.
 
Loberger, C.D., T.C. Theimer, S.S. Rosenstock, and C.S. Wightman. 2011. Use of a
Restoration-treated Ponderosa Pine Forest by Tassel-eared Squirrels. Journal of
Mammalogy 92(5)1021-1027.
The tassel-eared squirrel (Sciurus aberti) is dependent on ponderosa pine (Pinus
ponderosa) for food and cover, and is likely affected by management treatments intended
to restore currently dense ponderosa pine forests. These wildlife researchers used
radiotelemetry to determine how restoration treatments affected habitat use by tassel-
eared squirrels. Their results suggest retaining some denser, untreated patches and
treated areas with canopy cover of 51–75% because tassel-eared squirrels specifically
use such areas as winter habitat.
 
McGlone, C.M., C.H. Sieg, and T.E. Kolb. 2011. Invasion Resistance and Persistence:
Established Plants Win, Even with Disturbance and High Propagule Pressure. Biological
Invasions 13:291-304.
 
These researchers conducted a study in a southwestern ponderosa pine (Pinus
ponderosa)/bunchgrass system to determine the susceptibility of remnant native plant
communities to cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) invasion, and the persistence of cheatgrass
in invaded areas. Their results suggest that two factors dictated the persistence of the
resident communities: 1) the competitiveness of mature, native vegetation, especially
bottlebrush squirreltail (Elymus elymoides) when it is dominant on a site; and 2) the pre-
treatment levels of plant-available nitrogen and phosphorus in the soil because annual
species typically require higher levels of plant-available soil nutrients than perennial
plants. The study shows that established plants and lower level of soil nutrients can buffer
the influences of disturbance and high numbers of cheatgrass seed.
 
Roccaforte, J.P., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Chancellor, and D.C. Laughlin. 2012. Woody Debris and
Tree Regeneration Dynamics Following Severe Wildfires in Arizona Ponderosa Pine
Forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 42:593-604.
 
To investigate post-fire woody debris and regeneration dynamics, these researchers
studied severe fire areas in Arizona, spanning a timeframe from 1 to 18 years after
burning. They found that snag densities varied over time, with predominantly whole snags
in recent fires and broken or fallen snags in older fires. Coarse woody debris peaked
between 6 and 12 years after fire, and at a value higher than previously reported in post-
fire fuel assessments in this region, although after 12 years the amount of debris loadings
were within the range of recommended management values. Sprouting deciduous species
(e.g., oaks, aspen) experienced high levels of regeneration and commonly dominated the
overstory. Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa), on the other hand, failed to regenerate on

57% of the sites. This indicates that many post-wildfire sites are likely to change to
shrublands or grasslands rather than returning rapidly to pine forest. While these
researchers indicate that more time is needed to see whether these patterns will remain
stable, they feel that there are substantial obstacles to pine forest recovery including
competition from sprouting woody species and (or) grasses, lack of seed sources, and the
forecast of warmer, drier climatic conditions for coming decades. Follow this link to a
complementary ERI fact sheet.
Stoddard, M.T., C.M. McGlone, P.Z. Fulé, D.C. Laughlin, and M.L. Daniels. 2011. Native
Plants Dominate Understory Vegetation Following Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Treatments. Western North American Naturalist 71(2):206-214.
Using three stand-scale replicates, these researchers examined understory community
composition, species richness, and plant cover responses to four different tree-thinning
intensities—1) thinning to 1.5-3 trees per historic evidence per acre, 2) thinning to 2-4
trees per historic evidence per acre, 3) thinning to 3-6 trees per historic evidence per acre,
and 4) no thinning . They found that the restoration treatments altered the composition of
the understory community regardless of thinning intensity, and, while the results were
highly variable among the replicates, they observed strong trends of increasing richness
and cover in the treated stands. Initially non-native species cover comprised 6% of the
total cover where treatment-induced disturbances were the greatest, but that initial
increase did not persist and was 3% six years after treatment.
 
Wu, T., Y.-S. Kim, and M.D. Hurteau. 2011. Investing in Natural Capital: Using Economic
Incentives to Overcome Barriers to Forest Restoration. Restoration Ecology 19:441-445.
In an opinion piece, these authors contend that despite an increase in resources and
attention, the persistence of economic impediments has forestalled the successful
expansion of forest restoration to a landscape level. They make the case that a failure to
properly account for the full range of costs and benefits from restoration treatments has
contributed to the asymmetry between needed action and actual implementation. They
argue that the valuation of non-market ecosystem services, such as carbon sequestration,
along with the ability of ecological restoration to act as an agent of economic stimulus,
should be incorporated into the policymaking process. Follow this link to a complementary
ERI fact sheet.
Fact Sheets
Egan, D. 2011. Fact Sheet: Systematic Reviews and the Quality of Evidence. Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 4p.
 
Federal land management policies direct agencies to use “the best available science” to

inform agency decisions. However, reactions to the term “best available science”
sometimes lead to assertions that the quality of such science is a matter of opinion. How
then do managers evaluate and select scientific information that is defensible and
supportive of management policies and decisions as well as environmental assessments?
This is especially important for restoration and forest management projects at larger
spatial scales where field experiments are too costly and/or slow to produce needed
results. Recently, conservation science has begun employing a rigorous analytical
approach, known as a systematic review, for evaluating the existing scientific information
and then informing managers about treatment options. This ERI fact sheet examines how
systematic reviews work and how the ERI intends to use them.
 
Greer, W.J. 2012. Fact Sheet: Managing Sources of Conflict in Collaborative Settings.
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2 p.
 
Anyone who has been involved in a collaborative process knows that a conflict within the
group typically involves multiple participants, can be complex, and can intensify
dramatically, if left unresolved. In this ERI fact sheet, Windy Greer examines issues vital to
avoiding and resolving conflicts in a collaborative group. She examines topics such as
self-awareness, the importance of self-evaluation, sources of conflict (i.e., competition,
domination, miscommunication, misunderstandings, and injury). Windy concludes that
knowing how to manage or resolve conflict is a big part of succeeding at collaboration,
and maintaining respectful relationships and that managing conflict productively is a skill
that requires constant practice. Using some of the basic skills and information discussed
in this fact sheet, stakeholders can begin to understand what they can do to turn a
seemingly negative situation into a positive one--one that allows the collaborative to move
forward toward its common goals.
Stoddard, M.T. 2011. Fact Sheet: Historical Forest Structural Characteristics Review.
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 7p.
 
This ERI fact sheet provides pre-EuroAmerican settlement overstory structural reference
conditions (i.e., tree density and basal area) for pinyon-juniper, ponderosa pine,
ponderosa pine-oak, aspen, and mixed conifer forests across the southern Colorado
Plateau. It is intended to help managers visualize and describe what the forest structure
looked like before frequent surface fires were disrupted in the areas they now manage.
This reference information should also serve as an aid in making informed decisions that
are consistent with the evolutionary range of variability associated with individual forest
types.
 
Vosick, D. 2011. Fact Sheet: Lessons from the Wallow Fire. Ecological Restoration
Institute, Northern Arizona University, 1 p.
 
Diane Vosick outlines six lessons learned from the 2011 Wallow Fire, which consumed
more than 840 square miles of forested land in eastern Arizona and western New Mexico.

Her main points are: 1) the size of such fires requires immediate action; 2) these fires are
destroying critical wildlife habitat, including that of the Mexican spotted owl (Strix
occidentalis lucida); 3) WUI treatments worked as designed; 4) small restoration
treatments can withstand a high-intensity wildfire; 5) mixed conifer forests need our
attention; and 6) the real costs of fires, such as the Wallow Fire, are extremely high and
detrimental to society and the environment.
 follow on Twitter | forward to a friend 
Copyright © 2012 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights
reserved. 
You are receiving this email because you opted in at our website,
http://www.eri.nau.edu. 
Our mailing address is: 
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
 unsubscribe from this list | update subscription preferences 
