 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
The Economics of Ecological Restoration and Hazardous Fuel Reduction Treatments  
in Ponderosa Pine Forest Ecosystem 
 
By Michael H. Taylor, University of Nevada, Reno, and Andrew Joel Sánchez Meador, Northern Arizona University 
Introduction 
Increases in tree densities due to historical suppression of low-severity wildfires in frequent fire regimes is 
one of the primary drivers of increasing wildfire hazard in the United States. These severe fires are often ex-
pensive and difficult to suppress and can damage property and infrastructure, endanger human life, and lead 
to undesirable, and sometimes irreversible, changes in ecosystem function. Fuels and fire managers seeking 
to reduce costs and damages resulting from wildfires (e.g., Fig. 1) have two treatment options: hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments (HFRTs), which focus on reducing fuel loading and changing fuel characteristics to 
achieve short-term reductions in wildfire hazard; or ecological restoration treatments (ERTs), which are a 
composite of treatments (i.e., thinning followed by repeated burning) that focus on ecosystem recovery and 
function typically through treatments targeting historical stand composition and structure.  
 
In this study we use state-and-transition modeling to evaluate and compare the economic benefits and costs 
of ERTs and HFRTs in the ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forest ecosystem of the Colorado Plateau in the 
western United States (henceforth the “PIPO ecosystem”). This is the first study to evaluate and compare the 
economic benefits and costs of ERTs and HFRTs in a forested ecosystem where increasing wildfire hazard is 
driven by increased surface and canopy fuel loading attributed to historical suppression of low-severity wild-
fires. Increased fuel loading is a pervasive problem in the United States and land managers face and ongoing 
dilemma over the choice between ERTs and HFRTs.  
   Fact Sheet: The Economics of Ecological Restoration and Hazardous Fuel Reduction Treatments in  
   Ponderosa Pine Forest Ecosystem 
March  2016 
Figure 1. Example of forest conditions one year following the San Juan Fire on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest in 
areas that underwent burn-only hazardous fuel reduction treatment (left) and ecological restoration treatments (right). Miti-
gation of widespread damage and loss (i.e., tree mortality) following wildfire was unsuccessful following burn-only treat-
ments and successful following restoration treatments. Photos by John Paul Roccaforte  

 
Methods 
 A state-and-transition simulation model was developed to analyze the long-run impact of ERTs and 
HFRTs on ecological condition, wildfire behavior (occurrence and severity), and suppression costs.  
 ERTs were modeled to influence wildfire behavior by transitioning existing states to ecological states 
where the probability of severe, ecologically degrading fires was less probable.  
 HFRTs were modeled to influence wildfire behavior by increasing the probability that when a wild-
fire occurs it is low-severity.  
Results 
 Neither HFRTs nor ERTs can be justified on the basis of wildfire suppression costs savings alone. 
The choice between HFRTs and ERTs depends on site-specific ecological factors such as wildfire 
frequency, expected wildfire suppression costs, expected treatment longevity, and economic factors 
such as treatments costs and the market price of biomass.  
 Both HFRTs and ERTs increased the expected number of low-severity wildfires, which promote re-
siliency, and reduce the number of ecologically degrading wildfires.  
 HFRTs reduced expected wildfire suppression costs, but these savings depend crucially on the degree 
of treatment effectiveness and are generally not sufficient to offset treatment costs.  
 ERTs only reduced expected wildfire suppression costs if 1) wildfire return intervals in ecologically 
degraded states were on the short-end of the range of historic variability (e.g. 2–20 years) and/or 2) 
ERTs allow for certain low-intensity wildfires to be managed through wildland fire use thus reducing 
implementation costs.  
 Simulations suggest that while some revenues from biomass removed may offset the cost of ERTs, 
the net economic benefits from ERTs are only positive at biomass prices that are several times those 
currently observed in the study area.  
Conclusions and Limitations 
 Only the financial benefits of ERTs and HFRTs in terms of wildfire suppression costs savings and the 
revenues from biomass removed during treatment were considered in the analysis.  
 Other benefits such as reduced market (e.g., damage to housing and other infrastructure) and non-
market (e.g., post-fire erosion) wildfire costs were not considered, possibly causing our analysis to 
understate the total economic benefits of ERTs and HFRTs.  
 While robust to assumptions, our methods did not allow us to conclude categorically whether ERTs 
are preferable to HFRTs, or vice versa.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
Andrew Sánchez Meador, Andrew.SanchezMeador@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
This fact sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Taylor, M.H., A.J. Sánchez Meador, Y. Kim, K. Rollins, and H. Will. 2015. The Economics of Ecological Restoration 
and Hazardous Fuel Reduction Treatments in the Ponderosa Pine Forest Ecosystem. Forest Science, 61(6): 
988-1008. http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/forsci.14-030 
