 1 
 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social and eco-
nomic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science-based research 
of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Canopy Cover and How it Relates to Other Forest Attributes  
as an Indicator of Forest Conditions 
 
INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE 
This Fact Sheet is intended to clarify what information about forest restoration can be obtained by analyzing canopy cover 
or measuring canopy cover in combination with other monitoring indicators. There are four key questions that should be 
considered when using canopy cover as a metric to assess ecological forest restoration:  
 
1. What does canopy cover tell us about restored conditions?  
2. What additional indicators are needed to ensure a comprehensive analysis of the effectiveness of 
management actions?  
3. How is canopy cover measured and how accurate are measurements at different scales? 
4. What do we know about reference condition canopy cover? 
 
CANOPY COVER AND FOREST ATTRIBUTES 
Q:  Are measures of canopy cover a useful indicator for determining if management actions have restored forest 
structure to within the natural range of variability? 
 
A:  Useful, but not without combining it with other indicators. Canopy cover is one in a set of important variables that 
describe structural forest conditions. Canopy cover as a stand-alone indicator measures the proportion of the forest 
floor covered by the vertical projection of tree crowns. It is one of the few indicators that can be calculated at the 
landscape scale. However, it is not sensitive to many structural attributes, tree ages, tree size, tree density or stand 
basal area. This is particularly important to recognize in the Southwest where on basalt soils trees often occur in une-
ven-aged groups. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that a set of key indicators or variables are used to evaluate 
whether forest structure is within the natural range of variability and in turn whether forests are approaching desired 
conditions. Canopy cover is directly related to some forest attributes—particularly tree density and stand basal ar-
ea—but is relatively poor at predicting many other attributes. As shown in Table 1 on page 2, for a given canopy cov-
er value, forest stand characteristics may differ widely. 
 
Examples  
Potential fire behavior is a common forest attribute used to evaluate manage-
ment alternatives. However, models used by fire managers require information 
on tree height, crown characteristics, and surface fuels, in addition to canopy 
cover, to clearly evaluate effects of management on reducing the potential for 
crown fire. 
 
Wildlife species exploit a variety of forest patches with different canopy config-
urations. Some wildlife species are commonly referred to as “canopy-
dependent.” However, canopy cover by itself does not effectively capture their habitat requirements. For example, in pon-
derosa pine forests, the Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) commonly nests in stands with high canopy cover. These 
stands are also dominated by mature or old-growth trees and located near natural drainages. The tassel-eared squirrel pre-
fers ponderosa pine forest patches with high canopy cover, that also have interlocking tree crowns. And mule deer 
(Odocoileus hemionus) use dense, shaded stands for summer day beds, but feed in openings that support greater diversity 
and biomass of forage plants. In these cases, an understanding of canopy cover alone without considering tree size and 
arrangement would not fully indicate the forest conditions needed by these species. 
    Fact Sheet:  Canopy Cover and Forest Conditions       August 2012     

 2 
CANOPY COVER AND OTHER MONITORING INDICATORS 
Q:  What monitoring indicators should be used to determine if management actions have restored 
forest structure to within the natural range of variability?  
 
A: Measurements that examine stand structure, composition, and spatial pattern will provide a more 
complete picture of post treatment stand structure. These measurements include: tree sizes (heights 
and diameters), tree ages, the spatial arrangement of trees, the makeup of tree species, and densities 
of snags and logs.  
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Median reconstructed presettlement canopy cover based on reconstructions is 
16.7% (please see Table 3 on page 4 for data). Table 1 lists possible stand structures that 
would support 16.7% canopy cover. 
Table 2: Key variables/indicators, their units, examples of attributes indicated, and typical monitoring methods. 
 

 3 
MEASURING CANOPY COVER 
Q:  How is canopy cover measured and how accurate are measurements at different scales?  
 
A:   There are many ways to calculate canopy cover. Figure 1 below highlights a multi-age forested stand 
with trees denoted both individually and in groups, with open interspaces. The transect describes the 
canopy as it is observed along the line through the stand; the average canopy for the entire transect 
depicted below is 30%.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CANOPY COVER MEASUREMENTS: 
1. Transect Method: canopy measured from set of points along a transect using a densitometer to 
look vertically from ground to sky. Canopy is analyzed as a proportion of total points hitting 
branch, twig or foliage. Note: Observations can be under tree canopy and still hit “openings” 
through tree canopy. See transect profile in lower right of Figure 1. 
2. Remote Sensing Method: canopy measured from aerial imagery. Landscape categorized into can-
opy/ shadow/ no-canopy (opening), other. Errors exist where shadows cover canopy and where 
imagery is distorted or poor quality. Canopy is analyzed as proportion of total area with canopy 
cover, no canopy, water, rock, other. Note: generally, entire “drip line” of tree is canopy. See 
stand “image” in Figure 1. 
3. Estimates at stand level: stand designations are variable and user-defined. Canopy cover within 
stands is estimated by averaging multiple transect samples (Transect in Fig. 1 = 30%; multiple 
transects needed to describe a stand), or summarizing remote sensing proportions within stand 
designation.  
4. Estimates from basal area: basal area taken at plot level is used to predict canopy cover based on 
published regressions. 
 
 
Figure 1. Displays the transect method of canopy cover measurement as well as the various elements 
and composition of stand structure. 
 

 4 
PRESETTLEMENT REFERENCE CONDITIONS 
Q: What are presettlement reference conditions 
for canopy cover? 
 
A: Canopy cover determined from reconstructed 
sites ranged from 10% to 22% with a median 
of 16.7% (Table 3). Canopy cover today is sig-
nificantly greater than historical canopy cover 
reference conditions as depicted in Figure 2. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canopy cover, when combined with other indicators, 
can provide valuable information for forest structur-
al conditions and how current stands compare to a 
desired condition. However, canopy cover as a stand
-alone metric does not provide an adequate tool for 
assessing the array of structural characteristics im-
portant in setting desired conditions for restoring 
forest structure. 
Figure 2. In 1876 
(top), 17% of the 
entire 80 acres at 
Chimney Springs 
were under cano-
py, while 83% was 
in openings > 0.1 
acre. 
In 
1990 
(bottom), only 3% 
of the 80 acres at 
Chimney Springs 
remained in open-
ings > 0.1 acre. 
 
 
 
Table 3: Select reconstructions from ponderosa pine forests. 
 
PP = Ponderosa pine; PP-Oak = Ponderosa pine–Gambel oak; PP/MC = Ponderosa pine, Mixed conifer 
References 
Covington, W.W., Fulé, P.Z., and Moore, M.M. (1997).  Determining reference conditions for ecosystem management of south-
western ponderosa pine forests.  Ecological Applications, 7(3):895-908.  
 
Covington, W.W. and Sacket, S.S. (1986).  Effect of Periodic Burning on Soil Nitrogen Concentrations in Ponderosa Pine.  Soil 
Science Society of America Journal, 50(2):452-457.  
 
Fornwalt, P.J., Kaufmann, M.R., Stoker, J.M. and Huckaby, L.S. (2002). Using the Forest Vegetation Simulator to reconstruct his-
torical stand conditions in the Colorado Front Range. In Second Forest Vegetation Simulator Conference, Crookston, N. L. and 
R. N. Havis, Comps., MRS-P-25, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, 
UT, 108. 
 
Sánchez Meador, A.J., Parysow, P.F., and Moore, M.M. (2011).  A New Method for Delineating Tree Patches and Assessing Spa-
tial Reference Conditions of Ponderosa Pine Forests in Northern Arizona.  Restoration Ecology, 19(4):490-499.  
 
White, A.S. (1985).  Presettlement Regeneration Patterns in a Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Stand.  Ecology, 66(2):589-594. 
