Region's forests to get $9 million 
By DAILY SUN STAFF 
09/20/2000 
 
Fire prevention and forest restoration efforts in northern Arizona could receive nearly $9 
million in new funds as early as October under an emergency appropriation bill that is set 
for passage by Congress this week.  
The money would go to Northern Arizona University's Ecological Restoration Institute, 
which has pioneered the so-called "Flagstaff Model" of forest restoration that is being 
tested in the forests around Flagstaff.  
The emergency appropriation is sponsored by U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., who is 
shepherding it through the Senate Appropriations Committee.  
Kyl said this morning that he hopes to have the emergency bill on President Clinton's 
desk by Oct. 1 so that some of the money can be spent in the field this year.  
"We're trying to make sure this money is available in the next couple of months, not wait 
until next year," said Kyl, in a telephone interview from Washington, D.C.  
Kyl met earlier in the morning with Prof. Wallace Covington, director of the restoration 
institute, to iron out details of the appropriation.  
Covington said some of the money would go into ongoing research on forest thinning, 
controlled burns and wildlife impacts. The rest would go to ongoing restoration and 
thinning projects being conducted by the partners of the institute, including the Grand 
Canyon Forests Partnership, the Flagstaff Fire Department, and State Lands.  
"We need to make the investment now to prevent the fires of 2005," said Covington, who 
joined Kyl in the conference call from Washington.  
"This appropriation will provide the experience and the science base and allow us to 
collect more information and get it into the hands of communities to help them prevent 
the kinds of fires that occurred this last year."  
Kyl said he believes Congress will support increased appropriations to the kind of forest 
restoration work that Covington advocates after one of the West's biggest wildfire 
seasons on record. Covington advocates a combination of intensive thinning and 
prescribed burns to clear out overgrown forests that are more prone to disastrous crown 
fires.  

But Covington said his research model does not offer a one-size-fits-all approach to 
restoring forest health. Instead, he advocates citizen-based restoration partnerships of the 
type formed in Flagstaff that will use his research to tailor forest projects appropriate to 
their communities.  
"We can't just sit around and hope some perfect solution falls out of the sky," he said. 
"We are learning by doing. We're trying things in such a way that we can answer 
questions on wildlife, aesthetics, old growth trees and other aspects of forest health."  
In Flagstaff, the Grand Canyon Forest Partnership has used Covington's model to propose 
the treatment of 100,000 acres of forest in the region. Some critics have charged that the 
regimen of cutting trees up to 16 inches in diameter is too severe, but Covington says he 
is encouraged by the positive response he has gotten to his model after it received 
attention in the national news media this summer.  
"We want to share what we've learned," said Covington. "We don't want people to have 
to reinvent the wheel."  
Kyl said that in addition to the $8.8 million in emergency funds this year for the institute, 
there will be an additional $1.9 million next year for ongoing research and forest 
treatment operations. He is also optimistic that a much bigger appropriation being 
proposed by the Clinton administration to address this year's fires will include funds for 
remediation and restoration.  
"I hope this next budget will be the first opportunity to move forward on meaningful 
forest restoration," Kyl said.  
 
