 
 
Grand Canyon seeks tree-cutting experiment 
By MICHELLE RUSHLO 
Associated Press Writer 
 
07/04/1999 
GRAND CANYON NATIONAL PARK -- The sound of saws and the smell of burning 
wood could soon permeate the Grand Canyon. 
It won't be the result of commercial logging or a runaway wildfire but an experiment 
aimed at saving one of the Southwest's last stands of old-growth ponderosa pine trees, 
particularly the giants that have stood watch over the canyon for centuries. 
Years of fire suppression have allowed the proliferation of small trees and scrubby brush 
that now threaten to choke the ancient trees, said R.V. Ward, a Grand Canyon National 
Park biologist. 
"It's a war out there. They compete for nutrients, for water. Like people, the younger trees 
can be more vigorous," Ward said. 
Park officials and a group of scientists from Northern Arizona University are seeking 
ways to reduce that competition while lowering the risk of ravaging wildfires. 
They are proposing a group of experiments for the South and North Rims of the canyon 
using 160 of the park's roughly 1.2 million acres. 
The same four experiments would be done on 20-acre blocks on each rim and would 
include: 
* Doing nothing. The plots would be used as controls against which to compare the other 
treatments. 
* Controlled burn. A fire would be set in these sections and allowed to burn the entire 
plots. 
* Minimal thinning. Park officials would use hand saws to take out some of the smallest 
trees in an effort to fireproof the areas. 
* Full restoration. Many trees, some up to 12 inches in diameter, would be taken out to 
make the forest look like it did a century ago, before aggressive fire suppression started. 

Environmental groups generally support efforts to restore forests but are wary of some of 
the experiments being proposed at the Grand Canyon. 
Martos Hoffman, executive director of the Southwest Forest Alliance, said the full 
restoration plans are too experimental for a premiere national park.  
"They are very aggressive. It looks like a very intense timber harvest. The extreme nature 
is not one that we can all get behind," said Hoffman, whose group is an umbrella 
organization for 65 environmental and sportsmen organizations. 
Rob Smith, the Sierra Club's Southwest staff director, worries because the full restoration 
experiments will require the use of logging trucks to haul logs. 
"We just thought that was overkill," Smith said. 
Hoffman and Smith said they are concerned about the location chosen for the 
experimental plots on the North Rim. They fall, in part, in an area that has been proposed 
for a wilderness area designation, which would protect it from almost all human 
interference. 
"Until they know what they are doing ... we should not be going into the wilderness to 
find out," Smith said. 
But Wally Covington, the Northern Arizona University professor who developed the 
forest experiments, said some have been tried elsewhere in northern Arizona with some 
success. 
In experiments that began 15 years ago, a combination of thinning and burning yielded 
more grasses and wildflowers, which in turn brings a larger variety of birds, butterflies 
and small rodents, he said. 
The site at the Grand Canyon was chosen because most Forest Service land is devoid of 
old-growth trees, which were logged out long ago under commercial permits, Covington 
said. 
"The Grand Canyon is the largest area of ponderosa pine in an uncut area. The longer we 
delay the kind of data collection that they need (to make a decision on forest restoration), 
the greater the threat," Covington said. 
Ward said large ponderosa pines used to be able to survive periodic fires that would 
sweep through the forest, burning off the brush and small trees. 
But now because of overcrowding, fires sweep treetop to treetop, consuming tens of 
thousands of acres. In 1996, 53,000 acres were charred in a wildfire that struck the park 
and the national forest surrounding it. 

"Once they get roaring, they have so much fuel, it just rips through the countryside," he 
said. 
Threats of similar fires have made Ward and other park officials anxious about finding a 
forest restoration plan. They are reviewing public comments about the experiments and 
hope to have a decision this fall on whether to proceed. 
Ward wants to conduct the entire forest experiment, but concedes politics may make the 
full restoration proposal impossible. 
"We do want to do this experiment, but we do realize that the full restoration may be too 
vigorous. We may need to find a treatment that, frankly, gives environmentalists less 
heartburn," he said. 
