This article appeared in a journal published by Elsevier. The attached
copy is furnished to the author for internal non-commercial research
and education use, including for instruction at the authors institution
and sharing with colleagues.
Other uses, including reproduction and distribution, or selling or
licensing copies, or posting to personal, institutional or third party
websites are prohibited.
In most cases authors are permitted to post their version of the
article (e.g. in Word or Tex form) to their personal website or
institutional repository. Authors requiring further information
regarding Elsevier’s archiving and manuscript policies are
encouraged to visit:
http://www.elsevier.com/copyright

Author's personal copy
Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forest Ecology and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/foreco
Review
Post-wildﬁre seeding in forests of the western United States:
An evidence-based review
Donna Peppin a, Peter Z. Fulé a,∗, Carolyn Hull Sieg b, Jan L. Beyers c, Molly E. Hunter a
a School of Forestry and Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 200 East Pine Knoll Drive, Room 116, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5018, USA
b USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station – Flagstaff Lab, 2500 South Pine Knoll Drive, Flagstaff, AZ 86001, USA
c USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station, Forest Fire Laboratory, 4955 Canyon Crest Drive, Riverside, CA 92507, USA
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 11 March 2010
Received in revised form 29 May 2010
Accepted 3 June 2010
Keywords:
Systematic review
Post-wildﬁre rehabilitation
Plant community recovery
Soil stabilization
Invasive species
a b s t r a c t
Broadcast seeding is one of the most widely used post-wildﬁre emergency response treatments intended
to reduce soil erosion, increase vegetative ground cover, and minimize establishment and spread of non-
native plant species. We conducted an evidence-based review to examine the effectiveness and effects of
post-wildﬁre seeding treatments on soil stabilization, non-native species invasion, and plant community
recovery in the western U.S. We reviewed 94 scientiﬁc papers and agency monitoring reports identiﬁed
using a systematic search protocol. As sampling designs have become more rigorous in recent years,
evidence that seeding is effective in reducing erosion has decreased. Of highest and high quality studies
evaluating soil erosion, 92% (11 of 12) were published since 2000, none of which showed an effective
result. Before 2000, the majority of the studies (71%) fell into the lowest quality categories, of which 72%
showed seeding to be effective. The majority of studies (20 of 27, 74%) evaluating soil erosion in seeded
versus unseeded controls showed that seeding did not reduce erosion relative to unseeded controls.
Even when seeding signiﬁcantly increased vegetative cover, seeded sites rarely supported plant cover
levels considered sufﬁcient to stabilize soils within the ﬁrst and second year post-wildﬁre. Of the 11
studies evaluating seeding effectiveness for curtailing invasions of non-native plant species, an almost
equal percentage found seeding treatments to be either effective (54%, 6 studies) or ineffective (45%, 5
studies). However, the majority of effective and ineffective treatments (83% and 80%, respectively) used
non-native species. Sixteen of 26 studies (62%) evaluating seeding effects on plant communities reported
that seeding suppressed recovery of native plants, although data on long-term impacts of this reduction
are limited. The literature suggests that post-wildﬁre seeding does little to protect soil in the short-term,
has equivocal effect on invasion of non-native species, and can have negative effects on native vegetation
recovery, although long-term studies are needed to assess lasting impacts of seeded species.
© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents
1.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
573
2.
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
574
3.
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
575
3.1.
Does seeding after severe forest ﬁres in the western United States reduce soil erosion?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
575
3.2.
Does seeding reduce non-native species invasions in severely burned forest land in the western United States? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
578
3.3.
Does seeding after severe forest ﬁres in the western United States affect native plant community recovery? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
578
4.
Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
581
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
581
Appendix A. Evidence-based review references (with quality of evidence ratings) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
581
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
584
∗Corresponding author at: P.O. Box 15081, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA.
Tel.: +1 928 523 1463; fax: +1 928 523 0296.
E-mail addresses: donna.peppin@nau.edu (D. Peppin), Pete.Fule@nau.edu
(P.Z. Fulé), csieg@fs.fed.us (C.H. Sieg), jbeyers@fs.fed.us (J.L. Beyers),
Molly.Hunter@nau.edu (M.E. Hunter).
1. Introduction
By consuming protective vegetation and litter cover, high-
intensity wildﬁres frequently result in greatly increased erosion,
runoff, and sediment transport that can threaten downstream
0378-1127/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2010.06.004

Author's personal copy
574
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
resources and infrastructure (DeBano et al., 1998; Neary et al.,
2005). The increased availability of light and nutrients after wildﬁre
also creates conditions favorable for invasion of non-native plant
species (DeBano et al., 1998; Crawford et al., 2001; Keeley et al.,
2003; Wang and Kemball, 2005; Freeman et al., 2007). Land man-
agement agencies in the United States are required to assess burned
areas and to prescribe emergency watershed-rehabilitation mea-
sures when and where deemed necessary to minimize threats to
life and property or to stabilize and prevent further unacceptable
degradation to natural and cultural resources resulting from the
effects of a wildﬁre (USDA, 2004; USDI, 2006). Aerial seeding of
grasses, typically non-native annuals or short-lived perennials, has
been the most commonly used post-wildﬁre rehabilitation treat-
ment to establish ground cover for erosion control and reduce
non-native species invasions (Robichaud et al., 2000; Beyers, 2004).
Federal policy in the U.S. currently mandates use of seed from
native species for post-wildﬁre rehabilitation when available and
economically feasible (Richards et al., 1998). Although the use of
native species has increased (Beyers, 2004; Wolfson and Sieg, in
press), high costs and inadequate availability often limit inclusion
of native plants in post-wildﬁre seedings. Furthermore, a vague def-
inition of the term “native” has led to inconsistent interpretations
regarding the functional types and geographic origins of native
species used (Richards et al., 1998). Despite ongoing debates over
the efﬁcacy of post-wildﬁre seeding and potential negative impacts
on natural plant community recovery, seeding remains a widely
used stabilization treatment in forested ecosystems throughout the
western U.S. (Wolfson and Sieg, in press).
In 2000, Robichaud et al. reviewed the effectiveness and impacts
of the entire suite of burned area rehabilitation treatments used
on U.S. Forest Service land, including post-ﬁre seeding. Beyers
(2004) published a review speciﬁc to post-wildﬁre seeding, but
a good part of the conclusions were drawn from studies occur-
ring in chaparral. Almost all of the seeding projects reviewed
in these two publications used non-native species. Since these
reviews appeared, several developments have altered the context
of post-wildﬁre seeding in the western U.S. These include increased
research and quantitative monitoring on post-wildﬁre seeding,
largely in response to information needs highlighted in the review
publications; increased use of and allocation of funds for native seed
mixes (Wolfson and Sieg, in press); stronger policy direction for
the use of locally adapted and genetically appropriate seed sources
(seed sources adapted to local site conditions and genetically com-
patible with existing plant populations) (GAO, 2003; Rogers and
Montalvo, 2004; USDA, 2006); and increasing size and severity of
wildﬁres across the western U.S. (McKenzie et al., 2004; Westerling
et al., 2006; Littell et al., 2009). The time is ripe for a new analysis of
the effectiveness and ecological impacts of post-wildﬁre seeding.
To examine the effectiveness and effects of post-wildﬁre seed-
ing on soils and native plant communities in forested ecosystems
across the western U.S., we conducted a systematic review of sci-
entiﬁc literature and unpublished reports. We addressed three
questions pertaining to post-wildﬁre seeding treatment effective-
ness and effects: (1) Does seeding after severe forest ﬁres reduce
soil erosion? (2) Is seeding effective at reducing non-native plant
invasion into burned areas? and (3) Does post-wildﬁre seeding
affect native plant community recovery? The systematic review
methodology is relatively new in natural resource disciplines but
has been widely used in medical sciences (Fazey et al., 2005;
Pullin and Stewart, 2006). This methodology follows a rigorous,
predetermined protocol which greatly improves traditional narra-
tives or “vote-counting” reviews by reducing bias and enhancing
the accuracy, reliability, and usefulness of the review (Gates,
2002). Both land managers and the broader scientiﬁc commu-
nity should beneﬁt from the information contained within the
review.
Table 1
Inclusion categories and speciﬁed inclusion criteria used when evaluating post-
wildﬁre studies to be included in the review.
Inclusion category
Speciﬁed inclusion criteria
Subject(s) studied
Seeding studies conducted in forests burned by
wildﬁre in the western U.S. since 1970.
Experimental seeding studies in controlled
burns, such as prescribed ﬁres, were also
included if the information was deemed
relevant to post-wildﬁre seeding. Non-wildﬁre
seeding data were summarized separately
from wildﬁre data.
Treatment(s)
Seeding herbaceous plant or shrub seed alone
or in combination with other post-wildﬁre
rehabilitation activities such as mulching,
fertilizing, soil ripping, and log erosion barriers.
Outcome(s)
Soil stabilization attributes, such as runoff,
surface erosion, and sediment yield, and
change in plant community attributes, such as
cover, richness, diversity, biomass, and
composition of native and non-native
herbaceous plants, shrubs, and trees.
2. Methods
We conducted our formal systematic review in stages estab-
lished by Pullin and Stewart (2006): (1) question formulation, (2)
protocol formation and search strategy, (3) data extraction, and (4)
analysis. The review team drafted primary and secondary study
questions, which were further reﬁned by managers, scientists, and
outside experts. For this review, we deﬁned forested ecosystems
as those dominated by coniferous and/or deciduous trees occur-
ring at elevations above grasslands, pinyon-juniper woodlands, or
chaparral vegetation in the western U.S.
We produced a review protocol to guide key decisions:
(1)
search,
inclusion,
and
rejection
criteria;
(2)
extracting
evidence;
and
(3)
comparing
evidence.
We
submitted
our
review protocol to The Centre for Evidence-Based Conservation
(www.cebc.bangor.ac.uk/; Systematic Review No. 60), an interna-
tional organization that hosts systematic review protocols online
and facilitates review by a worldwide audience, for independent
review.
We searched online databases (JSTOR, Google Scholar, For-
est Science Database, Ingenta, Web of Science, AGRICOLA), online
government collections, and electronic university libraries using
combinations of key search terms: seeding AND ﬁre, seeding AND
burn, seeding AND wildﬁre, seeding AND erosion, and seeding AND
native species. Refereed journal articles, peer-reviewed reports
(such as government documents and conference proceedings), the-
ses and dissertations, and unpublished literature were considered.
Potential studies were then evaluated for inclusion according to
speciﬁed criteria (Table 1). All potentially relevant publications
were imported into a database, then examined by the senior author
for ﬁnal inclusion decisions.
For consistency, each paper was reviewed by two members of
the review panel. Reviewers did not evaluate papers they authored.
Both qualitative and quantitative data were extracted. The ﬁnal
review database was then reviewed by the senior author to locate
any inconsistencies in recorded data, which were discussed with
panel members and resolved.
We assigned “quality of evidence” ratings (standard terminol-
ogy used in systematic reviews and based on objective criteria;
Baker and Shinneman, 2004; Pullin and Stewart, 2006) for each
study based on experimental design and statistical robustness
(Table 2). Statistically robust data from replicated randomized and
controlled experiments were judged to be of “highest” quality;
whereas unreplicated, uncontrolled, qualitative data had “lowest”
quality of evidence. We evaluated post-wildﬁre seeding effective-

Author's personal copy
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
575
Table 2
Criteria for rating the quality of evidence presented in the post-wildﬁre papers
reviewed (occurring in forested ecosystems in the western U.S.) and their respective
categories.
Study designa and statistical robustness
Quality of evidence
Statistically robust evidence obtained from
replicated randomized and controlled
experiments with sampling occurring after
seeding treatments in areas burned by
wildﬁre, prescribed burn, or slash pile
burning
Highest
Unreplicated, controlled, observational or
monitoring report (multiple locations);
Before After Control Impact study (BACI)
with reliable quantitative data from
sampling occurring after seeding treatments
in areas burned by wildﬁre, prescribed burn,
or slash pile burning; peer-reviewed reviews
on post-wildﬁre seeding
High
Unreplicated, controlled, observational or
monitoring report (single location) with
reliable quantitative data
Medium
Unreplicated, uncontrolled, observational or
monitoring report; quantitative data
Low
Unreplicated, uncontrolled, qualitative data;
anecdotal observation; expert opinion; or
review of post-wildﬁre seeding (not
peer-reviewed with qualitative data)
Lowest
a Major study design categories included: replicated randomized experiment,
observational (multiple location case study), observational (single location case
study), monitoring report with quantitative data, monitoring report with qualitative
data, BACI, review paper, and expert opinion.
ness based on the treatment’s effectiveness in reducing: (1) erosion
and sedimentation; (2) non-native species invasion; and (3) effects
on native plant community recovery. Studies were examined for
overall seeding treatment effectiveness or ecosystem impacts in
each category (Table 3). When available, quantitative data from
seeded and unseeded treatments were compared. Some studies
had multiple sites; we made comparisons based on the number
of sites rather than the total number of publications. Each study
or individual site within a study was given an effectiveness rat-
ing (Table 4). Studies/sites rated as “no difference in effectiveness”
were not statistically or perceivably different in their effectiveness,
whereas those judged to be “ineffective” were counter-productive
in their effectiveness to a speciﬁed impact category (e.g., effect was
opposite of that intended).
For this review, we used descriptive statistics to explore rela-
tionships between post-wildﬁre seeding treatments and associated
variables as well as the inﬂuence of time since ﬁre. We divided rel-
evant papers into ecoregions (Bailey, 1983; Table 5) for analysis of
geographic inﬂuences. We characterized the types of plant species
seeded as non-native or native. Nativity was assigned according to
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resource Conservation
Service Plants Database (NRCS, 2010).
Table 3
Measurements reported in papers examining post-wildﬁre seeding in forested
ecosystems in the western U.S. that were used to judge overall seeding treatment
effectiveness or ecosystem impacts.
Category
Measures of effectiveness/impacts
Erosion control
Decreased sediment yield, surface
erosion, or runoff
Non-native species
Decreased cover, frequency, density, or
species richness of non-native invasive
plants
Effects on plant communities
Negative changes to native plant
community attributes such as cover,
biomass, composition, frequency,
species richness, and density
Table 4
Criteria for rating seeding treatment effectiveness and their respective categories in
the post-wildﬁre studies reviewed (occurring in forested ecosystems in the western
U.S.).
Criteria for rating seeding treatment
effectiveness
Effectiveness rating
Sufﬁcient evidence exists to conclude that
seeding was statistically or perceivably
effective in decreasing erosion, increasing
cover, or reducing non-native species
invasions without negative effects
Effective
Sufﬁcient evidence exists to conclude that
seeding was effective under some but not all
circumstances or seeding was effective, but
with potentially negative ecosystem impacts
Minimal effectiveness
Sufﬁcient information exists to conclude that
seeding treatments in treated and untreated
controls were not statistically or perceivably
different in their effectiveness for increasing
cover, reducing erosion, and/or reducing
non-native species invasions
No difference in effectiveness
Sufﬁcient evidence exists to conclude that
seeding was statistically or perceivably
different in effectiveness, where treatments
were counter-productive in their
effectiveness (e.g. effect was opposite of
what was intended); potentially negative
ecosystem impacts exist
Ineffective
For each review question, we draw conclusions (when possi-
ble) based on data from 1970 to 1999, including papers previously
reviewed by Robichaud et al. (2000), and on data published from
2000 to 2009. Given the policy shifts, we expected the most recent
studies to include more use of native species in seed mixes and
address invasive plant control in burned forests.
3. Results and discussion
Approximately 19,455 studies were identiﬁed through the liter-
ature search, of which 94 were considered relevant after applying
inclusion criteria (Table 1) and receiving full review (see Appendix
A). Within this dataset (n = 94), replicated and randomized exper-
iments made up the largest category (19%, Fig. 1). In the more
recent period, 2000–2009 (n = 57), there was a greater proportion
of replicated randomized experiments (46%), review papers (29%),
and expert opinions (27%) compared to 1970–1999 (n = 37) (Fig. 1).
Using quality of evidence criteria, during the time period between
1970 and 1999, 6 studies (16%) were of highest quality, 5 stud-
ies (14%) were high quality, 4 studies (11%) were medium quality,
and the majority (60%) were in the low and lowest quality cate-
gory (Fig. 2). The proportion of studies in these categories changed
slightly for the 2000–2009 papers, with the greatest increase in the
high quality of evidence category (28%).
3.1. Does seeding after severe forest ﬁres in the western United
States reduce soil erosion?
Twenty-seven
studies
provided
evidence
regarding
post-
wildﬁre seeding effects on soil erosion in the western U.S. Authors
deﬁned erosion control in terms of decreases in sediment yield,
runoff, or surface erosion. Using our effectiveness classiﬁcation
(Table 4), 9 of the 27 studies (33%) showed seeding to be effec-
tive, 7 (26%) showed minimal effectiveness or ineffectiveness, and
4 (15%) showed no difference in effectiveness of seeding in reduc-
ing erosion. However, the evidence for seeding effectiveness drops
substantially when quality of evidence criteria (Table 2) are consid-
ered: none of the four studies with highest quality evidence found
seeding to be effective or even minimally effective in reducing
soil erosion when compared to unseeded control plots. For exam-

Author's personal copy
576
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
Table 5
Number of sites in published post-wildﬁre studies conducted in forested ecosystems in the western U.S. reporting measures of seeding “success” by ecoregion (Bailey, 1983)
during the ﬁrst 2 years following ﬁre.
Ecoregion name
Sites showing
seeding signiﬁcantly
increased cover
% of sites showing >30
cover (no. of sites)
% of sites showing >60%
cover (no. of sites)
Sites showing
erosion
measurements
Those showing seeding
signiﬁcantly reduced
erosion
Seeded
Unseeded
Seeded
Unseeded
Post-wildﬁre year 1
Marine Regime Mountains
6
3
33 (2)
17 (1)
0
0
5
0
Temperate Steppe Regime Mountains
8
0
50 (4)
50 (4)
0
0
4
0
Tropical/Subtropical Regime Mountains
3
0
100 (3)
100 (3)
0
0
0
–
Mediterranean Regime Mountains
12
9
58 (7)
8 (1)
33 (4)
0
3
0
Combined
29
12
55 (16)
31 (9)
14 (4)
0
12
0
Post-wildﬁre year 2
Marine Regime Mountains
4
1
100 (4)
75 (3)
0
0
5
0
Temperate Steppe Regime Mountains
7
0
71 (5)
71 (5)
0
14 (1)
5
1
Mediterranean Regime Mountains
7
6
86 (6)
14 (1)
71 (5)
0
0
0
Combined
18
7
83 (15)
50 (9)
28 (5)
6 (1)
10
1
ple, Robichaud et al. (2006), in a study conducted in north-central
Washington, used a randomized block design of four plots with
controls, replicated eight times, to compare the effects of seeding
with winter wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and fertilizing on post-
wildﬁre erosion rates. They found no reduction in erosion rates for
seeding or fertilization treatments, alone or in combination, at any
time during the 4-year study. Five of the eight studies (63%) with
high quality evidence found seeding to be ineffective, while two
reported minimal effectiveness. The remaining study reported that
seeding (seeded species unknown) was effective for erosion reduc-
tion only in combination with mulching and log erosion barriers on
a ﬁre in southwestern Colorado (DeWolfe et al., 2008).
More evidence for seeding effectiveness was reported in studies
with lower quality evidence. One of three medium quality studies,
three of four low quality studies, and all eight lowest quality stud-
ies found seeding to be effective or minimally effective in reducing
erosion. For example, in a publication considered to have lowest
quality evidence, two subjectively chosen study areas were set
up within a single burned area in the Black Hills, South Dakota,
each with eight plots to assess sedimentation and runoff (Orr,
1970). The study found that a mixture of seeded non-native grass
and legume species dominated the cover at both sites throughout
the study and suggested that neither site would have reached a
60% ground-cover requirement for minimum soil stability within 4
Fig. 1. The number of papers by study design category for post-wildﬁre studies reviewed (occurring in forested ecosystems in the western U.S.) from 1970 to 1999 (37
papers) and those since 2000 (57 papers).

Author's personal copy
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
577
Fig. 2. The number of papers by quality of evidence for post-wildﬁre studies
reviewed (occurring in forested ecosystems in the western U.S.) from 1970 to 1999
(37 papers) and since 2000 (57 papers).
years without seeding; however, no unseeded sites were evaluated
(Orr, 1970).
As sampling designs have become more rigorous in recent years,
evidence that seeding is effective in reducing erosion has decreased.
None of the 16 studies published since 2000 concluded that seeding
was effective or minimally effective in reducing erosion compared
to controls, whereas seven of 11 studies published before 2000
found seeding to be in those categories. Only one of the earlier stud-
ies met the criteria for highest or high quality evidence, while 11of
the studies since 2000 did.
Only nine of the 27 studies used direct measures of sediment
yield from 30 seeded and unseeded sites to assess post-wildﬁre
seeding effectiveness. While seeded sites tended to produce less
sediment than unseeded sites the ﬁrst year after ﬁre (Fig. 3),
only seven of the sites showed a statistically signiﬁcant decrease
in erosion on seeded relative to unseeded sites. This largely
non-signiﬁcant trend toward sediment yield reduction was less
apparent in measurements from the second year post-wildﬁre and
essentially disappeared by the third and subsequent years. Fewer
studies quantiﬁed sediment yield in seeded and unseeded plots
Fig. 3. Amount of sediment yield versus time since ﬁre in seeded plots and unseeded
plots (data from 30 sites contained in nine studies assessing post-wildﬁre seeding
effectiveness for soil erosion in forested ecosystems in the western U.S.).
after 2 years, with only three studies continuing measurement
into the third and fourth year after ﬁre and two in year 5, mak-
ing assessment of overall trends difﬁcult. The studies continuing
measurements into the third to ﬁfth year after ﬁre showed little
sediment movement in either seeded or unseeded sites (Fig. 3),
indicating that slopes had largely stabilized. More longer term
studies are needed to conﬁrm the trend that slopes are largely sta-
bilized by the third year post-wildﬁre. If true, this would support
using only very short-lived plant species for post-wildﬁre seed-
ing.
Sediment movement is strongly related to the amount of cover
on a hillslope (Robichaud et al., 2006; Rough, 2007). Because so
few studies reported actual erosion measurements, we also used
vegetation cover as an indicator of seeding “success” for poten-
tial erosion control effectiveness (Dadkhah and Gifford, 1980;
Bruggink, 2007). We included studies from the ﬁrst and second year
after ﬁre that compared seeded treatments to unseeded plots in this
analysis. As was done in Robichaud et al. (2000) and Beyers (2004),
we used two levels of cover to indicate the potential for seeding to
reduce erosion. Cover between 30 and 60% was regarded as par-
tially effective at reducing erosion, and cover >60%, which has been
found to allow negligible sediment movement, was considered to
be effective (Noble, 1965; Orr, 1970).
Comparing cover measurements between seeded and unseeded
plots from 20 studies containing a total of 29 study sites, we found
that 12 sites (41%) had signiﬁcantly greater total plant cover on
seeded plots by the end of the ﬁrst year after ﬁre. Sixteen seeded
sites (55%) had >30 total plant cover in the ﬁrst year after ﬁre,
compared to only nine unseeded sites (31%; Table 5). Another four
seeded sites (14%) had >60% total plant cover after the ﬁrst-year
post-wildﬁre compared to none of the unseeded sites. However, of
the 12 sites where erosion was measured along with cover, none
showed that seeding signiﬁcantly reduced erosion in the ﬁrst year
after ﬁre.
In the second year after ﬁre, seeded sites were nearly four times
more likely to be stabilized than untreated sites based on percent
cover (Table 5). Second-year seeded sites had greater total cover
than did unseeded sites in 39% of the cases. Fifteen seeded sites
(83%) had plant cover that exceeded 30%, compared to only half (9
sites) of unseeded sites. Five seeded sites (28%) had adequate cover
(>60%) to reduce soil erosion to negligible amounts, compared to
only one unseeded site (6%). Despite these cover ﬁndings, only one
of the 10 studies measuring erosion in the second year showed
that seeding signiﬁcantly reduced erosion. It appears that greater
cover does not always produce less erosion. This could be due to
the timing of erosion-producing events – during winter or sum-
mer thunderstorms – relative to when plant and ground cover is
measured, typically at the end of the growing season. New stud-
ies that quantify cover and erosion events concurrently could help
address this conundrum. A main goal of post-wildﬁre stabilization
treatments is to reduce soil erosion in the year immediately follow-
ing a ﬁre (Robichaud et al., 2000). However, the ability of seeding
to effectively reduce erosion within the ﬁrst and even second year
post-wildﬁre depends largely of amount and timing of precipita-
tion events, not percent cover, as shown by minimal support for
the cover thresholds used.
Authors of all four review papers agreed that research to date
has failed to show any notable relationship between establishment
of vegetative cover and reduction of erosion within the ﬁrst year
after ﬁre (Beschta et al., 2004; Beyers, 2004; Wolfson and Sieg,
in press; Robichaud et al., 2000). This conclusion is not surpris-
ing as the majority of sediment movement often occurs before
plant cover is established (Robichaud et al., 2000). Interestingly,
our review suggests that seeding was more likely to increase plant
cover and therefore potentially reduce soil erosion in the Marine
and Mediterranean Regime Mountain ecoregions than in Temper-

Author's personal copy
578
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
ate Steppe Regime Mountains ecoregion (Table 5; see Bailey, 1983
for ecoregion boundaries).
In the Intermountain West and Rocky Mountains (Temperate
Steppe Regime Mountains), high-intensity short-duration rainfall
events often occur shortly after severe wildﬁres (Robichaud et
al., 2000). Watersheds within this region are therefore vulnera-
ble to heavy erosion immediately following ﬁre (Wagenbrenner
et al., 2006; Kunze and Stednick, 2006; Rough, 2007). In contrast,
forests of the Mediterranean and Marine Regimes (California and
the Paciﬁc Northwest) receive most precipitation during the winter
months as snow or are subjected to prolonged periods of rain-
fall, allowing seeded species to germinate under better conditions
(Anderson and Brooks, 1975; Roby, 1989; Amaranthus et al., 1993;
Robichaud et al., 2006; Peterson et al., 2007). Therefore, seeding
may be a more appropriate rehabilitation action in Mediterranean
and Marine Regimes than in Temperate Steppe Regime Mountains.
Several studies provide evidence that seeding for erosion control
may be more effective when done in concert with other treat-
ments (Maloney et al., 1995; Meyer et al., 2001; Earles et al., 2005;
DeWolfe et al., 2008), although other studies suggest that mulch
treatments alone may be more effective than seeding in reduc-
ing erosion (Wagenbrenner et al., 2006; Groen and Woods, 2008;
MacDonald and Larsen, 2009). For example, in a study conducted
in northwestern Montana, Groen and Woods (2008) found straw
mulch application at a rate of 2.24 Mg/ha resulted in 100% ground
cover and reduced rainsplash erosion by 87% in small test plots,
whereas an aerially seeded mixture of native grasses failed to pro-
vide enough ground cover to reduce the erosion rate relative to
untreated plots. In studies conducted in Colorado’s Front Range,
MacDonald and Larsen (2009) and Wagenbrenner et al. (2006) also
found straw mulch to be more effective than other treatments
(seeding alone, seeding and mulching, contour-felled logs, hydro-
mulch, and polyacrylamide) for reducing soil erosion following
wildﬁres. Seeded species in MacDonald and Larsen (2009) included
native cultivars and sterile cereal grains, while Wagenbrenner et al.
(2006) tested a mixture of non-natives plus sterile and non-sterile
cereal grains. In sum, the reviewed papers suggest that seeding
may be more effective when used with other erosion control mea-
sures, but mulching alone can provide as much or more cover then
all other treatment combined. Conversely, mulching can poten-
tially harm native ecosystems by inhibiting native species recovery
(Schuman et al., 1991; Bakker et al., 2003; Kruse et al., 2004) and
introducing non-native species through contaminated straw bales
(Kruse et al., 2004). The long-term consequences of mulching are
largely unknown and a critical area for future research.
3.2. Does seeding reduce non-native species invasions in severely
burned forest land in the western United States?
Post-wildﬁre seeding treatments are often designed to mitigate
or prevent invasions of undesirable non-native species (Robichaud
et al., 2000; USDA, 2004). Seeded grasses are thought to combat
non-native species due to their quick growth, capturing resources
ahead of invading non-native species (Robichaud et al., 2000;
Grime, 2001; Beyers, 2004). The 11 studies with direct data on seed-
ing effects on non-native species abundance were split: six studies
(55%) showed seeding to be effective in reducing non-natives,
whereas ﬁve studies (45%) showed it was not. The majority of high-
est quality studies (three of ﬁve) showed seeding to be effective
for reducing non-natives; however, two of those were conducted
in prescribed burn or slash pile burned areas. Only one of three
studies of high quality showed seeding to be effective for reducing
non-native species.
All of the papers on the effectiveness of seeding for reducing
non-native species invasion in forested ecosystems were published
since 1998, with more than half since 2004. This likely reﬂects the
increased interest in this kind of treatment by land management
agencies. Further research and longer term quantitative monitoring
are needed to assess more thoroughly the effectiveness of seeding
to prevent non-native species invasion after ﬁre.
Successful exclusion of non-natives often resulted when seeded
species produced high cover (Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004),
while ineffective studies generally showed no difference in total
cover on seeded and unseeded sites (Sexton, 1998; Hunter and Omi,
2006; Stella et al., in press). Of the six studies showing seeding to
be effective, ﬁve included non-native annual species in the seeding
treatments. Thus, successful suppression of non-seeded invaders
appears to result from the competitive advantage of other (seeded)
non-native species (Schoennagel and Waller, 1999; Barclay et al.,
2004; Keeley, 2004). These same studies and others showed suc-
cessful seeded species also displaced native species (Sexton, 1998;
Schoennagel and Waller, 1999; Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004;
Logar, 2006), in some cases through extended persistence in the
seeded sites (Sexton, 1998; Barclay et al., 2004; Hunter et al., 2006).
Two studies found that seed mixes were contaminated with exotics
(Sexton, 1998; Hunter et al., 2006). It appears that seeding to reduce
negative impacts of invading non-native species on post-wildﬁre
vegetation recovery may actually end up replacing one (or more)
competitive non-native species with another, thus being counter-
productive to the objective of the treatment.
Few studies have investigated the use of native species for
reducing non-native species invasion, and only one of the three
using native seed was conducted after a wildﬁre. Stella et al. (in
press) found that non-native species richness and abundance did
not differ among seeding treatments incorporating non-native and
native species mixes on three high-severity wildﬁres in Arizona.
The other studies were conducted following a prescribed burn in
northwestern Arizona (Springer et al., 2001) and following slash
pile burning in northern Arizona (Korb et al., 2004). Springer et
al. (2001) found that seeding certiﬁed “weed-free” native seeds
was ineffective in reducing non-natives, whereas Korb et al. (2004)
noted that seeding native species was effective only with the addi-
tion of soil amendments. Research on post-ﬁre seeding with native
species is clearly limited. Recently, debates over the use of “native”
species during rehabilitation and restoration have arisen based on
concern that using native seed from distant sources may contam-
inate local gene pools (Huenneke, 1991; Schmid, 1994; Linhart,
1995; Hufford and Mazer, 2003; Rogers and Montalvo, 2004); how-
ever, limited research has actually been conducted on the topic.
With increased incorporation of native species in post-ﬁre seeding
treatments, research investigating the effectiveness and effects of
using native species is warranted.
3.3. Does seeding after severe forest ﬁres in the western United
States affect native plant community recovery?
There is substantial evidence in older literature that seeded
species may suppress recovery of native herbaceous species and
woody plant seedlings (Beyers, 2004). Of the 26 papers with data
on post-wildﬁre seeding effects on native plant recovery reviewed
for this study, the majority (16 studies, 62%) found lower cover of
native species on seeded plots compared to unseeded plots, while
ﬁve studies (19%) showed greater native species cover on seeded
plots.
Of the highest (three out of six studies) and high quality (two
out of ﬁve studies) evidence studies ﬁnding a reduction of native
plant cover with seeding (ﬁve studies), three suggested that seeding
could have persistent effects on post-wildﬁre vegetation recovery.
For example, Stella (2009) found that annual and biennial native
forbs were signiﬁcantly reduced in seeded treatments (native and
annual non-native mix) compared to unseeded treatments the ﬁrst
year after ﬁre; this reduction persisted into the second year even

Author's personal copy
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
579
though the cover of seeded species declined. Another southwest-
ern U.S. study found a similar effect of seeding annual ryegrass
(Lolium perenne ssp. multiﬂorum (Lam.) Husnot) on native forbs
(Barclay et al., 2004): cover of native forbs in unseeded areas
increased from year 1 to year 2, but native forb cover in seeded
areas remained constant even though ryegrass cover declined. The
third study, conducted in the eastern Cascades, Washington, USA,
showed a reduction of native early-successional species and ﬁre-
dependent colonizers as a result of high frequency and cover of
seeded non-natives. The researchers suggested that seeding effects
could therefore alter native plant communities well beyond the life
of the seeded species (Schoennagel and Waller, 1999). Any persis-
tent effects seeding may have on native plant recovery can only be
determined through analysis of longer term monitoring data sets.
In contrast, two studies with highest and high quality evidence
found that seeding enhanced native plant cover (Springer et al.,
2001; Hunter and Omi, 2006). In a study conducted by Springer
et al. (2001), native species were seeded solely which may have
contributed to increased native species cover. Hunter and Omi
(2006) examined how seeded species (a mixture of native culti-
vars and non-native annual grasses) and native grasses responded
to increased availability of soil nitrogen and light after the Cerro
Grande Fire in New Mexico. They found that cover of native species
(those not seeded during post-ﬁre rehabilitation efforts) increased
over a 4-year period in seeded areas of low ﬁre severity and did
not differ between seeded and unseeded areas of high ﬁre sever-
ity, although seeded grass cover remained high. Results from these
studies indicate that what species are seeded and ﬁre severity play
a major role in determining any impacts seeded species may have
on native plant communities.
Both seeded species and native plant cover are highly inﬂu-
enced by post-wildﬁre precipitation. When unfavorable conditions
(e.g., low precipitation) occur, seeding often has no effect on native
species cover and/or recovery due to low success rates (Robichaud
et al., 2006; Wagenbrenner et al., 2006; Peterson et al., 2007). In
contrast, under favorable conditions seeded species can rapidly
dominate the post-wildﬁre environment, which in turn may lead to
low ﬁrst-year native plant recruitment and subsequent reductions
in native species over time. However, one long-term study revealed
that 31 years after a ﬁre in north-central Washington, non-native
cultivars which dominated seeded sites initially were completely
replaced by a diverse mixture of native graminoids, forbs, shrubs
and trees (Roche et al., 2008). This study suggests that non-native
grasses seeded after wildﬁres do not always have persistent effects
on native plant communities, but long-term datasets like this one
are rare.
Seeding treatment performance and effects are related to length
of time since ﬁre (Robichaud and Elliot, 2006; Rough, 2007). Cover
data from 15 studies containing 57 different study sites showed
decreased seeded cover relative to control plot cover with increas-
ing time since ﬁre (Fig. 4). Total cover on seeded plots was more
variable but only slightly higher on average than total cover on
control sites for 2 years post-wildﬁre; after 2 years, control cover
was consistently greater than seeded cover, although the number
of studies continuing measurements beyond this timeframe was
limited. Of 13 sites with greater cover on seeded than unseeded
sites in the ﬁrst and/or second year post-wildﬁre, the majority
(10 sites) occurred in ecoregions characterized by favorable rain-
fall intensity, amounts, and timing. In addition, in all of these sites
annual cereal grains or non-native perennial grass species were
either seeded alone (eight sites) or as a predominant proportion of
a mix with natives cultivars and legumes (ﬁve sites) (Anderson and
Brooks, 1975; Grifﬁn, 1982; Amaranthus, 1989; Amaranthus et al.,
1993; Holzworth et al., 2003; Keeley, 2004; Logar, 2006; Roche et
al., 2008). These results suggest that seeded species, in particular
annual cereal grains, may exit the system quickly (Kuenzi et al.,
Fig. 4. Ratio between seeded and control cover estimates versus time since ﬁre in
years (data from 57 sites contained in 15 studies assessing post-wildﬁre seeding
treatment performance in forested ecosystems in the western U.S.). Ratios greater
than one have greater seeded cover than control cover.
2008) or be outcompeted by native or naturalized species after 2
years. However, data beyond 2 years from areas seeded with annual
cereal grains are rare, so studies quantifying their ability for rapid
die-off are limited. In addition, the lack of long-term studies com-
promises assessment of overall trends in post-wildﬁre effects on
plant communities, something that only long-term data sets can
develop.
Based on data from all 57 sites, by 4 years after ﬁre both seeded
and unseeded sites supported approximately 45% total plant cover
(seeded + unseeded species) and only about 40% total plant cover
after 5 years (Fig. 5). Seeded cover (seeded species only) was rela-
tively high for the ﬁrst 3 years after ﬁre (about the same as control
cover (unseeded) during the ﬁrst 2 years) but declined substan-
tially to 13% and 14% in years 4 and 5, respectively. The higher
initial seeded cover suggests that one of the major goals of post-
wildﬁre rehabilitation was being effectively met: seeded species
established quickly and lasted for a few years, then decreased rel-
ative to other species. However, total cover in seeded sites and
controls was nearly identical by years 4 and 5, suggesting that
the remaining seeded species were offsetting local plant species
that would otherwise occupy the site. Regardless of species seeded,
total cover values converged at 4–5 years post-wildﬁre, suggest-
ing that ecosystems may only support a threshold level of plant
cover (Connell and Slatyer, 1977; Noble and Slatyer, 1977) and
post-wildﬁre seeding actually suppresses the establishment of local
species after ﬁres (Anderson and Brooks, 1975; Schoennagel and
Waller, 1999; Sexton, 1998; Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004).
Fire restoration research in eastern Spain suggests that cover in the
seeded plots and in the controls may reach similar values even more
quickly under optimal conditions (Bautista et al., 1997; Vallejo and
Alloza, 1998), in which case seeding may not provide any additional
beneﬁt to post-wildﬁre landscapes.
Data from this review cannot assess the differences in vege-
tation composition between seeded and non-seeded sites. Longer
term monitoring results (i.e. >5 years) are needed to assess last-
ing impacts of seeded species. Assessment of soil seed banks is
also needed to determine whether seed of non-persistent seeded
species can remain viable within the seed bank (Grifﬁn, 1982).
Seeding can negatively affect native plant communities by
reducing native species richness through seeded species domi-
nance in the ﬁrst and/or second year after ﬁre. Authors deﬁned
seeded species dominance in terms of high cover, biomass, density,
and/or frequency. Seven of nine studies assessing seeding treat-

Author's personal copy
580
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
Fig.
5. Average
(a)
seeded
cover
(seeded
species
only),
(b)
total
cover
(seeded + unseeded species), and (c) control cover (unseeded) versus time since ﬁre
(data from 57 sites contained in 15 studies assessing post-wildﬁre seeding treatment
performance in forested ecosystems in the western U.S.).
ment effects on native species richness reported reduced native
species richness, while the remaining two showed no difference
in native species richness on seeded versus unseeded controls.
Six studies reporting decreased native species richness were of
highest and high quality evidence, two-thirds of which were pub-
lished since 2000. Reduced native species richness is often a
function of high dominance by seeded species (Conard et al., 1991;
Fig. 6. Average percent shrub cover in seeded and unseeded sites versus time since
ﬁre in years (data from 16 sites contained in 14 studies assessing post-wildﬁre seed-
ing effects of seeded grasses on shrub establishment in forested ecosystems in the
western U.S.).
Amaranthus et al., 1993; Sexton, 1998; Schoennagel and Waller,
1999; Keeley, 2004). In ﬁve cases, studies reported high seeded
species dominance coincident with reduced native species rich-
ness. For example, Barclay et al. (2004) noted a reduction in native
forb richness in the second year following ﬁre in north-central
New Mexico coincident with low seeded annual ryegrass cover.
However, total cover was also reported to be low; thus, the rela-
tive abundance of seeded ryegrass compared to other species may
have remained high. The authors suggested that dominant ryegrass
cover may have led to the initial suppression of native species, lead-
ing to a subsequent lack of reproduction of native forbs. In the two
studies reporting no difference in native species richness between
seeded and unseeded plots, one showed minimal cover of seeded
annual species in both the ﬁrst and second year post-wildﬁre in
the Southwest (Stella, 2009). The other found that although seeded
non-native annual and perennial grass and legume species had
high cover and frequency in seeded plots in the eastern Cascades, a
native plant, pinegrass (Calamagrostis rubescensBuckley), also dom-
inated the site, which may have counteracted any effects of seeded
species abundance (Schoennagel, 1997).
A number of studies examined competitive effects of seeded
grasses on woody plant establishment. The potential for seeded
grasses to compete with woody plant species can be viewed as
positive or negative depending on the ecosystem or site being reha-
bilitated. Of 14 papers investigating post-wildﬁre seeding effects
on tree seedling growth and shrub cover, the majority (11 papers)
found seeding to negatively affect woody plant establishment. All
studies seeded only grasses in treated plots. Two of the four studies
providing highest or high quality evidence found that seeding nega-
tively affected tree seedling and/or shrub growth and survival. One
paper reported seeding had no effect on the growth and survival of
woody species, while the other showed seeding improved estab-
lishment. Of ﬁve studies quantifying shrub cover in sites seeded
with non-native species versus unseeded controls (16 sites), shrub
cover in unseeded plots was almost always higher than in seeded
plots (Fig. 6).
Soil moisture may inﬂuence establishment and survival of
trees and shrubs; soil moisture can be depleted more rapidly on
seeded sites yielding high plant production, thus limiting water
availability to woody plant species (Elliott and White, 1987). For
example, Amaranthus et al. (1993) found that seeded annual rye-
grass suppressed ﬁrst-year sugar pine (Pinus lambertiana Douglas)
seedling growth in southwestern Oregon by lowering soil mois-

Author's personal copy
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
581
ture availability and reducing root-tip and mycorrhiza formation.
Six other studies found reduced conifer seedlings and/or shrub
growth and survival on sites dominated by seeded annual non-
native species(Grifﬁn, 1982; Conard et al., 1991; Schoennagel and
Waller, 1999; Barclay et al., 2004; Keeley, 2004; Kruse et al., 2004).
In contrast, Sexton (1998) noted no difference in ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa Dougl. Ex Laws.) and antelope bitterbrush (Purshia
tridentata (Pursh) DC.) seedling establishment on plots seeded with
annual ryegrass versus controls in south-central Oregon; he found
similar soil moisture levels on seeded and control plots, suggesting
the seeded grass did not usurp soil moisture. These results sug-
gest that seeding non-native annual species may negatively affect
woody plant seedlings through competition for available resources
(speciﬁcally soil moisture), space, and light during the ﬁrst 2 years
after ﬁre (Beyers, 2004) and that important consideration must be
given to the types of species seeded.
In summary, the effects of seeding on native plant recovery are
strongly inﬂuenced by which species are seeded, post-wildﬁre pre-
cipitation intensity, ﬁre severity, and time since ﬁre (Schoennagel
and Waller, 1999; Barclay et al., 2004; Hunter and Omi, 2006;
Robichaud and Elliot, 2006; Wagenbrenner et al., 2006; Peterson et
al., 2007; Rough, 2007). Variation in these factors, individually or
in combination, will ultimately determine the direction and mag-
nitude of any impacts seeded species may have.
4. Conclusions
Among U.S. natural resource agencies, seeding continues to be
used as a common post-wildﬁre rehabilitation measure, although
the use and success of this treatment continues to be debated. Our
systematic review provides evidence that seeding to reduce post-
wildﬁre soil erosion and non-native species invasions has uncertain
results.
Indication that seeding is often ineffective in meeting post-
wildﬁre management objectives related to soil erosion has
strengthened as improved sampling designs produced more statis-
tically robust data. Due to a shortage of long-term studies (beyond 2
years post-wildﬁre), assessment of multi-year effectiveness could
not be quantiﬁed, although the studies available showed a trend
of soil stabilization in both seeded and unseeded sites by year 5.
In addition, there appears to be only a weak relationship between
measurements of vegetative cover and reduction of erosion. Ero-
sion may be better reduced by mulching, but care must be taken to
ensure that mulch is free of non-native seed. Future research efforts
should focus on developing more appropriate measures to evaluate
seeding success as well as quantifying effectiveness and effects of
mulching.
Evidence of seeding effectiveness for non-native species inva-
sions is contradictory. Successful exclusion of non-natives often
resulted when seeded species, speciﬁcally annual non-native
species, produced high cover. Conversely, these same studies
showed high seeded species cover displaced native species. Thus,
both effective and ineffective treatments have the ability to sup-
press native species recovery. Any lasting effects that seeded
non-native annuals may have on native plant communities can only
be addressed by continued monitoring. Moreover, studies assessing
the use of native species to combat non-native species invasions in
burned areas are almost non-existent. Taking a closer look at the
use of native species to reduce non-natives would be valuable.
Studies showed that post-wildﬁre seeding often decreases
native species cover in the short-term, but we found little infor-
mation addressing the effects of seeding on long-term post-wildﬁre
vegetation recovery. Although seeding with non-local genotypes of
native plants has been identiﬁed as a concern, we found no studies
that addressed genetic consequences of post-wildﬁre native seed-
ing. Given ongoing debates about seeding, additional research on
the long-term effects of seeding with both native and non-native
species on natural vegetation recovery and the genetic integrity of
native populations is essential.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from Joint Fire Science
Program (JFSP Project #08-2-1-11). We thank the students of the
Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University who
helped establish the publication database of relevant post-wildﬁre
seeding publications to synthesize.
Appendix A. Evidence-based review references (with
quality of evidence ratings)
Amaranthus, M.P., 1989. Effect of grass seeding and fertilizing on
surface erosion in two intensely burned sites in southwest Oregon.
In: Berg, N.H. (tech. coord.), Proceedings of the Symposium on Fire
and Watershed Management, October 26–28, 1988, Sacramento,
California. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Forest and Range Experiment
Station, Berkeley, CA, pp. 148–149. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Highest)
Amaranthus, M.P., Trappe, J.M., Perry, D.A., 1993. Soil mois-
ture, native revegetation, and Pinus lambertiana seedling survival,
growth, and mycorrhiza formation following wildﬁre and grass
seeding. Restor. Ecol. 1, 188–195. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Highest)
Anderson, W.E., Brooks, L.E., 1975. Reducing erosion hazard on a
burned forest in Oregon by seeding. J. Range Manage. 28, 394–398.
(Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium)
Barclay, A.D., Betancourt, J.L., Allen, C.D., 2004. Effects of seeding
ryegrass (Lolium multiﬂorum) on vegetation recovery following ﬁre
in a ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) forest. Int. J. Wildland Fire
13, 183–194. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Becker, R., 2001. Effective aerial reseeding methods: market
search report. USDA Forest Service 5100 – Fire Management, 0151
1204 – San Dimas Technology & Development Center, San Dimas,
CA. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Beschta, R.L., Rhodes, J.J., Kauffman, J.B., Gresswell, R.E., Minshall,
G.W., Karr, J.R., Perry D.A., Hauer F.R., Frissell C.A., 2003. Postﬁre
management of forested public lands of the western United States.
Conserv. Biol. 18, 957–967. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Beyers, J.L., 2004. Post-ﬁre seeding for erosion control: effective-
ness and impacts on native plant communities. Conserv. Biol. 18,
947–956. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Bruggink, J., 2007. Long term ecological changes with post-ﬁre
emergency seeding. In: Furniss, M., Clifton, C., Ronnenberg, K. (Eds.),
Advancing the Fundamental Sciences: Proceedings of the Forest
Service National Earth Sciences Conference, San Diego, CA, 18–22
October 2004. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-689. U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station,
Portland, OR, pp. 20–26. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Buckley, K.J., Walterscheid, J., Loftin, S., Kuyumjian, G., 2002.
Progress report on Los Alamos National Laboratory Cerro Grande
ﬁre rehabilitation activities one year after burned area rehabilita-
tion. Los Alamos National Laboratory Report LA-UR-02-4921, Los
Alamos, NM. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Buckley, K.J., Walterscheid, J., Loftin, S., Kuyumjian, G., 2003.
Progress report on Los Alamos National Laboratory Cerro Grande
ﬁre rehabilitation activities: status of burned area rehabilitation
two years postﬁre. Los Alamos National Laboratory Report LA-UR-
03-5196, Los Alamos, NM. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)

Author's personal copy
582
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
Callahan, K., Baker, B., 1997. Crystal burn analysis. Postﬁre suc-
cession and seeding monitoring: year three. Unpublished report on
ﬁle at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forst Service, Tahoe National
Forest, CA, 23 pp. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Christensen, M.D., Young, J.A., Evans, R.A., 1974. Control of
annual grasses and revegetation in ponderosa pine woodlands. J.
Range Manage. 27, 143–145. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Clark,
J.T,
Kuyumjian,
G.A.,
2006.
Landscape-scale
post-
ﬁre
vegetative
condition
monitoring
using
multi-temporal
landsat
imagery
on
the
Cerro
Grande
ﬁre.
Online
at:
http://www.fws.gov/ﬁre/ifcc/esr/Library/Library.htm.
(Quality
of Evidence Rating: Medium)
Cline, G.G., Brooks, W.M., 1979. Effect of light seed and fertilizer
application in steep landscapes with infertile soils after ﬁre. North-
ern Region Soil, Air, Water Notes 72, 6 pp. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: Highest)
Conard, S.G., Regelbrugge, J.C., Wills, R.D., 1991. Preliminary
effects of ryegrass seeding on postﬁre establishment of natural veg-
etation in two California ecosystems. In: Proceedings of the 11th
Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology. Society of American
Foresters, Missoula Montana, pp. 16–19. (Quality of Evidence Rat-
ing: Low)
Dellasala, D.A., Williams, J.E., Williams, C.D., Franklin, J.F., 2004.
Beyond smoke and mirrors: a synthesis of ﬁre policy and science.
Conserv. Biol. 18, 976–986. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
DeWolfe,
V.G.,
Santi,
P.M.,
Ey,
J.,
Gartner,
J.E.,
2008.
Effective
mitigation
of
debris
ﬂows
at
Lemon
Dam,
La
Plata
County,
Colorado.
Geomorphology
96,
366–
377. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Earles, T.A., Foster, P., Ey, J., Wright, K.R., 2005. Missionary Ridge
wildﬁre rehabilitation. In: Proceedings of the 2005 Watershed
Management Conference, Williamsburg, VA, pp. 1–14. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Elliott, K.J., White, A.S., 1987. Competitive effects of various
grasses and forbs on ponderosa pine seedlings. For. Sci. 33, 356–366.
(Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Field, D., 1991. Grass seeding for Wildﬁre Rehabilitation: Science
and Policy. M.S. Thesis. University of Montana. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: Low)
GAO (General Accounting Ofﬁce), 2003. Wildland ﬁres: better
information needed on effectiveness of emergency stabilization
and rehabilitation treatments. GAO-03-430. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: Lowest)
Grifﬁn, J.R., 1982. Pine seedling, native ground cover and Lolium
multiﬂorum on the Marble-Cone Burn, Santa Lucia Range, California.
Madro˜no 29, 177–188. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium)
Grifﬁth, R.W, 1998. Burned area emergency rehabilitation.
Proceedings, Nineteenth Annual Forest Vegetation Management
Conference: Wildﬁre Rehabilitation. Redding, CA, January 20–22,
1998, pp. 4–7. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Groen, A.H., Woods, S.W., 2008. Effectiveness of aerial seeding
and straw mulch for reducing post-wildﬁre erosion, north-western
Montana, USA. Int. J. Wildland Fire 17, 559–571. (Quality of Evi-
dence Rating: Highest)
Gross, E., Steinblums, I., Ralston, C., Jubas, H., 1989. Emer-
gency watershed treatments on burned lands in southwestern
Oregon. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Fire and Watershed
Management: October 26–28, 1988, Sacramento, California. Gen.
Tech. Rep. PSW-109, pp. 109–114. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Low)
Thode, A.E., Kershner, J.L., Roby, K., Decker, L.M., Beyers, J.L.,
2006. Fire, watershed resources, and aquatic ecosystems. In: Sug-
ihara, N.G., Van Wagtendonk, J.W., Shaffer, K.E., Fites-Kaufman, J.,
Thode, A.E. (Eds.), Fire in California’s Ecosystems. University of Cal-
ifornia Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA, pp. 466–480. (Quality
of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Haire, S.L., McGarigal, K., 2008. Inhabitants of landscape scars:
succession of woody plants after large, severe forest ﬁres in Ari-
zona and New Mexico. Southwestern Nat. 53, 146–161. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Hanes, R., Callahan, K., 1995. Crystal burn analysis: summary of
ﬁrst monitoring. Unpublished Report on File at: US Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Tahoe National Forest, CA. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: Low)
Hanes, R., Callahan, K., 1996. Crystal burn analysis. Post-ﬁre suc-
cession and seeding monitoring: Year two. Unpublished Report
on File at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Tahoe
National Forest, CA. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Helvey, J.D., 1980. Effects of north central Washington wildﬁre
on runoff and sediment production. J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc. 16,
627–634. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Holzworth, L.K., Hunter, H.E., Winslow, S.R., 2003. Disturbed
forestland revegetation effectiveness monitoring: results of 30
years. 2003 National Meeting of the American Society of Mining and
Reclamation and the 9th Billings Land Reclamation Symposium,
Billings, MT, June 3–6. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Hughes, L.E., 2004. Ponderosa pine undergrowth restoration on
the Arizona Strip. Rangelands 26, 23–27. (Quality of Evidence Rat-
ing: High)
Hunter, M.E., 2004. Post-ﬁre Grass Seeding for Rehabilitation
and Erosion Control: Implications for Native Plant Recovery and
Exotic Species Establishment. Ph.D. Dissertation. Colorado State
University. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Hunter,
M.E.,
Omi,
P.N.,
2006.
Response
of
native
and
exotic
grasses
to
increased
soil
nitrogen
and
recov-
ery
in
a
postﬁre
environment.
Restor.
Ecol.
14,
587–
594. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., 2006. Seed supply of native and culti-
vated grasses in pine forests of the southwestern United States and
the potential for vegetation recovery following wildﬁre. Plant Ecol.
183, 1–8. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., Martinson, E.J., Chong, G.W., 2006.
Establishment
of
non-native
plant
species
after
wildﬁres:
effects of fuel treatments, abiotic and biotic factors, and post-
ﬁre grass seeding treatment. Int. J. Wildland Fire 15, 271–
281. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Johnson, M., Rew, L.J., Maxwell, B.D., Sutherland, S., 2006. The
role of wildﬁre in the establishment and range expansion of non-
native plant species into natural areas. Montana State University
Center for Invasive Plant Management, Bozeman, MT. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Keeley, J.E., 2004. Ecological impacts of wheat seeding after a
Sierra Nevada wildﬁre. Int. J. Wildland Fire 13, 73–78. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: Medium)
Keeley, J.E., 2006. Fire management impacts on invasive plants
in the western United States. Conserv. Biol. 20, 375–384. (Quality
of Evidence Rating: High)
Keeley, J.E., Allen, C.D., Betancourt, J., Chong, G.W., Fothering-
ham, C.J., Safford, H.D., 2006. A 21st century perspective on postﬁre
seeding. J. Forest. 104, 103–104. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low-
est)
Klock, G.O., Tiedemann, A.R., Lopushinsk, W., 1975. Seeding
recommendations for disturbed mountain slopes in north central
Washington. USDA Forest Service Research Note PNW-244, 8 pp.
(Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Korb, J.E., Johnson, N.C., Covington, W.W., 2004. Slash pile
burning effects on soil biotic and chemical properties and plant
establishment: recommendations for amelioration. Restor. Ecol. 12,
52–62. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Kruse, R., Bend, E., Bierzychudek, P., 2004. Native plant
regeneration and introduction of non-natives following post-
ﬁre rehabilitation with straw mulch and barley seeding. Forest

Author's personal copy
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
583
Ecol. Manage. 196, 299–310. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Medium)
Kuenzi, A.M., 2006. Pre-ﬁre Treatment Effects and Understory
Plant Community Response on the Rodeo-Chediski Fire, Arizona.
M.S. Thesis. Northern Arizona University. (Quality of Evidence Rat-
ing: High)
Kuenzi, A.M., Fulé, P.Z., Sieg, C.H., 2008. Effects of ﬁre severity
and pre-ﬁre stand treatment on plant community recovery after
a large wildﬁre. Forest Ecol. Manage. 255, 855–865. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: Medium)
Kunze, M.D., Stednick, J.D., 2006. Streamﬂow and suspended
sediment yield following the 2000 Bobcat ﬁre, Colorado. Hydrol.
Process. 20, 1661–1681. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Law, D.J., Kolb, P.F., 2007. The effects of forest residual debris
disposal on perennial grass emergence, growth, and survival in
a ponderosa pine ecotone. Rangeland Ecol. Manage. 60, 632–643.
(Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Leege, T., Godbolt, G., 1985. Herbaceous response following pre-
scribed burning and seeding of elk range in Idaho. Northwest Sci.
59, 134–143. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Loftin, S., Fletcher, R., Luehring, P., 1998. Disturbed area reha-
bilitation review report. Unpublished Report on File at: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwestern Region,
Albuquerque, NM. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Loftin, S.R., 2004. Post-ﬁre seeding for hydrologic recovery.
Southwest Hydrol. 3, 26–27. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Logar, R., 2006. Results of reseeding a ﬁre impacted watershed
in south central Montana. USDA NRCS Forestry Technical Note No.
MT-28. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
MacDonald, L.H, Robichaud, P.R., 2007. Postﬁre erosion and the
effectiveness of emergency rehabilitation treatments over time.
Joint Fire Science Project Final Report No. 03-2-3-22. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: High)
MacDonald, L.H., 1989. Rehabilitation and recovery following
wildﬁres: a synthesis. In: Berg, N.H. (tech. coords.), Proceedings
of the Symposium on Fire and Watershed Management, October
26–28, 1988, Sacramento, California. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109.
Berkeley, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc
Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, pp. 141–144.
(Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
MacDonald, L.H., Larsen, I.J., 2009. Effects of forest ﬁres and
post-ﬁre rehabilitation: a Colorado, USA case study. In: Cerdà, A.,
Robichaud, P.R. (Eds.), Fire Effects on Soils and Restoration Strate-
gies. Science Publishers, Enﬁeld, NH, 589 pp. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: High)
Maloney, P.C., Thornton, J.L., John L., 1995. Implementation and
effectiveness monitoring of best management practices and soil
and water protection measures within the Foothills ﬁre salvage
logging area 1992–1995. Unpublished Report on File at: U.S. Forest
Service, Boise National Forest. 51 pp. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Lowest)
Meyer, V., Redente, E., Barbarick, K., Brobst, R. 2001. Biosolids
applications affect runoff water quality following forest ﬁre.
J. Environ. Qual. 30, 1528–1532. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Highest)
Meyer, V., Redente, E., Barbarick, K., Brobst, R., Paschke, M.,
Miller, A., 2004. Plant and soil responses to biosolids application
following forest ﬁre. J. Environ. Qual. 33, 799–804. (Quality of Evi-
dence Rating: High)
Miles, S.R., Haskins, D.M., Ranken, D.W., 1989. Emergency
burn rehabilitation: Cost, risk, and effectiveness. In: Berg, N.H.
(tech. coords.), Proceedings of the Symposium on Fire and Water-
shed Management, October 26–28,1988, Sacramento, California.
Gen.Tech. Rep. PSW-109. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station,
Berkeley, CA, pp. 97–102. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Minard, A.E., 2003. Limiting damage to forest soils during
restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona Uni-
versity: Working Paper 05, 5 pp. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Lowest)
Monsen, S.B., Shaw, N.L., 2000. Development and use of plant
resources for western wildlands. McArthur, E.D., Fairbanks, D.J.
(comps.), Shrubland Ecosystem Genetics and Biodiversity: Proceed-
ings. RMRS-P-21, pp. 13–15. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Noss, R.F., Franklin, J.F., Baker, W.L., 2006. Ecology and manage-
ment of ﬁre-prone forests of the western United States. Society
for Conservation Biology Scientiﬁc Panel on Fire in Western
US Forests. Society for Conservation Biology, North American
Section, Arlington, Virginia. Online at: http://www.conbio.org/
sections/namerica/napolicy.cfm. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Lowest)
Orr, H.K., 1970. Runoff and erosion control by seeded and native
vegetation on a forest burn: Black Hills, South Dakota. Research
Paper RM-60. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO, 12
pp. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Pearson, H.A., Davis, J.R., Schubert, G.H., 1972. Effects of wildﬁre
on timber and forage production in Arizona. J. Range Manage. 25,
250–253. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Peterson, D.W., Dodson, E.K., Harrod, R.J., 2007. Assessing the
effectiveness of seeding and fertilization treatments for reducing
erosion potential following severe wildﬁres. In: Butler, B.W., Cook,
W. (Comps.), The Fire Environment – Innovations, Management,
and Policy; Conference Proceedings 26–30 March 2007, Destin, FL.
Proceedings RMRS-P-46CD. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO, 662 pp.
(Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Ratliff, R.D., McDonald, P.M., 1987. Postﬁre grass and legume
seeding: what to seed and potential impacts on reforestation. In:
Proceedings, Ninth Annual Forest Vegetation Management Con-
ference. Redding, CA, November 3–5, 1987, pp. 3–5. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Regelbrugge, J.C., 1990. Effects of ﬁre intensity, rock type and
seeding on vegetation recovery following the 1987 Stanslaus Com-
plex ﬁres in California, USA. Bull. Ecol. Soc. Am. 71, 297. (Quality of
Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Richards, R.T., Chambers, J.C., Ross, C., 1998. Use of native plants
on federal lands: policy and practice. J. Range Manage. 51, 625–632.
(Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Robichaud, P.R., 2005. Measurement of post-ﬁre hillslope ero-
sion to evaluate and model rehabilitation treatment effectiveness
and recovery. Int. J. Wildland Fire 14, 475–485. (Quality of Evi-
dence Rating: Lowest)
Robichaud, P.R., Beyers, J.L., Neary, D.G., 2000. Evaluating the
effectiveness of post-ﬁre rehabilitation treatments. Gen. Tech.
Rep. RMRS-GTR-63. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. (Quality of Evi-
dence Rating: High)
Robichaud, P.R., Brown, R.E., 2005. Postﬁre rehabilitation treat-
ments: are we learning what works? In: Moglen, G.E. (Ed.),
Managing Watersheds for Human and Natural Impacts: Engi-
neering, Ecological, and Economic Challenges: Proceedings of
the 2005 Watershed Management Conference, Williamsburg,
VA, July 19–22, 2005, 12 pp. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Lowest)
Robichaud,P., MacDonald, L., Freeouf, J., Neary, D., Martin, D.,
Ashmun, L., 2003. Postﬁre rehabilitation of the Hayman ﬁre. USDA
Forest Service Gen Tech Rep RMRS-GTR-114, US Department of
Agriculture Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort
Collins, CO, pp. 293–313. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Robichaud, P.R., Lillybridge, T.R., Wagenbrenner, J.W., 2006.
Effects of postﬁre seeding and fertilizing on hillslope erosion in

Author's personal copy
584
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
north-central Washington, USA. Catena 67, 56–67. (Quality of Evi-
dence Rating: Highest)
Robichaud, P.R., Elliot, W.J., 2006. Protection from erosion fol-
lowing wildﬁre. Report. Paper No. 068009. ASABE. MI, US. (Quality
of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Roby, K.B., 1989. Watershed response and recovery from the
will ﬁre: ten years of observation. In Berg, N.H. (tech. coord.),
Proceedings of the Symposium on Fire and Watershed Manage-
ment, Sacramento, CA. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Forest and Range
Experiment Station, Berkeley, CA, pp. 131–136. (Quality of Evi-
dence Rating: Medium)
Roche, C.T., Sheley, R.L., Korfhage, R.C., 2008. Native species
replace introduced grass cultivars seeded following wildﬁre. Ecol.
Restor. 26, 321–330. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium)
Rough, D., 2007. Effectiveness of Rehabilitation Treatments in
Reducing Post-Fire Erosion after the Hayman and Schoonover Fires,
Colorado Front Range. M.S. Thesis. Colorado State University. (Qual-
ity of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Ruby, E.C., 1989. Rationale for seeding grass on the Stanis-
laus Complex burnt. In: Berg, N.H. (tech. coords.), Proceedings
of the Symposium on Fire and Watershed Management, October
26–28,1988, Sacramento, California. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Forest
and Range Experiment Station, Berkeley, CA, pp. 125–130. (Quality
of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
Schoennagel, T., 1997. Native Plant Response to High Intensity
Fire and Seeding of Non-native Grasses in an Abies grandis For-
est on the Leavenworth District of the Wenatchee National Forest.
M.S. Thesis. Univeristy of Wisconsin-Madison. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: High)
Schoennagel, T.L., Waller, D.M., 1999. Understory responses to
ﬁre and artiﬁcial seeding in an eastern Cascades Abies grandis for-
est, U.S.A. Can. J. Forest Res. 29, 1390–1401. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: High)
Sexton, T.O., 1998. Ecological Effect of Post-wildﬁre Manage-
ment Activities (Salvage-logging and Grass-seeding) on Vegetation
Composition, Diversity, Biomass, and Growth and Survival of Pinus
ponderosa and Purshia tridentata. M.S. Thesis. Oregon State Univer-
sity. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Highest)
Sirucek, D., 1987. The North Hills ﬁre-erosion event. Proceed-
ings of XVIII International Erosion Control Conference, Reno, NV,
February 26-27, 1987, pp. 199–202. (Quality of Evidence Rating:
Lowest)
Springer, J.D., 2007. Understory seeding in southwestern forests
following wildﬁre and ecological restoration treatments. Northern
Arizona University, Working Paper 19, 8 pp. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: Lowest)
Springer, J.D., Waltz, A.E.M., Fulè, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Covington,
W.W., 2001. Seeding versus natural regeneration: a comparison of
vegetation change following thinning and burning in ponderosa
pine. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station Pro-
ceedings RMRS-P-22. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Stella, K.A., 2009. Effects and Effectiveness of Seeding Follow-
ing High-Severity Wildﬁres in Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine
Forests. M.S. Thesis. Northern Arizona University. (Quality of Evi-
dence Rating: Highest)
Stewart, W.L., 1973. Emergency Rehabilitation of Watersheds
Denuded by Wildﬁre in the Ponderosa Pine and Douglas-ﬁr Zones
of North-Central Washington. M.S. Thesis. Washington State Uni-
versity. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Medium)
Story, M.T., Kracht, R., 1989. Memo: emergency watershed
stabilization, BMP implementation review Storm Creek ﬁre.
Unpublished Report on File at: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Gallatin National Forest, MT. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: Lowest)
Sullivan, J., Omi, P.N., Dyer, A.A., Gonzales-Caben, A., 1987. Evalu-
ating the economics efﬁciency of wildﬁre rehabilitation treatments.
West. J. Appl. For. 2, 58–61. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Tiedmann, A.R., Klock, G.O., 1973. First-year vegetation after
ﬁre, reseeding, and fertilization on the Entiat Experimental Forest.
Research Note PNW-195, 23 pp. (Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
U.S. Department of the Interior and U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, 2006. Interagency Burn Area Emergency Response Guidebook.
Interpretation of Department of the Interior 620 DM 3 and USDA
Forest Service Manual 2523. Version 4.0. February 2006. Washing-
ton, DC. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Lowest)
VanZuuk, K., 1997. Memo, Crystal Burn monitoring. Unpub-
lished Report on File at: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Tahoe National Forest, Nevada City, CA. (Quality of Evi-
dence Rating: Lowest)
Wagenbrenner, J.W., MacDonald, L.H., Rough, D., 2006. Effec-
tiveness of three post-ﬁre rehabilitation treatments in the Colorado
Front Range. Hydrol. Process. 20, 2989–3006. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: High)
Weigel, T.J., 2007. Assessing Post-Fire Reseeding Potential Using
Bureau of Land Management Criteria in Northeastern Nevada: A
Spatial Modelling Appoarch. M.S. Thesis. University of Nevada,
Reno. (Quality of Evidence Rating: Low)
Wolfson, B.A.S., Sieg, C.H., in press. 40-Year Post Fire Seeding
Trends in Arizona and New Mexico. U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
(Quality of Evidence Rating: High)
Woodsmith, R.D., Vache, K.B., McDonnell, J.J., Helvey, J.D., 2004.
Entiat experimental forest: catchment-scale runoff data before and
after a 1970 wildﬁre. Water Resour. Res. 40, 5. (Quality of Evidence
Rating: High)
References
Amaranthus, M.P., 1989. Effect of grass seeding and fertilizing on surface erosion
in two intensely burned sites in southwest Oregon. In: Berg, N.H. (tech. coord.),
Proceedings of the Symposium on Fire and Watershed Management, October
26–28, 1988, Sacramento, California. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Forest and Range Experiment
Station, Berkeley, CA, pp. 148–149.
Amaranthus, M.P., Trappe, J.M., Perry, D.A., 1993. Soil moisture, native revegeta-
tion, and Pinus lambertiana seedling survival, growth, and mycorrhiza formation
following wildﬁre and grass seeding. Restor. Ecol. 1, 188–195.
Anderson, W.E., Brooks, L.E., 1975. Reducing erosion hazard on a burned forest in
Oregon by seeding. J. Range Manage. 28, 394–398.
Bailey, R.G., 1983. Delineation of ecosystem regions. Environ. Manage. 7, 365–373.
Baker, W.L., Shinneman, D.J., 2004. Fire and restoration of pinon-juniper woodlands
in the western United States: a review. Forest Ecol. Manage. 189, 1–21.
Bakker, J.B., Wilson, S.D., Christian, J.M., Xingdong, L., Ambrose, L.G., Waddington, J.,
2003. Contingency of grassland restoration on year, site, and competition from
introduced grasses. Ecol. Appl. 10, 1400–1413.
Barclay, A.D., Betancourt, J.L., Allen, C.D., 2004. Effects of seeding ryegrass (Lolium
multiﬂorum) on vegetation recovery following ﬁre in a ponderosa pine (Pinus
ponderosa) forest. Int. J. Wildland Fire 13, 183–194.
Bautista, S., Abad, N., Llovet, J., Bladé, C., Ferran, A., Ponce, J.M., Caturla, R.N., Alloza,
J.A., Bellot, J., Vallejo, R., 1997. Siembra de herbáceas y aplicación de mulch para
la conservación de suelos afectados por incendios forestales. In: Vallejo, R. (Ed.),
La Restauración de la Cubierta Vegetal en la Comunidad Valenciana. Fundación
Centro de Estudios Ambientales del Mediterráneo, pp. 395–434.
Beschta, R.L., Rhodes, J.J., Kauffman, J.B., Gresswell, R.E., Minshall, G.W., Karr, J.R.,
Perry, D.A., Hauer, F.R., Frissell, C.A., 2004. Postﬁre management of forested
public lands of the western United States. Conserv. Biol. 18, 957–967.
Beyers, J.L., 2004. Post-ﬁre seeding for erosion control: effectiveness and impacts on
native plant communities. Conserv. Biol. 18, 947–956.
Bruggink, J., 2007. Long term ecological changes with post-ﬁre emergency seeding.
In: Furniss, M., Clifton, C., Ronnenberg, K. (Eds.), Advancing the Fundamental Sci-
ences: Proceedings of the Forest Service National Earth Sciences Conference, San
Diego, CA, 18–22 October 2004. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-689. U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR,
pp. 20–26.
Conard, S.G., Regelbrugge, J.C., Wills, R.D., 1991. Preliminary effects of ryegrass seed-
ing on postﬁre establishment of natural vegetation in two California ecosystems.
In: Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology, Society
of American Foresters, Missoula, MT, pp. 16–19.

Author's personal copy
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
585
Connell, J.H., Slatyer, R.O., 1977. Mechanisms of succession in natural commu-
nities and their role in community stability and organization. Am. Nat. 111,
1119–1144.
Crawford, J.A., Wahren, C.A., Kyle, S., Moir, W.H., 2001. Responses of exotic plant
species to ﬁres in Pinus ponderosa forest in northern Arizona. J. Veg. Sci. 12,
261–268.
DeBano, L.F., Neary, D.G., Ffolliott, P.F., 1998. Fire’s Effect on Ecosystems. Wiley Press,
New York.
Dadkhah, M., Gifford, G.F., 1980. Inﬂuence of vegetation, rock cover and trampling
on inﬁltration rates and sediment production. Water Resour. Bull. 16, 979–986.
DeWolfe, V.G., Santi, P.M., Ey, J., Gartner, J.E., 2008. Effective mitigation of debris
ﬂows at Lemon Dam, La Plata County, Colorado. Geomorphology 96, 366–377.
Earles, T.A., Foster, P., Ey, J., Wright, K.R., 2005. Missionary Ridge wildﬁre reha-
bilitation. In: Proceedings of the 2005 Watershed Management Conference,
Williamsburg, VA, pp. 1–14.
Elliott, K.J., White, A.S., 1987. Competitive effects of various grasses and forbs on
ponderosa pine seedlings. For. Sci. 33, 356–366.
Fazey, I., Salisbury, J., Lindenmayer, D.B., Douglas, R., Maindonald, J., 2005. Can meth-
ods applied in medicine be used to summarize and disseminate conservation
research? Environ. Conserv. 31, 190–198.
Freeman, J.P., Stohlgren, T.J., Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., Martinson, E.J., Chong, G.W.,
Brown, C.S., 2007. Rapid assessment of postﬁre plant invasions in coniferous
forests of the western United States. Ecol. Appl. 17, 1656–1665.
GAO (General Accounting Ofﬁce), 2003. Wildland ﬁres: better information needed
on effectiveness of emergency stabilization and rehabilitation treatments. GAO-
03-430.
Gates, S., 2002. Review of methodology of quantitative reviews using meta-analysis
in ecology. J. Anim. Ecol. 71, 547–557.
Grifﬁn, J.R., 1982. Pine seedling, native ground cover and Lolium multiﬂorum on the
Marble-Cone Burn, Santa Lucia Range, California. Madro˜no 29, 177–188.
Grime, J.P., 2001. Plant Strategies, Vegetation Processes and Ecosystem Properties.
Wiley, Chichester, UK.
Groen, A.H., Woods, S.W., 2008. Effectiveness of aerial seeding and straw mulch for
reducing post-wildﬁre erosion, north-western Montana, USA. Int. J. Wildland
Fire 17, 559–571.
Holzworth, L.K., Hunter, H.E., Winslow, S.R., 2003. Disturbed forestland revegeta-
tion effectiveness monitoring: results of 30 years. In: 2003 National Meeting
of the American Society of Mining and Reclamation and the 9th Billings Land
Reclamation Symposium, Billings, MT, June 3–6.
Huenneke, L.F., 1991. Ecological implications of genetic variation in plant popula-
tions. In: Falk, D.A., Holsinger, K.E. (Eds.), Genetics and Conservation of Rare
Plants. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, pp. 31–44.
Hufford, K.M., Mazer, S.J., 2003. Plant ecotypes: genetic differentiation in the age of
ecological restoration. Trends Ecol. Evol. 18, 147–155.
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., 2006. Response of native and exotic grasses to increased soil
nitrogen and recovery in a postﬁre environment. Restor. Ecol. 14, 587–594.
Hunter, M.E., Omi, P.N., Martinson, E.J., Chong, G.W., 2006. Establishment of non-
native plant species after wildﬁres: effects of fuel treatments, abiotic and biotic
factors, and post-ﬁre grass seeding treatment. Int. J. Wildland Fire 15, 271–
281.
Keeley, J.E., 2004. Ecological impacts of wheat seeding after a Sierra Nevada wildﬁre.
Int. J. Wildland Fire 13, 73–78.
Keeley, J.E., Lubin, D., Fotheringham, C.J., 2003. Fire and grazing impacts on plant
diversity and alien plant invasions in the southern Sierra Nevada. Ecol. Appl. 13,
1355–1374.
Korb, J.E., Johnson, N.C., Covington, W.W., 2004. Slash pile burning effects on soil
biotic and chemical properties and plant establishment: recommendations for
amelioration. Restor. Ecol. 12, 52–62.
Kruse, R., Bend, E., Bierzychudek, P., 2004. Native plant regeneration and intro-
duction of non-natives following post-ﬁre rehabilitation with straw mulch and
barley seeding. Forest Ecol. Manage. 196, 299–310.
Kuenzi, A.M., Fulé, P.Z., Sieg, C.H., 2008. Effects of ﬁre severity and pre-ﬁre stand
treatment on plant community recovery after a large wildﬁre. Forest Ecol. Man-
age. 255, 855–865.
Kunze, M.D., Stednick, J.D., 2006. Streamﬂow and suspended sediment yield follow-
ing the 2000 Bobcat ﬁre, Colorado. Hydrol. Process. 20, 1661–1681.
Linhart, Y.B., 1995. Restoration, revegetation, and the importance of genetic and
evolutionary perspectives. In: Roundy, B.A., McArthur, E.D., Haley, J.S., Mann,
D.K. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Wildland Shrub and Arid Land Restoration Sym-
posium; 19–21 October 1993, Las Vegas, Nevada. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-315.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station, Ogden, Utah, pp. 271–287.
Littell, J.S., McKenzie, D., Peterson, D.L., Westerling, A.L., 2009. Climate and wild-
ﬁre area burned in western U.S. ecoprovinces, 1916–2003. Ecol. Appl. 19,
1003–1021.
Logar, R., 2006. Results of reseeding a ﬁre impacted watershed in south central
Montana. USDA NRCS Forestry Technical Note no. MT-28.
MacDonald, L.H., Larsen, I.J., 2009. Effects of forest ﬁres and post-ﬁre rehabilitation:
a Colorado, USA case study. In: Cerdà, A., Robichaud, P.R. (Eds.), Fire Effects on
Soils and Restoration Strategies. Science Publishers, Enﬁeld, NH, 589 pp.
Maloney, P.C., Thornton, J.L., John, L., 1995. Implementation and effectiveness mon-
itoring of best management practices and soil and water protection measures
within the Foothills ﬁre salvage logging area 1992–1995. Unpublished Report
on File at: USDA Forest Service, Boise National Forest, 51 pp.
Meyer, V., Redente, E., Barbarick, K., Brobst, R., 2001. Biosolids applications affect
runoff water quality following forest ﬁre. J. Environ. Qual. 30, 1528–1532.
McKenzie, D., Gedalof, Z., Peterson, D.L., Mote, P., 2004. Climatic change, wildﬁre,
and conservation. Conserv. Biol. 18, 890–902.
NRCS (Natural Resource Conservation Service), 2010. The PLANTS Database. National
Plant data Center, Baton Rouge, LA. URL http://plants.usda.gov [accessed 5 Jan-
uary 2010].
Neary, D.G., Ryan, K.C., DeBano, L.F. (Eds.), 2005. Wildland ﬁre in ecosystems: effects
of ﬁre on soil and water. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station,
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR 42.
Noble, E.L., 1965. Sediment reduction through watershed rehabilitation. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Federal Inter-Agency Sedimentation Conference 1963, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Misc. Publ. 970, Washington, DC, pp. 114–123.
Noble, I.R., Slatyer, R.O., 1977. Post ﬁre succession of plants in Mediterranean ecosys-
tems. In: Mooney, H.A., Conrad, C.E. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Symposium on
Environmental Consequences of Fire and Fuel Management in Mediterranean
Ecosystems. Gen. Tech. Rep. WO-3. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser-
vice, Washington, DC, pp. 27–36.
Orr, H.K., 1970. Runoff and erosion control by seeded and native vegetation on a
forest burn: Black Hills, South Dakota. Research Paper RM-60. U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station, Fort Collins, CO, 12 pp.
Peterson, D.W., Dodson, E.K., Harrod, R.J., 2007. Assessing the effectiveness of seed-
ing and fertilization treatments for reducing erosion potential following severe
wildﬁres. In: Butler, B.W., Cook, W. (Comps.), The Fire Environment – Innova-
tions, Management, and Policy; Conference Proceedings 26–30 March 2007,
Destin, FL. Proceedings RMRS-P-46CD. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO, 662 pp.
Pullin, A.S., Stewart, G.B., 2006. Guidelines for systematic review in conservation
and environmental management. Conserv. Biol. 20, 1647–1656.
Richards, R.T., Chambers, J.C., Ross, C., 1998. Use of native plants on federal lands:
policy and practice. J. Range Manage. 51, 625–632.
Robichaud, P.R., Beyers, J.L., Neary, D.G., 2000. Evaluating the effectiveness of post-
ﬁre rehabilitation treatments. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-63. U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Robichaud, P.R., Lillybridge, T.R., Wagenbrenner, J.W., 2006. Effects of postﬁre seed-
ing and fertilizing on hillslope erosion in north-central Washington, USA. Catena
67, 56–67.
Robichaud, P.R., Elliot W.J., 2006. Protection from erosion following wildﬁre. 2006
ASABE Annual International Meeting, Portland, Oregon, July 9–12. ASABE Paper
No. 068009. St. Joseph, MI, ASABE.
Roby, K.B., 1989. Watershed response and recovery from the Will ﬁre: ten years of
observation. In: Berg, N.H. (tech. coord.), Proceedings of the Symposium on Fire
and Watershed Management, Sacramento, CA. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-109. U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Forest and Range
Experiment Station, Berkeley, CA, pp. 131–136.
Roche, C.T., Sheley, R.L., Korfhage, R.C., 2008. Native species replace introduced grass
cultivars seeded following wildﬁre. Ecol. Restor. 26, 321–330.
Rogers, D.L., Montalvo, A.M., 2004. Genetically appropriate choices for plant mate-
rials to maintain biological diversity. Report to the USDA Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Region, Lakewood, CO. University of California. Davis, CA.
Rough, D., 2007. Effectiveness of Rehabilitation Treatments in Reducing Post-Fire
Erosion after the Hayman and Schoonover Fires, Colorado Front Range. M.S.
Thesis. Colorado State University.
Schmid, B., 1994. Effects of genetic diversity in experimental stands of Solidago
altissima: evidence for the potential role of pathogens as selective agents in
plant populations. J. Ecol. 82, 165–175.
Schoennagel, T., 1997. Native Plant Response to High Intensity Fire and Seeding of
Non-native Grasses in an Abies grandis Forest on the Leavenworth District of the
Wenatchee National Forest. M.S. Thesis. University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Schoennagel, T.L., Waller, D.M., 1999. Understory responses to ﬁre and artiﬁcial
seeding in an eastern Cascades Abies grandis forest, U.S.A. Can. J. Forest Res.
29, 1390–1401.
Schuman, G.E., Tayor, E.M., Rauzi, F., 1991. Forage production of reclaimed mined
lands as inﬂuenced by nitrogen fertilization and mulching practice. J. Range
Manage. 44, 382–384.
Sexton, T.O., 1998. Ecological Effect of Post-Wildﬁre Management Activities
(Salvage-logging and Grass-seeding) on Vegetation Composition, Diversity,
Biomass, and Growth and Survival of Pinus ponderosa and Purshia tridentata.
M.S. Thesis. Oregon State University.
Springer, J. D., Waltz, A.E.M., Fulè, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Covington, W.W., 2001. Seed-
ing versus natural regeneration: a comparison of vegetation change following
thinning and burning in ponderosa pine. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station Proceedings RMRS-P-22.
Stella, K.A., 2009. Effects and Effectiveness of Seeding Following High-Severity Wild-
ﬁres in Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forests. M.S. Thesis. Northern Arizona
University.
Stella, K.A., Sieg, C.H., Fulé, P.Z., in press. Minimal effectiveness of native and non-
native seeding following three high severity wildﬁres. Int. J. Wildland Fire.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 2004. Burned Area Emergency Reha-
bilitation handbook. FSH 2509.13.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 2006. Notice of Proposed Native Plant
Material Policy, Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2070. 26 May 2006. 71 Federal
Register 102: 30375.
U.S. Department of the Interior, 2006. Interagency Burn Area Rehabilitation Guide-
book. Interpretation of Department of the Interior 620 DM 3. For the Burned
Area Rehabilitation of Federal and Tribal Trust Lands. Version 1.3. October 2006.
Washington, DC.

Author's personal copy
586
D. Peppin et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 260 (2010) 573–586
Vallejo, R., Alloza, J.A., 1998. The restoration of burned lands: the case of Eastern
Spain. In: Moreno, J.M. (Ed.), Large Forest Fires. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden,
The Netherlands, pp. 91–108.
Wagenbrenner, J.W., MacDonald, L.H., Rough, D., 2006. Effectiveness of three post-
ﬁre rehabilitation treatments in the Colorado Front Range. Hydrol. Process. 20,
2989–3006.
Wang, G.G., Kemball, K.J., 2005. Effects of ﬁre severity on early development of
understory vegetation. Can. J. Forest Res. 35, 254–262.
Westerling, A.L., Hidalgo, H.G., Cayan, D.R., Swetnam, T.W., 2006. Warming and
earlier spring increase western U.S. forest wildﬁre activity. Science 313, 940–
943.
Wolfson, B.A.S., Sieg, C.H., in press. 40-Year Post-Fire Seeding Trends in Arizona and
New Mexico. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
