FACT SHEET: SPATIAL PATTERN TERMS COMPARISON 
 
 
Terms 
Goshawk Guidelines  
AZGFD  
Clump 
Clumps are viewed as similar to groups 
(i.e., clumps/groups) and are otherwise not 
defined. 
A small cluster of trees with inter-spaces, 
typically of similar age and size, sometimes 
variable ages; interlocking crowns; 0.05-0.74 
acres in size; more or less isolated from 
adjacent clumps.  
Group 
A group is comprised of a tree canopy 
zone and a primary rooting zone (which is 
0.5 the radius of the canopy zone). 
Variable density tree groups comprised of 
2-40 trees depending on VSS class (i.e., 
VSS2 has more trees than VSS6) 
occupying up to 0.1 to 4 acres, but tree 
groups are generally less than 0.75 acres. 
“…groups should generally be sized from 
0.1 to 0.3 acre of various shapes.” VSS4-6 
groups each have 40+% canopy cover. 
There are no canopy cover guidelines for 
other VSS classes. 
 
A non-uniform arrangement of clumps and 
interspaces surrounding by openings; size 
varies, but typically 0.75 acres or much 
more; contains two or more clumps and some 
individual trees; includes uneven-aged trees of 
various size classes; interlocking crowns in 
clumps but not across the group. At least three 
age classes are desirable, create a mosaic of 
groups. 
Inter-
spaces 
No definition, although there may be open 
canopy within a group. 
A break in the canopy between clumps; 
relatively small in size (0.03 acre or less); 
little to no tree regeneration due to frequent 
fire and shade intolerance of ponderosa pine; 
no interlocking crowns.  
Canopy 
zone 
separation, 
inter-
group 
space or 
matrix 
Additional “inter-group” space or matrix 
can also be created between the rooting 
zones “to achieve a desired average 
distance between tree canopy zones in 
adjacent groups.” This space has few or no 
trees. “Create a matrix between tree groups 
if less than full stocking is desired, based 
upon project-level objectives.” No defined 
size. 
See definition of Opening 
Opening 
The original Goshawk Guidelines (GTR 
RM-217) used the term “openings,” but the 
R3 2007 Implementation Guide: Northern 
Goshawk Standards and Guidelines as well 
as Youtz (2008)) do not and instead refer 
to spaces in between groups as canopy 
zone separation, inter-group space or the 
matrix. 
A spatial break between groups of trees; 
varies but roughly 0.25-0.5 acres; covered 
with herbaceous vegetation; largely treeless 
except for snags and young seedlings or 
saplings; some large, coarse woody debris; 
kept open by frequent, surface fires. Create a 
mosaic of openings with larger openings 
surrounding and upwind of larger groups; can 
be larger than 10% of the stand. 
Meadow 
No definition 
An opening that is always treeless; not the 
same as openings or inter-spaces; typically has 
a high level of herbaceous biodiversity; may 
have different soil type or soil moisture.  
 

FACT SHEET: SPATIAL PATTERN TERMS COMPARISON 
 
 
Goshawk Guidelines diagram of three groups with canopy zone, primary rooting zone, group 
boundary, and canopy zone separation (i.e., inter-group space or matrix). 
 
 
AZGFD diagram of trees, clumps, groups, inter-spaces, and openings within a stand. 
 
Goshawk Guideline terms from: Youtz, J.A., R.T. Graham, R.T. Reynolds, and J. Simon. 2008. Implementing northern goshawk 
habitat management in southwestern forests: A template for restoring fire-adapted forest ecosystems. Pages 173-191 in R.L. Deal, 
tech. ed., Integrated restoration of forested ecosystems to achieve multiresource benefits: Proceedings of the 2007 national 
silviculture workshop. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-733. Portland, OR: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station; and Implementation Guide R3: Northern Goshawk Standards and Guidelines 2007. 
AZGFD terms from: Desired Forest Conditions for Wildlife. 2007. Lantz, S., C. Wrightman, R. Miller, A. Rodgers, R. Sieg, S. 
Rosenstock, and S. Hedwell. Flagstaff, AZ: Arizona Game and Fish Department. 
