The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI):  
The Role of Collaboration in Achieving Outcomes
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTE 
Issues in Forest Restoration
 

The Ecological Restoration Institute 
 
Te Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, 
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain 
West. Tese forests have been signiﬁcantly altered during the last century, with decreased ecological and 
recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity ﬁre regimes, and greatly increased risk of 
large-scale ﬁres. Te ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to restore these forests to 
a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the process helping to signiﬁcantly reduce the 
threat of catastrophic wildﬁre and its eﬀects on human, animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: 
In May 2015, Four Forest Restoration Initiative stakeholders, partners, and USFS staff came together for a two-day, 
facilitated retreat at The Nature Conservancy Hart Prairie Preserve in Flagstaff, Arizona. The retreat provided the 
opportunity to reﬂect on the collaborative process of the past six years. Photo courtesy of The Nature Conservancy
Northern Arizona University
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
928-523-5088
nau.edu/eri
Publication date: November 2016
Authors: Bryce Esch and Diane Vosick
Reviewers: Dick Fleishman, Kathleen McIntyre, Andi Rogers, Paul Summerfelt, and Buck Swaney
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Please use the following citation when referring to this paper:
Esch, B., and D. Vosick. 2016. The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI): The Role of Collaboration in 
Achieving Outcomes. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 15 p.
Northern Arizona University is an equal opportunity provider.
 
In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, sex, age, or disability. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) To ﬁle a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Ofﬁce of Civil Rights, 
Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-5964 (TDD). USDA is 
an equal opportunity provider and employer.
 
This publication made possible through a grant from the USDA Forest Service.

1
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... 2
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 3
Purpose and Methods .................................................................................................................... 3
Assessing the 4FRI Collaborative Process ................................................................................... 4
 
Deﬁning Successful Collaboration ......................................................................................... 4
Evaluating Collaboration Within the Stakeholder Group .................................................... 6
Effect of Collaboration on the Pre-Decisional Objection Process ....................................... 8
The Challenge of Post-NEPA Implementation ...................................................................... 9
Evaluating Collaboration Between the 4FRI Stakeholder Group and the U.S.  
Forest Service ........................................................................................................................ 10
Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................... 12
End Notes ...................................................................................................................................... 14
References ..................................................................................................................................... 16

2
Executive Summary
Te ﬁrst collaboratively developed Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) 
was ﬁnalized in April 2015. Tis achievement provides an opportunity to review the lessons learned during the last six years of 
collaboration. Tis white paper describes the successes, challenges, and evolution of the 4FRI collaborative process as told by the 
stakeholders and U.S. Forest Service (USFS) staﬀ. Tis white paper examines the following conclusions.
 
• Building trust takes time. Te 4FRI Stakeholder Group had diﬃculty building trust between members, however, consensus 
and outcomes were still produced. With respect to the stakeholders and USFS, trust was occasionally undermined by 
“unseen” decision-making at the regional level. In one case, there was frustration over the inability of the USFS to provide an 
explanation that satisﬁed all stakeholders for the methods used to create a data layer describing the distribution of large young 
trees.  Tis led to several members negotiating with the USFS outside the stakeholder group. 
• Collaboration is slow. At times, the stakeholder group may have slowed the USFS planning process; however, the planning 
time overall was shorter than the USFS EIS average. Conversely, collaboration may be one reason the project was not delayed 
by litigation. 
• Te pace and scale of restoration treatments did not increase across the 4FRI project area. Issues beyond the stakeholder 
group’s control, such as private industry and contracting complications, contributed signiﬁcantly to slow treatment 
implementation.
• Tere were several factors that contributed to a successful relationship with the USFS: 
- Te 4FRI stakeholders were involved in all facets of planning and felt that collaboration increased and improved over time. 
- Te USFS demonstrated a willingness to listen to the stakeholder group and stakeholders felt their contributions were 
valued. For example, several stakeholder-developed products were included in the analysis.
- Speciﬁc actions were taken to increase communication such as scheduling oﬃce hours for informal communication and 
posting draft documents on the public website in order to provide adequate time for document review and discussion. 
• Te stakeholder group-USFS partnership experienced  challenges: 
- Stakeholders had diﬃculty understanding the NEPA process, its complexity, and the planning timeline. 
- It was diﬃcult for stakeholders to understand where their contributions would be most eﬀective.
- Stakeholders had diﬃculty understanding how their contributions ﬁt into the USFS decision space given the constraints 
the NEPA process.
• Inclusion of the stakeholder group in the objection process was deemed valuable. Stakeholders were able to actively 
participate in conversations with objectors on topics that had already been deliberated by the stakeholder group. Tis allowed 
the stakeholder group to provide support for collaborative decisions and best available science included in the EIS.
• Te stakeholders felt that professional facilitation was important. 
• By working with the USFS to co-sponsor public meetings and open houses public participation (beyond the stakeholder 
group) was improved. 

3
Introduction
Te Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) is a collaborative eﬀort to restore forest ecosystems on more than 2.4 million 
acres of national forest land along the Mogollon Rim in northern Arizona. Te project spans portions of the Coconino, Kaibab, 
Apache-Sitgreaves, and Tonto national forests. Te 4FRI Stakeholder Group is led by citizens who represent more than 30 
diverse governmental, non-governmental, environmental, and conservation organizations, and businesses. Although not formal 
members of the 4FRI Stakeholder Group, U.S. Forest Service (USFS) personnel collaborate with the stakeholders to achieve 
common restoration goals.i  Te 4FRI Stakeholder Group coalesced in 2009 after a 12-year history of smaller collaborative 
forest restoration eﬀorts in northern Arizona.ii In 2010 it became the largest restoration pilot selected by the congressionally 
authorized Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) (Figure 1). Over the next six years, 4FRI 
stakeholders and partners worked with the USFS to produce the ﬁrst of what is expected to be three Environmental Impact 
Statements (EIS).iii Te ﬁrst EIS analyzed approximately one million acres on the west side of the 4FRI landscape located on 
the Coconino and Kaibab national forests. Tis EIS ultimately identiﬁed almost 600,000 acres for restoration treatments (Figure 
2). Te EIS also provided the ﬁrst opportunity to test a new objection process established by the USFS in 2013. Despite nine 
objections, most were resolved and a ﬁnal Record of Decision (ROD) was signed in April 2015. Although a complaint was ﬁled 
in U.S. District Court, District of Arizona on November 9, 2015, injunctive relief was not requested and the case was ultimately 
dismissed for lack of plaintiﬀ standing. 
Te ﬁrst 4FRI EIS represents a major breakthrough in contemporary forest management. It demonstrates that the USFS can 
successfully complete a large-scale, restoration-based National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) analysis in collaboration with 
diverse stakeholders. Te extent to which collaboration was the key to avoiding litigation that would have stopped or delayed 
implementation is a matter of keen interest by policy makers, federal agencies, and citizens. Since 2000, all major forest policy 
has promoted collaboration as a means to lower conﬂict and help avoid litigation, thereby accelerating forest restoration.iv Other 
anticipated beneﬁts of collaboration include identiﬁcation and use of best available scientiﬁc information, a fairer process that 
involves all interests, and easier implementation, to name a few (CEQ 2007).
Purpose and Methods
Te purpose of this white paper is to document 
the collaborative experience of the 4FRI 
Stakeholder Group over the last six years, 
capture lessons learned, and answer the 
question, “Did collaboration work?”
In May 2015, stakeholders, partners, and USFS 
staﬀ came together for a two-day retreat to 
celebrate the signed ROD for 
the ﬁrst 4FRI EIS, and other 4FRI 
accomplishments. Te celebration also created 
the opportunity for the group to reﬂect 
on the collaborative process before launching 
the “Rim Country” EIS (for the next million 
acres to the east on the Tonto 
and Apache-Sitgreaves national forests). 
Te facilitated meeting was held at Te 
Nature Conservancy Hart Prairie Preserve in 
Flagstaﬀ, Arizona, and was attended by 30 
people representing a diversity of stakeholder 
organizations. Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative charter organizations are listed 
in the end notes.v 
Te 4FRI retreat is the primary source 
for identifying the lessons learned by the 
stakeholder group. Information was gathered  
Figure 1. The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) landscape 
covering approximately 2.4 million acres.

4
in two ways. First, it was captured by the facilitators who, prior to 
the retreat, conducted a set of phone interviews with a common 
set of questions; and second, through transcribed notes from 
the retreat. For the stakeholder interviews, one facilitator asked 
questions while the other captured responses. Tese results were 
combined and summarized into a synthesis document that was 
used to objectively inform the agenda design and discussions at the 
retreat. Tis process allowed perspectives to be included without 
name attribution.
Te annual 4FRI stakeholder self-assessments provided a rich 
data set to support the conclusions from the retreat. Te 4FRI 
facilitator, in cooperation with the stakeholders, conducted annual 
self-assessments to evaluate progress, trust, and success. Surveys 
were completed in 2011 (n=40), 2012 (n=31), 2013 (n=28), and 
2014 (n=17). Te most recent three surveys (2012–2014) used 
identical questions, while 2011 had a similar, but not identical, set. 
Tese surveys were elective, therefore not all stakeholders participated, 
nor did the same number of stakeholders participate every year. Te 
survey results are not statistically valid and only reﬂect the views of 
those who took the survey; however, they do oﬀer valuable insight into 
stakeholder perceptions of how the 4FRI performed. 
U.S. Forest Service staﬀ provided valuable feedback by sharing their 
internal After Action Review (AAR) with the group. Relevant 
feedback from the AAR is also incorporated in this white paper. 
Finally, in the spirit of collaboration, this white paper was shared with the stakeholder group to ensure accuracy. A penultimate 
draft of the report was posted on the stakeholder’s internal website, BASECAMP, and members were given two weeks to 
comment. Two stakeholders responded with comments. Tose members were contacted for clariﬁcation and modiﬁcations 
were made to address their feedback. Additional review was provided by former 4FRI facilitators, a USFS staﬀ member, a 
stakeholder group steering committee member, and a collaboration researcher.
Assessing the 4FRI Collaborative Process
Deﬁning Successful Collaboration
Collaboration is characterized as a process where diverse stakeholders work together to solve a common problem or to achieve 
a common objective.vi In forest management, collaboration is viewed as a way to increase meaningful public involvement and 
input in natural resource management decisions with the goal of reducing environmental conﬂict and litigation (CEQ 2007). 
Measuring the eﬀectiveness of collaboration is notoriously diﬃcult (Marek et al. 2014). Te general assumption is that 
collaboration will lead to better management decisions that will result in implementation as opposed to litigation. Te 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Act (CFLRA) established “the strength of the collaborative process and the 
likelihood of successful collaboration throughout implementation” as one of the selection criteria for projects. Te purpose of 
the act is “to encourage the collaborative, science based ecosystem restoration” through processes that:
1) Encourage ecological, economic, and social sustainability;
2) Leverage local resources with national and private resources;
3) Facilitate the reduction of wildﬁre management costs through reestablishing natural ﬁre regimes and reducing 
uncharacteristic wildﬁre risk; and
4) Demonstrate the degree to which various ecological restoration techniques can achieve ecological and watershed health 
objectives, aﬀect wildﬁre activity and management costs, and oﬀset restoration costs and beneﬁt local communities via 
forest restoration by-products.vii 
Figure 2. Map of ﬁrst 4FRI EIS.

5
Tese goals set out by the CFLRA will require longer time scales for assessment. Te 4FRI collaborative group has leveraged 
local, national, and private resources, but otherwise it is too early to say if the project is accomplishing the other objectives of 
the act. Terefore, this analysis measures the success of 4FRI collaboration on the basis of how well the group accomplished 
its own goals and how participants felt the collaborative process contributed to achieving those goals. 
Te 4FRI stakeholders’ goals and structure for the collaborative process were articulated in three foundational documents. 
Tese documents include the Path Forward,viii the 4FRI Charter,ix and the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between 
the 4FRI Stakeholder Group and the USFS.x Te annual assessments and May retreat reveal how well the stakeholder group 
believed it performed.
 
Te goals of the 4FRI Stakeholder Group are clearly articulated in the MOU: 
Te purpose of this MOU is to document a framework of collaboration by all parties involved and interested in the restoration  
of northern Arizona’s ponderosa pine forests, and the cooperative relationship among the parties, in accordance with the following 
goals: 1) accelerate landscape-scale restoration across the Mogollon Rim to support resilient, diverse stands, that sustain populations 
of native plants and animals; 2) restore forests so they pose less threat of destructive wildﬁre to forest communities; 3) create 
sustainable forest industries that strengthen local economies while conserving natural resources and aesthetic values; and 4) engage 
the public at large through increased public outreach, education, and support for this initiative.
How collaboration should contribute to achieving those goals is best summarized in the Path Forward: 
… we believe that sustained investment in collaboration can build agreement and trust and minimize controversy surrounding 
forest management, thus allowing ambitious landscape scale restoration to proceed with maximum eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness 
without sacriﬁcing quality of work.
The May 2015 retreat was held 
at The Nature Conservancy Hart 
Prairie Preserve in Flagstaff, 
Arizona. It was attended by 30 
people representing a diversity 
of stakeholder organizations. 
Photos courtesy of  
The Nature Conservancy

6
Later in the document, it states that collaboration will help to “navigate difficult decisions” and “build agreement necessary to 
move forward.” 
The 4FRI Stakeholder Group goals for collaboration were distilled into two questions based on the Path Forward in order to 
evaluate stakeholder group performance. 
1.	 Did the stakeholder group build agreement and trust?
2.	 Did collaboration minimize controversy surrounding forest management, thus allowing ambitious landscape-scale 
restoration to proceed with maximum efficiency and effectiveness without sacrificing quality of work?
Evaluating Collaboration Within the Stakeholder Group
Did the stakeholder group build agreement and trust? 
Based on the self-assessment, interviews, and retreat outcomes, the group had varying degrees of success in building trust. The 
self-assessments in particular indicate that while trust increased overall, lack of trust persisted. In the 2014 self-assessment, half 
of respondents agreed that “trust has increased among members of the stakeholder group over the last year,” an increase from 
2013 (9 percent agreed) and 2012 (11 percent agreed). However, also in 2014, only 40 percent of stakeholders agreed that “all 
members of our stakeholder group want the 4FRI project to succeed,” less than the 60 percent who agreed with this statement 
in 2013, but similar to results from 2012. 
The survey also asked stakeholders, “Are you willing to make the trade-offs that collaboration requires?” Most respondents said they 
were, but when asked if they believed that their fellow stakeholders were willing to make those same trade-offs, most were unsure, 
or didn’t think their fellow stakeholders were willing.
The self-assessments across all years reveal that trust issues within the group arose from many respondents feeling that not 
all group members were honest about their motivations. A subset of survey respondents mentioned that they believed some 
stakeholders had “hidden agendas” and “(had) spoken to the press,” or “sought alternative processes” to collaboration in order 
to meet their needs. The respondents felt this behavior was dishonest or damaging to the collaborative. Pre-retreat interviews 
revealed that “dysfunction” of the stakeholder group was a primary concern of participants who identified the elements of the 
dysfunction to include the unwillingness of some stakeholders to disclose personal agendas and “bad behavior.” Stakeholders 
also recognized the inability of the group to hold each other accountable for bad behavior. A concern raised in the literature 
about bad behavior is that some stakeholders may choose not to participate in collaboration if the perceived costs to 
participation outweigh the perceived benefits (Cheng and Mattor 2006).
Although trust is often cited as a necessary quality to achieve collaborative outcomes, it leads to the question of whether or not 
trust was necessary to successfully complete the first 4FRI EIS. Despite the challenges in building trust among a broad base of 
group members, the 4FRI Stakeholder Group continued to meet and produce consensus-based products to inform the USFS 
planning process. Trust did exist among many individual members of the stakeholder group (surveys indicate that most trust 
issues were with a few individuals, not the majority of stakeholders) but the levels of trust were neither uniform nor possible 
in all stakeholder relationships. Building trust was an ongoing process, as demonstrated by the assessment results that show an 
incremental increase of those stakeholders who believed that trust was improving, and who became more likely to believe that 
their colleagues were willing to compromise. 
While absolute trust in all stakeholders may not be necessary to move forward, commitment in the form of time, effort, and 
participation, proved essential to 4FRI success during the first planning process. In pre-retreat interviews, stakeholders cited 
4FRI’s “grit” (i.e. staying power) as a primary strength of the group. Based on the answers to questions in the annual assessment, 
the qualities that drove 4FRI success were a commitment to addressing the challenges of large-scale forest restoration as a 
group, and the understanding that more can be accomplished to address the challenges facing northern Arizona forests as 
a group rather than as individuals. This in part can be attributed to the long history of collaboration in the region. Private 
and public groups have worked to address restoration challenges since the mid-1990s, creating momentum that many 4FRI 
stakeholders are unwilling to abandon. This commitment within the group may also have stemmed from a regular representation 
of diverse view points and a resulting tension, for example between stakeholders who argued for full restoration and those that 
were concerned about the removal of too many large trees. Based on information provided in the assessments and pre-retreat 
interviews, many stakeholders continued to attend meetings in order to represent their diverse points of view, and to decrease 
the chance that any one view point dominated the discussion. 

7
In addition, professional third-party facilitation helped the group work through contentious issues and maintain forward momentum 
by assisting with annual strategic planning. Beginning in 2009, the 4FRI Stakeholder Group cycled through five facilitators in six 
years, two of whom were forced to leave due to Stakeholder Group dissatisfaction. In the stakeholder self-assessments for 2012 
through 2014, the majority of respondents agreed that “external facilitation is important for the success of this group.” All stakeholders 
attending the retreat felt that professional facilitation was essential for effective operations of the group. 
Did collaboration minimize controversy surrounding forest management, thus allowing ambitious landscape-scale restoration to 
proceed with maximum efficiency and effectiveness without sacrificing quality of work?
Members of the stakeholder group have expressed frustration with the pace of the collaborative process. Self-assessment 
survey respondents reported that the stakeholder group “gets stuck on process often,” “too much time is spent on areas of 
disagreement,” and “overall, the process is slow.” However, the self-assessments reflect improvement over time in stakeholders’ 
feelings that progress was made as a group, and that the group became more timely and efficient in moving processes and 
products forward. Improvements in efficiency could be attributed to facilitation, becoming more familiar with the USFS 
planning process, developing a system and routine in how the collaborative does business, and also an adjustment of 
expectations over time.
When compared to other NEPA timelines, the first 4FRI EIS was completed in a reasonable period of time. According to 
an analysis by the National Association of Environmental Professionals (NAEP) and documented in the report “National 
Environmental Policy Act: Little Information Exists on NEPA Analyses”xi the 197 Final EIS’s prepared in 2012 had an 
average preparation time of 1,675 days, or 4.6 years. The start was defined as the publication of the Notice of Intent (NOI) to 
complete an EIS and the end was the Notice of Availability for the Final EIS. It is generally acknowledged that this timeframe 
underestimates the total preparation time because it does not include data development and other activities that contribute to 
the NOI. Nevertheless, it provides a benchmark to compare the 4FRI EIS. From NOI to the final ROD, the first 4FRI EIS 
took 1,561 days, or 141 days less than the 2012 average. It is also worth noting that the 4FRI EIS is far more complex than the 
average EIS, having integrated a full collaborative dimension, meeting the site specificity requirement for almost a million acres, 
and incorporating a legislated monitoring and adaptive management framework. Ultimately, the process analyzed the largest 
number of acres in USFS history for restoration-based mechanical treatments, approving 430,261 acres for mechanical thinning 
and prescribed burning and 155,849 acres for burn-only treatments. The number of acres successfully analyzed in one document 
is an alternative approach to evaluating the efficiency of collaboration during the NEPA process.
Although the 4FRI planning process fell within the average length of time required for an EIS, there were times when 
collaboration did slow the process. Negotiations over collaboratively developed products like the Landscape Strategy in 2010 
(required under the CFLRA) and controversy around the document that provided guidance on large tree retention and removal 
slowed progress, leading the USFS to periodically exhort the stakeholder group to complete its discussions in order to help 
inform and complete the Proposed Action.xii
Measuring the effectiveness and efficiency of collaboration with respect to NEPA timelines extends beyond the core planning 
process. While not mentioned in 4FRI stakeholder documents as a specific goal, one common aspiration for collaboration 
is that it will lead to decisions that avoid litigation. Fear of litigation is a legitimate concern. According to records from the 
Council on Environmental Quality (from 2009) the USFS was the most common federal defendant in legal action under 
NEPA (Mortimer and Malmsheimer 2011). U.S. Forest Service management, particularly with respect to timber harvest, has 
been under constant scrutiny and challenge by environmental advocates for the last 30 years (Broussard and Whitaker 2009).
By January 2015, the 4FRI Stakeholder Group endorsed the first draft 4FRI EIS, stating, “While no document can possibly 
encapsulate the integral embodiment of so many different stakeholders’ and Agencies’ individual visions, and while individual 
stakeholders may seek adjustments on specific issues during the objection process and through future collaborative efforts, we 
believe that the Draft Record of Decision adequately translates the Forest Service and Stakeholder Group common restoration 
goals for the 4FRI First Analysis Area.”xiii
This unanimity among diverse interests arguably supports the conclusion that the collaboration built durable agreements 
through the assessment process. However, two potential hurdles remained before getting to implementation: 1) the new 
objection process, and 2) whether objectors would be satisfied and/or not litigate.  

8
Eﬀect of Collaboration on the Pre-Decisional Objection Process
In 2013, the USFS created a new pre-decisional objection processxiv with the goal of identifying and resolving contentious issues 
after the issuance of the Final EIS and Draft ROD and before the Final ROD in order to avoid litigation. Participants in the 
objection process are limited to those who have standing established during the NEPA analysis. It also leaves it to the discretion 
of the deciding oﬃcer if and how to make the objection proceedings a public process. Te deciding oﬃcer for the  
ﬁrst 4FRI EIS was the Region 3 regional forester. His decision was to engage the 4FRI Stakeholder Group in the process. 
Participating in the objection process in the spring of 2015 gave the stakeholder group an opportunity to support the USFS  
in decisions that were made collaboratively, advocate for the best available science used in the EIS, and to learn from the 
objectors possible points of contention for the second EIS that was scheduled to begin in late 2015. Te objection process  
was not only new to the stakeholder group, but was also a new approach for the regional and forest level staﬀ involved with  
the project. Two of the objectors were stakeholders who participated in the collaborative process. 
Many members of the stakeholder group attending the retreat felt that inclusion in the process and the receptivity of the 
regional forester, and other regional staﬀ, to their input was a positive aﬃrmation of the value of collaboration. However, 
stakeholders indicated that navigating the objection process was complicated and confusing at times because the process  
was new for the agency and non-agency participants. Te primary challenges were related to communication, which included  
staying abreast of rapidly changing relevant documents, to keeping apprised of meeting schedules. Te stakeholder group 
members who participated in the objection process also found the process too quick, with insuﬃcient time to speciﬁcally  
address objector concerns or have more dialogue. A tight timeline also created short turn-around times for contributing 
information or reviewing documents. Strategies identiﬁed by the stakeholder group for future objection processes included 
continuing to use best available science and incorporating evidence-based reviews. Developing a communication strategy  
with the USFS ahead of the process also would have been helpful.
In November 2015, a complaint was ﬁled against the ﬁrst ROD and 4FRI EIS in the U.S. District Court, Arizona District. Te 
lawsuit was process-based, seeking clarity on the new objection process rules, asserting that the EIS violates portions of  
the Administrative Procedures Act, NEPA, and the CFLRA, and therefore requested that the EIS be remanded to the USFS for 
revision to achieve compliance.xv Te case was dismissed on September 14, 2016 because the court found the plaintiﬀ lacked standing.
Ultimately, the organizations that often litigate in order to stop management elected not to litigate the Final ROD. Was 
collaboration through NEPA successful? Te events and evidence suggest that collaboration did contribute to the successful 
completion of the ﬁrst 4FRI EIS.  
Kaibab National Forest Supervisor Mike Williams (left) and Coconino National Forest Supervisor Earl Stewart (right) sign 
the Final Record of Decision for the ﬁrst EIS. Photo courtesy of the USDA Forest Service

9
Te Challenge of Post-NEPA Implementation
Te core goal of the 4FRI Stakeholder Group appears in the MOU with the USFS. It is to “accelerate landscape-scale 
restoration across the Mogollon Rim to support resilient, diverse stands that sustain populations of native plants and animals.”  
More speciﬁcally, it is to implement restoration treatments (as opposed to timely, successful planning). However, implementation  
requires conditions and actions that are largely outside of the control of the stakeholder group. Most stakeholders would agree  
that implementation of treatments did not increase as quickly as originally envisioned by the collaborative. 
From federal ﬁscal year 2010 to April 2016, 131,069 acres have been mechanically treated across the entire 4FRI landscape. 
Tis is signiﬁcantly less than the stakeholder goal of 50,000 acres of mechanical treatment per year. Te number of acres 
accomplished to date has been and continues to be inﬂuenced by a number of factors including problems with the largest 
thinning contract, proximity of acres to processing facilities, lack of manufacturing capacity, the cost of biomass removal,  
and the overall marginal economics of wood utilization. 
Te acres reported treated in 2016 were based on NEPA shelf stock and do not represent the project acres collaboratively planned 
by the stakeholders under the ﬁrst 4FRI EIS. Te ﬁrst acres to be treated under the 4FRI stakeholder-developed EIS are still in 
preparation for treatment. By August 2016, only three task orders of 3,358 acres were completed as part of the 300,000-acre 4FRI 
contract, originally awarded in 2012.xvi
According to the original 4FRI CFLR proposal, in order to attract new restoration-based wood industry, a contract  
“at a large enough scale and with enough predictability of supply” would be needed to encourage signiﬁcant industry  
investment in the region.xvii Te ﬁrst contractor failed to perform, and the contract was reassigned to Good Earth Power 
Arizona (GEP) in October 2013. With no existing harvest and manufacturing capacity on the ground, GEP was tasked  
with rebuilding infrastructure, a process that has been slow. In addition, GEP has experienced other delays. Te result is  
that the intent of having one large contractor thin 30,000 acres per year (with other contractors achieving an additional  
20,000 acres a year) is not yet realized. 
Four Forest Restoration Initiative collaboration has set the stage for industry by successfully approving hundreds of thousands 
of acres for mechanical thinning. Restoration treatments may accelerate over the long term as industry capacity grows, but this 
will be more a function of the actions of the private business sector and wood product marketplace rather than collaboration.
 
Stakeholders tour a group of mature ponderosa pines on the 4FRI landscape. Photo courtesy of USDA Forest Service

10
10
Evaluating Collaboration Between the 4FRI Stakeholder Group and the U.S. Forest Service
An inﬂuential factor in stakeholder willingness to participate in collaboration is the expectation of having a direct inﬂuence  
on USFS planning, and as part of that, that stakeholder group contributions to that process are valued (Cheng and Mattor 
2006). Te MOU between the 4FRI Stakeholder Group and the USFS deﬁned the role of each partner. 
Te U.S. Forest Service and the 4FRI Collaborative will work together through all phases of the NEPA process potentially including 
the framing of the issues, the development of a range of reasonable alternatives, the analysis of impacts, and the identiﬁcation of the 
preferred alternative – up to, but not including, the agency’s ﬁnal decisions made by the relevant Line Oﬃcer (CEQ Handbook, p. 13).
Te 4FRI stakeholders were involved in all facets of planning. Most 4FRI stakeholders felt they inﬂuenced the planning  
of the ﬁrst analysis area and that their contributions were valued by the USFS. From 2011 to 2014, stakeholders believed  
that the USFS went beyond the minimum collaboration required by NEPA increased over time. Also, stakeholders believed  
that by working with the USFS, progress was made on concrete issues and on the 4FRI project (more so than progress just 
within the stakeholder group). Additionally, up to 90 percent of the stakeholders in 2014 agreed that the USFS 4FRI staﬀ 
evaluated stakeholder ideas, which was up from about 50 percent in 2011. 
Te extent to which documents and negotiations inﬂuenced the Final EIS varied. In the early years of the process some 
stakeholders expected all collaboratively derived products and positions to be adopted and incorporated into the NEPA  
analysis. Tis expectation became a point of contention with respect to the stakeholder group Large Tree Retention Strategy 
(LTRS), which described how large young trees would be managed. Despite the USFS assertion that there were legal reasons 
that the document could not be adopted verbatim, the interpretation of the LTRS included in the Draft EIS left some 
stakeholders dissatisﬁed. In contrast, the complete monitoring plan developed by the stakeholders was included in the Final 
EIS with only minor edits. When the stakeholders delivered the monitoring plan to the ID team it was accompanied by a letter 
stating clear stakeholder expectations. Including a letter of expectation may have contributed to better mutual understanding 
about desired outcomes. For example, the stakeholder group acknowledged the need for monitoring prioritization, and that the 
USFS would not be ﬁscally responsible for all desired monitoring. 
Tis level of commitment and willingness to hear stakeholder ideas presented by the collaborating USFS partners could  
be a factor driving continued stakeholder involvement. Several innovations to increase communication were tested by the  
4FRI Interdisciplinary (ID) Team as well. For example, team members held oﬃce hours to encourage informal conversations. 
Finally, an important and surprising outcome from collaboration was the role the stakeholder group played in public meetings. 
Te stakeholder group co-hosted several public meetings and open houses. Tere was a notable improvement in turnout when 
the USFS and stakeholder group combined eﬀorts in public outreach. 
Did trust improve between the stakeholders and the USFS during the planning process?
Building trust between the USFS staﬀ and stakeholders was an ongoing process. Initially, miscommunications and missteps 
strained 4FRI stakeholder and USFS relations. An example of this issue emerged during pre-retreat interviews and was 
discussed at the retreat. Te initial proposed action was drafted by the USFS based on input from a series of public open houses. 
Tis approach, although consistent with conventional public input process, did not meet stakeholder expectations for decision-
sharing. Tis left some members of the stakeholder group feeling that the planning process was moving forward without them. 
In February 2011 members of the 4FRI Stakeholder Group and the U.S. Forest Service Apache-Sitgreaves, Coconino, 
Kaibab, and Tonto national forests signed a Memorandum of Understanding to deﬁne the role of each partner. Photo 
courtesy of the USDA Forest Service

11
11
The USFS 4FRI staff indicated that their intent was not to exclude the stakeholders, but to provide a starting point. As a part 
of their After Action Review (AAR), the 4FRI USFS staff identified a few areas of improvement for the next proposed action 
development. Areas of improvement included providing more and better quality data to stakeholders, engaging the stakeholder 
group in the development of desired conditions, and asking the stakeholder group to advertise public meetings in order  
to improve public participation and streamline the public participation process. 
Conflict arose between the stakeholder group and the USFS 4FRI staff regarding the intent of the stakeholder group’s Large 
Tree Retention Strategy. This issue also caused friction within the stakeholder group. The most contentious issue revolved 
around a category titled, “Preponderance of Large Young Trees.” The consensus stakeholder position was that large trees should 
be retained across the landscape unless removal was necessary in order to achieve restoration goals (such as fire risk reduction 
and/or to re-establish pattern and function in the landscape). In other words, when restoration goals could not be achieved there 
would be an “exception” made that allowed the removal of large young trees. Conflict arose when the USFS indicated that most 
of the landscape fit this description, but then did not immediately produce the data and map layers to support this assertion. 
Discord developed in the stakeholder group between those individuals who were satisfied with the USFS contention that much 
of the landscape fell under this description and those who distrusted the USFS and felt the USFS was applying it too broadly. 
Ultimately, the dissatisfied parties negotiated directly with the USFS outside the stakeholder group. 
Having a dedicated USFS ID team and low rate of turnover within that team helped the stakeholder group maintain consistent 
working relationships with agency staff, leading to increased trust and communication over time.
What were the successes and challenges to the 4FRI Stakeholder Group and USFS partnership? 
Challenges for stakeholders have included struggling to learn the NEPA process, understanding the planning timeline, and 
determining where in the process their actions would be most effective. The USFS identified this problem in their AAR and 
proposed they continue to educate stakeholders about the NEPA process and timeline. 
Several times the stakeholder group and USFS had to discuss the legal limits of collaboration and the public process before 
it impinged on rules regulating pre-decisional actions. The NEPA process and the variable interpretations of where legal 
boundaries exist for collaborative decision-making were confusing to stakeholders and difficult for USFS planning staff to 
interpret.  At one point, the stakeholder group and USFS evaluated the efficacy of seeking Federal Advisory Committee Act 
(FACA) designation but concluded that it would limit participation. To avoid FACA violations, the 4FRI stakeholder group 
convened all meetings and developed the agendas. U.S. Forest Service staff were not voting members of the collaborative but 
participated at the invitation of the stakeholder group. 
During the first EIS analysis, stakeholders learned to accept that the collaborative group was not the sole voice for the public 
nor even for all members of the 4FRI collaborative. Issues that were painstakingly discussed and resolved by the collaborative 
had to be reconsidered by the USFS because of public comments on the proposed action, draft and final EIS document, and 
objection process. 
Dissatisfaction with the collaborative outcome on one issue led some members to step outside the collaborative process in 
order to pursue their organization’s position. Neither the SHG nor the USFS can require any member to stick with the process, 
and the USFS cannot refuse their input. At the retreat, some members of the collaborative stated they were offended by this 
behavior and it caused them to question the purpose of having a formal collaborative group. 
The length of time required to produce an EIS caused frustration in the group. Yet, while the stakeholder group would 
complain about the need for a faster process at some points, more time to review or produce documents would be requested at 
other times. Like many federal and state agencies, the USFS 4FRI staff have multiple demands on their time that limit their 
availability to collaborate. Capacity to accomplish a project as large and complex as the first EIS analysis was an issue for both 
the stakeholders and the USFS. In order to give the stakeholder group more time to review documents, the ID team posted 
draft documents on the public website prior to official publication to give more time for review. 
Stakeholders at the retreat identified implementation of the first EIS as a big issue still pending resolution. Many of the 
stakeholder group’s foundational documents advocate positions that focus on implementation issues, such as the strategic 
placement of treatments to facilitate management with prescribed or wildland fire. The USFS postponed discussion  
of these issues during the NEPA process, maintaining that the proper time for consideration would be during  
post-NEPA implementation. 

12
12
As previously mentioned, stakeholders were and continue to be frustrated with the contracting process. Concern about the USFS 
decision process for the ﬁrst 300,000-acre contract, and the failure of the ﬁrst contractor and slow performance of the second has 
been a primary concern of some members of the group and been a recurring, lengthy topic for discussion at meetings. Te USFS 
has responded to criticism by providing information to verify compliance with all legal procedures. Tey have also stated that as 
long as the contractor is not in default, no legal action can be taken to terminate the contract. Nevertheless, this element of the 
4FRI process and the inability of the stakeholders to inﬂuence it is a frustration to some members. 
As part of the May 2015 retreat, stakeholders and USFS 4FRI staﬀ identiﬁed strategies to improve their partnership.  
Te stakeholders prioritized increased access to information, data, and draft documents to increase the transparency  
of the planning process. Stakeholders also expressed a desire to reduce stakeholder group response time to USFS planning  
documents, and to reduce conﬂict over contentious planning issues. Te USFS 4FRI staﬀ expressed a desire for increased  
clarity in stakeholder comments and feedback, quicker response times, consolidated comments from diﬀerent groups within  
the stakeholder group, and increased recruitment, representation, and capacity in the stakeholder group. Te stakeholder  
group expressed a desire for more USFS participation in the collaborative, especially by line oﬃcers. 
Conclusions
Goals developed by the stakeholder group include building trust and agreement, and increasing the pace and scale of forest 
treatments. Over time the stakeholder group increased their eﬃciency, enhanced their understanding of the EIS process,  
and improved trust within the stakeholder group and between the stakeholder group and the USFS.  Collaboration has  
not led to a singular outcome of “successful” or “unsuccessful.” Te group has reached varying levels of success across  
stakeholder developed goals, which have been described in this paper. Issues still persist in the workings of the collaborative 
group; however, these were secondary to the stakeholders’ grit and determination to see the ﬁrst NEPA analysis to completion.
In April 2015, the Final EIS and ROD was signed for the ﬁrst one-million-acre analysis for the 4FRI. Tis action approved 
almost 600,000 acres for restoration treatments that include thinning and burning, and burn-only. Tis EIS exceeded the size 
and scope of previous EIS’s that include mechanical thinning and it demonstrated that landscape-scale EIS analysis can be 
successful. Although a complaint was ﬁled in Arizona District Court, the plaintiﬀ did not seek an injunction and ultimately  
the case was dismissed. Te question arises, would this NEPA process have succeeded without the six-year collaboration 
between the USFS and the 4FRI Stakeholder Group? 
Te last six years demonstrate that collaboration did contribute to the successful completion of the ﬁrst 4FRI EIS. Te process 
and outcome of the pre-decisional objection process is an illustration of the power of collaboration. Te process strives to resolve 
objections during the time between the release of the Draft and Final ROD. How the process works is left to the discretion  
of the deciding oﬃcer. In the case of the ﬁrst 4FRI EIS, the regional forester chose to include the stakeholder group throughout 
the proceedings, often requesting input about whether or not the stakeholder group had discussed the issue raised by the 
objector. Where the stakeholder group had discussed and resolved issues, the USFS aligned with the stakeholder group. 
The Four Forest Restoration Initiative is a collaborative effort to restore forest ecosystems on more than 2.4 million acres 
of national forest land along the Mogollon Rim in northern Arizona. The collaborative work completed over the past six 
years has set the stage for accelerating the pace and scale of restoration and reducing the threat of ﬁre to communities. 
Photo courtesy of the USDA Forest Service

13
The true measure of whether or not collaboration works is whether or not the group was able to achieve the goals identified in 
the MOU between the stakeholder group and USFS. For outcomes within its control the stakeholder group has been successful. 
Collaboration has set the stage for accelerating the pace and scale of restoration and reducing the threat of fire to communities by 
supporting the NEPA process and successfully completing the analysis. The next step for accelerating treatment implementation 
is beyond the authority and capacity of the stakeholder group. It requires the creation of appropriately scaled industries to do the 
restoration work — a remaining challenge that is a work in progress. Finally, the 4FRI is well known to the interested public, in 
part due to the innovative approach taken to conduct joint public meetings with the USFS and promotion and outreach done by 
the stakeholder group members and their organizations. The second “Rim Country” EIS is already underway, demonstrating the 
commitment of the stakeholder group and the USFS for achieving the 4FRI goal to restore 2.4 million acres across the Mogollon Rim. 

14
End Notes
i http://www.4fri.org/description.html, 4FRI Stakeholder Group Website, Accessed on 2/26/2016.
ii For more history see ERI white paper, “Te History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010.” http://library.eri.
nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2014031.dir/doc.pdf. 
iii Te Notice of Intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement was ﬁrst published in the Federal Register on January 25, 
2011. 
iv Western Governors’ Association 10-Year Comprehensive Strategy, Te Healthy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA), 
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (New Mexico), the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Act, 2012 U.S. Forest 
Service Forest Planning Rule
v Te following is a list of organizations that signed the 4FRI Stakeholder Group Charter: 
vi Rural Voices for Conservation Coalition. April 2007. “Collaboration Issues Paper.” 
vii CFLRA, Omnibus Public Lands Act of 2009, P.L. 111-11
viii Te Path Forward, http://www.4fri.org/pdfs/path_forward_032410.pdf. Accessed on 6/8/2016.
ix Te 4FRI Charter: http://www.4fri.org/pdfs/4FRI_charter_amended_022713.pdf. Accessed on 6/8/2016.
x Te Memorandum of Understanding between the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) Collaborative Stakeholder Group 
Representatives and the U.S. Forest Service Apache-Sitgreaves, Coconino, Kaibab, and Tonto national forests. http://www.4fri.
org/pdfs/MOU_with_signatures.pdf. Accessed on 6/8/2016.
xi GAO-14-369, http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/662543.pdf
xii Provencio, Henry. U.S. Forest Service, personal conversation July 9, 2016.
Arizona Elk Society 
Arizona Game and Fish Department 
Arizona State Forestry 
Arizona Wildlife Federation 
Bejac Corporation
Campbell Global
Canyon Creek Logging Inc. 
Center for Biological Diversity 
City of Flagstaﬀ-Fire Department 
Coconino County 
Coconino Natural Resource Conservation District 
Coconino Rural Environment Corps 
Eastern Arizona Counties Organization 
Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU 
Empire Machinery 
Forest Energy Corporation 
Gila County 
Grand Canyon Trust 
Great Old Broads for Wilderness 
Greater Flagstaﬀ Forest Partnership 
Greenlee County 
Little Colorado River Plateau RC&D Area, Inc. 
Mottek Consulting 
National Wild Turkey Federation 
Te Natural Resources Working Group 
Navajo County
Northern Arizona Logging Association 
NAU Forest Ecosystem Restoration Analysis 
Northern Arizona Wood Products Association 
Northland Pioneer College 
Novo BioPower, LLC. 
Pine Strawberry Fuel Reduction Inc. 
Pioneer Association 
Real Arizona Development Council 
Southwest Forestry Inc. 
Southwest Forests Sustainable Partnerships 
Te Nature Conservancy 
Tri Star Logging Inc. 
Town of Pinetop - Lakeside 
Town of Snowﬂake 
TRACKS 
Trout Unlimited 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
White Mountain Conservation League 
White Mountain Stewardship Multiparty Monitoring 
Board 
Wildwood Consulting

15
xiii 4FRI Stakeholder Group Position Statement, http://www.4fri.org/pdfs/press/4FRI_SHG_ResponseToFEISDRODFinal.pdf 
xiv 36 CFR Part 218, http://www.fs.fed.us/emc/applit/36cfr218a.htm
xv U.S. District Court, District of Arizona. Case 3:15-cv-08265-PCT-NVW. Filed 11/09/15.
xvi An additional 4.058 acres have been harvested but not accepted by the USFS.
xvii The 4 Forest Restoration Initiative: Promoting Ecological Restoration, Wildfire Risk Reduction, and Sustainable Wood 
Products Industries: A Proposal for Funding Under the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. http://www.
fs.fed.us/restoration/documents/cflrp/2010Proposals/Region3/R3_4FRI/R3_4FRI_CFLRP_Proposal_05142010.pdf. Accessed 
on 7/7/2016.

16
References
Broussard, S.R., and B.D. Whitaker. 2009. Te Magna Carta of Environmental Legislation: A Historical Look at 30 Years of   
 
NEPA-Forest Litigation. Forest Policy and Economics, 11 (2009) 148-154.
Cheng, A.S., and K.M. Mattor. 2006. Why won’t they come? Stakeholder perspectives on collaborative national forest planning  
 
by participation level. Environmental management, 38(4), 545-561.
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 2007. Collaboration in NEPA: A Handbook for NEPA Practitioners.  
 
October 2007.
Marek, L.I, Brock, D.P. and J. Savla. 2014. Evaluating Collaboration for Eﬀectiveness: Conceptualization and Measurement.   
 
American Journal of Evaluation 1-19. http://aje.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/04/18/1098214014531068
Mortimer, M.J., and R.W. Malmsheimer. 2011. Te Equal Access to Justice Act and U.S. Forest Service Land Management:   
 
Incentives to Litigate. Journal of Forestry, (352-358).
USDA Forest Service (USFS). 2012. Te WGA Cohesive Strategy, Healthy Forest Restoration Act, CFLP, CFRP, 2012 Forest  
 
Planning Rule.

Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
 
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural 
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International deﬁnes ecological 
restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its 
health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for 
Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and lack their 
once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, 
stand-replacing ﬁres and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing 
frequent, low-intensity surface ﬁres—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory 
plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and 
monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-ﬁre forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, 
such as ﬁre, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, 
wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research and 
observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every forest restoration is 
site speciﬁc, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decisionmakers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not 
constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
ERI–Issues in Forest Restoration
1. 
Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for Western Forest Restoration
2. 
Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western United States
3. 
Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected Literature and Surveys
4. 
Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
5. 
Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of Community  
Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. 
Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern Arizona
7. 
Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. 
Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. 
Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: Te White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for Practitioners
11. Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest Lands
15. Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level
16. Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis
17. A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire
18. Forest Restoration Treatments: Teir Eﬀect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs
19. Te History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s-2010
20. Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups
21. Flagstaﬀ Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions Trough Community Partnerships

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
G1003031
