18
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Prescribed and Wildland
Use Fires in the Southwest:
Do Frequency and Timing
Matter?
February 2007

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native
species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration
International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates
the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration
attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly
susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics.
Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often
after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By
allowing natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish
healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes
that every restoration project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information provided in the
Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of
trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States
Government.

Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: 
Do Frequency and Timing Matter?
Introduction
Support for the use of prescribed fire and
wildland fire use has increased in the
Southwest in recent decades. However, the
frequency and seasonality of these
contemporary fires is typically different than
historical fires, which burned during late
spring and early summer in the driest and
windiest time of the year. Contemporary
changes in the landscape, including
unprecedented fuel loads and human
development in and around forests, now
limit the ability to use fire during those
times of the year. Most managed fire now
occurs outside the windy fire season because
it is safer and allows managers to provide
greater protection to susceptible cultural or
natural resources, such as historic structures
or dry snags.
By interpreting fire scars, researchers know
that fires in southwestern forests historically varied
across time and space, and burned at various levels
of severity. This variability affected fuel levels, fire
behavior, and post-fire regeneration. Moreover,
historical fires burned for long periods (weeks to
months) and varied in behavior according to
topography, fuel types and loads, and weather
fluctuations--burning hotter in some areas and
leaving others unscorched. In addition to
considering the mean interval of historical fire, fire
planning and management personnel should keep
in mind the variability of historical fires because
almost all forests studied have had at least one
instance of fires in two subsequent years as well as
maximum fire-free periods reaching one to several
decades. This suggests that a different strategy may be
needed for modern prescribed burns—one that is
more variable than present-day burns, which are
often conducted at regular intervals, generally in
the fall using the same ignition strategy, and have
the goal of burning the entire site.
Land managers concerned with restoring fire often
ask: What is the best time to burn? What are the
implications of burning in different seasons to the
plants and animals of southwestern ecosystems?
How often should a given site be burned? These
questions are linked to the various ecological
aspects of fire and fire management (fire frequency,
fire severity, amount of fuel load) and plant
seasonal development (phenology) and the seasonal
use of habitat by a variety of wildlife species.
Plants
Researchers and land managers know that the
season, regularity, and duration of a fire can
significantly affect fire severity and, therefore, the
ability of the plants to grow, reproduce, and even
survive. However, plant susceptibility to fire varies
among species and according to individual and
site conditions.
Trees 
Fire can damage the roots, trunk or crown of a
tree, and a severe fire can seriously affect all these
tree parts. Tree roots are typically safe from fire if
they are below the soil surface and the soil is
moist. However, when fire is reintroduced to a site
that has been without fire for long periods of time,
it will often burn slowly through the accumulated
duff and litter creating lethal temperatures because
of the long residence time of the smoldering fire
(Herman 1954, Harrington 1993). Intense or long
duration fires around the base of a tree can kill the
cambium tissue, effectively girdling the tree.
Fires in tree crowns will typically kill or severely
damage most tree species. Small trees and
seedlings are especially susceptible to fire (even
low-severity fires) because their crowns are so
close to the ground. Moreover, their bark is thin
and a poor insulator against excessive heat.
Harrington (1993) found that ponderosa pine
trees with a 12-inch dbh or more typically
survived regardless of the burn season, while
1
a
Ecological Restoration Institute

smaller-size trees (6-inch dbh or less) tended
to die, although more so after spring and
summer burns. However, fire effects on
mature trees vary by species—that is, some
are fire tolerant, others fire intolerant. Firs,
for example, are fire intolerant and
incapable of surviving most fires due to
their shallow roots, thin bark, and closed
crowns. Tree species with thicker bark and
higher canopies, such as ponderosa pine and
Jeffrey pine, are fire tolerant. Some trees
(e.g., oaks, locust) and shrubs (e.g.,
ceanothus; Kauffman and Martin 1990) will
resprout after being topkilled by fire.
Trees are most susceptible to fire damage in
the spring and early summer, when cellular
activity is high and trees are restocking
stored carbohydrates that were used to grow
foliage and fine roots. In general, trees are
less susceptible to heat damage during their
dormant season because cellular activity is
low. However, the data from a few studies on
seasonal burning show mixed results. For
instance, Harrington (1993) observed 2.5
times greater mortality in ponderosa pines
trees that were burned in late spring and
midsummer than those burned during fall
dormancy. Thies and colleagues (2005)
found more dead ponderosa pine after a fall
burn than a spring burn, although they noted that
the fall burns were more severe than the spring
burns. Schwilk and colleagues (2006), in a
replicated study of multiple species, including
ponderosa pine and Jeffrey pine, in a Sierra
Nevada mixed-conifer forest found a direct link
between fire intensity and mortality, but no
relationship to early or late-season burning. This
limited information suggests that heat damage in
any season is the most important factor affecting
tree survival, although trees are more susceptible
to the same fire intensity during the growing season.
The amount of duff and the moisture level of the
fuel play key roles in determining the duration and
intensity of a fire. If the duff is deep and moisture
low, the result may be a high-severity fire that will
injure or kill even large trees. Raking fuels away
from “leave” trees and removing dead and downed
logs will increase the survival of old trees (see ERI
Working Paper #3, Protecting Old Trees from
Prescribed Fire).
Low-severity fires can destroy snags (dead trees)
that are used by wildlife for habitat. While it is
impossible to save all snags during a prescribed
burn, consider maintaining a population of snags
of all age classes, especially relatively new snags,
for wildlife purposes (see ERI Working Paper #16,
Snags and Forest Restoration). Raking around the
bases of snags is probably the best way to ensure
their presence. High-severity burns typically
destroy and create snags but, given the present
deficit of old trees in most ponderosa pine forests,
most newly created snags will likely be small and
short, and unsuitable for wildlife use.
Understory Plants
Unlike other parts of the country (Platt et al. 1988,
Henderson and Statz 1995, Thompson 2006,
Knapp et al. 2007), there is little research in the
Southwest about the effects of fire timing or fire
frequency on understory plants. Researchers do
agree, however, that pre-settlement, low-severity
fires helped maintain the understory vegetation of
ponderosa pine forests. James Agee (1993), for
Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: 
Do Frequency and Timing Matter?
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
2

Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: 
Do Frequency and Timing Matter? a
Ecological Restoration Institute
3
example, provides this summary: “The typical fire
in ponderosa pine forests had little effect on the
herbaceous component besides removing the
cured material above the ground. Removing the
accumulated needles and topkilling shrubs [and
tree seedlings] generally aided the grasses and
forbs (Weaver 1951b, Biswell 1973) and stimulated
flowering. Bunchgrasses normally recover in one
to three years, and most forbs recover quickly
(Wright et al. 1979). Bulb and tuberous species are
rarely harmed by fire.” Research from other
ecosystems—mixed-conifer forest, pinyon-juniper
woodlands, and chaparral—indicates that
historical fires were also a key disturbance factor
in those systems, and that understory species were
adapted to the fire regimes of these different
ecosystems.
Like woody plants, there are many variables that
affect how herbaceous plants respond to fire—fire
parameters, site conditions, weather conditions,
and plant morphology and physiology. In terms of
these last two items, most land managers realize
that burning during periods of active herbaceous
plant growth harms plants, affects the amount and
timing of flowering and seed production, and can
cause plant death, especially if the fire is too
severe. This occurs because plants that are burned
while they are actively growing no longer have the
photosynthetic structures (stems and leaves)
needed to produce the carbohydrates required for
future growth and reproduction (Moser 1977).
Thus, burning in the early summer before the
cool-season C3 grasses have gone dormant can
harm those species, while fall burning can damage
or, at least, slow the growth of the warm-season
C4 grasses. A 14-year study of vegetation response
to thinning and burning by Moore and colleagues
(2006) produced findings consistent with this
point. After thinning and several fall burns in a
ponderosa pine forest, these researchers noted an
increase in cool-season grasses but no increase in
warm-season grasses. Other studies (Gaines et al.
1958, Haisley 1984) found decreases in mountain
muhly, a prominent warm-season grass in
northern Arizona, following fall burning.
The morphology of a grass, especially the location
of its meristems and buds, also affects its
vulnerability to seasonal and/or frequent fires. In
general, grasses that expand by means of
aboveground stolons (e.g., buffalograss, black
grama, curly mesquite) are most susceptible to fire
at any time, while rhizomatous grasses (e.g.,
Kentucky bluegrass, western wheatgrass, galleta
grass) are least susceptible, and often react
positively, to fire because their growing points are
below ground. However, rhizomatous grasses in
forested stands may be more susceptible to
seasonal fires because their meristems and buds

Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: 
Do Frequency and Timing Matter?
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
are often be located in litter or duff layers or near
woody fuels. Bunchgrasses (e.g., blue grama,
muttongrass, Arizona fescue, little bluestem,
Sandberg bluegrass, side-oats grama), are
considered more susceptible to seasonal fires than
rhizomatous grasses, especially those that are
warm-season grasses because their growing points
elevate as the plant matures (typically when leaves
are 4-6” long). However, bunchgrasses with
densely clustered culms, such as Idaho fescue and
needle-and-thread, tend to burn longer and hotter
because of their structure, as do bunchgrasses with
fine leaves and stems, such as Arizona fescue.
Larger-diameter bunches also tend to burn hotter
and more slowly than smaller bunches. Fire is also
especially detrimental to bunchgrasses that are
burned when they are in seed because
bunchgrasses, unlike stoloniferous and
rhizomatous grasses, reproduce solely by seed.
There is little evidence to indicate that the
seasonality of fire negatively affects long-lived,
native perennial forbs (Kerns et al. 2006), unless
the fires are extremely severe or occur too
frequently over the course of several growing
seasons (Armour et al. 1984). Perennial forbs
generally have the ability to resprout from
belowground buds, rhizomes, or tap roots. Woody
forbs, however, are slower to recover. Fire during
the growing season can also affect seed
production, often positively by increasing post-fire
flowering in members of the Iris, Orchid and Lily
families, and by producing a favorable seedbed.
However, as with the bunchgrasses, if the fire is set
at the time when the plant is producing seed, then
the entire year’s seed production is typically lost,
which can affect annual and biennials.
While there are virtually no studies of spring fire
effects in the Southwest (but see Fiedler et al. 2006
for study in Montana), studies of fall fires in
ponderosa pine restoration areas indicate that they
encourage the emergence and growth of native
and exotic annuals and biennials (Abella and
Covington 2004, Laughlin et al. 2004, Kerns et al.
2006, Moore et al. 2006). Most of these annuals
and biennials are short-lived, although some
exotic species, including dalmatian toadflax and
cheatgrass, can be serious ecological problems.
More specific information on fire effects for
individual plant species, especially grasses, can be
located on the Forest Service Fire Effects
Information Systems (FEIS) web site:
www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants.
4

Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: 
Do Frequency and Timing Matter? a
Ecological Restoration Institute
Regardless of the ecosystem, it remains difficult in
the Southwest to determine whether changes in
understory vegetation are due to differences in
burn prescriptions or are related to site conditions,
including plant composition, density and biomass;
live and dead fuel conditions; or soil conditions at
the time of the burn. It is, therefore, difficult to
determine which factor--the season of the burn,
the intensity or duration of a burn, or the
frequency of burning—produced the most
significant effects on understory vegetation.
Because climatic differences, especially the amount
of yearly precipitation, play a major role in
understory performance, long-term monitoring of
burning effects of understory change is necessary
to determine variability in understory biomass and
diversity (McLaughlin 1978).
Soil Nutrients & Biota
Fires in the Southwest may produce other effects
on the environment, such as the removal of vital
ectomycorrhizal fungi and the loss of live root
biomass and fine root length (Smith et al. 2004,
Hart et al. 2005), and the creation of favorable
conditions (bare soil and increased soil nutrients)
for invasive species (Harris and Covington 1983,
Covington and Sackett 1992). However, these
effects may be due to the soil moisture conditions
and the intensity and/or duration of the burn
rather than the season of burn (although for the
effects of fall burning on ectomycorrhizal fungi,
see Smith et al. 2004). Research by Shearer (1975)
and Frandsen and Ryan (1986) indicates that
burning when the soil and lower duff layer are
moist will produce fewer negative effects on
grasses, forbs, and ectomycorrhizal fungi than
burning when those layers are dry. In terms of soil
nutrients, Wright and Hart (1997) found that
burning too frequently (every two years) may
reduce carbon and nitrogen in the soil and may
also affect phosphorus availability in ponderosa
pine ecosystems.
Wildlife 
Although reliable data on the subject is scarce, the
frequency and timing of fire can have direct effects
(mortality, reduced reproduction) and indirect
effects (temporary or long-term habitat modification,
changes in food supply, changes in competitors
and/or predators) on wildlife. The effects vary
depending on the size, duration, and severity of
the fire as well as the life history of the animal.
Large, mobile animals (raptors and ungulates, for
example) can typically escape fires. Similarly,
mammals, reptiles, and birds that live belowground
or in trees usually experience low mortality (Smith
2000). At greatest risk are aboveground nesters,
including ground-nesting birds, rabbits, mice, and
woodrats (Smith 2000). Breeding animals are also
at risk because they may be less willing to leave
their burrow or nest, or abandon their young, or
they may attempt to move their young in the
midst of a fire (Finch et al. 1997).
Most birds and mammals associated with dry
coniferous forests breed from April through June
or July (Hoffmeister 1985, Corman and Wise-
Gervais 2005), which may coincide with a spring
fire. A fall fire may cause less direct mortality
because these animals, including migrating
neotropical songbirds, would be more mobile.
Other bird and mammal species, including wild
turkeys, tassel-eared squirrels and mule deer, breed
in late summer after the historical fire season.
Dusky shrews in northern Arizona breed in April
and August, which is both before and after the
historical fire season (Hoffmeister 1986). These
late-breeding animals are adapted to the late-
spring fire season and could be negatively affected
by a fire during another part of the year.
Changes in food and habitat, which in turn affects
survival and reproduction, are the most important
fire effects for wildlife. For instance, animals may
not establish nests or breed in response to a fire
and the subsequent loss of ground and shrub
cover (Patton and Gordon 1995, Short 2002).
Juveniles born in late summer depend on fall
vegetation as a food source when dispersing and
preparing to survive the winter. Botta’s pocket
gophers, for example, spend the majority of their
life underground and only come aboveground as
dispersing juveniles in the fall (Hoffmeister 1986).
The fall is also an important season for animals
preparing for winter hibernation (e.g., golden-
mantled ground squirrels, bears, and raccoons) or
late-fall migration (e.g., bats and birds). A fall fire
could eliminate food sources and force animals to
leave familiar territories during this critical time,
which can reduce their ability to effectively forage
and escape predators due to the lack of familiarity
with a new area (Patton and Gordon 1995). For
example, Jourdonnais and Bedunah (1990) found
that elk did not use sites where the understory had
not recovered immediately after a fall burn.
5

Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: 
Do Frequency and Timing Matter?
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
Management Implications
• Although doing nothing will ultimately result
in large uncontrollable wildfires, hasty or
poorly planned use of fire can also produce
extremely negative consequences for managed
ecosystems.
• The existing body of knowledge on fire timing
is limited. Managers will have to use fire based
on their experience and evidence from the
ecosystems they work with, monitoring the
results of local fires and adapting management
activities according to their own findings.
• It may be possible, in some settings, to allow
fire to play a relatively natural role. This might
be an aim of managers in some wilderness areas
or other preserves. Where they should and can
be applied, historical fire patterns are probably
the most consistent with forest restoration and
fuel management goals.
• However, most wildlands will be managed for
the foreseeable future under fire regimes that
differ in fire frequency and timing (seasonality)
from their historical patterns.
• Managers might consider focusing on the
ecological effects of burning, rather than
primarily 
on 
historical 
frequency 
and
seasonality. If uncharacteristically infrequent or
intense modern fires serve to shift forest fuels
and species composition closer to historical
reference conditions, these fires may be useful
to restore forests and increase resistance to
severe fires.
• Effects of fire seasonality should also be
evaluated from an ecosystem perspective.
Where 
modern 
fires 
burning 
in
uncharacteristic seasons do not result in
undesirable changes in species composition,
wildlife habitat or invasive plants, the beneficial
effects of fire would seem likely to outweigh any
negative results.
• Managers may seek to minimize the risk of
unanticipated problems by trying to emulate
historical fire timing to extent possible. Rather
than following rigid burning schedules, it
would be prudent to vary burn schedules,
seasons, and fire mosaics on the ground when
burning at uncharacteristic times.
• When developing a burn plan, remember that
historical fires did not occur at regular
intervals. Fire occurrences were random and
depended on the weather, existing fuel loads,
and other factors. In addition, fuel buildup was
discontinuous, which means that not every
square foot or individual plant burned when
fire did return to the landscape.
• The contemporary emphasis on homogenous
burning may not be the best approach to
restoring fire on the landscape. Land managers
might consider altering burning methods in
order to achieve a staggered maintenance
burning program and a mosaic of burn effects.
6

Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: 
Do Frequency and Timing Matter? a
Ecological Restoration Institute
7
References
Abella, S.R. and W.W. Covington. 2004.
Monitoring an Arizona ponderosa pine
restoration: Sampling efficiency and
multivariate analysis of understory vegetation.
Restoration Ecology 12(3):359-367.
Agee, J.K. 1993. Fire ecology of Pacific Northwest
forests. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Armour, C.D., S.C. Bunting, and L.F.
Neuenschwander. 1984. Fire intensity effects on
the understory in ponderosa pine forests.
Journal of Range Management 37(1):44-49.
Corman T.E. and C. Wise-Gervais. 2005. Arizona
breeding bird atlas. Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico Press.
Covington, W.W. and S.S. Sackett. 1992. Soil
mineral nitrogen changes following prescribed
burning in ponderosa pine. Forest Ecology and
Management 54:175-191.
Fiedler, C.E., K.L. Metlen, and E.K. Dodson. 2006.
Restoration/Fuels reduction treatments
differentially affect native and exotic
understory species in a ponderosa pine forest
(Montana). Ecological Restoration 24(1):44-45.
Finch, D.M, J.L. Ganey, W. Yong, R.T. Kimball, and
R. Sallabanks. 1997. Effects and interaction of
fire, logging, and grazing. Pp 103-136 in W.M
Block and D.M. Finch (tech. eds.), Songbird
ecology in southwestern ponderosa pine
forests: A literature review. Fort Collins, CO :
U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-292.
Frandsen, W.H. and K.C. Ryan. 1986. Soil moisture
reduces belowground heat flux and soil
temperature under a burning fuel pile.
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 16:244-248.
Gaines, E.M., H.R. Kallander, and J.A. Wagner.
1958. Controlled burning in southwestern
ponderosa pine: Results from the Blue
Mountain plots, Fort Apache Indian
Reservation. Journal of Forestry 54:323-327.
Haisley, J.R. 1984. The effects of prescribed
burning on four aspen-bunchgrass
communities in northern Arizona. M.S. thesis.
Northern Arizona University.
Harrington, M.G. 1993. Predicting Pinus
ponderosa mortality from dormant season and
growing season fire injury. International Journal
of Wildland Fire 3(2):65-72.
Harris, G.R. and W.W. Covington. 1983. The effect
of a prescribed fire on nutrient concentration
and standing crop of understory vegetation in a
ponderosa pine forest. Canadian Journal of
Forest Research 13:501-507.
Hart, S.C., A.T. Classen, and R.J. Wright. 2005.
Long-term interval burning alters fine root
mycorrhizal dynamics in a ponderosa pine
forest. Journal of Applied Ecology 42:752-761.
Henderson, R.A. and S.H. Statz. 1995.
Bibliography of fire effects and related
literature applicable to the ecosystems and
species of Wisconsin. Madison: Wisconsin
Dept. of Natural Resources Technical Bulletin
No. 187.
Herman, F.R. 1954. A guide to marking fire-
damaged ponderosa pine in the Southwest.
USDA Forest Service Southwestern Forest
Experiment Station Research Paper SE-187.
Fort Collins, CO.
Hoffmeister, D.F. 1986. Mammals of Arizona.
Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Jourdonnais, C.S. and D.J. Bedunah. 1990.
Prescribed fire and cattle grazing on an elk
winter range in Montana. Wildlife Society
Bulletin 18:232-240.
Kauffman, J.B. and R.E. Martin. 1990. Sprouting
shrub response to different seasons and fuel
consumption levels of prescribed fire in Sierra
Nevada mixed conifer ecosystems. Forest Science
36(3):748-764.
Kerns, B.K., W.G. Thies, and C.G. Niwa. 2006.
Season and severity of prescribed burn in
ponderosa pine forests: Implications for
understory native and exotic plants. Ecoscience
13(1):44-55.
Knapp, E.E., D.W. Schwilk, J.M. Kane, and J.E.
Keeley. 2007. Role of burning season on initial
understory vegetation response to prescribed
fire in a mixed conifer forest. Canadian Journal
of Forest Research 37:11-22.

Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: 
Do Frequency and Timing Matter?
a
8
Ecological Restoration Institute
Smith, J.E., D. McKay, C.G. Niwa, W.G. Thies, G.
Brenner, and J.W. Spatafora. 2004. Short-term
effects of seasonal prescribed burning on the
ectomycorrhizal fungal community and fine
root biomass in ponderosa pine stands in the
Blue Mountains of Oregon. Canadian Journal
of Forest Research 34:2477-2491.
Smith, H.Y. 2000. Wildlife habitat considerations.
Pp. 26-27 in H.Y. Smith (ed.), The Bitterroot
Ecosystem Management Research Project:
What we have learned: Symposium
proceedings. 1999 May 18-20,; Missoula, MT.
Proceedings RMRS-P-17. Ogden, UT: USDA
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research
Station.
Thies, W.G., D.J. Westlind, and M. Loewen. 2005.
Season of prescribed burn in ponderosa pine
forests in eastern Oregon: Impact on pine
mortality. International Journal of Wildland Fire
14:223-231.
Thompson, J. 2006. Prescribed fires are not created
equal: Fire season and severity effects in
ponderosa pine forest of the southern Blue
Mountains. Science Findings 81: 1-2. Portland:
USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest
Research Station.
Wright, R.J. and S.C. Hart. 1997. Nitrogen and
phosphorus status in a ponderosa pine forest
after twenty years of interval burning.
Ecoscience 4:526-533.
Web site
Arizona Game and Fish Plant and Animal
Abstracts, Distribution Maps, & Illustrations
http://www.gf.state.az.us/w_c/edits/hdms_abstracts.shtml
Laughlin, D.C., J.D. Bakker, M.T. Stoddard, M.L.
Daniels, J.D. Springer, C.N. Gildar, A.M. Green,
and W.W. Covington. 2004. Toward reference
conditions: Wildfire effects on flora in an old-
growth ponderosa pine forest. Forest Ecology
and Management 199:137-152.
McLaughlin, S.P. 1978. Determining understory
production in southwestern ponderosa pine
forests. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club
105:224-229.
Miller, M. and J. Findley. 2001. Plants. Chapter 6 in
Fire effects guide. National Wildfire
Coordinating Group.
http://www.nwcg.gov/pms/RxFire/FEG.pdf.
Moser, L.E. 1977. Carbohydrate translocation in
range plants. Pp. 47-72 in R.E. Sosebee (ed.),
Rangeland plant physiology. Denver, CO:
Society for Range Management.
Moore, M.M., C.A. Casey, J.D. Bakker, J.D.
Springer, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and D.C.
Laughlin. 2006. Herbaceous vegetation
responses (1992-2004) to restoration
treatments in a ponderosa pine forest.
Rangeland Ecology & Management 59(2):135-144.
Patton, D.R. and J. Gordon. 1995. Fire, habitats,
and wildlife. Final report. Flagstaff, AZ: USDA
Forest Service, Coconino National Forest.
Platt, W.J., G.W. Evans, and M.M. Davis. 1988.
Effects of fire season on flowering of forbs and
shrubs in longleaf pine forests. Oecologia
76(3):353-363.
Schwilk, D.W., E.E. Knapp, S.M. Ferrenberg, J.E.
Keeley, and A.C. Caprio. 2006. Tree mortality
from fire and bark beetles following early and
late season prescribed fires in a Sierra Nevada
mixed-conifer forest. Forest Ecology and
Management 232:36-45.
Shearer, R.C. 1975. Seedbed characteristics in
western larch forests after prescribed burning.
USDA Forest Service Research Paper INT-167.
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment
Station. Ogden, UT.
Short, K. 2002. Fire in southwestern ponderosa
pine forests: A bird’s-eye view.
http://home.nps.gov/applications/nature/
documents/WACA%20Karen%20Short.pdf.

Written by Peter Z. Fulé, Charlie Denton, Judy D. Springer, Elizabeth L. Kalies,
and Dave Egan
Photographs courtesy of Peter Z. Fulé
Reviewed by Dave Brewer and Dennis Lund
Series Editor: Dave Egan 
For more information about forest restoration,
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G62334/1M/02-07
Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
1:
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2:
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5:
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
ERITA44
