 
DECEMBER
 
 
 
2001
 
Restoration Ecology Vol. 9 No. 4, pp. 443–452
 
443
 
© 
 
2001 Society for Ecological Restoration
 
Microclimatic Changes 
Induced by Ecological 
Restoration of 
Ponderosa Pine Forests 
in Northern Arizona
 
Cecilia L. Meyer
 
1,2
 
Thomas D. Sisk
 
1,3
 
W. Wallace Covington
 
2
 
Abstract
 
Restoration of ponderosa pine ecosystems results in
altered stand structure, potentially affecting microcli-
matic conditions and habitat quality for forest organ-
isms. This research focuses on microclimatic changes
resulting from forest and landscape structural alter-
ations caused by restoration treatments in southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Three microclimate variables—
light intensity, air temperature, and vapor pressure
deficit (VPD)—were monitored over two field sea-
sons. Differences in microclimate between the treated
forest and the surrounding untreated forest were mea-
sured, and microclimatic gradients across the structural
edge between these two forest types were quantified.
Restoration treatments increased sunlight penetration
to the forest floor but did not significantly impact am-
bient air temperature or VPD. Mean values for air
temperature and VPD did not differ significantly be-
tween treatments, although temperature and vapor
pressure deficit did exhibit a trend in the morning;
both variables were higher at the structural edge and
in the treated forest during morning hours. Signifi-
cant edge gradients were detected for air temperature
and VPD in the morning and evening, increasing from
the structural edge into the untreated forest. Our re-
sults show that microclimatic effects of these restora-
tion treatments are generally modest, but the changes
are more prominent at specific locations and during
certain times of day. Because even modest changes in
microclimate have the potential to impact a range of
key ecological processes, microclimatic effects should
be considered when forest restoration treatments at the
landscape scale are being planned and implemented.
 
Key words: 
 
ecological restoration, edge effects, land-
 
scape ecology, light intensity, microclimate, 
 
Pinus pon-
derosa
 
, ponderosa pine, relative humidity, tempera-
ture, vapor pressure deficit.
 
Introduction
 
P
 
resent day 
 
Pinus ponderosa
 
 (ponderosa pine) forests
in the southwestern United States support greater
tree densities, lower tree growth rates, and reduced her-
baceous understory production than did forest condi-
tions that predominated during the past 200 years (Suth-
erland 1983; Covington & Moore 1994
 
b
 
; Covington et al.
1997). Overgrazing, logging, fire suppression, and peri-
odic high recruitment of pine seedlings have resulted in
a contemporary forest characterized by dense stands of
small-diameter trees (Cooper 1960; Madany & West 1983;
Savage et al. 1996). Ecological restoration treatments in
ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona are de-
signed to recreate a forest structure that existed in the
late 1800s prior to the interruption of natural distur-
bance regimes.
During the past five years, efforts have focused on
thinning trees and reintroducing low-intensity, high-
frequency fire regimes (Covington et al. 1997). These treat-
ments create patches of relatively open forest within a
matrix of denser, untreated forest dominated by smaller-
diameter trees. These treatments, when applied at the
landscape scale, create a shifting patchwork of treated
and untreated forest, altering both forest and landscape
structure. These patchy landscapes, generated system-
atically as restoration occurs site by site across large ar-
eas, are likely to influence ecological processes and spe-
cies distributions, especially for organisms sensitive to
patch size and edge effects (Quinn & Harrison 1988;
Wiens et al. 1993).
Previous research on the ecological effects of ponderosa
pine restoration has focused primarily on the response
of older trees retained in the treatment areas. Restora-
tion treatment has resulted in increased growth rates
and vigor of older trees (Covington & Moore 1994
 
a
 
),
while stimulating growth of the herbaceous understory
(Covington et al. 1997). Belowground abiotic condi-
 
1
 
Center for Environmental Sciences and Education and Mer-
riam-Powell Center for Environmental Research, Northern 
Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona, 86011, U.S.A.
 
2
 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona Univer-
sity, Flagstaff, Arizona, 86011, U.S.A.
 
3
 
Address correspondence to T. D. Sisk, email Thomas.Sisk@
nau.edu

 
Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
 
444
 
Restoration Ecology
 
DECEMBER
 
 
 
2001
 
tions, such as elevated soil temperature and moisture,
have been observed in treatments (Kaye et al. 1999), but
aboveground microclimate has received scant attention.
This study, focusing on aboveground microclimate
changes resulting from both forest and landscape struc-
tural changes, is the first to examine microclimatic
changes and gradients associated with ecological resto-
ration in ponderosa pine forest.
A microclimate is the host of climatic variables
unique to a specific location at a specific time (Geiger
1966; Oke 1996). It is an important factor influencing forest
ecosystem structure and function (Wales 1967), affecting
recruitment (Reifsnyder & Lull 1965; Tsubuki & Taki-
zawa 1996) and growth (Kittredge 1948; Brothers 1993),
and potentially influencing the fecundity of virtually all
taxa (Meffe & Carroll 1994). For this research three above-
ground microclimatic variables—light intensity, air tem-
perature, and vapor presure deficit (VPD)—were chosen
because of their importance to animal behavior, the sub-
ject of related research (Meyer & Sisk 2001). These vari-
ables can influence the dispersal of many flying insects
(Johnson 1969), rates of larval development (Weiss et al.
1991), and foraging behavior of birds (Wachob 1996).
Microclimate also affects plant growth by influencing
physiological processes, including photosynthesis, seed
germination, and mortality (Hungerford & Babbit 1987;
Jones 1992).
Until recently, few studies have examined microcli-
mate at edges between habitats. Microclimatic edge ef-
fects are important because they can potentially change
the quality of the habitat within seemingly homoge-
neous habitat patches (Geiger 1966; Wales 1967; Ranney
1977; Kapos 1989; Williams-Linera 1990; Chen et al.
1993; Matlack 1993; Carmago & Kapos 1995; Chen et al.
1995; Jose et al. 1996; Sisk et al. 1997). Microclimatic gra-
dients across forest edges have exhibited increased light
intensity, higher air temperature, and lower VPD at or
near forest edges, with these influences penetrating 100 m
or more into the forest (Ranney 1977; Chen et al. 1995;
Sisk et al. 1997). These influences are likely to be ecosys-
tem-specific, and Chen et al. (1999) have cautioned that
microclimatic effects caused by forest management may
vary due to the unique influences of ecosystem struc-
ture, species composition, and characteristic landforms.
We investigated restoration treatment effects on mi-
croclimate and measured microclimatic edge effects
that may have landscape-scale implications for restora-
tion planning. We monitored light intensity, air temper-
ature, and relative humidity (used in calculating VPD)
at one meter above ground level. Our main objectives
were to (1) quantify and compare microclimatic vari-
ables in restored and untreated forest, (2) compare micro-
climatic conditions at fixed points, prior to and follow-
ing treatments, and (3) quantify microclimatic gradients
across edges created by ponderosa pine forest restora-
tion. Although forest canopy removal will inevitably in-
crease light penetration to the forest floor, it is not clear
how forest restoration treatments affect shading, because
thinning changes canopy structure, stem density, and
shrub cover in complex ways. Because effects of restora-
tion treatments on microclimate are indirect and complex,
direct empirical measurements offer the best approach
for addressing the impacts of restoration treatments on
understory microclimatic conditions. We observed the
extent to which light intensity would increase in re-
sponse to the removal of overstory biomass and the ex-
tent to which air temperature and VPD would respond
to increased penetration of sunlight into the forest un-
derstory. Based on changes in shading related to tree
density, we expected to document gradual, monotonic
gradients for all three microclimatic variables across the
abrupt edges between treated and untreated forest.
 
Methods
 
Study Sites
 
This research was conducted in northern Arizona at the
Mt. Trumbull Resource Conservation Area and the Flag-
staff Urban Wildland Interface (FUWI) restoration sites.
Mt. Trumbull is located in Grand Canyon-Parashant
National Monument, approximately 96 km southwest
of Fredonia, Arizona, and at an elevation of approxi-
mately 2,000 m (lat 36
 
!
 
24
 
"
 
N, long 112
 
!
 
19
 
"
 
W). FUWI is
located 10 km northwest of Flagstaff, Arizona, at approxi-
mately 2,100 m elevation (lat 35
 
!
 
22
 
"
 
N, long 111
 
!
 
44
 
"
 
W).
Summers in northern Arizona are characterized by
warm, dry conditions in June and early July, followed
by monsoonal rain from mid-July through September.
Mean annual precipitation in the Flagstaff vicinity is
573 mm, with half the precipitation falling as snow and
half during summer rains (Schubert 1974; Savage et al.
1996). Mean annual summer air temperature is 17.4
 
!
 
C at
FUWI, with approximately 162 clear days per year (West-
ern Regional Climate Center 2000). Climatic data were
unavailable for Mt. Trumbull, but conditions there are
similar to Flagstaff.
 
Forest Structure and Treatments
 
Both study sites are characterized by ponderosa pine
forest composed of large, presettlement pines estab-
lished prior to Euro-American settlement around 1870,
surrounded by small postsettlement pines established
after the initiation of grazing and fire suppression in the
early twentieth century (Covington et al. 1994). At Mt.
Trumbull presettlement trees constituted about 14.4%
of the trees per hectare, and postsettlement trees consti-
tuted about 85.6%, prior to treatment (Waltz 1998). At
FUWI, 5.3% of the trees per hectare prior to treatment

 
Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
 
DECEMBER
 
 
 
2001
 
Restoration Ecology
 
445
 
existed prior to Euroamerican settlement, and 94.7% were
postsettlement (W. W. Covington, unpublished data). At
all study sites, the first stage of restoration treatment, in-
volving the thinning of small-diameter trees, occurred
during 1998. All presettlement-era trees were retained,
and selected postsettlement trees were retained as re-
placements for cut or dead presettlement-era trees iden-
tified in historical reconstructions (Covington et al. 1997).
All other postsettlement trees were cut, and burning
treatments in 2000 and 2001 have completed restoration
treatments. Our microclimate measurements were taken
prior to burning to avoid recording the transitory effects
of surface fires. Thus, our results reflect changes in for-
est structure, not burning. At Mt. Trumbull we monitored
microclimate at two treatment areas in 1998 and one in
1999 and 2000, ranging in size from 25 to 400 ha. At FUWI
we worked in four treatment areas, each 12 to 14 ha.
 
Instrumentation
 
We used two types of microclimate monitoring systems
in this research. Hobo dataloggers (Spectrum Technolo-
gies, Plainsfield, IL), with integrated light intensity, air
temperature, and relative humidity sensors, were used
to monitor diurnal changes in microclimate at multiple
locations over two summers in 1998 and 1999. In 1999,
we used a Campbell 10
 
#
 
 micrologger (Campbell Scien-
tific Inc., Logan, UT) combined with a Li-Cor quantum
sensor (Li-190SA, Li-Cor, Inc., Lincoln, NE) and a tem-
perature and relative humidity probe (CS500-L, Camp-
bell Scientific Inc., Logan, UT) to monitor microclimatic
gradients and to cross-reference readings from the sim-
pler Hobo units. Air temperature and relative humidity
sensors were shielded from the sun using standard ra-
diation shields (Spectrum Technologies, Plainsfield, IL).
In the field, Hobo light intensity sensors were shielded
from moisture by clear plexiglass cases (Spectrum Tech-
nologies, Plainsfield, IL). Between the 1998 and 1999
field seasons, the Hobo light intensity sensors were
modified to eliminate obstructions from the datalogger
case. Both Hobo and Campbell sensors were calibrated
by the manufacturers prior to purchase. The Hobo air
temperature sensors were recalibrated in our lab prior
to the 1999 field season.
The two types of light intensity sensors differ in how
they measure insolation. The Hobo sensors measure ra-
diant flux density between 400 and 1,100 nm, whereas
the quantum sensor measures photon flux density be-
tween 400 and 700 nm (photosynthetically active radia-
tion). In all cases, these two technologies produced sim-
ilar results regarding relative values among points and
trends along forest structural gradients. No novel in-
sight was derived from separate comparison of results
from the different sensors. To simplify presentation of
the results and permit consistent units of measure, we
calibrated the modified Hobo sensors against the quan-
tum sensor in full sun and converted the Hobo readings
to standard units (W/m
 
2
 
) using conversion equations
provided by Li-Cor (Li-Cor, Inc., Lincoln, NE; details
available from authors).
 
Study Design and Data Analysis
The Effect of Restoration Treatments on Microclimate.
 
For the
purpose of examining restoration treatment effects on
microclimate, we analyzed data collected 100 m from the
edge in the treated forest, at the edge, and 100 m from the
edge in the untreated forest. Transects were established
perpendicular to the edge, and microclimate was moni-
tored one meter above ground level during clear days
from July through September. Edge points for each
transect were selected randomly; points near atypical
landscape features (i.e., canopy gaps in untreated forest
or exceptionally steep topography) were discarded prior
to establishing transects. In 1998 Hobo dataloggers re-
corded air temperature and relative humidity every five
minutes for one 24-hour period at six transects centered
on the forest edge. Using the Campbell micrologger dur-
ing the 1999 field season, we monitored light intensity, in
addition to temperature and relative humidity, one meter
above ground level on eight pairs of transects with east-
and west-facing edges (16 total). These data were col-
lected as instantaneous measurements along all transects,
between 1000 and 1400 hours over three clear days at the
end of September 1999; equipment limitations prevented
us from collecting microclimate data over 24-hour peri-
ods with the Campbell micrologger. Relative humidity
values were used to calculate VPD using equations from
Lowe (1977).
The 1999 air temperature and VPD data were ana-
lyzed for three time periods—morning (0630 to 0730 hr),
midday (1000 and 1400 hr), and evening (1630 to 1730
hr)—using a repeated measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA), with effects for treatment and time period.
These time periods were chosen to examine microcli-
mate at midday and during transitions between day-
light and night, when variables changed rapidly and
pronounced differences were expected between treat-
ments. The data collected with the Campbell microlog-
ger in 1999 were analyzed for treatment effects during
midday using a three-way ANOVA, with treatment and
edge orientation as factors, and transect pairs as a block-
ing variable. When ANOVA results were significant for
treatment, Tukey’s honestly significant difference test
was used to determine relationships between microcli-
matic conditions in the treatment, at the edge, and in the
untreated forest. Due to modifications in sampling
methods between seasons, data from each field season
were analyzed separately. For these data, assumptions
were met for homogeneity of variances and normality.

 
Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
 
446
 
Restoration Ecology
 
DECEMBER
 
 
 
2001
 
Comparison of Pre- and Post-Restoration Microclimatic Condi-
tions at Fixed Points.
 
Hobo dataloggers were used to ex-
amine microclimatic conditions in 1999 before restora-
tion treatments and during the 2000 field season in the
same locations after the treatments had occurred. Light
intensity, air temperature, and VPD were recorded ev-
ery minute for one 24-hour period, at one meter above
ground level. We analyzed data from clear days during
the last two weeks of June 1999, prior to implementation
of restoration treatments. Fifteen transects were placed
in areas where restoration treatments were planned at
the Mt. Trumbull site. The transects contained three
sampling points, one 100 m from the edge in the treat-
ment, one at the edge, and one 100 m from the edge in
the untreated forest. Due to implementation delays, resto-
ration treatments occurred at only seven of these transects.
Posttreatment microclimatic data were monitored along
the same transect points on clear days one year later, in
June 2000, when location of the sun was equivalent to
that during pretreatment data collection.
Relative values of light intensity, air temperature,
and VPD were used to examine pre- and post-treatment
effects. To account for interannual macroclimatic differ-
ences at each transect, treatment and edge microcli-
matic conditions for pre- and post-treatments were nor-
malized to conditions in the untreated forest location
for each transect (for example, X
 
treated
 
 
 
$
 
 X
 
untreated
 
 
 
%
 
 X
 
relative
 
,
for any variable X). Three times of day, morning (0630
to 0730 hr), midday (1000 to 1400 hr), and evening (1630
to 1730 hr), were examined using a split-plot repeated
measures ANOVA with two factors, pre-/post-treat-
ment and time period nested within pre-/post-treat-
ment. The nested factor allowed us to examine the be-
tween-subject variability (Sokal & Rohlf 1981).
 
Microclimatic Gradients at the Forest Structural Edge.
 
So that
microclimatic gradients across forest structural edges
could be examined, additional data collection points
were added to the established transects discussed in the
treatment effects section above. In 1998 we monitored
microclimate at one meter above ground level at points
0, 10, 25, 50, and 100 m from the edge in both treated
and untreated forest, for a total of nine sampling points
along each transect. Gradients for air temperature and
VPD in 1998 were analyzed for three time periods,
morning (0630 to 0730 hr), midday (1000 to 1400 hr),
and evening (1630 to 1730 hr). During the 1998 field sea-
son, we discovered that the placement of the sensor on
the Hobo light intensity dataloggers obstructed some of
the incoming solar radiation, precluding insightful analy-
sis and necessitating the modifications discussed above.
In 1999 at the FUWI site, we focused on sampling the ef-
fects of edge orientation, centering data collection more
closely around the edge with sampling points at 0, 5, 10,
25, 50, 75, and 100 m into each forest type, for a total of
13 sampling points per transect. During this field sea-
son we collected midday edge-gradient data for light
intensity, air temperature, and VPD with the Campbell
micrologger.
For the purpose of edge-gradient analyses, transects
were divided into two sections, one from the edge into
the untreated forest and another from the edge into the
treatment area. For each transect portion, linear regres-
sion was used to determine the best fit to the relation-
ship between microclimatic values and distance from
the edge. A significant microclimatic gradient was de-
fined as a gradient where the mean of the slopes from
each regression equation differed significantly from zero
(
 
t
 
 test). In cases of nonnormality, the Wilcoxen signed
rank test was used. Finally, to examine the nature of the
light intensity response across the edges, we calculated
the frequencies at which different values were mea-
sured along each of the 16 edge transects. We compared
the frequencies of observed values in six light intensity
classes to a uniform distribution (chi-square test) to test
the null hypothesis that midday insolation values were
evenly distributed between the maximum and mini-
mum values observed. All statistical analyses were per-
formed using the statistical package JMP IN (version
3.2.1, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) with 
 
p
 
 
 
&
 
 0.05 deemed
sufficient to reject the null hypothesis that microclimate
was independent of distance from the edge.
 
Results
 
The Effect of Restoration Treatment on Microclimate
 
To determine changes in microclimate induced by the
restoration treatments, we analyzed data from the 1998
and 1999 field seasons collected at the edge and at
points 100 m from the edge, in both the treated and un-
treated forest. In 1998 air temperature and VPD were
examined for treatment effects during three time peri-
ods, morning, midday, and evening. Although trends
were evident, especially during morning periods, the
differences between the treated, edge, and untreated
forest were not statistically significant in an analysis of
variance that included all time periods (temperature,
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.08; VPD, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.48; Fig. 1). In the morning, air tem-
perature and VPD exhibited strong trends; on average,
both were higher in the treated forest and near the edge
than in untreated forest, but similar trends were not ob-
served during midday or evening (Fig. 1). Morning air
temperature was about 15% higher (3.3
 
!
 
C) in the resto-
ration treatment compared to the control forest, while
morning VPD was about 47% higher (0.6 kPa). A signif-
icant diurnal effect was present throughout the day for

 
Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
 
DECEMBER
 
 
 
2001
 
Restoration Ecology
 
447
 
both variables (temperature, 
 
p
 
 
 
'
 
 0.001; VPD, 
 
p
 
 '
 
 0.01).
The interaction terms of temperature and time period
and VPD and time period were not significant (temper-
ature, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.58; VPD, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.16).
Light intensity, monitored only during midday dur-
ing the 1999 field season, was the only variable to ex-
hibit statistically significant differences due to restora-
tion treatments. On average light intensity was 2.3
times higher in the treatment area and 1.5 times higher
near the edge than in the untreated sites during midday
(
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.0005; Fig. 2). When compared to light intensity in
the untreated forest, this amounted to a 200 W/m
 
2
 
 in-
crease in the treated forest and a 130 W/m
 
2
 
 increase
near the structural edge. Light intensity in the treatment
area and near the edge was significantly higher than in
the untreated forest (Tukey’s HSD, 
 
p
 
 
 
'
 
 0.05). Midday
air temperature and VPD, collected in 1999 with the
Campbell micrologger, did not exhibit significant dif-
ferences between the treatment, edge, and untreated
forest (temperature 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.86; VPD, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.94; Fig. 2).
 
Pre- and Post-Restoration Microclimatic Conditions at Fixed Points
 
In 1999 we collected microclimate data in locations slated
for restoration treatments the following year. When we
compared microclimate collected at these fixed points
in 1999, before the restoration treatment, to data col-
lected in 2000, after treatment, the only variable to ex-
 
hibit significant differences (
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.04; Fig. 3) was light
intensity. On average, the difference between the
treated and untreated forest was 47 W/m
 
2
 
 higher after
restoration and 15 W/m
 
2
 
 higher at the edge after resto-
ration. Air temperature and VPD were not significantly
different after restoration treatment (temperature, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
0.25; VPD, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.21) or near the edge (temperature, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
0.95; VPD, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.93; Fig. 3). For these data, we did not
observe significant time-of-day effects following resto-
ration for any of the variables in the treated area (light
intensity, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.36; temperature, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.13; VPD, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
0.10) or near the edge (light intensity, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.18; tempera-
ture, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.63; VPD, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.48).
 
Microclimatic Gradients at the Forest Structural Edge
 
Air temperature and VPD exhibited significant edge
gradients at certain times of day, but differences in
light intensity were abrupt, rather than gradual. Sig-
nificant microclimate gradients were observed from
the edge into the untreated forest for air temperature
and VPD in the morning and evening (Fig. 4). Data
collected in 1998 showed that morning air tempera-
ture was about 12% lower (2.3
 
!
 
C, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.02) and morn-
ing VPD was 40% lower in the untreated forest than at
the edge (0.4 kPa, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
 0.009; Fig. 4). On average,
evening air temperature was 1% lower (0.1
 
!
 
C, 
 
p
 
 
 
%
 
0.003) and VPD 3% lower in the untreated forest (0.1
Figure 1. The effect of restora-
tion treatment on (a) air tem-
perature (!C) and (b) vapor 
pressure deficit (VPD, kPa) for 
untreated forest, edge, and res-
toration treatment areas at the 
Mt. Trumbull site during morn-
ing, midday, and evening, 1998 
field season. Treatment effects 
were not significant for either 
variable, although morning 
hours exhibited a strong trend 
for both variables (temperature, 
p % 0.08; VPD, p % 0.48, n % 6 
for both).

Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
448
Restoration Ecology
DECEMBER 2001
kPa, p % 0.006; Fig. 4). During midday, no edge gradi-
ent was observed for either variable from the edge
into the untreated forest (temperature, p % 0.59; VPD,
p % 0.42; Fig. 4).
In 1998 neither temperature nor VPD showed signifi-
cant edge gradients from the edge into the restoration
treatment at any time of day. Air temperature was highly
variable throughout the day, yet showed a strong morn-
ing trend that approached statistical significance (morn-
ing, p % 0.06; midday, p % 0.84; evening, p % 0.22). Trends
in VPD were similar over the course of the day, and no
gradient was detected from the edge into the treatment
(morning, p % 0.63; midday, p % 0.50; evening, p % 0.12).
Using data collected during midday in 1999, we were
able to stratify transects for edge orientation. This did
not help identify midday edge gradients from either the
edge into the untreated forest or the edge into the
treated forest. At both east- and west-facing edges, mid-
day air temperature decreased slightly within 10 m of
the edge, remaining 0.5% lower (0.1!C) into the dense
control forest (east-facing edge, p % 0.11; west-facing
edge, p % 0.14). Air temperature increased 0.5% (0.1!C),
from the edge into the treatment but was also not signif-
Figure 2. The response of (a) light intensity (W/m2), (b) air tem-
perature (!C), and (c) vapor pressure deficit (VPD, kPa) for the 
untreated forest, the edge, and the restoration treatment areas at 
the Flagstaff Urban Wildland Interface (FUWI) site during mid-
day (1000 to 1400 hr), 1999 field season. P-values correspond to 
treatment effects for each of the three variables (n % 16).
Figure 3. A comparison of pre- and post-treatment (a) light 
intensity (W/m2), (b) air temperature (!C), and (c) vapor pres-
sure deficit (VPD, kPa) during morning, midday, and evening 
at sampling points in the restoration treatment (left) and near 
the edge (right), in June 1999 and 2000. Data were normalized 
to the value in the untreated forest to eliminate differences 
due to interannual variation. Time of day was not a significant 
factor explaining differences (n % 7).

Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
DECEMBER 2001 Restoration Ecology
449
icant for east- and west-facing edges (east-facing edge,
p % 0.20; west-facing edge, p % 0.84). VPD was 1% lower
(0.02 kPa) lower in the control forest for both edge orien-
tations (east-facing edge, p % 0.74; west-facing edge, p %
0.71) and 1% higher (0.02 kPa) into the treatment area
(east-facing edge, p % 0.74; west-facing edge, p % 0.30).
Midday light intensity edge gradients were also not sig-
nificant, nor did they exhibit any clear patterns, at either
east- or west-facing edges from the edge into the un-
treated forest (east-facing edge, p % 0.39; west-facing
edge, p % 0.71) or into the treated forest (east-facing
edge, p % 0.96; west-facing edge, p % 0.55).
Across all transects, light intensity values showed
great spatial and temporal variability, with very low
and very high values occurring more commonly than
would be expected by chance alone ((2 % 121, p '
0.001; Fig. 5)
Discussion
Ecological restoration in ponderosa pine forest increased
sunlight penetration to the forest floor but did not sig-
nificantly impact ambient air temperature or VPD. Typ-
ically forested areas that are more open, such as ponde-
Figure 4. Edge gradients in (a) 
air temperature (!C) and (b) va-
por pressure deficit (VPD, kPa) 
for three times of day, morning 
(top), midday (middle), and 
evening (bottom), from the edge 
into the untreated forest at the 
Mt. Trumbull study site, 1998 
field season. Bars represent stan-
dard errors for transects (n % 6).

Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
450
Restoration Ecology
DECEMBER 2001
rosa pine after thinning treatments, are sunnier, warmer,
and drier than areas under denser forest canopy (Gei-
ger 1966; Wales 1967). At our study sites, 60 to 90% of
the trees were removed through thinning, but only so-
lar radiation increased significantly in the treatment ar-
eas, and even this change was modest. Early studies by
Pearson (1931) reported similar results for air tempera-
ture in stands of ponderosa pine forest and open areas
adjacent to these stands in Arizona and New Mexico.
Kittredge (1948) noted that, of many forest types, thin-
ning in ponderosa pine forests had the least effect on air
temperature and relative humidity.
Our findings, however, contrast those from a more
recent study in old-growth Douglas fir forest. During
clear days in summer, Chen et al. (1993) found higher
air temperature and lower relative humidity near edges
between Douglas fir forest and clearcuts, with interme-
diate conditions in clearcuts. We observed that morning
air temperature and VPD at the structural edge were
more similar to values in the treated area but that edge
microclimate was intermediate between the treated and
untreated forest. Light intensity showed a similar pat-
tern during midday.
When detected, microclimatic gradients were grad-
ual across the structural edge between treated and un-
treated forest. Air temperature and VPD dropped grad-
ually over a distance of 100 m from the edge into the
untreated forest during the morning and evening. No
microclimatic edge gradient was observed during mid-
day. We did not detect significant effects due to edge
orientation, but equipment limitations permitted only
midday data collection at paired east- and west-facing
transects. Results from a related experiment indicate
that edge orientation can exert strong influence on
morning air temperature and VPD (Meyer & Sisk 2001).
Our gradient results are qualitatively similar to find-
ings from other ecosystems, although the magnitude of
the response appears to be considerably lower in pon-
derosa pine forest. Several studies have shown that air
temperature and VPD decreased in the tropics from the
edge into tropical forest, with little change detected af-
ter the initial 20 m (Kapos 1989; Williams-Linera 1990).
Air temperature gradients in old-growth Douglas fir
forests, however, have been shown to penetrate up to
180 m from the edge into the forest during the day
(Chen et al. 1995). We found the most prominent gradi-
ents in the morning, with changes of 2.3!C and 0.4 kPa
over 100 meters. In the evening, the magnitudes of
change were lower: 0.1!C and 0.1 kPa over 100 m. In
fact, these evening values were equivalent to gradients
observed during midday, but the midday readings
were much more variable. We did not observe microcli-
matic gradients from the edge into the restoration treat-
ment; conditions at the edge were equivalent to those in
the center of the treatment area for all time periods. Our
results indicate that restoration treatments exert an in-
fluence up to 100 m into the dense, untreated forest but
that the forest exerts little influence on the microclimate
of treated areas.
In southwestern ponderosa pine forests, air tempera-
ture and VPD appear to be less influenced by restoration
treatments than is light intensity. This unexpected decou-
pling of microclimatic variables may be due to boundary-
layer mixing of air across the edge between treated and
untreated forest. Wind movement in open meadows is
similar to that near the forest floor in stands of ponde-
rosa pine (Arthur 1969), which is probably due to the
simple canopy structure (i.e., a single semi-open canopy
Figure 5. Frequency of light in-
tensity values measured during 
midday along sixteen 200-m 
transects established perpendicu-
lar to the edge between treated 
and untreated ponderosa pine 
forest. Thirteen points were sam-
pled along each transect in Sep-
tember 1999, six in the more open, 
treated forest (striped bars), six in 
the dense, untreated forest (black), 
and one point at the edge between 
the two forest types (gray). The 
frequency of observed light inten-
sity values differed significantly 
from an even distribution (p ' 
0.001, n % 96 for treated and un-
treated forest, 16 for edge).

Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
DECEMBER 2001 Restoration Ecology
451
layer) of ponderosa pine forest and the relatively dry cli-
mate of northern Arizona. In comparison, most old-
growth forests of the Pacific Northwest and tropical re-
gions develop closed canopies and multilayered stand
structures, resulting in a distinct forest microclimate and
much greater contrasts to thinned and cleared areas
(Williams-Linera 1990; Chen et al. 1995).
Further examination of the response of light intensity,
compared with temperature and VPD, provides insight
into how restoration treatments affect microclimatic con-
ditions in ponderosa pine forests. Light intensity was
higher in treated areas than in untreated areas, and the
values changed abruptly at edges between the two for-
est types. Ambient air temperature and VPD were simi-
lar at midday in treated and untreated forest stands but
showed modest, decreasing gradients from the treated
areas to adjacent untreated stands in the morning and
evening. These patterns may result from the nature of
light intensity, shading, and insolation near the forest
floor. We categorized midday light intensity data from
1999 based on magnitude, as illustrated in Figure 5.
Light readings, when graphed by frequency and magni-
tude, followed a bimodal distribution within both forest
types, exhibiting fewer intermediate values of light in-
tensity (Fig. 5). These fewer intermediate values suggest
that overstory structure in this system creates a light en-
vironment that fluctuates between “high” (direct sun)
and “low” (shade). Treated areas are not necessarily re-
ceiving more intense light, but they are in direct sun
more often than untreated areas. This contrasts with
many other forested ecosystems, where incident light
filters through several vegetative layers, resulting in a
more continuous gradient in light intensity near the for-
est floor (Kapos 1989; Chen et al. 1995).
Although the microclimatic effects due to restoration
treatments and the magnitude of the gradients observed
across edges were smaller than those found in other for-
est ecosystems, our findings are still likely to be biologi-
cally relevant. Increased light intensity is almost cer-
tainly driving observed increases in soil temperature
following restoration (Covington et al. 1997; Kaye et al.
1999). Increased insolation, combined with higher soil
temperature and moisture, could increase tree vigor
and forest productivity (Kittredge 1948) and benefit
pine regeneration in the treated areas by increasing ger-
mination and photosynthetic rates (Jones 1992). An in-
crease of even 1!C, roughly what we observed in this
study during midday, can lead to earlier germination
and a longer growing season (Jones 1993).
For some animals, the modest microclimatic changes
induced by ponderosa pine restoration treatments could
indirectly affect food resources and survival rates. Mobile
organisms that are sensitive to forest microclimate, par-
ticularly butterflies and other volant, diurnal arthro-
pods, may respond directly to altered light regimes, such
as those we observed in the treated forest (Heinrich
1981). Indeed, the behavior, dispersal, and distribution
of butterflies have been shown to respond to such mi-
croclimatic changes in patchy landscapes (Clench 1966;
Tsuji et al. 1986). In these ponderosa pine forests, Meyer
and Sisk (2001) have shown the flight behavior of two
common butterfly species to be directly affected by the
increased light levels and higher air temperature associ-
ated with restoration treatments.
Given increasing concerns about the dense and over-
stocked conditions of pine forests throughout the inter-
mountain West, restoration treatments, as well as other
thinning prescriptions designed to reduce the likeli-
hood of catastrophic crown fires, are likely to be imple-
mented over increasingly larger areas. Our research
shows that the microclimatic effects of such treatments
are relatively modest when compared to the effects of
similar treatments in more structurally complex forest
ecosystems. However, differences in microclimate be-
tween treated and untreated ponderosa pine forest stands
were magnified at certain times of day (morning and
evening) and in certain locations (untreated forest near
the edge). Because even modest changes in light inten-
sity, air temperature, and moisture availability are likely
to have meaningful effects on seedling recruitment and
productivity, as well as on the distribution and abun-
dance of arthropods, forest managers should address
the implications of changing microclimates when they
are planning and implementing landscape-scale resto-
ration treatments.
Acknowledgments
A grant from the Strategic Environmental Research and
Development Program (SERDP Project CS-1100), and
support from the Ecological Restoration Institute at
Northern Arizona University, provided funding for this
project. We thank Dr. Lee Dexter for the generous loan of
equipment. Statistical support was provided by Leslie
Ries, Diane Rowland, and the Statistical Consulting Re-
search Group in the Department of Mathematics and
Statistics at Northern Arizona University. We are espe-
cially grateful to individuals who provided field assis-
tance, especially Julie Blake, Matthew Loeser, and Shan-
non Kelly, and to the Colonino National Forest and
Arizona Strip Office of the Bureau of Land Management
for access to sites and for logistical support.
LITERATURE CITED
Arthur, J. P. J. 1969. Environmental measurements in a natural
park and in surrounding ponderosa pine stands. Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Brothers, T. S. 1993. Fragmentation and edge effects in central In-
diana old-growth forests. Natural Areas Journal 13:268–274.
Carmago, J. L. C., and V. Kapos. 1995. Complex edge effects on

Microclimatic Effects of Pine Forest Restoration
452
Restoration Ecology
DECEMBER 2001
soil moisture and microclimate in central Amazonian forest.
Journal of Tropical Ecology 11:205–221.
Chen, J., J. F. Franklin, and T. A. Spies. 1993. Contrasting microcli-
mates among clearcut, edge, and interior old-growth Douglas
fir forest. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 63:219–237.
Chen, J., J. F. Franklin, and T. A. Spies. 1995. Growing-season mi-
croclimatic gradients from clearcut edges into old-growth
Douglas-fir forests. Ecological Applications 5:74–86.
Chen, J., S. C. Saunders, T. R. Crow, R. J. Naiman, K. D. Brosofske,
G. D. Mroz, B. L. Brookshire, and J. F. Franklin. 1999. Micro-
climate in forest ecosystem and landscape ecology. Bio-
Science 49:288–297.
Clench, H. K. 1966. Behavioral thermoregulation in butterflies.
Ecology 47:1021–1034.
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth
of southwestern pine forests since white settlement. Ecologi-
cal Monographs 30:129–164.
Covington, W. W., R. L. Everett, R. Steele, L. L. Irwin, T. A. Daer,
and A. N. D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and anticipated changes
in forest ecosystems of the inland west of the United States.
Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:13–63.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, S. C. Hart, T. E. Kolb,
J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R. Wagner. 1997. Restoring
ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest.
Journal of Forestry 95:23–29.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994a. Postsettlement
changes in natural fire regimes and forest structure: ecologi-
cal restoration of pre-settlement ponderosa pine forests.
Journal of Sustainable Forestry 2:153–181.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994b. Southwestern pon-
derosa forest structure. Journal of Forestry 92:39–47.
Geiger, R. 1966. The climate near the ground. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Heinrich, B. 1981. Ecological and evolutionary perspectives.
Pages 235–302 in B. Heinrich, editor. Insect thermoregula-
tion. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Hungerford, R. D., and R. E. Babbit. 1987. Overstory removal and
residue treatments affect soil surface, air, and soil tempera-
tures: implications for seedling survival. USDA Forest Ser-
vice Intermountain Research Station, Ogden, Utah.
Johnson, C. G. 1969. Migration and dispersal of flying insects.
Methuen, London.
Jones, H. 1992. Plants and microclimate: a quantitative approach
to environmental plant physiology. Cambridge University
Press, New York.
Jones, M. B. 1993. Plant microclimate. Pages 47–64 in D. O. Hall,
J. M. O. Scurlock, H. R. Bolhar-Nordenkampf, R. C. Leegood,
and S. P. Long, editors. Photosynthesis and production in a
changing environment. Chapman Hall, New York.
Jose, S., A. R. Gillespie, S. J. George, and B. M. Kumar. 1996. Veg-
etation responses along edge-to-interior gradients in a high
altitude tropical forest to peninsular India. Forest Ecology
and Management 87:51–62.
Kapos, V. 1989. Effects of isolation on the water status of forest
patches in the Brazilian Amazon. Journal of Forest Ecology
5:173–185.
Kaye, J. P., S. C. Hart, R. C. Cobb, and J. Stone. 1999. Water and
nutrient outflow following the ecological restoration of a
ponderosa pine–bunchgrass ecosystem. Restoration Ecology
7:252–261.
Kittredge, J. 1948. Forest influences. McGraw-Hill Book Com-
pany, Inc., New York.
Lowe, P. R. 1977. An approximating polynomial for the computa-
tion of saturation vapor pressure. Journal of Applied Meteo-
rology 16:100–103.
Madany, M. H., and N. E. West. 1983. Livestock grazing—fire re-
gime interactions within montane forests of Zion National
Park. Ecology 64:661–667.
Matlack, G. R. 1993. Microenvironment variation within and
among forest edge sites in the eastern United States. Biologi-
cal Conservation 66:185–194.
Meffe, G. K., and C. R. Carroll. 1994. Principles of conservation bi-
ology. Sinauer Associates, Inc., Sunderland, Massachusetts.
Meyer, C. L., and T. D. Sisk. 2001. Butterfly response to microcli-
matic conditions following ponderosa pine restoration. Res-
toration Ecology 9:453–461.
Oke, T. R. 1996. Boundary climate layers. Routledge, New York.
Pearson, G. A. 1931. Forest types in the southwest as determined
by climate and soil. United States Department of Agricul-
ture, Washington, D.C.
Quinn, J. F., and S. P. Harrison. 1988. Effects of habitat fragmenta-
tion and isolation on species richness: evidence from biogeo-
graphic patterns. Oecologia 75:132–140.
Ranney, J. W. 1977. Forest island edges: their structure, develop-
ment, and importance to regional forest ecosystem dynam-
ics. Environmental Sciences Division, Publication No. 1069.
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee.
Reifsnyder, W. E., and H. W. Lull. 1965. Radiant energy in rela-
tion to forests. United States Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
Savage, M., P. M. Brown, and J. Feddema. 1996. The role of cli-
mate in a pine forest regeneration pulse in the southwestern
United States. Ecoscience 3:310–318.
Schubert, G. H. 1974. Silviculture of southwestern ponderosa
pine: the status of our knowledge. Rocky Mountain Forest
and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado.
Sisk, T. D., N. M. Haddad, and P. R. Ehrlich. 1997. Bird assem-
blages in patchy woodlands: modeling the effects of edge
and matrix habitats. Ecological Applications 7:1170–1180.
Sokal, R. R., and F. J. Rohlf. 1981. Biometry. W. H. Freeman and
Company, New York.
Sutherland, E. K. 1983. The effects of fire exclusion on growth in
mature ponderosa pine in northern Arizona. University of
Arizona, Tucson.
Tsubuki, T., and T. Takizawa. 1996. Flight activities of Colias erate
(Lepidoptera, Pieridae) in high and low altitudes. Transcon-
tinental Lepidopteran Society of Japan 47:17–28.
Tsuji, J. C., J. G. Kingsolver, and W. B. Watt. 1986. Thermal physi-
ological ecology of Colias butterflies in flight. Oecologia 69:
161–170.
Wachob, D. G. 1996. The effect of thermal microclimate on forag-
ing site selection by wintering Mountain Chickadees. Con-
dor 98:114–122.
Wales, B. A. 1967. Climate, microclimate, and vegetation relation-
ships on north and south forest boundaries. The William L.
Hutcheson Memorial Forest Bulletin 2:1–60.
Waltz, A. 1998. Mt. Trumbull Ecosystem Restoration Project: an-
nual report. Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Weiss, S. B., P. M. Rich, D. D. Murphy, W. H. Calvert, and P. R.
Ehrlich. 1991. Forest canopy structure at overwintering Mon-
arch butterfly sites: measurements with hemispherical pho-
tography. Conservation Biology 5:165–175.
Western Regional Climate Center. 2000. Western U.S. climate
historical summaries. Western Regional Climate Center,
http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/climsum.html.
Wiens, J. A., N. C. Stenseth, B. van Horne, and R. A. Ims. 1993. Eco-
logical mechanisms and landscape ecology. Oikos 66:369–380.
Williams-Linera, G. 1990. Vegetation structure and environmen-
tal conditions of forest edges in Panama. Journal of Ecology
78:356–373.
