Forest thinning foiled again 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
10/27/2000 
 
For the fourth time in two years, opponents have moved to halt a Forest Service plan to 
thin, burn and restore congested ponderosa pine forest northwest of Flagstaff in Fort 
Valley.  
Flagstaff activists and four national environmental groups filed an appeal Wednesday of 
the Fort Valley plan, which calls for thinning 4,500 acres of some 9,000 acres of 
government and private land. Prescribed burns will be ignited to remove accumulated 
forest fuels on 7,000 acres, miles of roads will be closed and fragile meadows will be 
protected.  
The appeal to Regional Forester Eleanor Towns triggers another 45-day delay in the 
controversial project, which is the first phase of a decade-long plan to "treat" 180,000 
acres of congested and wildfire-prone forest in the Flagstaff area.  
This morning, officials from the Forest Service and Grand Canyon Forests Partnership 
declined comment on the appeal, saying they have not received it.  
Since it was proposed two years ago, opponents have filed three appeals and a lawsuit to 
derail the Fort Valley plan.  
Opponents contend the plan will result in overcutting a forest that will resemble a "tree 
farm."  
But according to the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project decision, only 690 acres 
will receive full restoration thinning, a significant reduction from an earlier plan to 3,450 
acres with this prescription.  
Modified and minimal thinning regimes are proposed on about 4,000 acres and no 
logging will occur on more than 2,000 acres in Fort Valley under the Forest Service plan.  
The plan also calls for a reassessment of the project after 1,700 acres are treated by the 
Forest Service, the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership and any interested parties.  
The Fort Valley restoration plan, with its  

various prescriptions of logging small-diameter trees and setting controlled burns to 
remove decades of accumulated debris, is considered by some forestry experts as a 
national model to treat millions of acres of congested forests in the West. 
 And that's why the Forest Conservation Council wants to stop it, said John Talberth, 
conservation director for the group's Santa Fe, N.M. office.  
"Fort Valley is a shining example of how not to restore our national forests. Ignoring its 
own science and regulations, the Forest Service wants to tear down the forest and replace 
it with a manicured landscape devoid of the attributes that make our forests living, 
thriving ecosystems. This so- called 'Flagstaff model' would be a disaster for national 
forests throughout the interior West," said Talberth.  
The Fort Valley decision was also appealed by the Flagstaff Activist Network, John Muir 
Project, the Native Forest Council and the Lands Council.  
The 32-page appeal claims the Forest Service ignored "a substantial body of scientific 
evidence" that logging increases the risk of fire and failed to protect sensitive species 
inhabiting the Fort Valley forest such as the endangered northern goshawk and Mexican 
spotted owl.  
The appeal also said that the government ignored its own regulations by not proposing a 
non-logging alternative to reduce fire risk. In addition, it said the Forest Service should 
have conducted a formal environmental impact statement assessing the cumulative effect 
of thinning and burning on all 180,000 acres surrounding Flagstaff.  
Critics of the Fort Valley plan say it relies heavily on a thinning prescription developed 
by the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University that attempts to 
return the forest to presettlement conditions.  
Before settlers arrived, a typical forest had from 20 to 30 trees per acre. After a century of 
fire suppression, grazing and clearcutting, that figure has grown to nearly 700 trees per 
acre.  
The Fort Valley plan calls for restoring less than 700 acres to that original density, with 
no trees larger 16 inches being cut.  
But the Flagstaff Activist Network contends that 80 percent of the areas being treated will 
reflect the presettlement model resulting in a forest that looks like a "tree farm".  
"This new decision is the same as the old decision. We're still looking at the same project. 
We're still looking at the heavy bias toward the presettlement model which is 
environmentally unacceptable," said Roxanne George of Flagstaff Activist Network.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251.  
