 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern  
Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests 
By Judy Springer 
INTRODUCTION 
Post-fire rehabilitation is separated into short-term, emergency stabilization and long-term restoration 
measures. The Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER) program includes emergency treatments to stabi-
lize the burned area, protect public health and safety, and reduce the risk of additional damage to valued re-
sources. As opposed to emergency rehabilitation, ecological restoration focuses on assisting the recovery of 
characteristic ecological structure, process, and function, which requires an understanding of natural range of 
variability for these key attributes as well as development of reference conditions to guide management ac-
tivities. In addition, restoration activities demand long-term commitment and evaluation. Given the altered 
conditions that can follow high-severity fires, successful restoration to a desired state may be difficult and 
costly. Areas experiencing high-severity fire often exhibit accelerated soil erosion and subsequent loss of soil 
productivity; expansions or invasions of non-native plant populations; loss of wildlife habitat; damaged wa-
tersheds and degraded water quality to connected streams; and/or vegetation type conversion. Attributes of a 
restored ecosystem include the reestablishment of resilience, forest structure, composition, function, physical 
environment, and landscape context and integrity.  
 
RESILIENCE 
Stability is the natural ability of a system to return to equilibrium after a temporary disturbance. The more 
rapidly it returns and the less it fluctuates, the more stable it is. Resilience is the capacity of a system to expe-
rience shocks while retaining essentially the same function, structure, feedbacks, and identity. A restored 
ecosystem is sufficiently resilient to endure the normal periodic stress events in the local environment that 
serve to maintain the integrity of the ecosystem (SER 2004). When certain thresholds are exceeded (fire se-
verity, for example), system feedbacks may lead to changes in function and structure and to irreversible re-
gime shifts. The more resilient a system is, the larger a disturbance it will be able to absorb without shifting 
into an alternate regime. 
 
FOREST STRUCTURE 
Given the key role that forest overstory structural patterns play in regulating many ecosystem processes and 
functions, long-term restoration planning designed to reestablish characteristic structural attributes is critical 
after a wildfire. Returning structural attributes to a forest burned at high severity may involve planting trees, 
managing natural regeneration, and manipulating levels and types of dead wood. Species composition, densi-
ty, and spatial arrangement of tree regeneration should follow natural ranges of variability appropriate for the 
disturbed ecosystem. Restoring reference structure also requires consideration of the spatial pattern of plant-
ed trees. In some cases, evidence of reference patterns (e.g., large stumps, snags, and logs) may remain on 
the site and can be used to guide planting to achieve reference spatial patterns. However, loss of field evi-
dence often increases with fire severity. In such cases, other sources of information, such as pre-fire invento-
ries, written reports, and photos, may be needed to develop spatial pattern planting prescriptions.  
       Fact Sheet: Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern  
 
      Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests 
January 2014 

 
COMPOSITION 
A restored ecosystem contains a characteristic assemblage of the species that occur in the reference ecosys-
tem and that provide appropriate community structure (SER 2004). Post-fire environments have an abun-
dance of nutrients, sunlight and bare soil — conditions that can be favorable to the establishment of aggres-
sive and invasive non-native plant species. Ecological impacts of invasion by these species vary along a gra-
dient, depending on whether they affect a single native species or the ecosystem as a whole, with “strong” 
invaders (transformer species) having the most negative impacts. Transformers are a subset of invasive 
plants that can change the form of ecosystems over substantial areas. They include species such as knap-
weeds and annual bromes, including cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum), which are of particular concern because 
they are capable of reducing species diversity and/or changing fire regimes. Control efforts using herbicides, 
grazing livestock or biological controls can be quite effective for some species. However, others are ex-
tremely difficult to eradicate once established, and competing native vegetation is necessary to colonize bare 
soil in order to prevent further invasion and colonization by invading species.  
FUNCTION 
Ecosystem functions are the ecological processes that control the fluxes of energy, nutrients, and organic 
matter, including primary production, decomposition of dead matter, and nutrient cycling. High-severity fire 
can lead to dramatic species losses and changes in species composition and structure, which in turn will af-
fect nutrient composition and turnover rates. A re-
stored ecosystem apparently functions normally for its 
ecological stage of development, and signs of dys-
function are absent (SER 2004). 
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT 
The success of early BAER treatments varies by type 
of treatment, treatment combinations, and environ-
mental conditions, and carries implications for long-
term health and restoration of an ecosystem. Long-
term monitoring can allow for information to be ac-
cessible to BAER teams to further refine future treat-
ments. Preventing accelerated soil erosion is a prima-
ry BAER activity, but erosion can continue to occur 
for several years following a severe wildfire. In-
channel erosional processes may last much longer 
than those occurring in upland systems. Some of the dynamics associated with erosion may be desirable for 
rejuvenating aquatic systems, but over large areas and where species are vulnerable, such impacts may be a 
real concern.  
LANDSCAPE CONTEXT AND INTEGRITY 
Some important and common threats to severely burned forest sites from surrounding landscapes include 
domestic and wild grazers, which may feed on newly seeded or planted areas, and the introduction of inva-
sive plants that may disperse or be inadvertently transported into burned areas. The effect of subsequent 
wildfires (reburns) on areas that have already burned is another landscape context issue. Both shrubfields 
and hyper-dense forests are subject to high-severity reburns in the Southwest. Determining when and where 
it makes sense to intervene and where natural recovery processes may be deemed sufficient within high-
severity burn patches requires careful consideration of a number of site-specific interactive factors, and deci-
sions should be made within a broad landscape context. Long-term monitoring is crucial in order to deter-
mine if ecosystem changes are occurring and how to best respond to them. 
 
 
 
Conifer seedlings surrounded by tree shelters on a high-severity 
burn patch. Photo courtesy of Elwood Rokala, Kaibab NF  

 
SUMMARY 
The Society for Ecological Restoration has developed nine attributes that provide a basis for determining 
when restoration of an ecosystem has been accomplished (SER 2004): 
 
1. The restored ecosystem contains a characteristic assemblage of the species that occur in the reference 
ecosystem and that provide appropriate community structure. 
2. The restored ecosystem consists of indigenous species to the greatest practicable extent.  
3. All functional groups necessary for the continued development and/or stability of the restored ecosys-
tem are represented or, if they are not, the missing groups have the potential to colonize by natural 
means. 
4. The physical environment of the restored ecosystem is capable of sustaining reproducing populations 
of the species necessary for its continued stability or development along the desired trajectory. 
5. The restored ecosystem apparently functions normally for its ecological stage of development, and 
signs of dysfunction are absent. 
6. The restored ecosystem is suitably integrated into a larger ecological matrix or landscape, with which 
it interacts through abiotic and biotic flows and exchanges. 
7. Potential threats to the health and integrity of the restored ecosystem from the surrounding landscape 
have been eliminated or reduced as much as possible. 
8. The restored ecosystem is sufficiently resilient to endure the normal periodic stress events in the local 
environment that serve to maintain the integrity of the ecosystem. 
9. The restored ecosystem is self-sustaining to the same degree as its reference ecosystem, and has the 
potential to persist indefinitely under existing environmental conditions. Nevertheless, aspects of its 
biodiversity, structure and functioning may change as part of normal ecosystem development, and may 
fluctuate in response to normal periodic stress and occasional disturbance events of greater conse-
quence. As in any intact ecosystem, the species composition and other attributes of a restored ecosys-
tem may evolve as environmental conditions change. 
 
Emergency stabilization activities have been well-researched. However, longer-term post-fire restoration 
efforts require commitment, research and monitoring, but have generally received much less attention. The 
increasing occurrence of very large wildfires has prompted more attempts to articulate and evaluate long-
term restoration strategies. Monitoring is crucial in order to determine if ecosystem changes are occurring 
and how best to respond to them in both the short- and long-term.  
REFERENCE 
Society for Ecological Restoration. 2004. SER International Primer on Ecological Restoration. Society for 
Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group. Version 2, October, 2004. 
http://www.ser.org/resources/resources-detail-view/ser-international-primer-on-ecological-restoration  
 
 
 
   
 
 
Contact 
Judy Springer, Judy.Springer@nau.edu  
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Springer, J.D. 2013. Post-wildfire restoration of structure, composition, and function in south-
western ponderosa pine and warm/dry mixed-conifer forests. ERI Working Paper 29. Eco-
logical Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/
collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2014003.dir/doc.pdf  
