15
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Effects of Forest Thinning
Treatments on Fire Behavior
February 2006 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International
defines restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an
ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability. . . . Restoration attempts to return
an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years; many areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees and have lost their once
diverse understory. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing
fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on
reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after first thinning dense stands—and
reestablishing productive understory plant communities. The Ecological Restoration Institute at
Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By allowing natural processes such as fire to
resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and
management recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner
organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the U.S. Government. Mention of trade
names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs

Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
Introduction
One of the goals of restoration in southwestern ponderosa
pine ecosystems is to reduce the risk of unnaturally severe
wildfires. Many factors influence fire behavior – including
drought, topography, insect infestation, and weather – but
fuels are the only factor that people can realistically manage
(Zimmerman 2003; Pollet and Omi 2002). This publication
summarizes what is known about restoration treatment
effects on fire behavior in ponderosa pine forests, and
suggests treatment options that can alter future fire behavior.
Forest Structure and Fire Severity
Historic fire regimes in southwestern ponderosa pine forests
involved frequent low-severity fires (Weaver 1951; Swetnam
and Baisan 1996). Typically, these fires maintained relatively
light fuel loads within the landscape by burning herbaceous
vegetation, downed needles, and woody debris, as well as
smaller tree saplings and seedlings. The result was a generally
open-structured forest. Today most of these same forests are
much denser (Covington et al. 1997) and the majority of fires,
whether ignited by people or lightning, are suppressed to
protect natural resources, human communities, and
structures. The result has been an accumulation of fuels that
greatly increases the likelihood of wildfires of unprecedented
severity.
Of particular concern is the occurrence in recent years of
widespread crown fires that are dangerous to human lives,
damaging to human communities, and ecologically harmful
(Covington 2000). A passive crown fire torches an individual
tree or group of trees, while an active crown fire spreads
wildfire from tree to tree through the canopy of a forest stand
(Zimmerman 2003).
Forest restoration treatments typically incorporate tree
thinning and/or prescribed fire, both of which are intended to
reduce overall fuel loads. These actions are sometimes
followed by activities such as seeding of native understory
plants and control of invasive species (see Working Paper 4:
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of
Benefits). Treatments that reduce fuel loads can reduce fire
severity and spread by limiting the initiation of passive crown
fire and making it more difficult for active crown fire to
spread. Treated tracts can also function as areas in which
firefighters can work to contain a large wildfire.
Treated areas, though, are never entirely fireproof and do not
always serve as fire barriers. In the right conditions, severe
fires can burn through treatments or “spot” over them. But as
treatments accumulate over the landscape or are placed in
strategic locations, they have the potential to make a
significant impact on the behavior of individual wildfires and
overall fire patterns (Finney 2001). Over time, reducing
excessive fuel loads may allow the possibility for natural
regimes of frequent, low-severity fires to once again prevail in
some areas, thereby maintaining sustainable forest structures
and further reducing the likelihood that stand-replacing
wildfires will occur in the future (Omi and Martinson 2004).
Treatment Effects on Fire Behavior:
Examples
Research of various sorts (Box 1) has consistently shown that
the risk of crown fire can be lowered if fuel loads are reduced,
small-diameter trees are removed, and ladder fuels are
minimized (Fulé et al. 2001a and 2001b; Pollet and Omi 2002;
Finney et al. 2003; Schoennagel et al. 2004). Table 1 shows
how reductions in basal area, overall tree density, and density
of small-diameter trees reduce the likelihood of crown
torching, according to observational studies of three large
wildfires in ponderosa pine forests (Pollet and Omi 2002). In
these fires, stands with higher basal areas, higher density of
trees, and a larger proportion of small-diameter trees
consistently showed a greater degree of crown scorch than
other areas.
These results echo the effects of the 2002 Rodeo-Chediski Fire
in Arizona, which burned through a mosaic of previously
thinned and unthinned areas. A postfire assessment showed
that 35 percent of stands that had been thinned within the
previous 15 years (with an average stand density of 157 stems
per acre) experienced high-severity crown fire, while 55
percent of stands that had not been thinned (449 stems per
1
a
Table 1.  Treatment effects on crown scorch for three fires in ponderosa pine forests. 
Wildfire name
Treatment type
Basal area
Density
Average tree diameter
Crown scorch
Location
(ft2/acre)
(stems/acre)
(inches)
(%)
Size
Date
Untreated
Treated
Untreated
Treated
Untreated
Treated
Untreated
Treated
Webb Fire
Prescribed fire
100.1
60.3
258
30
9.5
17.0
67.0
23.0
Kootenai NF, MT
1989; no
3,500 acres
thinning
1994
Tyee Fire
Thinned 1970; 
107.6
68.9
504
88
8.1
12.1
100.0
74.0
Wenatchee NF, WA
prescribed fire 
140,300 acres
1983
1994
Hochderffer Fire
Thinned 1970;
108.7
101.2
310
225
8.6
9.5
99.0
29.0
Coconino NF, AZ
prescribed fire
16,400 acres
1995
1996

acre) burned intensely (Schoennagel et al. 2004). Stands with
greater production of understory vegetation and with an open
tree structure burned with less severity than did stands with
more trees and less grass. It is important to note, though, that
thinned stands in which slash had been left in place were
more likely to burn at high severity than even unthinned
stands; a variety of methods are available for removing this
abundant dry fuel after thinning (see Working Paper 13:
Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning).
These observational studies are consistent with the outcomes
of modeling exercises conducted following restoration
treatments in two areas in northern Arizona (Fulé et al. 2001a
and 2001b; Box 2). In those studies, thinning of smaller trees
followed by prescribed fire resulted in fire behavior
characterized by less canopy consumption, shorter flame
lengths, and a slower rate of spread than in untreated areas; in
addition, it was shown that a much stronger wind would be
needed to sustain a crown fire in treated areas than in
untreated areas.
But treatments alone do not determine fire behavior. A study
assessing treatment effects on the behavior of the Hayman
Fire in Colorado concluded that treatments largely, but not
entirely, succeeded at minimizing fire severity (Finney et al.
2003). On days of extremely low humidity and unusually high
wind speeds of up to 84 mph, the fire burned through treated
as well as untreated areas; on days of more moderate fire
behavior, however, previously implemented treatments helped
to slow fire spread and lower its severity. Researchers
concluded that areas that had been recently broadcast burned
(within the previous year) appeared to be more effective at
reducing fire severity than areas that were broadcast burned
years earlier, and that large fuel breaks were substantially
more successful at reducing fire progress than small fuel
breaks.
Recommendations
There is no one-size-fits-all recommendation for how
mechanical thinning or prescribed fire should be used at a
given location in order to reduce wildfire risk. Fire behavior is
variable enough that it is impossible to precisely predict
future fire behavior from a given stand density and structure.
In addition, ponderosa pine landscapes across the
southwestern states are naturally highly variable. But some
general points are important.
Thinning of both canopy and ladder fuels is generally
needed to reduce crown fire potential. The modeling tools
available at www.fire.gov can help assess how much thinning
will be needed to reduce potential fire behavior by a certain
amount. Though it can be expensive, thinning does not carry
the risks of prescribed fire and can be carried out through
much of the year (though often not when soils are wet; see
Working Paper 5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During
Restoration).
Slash treatments affect future fire behavior. Leaving slash in
place after an otherwise effective thinning treatment can
increase rather than reduce fire hazard. See Working Paper 13:
Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning for ideas on how to
deal with slash.
Prescribed fire is important in reducing fuel loads and
cycling nutrients. Prescribed burning is typically cheaper
than mechanical thinning and can often be done without
heavy equipment that impacts soils. It releases nutrients into
the system and often results in a flush of herbaceous growth,
thereby more closely emulating natural fire regimes than
thinning alone. Burning in combination with thinning may
be the most successful fuel treatment combination (Strom
2005). Prescribed fire, when used alone, can reduce potential
fire behavior for a maximum of about ten years (Finney et al.
2005; Strom 2005).
Fuel reduction treatments provide short-term benefits,
while restoration provides long-term benefits. Treatments
that combine thinning with prescribed fire and that focus
attention on a wide range of post-treatment conditions
(including herbaceous vegetation, wildlife habitat, watershed
benefits, and recreation) do the best job of reducing fire
danger and improving forest health in the long term
(Covington et al. 2001; Omi and Martinson 2004).
Restoration treatments that focus on healthy forest structure
allow low-severity fire to easily and inexpensively shape forest
conditions in the future – and this, in turn, reduces the need
for future maintenance thinning.
Size matters. Larger treated areas more effectively reduce fire
behavior than smaller areas (Finney et al. 2003).
Treatments that leave too much fuel behind can be a waste
of money and effort. New growth follows thinning or
prescribed fire and puts a time limit on the effectiveness of
these treatments. By itself, prescribed burning can be effective
in reducing wildfire severity for up to ten years (Finney et al.
2005; Strom 2005). If management goals include reducing fire
danger, then treatments that leave heavy fuels behind in the
form of slash or living trees don’t work – they waste resources
and will force managers to implement more treatments in
coming years. Only treatments that allow the possibility of
future low-severity fires that manage fuels represent a long-
term solution to the problem of unnatural wildfire intensity.
Landscape patterns matter. Landscape-scale planning
techniques such as those developed by Finney (2001) and Sisk
et al. (2004) can help assess where treatments should be
concentrated in order to achieve the greatest degree of fire
risk reduction and other corollary benefits. Software tools
available at www.fire.gov, along with GIS technology, can
help assess where treatments are most important and where
resources should be concentrated.
Enough uncertainty exists that adaptive management is
crucial. Reducing fuel loads is both a science and an art. Fire
behavior and forest ecology are both complex, and some
effects of restoration treatments will inevitably not be those
predicted. For that reason, it is vital to incorporate adaptive
management techniques such as evaluating the results of past
treatments during the planning of new ones (Murray and
Marmorek 2003).
Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
a
2

Box 2: Fire Modeling Results from Experimental Restoration Treatments
Detailed fire modeling efforts have predicted how effective two large-scale forest restoration projects in northern Arizona have been in
reducing wildfire danger. At Mount Trumbull on the Arizona Strip treatments were designed to replicate historic forest conditions. All
trees pre-dating 1870 were not thinned, regardless of species; three replacement pines were left for every one snag, stump, or fallen
conifer. Oak and locust were not thinned. Prescribed fires followed thinning. Fire behavior after treatment was modeled using NEXUS
Fire Behavior and Hazard Assessment System (Scott and Reinhardt 1999). The modeling projected more moderate fire behavior in
thinned areas than in the control plots (Fulé et al. 2001b).
Treatment effects on modeled fire behavior, Mount Trumbull
Crown bulk 
Crown fuel
Basal
Pine density
Percent
Rate of
Flame
density (lb/ft3)
loading
area
(trees/acre)
of crown
spread
length
(tons/acre)
(ft2/acre)
burned
(ft/min)
(ft)
Control plots
0.00372
4.89
145.7
354.0
68
111.5
38.0
Treated plots
0.00319
2.63
80.5
70.5
20
63.3
11.8
In the Fort Valley Experimental Forest, just northwest of Flagstaff, three different thinning treatments, followed by prescribed fire, and a
control were incorporated into experimental blocks to assess how fire behavior would be affected. The thinning treatments differed in
how many living trees were retained around stumps, snags, stump holes, and other evidence of once-extant trees (for more details on the
thinning methods, see Working Paper 9: Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions). The largest trees were retained
in all treatments. Once the treatments were complete, forest conditions were modeled using NEXUS (Scott and Reinhardt 1999). The
modeling (detailed in Fulé et al. 2001a) predicted that considerably higher wind speeds would be needed to produce crown fire
conditions in treated areas than in untreated areas.
Effects of types of thinning on modeled fire behavior, Fort Valley
Stand density 
Basal area
Crown bulk
Average crown
Crowning
(trees/acre)
(ft2/acre)
density (lbs/ft3)
base height (ft)
index (mph)
Control plots
480.6
164.3
0.0052
21.5
28
1.5/3 thinning
56.8
67.8
0.0021
29.1
55
2/4 thinning
68.8
77.7
0.0026
31.9
47
3/6 thinning
98.3
97.2
0.0032
27.4
40
Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior a
3
Box 1: How Do We Know How Treatments Affect Fire Behavior?
Understanding the effect of treatments on fire behavior is a challenge. All wildfires are unique, and variables such as drought,
topography, tree health, overall fuel loading, and weather all affect how stand conditions correspond with fire behavior. Yet observational
studies, experimental studies, and modeling have established some general relationships between forest structure and fire behavior.
Anecdotal knowledge, based on close observation by trained fire personnel, has been an important addition to the base of more formal
research.
Observational Studies
If researchers look retrospectively at what fuel treatments were in place before a wildfire started, they can use that information in
conjunction with ecological information collected post-fire to determine how the treatments influenced fire severity and behavior.
•
Advantages: Wildfire regimes, including the effects of catastrophic wildfire, are utilized to provide the study’s data.
•
Disadvantages: There is little control. Researchers may have limited knowledge of the specific and changing conditions present at the
time of the fire. Information about previous treatment prescriptions may be limited.
Experimental Studies
These studies usually involve implementing a treatment prescription and then igniting a fire to assess how the fire moves through the
treated landscape, as compared to untreated areas.
•
Advantages: Experimental studies provide an opportunity for researchers to assess at first hand how fire behavior can be modified as
a result of different treatment types.
•
Disadvantages: It is difficult to test how a treated area will respond to a high-severity wildfire because it is rarely acceptable for
researchers to light such a fire; therefore, this type of design has limited value in truly understanding the risk of catastrophic fire.
Fire Modeling
Several fire behavior prediction software packages can model fire behavior given a set of forest conditions, such as fuel loads, fuel
moisture, canopy bulk density, slope, elevation, and wind speed. The programs can then predict the speed and direction of the fire, flame
length, rate of spread, fuel consumption, smoke production, and crown fire indices. Many of these programs are available for free
download (see inside back cover).
•
Advantages: Simulating fire behavior on the computer allows researchers to observe and compare how fire severity changes within
different treatment prescriptions and ecosystem parameters, without having to undergo the cost of treatments.
•
Disadvantages: It can be difficult to accurately model all of the variability within a given landscape. As a result, patterns observed in
fire simulations can be different than what is observed on the landscape, even when existing fuel loads and weather conditions are
incorporated into the model.

Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
a
4
References
Covington, W. W. 2000. Helping western forests heal.
Nature 408(6809):135-163.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fulé, S. C. Hart, and R. P. Weaver.
2001. Modeling ecological restoration effects on ponderosa
pine forest structure. Restoration Ecology 9:421–431.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, S. C. Hart, T. E.
Kolb, J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R. Wagner. 1997.
Restoration of ecosystem health in southwestern ponderosa
pine forests. Journal of Forestry 95:23-29.
Finney, M. A. 2001. Design of regular landscape fuel
treatment patterns for modifying fire growth and behavior.
Forest Science 47(2):219-228.
https://library.eri.nau.edu/handle/2019/85.
Finney, M. A., R. Bartlette, L. Bradshaw, K. Close, B. M.
Collins, P. Gleason, W. M. Hao, P. Langowski, J. McGinely, C.
W. McHugh, E. Martinson, P. N. Omi, W. Shepperd, and K.
Zeller. 2003. Fire behavior, fuel treatments, and fire
suppression on the Hayman Fire. Pp. 33-180 in Hayman Fire
case study, ed. R. T. Graham. General technical report RMRS-
114. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service.
www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr114.html.
Finney, M. A., C. W. McHugh, and I. C. Grenfell. 2005. Stand-
and landscape-level effects of prescribed burning on two
Arizona wildfires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research
35(7):1714-1722.
Fulé, P. Z., C. McHugh, T. A. Heinlein, and W. W. Covington.
2001a. Potential fire behavior is reduced following forest
restoration treatments. Pp. 22-28 in Ponderosa pine ecosystems
restoration and conservation: Steps toward stewardship, ed. R.
K. Vance et al. Proceedings RMRS-22. Ogden, Utah: USDA
Forest Service.
www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_p022/rmrs_p022_028_035.pdf.
Fulé, P. Z., A. E. M. Waltz, W. W. Covington, and T. A.
Heinlein. 2001b. Measuring forest restoration effectiveness in
reducing hazardous fuels. Journal of Forestry 99:24-29.
Murray, C., and D. Marmorek. 2003. Adaptive management
and ecological restoration. Pp. 417-428 in Ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests, ed. P.
Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Omi, P. N., and E. J. Martinson. 2004. Effectiveness of
thinning and prescribed fire in reducing wildfire severity. Pp.
87-92 in Proceedings of the Sierra Nevada science symposium:
Science for management and conservation, ed. D. D. Murphy
and P. A. Stine. General technical report PSW-193. Albany,
Calif.: USDA Forest Service.
www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/psw_gtr193/ps
w_gtr193_2a_04_Omi_Martinson.pdf.
R
Pollet, J., and P. N. Omi. 2002. Effect of thinning and
prescribed burning on crown fire severity in ponderosa pine
forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire 11:1-10.
Schoennagel, T., T. T. Veblen, and W. H. Romme. 2004. The
interaction of fire, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain
forests. BioScience 54:661-676.
Scott, J. H., and E. Reinhardt. 1999. NEXUS fire behavior and
hazard assessment system. Software program available from
Systems for Environmental Management, Missoula, MT.
Sisk, T. D., H. M. Hampton, J. Prather, E. N. Aumack, Y. Xu,
M. R. Loeser, T. Muñoz-Erickson, B. Dickson, and J. Palumbo.
2004. Forest Ecological Restoration Analysis (ForestERA)
project report, 2002-2004: Executive summary.
www.forestera.nau.edu/overview_2002-
2004_project_report.htm.
Society for Ecological Restoration International. 2004.
The SER International primer on ecological restoration.
www.ser.org/pdf/primer3.pdf.
Strom, B. 2005. Pre-fire treatment effects and post-fire forest
dynamics on the Rodeo-Chediski
burn area, Arizona. M.S. thesis, School of Forestry, Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 1996. Historical fire regime
patterns in the southwestern United States since AD 1700. Pp.
11–32 in Fire effects in southwestern forests: Proceedings of the
Second La Mesa Fire Symposium, ed. C. D. Allen. General
technical report RM-286. Fort Collins, Colo.: USDA Forest
Service.
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in the
southwestern pine forests. Journal of Forestry 49:93–98.
Zimmerman, G. T. 2003. Fuels and fire behavior. Pp. 126-143
in Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests,
ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.

For More Information
To download fire-modeling software programs, visit www.fire.org
For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu
Written by Kimberly Lowe
Reviewed by John Bedell, Charlie Denton, Pete Fulé, Dennis Lund, Martha Schumann, Doc Smith, Diane
Vosick, and Tom Zimmerman
Series Editor Peter Friederici
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G59099/1500/02-06

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
2ERI35AE
