USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.	
257
In: Olberding, Susan D., and Moore, Margaret M., tech coords. 2008. Fort Valley Experimental Forest—A Century of 
Research 1908-2008. Proceedings RMRS-P-53CD. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 408 p.
Dynamics of Buckbrush Populations 
Under Simulated Forest Restoration 
Alternatives
David W. Huffman, Ecological Restoration Institute, and Margaret M. 
Moore, School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ
Abstract—Plant population models are valuable tools for assessing ecological 
tradeoffs between forest management approaches. In addition, these models can pro-
vide insight on plant life history patterns and processes important for persistence and 
recovery of populations in changing environments. In this study, we evaluated a set of 
ecological restoration alternatives for their long-term effects on buckbrush (Ceanothus 
fendleri Gray), a shrub common in understories of ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa 
Laws. var. scopulorum Engelm.) forests of the southwestern United States. The field 
data were collected from a set of forest restoration units located on the Fort Valley 
Experimental Forest. We constructed simple stage-based models in order to simulate 
25-year population dynamics. Results showed that scenarios that included overstory 
thinning, herbivore protection, and prescribed fire resulted in buckbrush populations 
with significantly greater numbers of aboveground stems than populations in the oth-
er alternatives. Vegetative stem recruitment, flowering, and seedling emergence were 
important in producing these results. For alternatives that included protection from 
herbivores, burning at 2-year frequencies resulted in populations with significantly 
greater numbers of aboveground stems than scenarios with longer intervals between 
burning. In contrast, frequent burning in alternatives without herbivore protection 
resulted in population decline. These results indicate that protecting buckbrush from 
large herbivores allowed plants to complete life cycles and fully express these life his-
tory traits. This research demonstrates that population modeling can help illuminate 
ecological tradeoffs associated with land management alternatives.
Introduction
Buckbrush is a common shrub found in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. 
It is capable of nitrogen-fixation, provides important browse for wildlife such as 
mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) and elk (Cervus elaphus), and adds structural di-
versity to predominantly herbaceous understories of these ecosystems (Allen 1996, 
Story 1974, Urness et al. 975).

258	
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
Plant life history traits are adaptive strategies that influence a species’ potential 
for survival, growth, and reproduction in a changing environment (Bellingham and 
Sparrow 2000). Life history traits include characteristic seed germination require-
ments, rates of growth and development of individuals, patterns of flowering, and 
recruitment of new individuals (Barbour et al. 1999). With an understanding of how 
life history traits and environmental conditions interact, models of long-term plant 
population dynamics may be constructed. Such models can be useful in evaluating 
potential effects of various land management alternatives. Our objectives in this 
study were the following: (1) to construct population models that describe demo-
graphic responses of buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri Gray) to various treatment 
alternatives used to restore southwestern ponderosa pine forests. (2) to use these 
models to analyze long-term effects of restoration alternatives on buckbrush popu-
lations; and (3) to interpret model results in order to provide information useful to 
ecologists and forest managers.
Methods
Demographic and Life Stage Data
To build buckbrush population models, we used life history and demographic 
data derived from field and laboratory experiments conducted 1999-2002. Field 
experiments were conducted on the Fort Valley Experimental Forest about 7 km 
northwest of Flagstaff. We established a total of 210 buckbrush-centered plots in 
three experimental forest restoration units and three untreated units (see Fulé et al. 
2001 for forest restoration experiment details). Buckbrush plots were 2 x 2 m in 
size. We randomly assigned each plot to one of five treatments: (1) no thinning, no 
herbivore protection, no prescribed fire (control); (2) overstory thinning only (thin-
only); (3) overstory thinning plus herbivore protection (thin-protect); (4) overstory 
thinning plus prescribed burning (thin-burn); and (5) overstory thinning plus her-
bivore protection plus prescribed burning (thin-protect-burn). Herbivore protection 
was provided by wire fence exclosures built around plots.   Plots were burned with 
prescribed, low-intensity fire in April-May, 2000 and 2001. Field data were collect-
ed each year 1999-2002 and included measurements of flowering, seed production, 
stem density, and seedling density (see Huffman 2003 for details). In addition, seed 
germination characteristics, including response to heat and cold stratification, were 
determined in the laboratory.
Simulation Modeling and Analysis
To model management effects on population dynamics, the life cycle of buck-
brush was simplified into four discrete stages (Figure 1). Seeds and aerial stems 
were chosen as the population units of analysis. Aerial stems were defined as in-
dividuals that arose singularly from the soil surface but with various amounts of 
aboveground branching. Stage-based transition matrices (Caswell 2001) were built 
from 1999-2002 field and laboratory data. Vital rates for stage elements were calcu-
lated as the average of the annual changes for each life stage transition over the four 
years of field study. Separate transition matrices were constructed for buckbrush 

USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.	
259
field data from each experimental forest unit (n=3) and were used as replicates in 
our analysis. Details of vital rate assumptions and calculations are described in 
Huffman (2003). Buckbrush population dynamics for the five management sce-
narios were modeled using the computer software RAMAS Metapop (Akçakaya 
1998). Model parameters, including stochasticity, initial population structure, and 
density dependence, are found in Huffman (2003). One-year time step and 25-year 
duration was used for all simulations. Prescribed burning scenarios were modeled 
by treating fire as a probabilistic “catastrophe” in the plant population sense of the 
word (Harper 1977). In years when fire occurred, we adjusted vital rates to reflect 
values derived from field and laboratory observations of fire response. In addition 
to analyzing 25-year buckbrush dynamics for the five restoration alternatives, we 
also examined effects of 2, 5, 10, and 25-year prescribed fire intervals for overstory 
thinning alternatives with and without herbivore protection by varying fire prob-
abilities in our model.
We used analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Bonferroni adjusted pairwise com-
parisons to test effects of restoration alternatives on the following model outputs: 
(1) total abundance (population size including seeds); (2) total number of above-
ground plants (not including seeds); and (3) relative abundance of each life stage 
at the end of the 25-year period.  Output values analyzed were the average of 1000 
simulations for each restoration alternative and P-values less than 0.05 were con-
sidered statistically significant.
Results
Restoration alternatives that included protection from large herbivores had signif-
icantly greater rates of population increase (λ=1.33) than those that did not include 
protection (λ=0.99-1.06) (Table 1). Prescribed fire did not change model estimates 
of λ. Population trajectories showed considerably different patterns among the five 
Figure 1. Simplified life cycle of buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri) based on field 
observations. Seedlings are identified by size and presence of cotyledons (seed leaves). 
Vegetative stems produce no flowers whereas reproductive stems do flower. Arrows 
indicate probable life stage transitions, including seed contributions from reproductive 
adult stems.

260	
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
management scenarios (Figure 2). At the end of the 25-year period, the thin-protect 
alternative had significantly greater total population abundance (aerial stems plus 
seeds) than control and thin-burn alternatives (Table 2). Thin-protect-burn and thin-
only had significantly greater total abundance than thin-burn. Restoration scenarios 
also affected abundance of individuals in the four life stages (Table 2). For example, 
thin-protect-burn had significantly greater number of aerial stems and relatively 
more seedlings and reproductive stems than all other alternatives (Table 2).
Fire frequency and protection from herbivores interacted to affect buckbrush 
population size and structure (Figure 3). Total population abundances of protected 
and unprotected populations at the end of the simulated period were significantly 
greater under the 25-year prescribed fire interval than under the 2-year interval. 
Both protected and unprotected populations showed a pattern of increasing seed 
abundance with longer intervals between fires (Figure 3). However, herbivore 
protection and fire interval interacted to affect abundance of other life stages. For 
example, seedling, vegetative and reproductive stem abundances tended to decline 
in protected populations but increase in unprotected populations as fire interval 
decreased (Figure 3).
Table 1. Mean values and standard error (SEM) of finite rate 
of increase (λ) for simulated management scenarios of 
buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri). Prescribed fire did not affect 
values of λ. Different letters associated with values denote 
statistically different means at P ≤ 0.05.
Restoration Alternative	
λ	
SEM
Control	
0.99 b	
0.001
Thin-only	
1.06 b	
0.036
Thin-protect	
1.33 a	
0.044
Figure 2. Buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri) population trajectories for five restoration 
management scenarios. Abundance is total number in population, including dormant 
seeds. Chart shows carrying capacity (K) “ceiling” for abundance, which was a user-
defined model parameter.

USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.	
261
Figure 3. Life stage abundances (number in population) for buckbrush populations protected 
and unprotected from large herbivores under four simulated prescribed fire intervals.
Table 2. Mean characteristics of buckbrush populations (Ceanothus fendleri) after 25-year simulations 
of five restoration alternatives. Different letters read across management scenarios denote statistically 
different means at P ≤ 0.05.
	
Restoration Alternative
Characteristic	
Control	
Thin-only	
Thin-protect	
Thin-burn	
Thin-protect-burn
Number in Population:
	
Aerial stems1	
25.6 b	
198.4 b	
119.4 b	
175.9 b	
575.8 a
	
Total2	
922.3 bc	
1847.1 ab	
2420.0 a	
468.2 c	
1832.4 ab
Relative Abundance in  
      Population (%):
	
Seeds 	
97.2 a	
90.6 a	
95.0 a	
58.3 b	
68.6 b
	
Seedlings	
1.3 b	
1.1 b	
1.0 b	
8.9 a	
10.3 a
	
Vegetative	
1.4 b	
8.0 ab	
2.4 b	
31.8 a	
16.3 ab
	
Reproductive	
<0.01 c	
0.3 bc	
1.6 b	
1.1 bc	
5.8 a
1 Number of aerial stems in population—does not include seeds.
2 Number in population; total aerial stems plus seeds.

262	
USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.
Discussion and Conclusions
Results of this study indicated that buckbrush populations benefit most from res-
toration alternatives that include overstory thinning, prescribed fire, and protection 
from large herbivores. These results reflected responses linked to the life history 
of this species. Important responses were the following: (1) seedling emergence in 
years of fire due to heat scarification of seeds (Huffman 2006); (2) recruitment of 
vegetative stems from belowground buds in both fire and no-fire years; and (3) re-
cruitment of reproductive stems in years without fire. For control populations, aerial 
stems showed gradual attrition, although seed survival in seed banks may represent 
potential for eventual population recovery. These responses demonstrated evolu-
tionary characteristics that allow buckbrush to thrive in open forests with frequent, 
low-severity fire regimes (Arnold 1950, Fulé et al. 1997). Protecting buckbrush 
from large herbivores appeared to allow plants to complete life cycles and fully 
express life history traits. Prescribed fire facilitated recruitment of new individuals, 
a process that may enhance population viability by increasing genetic variation.  In 
contrast, intensive use by large herbivores such as Rocky Mountain elk appeared 
to constrain long-term population growth and simplify population structure. This 
research demonstrates that population modeling can help provide insights concern-
ing ecological tradeoffs associated with land management alternatives.
References
Akçakaya, H.R. 1998. RAMAS Metapop: viability analysis for stage-structured 
metapopulations (version 3.0). Applied Biomathematics, Setauket, New York.
Allen, C.D. 1996. Elk response to the La Mesa fire and current status in the Jemez 
mountains. pp.179-195 in Allen, C.D. (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa Fire 
Symposium. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-GTR-286.
Arnold, J.F. 1950. Changes in ponderosa pine bunchgrass ranges in northern Arizona 
resulting from pine regeneration and grazing. Journal of Forestry. 48(2): 118-126.
Barbour, M.G.; Burk, J.H.; Pitts, W.D.; Gilliam, F.S.; Schwartz, M.W. 1999. Terrestrial 
plant ecology. Addison Wesely Longman, Inc. NY.
Bellingham, P.J.; Sparrow, A.D. 2000. Resprouting as a life history strategy in wood plant 
communities. Oikos. 89: 409-416.
Caswell, H. 2001. Matrix population models: construction, analysis, and interpretation. 
Sinauer Associates Inc., Sunderland, MA.
Fulé, P.Z.; Covington, W.W.; Moore, M.M. 1997. Determining reference conditions 
for ecosystem management in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Ecological 
Applications. 7(3): 895-908.
Fulé, P.Z.; McHugh, C.; Heinlen, T.A.; Covington, W.W. 2001. Potential fire behavior 
is reduced following forest restoration treatments. Pp. 28-35 in Vance, R.K., C.B. 
Edminster, W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake (comps.), Ponderosa pine ecosystems 
restoration and conservation: steps toward stewardship. USDA Forest Service 
Proceedings RMRS-P-22.
Harper, J.L. 1977. Population biology of plants. Academic Press, New York.

USDA Forest Service RMRS-P-53CD.  2008.	
263
Huffman, D.W. 2003. Population ecology of Fendler ceanothus: responses to herbivory 
and forest restoration treatments. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University. Ph.D. 
Dissertation.
Huffman, D.W. 2006. Production, losses and germination of Ceanothus fendleri seeds in 
an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Western North American Naturalist. 66: 365-373.
Story, M.T. 1974. Nitrogen fixation by Ceanothus fendleri and Lupinus argenteus as a 
function of parent material and vegetal cover. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona. M.S. 
Thesis.
Urness, P.J.; Neff, D.J.; Watkins, R.K. 1975. Nutritive value of mule deer forages on 
ponderosa pine summer range in Arizona. Res. Note RM-304. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station.
The content of this paper reflects the views of the author(s), who are responsible for the 
facts and accuracy of the information presented herein.
