Ecological Restoration 
Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Fact Sheet: Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus  March 2009 
Introduction 
Our nation’s history is a testament to the human ability to turn a time of crisis into an opportunity for positive change. As we 
prepare to implement the economic stimulus package in this time of economic crisis, we see many opportunities to provide sus-
tainable, green jobs to people who need them most, while restoring ecosystems and building social capital through active 
restoration and stewardship.   
Sustainable, green public works projects can include:   
Forest thinning treatments for fuel reduction to reduce unnatural 
fire risk and restore forests (e.g., Healthy Forests Restoration Act 
authorizes $760 million per year for hazardous fuel reduction pro-
jects).  
Riparian restoration projects including removing invasive species 
(e.g., Salt Cedar and Russian Olive Control Demonstration Act, P.L. 
109-320 authorizes $15 million per year through 2010)) and replant-
ing native vegetation.   
Construction and improvement of forest road and trails (e.g., 
designated roads and trails under the Travel Management Rule) and 
other recreational facilities (e.g., developed campgrounds and pic-
nic tables).  
These public works conservation projects would provide both ecological 
and economic benefits.  Such projects can be planned in a way to diversify 
rural economies and build the social capital that would facilitate future collaborative planning. Carefully planned restoration 
and stewardship activities establish stable and predictable supplies of raw materials (biomass) that encourage local business 
start-ups, especially high-value wood products from small-diameter trees and biomass for bioenergy production. 
 
Previous studies have documented clear economic impacts of forest thin-
ning treatments. For example, the national forest fuels reduction programs 
in the five national forests in the Southwest treated 59,720 acres in 2005. 
The treatments alone accounted for more than $40 million of output and 
helped generate some 500 jobs (Hjerpe and Kim 2008).  If we account for 
potential woody biomass utilization, the economic impacts would be much 
greater. For example, the construction of an oriented strand board (OSB) 
facility in Winslow, AZ would generate $244 million of economic output 
and more than 1,000 jobs. Its operation would create total output of $170 
million and almost 600 jobs annually (Hjerpe and Gunderson, 2007). 
Keegan et al. (2004) estimated that treating 64,000 acres of high- to moder-
ate-hazard ponderosa pine in Montana would generate 3,000 jobs and more 
than $90 million in labor income, assuming that the removed logs are used 
as sawtimber.  
There is clear evidence that woody biomass utilization, especially biomass energy development, would create significant 
economic impacts. Kammen et al. (2004) reviewed 13 independent reports and studies that analyze the economic and employ-
ment effects of the clean energy industry, including biomass energy, in the United States and Europe. They concluded that in-
vestment in renewable energy generates more jobs per dollar invested (also more jobs per unit of energy delivered) than the 
fossil fuel energy sector.  
Aside from the job creation and poverty reduction effects, the ecological and economic benefits of restoring ecosystem and 
avoiding catastrophic wildfire are compelling. Mason et al. (2006) found that the overall benefits of government investments 
in fuel reductions are substantial when they account for avoided fire suppression costs, avoided fatalities, and the economic 
values of protected ecological services (i.e., minimum net benefits ranging from $600/acre for moderate-risk forest and $1,400 
per acre for high-risk forests).  
How Many Jobs?  
If fully funded, the thinning projects 
authorized by Healthy Forests Res-
toration Act would generate on aver-
age at least $1.1 billion of output and 
13,000 jobs in surrounding commu-
nities, even with no subsequent bio-
mass utilization.* 
 
* These estimates are made by extrapolating the multipli-
ers from Hjerpe and Kim(2008)’s study. 

The costs of suppressing fire have risen significantly during the 
past two decades (see figure right) due to an increase in acres burned 
as well as an increase in suppression costs per acre (Prestemon et al. 
2008). In 2008, the USDA Forest Service and the Department of Inte-
rior have spent $1.86 billion for fire suppression. Snider et al. (2007) 
calculated the present values of fire suppression costs for various treat-
ment scenarios. Assuming one-third of the forests in Arizona and New 
Mexico require thinning treatments, treating 5% of the required acre-
age (163,000 acres) annually would reduce fire suppression costs by 
$600 million over time. 
 
 
 
Already millions of dollars each year ($987 million dollars in the 
2005 US Department of Agriculture budget alone) have been spent 
on numerous invasive plant control and restoration efforts. For 
one example, a project to restore 1,400 acres of Yuma East Wet-
lands, located along the Lower Colorado River in Arizona, has 
brought more than $8 million into the area in the last eight years 
and has created more than 150 full-time and temporary jobs. The 
picture on the left shows the progression from dense salt cedar (top) 
to native vegetation (bottom) resulting from the restoration projects.  
Conclusion 
With careful planning, the conservation projects can create truly “green collar” jobs to people who need them most in the places 
where economic stimulus spending can make most significant differences. The following table summarizes ecological, economic and 
social benefits of the proposed conservation projects.  
Footnotes 
1. Evan E. Hjerpe and Yeon-Su Kim. 2008. Economic impacts of southwestern national forest fuels reductions. Journal of Forestry 106(6):311-316. 
2. Evan E. Hjerpe and Ronald Gunderson. 2007. Impact analysis of Arizona Forest Restoration Products’ Oriented Strand Board Facility. A Report from Northern    
Arizona W. A. Franke College of Business Center for Business Outreach. 
3. Charles E. Keegan III, Carl E. Fiedler, and Todd A. Morgan. 2004. Wildfire in Montana: Potential hazard reduction and economic effects of a strategic treatment  
program. Forest Products Journal 54(7/8):26-28. 
4. Daniel M. Kammen, Kamal Kapadia, and Matthias Fripp. 2004. Putting renewables to work: How many jobs can the clean energy industry generate? A Report of 
the Renewable and Appropriate Energy Laboratory. University of California, Berkley. 
5. C. Larry Mason, Bruce R. Lippke, Kevin W. Zobrist, Thomas D. Bloxton, Kevin R. Ceder, Jeffrey M. Comnick, James B. McCarter, and Heather K. Rogers. 2006. 
Investments in fuel removals to avoid forest fires result in substantial benefits.  Journal of Forestry 104(1):27-31. 
 
National Interagency Fire Center. 
6. Jeffrey P. Prestemon, Karen Abt, and Krista Gebert. 2008. Supression cost forecasts in advance of wildfire seasons. Forest Science 54(4):381-396.  
 
Project 
Types 
Ecological Benefits 
Economic Benefits 
Social Benefits 
Forest Thin-
ning 
Improved ecosystem health 
Reduced wildfire risk/fire suppression cost 
Increased and more diverse 
employment /income 
opportunities 
Increased diversity of rural 
economies 
Increased tax revenues 
  
Increased public familiarity 
with local resources and 
more participation and 
buy- in for collaborative 
ecosystem planning 
Increased social stability with 
economic security 
Riparian Res-
toration 
Removal of invasive plant species 
Increased water yield 
Restoring native ecosystems 
Forest Rec-
reation 
Infrastructure construction and improved condi-
tions of designated roads,trails, and recrea-
tion facilities 
Minimized impacts  on undesignated areas 
