7/18/14 2:15 PM
Coconino Voices: Local watershed thinning a national example
Page 1 of 3
http://azdailysun.com/news/opinion/columnists/coconino-voices-local-…-national-example/article_cafa8f46-cc49-11e3-8ea3-0019bb2963f4.html
April 25, 2014 5:00 am  ! PAUL SUMMERFELT, DIANE VOSICK, EARL STEWART
Home // News // Opinion // Guest columns
Coconino Voices: Local watershed
thinning a national example
The early start to the 2014 fire season has us working overtime to avoid a major fire in our
community. But are we, as a community, doing our best?
On April 9, the three of us were proud to present the story of the Flagstaff Watershed Protection
Project (FWPP) to the members of the Wildland Fire Leadership Council (WFLC) in Washington,
D.C. The WFLC is comprised of the leadership of the federal and state fire-fighting agencies, as
well as representatives of county and state government, the Western Governors' Association and
Native American tribes. For the last four years WFLC has worked with stakeholders across the
United States to develop a "National Cohesive Strategy" to address the spiraling cost of fire
suppression by developing strategies that will help reduce the threat of unnatural, catastrophic fire
to forests and communities. Although FWPP preceded the completion of the Cohesive Strategy,
FWPP was included as an example of what success of the National Cohesive Strategy should look
like.
We knew we had a great story, the first of its kind in the country, but we did not realize the huge
interest it would generate and the national implications of what our community has started until the
presentation. The number of questions and positive comments were overwhelming. Repeatedly the
question was asked - can this be done elsewhere? In our estimation the answer is yes, if the
community in question can accept responsibility for becoming part of the solution and can rally the
broad support of elected officials, conservationists, and other key stakeholders in the community
to take action.
But as successful as we've been, the time to celebrate is still in our future.
Since voter passage of Question 405 in 2012, which approved $10 million to accelerate forest
thinning treatments on the Dry Lake Hills north of Flagstaff and Mormon Mountain, the city of
Flagstaff and the Coconino National Forest have worked together to complete 191 acres of
thinning and 176 acres of prescribed fire, resurface the nearly 8 miles of Schultz Pass Road that is
necessary for future operations, and conduct an equipment demonstration project to evaluate what
types of machinery will work best to minimize harvest impacts on steep slopes. Citizens and
scientists have met to determine how to monitor treatments so we can evaluate treatment
responses as well as determine when we have achieved thinning thresholds that reduce the risk of
unnatural catastrophic fire and the potential for post-fire flooding. The FWPP will also track
In Depth

7/18/14 2:15 PM
Coconino Voices: Local watershed thinning a national example
expenditures, potential cost offsets from the sale of thinning by-products, and other economic
variables in order to show voters how their money has been spent. Voters will be interested to
know that from January 2013 until now, nearly $1.1 million in additional funding or in-kind services
have been provided by our many partners, allowing funding for the project to expand by more than
10 percent.
This summer all citizens will have an opportunity to comment on the single most important
foundation for success of the FWPP project. The Coconino National Forest will release the Draft
Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) assessing the impact of proposed treatments on federal
land in the FWPP project area. This document is required under federal law and provides an
opportunity for the public to comment on the project. If there are no objections, it is possible that
the environmental review process will be completed in the fall of this year and the FWPP will be
fully underway.
As citizens, you can also contribute to your own safety by making your property Firewise: remove
excessive trees and other flammable vegetation and debris, rake and dispose of pine needles and
remove them from your roof and gutters, cut weeds, and most importantly, work together as a
neighborhood to make our community safe. Additional information on what you can do can be
found at the following websites: http://www.gffp.org/, http://www.firewise.org/wildfire-
preparedness/be-firewise/home-and-landscape.aspx, or at www.flagstaff.az.gov/wildlandfire. You
may also contact the Flagstaff Fire Department at 213-2500.
Paul Summerfelt is Fire Management Officer for the city of Flagstaff; Diane Vosick is with the
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University; Earl Stewart is Forest Supervisor,
Coconino National Forest.
Copyright 2014 Arizona Daily Sun. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or
redistributed.

