FACT SHEET: CANOPY COVER and CANOPY CLOSURE 
Canopy cover and canopy closure are the two basic ways of measuring forest canopies.  
 
Definitions of canopy closure 
“Canopy closure measurements integrate information over a segment of the sky hemisphere above one 
point on the ground. Ideally the entire sky should be assessed, although the segment measured varied 
with the instrument used.” Jennings, S.B., N.D. Brown, and D. Sheil. 1999. Assessing forest canopies and 
understorey illumination: Canopy closure, canopy cover and other measures. Forestry 72(1):59-73. 
“Canopy closure is the proportion of the sky hemisphere obscured by vegetation when viewed by a single 
point. Closure is affected by tree heights and canopy widths and takes into account light interception and 
other factors that influence microhabitat.” Sierra Nevada Adaptive Management Project web site 
http://snamp.cnr.berkeley.edu/about/snamp-glossary/ 
Definitions of canopy cover 
 “Canopy Cover: The percent of a fixed area covered by the crown of an individual plant species or 
delimited by the vertical projection of its outermost perimeter; small openings in the crown are included.” 
Source: USDA Forest Service, Natural Resource Information Service, Field Sampled Vegetation 

(FSVeg), Common Stand Exam Users Guide, Appendix M, Glossary of Terms, 2010. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/emc/nris/products/fsveg/index.shtml. 
“Canopy cover refers to the proportion of the forest floor covered by the vertical projection of the tree 
crowns….Measurements of canopy cover assess the presence or absence of canopy vertically above a 
sample of points across an area of forest.” Jennings, S.B., N.D. Brown, and D. Sheil. 1999. Assessing 
forest canopies and understorey illumination: Canopy closure, canopy cover and other measures. Forestry 
72(1):59-73.  
“Canopy cover is a measure of the percentage of ground covered by a vertical projection of the tree 
canopy. In SNAMP, it is collected using point measurements (yes/no canopy cover).” Sierra Nevada 
Adaptive Management Project web site http://snamp.cnr.berkeley.edu/about/snamp-glossary/ 
“…canopy cover, in Northern Goshawk Management Recommendations, RM-217, is defined on page 
87 as: ‘The percentage of a fixed area covered by the crowns of plants delimited by a vertical 
projection of the outermost perimeter of the spread of the foliage.’ The context in which this 
definition is written is based upon the group or clump of trees. Canopy cover is measured from the 
outermost edge of tree crowns within a group or clump of trees. It is not measured as percentage of 
cover across a stand or project area.” Pp. 8-9 of Implementation Guide Region 3: Northern Goshawk 
Standards and Guidelines (April 6, 2007). (emphasis added) 
Analysis 
“Mean canopy closure (or openness) over an area of forest is not necessarily correlated with the canopy 
cover of the same area. Tree height does not affect canopy cover as the vertical projection of the crown 
alone is assessed. Canopy closure will increase beneath progressively taller trees as more and more of 
the sky hemisphere is obscured. Canopy closure is likely a better to be a measure of greater utility to 
foresters, as it will be directly related to the light regime and microclimate and will, therefore, be linked 
to plant survival and growth at the point of measurement. Canopy cover is a measurement that reflects 
the dominance of a site by trees or a particular species of tree. Canopy cover can also be used to predict 
stand volume. This is because, for a particular species of tree, there is a nearly linear relationship 
between the area occupied by its crown and the basal area of its trunk.” Jennings, S.B., N.D. Brown, and 
D. Sheil. 1999. Assessing forest canopies and understorey illumination: Canopy closure, canopy cover 
and other measures. Forestry 72(1):59-73. 
“The ecological relevance of each (cover being important to stand-level microclimate and prey protection 
while closure directly influences understory light and temperature at a given point) measurement is 
needed to interpret their biological importance.” Stephenson, S.L., D.L. Fry, E. Franco-Vizcaino, B.M. 
Collins, and J.M. Moghaddas. 2007. Coarse wood debris and canopy cover in an old-growth Jeffrey pine-
mixed conifer forest from the Sierra San Pedro Martir, Mexico. Forest Ecology and Management 240:87-
95. 
 
Note: The glossary for the Forest Service Field Sampled Vegetation Common Stand Exam Users Guide 
does not contain a definition for canopy closure (although it does contain definitions for canopy closure 
for herbs, non-trees, and shrubs). Nor is there any discussion of canopy closure in the Implementation 
Guide Region 3: Northern Goshawk Standards and Guidelines (2007) or in the Management 
Recommendations for the Northern Goshawk in the Southwestern United States (1992). 
