 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Sediment Yield After Severe Wildfire 
By Victoria Stempniewicz  
INTRODUCTION 
Wildfires throughout the western U.S. have increased in size and severity as a result of 20th century land use 
practices including fire suppression, which has elevated risks to communities bordering and downstream of 
forested watersheds. High-severity wildfire (i.e., where most trees are killed) in the arid and semi-arid South-
west changes watershed response to precipitation, mainly by increasing runoff. This results in a high risk of 
flooding, sediment transport, and erosion, particularly on steep slopes (DeBano et al. 1998). Forest floor ma-
terials such as organic matter and dead leaves normally absorb most precipitation and limit runoff, but severe 
fire eliminates this forest floor cushion, leaving a slick, sometimes water resistant surface that deflects a sig-
nificant amount of rain, or runoff. Slope stability is compromised by loss of herbaceous cover. The increased 
runoff combined with the reduced slope stability creates an optimal environment for sediment mobilization 
from hillslopes (also known as hillsides) and channels, erosion, and flooding.  
 
This fact sheet summarizes significant findings on sediment transport and erosion on burned landscapes in 
semi-arid systems with ponderosa pine and mixed conifer type vegetation.  
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 Peak flows can increase from 500% to 9,600% following wildfire in the 
Southwest.  
 Higher peak flows increase the runoff’s capacity to carry sediment (Figure 
1).  
 Sediment flux on hillslopes is the greatest source of increased erosion post-
fire (Canfield et al. 2005), but about 75% of the sediment sources are in 
channels (Moody and Martin 2009).   
 Burned hillslopes are prone to rill and gully formation during precipitation, 
increasing runoff transport to channels. 
 Water sources can be contaminated by ash-laden post-fire runoff, reducing 
potability.  
 The 2012 Sunflower Fire burned 17,618 acres of Tonto National Forest 
(NF), and ash-laden runoff caused water turbidity to spike. Production was 
reduced and treatments were increased to make water safe for consumption 
in Phoenix. Murky water was noted up to 45 miles away in a Mesa water 
treatment plant the following winter.  
 Sediment transport in ephemeral channels is unsteady, meaning sediment response to changing flow 
conditions lag, and sediments are transported in pulses (Hummel et al. 2012).  
 Regional geological studies indicate that sediments have been accumulating for ~6,000 years. 
          Fact Sheet: Sediment Yield After Severe Wildfire  
 
 
 
  
 
April 2014 
Figure 1. An ash- and sediment
-laden flood flows during a July 
20, 2010 storm on the Schultz 
Fire burn area.  

 
 
Schultz Fire — Coconino NF, Arizona 
 
 The Schultz Fire was a high-severity wildfire that burned 
15,051 acres north of Flagstaff in June 2010. Post-Schultz 
Fire monsoon storms caused some channels to erode doz-
ens of feet down to bedrock. These channels more rapidly 
transport runoff and sediment than sediment-lined channels 
(Figure 2).  
 Post-fire flood flows were estimated to be two orders of 
magnitude larger than pre-fire flows, although lack of pre-
fire rain gages limited accurate estimates (Carroll 2011).  
 Maximum increases in erosion were projected for one to 
two years after wildfire, but high-severity burn areas could 
produce abnormal sediment loads for 14 years.  
 Some Burn Area Emergency Response (BAER) erosion 
mitigation treatments contributed to damage due to limited 
understanding of watershed’s geomorphology and potential 
responses to post-fire flooding.  
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
 Post-wildfire sediment transport, erosion, and flooding can result in costly damages to property and 
municipal and utility infrastructure.  
 Predicting the location and magnitude of sediment transport and flooding is complicated due to spa-
tial complexity of burn severities and precipitation. 
 Prior knowledge of sediment sources and rainfall/runoff/sediment relationships could increase ef-
fectiveness of post-fire emergency erosion mitigation. 
 Sediment monitoring, rain and flow gage installation, and mapping of geomorphic units can lead to 
more accurate and precise modeled predictions of post-wildfire runoff and sediment transport mag-
nitudes and locations. 
REFERENCES 
Canfield, H.E., Wilson, C.J., Lane, L.J., Crowell, K.J., and Thomas, W.A. 2005. Modeling scour and deposi-
tion in ephemeral channels after wildfire. Catena, 61.2: 273-291.  
Carroll, M.D. 2011. Movement of channel borne sediments in the 2010 Schultz Fire burn area. M.S. Thesis, 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. 83 p. 
DeBano, L.F., Neary, D.G., and Walch R.P.D. 1998. Fire effects on ecosystems. John Wiley & Sons, New 
York 
Hummel R., Duan, J.G., and Zhang, S. 2012. Comparison of unsteady and quasi-unsteady flow models in 
simulating sediment transport in an ephemeral Arizona stream. Journal of the American Water Re-
sources Association, 48(5): 987-998.  
Moody, J.A., and Martin, D.A. 2009. Sythensis of sediment yields after wildland fire in different rainfall 
regimes in the western United States. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 18(1): 96-115.  
 
 
 
 
Contact 
Dr. Abe Springer, Abe.Springer@nau.edu  
 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
 
Figure 2. A municipal waterline is exposed from 
a 12-foot incision of a main drainage gully post-
Schultz Fire. 
