Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 24
Protecting Old Trees
from Prescribed Burning
February 2011 
24

Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native
species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration
International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the
recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts
to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration International
Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during the last
150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets of small trees, and
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly
susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics.
Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-severity surface fires—often after
thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of the Intermountain
West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we
hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational
opportunities.
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from research
and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every
restoration project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information provided in the Working
Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service and
the Southwest Fire Science Consortium. The views and conclusions contained in this document are
those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the
United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their
endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Cover Photo: An old tree with a duff mound and small, coarse woody debris at its base. Prescribed
burning through the area shown could cause the duff mound to ignite and smolder, potentially
damaging fine tree roots or the tree cambium. While earlier recommendations suggested raking duff
away from all old trees, more recent research suggests that removing duff from the base of old trees may
be necessary only in cases where the tree has signs of previous damage (i.e., fire scars, pitch seams,
lightning scars). This and other recommendations about prescribed burning near old trees are updated
in this ERI Working Paper. Photo by Dave Egan, ERI

Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
Introduction
Although now relatively rare due to high-grade logging throughout
the Intermountain West, old trees and old-growth stands still exist in
the region's frequent-fire forested landscapes (SREP 2000, Kaufmann
and others 2007). These old trees and old-growth stands help sustain
the ponderosa pine ecosystem in terms of structure, processes,
composition, and food-chain interactions—at a variety of scales.
Older trees are also important because they have survived centuries of
environmental and biotic fluctuations, and their seeds and pollen may
make critical contributions to genetic diversity (Kolanoski 2002,
NCSSF 2008). 
One of the real problems restorationists encounter when they work in
areas with old-growth trees is the possibility that prescribed burns—a
recommended and useful restoration technique, especially when
proceeded by mechanical thinning—may kill or seriously injure these
biologically and socially important trees. This tricky situation
developed in part because decades of fire suppression have allowed
needle litter and duff to accumulate at the base of old trees instead of
being consumed by frequent, surface fires. In ERI Working Paper No.
3 (Minard 2002), author Anne Minard cited a variety of ways to
prevent fire-caused old tree mortality in southwestern ponderosa pine
stands, including raking fuels away from the base of old trees. This
working paper will review and update the recommendations made in
that earlier ERI working paper in light of new research findings as
well as the desire to expand restoration efforts to the landscape scale
throughout the region.
Why Fires Can Kill Old Trees
Although tree species with thick bark, such as Douglas-fir
(Pseudotsuga menziesii), ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and
western larch (Larix occidentalis), are adapted to survive low-intensity,
surface fires, they may be susceptible to such fires when the depth of
litter and duff around them increases dramatically due to decades of
fire suppression and the natural tendency of ponderosa pine, in
particular, to slough off bark flakes as well as needles. As these flakes
and needles decompose, they form a duff layer around the base of a
tree that increases with time unless it is removed by fire or another
disturbance. The ability of fire to remove the duff depends largely on
the fire intensity, the amount of duff, and the duff's moisture level.
Thicker duff and duff that is moist take longer to burn than thinner
duff and dry duff. While a thin layer of duff will be quickly consumed
by fire, a thicker, dry duff will burn slowly and at high temperatures
injuring the nearby tree by damaging its cambium and roots.
For example, Ryan and Frandsen (1991), in their analysis of 19 old
ponderosa pines following a late summer, low-intensity prescribed
burn in northwestern Montana, found that burning duff mounds
beneath those trees produced a lethal level of heating in 45 percent of
the cambium samples, causing the subsequent death of four trees after
six years. 
While these results are from only one site, they are likely to be fairly
representative because smoldering mounds of duff can produce high,
damaging temperatures for long periods of time. For example, Agee 
(1973) measured temperatures greater than 572°F for as long as two
hours when burning ponderosa pine duff. Similarly, Hartford and
Frandsen (1992) reported soil temperatures of 750°F under
smoldering duff mounds, with duff temperatures greater than 212°F
for more than 16 hours. 
These and other studies (see Fowler and Sieg 2004, Hood 2010)
provide strong evidence that there are three general ways that
prescribed fire can kill trees, including old trees: 1) injury or
destruction of the cambium; 2) injury or death of the roots, including
fine roots; and 3) secondary effects, due to bark beetles, disease, and
climate stress. 
Cambium
The cambium is a layer of living cells, between the inner bark and the
sapwood, that each year produces additional wood (xylem) and bark
(phloem) cells. It is responsible for the diameter growth of a tree. The
cambium is killed when temperatures reach approximately 140°F, a
temperature that can easily be reached during a prescribed burn as
noted above. Cambium kill occurs when fire destroys enough of the
cambium layer to effectively girdle the tree and, thereby, stop the flow
of nutrients and water. In trees with thick bark, this occurs when a
smoldering fire settles into the duff layer and burns slowly, but with
enough heat, to severely impair the cambium at the base of the tree.
This type of fire tends to leave a ring of blackened, charred bark near
the ground. Partial cambium kill often results in a fire scar. Fire-
scarred trees are more vulnerable to future cambium kill because fire
scars often provide openings for fire to enter underneath the bark
following xylem (wood) decay.
Roots
Root injury occurs when smoldering ground fires kill roots growing
near the soil surface or in duff or litter. Like cambium kill, root injury
and/or mortality result from temperatures of 140°F and long-
duration, smoldering fires in the duff and litter. Sackett and Haase
(1998) found that deep, smoldering duff in ponderosa pine forests can
heat the soil at least 8 inches deep to more than 140°F. They also
found that similar conditions in mixed conifer forests produced lethal
temperatures to 4 inches deep in mineral soil. Such fires kill fine
roots, which are vital for water and nutrient uptake, and may force
trees to use available carbohydrates stored in coarse roots in order to
survive. Fine roots are especially susceptible to these smoldering fires
because they are often growing in the duff rather than underground.
Cavities in the root zone of old trees as well as nearby rotten stumps
with dead roots make old trees vulnerable to damage from surface
fires and smoldering, ground fires. Determining root kill can be
difficult because there is limited visual evidence of injury to the tree.
Secondary Effects
Once trees have been severely injured from fire, it's usually only a
matter of time before they will die due to pine beetles, disease, and/or
drought-induced stresses. How rapidly this happens depends on the
severity of the fire damage, beetle population levels, number of
diseased trees in the area, and climatic conditions.
1
Ecological Restoration Institute

Review of Previous Recommendations in
Light of Recent Research
Burn When Trees are Dormant and Forests are Moist
The original ERI working paper recommended dormant season (late
fall) burning as the best way to protect large ponderosa pine trees
from prescribed burning, and this still holds true for the southwestern
United States. Burning during the dormant season, ideally with a
somewhat moist duff layer, significantly reduces the chances that fine
roots will be destroyed in this region (Sackett and others 1996, Hood
2010). In other areas of the Intermountain West, early spring burns,
again when duff moisture levels are relatively high, may be the best
option (Perrakis and Agee 2006, Hood and others 2010) for
prescribed burning near old ponderosa pines.
Use Fire Spread Types and Ignition Techniques that Result in
Low-intensity Fire
As reported in the earlier working paper, the low-intensity heat
created by backing fires, short-run strip fires, and spot ignitions create
conditions that help prevent old-tree mortality. That said,
Weatherspoon and his colleagues (1989) warn against using backing
fires or strip-head fires in downslope situations where those very
slow-burning fires can reside long enough to preheat the uphill side of
a tree causing the bark to ignite when the flames reach the tree.
Avoid Burning on Lava and Very Thin Soils
While little additional research has been done to confirm this
recommendation, which was based largely on ERI research at Mt.
Trumbull in northwestern Arizona (Fulé and others 2002, 2007; Waltz
and others 2003; also see study from Oregon by Swezy and Agee
1991), burning on thin lava-based soils and other very thin soils is still
not recommended because fires tend to have long residence times in
these substrates, which can kill fine tree roots and important soil
microfauna. 
Rake Fuels Away from Old Trees to Increase Their Survival Rate
Recent studies indicate that saving old trees by removing fuels from
their bases is more complicated than previously thought. Since the
earlier ERI working paper, there have been two controlled
experiments dedicated to exploring this issue and making
management recommendations (Fowler and others 2007, 2010; Hood
and others 2007, Hood 2010). While these studies were limited, the
results suggest the following:

Removing litter and duff from around old trees may not be
necessary, except in those cases where old trees have fire scars
and/or pitch seams, are located near old stumps, or are growing
in droughty microsites.

The decision to rake or not around old trees should be based on
management goals and objectives, tree species involved, current
level of bark beetle activity, amount of duff, and prescribed
burning conditions. While some small-scale studies show the
effectiveness of raking (Swezy and Agee 1991, Covington and
others 1997, Kolb and others 2001, Fule and others 2002), there
will likely be situations were manually removing litter and duff is
not worth the time and/or effort (Hood and others 2007).

Manually removing litter and duff from around old trees is
basically an individual tree-level operation. It could be employed
at the stand level but only if the necessary resources can be
found and deployed. 

If the decision is made to remove litter and duff, the material
should raked or blown at least 9 inches away from the base of
the tree, and removed 3 feet (or more, as necessary) if shallow,
exposed roots are present. Be careful not to create a berm of
raked material around the tree.

Leaving 2 to 3 inches of duff within a 9-inch radius around old
trees will not cause any harm, except to those trees with rotten
fire scars; pitch seams; large, nearby stumps; or those growing in
droughty microsites. For this group of old trees, completely
removing litter and duff from a larger radius will be necessary.

In a study of ponderosa pine and Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi)
stands in northern California, Hood and her colleagues (2007)
found that the average time for one person to rake one large, old
tree was 16 minutes. The depth of litter and duff near the tree
base and the number of shrubs in the removal area were key
factors in determining the amount of time involved. Other
anecdotal reports (Fulé pers. comm.) suggest that raking can be
done more quickly.

Using a commercial-size leaf blower is as effective as raking at
preventing cambial kill and bole char, although it may take
slightly longer because it requires a two-person crew, one to
loosen the litter and duff with a rake and the other to operate
the leaf blower.

Rake or leaf blow during the fall or winter when fine root
growth is minimal.

Allow at least 60 days, and preferably one growing season, after
raking or leaf blowing before attempting a prescribed burn. This
will give new fine roots time to develop in mineral soil.

While there is limited research to support the idea (although see
Weatherspoon and others 1989), it may be prudent to remove
litter and duff from old trees on slopes in drainages, ravines, and
canyons because prescribed burns, regardless of ignition type,
are likely to burn hotter and less predictably in these landscape
positions than in flatter, open topography.

Some thick-barked trees, notably giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron
giganteum) and western larch, appear extremely resistant to
smoldering, duff fires and probably do not require litter and duff
removal (Hood 2010).
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
Ecological Restoration Institute
2

Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
Ecological Restoration Institute
3
Manually Clear Out Live, Dead, and Downed Fuel from
Beneath the Canopy of Trees to be Protected
As in the earlier ERI working paper, researchers continue to
recommend removing all coarse, woody debris (and even large pine
cones, Hood 2010) from the vicinity of old trees because these woody
items can ignite and burn slowly and deeply into the duff layer
causing damage to fine roots. Masticating coarse woody debris is also
an option (Hood and others 2007), although it can be expensive
because the process involves equipment and equipment operators.
Burn Frequently to Maintain Healthy Forests
At the stand level and larger scales, prescribed burning, typically
preceded by mechanical thinning, may be the best way to remove
decades of accumulated litter and duff around old trees.
Unfortunately, it cannot be all done at once without damaging or
killing old trees. The best strategy is to introduce multiple prescribed
burns over the course of a decade or so. For example, Sackett and his
colleagues (1996) recommend starting with late fall burns that only
consume the litter layer and the upper level of the matted
fermentation layer of duff. After one or two of these burns, each
conducted four years apart, fuel loading will be reduced and burns
can be conducted in the spring or fall. Another possible option,
although largely untested, is mixing the litter and duff with a hoe or
other implement prior to burning, thereby 1) speeding up their
decomposition, 2) “training” the fine roots to grow into the mineral
soil, and 3) decreasing the time in between prescribed burns (Graham
and Jain 2007, Hood 2010). Such mixing requires 3 to 5 minutes of
work per tree (Hood 2010). The initial results of this single
experiment look promising in that no healthy, old trees died.
Monitoring
Whatever strategy is used to protect old trees from prescribed
burning, including taking no action, it should include a multi-year
monitoring protocol and a means to change to a new strategy if old
trees are dying. Old trees are too rare and valuable not to have such a
plan in place.
While there are few studies to indicate what might be a reasonable
level of old-tree mortality following restoration treatments (including
removing duff away from old trees), the results of those that do exist
(see Kolb and others 2001, Fulé and others 2005) suggest that
anything greater than 9 percent mortality is too high and should
cause managers to reconsider their restoration treatment approach.
Photo 1: Removing needle litter and duff from around and in between
this tight clump of ponderosa pine is probably a good idea if managers
want to save these trees. Also note that one of the trees has a pitch
seam (see arrow), which makes it vulnerable to prescribed burning.
Photo by Dave Egan
Photo 2: This nicely spaced clump of healthy ponderosa pines on
moderately deep soil has a relatively thin layer of needle litter and duff,
and may not need to be raked before prescribed burning.  Photo by
Dave Egan

Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning
4
Ecological Restoration Institute
References
Agee, J.K. 1973. Prescribed fire effects on physical and hydrologic
properties of mixed-conifer forest floor and soil. Contributed
report. Davis, CA: Water Resources Center, University of
California.
Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N.
Mast, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecosystem
health in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of
Forestry 95(4):23-29.
Fowler, J.F. and C. Hull Sieg. 2004. Postfire mortality of ponderosa
pine and Douglas-fire: A review of methods to predict tree death.
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station. RMRS GTR-132.
http://www.rmrs.nau.edu/publications/Fowler_Sieg_RMGTR132/
Fowler_Sieg_RMGTR132.pdf.
Fowler, J.F., C. Hull Sieg, L. Wadleigh, and S.M. Haase. 2007.
Effectiveness of litter removal in preventing mortality of yellow
barked ponderosa pine in northern Arizona. Joint Fire Science
Program Final Report # 04-2-1-112.
Fowler, J.F., C. Hull Sieg, and L.L. Wadleigh. 2010. Effectiveness of
litter removal to prevent cambial kill-caused mortality in
northern Arizona ponderosa pine. Forest Science 56(2)166-171.
Fulé P.Z., D.C. Laughlin, and W.W. Covington. 2005. Pine-oak forest
dynamics five years after ecological restoration treatments. Forest
Ecology and Management 218:129-145.
Fulé, P.Z., J.P. Roccaforte, and W.W. Covington. 2007. Post-treatment
tree mortality after forest ecological restoration, Arizona, United
States. Environmental Management 40:623-634.
Fulé, P.Z., G. Verkamp, A.E.M. Waltz, and W.W. Covington. 2002.
Burning under old-growth ponderosa pines on lava soils. Fire
Management Today 62:47-49.
Graham, R.T. and T.B. Jain. 2007. Stand and fuel treatments for
restoring old-growth ponderosa pine forests in the Interior West.
Joint Fire Science Program Final Report. Project 00-2-19.
Hood, S.M. 2010. Mitigating old tree mortality in long-unburned,
fire-dependent forests: A synthesis. USDA Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Research Station, General Technical Report. RMRS-
GTR-238. http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr238.pdf.
Hood, S.M., J. Reardon, S. Smith, and D. Cluck.  2007. Prescribed
burning to protect large diameter trees from wildfire: Can we do it
without killing the trees we're trying to save? Joint Fire Science
Program Final Report # 03-3-2-04.
Kaufmann, M.R., D. Binkley, P.Z. Fulé, M. Johnson, S.L. Stephens,
and T.W. Swetnam. 2007. Defining old growth for fire-adapted
forests of the western United States. Ecology and Society 12(2):15.
[online] URL:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/.
Kolanoski, K.M. 2002. Genetic variation of ponderosa pine in
northern Arizona: Implications for restoration. M.S. thesis,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Kolb, T.E., P.Z. Fule´, M.R. Wagner, and W.W. Covington. 2001. Six-
year changes in mortality and crown condition of old-growth
ponderosa pines in different ecological restoration treatments at
the G.A. Pearson Natural Area. Pages 61-66 in R.K. Vance, C.B.
Edminster, W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake, compilers,
Ponderosa pine ecosystems restoration and conservation: Steps
towards stewardship, conference proceedings. United States
Department of Agriculture Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-
22. Ogden, UT.
Minard, A. 2002. Protecting old trees from prescribed fire. Working
Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration No. 3.
Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute.
http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/HASH
017c.dir/doc.pdf.
National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry. 2008.
Beyond old growth. Older forests in a changing world: A synthesis
of findings from five regional workshops. Washington, D.C.:
National Council for Science and the Environment.
http://www.ncseonline.org/00/Batch/NCSSF/BOG/OldGrowth_fi
nal%203.10.08.pdf.
Perrakis, D.D.B. and J.K. Agee. 2006. Seasonal fire effects on mixed-
conifer forest structure and ponderosa pine resin properties.
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 36:238-254.
Ryan, K.C. and W.H. Frandsen. 1991.Basal injury from smoldering
fires in mature Pinus ponderosa Laws. International Journal of
Wildland Fire 1:107-118.
Sackett, S.S. and S.M. Haase. 1998. Two case histories for using
prescribed fire to restore ponderosa pine ecosystems in northern
Arizona. Pages 380-389 in T.L. Pruden and L.A. Brennan, eds.,
Fire in ecosystem management: Shifting the paradigm from
suppression to prescription. Proceedings of the 20th Tall Timbers
fire ecology conference. Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research
Station.
Sackett, S. S., S.M. Haase, and M.G. Harrington. 1996. Lessons
learned from fire use for restoring southwestern ponderosa pine
ecosystems. Pages 54-61 in W.W. Covington and P.K. Wagner,
eds. Conference on adaptive ecosystem restoration and
management: Restoration of Cordilleran conifer landscapes of
North America. General Technical Report RM-GTR-278. Fort
Collins, CO: USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and
Range Experiment Station.
SREP (Southern Rockies Ecosystem Project). 2000. The state of the
southern Rockies ecoregion. Nederland, CO: Southern Rockies
Ecosystem Project.
Swezy, D.M. and J.K. Agee. 1991. Prescribed fire effects on fine root
and tree mortality in old-growth ponderosa pine. Canadian
Journal of Forest Research 21:626-634.
Waltz, A.E.M., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, and M.M. Moore. 2003.
Diversity in ponderosa pine forest structure following ecological
restoration treatments. Forest Science 49:885-900.
Weatherspoon, C.P., G.A. Almond, and C.N. Skinner. 1989. Tree-
centered spot firing: A technique for prescribed burning beneath
standing trees. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 4(1):29-31.

Written by Dave Egan
Reviewed by Jim Fowler, Dr. Pete Fulé, Carolyn Hull Sieg, Dennis Lund, and Diane Vosick
Series Editor: Dave Egan
For more information about forest restoration, 
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/71109/250/02-11
Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-fire Forest Restoration
1:
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management
Practices
2:
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5:
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological
Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
22:   Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23:   Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests 
of Northern Arizona

Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
1ERI1100
