Smoke from prescribed burning—
      Issues on public forestlands of the Western United States
ERI — Issues in Forest Restoration
E c o l o g i c a l R e s t o r a t i o n I n s t i t u t e
This document is layed-out for double-sided printing 

The Ecological Restoration Institute
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is
a pioneer in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. These forests
have been significantly altered over the last century, with decreased
ecological and recreational values, near-elimination of natural
low-intensity fire regimes, and greatly increased risk of large-scale
fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other partners to
restore these forests to a more ecologically healthy condition and
trajectory—in the process helping to significantly reduce the threat
of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, animal, and plant
communities.
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
Box 15017, Flagstaff AZ 86011-5017
928.523.7182
www.eri.nau.edu
Author:  Joel VIers
Publication date:  February 2005
Please contact ERI for reproduction policies
All material copyright  
2005 ERI
•
©
Cover photo: A surface prescribed fire clears out forest litter and 
debris on an ERI Fort Valley research site, near 
Flagstaff Arizona. 

1
Smoke from prescribed burning—
 
Issues on public forestlands of the western United States
Introduction
Increasingly severe wildﬁ res have spurred many policymakers and foresters to strongly 
advocate expanded forest thinning. Thinning to reduce the number and density of over-
stocked trees lowers the speed and intensity of wildﬁ res and, in many forest types, con-
tributes to improved forest health.1 Thinning is often accomplished by cutting smaller or 
over-abundant trees followed by low-intensity prescribed burning (see cover photograph). 
Beneﬁ ts of prescribed burning have long been observed and known.2 This relatively gentle 
intentional burning removes high-ﬁ re-danger thinning debris and other accumulated fuels 
and promotes forest health by reducing competition, reinvigorating growth, and increasing 
resiliency and tolerance to disturbances. As the pace of thinning and prescribed burning on 
public forestlands accelerates, the effects of smoke and other consequences of prescribed 
burns will be more apparent, and will be more prominent public issues.
A wide range of human and ecosystem issues can be associated with prescribed burning. 
Forest ecosystem impacts can include effects on wildlife, riparian areas, soil productiv-
ity, erosion, timber growth, and more. Among human and societal issues are public health 
and safety, aesthetics, economics, recreation, and accountability. There is concern over 
prescribed ﬁ res escaping their management boundaries, and this risk raises fears of prop-
erty damage, particularly as a greater number of ﬁ res are set and more are set near urban 
areas and in the wildland-urban interface. Improved planning and careful management 
are decreasing the risk of runaway burns and minimizing smoke production. But smoke 
is inevitable, can be unpredictable, carries harmful particulate matter and aerosol chemical 
compounds, obscures vision, and is difﬁ cult to manage. Smoke often travels great distances 
and can affect communities far away some time after burning has ceased, or it can persist 
in an area for long periods. Weather conditions can aggravate effects, local inversions may 
hold smoke “pinned” to an area, and prevailing winds can concentrate smoke in particular 
locations. These issues must be approached with consideration of the many beneﬁ ts of for-
est restoration thinning and prescribed burning. 
Large wildfires threaten forests and humans alike. Thinning and controlled burning ca-
naddress many of the forest health and community safety concerns. However, the smoke 
generated during these burns can be a nuisance, a public health issue, and can have other 
consequences. As more acres are burned, the public will be faced with more smoke in the 
air. It is important to understand the importance of and the reasoning behind low-intensity 
burning, and the issues associated with it. Particularly in the west United States, public 
forestlands are overgrown and we are confronted with a choice between smaller amounts 
of smoke more often, or large amounts of smoke less frequently—each of these choices 
carries trade-offs and long-term consequences.

2
Public acceptability of prescribed burning will become a more critical issue in the future, 
and smoke, as the most tangible aspect, will be the focus. The following pages introduce 
some of the smoke issues which public lands managers, communities, and society will be 
obliged to consider in conducting burns. While reviewing these issues it is of course im-
portant not to lose sight of why thinning and burning are done and the beneﬁ ts.
The potential for lots of smoke
The vast number of acres recommended for thinning—variously estimated between 30 and 
200 million3—contain many hundreds of millions of trees, the great majority small-diame-
ter and stressed or unhealthy. These overstocked small trees crowd each other and compete 
for limited resources with larger, older, healthier trees. This situation is largely the result 
of over-grazing and forest management practices based on ﬁ re exclusion, compounded by 
past logging practices and, most recently, continued drought and insect outbreaks.4 Before 
almost a century’s worth of ﬁ re exclusion, natural low-intensity surface ﬁ res reduced the 
number of seedlings and cleared the forest ﬂ oor of accumulated debris. Ecologists now 
hope that removing a high percentage of these smaller trees will reduce the incidence of se-
vere ﬁ re and promote healthier forest ecosystems. Prescribed burning, designed to approxi-
mate surface-ﬁ re regimes, keeps fuel levels low and mimics natural ﬁ re processes. These 
actions, over large forested areas, will produce signiﬁ cant amounts of smoke. 
Many decades of fuels buildup means the smoke potential during fuels reduction work, 
even if the task is carried out over many years, is enormous. Initial thinning and burning 
greatly reduces fuel, but 
this effect is only tempo-
rary as new growth occurs 
and debris begins re-ac-
cumulating. Once the bulk 
of initial forest thinning is 
accomplished, some peri-
odic reintroduction of ﬁ re 
will be required in many 
areas to manage regrowth 
and debris. Smoke from 
this maintenance burning 
may be more constant and 
more frequent than we 
are used to, but removal of 
many small trees and accu-
mulated fuels and reintroduction of surface ﬁ re regimes will reduce large, intense ﬁ res. It is 
these ﬁ res that generate so much smoke and a higher proportion of pollutants (see photo-
graph, above, and compare with cover photo). Future smoke levels should be reduced, but 
it will be more common and may be generated and dispersed over more areas. In terms of 
smoke, the rationale for pursuing thinning can be summed up as “restoration projects that 
produce moderate amounts of smoke reduce the potential for large smoke-producing wild-
ﬁ res and will eventually lead to a maintenance cycle of lighter smoke-producing ﬁ res.”5
Trail Creek Fire, Atlanta, Idaho
Copyright © 2000-2005 Karen Wattenmaker

3
The Forest Service and other federal agencies burn signiﬁ cantly more than a million acres 
of public land a year, and this acreage is increasing. However, not only is natural forest 
regrowth outpacing thinning efforts, population growth is complicating the ability of land 
managers and local governments to conduct burns. Even at a relatively low burning rate, 
towns and cities have felt negative consequences, and increased thinning and accelerated 
burning will affect many more communities.
Historical perspective
After a century of ﬁ re exclusion, livestock grazing, and poor logging practices,6 many of the 
forests of the West are overgrown and in poor health. For insight into current forest condi-
tions, it is helpful to look brieﬂ y at ﬁ re history in the western United States. 
The majority of ﬁ res in the western states have always been caused by lightning, and ﬁ re 
regimes varied by strike occurrence, altitude and latitude, topography, fuel type, and other 
factors. While extensive areas were characterized by stand-replacing ﬁ re regimes, in much 
of the pine-dominated forests of the West the most common natural ﬁ re regime was low-
intensity surface ﬁ re. These ﬁ res occurred periodically and kept vegetation thinned and 
fuel levels low. Although evidence for landscape-scale effects is sparse, Native Americans 
used ﬁ re for a variety of purposes, among these land clearing, reinvigorating vegetation 
growth, warfare, pest management, and driving game.7 Between natural and human-caused 
ﬁ res, researchers believe that smoke was present a good deal of the time. While overall lev-
els may have been low, indications are that smoke was fairly common and well-dispersed 
over the landscape when Euro-American settlers arrived.8 Early settlers engaged in wide-
spread agricultural burning. Along with unintentional ignitions and other ﬁ re activities, 
they rapidly surpassed Native Americans as a source of ﬁ re on the landscape. 
As large-scale settlement of the West gained momentum, however, natural ﬁ res began 
interfering with property and livelihoods, leading to calls for ﬁ re suppression. As grazing 
removed much of the material that carried ﬁ re, as trees were cut down, and as Westerners 
continued changing the landscape—and began ﬁ ghting ﬁ res, the number of ﬁ res dropped. 
While there was brief support for letting natural ﬁ res burn, by the 1920s the Forest Service 
had a well-established policy of ﬁ re exclusion and aggressive suppression. After World War 
II there was a rededication to ﬁ re protection and suppression, motivated in part by widely 
available war-surplus equipment, new technology, a recharged labor pool, and heightened 
public awareness and concern.9 Over the next decades it was widely assumed and accepted 
that ﬁ re was bad and had to be extinguished as quickly as possible. The still-evolving shift 
in attitude toward ﬁ re as a desired natural component of forest health is fairly recent. 
Prescribed burning is now a widely recognized and used ﬁ re and forest health manage-
ment tool. However, some public resistance to the use of ﬁ re certainly remains. Its use is 
complex, affected by questions of where and when to burn, how much, sensitive areas and 
populations, and other factors.
  
The amount of smoke which will be produced by increased prescribed 
burning will be signiﬁ cant—and a signiﬁ cant public policy issue for  which 
there should be intensiﬁ ed research, public education, and planning. 

4
Smoke issues in prescribed burning
Public concerns about prescribed burning have been directed toward:10
 
•  risk factors (public safety and adjacent property damage),
 
•  aesthetic concerns (scenic quality and recreation use),
 
•  health issues (smoke and air quality),
 
•  ecological effects (wildlife, vegetation, and water quality), and
 
•  economic consequences (loss of timber, tourism, property and material damage).
Some of these might be considered more general “nuisance” issues, while others are haz-
ards and can potentially affect large numbers of people or cause considerable damage. 
Risk factors
The smoke produced by prescribed burning is a public safety issue for a variety of reasons. 
Smoke reduces visibility (an issue of particular relevance on busy roadways) and increases 
the number of calls to health and law-enforcement agencies. Smoke incidents can require 
additional public safety and health staff or more personnel time to monitor conditions, 
coordinate trafﬁ c, answer citizen questions, and attend to accidents and transport any 
victims. In some cases sensitive people have to be temporarily moved to other locations. 
Researchers have documented increases in accidents (and in lawsuits) due to impaired 
visibility during prescribed ﬁ re events.11 Smoke-related accidents usually occur at night 
or dawn, as daily cycli-
cal weather patterns drive 
smoke lower and across 
roadways. The extra work 
and stress can be a hazard 
both to the public and to 
public safety staff. Other 
weather conditions, most 
common at night or under 
conditions of high humid-
ity, can cause water vapor 
and smoke particulates to 
create thick fog. Particu-
late matter in smoke can 
scatter headlight beams. 
Similarly, reduced above-
ground visibility from rising 
Instrument ﬂ ying conditions near a prescribed ﬁ re
USDA Forest Service Archives, USDA Forest Service, www.forestryimages.org
Historically, it appears that low levels of smoke were relatively pervasive  
and constant over many parts of the West, and certainly in much greater  
quantities and extent than seen today. Accelerated burning will likely raise 
levels again such that smoke will often be visible over more communities 
and areas.

5
or accumulated smoke can impede aircraft movement (see photograph, facing page), with 
economic consequences as well as obvious public safety worries. Reduced visibility may 
lead to temporary airport closures or rerouting of aircraft. 
Aesthetic consequences and concerns
Aesthetic issues are important, as public tolerance can vary widely, change rapidly, and can 
have political ramiﬁ cations. Smoke and haze can obscure the scenic character of an area, di-
minishing a place’s value to residents. Besides potential degradation in visibility and scenic 
assets—and disregarding for the moment any potential health effects—residents may worry 
about impacts on property values (on the other hand, some residents may see this protec-
tion of property as a real beneﬁ t, an asset in safeguarding their investment or even raising 
property values), effects on tourism, and quality-of-life issues. For instance, residents may 
have to endure, perhaps for several weeks or longer, the unpleasant smell of smoke. Falling 
and accumulated ash may mar views, and scenic streams may suffer contamination. And 
while planners can leave belts or screens of vegetation to shield burn areas from view, the 
results of ﬁ re on the landscape may be temporarily visible and unattractive. All these ele-
ments can contribute to a lessening of personal or community-perceived place-value, and 
public concerns could pressure land managers to slow or curtail burning.
The areas most in need of thinning are the national forests of the West, and these scenic 
forestlands are precisely the reason many people move to the region. Populations in many 
of these areas are growing rapidly, bringing people drawn by a particular image of the 
forested West. These new arrivals often do not understand ﬁ re danger and the need for 
thinning, and could be less accepting of the role of burning and the smoke generated. The 
amount of smoke that will be produced is uncertain but signiﬁ cant. Perhaps the only cer-
tainty is uncertainty about how western residents will adapt to higher and more frequent 
and persistent levels of smoke over the next decade.
The effects of thinning and burning on forest health and visual structure take time to be 
evident. Some residents will always prefer, or see as natural, existing forest conditions 
(“achieving natural, healthy forest systems is complicated by a range of perceptions of what 
`natural’ forests might be”).12 Some residents may not see value in the effects of prescribed 
burning, or will not feel the trade-offs are worth the increased smoke, possible hazards, and 
alteration of personal concepts of “natural” forest. Prescribed ﬁ res may in fact be viewed by 
some as an attack on a cherished image of a valued resource.
Risk to life and property are critical considerations when planning burns, 
and the perception of risk must be addressed so that the public is comfort-
able with and understand thinning. 

6
Health risks
For most communities, health risks are the most pressing smoke issue, and one that can af-
fect a large number of people. Both direct and indirect health problems are associated with 
any ﬁ re. The direct health risks from smoke are well-known, while the indirect or cumula-
tive effects are not as well understood.13 Effects are generally more pronounced in the very 
young, the elderly, and those already suffering respiratory difﬁ culties. Very active people 
can also be more adversely affected.
The danger in smoke arises from the vaporization of the chemical constituents of woody 
fuel as it undergoes combustion. The burning of typical forest materials produces a large 
number of chemical products—several hundred identiﬁ ed substances are “formed, liber-
ated, or modiﬁ ed.”14 Particulates, smoke-borne particles of various sizes, are the greatest 
hazard. Wildﬁ res can produce huge volumes of particulate matter, while intentional burns 
as a rule produce much smaller amounts. At larger sizes particulate matter may cause 
bronchial and lung irritation and respiratory illness; at smaller sizes inhaled particles can 
lead to lung cancer or emphysema. Exposure can aggravate existing respiratory conditions 
such as asthma, and can irritate eyes and mucus membranes. Chemical aerosols produced 
by burning are of less concern, as their volume compared to that of particulates is relatively 
small. Toxic carbon monoxide is produced as well, but dilution and dispersal takes place 
rapidly; volatile organic compounds (including carcinogens) are generally produced in 
small enough amounts to be of lesser concern.15 Primary and secondary smoke combustion 
products vary depending on vegetation composition and mix, volume, and moisture levels.
The types of smoke compounds created depend to a large extent on the intensity of com-
bustion; brief but intensely smoky burns may have different exposure effects than a long-
smoldering ﬁ re.16 Wildﬁ res, often simply because of their size, propel large quantities and 
a wider range of particulates and other pollutants into the air, and their intense heat can 
modify and even create new chemical compounds. Because of lower temperatures and rela-
tive differences in ﬁ re severity, prescribed burns produce less smoke than wildﬁ re, fewer 
pollutants, and fewer potentially hazardous chemicals.17 It is believed that personnel who 
set and monitor intentional burns are subject to comparatively less intense smoke reactions 
than during wildﬁ re events.18 The usually relatively mild burn of prescribed events, then, 
lowers the risk per incident or per unit of time compared to wildﬁ re.
While repeated occupational exposure to relatively short-term severe smoke, such as that 
experienced by ﬁ reﬁ ghters, is being studied, less is known about infrequent exposure to 
short-term acute events, such as might be experienced by residents near a large ﬁ re. Simi-
larly, research is lacking into the long-term effects on people exposed to more frequent 
but lesser volumes of smoke. The amount and duration of smoke exposure and a person’s 
Visible smoke and visibility impairment—the most obvious consequences 
of prescribed burning—will be key issues in public education and accep-
tance, and in burn planning.

7
health are principal determinants of risk. While ﬁ reﬁ ghters may be in admirable physi-
cal condition, they obviously have a high chance of exposure. The 1988 Yellowstone ﬁ res 
brought attention to the issue, as thousands of ﬁ reﬁ ghters experienced respiratory prob-
lems.19 These ﬁ res brought about more active investigation into ﬁ reline health risks. Still, 
research into the dangers that smoke poses to ﬁ re personnel is relatively recent and still 
limited. A 2000 report on 
western ﬁ res did conclude 
that smoke exposure was 
a relatively insigniﬁ cant 
health hazard. While expo-
sure (which varies widely 
depending on the nature 
of the ﬁ re and by job activ-
ity) could be severe, these 
periods were usually short 
and overall effects negligi-
ble. The authors note that 
the only well-documented 
smoke hazards to ﬁ reﬁ ght-
ers are respiratory irritants 
and carbon monoxide. As 
a consequence many person-
nel now head to the ﬁ re line 
equipped with exposure monitoring devices.20 Protective equipment is widely available, and 
there is continued research and development in this area. Improved planning and burning 
strategies will also help lower risks to ﬁ reﬁ ghters and to communities.
Ecological effects
The ecological effects of prescribed burning are complex. From an ecological perspective, 
forest ecosystems are rarely destroyed by ﬁ re—in fact, many components require ﬁ re for 
periodic renewal and rejuvenation. While severe ﬁ res can be lethal (“stand-replacing”) to 
many plants, low-intensity surface ﬁ res more uniformly increase plant vigor, generate and 
promote recycling of nutrients (such as nitrogen), and increase biodiversity and productiv-
ity.21 Alongside a reduction in severe ﬁ re risk, prescribed burning is conducted precisely to 
increase forest health and vigor. Fire is accompanied by smoke, and smoke is an important 
component of the natural forest ecosystem. 
Ecological effects of ﬁ re and smoke can either be at a small scale—changes in soil grain 
porosity—or large scale, such as theorized effects on climate.22 More of the direct ecological 
effects on ﬂ ora and fauna are associated with ﬁ re (not addressed here) rather than smoke. 
Setting a prescribed ﬁ re line with a drip torch
James H. Miller, USDA Forest Service, www.forestryimages.org
The direct and indirect human health effects will become more and more 
of a concern as increased burning is undertaken and long-term impacts 
become better known and understood. 

8
While they can be locally severe, the negative effects of smoke on the forest ecosystem are 
probably negligible overall. Moreover, some plant species are dependent on smoke for 
germination.23 There is some evidence that smoke may function as a plant pest biocide, and 
smoke and smoke residues can act as plant fertilizer.24 Even though smoke and convection 
can carry large amounts of particulate matter, the overall ecosystem nutrient balance may 
be maintained somewhat by this material then falling on other parts of the forest. Smoke 
may temporarily drive some wildlife away, and some individuals are known to have been 
asphyxiated by heavy smoke concentrations they could not escape,25 but the effects are 
generally temporary. Many animals are attracted to smoke, ﬁ re, and recently burned areas, 
and some use burned areas exclusively or require some aspect of these sites or of ﬁ re. The 
overall effects of ﬁ re and smoke on most ﬂ oral and faunal populations in fact appears to be 
positive.26
Prescribed ﬁ re is designed to replicate as closely as possible natural low-intensity surface 
ﬁ re. Ecosystems in which these types of ﬁ res historically occurred evolved hand-in-hand 
with these ﬁ res. Flora and fauna adapted, and this ﬁ re regime was an important compo-
nent of ecosystem structure and function. The ecological effects of prescribed ﬁ re are 
numerous, complex, and varied. But these effects are in most cases comparable to natural 
low-intensity surface ﬁ re and much less than intense wildﬁ re.27 There is almost universal 
agreement that forest ecosystems will be better off, but certainly there will be challenges as 
prescribed burning becomes more common and frequent. 
Economic impacts
The economic ramiﬁ cations of prescribed ﬁ re can be either direct or indirect, and may not 
all be negative. Setting aside the risk of ﬁ res escaping their planning bounds (a compli-
cated issue for another time), smoke has a broad range of possible economic consequences. 
Smoke and smoke compounds can damage buildings, surfaces, and materials, requiring 
cleanup and repair. There can be public safety costs and short- and long-term public and 
private healthcare costs. The public safety costs associated with ﬁ re management have 
already been mentioned, and there are individual and societal costs related to accidents, 
missed work days, travel and commercial trafﬁ c delays, activity or event postponements, 
and loss in tourism revenue or other sales (and declines in tax receipts).28 On the other 
hand, local merchants may beneﬁ t from the sale of respiratory medications, emergency 
preparedness supplies, ﬁ reline supplies and services, and other items. 
However, these various costs must be compared to the very large local, state, and federal 
outlays in the event of a severe ﬁ re. As one example, the 2002 Hayman Fire in Colorado 
cost an estimated $39,100,000 to suppress, more than $20,000,000 in post-ﬁ re rehabilita-
tion, and large losses in property values and economic activity—a rough total cost and lost-
opportunity estimate of $1 billion is not too difﬁ cult to arrive at nor believe. While quan-
tifying these costs is complicated, it is being done more frequently and comprehensively.29 
Add in intrinsic and other more intangible values of healthier forest ecosystems and the 
issue of costs versus beneﬁ ts becomes much less of a trade-off. 
There are a wide range of potential ecological impacts from prescribed 
burning and smoke, and many of the large-scale effects are not known. 

9
Public perception and behavior
Many people move to the West for sunny days, rich vistas, and proximity to open or green 
spaces—particularly forests. Their desires for a perhaps mythic western lifestyle can collide 
with the realities of thinning needs and pressures, pressures that will lead to at least a short-
term degradation of aesthetic and perhaps other values. Population growth and inﬂ ux of 
new residents make the problem more visible and contentious. Retirement populations, of-
ten with more sensitive health problems, are growing, as are more-mobile populations able 
to work from home. People are pushing father and farther into ﬁ re-prone areas, and many 
newcomers have no experience with forest ﬁ res. New residents often come from areas not 
subject to ﬁ re, so they may be unfamiliar with ﬁ re, its effects, and prescribed burning.
If the public can agree that forests are in need of thinning, then land management agen-
cies have a responsibility to educate citizens on exactly what is involved.30 Wider and more 
effective public education is a signiﬁ cant challenge to ﬁ re management, and efforts have 
had mixed success. But an informed public is an important ﬁ rst step. The community must 
also accept the concept and then the operational details of thinning and burning—“citizen 
support is an essential component of effective ﬁ re management programs.”31 Public reac-
tions to smoke can differ substantially as “public tolerance to smoke is highly subjective 
and can vary widely depending on location.”32 Opinions may differ by observer location, 
weather patterns or cycles, length of smoke periods, and other factors such as an individu-
al’s relative health level at a particular time.33
Awareness and understanding of the factors that shape public perception and the expres-
sion of policy is crucial. Keeping some balance between prescribed burning and what can 
be perceived as its negative consequences will be a challenge for land management agencies 
and communities. Compromises in some form will be necessary along the way, and educa-
tion will be an ongoing process. 
Prescribed burn and smoke management
Prescribed burn and smoke management has become—some notable and very visible 
exceptions notwithstanding—very good. Yet there is some hesitation on the part of land 
managers to pursue aggressive burning strategies because of the fear of property damage 
and litigation. The issue of liability is being more commonly explored. Some states in the 
South have adopted legislation to reduce liability by creating a certiﬁ cation process involv-
Economic ramiﬁ cations of increased burning and smoke could perhaps be
considered neutral. While there are minor opportunities for local economic 
development, there will be costs to local government that will not be re-
couped, and additional societal costs which will be difﬁ cult to quantify.
Providing good information and full and timely notice to the public will 
increase understanding of the process and the rationale, and build trust. 
Public understanding and acceptance of thinning and prescribed burning 
will be a key to continued and increased progress. Education efforts must 
be backed with sufﬁ cient funds and social  and political will. 

10
ing training and an examination. In Florida, for instance, once burn managers are state-cer-
tiﬁ ed, they are not held liable for runaway events if all plan steps and protocols were fol-
lowed.34 Nevertheless, with an increase in burning, not just in acreage but in frequency and 
in more areas, there could well be legal actions and political repercussions if burns destroy 
property. Burn managers also face ambiguity in regulatory standards, sometimes-conﬂ ict-
ing restrictions or more stringent regulations, and volatile public opinion. Smoke issues are 
particularly challenging to the manager because the beneﬁ ts of burning are long-term, not 
guaranteed, may not be visible, and are fairly intangible unless wildﬁ re occurs. That is, the 
public may not see positive beneﬁ ts for many years or unless a wildﬁ re occurs.
Two of the principal aims in comprehensive prescribed burn management are to contain 
the ﬁ re within prescribed bounds and to minimize smoke production. Many states have 
Smoke Management Programs to authorize and manage prescribed ﬁ res, and all burns 
must conform to the federal Clean Air Act (individual state programs can be more strin-
gent but not less). While conducting burns, agencies are required to adhere to air quality 
regulations and may be required to obtain state approval. Season, weather, topography, 
resources, and other factors also play large roles in determining burn areas, extent, and tim-
ing. There are techniques to reduce smoke during burning (e.g., favorable wind conditions, 
clearing around stumps and remove larger logs to avoid smoldering), and ways to reduce 
exposure, but it may not be possible to implement these in all cases. This is particularly 
true as burning increases in volume and extent (there is already a backlog of work in most 
areas of the West). 
Agency decisions, funding constraints, and personnel short-falls can alter burn plans, or 
delay a burn to a non-optimal time. The complications of cross-boundary management 
can be an obstacle to quick implementation and the best use of limited resources, with 
attendant ecological consequences caused, for instance, by delays or inadequate planning. 
Federal coordination of forest management actions is mandated but still challenging, and 
cross-boundary management may be one of the most important considerations for mini-
mizing harm to the ecosystem and maximizing positive results. The Clean Air Act and 
land-use designations (e.g., Wilderness) may govern or limit burn activity. Depending on 
circumstances, other federal and state regulations or land management agency rules may 
come into play as well. Since each situation is unique, tackling conﬂ icts between wider land 
management policy and smoke management may be best done on a case-by-case basis.
Smoke management concerns should be reduced, over time, due to the shorter duration 
and lower volumes of smoke generated with less available forest fuel and less intense ﬁ res. 
Fewer and healthier trees, as a result of thinning, will become more ﬁ re resistant, and 
understory vegetation and grasses will become established. With these lowered fuel levels, 
the acceptable ambient conditions and window for burning is broader too than for initial 
burns, with warmer, drier, windier situations being advantageous to burn conduction and 
smoke dispersion. As fuel levels drop, and as managers gain more experience, work could 
be spread over longer periods.

11
Work continues in reﬁ ning weather prediction models and models to predict emissions and 
smoke movement.35 More sophisticated models and techniques, and experience, will make 
burning more predictable and efﬁ cient, but the size of the task and the shortage of resourc-
es will hinder large-scale progress into at least the near future.
Discussion
Ecologists and foresters agree that western forests are in poor health and need thinning both 
to improve ecosystem health and to reduce the extreme nature and number of wildﬁ res. Fu-
els accumulation over the last century and tree die-back from drought and insect-kill has put 
many forests in an unsafe and unstable state. This condition endangers both communities 
and forests. One way to tackle the problem is appropriate forest thinning and low-intensity 
burning.
 
Because the health and functional stability of many western forest ecosystems was in the 
past keyed to low-intensity frequent ﬁ re, the importance of proper ﬁ re reintroduction 
is clear. The alternatives are prescribed burning, natural ﬁ re, or some combination. It is 
quite unlikely that natural ﬁ re regimes will have a signiﬁ cant role in the foreseeable future. 
Because of population growth into forested areas and long-standing societal feelings and 
values attached to forests and to ﬁ re, there is little chance of wide adoption of natural ﬁ re 
use across the landscape as a whole. Suppression will still be the most common response to 
the majority of ﬁ res, at least anywhere near human settlement. While burn managers will 
allow—or may even strive for—some combination of natural-use and intentional burns, 
prescribed burning represents the best opportunity to reintroduce the controlled and ben-
eﬁ cial effects of surface ﬁ re. 
Because of the quantity of slash and debris produced, fuels reduction and restoration thin-
ning have the potential to produce large amounts of smoke. Prescribed ﬁ re and smoke will 
always have some effects on human, plant, and animal populations. However, the overall 
effects will be substantially less than those caused by large wildﬁ res and healthier forest 
ecosystems will result. While the focus here has been on issues in terms of negative im-
pacts, the underlying message is that thinning and prescribed burning offer positive ap-
proaches toward a range of problems.
 
 
 
 
 
 
The intent of this short issue review is to introduce low-intensity ﬁ re smoke consider-
ations. Additional research is needed in many areas, such as pubic perception and long-
term health effects. In terms of forest health and community protection, planning, imple-
mentation, and progress will be easier and more effective if challenges and opportunities 
are anticipated and addressed as early as possible. Continued extreme ﬁ re risk—and ﬁ res—
Rx burn management is quite good and becoming better—it will have to 
be up to the challenge of the enormous thinning need. 

12
and declining forest health will confront society with a choice: relatively infrequent, large, 
severe, unpredictable ﬁ res, or, more frequent but smaller, less intense, and more predict-
able ones. This is a complex choice that will take time to evolve. 
Aggressive but careful thinning accompanied by careful prescribed burn-
ing will over time lower the risk of extreme wildﬁ re and will increase forest 
ecosystem health. However, there are an important range of issues to con-
sider to yield the best and most publically-acceptable results. 

13
Endnotes
1. 
See, for instance, Omi and Martinson 2002.
2. 
Fernandes and Botelho 2003, Blank 2001, Sackett, Haase, and Harrington 1996,  
 
Weaver 1957. 
3. 
For example, Bosworth 2003; Vissage 2003; McCarthy 2002; USDA 2000; GAO 
 
1999.
4. 
Dahms and Geils 1997.
5. 
Barkmann 2003.
6. 
Fire exclusion - see Arno and Allison-Bunnell 2003; livestock grazing - Belsky and 
 
Blumenthal 1997 and Weaver 1964; and logging practices - Noss, LaRoe, and Scott 
 
1997.
7. 
Allen 2002, p160–166, p180; Alcoze 2003; Cooper 1960. 
8. 
“Early visitors to the Southwest apparently took for granted the frequency of 
 
surface ﬁ res in the pine forest” (Cooper 1960, p137).
9. 
See Stephen Pyne (1995, p183) for a brief history and discussion of US ﬁ re policy.
10. 
List adapted from Blue Mountains Natural Resources Institute 1997.
11. 
Mobley (1989) compiled accident reports for the period 1979 to 1988, noting 28 
 
fatalities, 60 serious and many minor injuries, and millions of dollars in lawsuits; 
 
Achtemier and colleagues (1998) estimate over 150 smoke-related incidents 
 
annually for the southern United States.
12. 
Shindler 2002, p143.
13. 
Barkmann 2003.
14. 
Sandberg and Dost 1990, p201.
15. 
Sandberg and Dost 1990, p192.
16. 
Reinhardt and Ottmar 2000.
17. 
For instance, production of smoke particles of 10 microns (PM10) is roughly twice 
 
as high for wildﬁ res; Huff et al. 1995, p10, and see p26.
18. 
Reinhardt, Ottmar, and Hanneman 2000.
19. 
McMahon 1999.

14
20. 
Reinhardt and Ottmar 2000.
21. 
Dahms and Geils 1997; MacCleery 1995; Hardy and Arno 1996. 
22. 
See, for instance, Levine 1996 and Crutzen and Goldammer 1993.
23. 
Keeley and Fotheringham 1997.
24. 
For instance see selections in Walstad, Radosevich, and Sandberg 1990.
25. 
Smith 2000.
26. 
See Smith 2000 for a complete discussion of ﬁ re effects on fauna, and Cunningham 
 
et al. 2001 for a case study of one extreme ﬁ re event. 
27. 
McNabb and Cromack 1990; McMahon and deCalesta 1990.
28. 
For examples of the range of impacts and valuation see Morton et al. 2003, Kent et 
 
al. 2003, and Hesseln, Loomis, and González-Cabán 2003. 
29. 
Kent et al. 2003.
30. 
Barkmann 2003.
31. 
Shindler 2002, p139.
32. 
Barkmann 2003, p381. 
33. 
Shindler and Toman 2003.
34. 
Brenner and Wade 2003.
35. 
Such as PD-Piedmont (Achtemeier 1994).

15
References
Achtemeier, Gary, William Jackson, Bernie Hawkins, Dale Wade, and Charles McMahon. 
 
1998. The smoke dilemma: a head-on collision! Pp. 415–421 in Transactions of the  
 
63rd North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference, March 20–25, 
 
1998; Orlando, Florida. Washington, D.C.: Wildlife Management Institute. 
 
 
 
 
Achtemeier, Gary. 1994. A computer wind model for predicting smoke movement. 
 
Southern Journal of Applied Forestry 18:  60–64.
Alcoze, Thom. 2003. First peoples in the pines: Historical ecology of humans and 
 
ponderosa. Pp. 48–57 in Peter Friederici (ed.) Ecological Restoration of 
 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests: A Sourcebook for Research and Application. 
 
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Allen, Craig. 2002. Lots of lightning and plenty of people: an ecological history of ﬁ re in the 
 
upland southwest. Pp. 143–193 in Thomas Vale (ed.) Fire, Native Peoples, and the 
 
Natural Landscape. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Arno, Stephen, and Steven Allison-Bunnell. 2003. Managing ﬁ re-prone forests: roots of our 
 
dilemma. Fire Management Today 63(2).
Barkmann, Gretchen. 2003. Air quality and smoke management. Pp. 371–386 in Peter 
 
Friederici (ed.) Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
 
Washington D.C.: Island Press.
Belsky, Joy, and Dana Blumenthal. 1997. Effects of livestock grazing on stand dynamics and 
 
soils in upland forests of the interior west. Conservation Biology 11(2): 315-327.
 
Blank, Robert. 2001. Prescribed burning as a tool for restoration. Resource Notes 56. 
 
Bureau of Land Management, National Science and Technology Center. Accessed 
 
December 10, 2003 at the BLM Web site at 
 
www.blm.gov/nstc/resourcenotes/respdf/RN56.pdf.
Blue Mountains Natural Resources Institute. 1997. Public perspectives on prescribed ﬁ re 
 
and mechanical thinning. Tech Notes BMNRI-TN-9. Portland, Oregon: USDA 
 
Forest Service, Paciﬁ c Northwest Research Station, Blue Mountains Natural 
 
Resource Institute.
Bozworth, Dale. 2003. Fires and forest health: Our future is at stake. Fire Management 
 
Today 63(2): 4–11.
Brenner, Jim, and Dale Wade. 2003. Florida’s revised prescribed ﬁ re law: protection for 
 
responsible burners. Pp. 132–136 in Krista Galley, Robert Klinger, and Neil 
 
Sugihara (eds.), Proceedings of Fire Conference 2000: The First National Congress 
 
on Fire Ecology, Prevention, and Management, Miscellaneous Publication No. 13. 
 
Tallahassee, Florida: Tall Timbers Research Station. 

16
Cooper, Charles. 1960. Change in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwestern pine 
 
forests since white settlement. Ecological Monographs 30: 129–164.
Crutzen, Paul, and Johann Goldammer. 1993. Fire in the environment: the ecological, 
 
atmospheric, and climactic importance of vegetation ﬁ res. Report of the Dahlem 
 
Workshop, Berlin, March 15–20, 1992. New York: Wiley. 
Cunningham, Stanley, Lindsey Monroe, LariBeth Kirkendall, and Cindy Ticer. 2001. 
 
Effects of the catastrophic Lone Fire on low, medium, and high mobility wildlife 
 
species. Technical Guidance Bulletin No. 5. Phoenix, Arizona: Arizona Game and 
 
Fish Department, Research Branch.
Dahms, Cathy, and Brian Geils. 1997. An assessment of forest ecosystem health in the 
 
Southwest. General Technical Report RM-GTR-295. Fort Collins, Colorado: 
 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
Fernandes, Paulo, and Hermínio Botelho. 2003. A review of prescribed burning 
 
effectiveness in ﬁ re hazard reduction. International Journal of Wildland Fire 12: 
 
117–128.
GAO. 2000. Fire Management: Lessons learned from the Cerro Grande (Los Alamos) ﬁ re. 
 
Statement prepared for the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, U.S. 
 
Senate. GAO/T-RCED-00-257. Washington, D.C.: General Accounting Ofﬁ ce.
GAO. 1999. Western National Forests, a cohesive strategy is needed to address catastrophic 
 
wildﬁ re threats. Report to the Subcommittee on Forests and Forest Health, 
 
Committee on Resources, House of Representatives. GAO/RCED-99-65. 
 
Washington, D.C.: General Accounting Ofﬁ ce.
Hardy, Colin, and Stephen Arno (eds.). 1996. The use of ﬁ re in forest restoration. General 
 
Technical Report INT-GTR-341. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service, 
 
Intermountain Research Station.
Hesseln, Hayley, John Loomis, and Armando González-Cabán. 2003. The effects of ﬁ re on 
 
hiking demand: a travel cost study of Colorado and Montana. Proceedings, 
 
RMRS- P-29. Fort Collins, Colorado: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
 
Research Station.
Huff, Mark, Roger Ottmar, Ernesto Alvarado, Robert Vihnanek, John Lehmkuhl, Paul 
 
Hessburg, and Richard Everett. 1995. Historical and current forest landscapes in 
 
eastern Oregon and Washington—Part II: linking vegetation characteristics to 
 
potential ﬁ re behavior and related smoke production. General Technical Report 
 
PNW-GTR-355. Portland, Oregon: USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁ c Northwest 
 
Research Station. 
Ice, George, Daniel Neary, and Paul Adams. 2004. Effects of wildﬁ re on soils and watershed 
 
processes. Journal of Forestry 102(6): 16–20.

17
Keeley, Jon, and C. J. Fotheringham. 1997. Trace gas emissions and smoke induced seed 
 
germination. Science 276(5316): 1248–1250.
Kent, Brian, Krista Gebert, Sarah McCaffrey, Wade Martin, David Calkin, Ervin Schuster,  
 
Ingrid Martin, Holly Bender, Greg Alward, Yoshitaka Kumagai, Patricia Cohn, Matt 
 
Carroll, Dan Williams, and Carol Ekarius. 2003. Social and economic issues of the 
 
Hayman Fire. Pp. 315–396 in Russell Graham (technical ed.), Hayman Fire Case 
 
Study, General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-114. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest 
 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Levine, Joel. (ed.). 1996. Biomass Burning and Global Change, Volumes 1 and 2. 
 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Loomis, John, Lucas Bair, and Armando González-Cabán. 2001. Prescribed ﬁ re and public 
 
support: knowledge gained, attitudes changed in Florida. Journal of Forestry 9(11): 
 
18–22.
Macadam, Anne. 1989. Effects of prescribed ﬁ re on forest soils. British Columbia Ministry  
 
of  Forests, Research Report 89001-PR; Victoria, British Columbia.
McCarthy, Laura. 2002. Deﬁ ning the debate: agreement about hazardous fuel reduction 
 
treatment is elusive. Forest Trust Quarterly Report, November 2002.
McMahon, Charles. 1999. Forest ﬁ res and smoke—impacts on air quality and human 
 
health in the USA. Pp. 443–453 in Proceedings, TAPPI International 
 
Environmental Conference, Nashville, Tennessee, April 18–21, 1999. Nashville, 
 
Tennessee: TAPPI.
McMahon, Thomas, and David deCalesta. 1990. Effects of ﬁ re on ﬁ sh and wildlife. Pp. 
 
233–250 in Natural and Prescribed Fire in Paciﬁ c Northwest Forests, John Walstad, 
 
Steven Radosevich, and David Sandberg (eds.). Corvallis, Oregon: Oregon 
 
State University Press. 
McNabb, David and Kermit Cromack. 1990. Effects of prescribed ﬁ re on nutrients and 
 
soil productivity. Pp. 125–142 in Natural and Prescribed Fire on Paciﬁ c Northwest 
 
Forests. John Walstad, Steven Radosevich, and David Sandberg (eds.). Corvallis, 
 
Oregon: Oregon State University Press.
MacCleery, Douglas. 1995. The way to a healthy future for National Forest ecosystems 
 
in the West: what role can silviculture and prescribed ﬁ re play? Pp. 37–45 in 
 
Forest health through silviculture, proceedings of the 1995 National Silviculture 
 
Workshop; 1995 May 8–11, Mescalero, New Mexico. General Technical Report 
 
RM-GTR-267. Fort Collins, Colorado: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
 
Forest and Range Experiment Station.
Mobley, Hugh. 1989. Summary of smoke-related accidents in the South from prescribed 
 
ﬁ re (1979–1988). Technical Release 90-R-1 1, American Pulpwood Association. 

18
Morton, Douglas, Megan Roessing, Ann Camp, and Mary Tyrrell. 2003. Assessing the 
 
environmental, social, and economic impacts of wildﬁ re. GISF Research Paper 001, 
 
Forest Health Initiative. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University, School of 
 
Forestry and Environmental Studies, Global Institute of Sustainable Forestry. 
Neary, David, Steven Overby, Gerald Gottfried, and Hazel Perry. 1996. Nutrients in 
 
ﬁ re-dominated ecosystems. Pp. 107–1117 in Peter Ffolliott, Leonard DeBano, 
 
Malchus Baker, Jr., Gerald Gottfried, Gilberto Solis-Garza, Carleton Edminster, 
 
Daniel Neary, Larry Allen, R. Hamre (technical coordinators). Effects of ﬁ re on 
 
Madrean Province ecosystems—A symposium proceedings, March 11-15, 1996. 
 
Tucson, Arizona. General Technical Report RM-GTR-289. Fort Collins, Colorado: 
 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Noss, Reed, Edward LaRoe III, J. Michael Scott. 1997. Endangered ecosystems of the 
 
United States: A preliminary assessment of loss and degradation. Technical 
 
Report BSR 9501. Washington, D.C.: United States Geological Service, Biological 
 
Resources Division.
Omi, Philip, and Erik Martinson. 2002. Final report: Effect of fuels treatment on wildﬁ re 
 
severity. Fort Collins, Colorado: Western Fire Research Center, Colorado State 
 
University. 
Pyne, Stephen. 1995. World Fire. New York: Henry Holt.
Reinhardt, Timothy and Roger Ottmar. 2000. Smoke exposure at Western wildﬁ res. 
 
General Technical Report PNW-RP-525. Seattle, Washington: USDA Forest 
 
Service, Paciﬁ c Northwest Research Station.
Reinhardt, Timothy, Roger Ottmar, and Andrew Hanneman. 2000. Smoke exposure among 
 
ﬁ reﬁ ghters at prescribed burns in the Paciﬁ c Northwest. Research Paper PNW-RP-
 
526. Portland, Oregon USDA Forest Service, Paciﬁ c Northwest Research Station. 
Sackett, Stephen, Sally Haase, and Michael Harrington. 1996. Prescribed burning in 
 
Southwestern ponderosa pine. Pp. 178–186 in Peter Ffolliott, Leonard DeBano, 
 
Malchus Baker, Jr., Gerald Gottfried, Gilberto Solis-Garza, Carleton Edminster, 
 
Daniel Neary, Larry Allen, R. Hamre (technical coordinators). Effects of Fire on 
 
Madrean Province Ecosystems—A symposium proceedings, March 11-15, 1996. 
 
Tucson, Arizona. General Technical Report RM-GTR-289. Fort Collins, Colorado: 
 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
Sandberg, David, Roger Ottmar, Janice Peterson, and John Core. 2002. Wildland ﬁ re in 
 
ecosystems: Effects of ﬁ re on air. General Technical Report RM\RS-GTR-42-vol. 5. 
 
Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
Sandberg, David, and Frank Dost. 1990. Effects of prescribed ﬁ re on air quality and human 
 
health. Pp. 191–218 in Natural and Prescribed Fire in Paciﬁ c Northwest Forests, 
 
John Walstad, Steven Radosevich, and David Sandberg (eds.). Corvallis, Oregon: 
 
Oregon University Press. 
 
 

19
Shindler, Bruce, and Eric Toman. 2003. Fuel reduction strategies in forest communities—a 
 
longitudinal analysis of public support. Journal of Forestry 101(6): 8–15.
Shindler, Bruce. 2002. Citizens in the fuel-reduction equation: problems and prospects for 
 
public forest managers. Pp. 139–147 in Fitzgerald, Stephen (ed.) Fire in Oregon’s 
 
Forests: Risks, Effects, and Treatment Options. Portland, Oregon: Oregon Forest 
 
Resources Institute.
Smith, Jane Kapler (ed.). 2000. Wildland ﬁ re in ecosystems: Effects of ﬁ re on fauna. 
 
RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 1. Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
 
Research Station. 
USDA Forest Service. 2000. Protecting people and sustaining resources in ﬁ re-adapted 
 
ecosystems–a cohesive strategy, the Forest Service management response to the 
 
General Accounting Ofﬁ ce Report GAO/RCED-99-65. Accessed March 20, 2003 
 
at the Society of American Foresters Web site at 
 
www.safnet.org/policy/costrategy1013.pdf.
Vissage, John, and Patrick Miles. 2003. Fuel-reduction treatment: a West-wide assessment 
 
of opportunities. Journal of Forestry 101(2): 5–6.
Walstad, John, Steven Radosevich, and David Sandberg (eds.). Natural and Prescribed Fire 
 
in Paciﬁ c Northwest Forests. Corvallis, Oregon: Oregon State University Press.
Weaver, Harold. 1964. Fire and management problems in ponderosa pine forests. Pp. 60–
 
179 in Proceedings of the Annual Tall Timbers Ecology Conference 3. Tallahassee, 
 
Florida: Tall Timbers Research Station.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weaver, ______. 1957. Effects of prescribed burning in ponderosa pine. Journal of Forestry 
 
55(2): 133–138.
