 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Dr. W. Wallace Covington, Regents’ Professor 
And Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute 
Northern Arizona University 
http://www.eri.nau.edu 
 
 
Before the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
U.S. Senate 
 
 
Hearing to receive testimony on additional funds for wildland 
firefighting and forest restoration and ongoing implementation of the 
National Fire Plan 
 
July 16, 2002 
 
 
Chairman Bingaman, and members of the Committee, thank you for this opportunity to 
testify on a subject of personal importance to me and of critical importance to the health 
of our nation’s forests and the people and communities that live within them. 
 
My name is Wallace Covington.  I am Regents’ Professor of Forest Ecology at Northern 
Arizona University and Director of the Ecological Restoration Institute.  I have been a 
professor teaching and researching fire ecology and restoration management at NAU 
since 1975.  I chair Arizona Governor Jane Dee Hull’s Forest Health/Fire Plan Advisory 
Committee and am a member of the National Commission on Science for Sustainable 
Forestry. 
 
I have a Ph.D. in forest ecosystem analysis from Yale University and an M.S. in ecology 
from the University of New Mexico. Over the past 27 years I have taught graduate and 
undergraduate courses in research methods, ecological restoration, ecosystem 
management, fire ecology and management, forest management, range management, 
wildlife management, watershed management, recreation management, park and wildland 
management, and forest operations research.  I have been working in long-term research 
on fire ecology and management in ponderosa pine and related ecosystems since I moved 
to Northern Arizona University in 1975.  In addition to my publications on forest 
restoration, I have co-authored scientific papers on a broad variety of topics in forest 
ecology and resource management including research on fire effects, prescribed burning, 
thinning, operations research, silviculture, range management, wildlife effects, 
multiresource management, forest health, and natural resource conservation.   
 
1

 
My testimony will focus on the implementation of the National Fire Plan and the 
urgent need to increase the pace and size of forest restoration treatments to reverse 
the trend of increasing catastrophic wildfires. I will outline a three-step approach to 
help achieve this goal. 
 
Although the general principles that I will discuss apply to the vast majority of the West’s 
dryer forest types, I will focus my testimony on ponderosa pine forests. As the GAO has 
pointed out over 90 percent of the severe crown fire damage nationally is in this forest 
type.  Although there is plenty of blame to go around, much of the burden for the failure 
of wildland management policies must rest on natural resource professionals and 
scientists, who work hard but always seem to offer too little too late in the way of 
practical advice. 
 
Knowing what we now know, it would be grossly negligent for us not to move 
forward with large-scale restoration based fuel treatments in the dry forests of the 
West. 
 
It is an unfortunate set of circumstances that have led to this hearing.  Scientists have 
predicted the current forest crisis for the last 75 years.  In 1994 I was senior author on a 
review paper in which I stated that we could anticipate exponential increases in the 
severity and extent of catastrophic fire.  It is not a prediction I ever wanted to come true.  
In that same paper, I also suggested that we have a narrow window of 15-30 years to take 
preventative actions to restore forest health, minimize the loss of civilian and firefighter 
lives, and the mounting damage to our nation’s natural resources.   
 
Although scientists have long foreseen the increase in fire size and severity in ponderosa 
pine ecosystems, the scale of the fires we have seen so far this year is staggering.  Years 
of neglect are coming home to roost.  The Rodeo/Chediski fire in Arizona consumed 
469,000 acres and is Arizona’s largest wildfire to date.  Prior to the 1960s a fifty-acre 
crown fire was considered a “large fire”. In addition, the fire behavior these fires are 
exhibiting make suppression efforts exceptionally challenging—demonstrating that there 
are limits to our ability to fight them. The Hayman Fire in Colorado and the 
Rodeo/Chediski Fire in Arizona are major wakeup calls to all of us.   
 
Clearly, we have to do something quickly on a larger scale to reverse the trend of 
exponentially increasing fire suppression costs, increases in fire severity, and destruction 
of what should be a healthy legacy for future generations.  Thus far, the National Fire 
Plan has not resulted in the implementation of large-scale, comprehensive 
restoration treatments that are required to prevent catastrophic fire.  In addition, 
implementation must focus on the greater landscape as well as the wildland/urban 
interface to achieve success.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2

 
 
 
 
Why forest restoration treatments work 
 
We have been in open revolt against nature in the dry forests of the West since 
settlement.  It is time to start managing in harmony with natural tendencies.  Science-
based forest restoration treatments are consistent with natural tendencies.  
Comprehensive restoration is superior to forest thinning alone for one significant 
reason—restoration treatments simultaneously improve forest health (the underlying 
cause of catastrophic fire) while reducing fire risk.  Restoration treatments permit the safe 
reintroduction of fire and present a long-term strategy for fixing forests. 
 
Research across the Intermountain West has shown that restoration treatments 
substantially reduce fire hazard by thinning trees to decrease tree canopy density, break 
up interconnected canopy fuels, raise the crown base height (the distance from the ground 
to the crown), and then reduce accumulated forest floor fuels and debris with prescribed 
fire.  Fire alone in the unnaturally dense forests that dominate so much of the West today 
is inadequate.  Without thinning, prescribed burning is an exceedingly dangerous way to 
get the amount of thinning done that is needed and it can lead to increased mortality, 
especially among old growth trees.  Furthermore, the probability of a prescribed fire 
escaping its planned burn area are increasingly likely as fuels continue to accumulate. 
 
There is abundant scientific research that began in the 1890’s and continues today that 
provides a sound scientific framework for implementing the science and practice of 
restoration.  We have solid information about forest conditions prior to Euro-American 
settlement, changes in fire regimes over the last century, deterioration of overall 
ecosystem health, and ecological responses to thinning and prescribed burning—the key 
elements of any attempt to restore ecosystem health in ponderosa pine and related 
ecosystems. We know that current overcrowded stands of trees do not sustain the 
diversity of wildlife and plants that existed a century ago.  We know this by examining 
the data of early naturalists and scientists.  We also know this to be true from primary 
research.  Scientists that have compared biological diversity of overstocked stands—
stands that have had decades of fire exclusion--with open, park-like stands that have not 
had severe fire regime disruption, have found greater plant diversity, greater insect 
diversity, and greater bird diversity.  Similar studies have also found greater old-growth 
tree vigor and resistance to insect attack in open, park-like stands—stands similar to those 
present before settlement. We also know that stopping ecologically based forest 
restoration that includes thinning, is not saving the forest as some would like you to 
believe, but only contributing to its demise and causing severe losses to the wealth of 
species that depend on it.  
 
 
 
 
 
3

Restoration thinning enhances the productivity (growth) of trees, allowing young trees to 
develop old-growth characteristics such as large size and full crowns.  Perhaps most 
importantly, restoration has been shown to increase rapidly the productivity of native 
understory grasses and herbs, the species that make up 90-99% of the plant biological 
diversity in western fire-adapted forests.  The resources provided by abundant understory 
vegetation—seeds, flowers, fruits, and cover—translate into key wildlife habitat 
components.  For example, the number of butterfly species and individuals increased 
within two years in Arizona sites that had received ecological restoration treatments. 
 
Why attention must be paid to both the wildland/urban interface and the greater 
forests 
 
The fires of 2002 and 2000 have focused policy attention on the need to create defensible 
perimeters around communities in the wildland/urban interface.  Without a doubt we 
need to take action to secure communities.  However, defining the “urban/wildland 
interface” as some sort of narrow ring around a town to protect property will not prevent 
fires like we have just seen in Arizona to impact towns.  In addition, this definition will 
miss the whole reason for the existence of forest communities.  
 
A town is not just the place where people have homes.  Communities are in the forest 
because they are emotionally, economically, and socially linked and dependent on the 
forest.  When we consider the areas that need immediate treatment we should consider 
the human community “impact area”--the entire area that if impacted by a catastrophic 
fire, will undermine the health and livelihood of a community.   
 
Following is a quote from one of the many e-mails and telephone calls I have received 
from residents in the region burned so severely by the Rodeo/Chedeski fire in Arizona 
this season: 
 
“Many homeowners in the Overgaard community who lost our homes are anxious to make decisions about 
the possibility of rebuilding. While we know our homes can be reconstructed, we are more concerned about 
the beautiful forest, now blackened, in our back yards...” 
 
The Forest Service Cohesive Strategy includes one aspect of this greater impact area I’ve 
mentioned by identifying watersheds as important areas of focus. An excellent example is 
the Santa Fe Watershed, a 17,000-acre area that provides 40% of the water supply for the 
city.  The fact that the City of Santa Fe, the Forest Service, the Santa Fe Watershed 
Association (including the Sierra Club, the Audubon Society, and the Nature 
Conservancy), and citizens are actively designing pre-suppression treatments is 
commendable.    
 
A second example of an important impact area beyond the town site itself is the San 
Francisco Peaks north of Flagstaff, Arizona.  Recreation and tourism contributes 
significantly to the Flagstaff economy. A wildfire at the Snowbowl ski area or along one 
of the many popular trails on the peaks could have a significant impact on many small 
businesses dependent on recreation dollars.  Although it is critical that we design 
 
4

treatments to protect the property of Flagstaff residents, it will be fruitless in the long run 
if their economic livelihood and quality of life disappears. 
 
Another reason that attention cannot be narrowly focused on a ring around the city is 
because it will fail to address one of the most contentious issues of our time, the 
protection of endangered species. Wildfire in the Southwest contributes to the loss of 
essential habitat for many of these vulnerable species because they are not adapted to 
stand replacing fires.  According to a recent draft plan by the Coconino National Forest, 
over the last ten years the nesting habitats of six northern goshawks and eight Mexican 
spotted owls have been eliminated or severely altered by stand replacement fires in the 
vicinity of the San Francisco Peaks. 
 
Towns are inextricably linked to the greater forest.  To treat one and not the other will fail 
to solve the problem. 
 
Steps to implement landscape scale treatments 
 
I have been advocating forest restoration over the past 20 years, but my sense of urgency 
has greatly increased.  We need to break the logjam that impedes progress. A logjam that 
is rooted in distrust, personal preferences and a legal process (NEPA) that should 
contribute to the design of solutions but is sometimes used to obstruct them.  I believe 
that with thoughtful action, adequate resources and public and private leadership we can 
solve this logjam and emerge victorious from our current crisis.  The three key steps are: 
 
1. DESIGN TREATMENTS STARTING WITH SOLID SCIENCE AND 
SET STANDARDS FOR EFFECTIVENESS. Ideological issues have been 
impediments to advancing treatments.  Research to date indicates that 
alternative fuel reduction treatments (e.g., diameter caps for thinning) have 
strikingly different consequences not just for fire behavior but also for 
biodiversity, wildlife habitat, tree vigor and forest health.  Treatment design 
should be based on what the forest requires to maintain health and reduce 
catastrophic fire.  Science-based guidelines should be developed and become 
the foundation for treatments.  In addition, they should be the criteria for 
evaluating the effectiveness of treatments. Guidelines will help guide 
managers and provide a base of certainty to those that are distrustful of land 
management agencies. The standard should be clear—if a treatment does not 
permit the safe reintroduction of fire and simultaneously facilitate the 
restoration of the forest it is not a solution.  
 
2. REDUCE CONFLICT BY USING AN ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT 
FRAMEWORK TO DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT A SERIES OF 
TREATMENTS.  We can wait no longer.  Solutions to catastrophic wildfire 
must be tested and refined in a “learning while doing” mode.  Two of the 
barriers preventing the implementation of landscape scale treatments are the 
unrealistic desire for scientific certainty and a fear that once an action is 
selected it becomes a permanent precedent for future management.  Scientific 
 
5

certainty will never exist and the past century of forest management 
demonstrates the need for applied research and active adaptation of 
management approaches using current knowledge. We should expand our 
environmental review process to provide approval of a series of iterative 
treatments, provided they are science based, actively monitored and 
committed to building from lessons learned and new information.   
 
3. REBUILD PUBLIC TRUST IN LAND MANAGEMENT AGENCIES. 
SUPPORT A BROAD VARIETY OF PARTNERSHIP APPROACHES 
FOR PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTING RESTORATION-BASED 
FUEL TREATMENTS.  The lack of trust that exists between some members 
of the public and land management agencies is the genesis for obstructionist 
actions. The only way to rebuild trust is to develop meaningful collaborations 
between the agencies, communities and the public. There are emerging 
models of various forms of collaborative partnerships working to reduce the 
threat of fire while restoring the forest for its full suite of values.  Their 
success depends on respectful community collaboration, human and financial 
resources and adequate scientific support to make well informed management 
decisions. Congress, federal agencies, universities, and non-governmental 
organizations must support these communities to help them achieve success.  
  
STEP ONE:  
DESIGN TREATMENTS STARTING WITH SOLID 
SCIENCE AND SET STANDARDS FOR EFFECTIVENESS 
 
If we wanted to destroy our ponderosa pine forest landscapes, we could hardly come up 
with a more devastating plan than what we have done and continue to do—make a series 
of management mistakes and then engage in lengthy ideological debates instead of rolling 
up our sleeves and working to solve the problem.  The fires of this year, and the past 
several decades, have forged a consensus that the problem of catastrophic wildfire is 
severe.  Almost everyone agrees that restoration is the most scientifically rigorous and 
environmentally and economically reasonable way to proceed.  Nonetheless, there is a lot 
of poorly informed speculation about how it should be applied, by activists, members of 
the lay public, and even some within the academic community.  Some of the arguments 
are founded on differences of opinion about desirable ecological conditions for western 
forestlands.  Others stem from differences of opinion about whether public lands should 
be used for consumptive resource use, especially by wood products or grazing interests, 
or for individual uses and/or non-consumptive uses.   
 
We are now at the point where we must move beyond ideologically based rhetoric to 
apply restoration fuel treatments in such a way that we can simultaneously work to solve 
fire problems and restore ecosystem health.   
 
We have a solid body of scientific information to design and test large-scale forest 
restoration that will protect people, communities and the forest. This knowledge should 
be synthesized into management guidelines that are scientifically solid and immediately 
 
6

useful to managers and others who want to work to solve the crownfire problems of the 
West.   
 
An important outcome from the guidelines will be a set of performance standards. Since 
2001 many treatments have been applied on federal land, however, the effectiveness of 
many of these treatments to reduce fire risk has been questioned.  Treatments that do not 
provide long-term protection against unnatural wildfire and repair the forest are a waste 
of money and effort.  
 
STEP TWO:  
REDUCE CONFLICT BY USING AN ADAPTIVE 
MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK TO DESIGN AND 
IMPLEMENT A SERIES OF TREATMENTS   
 
A variety of restoration options is being investigated at research sites across the West, 
applying treatments developed locally by scientists, managers, environmental activists, 
resource users, and members of the public.  It is important to continue and expand the 
research effort, but at the same time it is imperative that we accept the responsibility to 
apply the extensive knowledge we already have, before more forests are lost.   
 
The actions that others and I believe should be taken to restore the ecological integrity of 
ponderosa pine forests and therefore reduce the threat of crown fire are well known.  I do 
not advocate a “one-size fits all approach” but rather crafting management approaches 
based on the location under analysis, its presettlement condition, and its relationship to 
the broader ecosystem and the communities that live within it.  In this sense, ecological 
restoration should not be viewed as a strict recipe or a rigid set of prescriptions.   
 
The safest way to advance treatment design and implementation is to apply scientifically 
rigorous adaptive management principles.  By scientifically rigorous I mean that the 
design of landscape scale restoration treatments must be based on: 
 
1. Comprehensive awareness of solid science (not ideologically driven, 
selective citation of existing knowledge). 
2. Implementing large-scale, adaptive management experiments to test ideas. 
3. Monitoring fundamental parameters to determine treatment effectiveness. 
4. Objective scientific analysis of the results. 
5. Further adaptation of management experiments suggested by these 
monitoring observations. 
6. Sharing, publicizing and publishing results for lay audiences, policy makers, 
resource management professionals, and the scientific community. 
 
The scientific community could help this effort by developing monitoring protocols that 
are simply applied, affordable, understandable to land managers and that can be quickly 
synthesized to inform adaptive management.   
 
 
 
 
7

Consideration should be given to a new form of environmental review and approval for 
projects committed to adaptive management.  If the project design is sufficiently rigorous 
to test different approaches that will then be used to improve the design of the next set of 
approaches—and monitoring is actively employed—then perhaps a series of actions 
could be approved in advance under one environmental review.  For example, the Greater 
Flagstaff Forest Partnership has spent years in the environmental review process to 
implement the first phase of a ten-year effort that will protect the city and surrounding 
communities.  The second phase is now going through the same long environmental 
review process even though it is explicitly incorporating many lessons learned from the 
first phase and was developed with full community participation.  Perhaps something can 
be done to allow projects that show this much rigor, community involvement, solid 
science and monitoring a simplified review.  
 
STEP THREE:  
HELP REBUILD PUBLIC TRUST IN LAND 
MANAGEMENT AGENCIES BY SUPPORTING A BROAD 
VARIETY OF PARTNERSHIP APPROACHES FOR 
PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTING RESTORATION-
BASED FUEL TREATMENTS  
 
Some individuals and organizations have obstructed forest restoration because they do 
not trust the land management agencies to apply good ecologically based management in 
the forest.  Restoring respect and trust in the land management agencies is central to 
breaking the logjam. One approach to rebuilding this trust is through the meaningful 
engagement of members of forest communities and other stakeholders.  
 
Numerous community-based models exist.  Each is unique because of the community it 
represents and the priorities each community defines (jobs, economic, environmental 
etc).   Congress and the federal agencies should continue to support and respect inclusive 
approaches to designing and implementing forest treatments. 
 
What Congress Can Do 
 
There are several constructive steps Congress and the federal agencies can take to 
improve our current situation.  
 
1. Strategically located landscape scale treatments to reduce fire threat and restore the 
ecological integrity of forests should become the single biggest priority of forest 
management policy and the land management agencies working in the Intermountain 
West.  
 
2. Congress should continue its commitment to provide adequate resources to the 
agencies to maximize restoration treatments that will prevent wildfires.  In turn, the 
agencies must act swiftly to implement preventative treatments.  A simple 
extrapolation of recent rates of increase in crown fire damage suggests that within the 
next decade acres burned could easily double whereas costs for fire suppression, 
rehabilitation of burned area, lost resource values, and compensation could average 
five to ten billion dollars annually. 
 
8

 
3. Wherever possible, Congress and the land management agencies should support the 
positive collaboration of partnerships to design ecologically based restoration 
treatments 
 
4. Support the implementation science-based restoration treatments, adaptive 
management approaches and restoration guidelines to ensure quality control. 
 
5. Consider adding a new environmental review process that simplifies the approval of 
projects using adaptive management, monitoring, solid science and community 
involvement. 
 
Senator Jon Kyl, with the support of Secretary of Interior Gale Norton and Forest Service 
Chief Dale Bosworth, has recognized the need for good science and has actively 
supported the work of the Ecological Restoration Institute at NAU.  His support for 
science-based solutions has allowed us to design, test, and refine restoration treatments 
that are the underpinning of the development of socially acceptable approaches to forest 
restoration underway in Flagstaff and other forest communities.    
 
We are at a fork in the road.  Down one fork lies burned out, depauperate landscapes—
landscapes that are a liability for future generations.  Down the other fork lies health, 
diverse, sustaining landscapes—landscapes that will bring multiple benefits for 
generations to come.  Inaction is taking, and will continue to take, us down the path to 
unhealthy landscapes, costly to manage.  Scientifically-based forest restoration 
treatments, including thinning and prescribed burning, will set us on the path to healthy 
landscapes, landscapes like the early settlers and explorer saw in the late 1800s. 
 
Thank you very much for asking me to appear before the Committee.  
 
 
9
