Both sides of forest restoration movement find common 
ground at conference 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
05/03/2000 
 
While few would disagree that a century of over-logging, grazing and fire suppression 
has created congested and fire-prone western forests, so far the search for a restoration 
formula has sparked lawsuits, controversy and bitterness.  
But for three days at Northern Arizona University, both sides of the issue gathered to 
learn about the latest research and discuss the political, economic and environmental 
hurdles facing the forest restoration movement.  
The message that emerged from NAU's ponderosa pine ecosystem restoration conference 
was echoed by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt who said in his keynote address that it 
was time to start "scaling up" the effort.  
"You have the knowledge, you have the answers," Babbitt said.  
The conference, April 25-27, was sponsored by the NAU Ecological Restoration Institute 
and the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership and drew scores of forest researchers, 
environmentalists, scientists and government land managers.  
Panel discussions featured prominent ecologists such as Michael Soule of The Wildlands 
Project and Reed Noss, editor for Wild Earth magazine, while in smaller sessions, NAU 
ecosystem scientists and foresters, government researchers and environmental activists 
compared notes.  
"It's really useful to get everyone in one place talking about what they agree on and what 
they don't agree on," said Diane Vosick of the Ecological Restoration Institute, "I think it 
was very valuable for ever side to see the research that was presented."  
The conference provided a showcase for data on issues such as how to apply ecological 
science to restore natural environments and technical treatments of complicated topics.  
Vosick said the direct access to information and the "cross-fertilization" that occurred 
during the conference when information was shared has already had concrete results.  

Two state Game and Fish Dept. wildlife researchers presented a study about the impact of 
restoration logging on Mt. Trumbull that will be used by the Grand Canyon Forests 
Partnership on its restoration models, she said.  
Environmentalists, such as Todd Schulke, co-founder of the Southwest Center for 
Biological Diversity, said that despite groups which advocate no logging on public lands, 
more than 60 regional environmental groups recognize the need for restoration that 
involves the removal of trees.  
"I think it's important for folks to understand that some of the so-called extreme 
environmental groups in the Southwest are committed to restoration.  
We've been working on this problem for quite a long time and we really care about it," he 
said during a panel discussion closing out the conference.  
He added however, that there is a "lack of broad-based agreement" on the type and 
intensity of restoration programs now being developed by groups such as the Grand 
Canyon Forests Partnership and NAU.  
Schulke, who is also the restoration coordinator for Southwest Forest Alliance, said the 
group is working on pilot restoration programs in the Kaibab and Coconino National 
Forests and the Gila National Forest in Silver City, N.M.  
A $350,000 grant from the Ford Foundation is being used to develop markets for the 
timber and byproducts produced by restoration logging in Silver City, he said.  
While agreeing on the need for restoration, the Alliance is advocating a thinning program 
that is conservative and is sensitive to the impact on imperiled bird and mammal species, 
but accomplishes forest health and fire risk reduction goals, he said.  
To bring most of the Southwest environmental community and the general public aboard, 
the Alliance said a conservative approach to restoration is necessary.  
Jim Golden, supervisor of the Coconino National Forest, said finding government funds 
to help perform restoration research and implement strategies is a major barrier to the 
effort.  
"Right now there is not enough money coming from Congress to get the job done, other 
than to sustain the snail's pace in which were moving," Golden said during a panel 
discussion, "And there won't be enough money until there is a national constituency for 
the restoration of public lands," Golden said.  
He added that there is an "East Coast mentality" that opposes logging on public lands, 
even for restoration, that must be changed.  

Locally, Golden said the understanding for the need of restoration is high, especially in 
light of fire danger posed by congested forests.  
"I remain very optimistic that over the course of the next few years we will see an 
increase in the pace of restoration in the national forest," Golden said.  
A major obstacle to restoration is the marketing of small diameter logs and byproducts 
produced by the restoration models under development, said Richard Mirth, a retired 
NAU Engineering Dept. faculty member and civil engineer.  
The restoration logging proposed for the Flagstaff area caps the size of logs being 
removed at 16 inches.  
Mirth said research shows that the material can be used for a variety uses including 
lumber, poles, wood chips and arts and craft.  
The problem is the cost of "treating" the landscape, which Mirth estimated to be at least 
$750 an acre.  
With 1.5 million acres in the region needing thinning and restoration, finding $1 billion 
will be difficult, Mirth said.  
So developing a commercial strategy to help pay for the restoration is needed to augment 
financial assistance from government and foundations, Mirth said.  
"The biggest obstacle is providing a sustained supply. You need a sustained supply to get 
a user to invest in the use of this wood," he said.  
To provide businesses with a constant supply of wood products, Mirth said a regional 
wood yard is needed that would sort timber and byproducts for instant sale and pickup by 
forest industry companies.  
Mirth said that government can also play a role by providing low interest business 
development loans for budding forest industry businesses that would use material 
provided by restoration programs.  
Gary Ghioto can be reached at gghioto@azdailysun.com or 556-2251.  
 
