William Romme, Craig Allen, John Bailey, William Baker, Brandon Bestelmeyer, Peter Brown,
Karen Eisenhart, Lisa Floyd-Hanna, David Huffman, Brian Jacobs, Richard Miller, Esteban
Muldavin, Thomas Swetnam, Robin Tausch, Peter Weisberg
May 2007
 
 
 
 
-J
  
 

Citation: Romme, W., C. Allen, J. Bailey, W. Baker, B. Bestelmeyer, P. Brown, K. Eisenhart, L. Floyd-Hanna, D.
Huffman, B. Jacobs, R. Miller, E. Muldavin, T. Swetnam, R. Tausch and P. Weisberg. 2007. Historical and Modern
Disturbance Regimes of Piñon-Junifer Vegetation in the Western U.S.
Cover photo:  Piñon-juniper woodland, Walker Ranch, near Pueblo, Colorado. © Peter McBride 

Contents
Page
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Piñon-Juniper: A Variable and Diverse Type of Vegetation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
What We Know About Persistent Woodlands  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
What We Know About Piñon-Juniper Savannas  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
What We Know About Areas of Potential Expansion and Contraction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Tables
1. A suggested key for identifying the three historical types of piñon-juniper 
vegetation discussed in this paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2. Tips for estimating tree ages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
iii - Contents

Piñon-juniper vegetation covers some
100 million acres in the western U.S.,
where it provides economic products,
ecosystem services, biodiversity, and
aesthetic beauty in some of the most
scenic landscapes of North America.
There are concerns, however, that the
ecological dynamics of piñon-juniper
woodlands have changed since Euro-
American settlement, that trees are
growing unnaturally dense, and that
woodlands are encroaching into former
grasslands and shrublands. Yet
surprisingly little research has been
conducted on historical conditions and
ecological processes in piñon-juniper
vegetation, and the research that does
exist demonstrates that piñon-juniper
structure, composition, and disturbance
regimes were very diverse historically as
well as today. 
Uncertainties about historical stand
structures and disturbance regimes in
piñon-juniper vegetation create a serious
conundrum for land managers and policy-
makers who are charged with overseeing
the semi-arid landscapes of the West.
Calls for restoration of historical conditions
(i.e., those that prevailed before the
changes wrought by Euro-American
settlers) are being heard with increasing
frequency. However, if those historical
conditions are poorly understood it is
difficult or impossible to set realistic
targets for restoration. In the absence of
site-specific information about historical
disturbance regimes and landscape
dynamics, there is danger that well-
meaning “restoration” efforts actually may 
move piñon-juniper ecosystems farther
from their historical condition.
The purpose of this report is to briefly
summarize our current understanding of
historical stand structures, disturbance
regimes, and landscape dynamics in
piñon-juniper vegetation throughout the
western U.S. The authors gathered for a
workshop in Boulder, CO, on August 22-
24, 2006, to develop the information
presented here. All have conducted
research in piñon-juniper vegetation, and
together they have experience with a wide
diversity of piñon-juniper ecosystems, from
New Mexico and Colorado to Nevada and
Oregon. Our summary of current
knowledge is presented as a series of
statements, each followed by our level of
confidence in the statement and the
geographical area to which it applies.
High-confidence statements generally are
supported by rigorous field studies;
statements of moderate confidence are
based on anecdotal evidence or logical
deductions, but lack the rigorous studies
necessary to confirm or refute the idea.
We intentionally refrain from making any
specific policy or management
recommendations in this paper. Instead we
provide the consensus among researchers
of what we know (and don’t know) about
the science of piñon-juniper vegetation.
The authors encourage managers and
practitioners to give us feedback on the
utility and shortcomings of this summary.
There is much that we do not know about
piñon-juniper vegetation, and new
syntheses of this kind will be needed in
the future as new knowledge becomes
available. 
1 - Introduction
Introduction

We identify three fundamentally different
types of piñon-juniper vegetation, based
primarily on canopy structure, understory
characteristics, and historical disturbance
regimes. There is of course great diversity
within each of the three basic types, but
the classification below represents much
of the variability in piñon-juniper
vegetation across the western U.S.
Research is underway to link these
vegetation types to specific soil types and
other environmental characteristics that
would allow for reliable prediction and
mapping across large landscapes, but at
present we can only identify some very
general environmental correlates. Table 1 
is a key for distinguishing among the
three types in the field.
(1) Persistent Woodlands are found where
site conditions (soils and climate) are
inherently favorable for piñon and/or
juniper. Canopy and understory
characteristics vary considerably from
place to place, from sparse stands of
scattered small trees growing on poor
substrates (Figure 1) to relatively dense
stands of large trees on productive sites
(Figure 2). Tree density and canopy cover
also may fluctuate in response to
disturbance and climatic variability.
Nevertheless, these are plant
2 - Piñon-Juniper: A Variable and
Diverse Type of Vegetation
Piñon-Juniper: A Variable & Diverse
Type of Vegetation
 
Persistent woodland, growing on shallow rocky soils on the mesa tops, with deeper
colluvial soils in the canyon bottom.  The canopy is composed of Pinus edulis and Juniperus
osteosperma. The trees are all-aged, including many old individuals, and the woodlands within this
view contain no evidence of past fire. Colorado National Monument, Colorado, elevation ca. 6,000
feet.  (Photo by W. Romme, 2006)

communities in which piñon and/or
juniper are dominant species, both
historically and currently, unless recently
disturbed by fire, clearing, or other severe
disturbance. Notably, these woodlands do
not represent 20th century conversion of
formerly non-woodland vegetation types
to woodland. 
Persistent Woodlands are typically found
on rugged upland sites with shallow,
coarse-textured soils that support
relatively sparse herbaceous cover even in
the absence of heavy livestock grazing.
However, they also occur in a variety of
other settings, such that steep terrain and
shallow or rocky substrate are not by
themselves adequate indicators. This type
of piñon-juniper vegetation is found
throughout the West; it appears to be
especially prevalent on portions of the
Colorado Plateau, where moisture comes
predominantly in winter. Indeed, large
expanses of the Colorado Plateau are
characterized by ancient, sparse-density,
persistent woodlands within spectacular
rocky landscapes.
(2) Piñon-juniper savannas are usually
found on gentle upland and transitional
valley locations, where soil conditions
favor grasses (or other grass-like plants)
but can support at least some tree cover.
Some savannas apparently have sparse
tree cover because of edaphic or climatic
limitations on woody plant growth; many
of these savannas have probably changed
little during the past century (Figure 3).
3 - Piñon-Juniper: A Variable and
Diverse Type of Vegetation 
 
Persistent woodland, growing on a moderately productive site with high canopy cover and
sparse herbaceous understory. The canopy is composed of Pinus edulis and Juniperus osteosperma;
the major understory shrub is Artemisia tridentata. Trees are all-aged, including many individuals >
300 years old, and the stand contains no evidence of past fire. Navajo Point, Glen Canyon National
Recreation Area, Utah, elevation ca. 7,000 feet.  (Photo by W. Romme, 2005) 

Other savannas, in contrast, have site
conditions that could potentially support
denser tree cover, but at these locations
savanna structure is maintained by
herbaceous competition, recurrent fire,
drought, and other disturbances; many of
these savannas have converted into
denser woodlands during the past century
because of release from competitive
effects on tree seedling establishment,
favorable climatic conditions for tree
survival, and lack of fire (Figure 4). Some
savannas and woodlands are found today
in places that were tree-less grasslands
prior to 1900; such sites can sometimes
be recognized by remnant grasslands soils
and species composition. 
Piñon-juniper savannas typically are found
on moderately deep, coarse to fine-
textured soils that readily support a variety
of growth forms including trees, grasses,
and other herbaceous plants, and in
regions that receive reliable summer
rainfall that fosters growth of warm-
season grasses. This type of piñon-juniper
vegetation appears to be especially
prevalent in the basins and foothills of
southern New Mexico, where a large
portion of annual precipitation comes in
the summer via monsoon rains. However,
it is relatively rare in the Rocky Mountains,
northern Colorado Plateau, and the Great
Basin, where precipitation is more winter
dominated. 
(3)  Areas of potential woodland
expansion & contraction are found where
site conditions are only intermittently
suitable for piñon and/or juniper
4 - Piñon-Juniper: A Variable and
Diverse Type of Vegetation 
 
Juniper savanna, growing in fine-textured soils in a region of low precipitation where low
tree density probably is a result of competition for moisture rather than fire or other disturbances.
Trees are predominantly Juniperus osteosperma, with occasional Juniperus monosperma and
Pinus edulis. Many of the trees appear to be relatively old (>150 years), i.e., crowns are flattened
and branches are large and gnarly (Table 2). Evidence of past fire is scarce. San Juan Basin,
northwestern New Mexico, elevation ca. 6,800 feet. (Photo by B. Jacobs, 2006)

establishment and survival over long time
scales. Trees may become more abundant
during moist climatic periods or during
long disturbance-free intervals, but
subsequently die back during drought and
associated insect outbreaks or following
fire. Many woodlands of this type have a
shrub-dominated understory (Figure 5).
Some such areas may have a distinctive
historical fire regime, and therefore could
be classified as a separate piñon-juniper-
shrub type if such a distinction is useful
for management. This vegetation type
overlaps somewhat with disturbance-
maintained savannas, but refers primarily
to areas that fluctuate between shrubland
or grassland structure and tree
dominance, as well as other sites where
soils or climate are only occasionally
suitable for tree growth and survival.
Areas of potential woodland expansion
and contraction are found on a wide
variety of substrates and climatic
conditions. Such areas sometimes are
located adjacent to persistent woodlands
or savannas, where soil conditions
gradually change from favorable to
marginal for tree growth. However, precise
bioclimatic conditions associated with
areas of potential piñon-juniper expansion
and contraction are poorly defined at this
time. This type of piñon-juniper vegetation
is found throughout the West; it appears
to be especially prevalent in the Great
Basin.
5 - Piñon-Juniper: A Variable and
Diverse Type of Vegetation 
 
Piñon-juniper savanna, growing in relatively deep soils on gentle terrain, in a region of
summer-dominated precipitation.  Trees are predominantly Juniperus monosperma with occasional
Pinus edulis.  Most trees are less than 150 years old, but there is at least one older tree per acre.
Blue grama (Bouteloua gracilis) is the dominant grass; cholla cactus (Opuntia imbricata) is also
present. With a well-developed herbaceous stratum within a relatively productive environment, low
tree density at this site may have been maintained historically by periodic fire. However, fire history
studies have not been conducted in this area to confirm or reject this hypothesis. Near
Mountainair, New Mexico, elevation ca. 6,400 feet. (Photo by W. Romme, 2006)

6 - Piñon-Juniper: A Variable and
Diverse Type of Vegetation 
 
An area of potential expansion and contraction, on fine-textured soils in a region of
moderate, winter-dominated precipitation. The canopy is composed of Pinus edulis, Juniperus
osteosperma, and Juniperus monosperma. The prominent shrub is Artemisia tridentata. The trees
are all-aged.  Note the relatively old-appearing (>150 years, Table 2) piñon trees in the
background, with flattened crowns and large branches near the top; and the younger-appearing
piñon and juniper trees in the foreground, with spire-shaped crowns. The younger trees are
evidence of expansion during the past century, but contraction also has occurred during a severe
regional piñon mortality event within the past decade (see Figure 7). Evidence of past fire is
scarce. San Juan Basin, northwestern New Mexico, elevation ca. 6,800 feet. (Photo by B. Jacobs,
2006)  

1. Spreading, low-intensity surface fires
had a very limited role in molding
stand structure and dynamics of
persistent piñon-juniper woodlands in
the historical landscape. In very sparse
woodlands, especially on rocky terrain,
fires typically burned individual trees
but did not spread extensively because
of lack of surface fuels. Surface spread
was more likely to occur in higher-
density woodlands growing on more
productive sites, but even here fire
spread was typically from crown to
crown, especially when wind-driven.
Regardless of tree density, the
dominant fire effect was to kill most or
all trees and to top-kill most or all
shrubs (Figure 6). This statement also
is true of most fires today. 
HIGH CONFIDENCE … APPLIES TO
PERSISTENT WOODLANDS
THROUGHOUT THE WEST
2. Historical fires in persistent piñon-
juniper woodlands generally did not
“thin from below,” i.e., they did not kill
7 - What We Know About 
Persistent Woodlands 
What We Know About Persistent
Woodlands
 
A recent stand-replacing burn in persistent woodlands, the ca. 25,000-acre Mustang
Fire of 2002, photographed in fall of 2006. Note the sharp boundaries between burned and
unburned woodlands, and the nearly complete canopy mortality within the burn perimeter —
typical characteristics of large fires in persistent piñon-juniper woodlands, both historically and at
present. Trees are Pinus edulis and Juniperus osteosperma. Near Flaming Gorge Reservoir,
northeastern Utah, elevation ca. 6,200 feet. (Photo by C. D. Allen, 2006)  

predominantly small trees. Instead,
they tended to kill all or most of the
trees within the places that burned
regardless of tree size. This statement
also is true of most fires today. 
HIGH CONFIDENCE … APPLIES TO
PERSISTENT WOODLANDS
THROUGHOUT THE WEST
3. Historical fire rotations (i.e., the time
required for the cumulative area
burned to equal the size of the entire
area of interest) varied from place to
place in persistent piñon-juniper
woodlands, but generally were very
long (e.g., two to six centuries). This
statement also is true of most
persistent woodlands today. 
HIGH CONFIDENCE … APPLIES TO
PERSISTENT WOODLANDS
THROUGHOUT THE WEST
4. Some persistent woodlands are stable
for hundreds or even thousands of
years without fire, other than isolated
lightning ignitions that burn only a
single tree and produce no significant
change in stand structure. Many
woodlands today show no evidence of
past fire, though they may have
burned in the very remote past (many
hundreds or thousands of years ago).
This may be true especially of very
sparse woodlands in rocky areas, but
is also true of many higher-density
woodlands growing on more
productive sites. 
HIGH CONFIDENCE … BUT PRECISE
GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY NOT
ADEQUATELY KNOWN
5. In some persistent woodlands, stand
dynamics are driven more by climatic
fluctuation, insects, and disease than
by fire. For example, a massive piñon
mortality event occurred recently in
the Four Corners region as a result of
drought, high temperatures, and bark
beetle outbreaks (Figure 7).
HIGH CONFIDENCE … BUT PRECISE
GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY NOT
ADEQUATELY KNOWN
6. Tree density and canopy coverage have
increased in many or most persistent
woodlands during the 20th century. 
HIGH CONFIDENCE … BUT PRECISE
MAGNITUDE OF INCREASE, CAUSES,
AND GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY
NOT ADEQUATELY KNOWN
7. The gradual increase in tree density
and canopy cover during the 20th
century in most persistent PJ
woodlands is not due entirely, or even
primarily, to fire exclusion. Effects of
past livestock grazing and/or favorable
climatic conditions for tree growth
during most of the 20th century
probably are more important
mechanisms in most areas. However,
we do not yet fully understand how
grazing, climate, and fire exclusion
interact to promote increased tree
density, nor can we say with
confidence which of these
mechanisms is most important in any
specific location. In addition, some
stands that resemble persistent
woodlands — i.e., with dense tree
canopies, shallow rocky soils, and
sparse herbaceous cover — actually
may represent an eroded and
degraded state of formerly lower-
density woodlands that had grassy
understories and could have supported
8 - What We Know About 
Persistent Woodlands

frequent fire. However, research to
critically test this interpretation is lacking
in most areas.
MODERATE CONFIDENCE … BUT
GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY AND SITE
SPECIFIC CAUSES NOT ADEQUATELY
KNOWN
8. Recent large, severe fires in persistent
piñon-juniper woodlands probably are
normal kinds of fires, for the most part,
because similar fires occurred before
1900 (as documented, e.g., at Mesa Verde
and on the Kaiparowitts Plateau).
However, the frequency of large severe
fires appears to have increased
throughout much of the West during the
past 20 years, in piñon-juniper and also in
other vegetation types. This increased fire
activity may be a consequence of warmer
temperatures and longer fire seasons,
greater fuel continuity developing from
increasing tree cover, invasion by highly
flammable annual grasses (e.g.,
cheatgrass, Bromus tectorum), or a
combination of all these causes. However,
with the very long fire rotations that
characterize persistent piñon-juniper
woodlands, we cannot yet determine if
this recent apparent trend represents real,
directional change or simply a temporary
episode of increased fire activity, similar
to comparable episodes in the past.
MODERATE CONFIDENCE … APPLIES
TO MOST PERSISTENT WOODLANDS
THROUGHOUT THE WEST
9 - What We Know About 
Persistent Woodlands
 
Grey piñon skeletons illustrate the severe mortality event that occurred in Pinus edulis
throughout much of the Four Corners region between 2002 and 2004. Tens of millions of piñon
trees died from interactions among drought stress, bark beetle outbreaks, and anomalous high
temperatures. Mortality was most severe in northern New Mexico, northern Arizona, southern
Colorado, and southern Utah. Bandelier National Monument and Los Alamos National Laboratory,
New Mexico, elevation 6,500 feet. (Photo by C. D. Allen, 2006)

9. In many regions where a large fraction
of annual precipitation comes in the
summer, savannas and grasslands
were more extensive historically than
they are today. During the 20th
century, many former savannas and
grasslands in these regions have been
converted to juniper or piñon-juniper
woodlands of moderate to high
canopy coverage, especially in parts of
New Mexcio, Arizona, and perhaps
also in southeastern Colorado. 
HIGH CONFIDENCE … BUT PRECISE
GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY NOT
ADEQUATELY KNOWN
10. Livestock grazing and fire exclusion
since the late 1800s are important
mechanisms driving the conversion of
savanna to piñon-juniper woodland in
at least some areas, but probably not
all. Twentieth-century climatic
conditions also have played a role in
at least some areas, but how these
potential causes interact is not well
understood. On some sites with
relatively high effective moisture for
trees, tree cover may have become
great enough to suppress herbaceous
growth, thereby reducing the potential
for subsequent surface fires and
creating a new fire regime more
similar to that of persistent woodlands
than to the former savanna fire
regime. Disentangling the mechanisms
driving tree expansion in former
grasslands and savannas is a high-
priority research topic.
MODERATE CONFIDENCE … BUT
PRECISE MAGNITUDE OF INCREASE,
CAUSES, AND GEOGRAPHIC
APPLICABILITY NOT ADEQUATELY
KNOWN
10 - What We Know About 
Piñon-Juniper Savannas
What We Know About Piñon-Juniper
Savannas

11. Expansion of piñon and/or juniper into
previously non-wooded areas
(especially former shrublands and
grasslands) is occurring extensively in
some regions, notably the Great Basin
and parts of Arizona and New Mexico,
but is of comparatively limited extent in
other areas, notably western Colorado.
An important consequence of this
process is that formerly heterogeneous
landscape mosaics — intermingled
patches of woodland, shrubland, and
grassland — are becoming more
homogeneous as trees become
established within the former
shrubland and grassland patches. 
HIGH CONFIDENCE … BUT PRECISE
GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY NOT
ADEQUATELY KNOWN
12. Presence of young piñon-juniper
woodlands does not necessarily imply
expansion into formerly non-woodland
vegetation. The young trees may
instead represent recovery of
persistent woodlands from previous
disturbance (e.g., clearing or fire).
Thus, knowledge of local history is
important. 
HIGH CONFIDENCE … BUT PRECISE
GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY NOT
ADEQUATELY KNOWN
13. Near the current altitudinal and
geographical limits of piñon and
juniper, expansion may represent
natural, long-term change in the
species' range (e.g., piñon expansion
in the northern Front Range of
Colorado and near Flaming Gorge
Reservoir in northeastern Utah during
the past several centuries)  
HIGH CONFIDENCE … BUT PRECISE
GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY NOT
ADEQUATELY KNOWN
14. Expansion of piñon and/or juniper into
previously non-wooded areas occurred
prior to Euro-American settlement on
at least some sites; it is not strictly a
20th century phenomenon, and is not
necessarily an abnormal process
caused by past land use or fire
exclusion. Loss of piñon and/or juniper
from marginal sites also occurred
historically, and has occurred recently
in some areas, e.g., the Four Corners
region (Figure 7).
HIGH CONFIDENCE … BUT PRECISE
GEOGRAPHIC APPLICABILITY NOT
ADEQUATELY KNOWN
15. Expansion of piñon and/or juniper into
previously non-wooded areas may
have been more extensive in the 20th
century than in the previous few
centuries, at least in some regions.
Grazing and fire exclusion probably are
major causes of expansion of piñon
and/or juniper into some savannas,
grasslands, and shrublands, but not all.
Climate change probably also plays an
important role. However, we do not
have a good understanding of how
these potential causes interact. 
MODERATE CONFIDENCE … BUT
PRECISE MAGNITUDE OF INCREASE,
CAUSES, AND GEOGRAPHIC
APPLICABILITY NOT ADEQUATELY
KNOWN
11 - What We Know About Areas of 
Potential  Expansion & Contraction
What We Know About Areas of
Potential Expansion & Contraction

12
Table 1. A suggested key for identifying the three historical types of piñon-juniper
vegetation discussed in this paper. Note: This key has not yet been extensively field
tested. The authors will appreciate feedback on how well it works (or does not
work). 
Total tree canopy cover (piñon and juniper combined) < 10 % …… 2
  
Total tree canopy cover (piñon and juniper combined) > 10 % …… 6 
  
At least one old tree (over 150 years old*) per acre …… 3 
 
Old trees (over 150 years old*) fewer than one per acre …… 4 
 
Understory dominated by grassland species, often on deep soils and gentle topography ……
 (relatively stable)
 
Understory dominated by shrubs or other species not associated with grassland, often on
shallow soils and rugged or rocky topography …… 
 
(a very sparse
form of persistent woodland)
  Large dead wood (> 10 inches diameter, standing or fallen), conspicuously present,
showing evidence of past fire, woodcutting, or other severe disturbance …… 
(recovering from disturbance)      
 
Large dead wood (> 10 inches diameter, standing or fallen), conspicuously absent …… 5
Understory dominated by grassland species, often on deep soils and gentle topography ……
former 
being converted to 
Understory dominated by shrubs or other species not associated with grassland, often on
shallow soils and rugged or rocky topography …… 
 
 
 
 
(with recent episode of expansion)
At least 10% of canopy trees are over 150 years old* …… 
 
 
Fewer than 10% of canopy trees are over 150 years old* …… 7  
Large dead wood (> 10 inches diameter, standing or fallen), conspicuously present,
showing evidence of past fire, woodcutting, or other severe disturbance …… 
(recovering from disturbance)      
 
Large dead wood (> 10 inches diameter, standing or fallen), conspicuously absent …… 8
  Understory dominated by grassland species, often on deep soils and gentle topography ……
former 
or 
being converted to 
  Understory dominated by shrubs or other species not associated with grassland, often on
shallow soils and rugged or rocky topography …… 
 
 
 
 
(with recent episode of expansion)
*  See Table 2 for assistance in estimating tree ages.

13
Table 2. Tips for estimating tree ages. Tree size is often an unreliable indicator of
tree age, and the oldest trees on a site are sometimes among the smaller
individuals. The best way to determine tree age is by extracting an increment core
and cross-dating the rings. Piñons usually can be dated accurately if the wood is
sound, but junipers generally are difficult or impossible to cross-date. Where
coring and cross-dating are not feasible, other qualitative features can be used to
distinguish between relatively old trees vs. relatively young trees with a moderate
degree of confidence:
 
 
 
 
Crown shape
Conical, with pointed tip
and lower branches still
living
Flattened top, with lower branches dead or
previously shed
Branch structure
Branches become
progressively smaller from
bottom to top of tree
Large, gnarly branches throughout the living
portion of the crown
Dead wood
Little dead wood in the
bole, few dead branches,
little or no sign of past wood
cutting
Large dead branches, often broken off or cut
by wood gatherers long ago; bark missing
from portions of the bole and weathered
wood exposed in these places
Bark
Somewhat smooth, with
relatively shallow furrows
Often rough and shaggy (junipers only),
with relatively deep furrows (piñons and
junipers)
