EDITORIAL OPINION
Does It Make Sense to Restore Wildland Fire
in Changing Climate?
Peter Z. Fule´1,2
Abstract
Forest restoration guided by historical reference condi-
tions of ﬁre regime, forest structure, and composition has
been increasingly and successfully applied in ﬁre-adapted
forests of western North America. But because climate
change is expected to alter vegetation distributions and
foster severe disturbances, does it make sense to restore
the ecological role of wildland ﬁre through management
burning and related activities such as tree thinning?
I suggest that some site- and date-speciﬁc historical con-
ditions may be less relevant, but reference conditions in
the broad sense are still useful. Reference conditions
encompass not only the recent past but also evolutionary
history, reﬂecting the role of ﬁre as a selective force over
millennia. Taking a long-term functional view of histori-
cal reference conditions as the result of evolutionary pro-
cesses can provide insights into past forest adaptations
and migrations under various climates. As future cli-
mates change, historical reference data from lower,
southerly, and drier sites may be useful in places that are
higher, northerly, and currently wetter. Almost all mod-
els suggest that the future will have substantial increases
in wildﬁre occurrence, but prior to recent human-caused
ﬁre exclusion, ﬁre-adapted pine forests of western North
America were among the most frequently burned in the
world. Restoration of patterns of burning and fuels/forest
structure that reasonably emulate historical conditions
prior to ﬁre exclusion is consistent with reducing the sus-
ceptibility of these ecosystems to catastrophic loss. Prior-
ities may include ﬁre and thinning treatments of upper
elevation ecotones to facilitate forest migration, whereas
vulnerable low-elevation forests may merit less manage-
ment investment.
Key words: climate change, Durango pine, ﬁre, Jeffrey
pine, ponderosa pine.
Introduction
North American forests adapted to disturbance regimes of
frequent ﬁres have been the focus of efforts to reinstate sur-
face ﬁre, alone or in combination with tree thinning, to
reduce stand density and hazard of severe ﬁre, re-create
historical species composition, and restore self-regulating
processes of nutrient cycling, productivity, and regenera-
tion (Covington et al. 1997; Allen et al. 2002; Falk 2006).
Research suggests that these goals are broadly feasible in
many sites across the range of ponderosa pine (Pinus pond-
erosa) and related species (e.g., Pi. jeffreyi, Pi. durangensis)
that dominate millions of hectares from Mexico to Canada.
To illustrate brieﬂy a range of examples, a management
strategy in U.S. National Parks of allowing naturally ignited
ﬁres to burn on large landscapes has resulted in self-limiting
ﬁre patterns in California (Collins et al. in press) and
tended to thin mesic species that had invaded while ﬁre had
been excluded (true ﬁrs, Abies concolor and A. lasiocarpa)
while conserving surface ﬁre–adapted species (ponderosa
pine and Douglas-ﬁr [Pseudotsuga menziesii]) in Arizona
(Fule´ & Laughlin 2007) (Fig. 1). Prescribed burning and
thinning have been shown to substantially reduce the pro-
jected intensity of simulated wildﬁres under severe weather
conditions at the scale of entire states across the Rocky
Mountains (Fiedler et al. 2002, 2004); the conclusions of
modeling studies have been validated with actual examples
of reduced ﬁre behavior in treated stands even under the
most severe wildﬁres of the past decade (Pollet & Omi
2002; Finney et al. 2005). Economic analysis suggests that
forest thinning and burning treatments would more than
pay for themselves just by avoiding wildﬁre suppression
costs, even without accounting for ecological and social
consequences of severe ﬁres (Snider et al. 2006). Finally,
restoration treatments have been shown experimentally to
restore ecosystem productivity (Kaye et al. 2005), plant
community composition (Laughlin et al. 2006), and ele-
ments of wildlife habitat (Germaine & Germaine 2002;
Waltz & Covington 2004). In sum, the early results of a few
decades of restoration efforts suggest that it may be possi-
ble to recapture many key aspects of structure, composi-
tion, and function consistent with historical reference
conditions, helping to sustain these important forests.
1 Ecological Restoration Institute and School of Forestry, Northern Arizona
University, PO Box 15018, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, U.S.A.
2 Address correspondence to P. Z. Fule´, email pete.fule@nau.edu
 2008 Society for Ecological Restoration International
doi: 10.1111/j.1526-100X.2008.00489.x
526
Restoration Ecology Vol. 16, No. 4, pp. 526–531
DECEMBER 2008

The broad challenge that climate change poses for eco-
logical restoration, and for sustaining natural systems in
general, is that uncharacteristically rapid alteration of
environments and novel combinations of disturbances and
non-native biotic factors may create conditions never
before encountered in evolutionary history. The speed
and severity of change may overwhelm natural processes.
For example, Malcolm et al. (2002) estimated that the
rates of migration required to keep pace with projected
temperature increases in boreal forests would be 100–
1,000 times faster than the most rapid postglacial migra-
tion of spruce (Picea) found in the paleoecological record.
Under these circumstances, the relevance of historical
conditions as a reference point and target for restoration
has been challenged (Harris et al. 2006). My objectives in
this article are to review the potential impacts of climate
change on surface ﬁre–adapted (hereafter, ‘‘ﬁre-adapted’’)
forests, ask to what extent historical reference conditions
remain relevant, and suggest considerations that may be
useful for evaluating the role of alternative ﬁre manage-
ment strategies.
Potential Impacts of Future Climate
Predictions of future climate characteristics are limited in
precision because of the enormous complexity of Earth–
atmosphere coupling, inadequate data, and insufﬁcient
understanding of the mechanisms of climate forcing.
Investigations of the potential effects of climate change,
therefore, have tended to apply a series of constant
changes in temperature, precipitation, or other climate or
environmental variables. Because no single climate model
is necessarily preferred, analyses are developed under
a range of climate models and social assumptions about
future greenhouse gas emissions, with the argument that
the evidence for particular changes is strongest when mul-
tiple models are in consensus (Seager et al. 2007).
Climate change is expected to affect forests both by
movement of the suitable environmental conditions for
dominant species and by altering disturbance. Geographi-
cal ranges for many dominant North American tree spe-
cies are anticipated to shift northward (Shafer et al. 2001).
A U.S.–wide model that incorporated climatic, edaphic,
and topographic data predicted that the contemporary
vegetation would not persist by 2100 AD in over half of the
places where it is found at present under a high-emission
scenario and would decline nearly everywhere even under
a reduced-emission scenario (Saxon et al. 2005).
Disturbance regimes can be directly affected by climate
change, thereby accelerating vegetation change. Seager
et al. (2007) showed that the average of 19 climate models
consistently predicted increasing drying for the southwest-
ern United States/northwestern Mexico, suggesting that
the level of droughts historically viewed as extreme may
become the norm. In addition to mortality caused directly
by drought, water-stressed forests are vulnerable to large-
scale pathogen attacks (Breshears et al. 2005). Hotter,
Figure 1. Ponderosa pine forests across the current elevational range in which they occur at Grand Canyon, Arizona, U.S.A. (a) Low-elevation
ponderosa interspersed with woodland may be most vulnerable to climate change. (b) Midrange ponderosa in a relict site exhibiting structure
composition and ﬁre regime generally consistent with historical reference conditions. (c) High-elevation ponderosa mixed with other conifers
burning in a ‘‘wildland ﬁre use’’ managed ﬁre in 2003 (National Park Service photo). This use of ﬁre reduced fuel and preferentially thinned mesic
species.
Does It Make Sense to Restore Wildland Fire?
DECEMBER 2008 Restoration Ecology
527

drier environments, with increasing amounts of dying vege-
tation, are likely to enhance the size and severity of wild-
ﬁres. Area burned in Canada was projected to increase
74–118% by 2100 in a tripled CO2 scenario (Flannigan et al.
2005). Across the western U.S. states, McKenzie et al.
(2004) correlated the historical occurrence of large wild-
ﬁres with warm and dry conditions. Overlaying projected
future climate conditions suggested an increase from
approximately 50 to 500% in area burned in 10 of the
11 states. Mechanistic links between earlier spring warm-
ing since the mid-1980s and abrupt increases in ﬁre have
already been observed (Westerling et al. 2006). Pyro-
genic invasive species such as bromes (Bromus spp.),
favored by warming, may also facilitate increased burning
(Keeley & McGinnis 2007).
Despite the uncertainties of climate prediction and the
complicated interacting factors, there appears to be no rea-
son to doubt that ﬁre will only increase as a disturbance factor
that accelerates the process of forest change in coming deca-
des. Fire-adapted forests that underwent the well-docu-
mented changes associated with extended ﬁre exclusion,
such as greater stand density, forest ﬂoor fuel accumulation,
and encroachment by ﬁre-susceptible species (Cooper 1960;
Cocke et al. 2005), will be increasingly vulnerable to stand-
replacing ﬁre. And postﬁre vegetation will be less likely to
be similar to the historical forest because severe ﬁres often
favor alternative stable states (grasslands, shrublands)
rather than a return to preﬁre pine forest (Barton 2002;
Savage & Mast 2005; Strom & Fule´ 2007).
Are Reference Conditions Relevant?
Before asking to what degree historical reference condi-
tions are relevant in light of the extraordinary transforma-
tions that may be associated with climate change, it is
helpful to consider the range of concepts represented by
‘‘reference conditions.’’ Commonly, reference conditions
are taken to mean the range of variability in ecosystem
structure, composition, and function, ‘‘developed by natu-
ral processes and . self-organizing and self-maintaining’’
(Society for Ecological Restoration International 2002),
at a particular place and time (Landres et al. 1999). Thus,
the sinuosity and ﬂow of a river before damming, or the
frequency of ﬁres and spacing of forest trees before
logging and livestock grazing, could serve as evidence
for the historical events and natural processes that sus-
tained these ecosystems before recent human-caused
ecological degradation. This view of reference conditions
was inﬂuential in the development of restoration con-
cepts (Aronson et al. 1993) and remains prominent in
procedures advocated by the Society for Ecological
Restoration International (2002). Restorationists have
never suggested that reference conditions could be com-
pletely restored, given irreversible changes such as
non-native invasion or extinctions of native species.
For example, the invasive non-native species cheatgrass
(Bromus tectorum) is favored by the high ﬁre frequency
characteristic of ponderosa and Jeffrey pine ecosystems, so
restoration burning may need to strike a compromise—
burning at longer intervals—to balance ﬁre beneﬁts and
risks (Fule´ & Laughlin 2007; Keeley & McGinnis 2007).
But because climate change implies that even the funda-
mental biophysical environment may be altered, Millar and
Brubaker (2006) questioned the value of trying to restore
to ‘‘conditions that cannot be turned back.’’ Most people
would agree that it is not reasonable to seek to ‘‘restore’’
historical forest conditions exactly as they were in a particu-
lar place in 1750, for instance, because the climate of 2050
or 2150 is likely to be quite different at that place.
Reference conditions are not simply a historical snap-
shot, however; they must be viewed over much longer
timescales. The ﬁre-related adaptations of pine forests are
associated with ﬁre’s role as a selective force going far
back in evolutionary time (Keeley & Zedler 1998; Moore
et al. 1999; Covington 2003). Our relatively detailed
knowledge of ﬁre regimes is limited to a century or so of
historical records, a few centuries of tree-ring data, and up
to some thousands of years of charcoal sediments (Agee
1998). But the frequent occurrence of ﬁres among certain
related pine species is consistent with adaptations that
developed much longer ago when these species were
found in different distributions on Earth due to ice ages or
interglacial warming (Covington 2003). The ﬁre-related
traits of ponderosa and related pines, such as thick bark,
protected buds, abundant seeding, and long life span (Agee
1998), had adaptive value in allowing these species to per-
sist and dominate mountainous regions of North America
over long periods characterized by droughts and ignitions.
Taking a long-term functional view of reference condi-
tions as the result of evolutionary processes highlights
three issues that are relevant to decisions about restoring
the ecological role of wildland ﬁre. First, under whatever
circumstances ﬁre-adapted pine ecosystems might persist
in the future, evolutionary history suggests that ﬁre is
likely to continue to play a key role as an agent of either
ecosystem maintenance (predominantly surface ﬁre) or
ecosystem change (predominantly stand-replacing ﬁre).
Second, paleoecological evidence of vegetation migration
has become increasingly valuable for predicting how
future distributions may track changing climate (Harris
et al. 2006; Petit et al. 2008). Fire regime changes were
associated with the loss and arrival of forest communities,
and ﬁres may have been the mechanism for change. For
example, a shift from pulsed to sustained high charcoal
inputs occurred with the transition from spruce- to pine-
dominated forest in a high-elevation Arizona forest 11,000
years before the present (Weng & Jackson 1999). New
research approaches are seeking to improve the temporal
resolution of long-term ﬁre records, thereby helping link
migration and ﬁre (Allen et al. 2008). Third, though cli-
mate forecasting remains imperfect, virtually every ﬁre
prediction analysis for western North America indicates
that the future will be characterized by substantial increases
in wildﬁre occurrence. Prior to recent human-caused ﬁre
Does It Make Sense to Restore Wildland Fire?
528
Restoration Ecology
DECEMBER 2008

exclusion and forest alteration, ﬁre-adapted pine forests
of western North America were among the most fre-
quently burned in the world (Heyerdahl & Alvarado
2003; Swetnam & Baisan 2003; Hessl et al. 2004). Resto-
ration of patterns of burning and fuels/forest structure
that reasonably emulate historical conditions prior to ﬁre
exclusion is consistent with reducing the vulnerability of
these ecosystems to catastrophic loss (Allen et al. 2002;
Falk 2006).
Considerations for Fire Use in Ecological Restoration
Decisions about ﬁre use in ecological restoration are not
simple. Igniting ﬁres, permitting natural ﬁres to burn, and
tree cutting are regulated under national and local laws
and rules (Stephens & Ruth 2005). Fire use involves pro-
duction of smoke, release of CO2, costs of management,
effects on wildlife, and the possibility of escaped ﬁre.
When accompanied by tree thinning or other fuel treat-
ments, costs can rise to hundreds or thousands of dollars
per hectare because the thinned trees are generally of low
value. Managers and society as a whole must evaluate
trade-offs among risks, costs, and beneﬁts. In light of the
changes that may be associated with climate change, I sug-
gest the following considerations for restoration of ﬁre.
(1) Forests in places most vulnerable to the effects of cli-
mate change, such as low-elevation pine forests or
ecotones with woodlands or other low-elevation vege-
tation, may be a relatively low priority for ecological
restoration. Given the high likelihood of loss, manage-
ment resources might be better applied elsewhere.
Instead of seeking to perpetuate low-elevation forests
in their current form, managers could follow a course
of facilitating their replacement with native vegetation
that is presently found at lower, drier sites.
(2) Forests that currently occupy the middle range of
elevation may be expected to face severe stress from
climate change in the coming decades. In these pla-
ces, restoration of surface ﬁre in most sites and thin-
ning in strategic sites will increase resistance to
severe wildﬁre at the stand and landscape scales,
insect pathogens, and invasive non-native species.
The projections for climate change effects on vegeta-
tion distributions suggest that even midrange forests
may not be capable of survival (e.g., Saxon et al.
2005). However, site-speciﬁc climate forecasting is
uncertain, and the climate-related mechanisms of
vegetation change—principally ﬁre, bark beetles,
and die-back—have stochastic elements (e.g., chance
of an ignition), meaning that we cannot be sure now
which
places
will
experience
the
most
severe
changes. It is possible that even open, burned forests
may be unsustainable in the heart of their present
ranges, but until and unless that point is reached, for-
ests more similar to reference conditions are the
most likely to persist.
(3) Forests at the upper, wetter end of the elevational
range are best positioned to survive climate change
and to serve as the leading edge of upward migration.
Restoration treatments based on historical reference
conditions characteristic of lower elevation sites
could help facilitate the transition. In the southern
range of ﬁre-adapted pines, the upper ecotone is usu-
ally a mixed-conifer forest that historically burned
with surface to mixed-severity or severe ﬁre. Appli-
cation of surface ﬁre, perhaps coupled with thinning
of mesic taxa (Abies, Picea), will favor pine domi-
nance with enhanced resistance to severe ﬁre, shift-
ing the surface/lethal ﬁre boundary uphill. In the
northern range, where ﬁre-adapted pines are seral to
other conifers, future climate may be more consistent
with the historical situation in the Southwest where
pines remained dominant. In sum, it may be logical
to apply historical reference data from lower, south-
erly, and drier sites to places that are higher, north-
erly, and currently wetter sites. This may enhance
vegetation transition and reduce the probability of
severe disturbance with invasion by native and non-
native ruderal species. The same logic would apply
to ecosystem creation: if climate change effects out-
stripped migration to the point where it was consid-
ered advisable to establish pine forests in entirely
new locations, a suggestion offered by Millar and
Brubaker (2006), surface ﬁre would still play an
important role in the formation and maintenance of
these ecosystems.
Attempting to deal with the challenges posed by cli-
mate change is humbling and difﬁcult. Restoration of ﬁre-
adapted pine forests does not present an either/or situa-
tion; it is unlikely that a comprehensive blanket approach
to management can or should be devised. However, as we
move into a more ﬁre-prone environment, it makes sense
to use ﬁre and ﬁre-related characteristics of structure and
composition to enhance resistance to loss and facilitate
migration. Many restorationists have had a naive reliance
on ecosystem stability that is appropriately being chal-
lenged by paleoecological and ﬁeld ecology evidence
(Cortina et al. 2006; Harris et al. 2006; Millar & Brubaker
2006). Yet even as we recognize that a broader, longer,
more variable, and more functional perspective on refer-
ence conditions reduces the perception of stability, it is
important to bear in mind that native ecosystems are not
necessarily fragile. Since the last glacial period, ﬁre-adapted
pines of North America have occupied a vast range
encompassing monsoonal, Mediterranean, and continental
climates with an extraordinary diversity of soils, geomor-
phological types, and associated plant and animal species.
These forests have already exhibited great ﬂexibility and
adaptation. Thoughtful restoration of the ecological role
of ﬁre and ﬁre-related structure and composition should
enhance the chances of persistence of some of these native
forests under future climate conditions.
Does It Make Sense to Restore Wildland Fire?
DECEMBER 2008 Restoration Ecology
529

Implications for Practice
d Climate change will affect both vegetation distribu-
tions and disturbance, placing ﬁre-adapted pine eco-
systems
under
unprecedented
stress.
However,
moving into a more ﬁre-prone environment, it makes
sense to use ﬁre and ﬁre-related characteristics of
structure and composition to enhance resistance to
catastrophic loss and facilitate migration.
d Historical reference conditions remain useful to
guide management because forests were historically
resilient to drought, insect pathogens, and severe
wildﬁre. Adaptation of reference information to
future climates is logical: historical characteristics
from lower, southerly, and drier sites may be increas-
ingly relevant to higher, northerly, and currently wet-
ter sites.
d The perspective presented here focuses on western
North American forests, but similar considerations
may be relevant for other ﬁre-adapted pine ecosys-
tems in the Mediterranean, Central America, and
Asia.
Acknowledgments
These ideas were inﬂuenced by discussions with W.
Covington, D. Falk, M. Moore, and L. Yocom.
LITERATURE CITED
Agee, J. K. 1998. Fire and pine ecosystems. Pages 193–218 in D. M.
Richardson, editor. Ecology and biogeography of Pinus. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Allen, C. D., R. S. Anderson, R. B. Jass, J. L. Toney, and C. H. Baisan.
2008. Paired charcoal and tree-ring records of high-frequency Holo-
cene ﬁre from two New Mexico bog sites. International Journal of
Wildland Fire 17:115–130.
Allen, C. D., D. A. Falk, M. Hoffman, J. Klingel, P. Morgan, M. Savage,
T. Schulke, P. Stacey, K. Suckling, and T. W. Swetnam. 2002. Eco-
logical restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems:
a broad framework. Ecological Applications 12:1418–1433.
Aronson, J., C. Floret, E. Le Floc’h, C. Ovalle, and R. Pontanier. 1993. Res-
toration and rehabilitation of degraded ecosystems in arid and semi-
arid lands. I. A view from the south. Restoration Ecology 1:8–17.
Barton, A. M. 2002. Intense wildﬁre in southeastern Arizona: transforma-
tion of a Madrean oak–pine forest to oak woodland. Forest Ecology
and Management 165:205–212.
Breshears, D. D., N. S. Cobb, P. M. Rich, K. P. Price, C. D. Allen, R. G.
Balice, et al. 2005. Regional vegetation die-off in response to
global-change-type drought. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science 102:15144–15148.
Cocke, A. E., P. Z. Fule´, and J. E. Crouse. 2005. Forest change on a steep
mountain gradient after extended ﬁre exclusion: San Francisco
Peaks, Arizona, USA. Journal of Applied Ecology 42:814–823.
Collins, B., J. Miller, A. Thode, M. Kelly, J. van Wagtendonk, and S.
Stephens. Interactions among wildland ﬁres in a long-established
Sierra Nevada natural ﬁre area. Ecosystems (in press).
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of south-
western ponderosa pine forests since white settlement. Ecological
Monographs 30:129–164.
Cortina, J., F. Toma´s Maestre, R. Vallejo, M. J. Baeza, A. Valdecantos,
and M. Pe´rez-Devesa. 2006. Ecosystem structure, function, and res-
toration success: are they related? Journal for Nature Conservation
14:152–160.
Covington, W. W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. Pages
26–47 in P. Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration of southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fule´, M. M. Moore, S. C. Hart, T. E. Kolb, J. N.
Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R. Wagner. 1997. Restoration of ecosys-
tem health in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Journal of For-
estry 95:23–29.
Falk, D. A. 2006. Process-centered restoration in a ﬁre-adapted ponder-
osa pine forest. Journal for Nature Conservation 14:140–151.
Fiedler, C. E., C. E. Keegan III, S. H. Robertson, T. A. Morgan, C. W.
Woodall, and J. T. Chmelik. 2002. A strategic assessment of ﬁre haz-
ard in New Mexico. Final report to the Joint Fire Science Program.
Boise, Idaho.
Fiedler, C. E., C. E. Keegan III, C. W. Woodall, and T. A. Morgan. 2004.
A strategic assessment of crown ﬁre hazard in Montana: potential
effectiveness and costs of hazard reduction treatments. General
Technical Report PNW-GTR-622. U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station.
Finney, M. A., C. W. McHugh, and I. C. Grenfell. 2005. Stand- and land-
scape-level effects of prescribed burning on two Arizona wildﬁres.
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 35:1714–1722.
Flannigan, M. D., K. A. Logan, B. D. Amiro, W. R. Skinner, and B. J.
Stocks. 2005. Future area burned in Canada. Climatic Change 72:
1–16.
Fule´, P. Z., and D. C. Laughlin. 2007. Wildland ﬁre effects on forest struc-
ture over an altitudinal gradient, Grand Canyon National Park,
USA. Journal of Applied Ecology 44:136–146.
Germaine, H. L., and S. S. Germaine. 2002. Forest restoration treatment
effects on the nesting success of Western Bluebirds (Sialia mexi-
cana). Restoration Ecology 10:362–367.
Harris, J. A., R. J. Hobbs, E. Higgs, and J. Aronson. 2006. Ecological resto-
ration and global climate change. Restoration Ecology 14:170–176.
Hessl, A. E., D. McKenzie, and R. Schellhaas. 2004. Drought and Paciﬁc
Decadal Oscillation linked to ﬁre occurrence in the inland Paciﬁc
Northwest. Ecological Applications 14:425–442.
Heyerdahl, E. K., and E. Alvarado. 2003. Inﬂuence of climate and
land-use on historical surface ﬁres in pine-oak forests, Sierra Madre
Occidental, Mexico. Pages 196–217 in T. T. Veblen, W. L. Baker,
G. Montenegro, and T. W. Swetnam, editors. Fire and climatic
change in temperate ecosystems of the western Americas. Springer-
Verlag, New York.
Kaye, J. P., S. C. Hart, P. Z. Fule´, W. W. Covington, M. M. Moore, and
M. W. Kaye. 2005. Initial carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus ﬂuxes
following ponderosa pine restoration treatments. Ecological Appli-
cations 15:1581–1593.
Keeley, J. E., and T. W. McGinnis. 2007. Impact of prescribed ﬁre and
other factors on cheatgrass persistence in a Sierra Nevada ponder-
osa pine forest. International Journal of Wildland Fire 16:96–106.
Keeley, J. E., and P. H. Zedler. 1998. Evolution of life histories in Pinus.
Pages 219–250 in D. M. Richardson, editor. Ecology and biogeography
of Pinus. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Landres, P., P. Morgan, and F. Swanson. 1999. Overview of the use of nat-
ural variability in managing ecological systems. Ecological Applica-
tions 9:1279–1288.
Laughlin, D. C., M. M. Moore, J. D. Bakker, C. A. Casey, J. D. Springer,
P. Z. Fule´, and W. W. Covington. 2006. Assessing targets for the
restoration of herbaceous vegetation in ponderosa pine forests.
Restoration Ecology 14:548–560.
Malcolm, J. R., A. Markham, R. P. Neilson, and M. Garaci. 2002. Esti-
mated migration rates under scenarios of global climate change.
Journal of Biogeography 29:835–849.
Does It Make Sense to Restore Wildland Fire?
530
Restoration Ecology
DECEMBER 2008

McKenzie, D., Z. Gedalof, D. L. Peterson, and P. Mote. 2004. Climatic
change, wildﬁre, and conservation. Conservation Biology 18:890–902.
Millar, C. I., and L. B. Brubaker. 2006. Climate change and paleoecology:
new contexts for restoration ecology. Pages 315–340 in D. A. Falk,
M. A. Palmer, and J. B. Zedler, editors. Foundations of restoration
ecology. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Moore, M. M., W. W. Covington, and P. Z. Fule´. 1999. Reference condi-
tions and ecological restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine per-
spective. Ecological Applications 9:1266–1277.
Petit, R. J., F. S. Hu, and C. W. Dick. 2008. Forests of the past: a window
to future changes. Science 320:1450–1452.
Pollet, J., and P. N. Omi. 2002. Effect of thinning and prescribed burn-
ing on crown ﬁre severity in ponderosa pine forests. International
Journal of Wildland Fire 11:1–10.
Savage, M., and J. N. Mast. 2005. How resilient are southwestern ponder-
osa pine forests after crown ﬁre? Canadian Journal of Forest
Research 35:967–977.
Saxon, E., B. Baker, W. Hargrove, F. Hoffman, and C. Zganjar. 2005.
Mapping environments at risk under different global climate change
scenarios. Ecology Letters 8:53–60.
Seager, R., M. F. Ting, I. M. Held, Y. Kushnir, J. Lu, G. Vecchi, et al.
2007. Model projections of an imminent transition to a more arid cli-
mate in southwestern North America. Science 316:1181–1184.
Shafer, S. L., P. J. Bartlein, and R. S. Thompson. 2001. Potential changes
in the distributions of western North America tree and shrub taxa
under future climate scenarios. Ecosystems 4:200–215.
Snider, G. B., P. J. Daugherty, and D. B. Wood. 2006. The irrationality of
continued ﬁre suppression: an avoided cost analysis of ﬁre hazard
reduction treatments versus no treatment. Journal of Forestry 104:
431–437.
Society for Ecological Restoration International. 2002. SER primer on
ecological restoration (available from www.ser.org) accessed 1 July
2008.
Stephens, S. L., and L. W. Ruth. 2005. Federal forest-ﬁre policy in the
United States. Ecological Applications 15:532–542.
Strom, B. A., and P. Z. Fule´. 2007. Pre-wildﬁre fuel treatments affect
long-term ponderosa pine forest dynamics. International Journal of
Wildland Fire 16:128–138.
Swetnam, T. W., and C. H. Baisan. 2003. Tree-ring reconstructions of ﬁre
and climate history in the Sierra Nevada and southwestern United
States. Pages 158–195 in T. T. Veblen, W. L. Baker, G. Montenegro,
and T. W. Swetnam, editors. Fire and climatic change in temperate
ecosystems of the western Americas. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Waltz, A. E. M., and W. W. Covington. 2004. Ecological restoration treat-
ments increase butterﬂy richness and abundance: mechanisms of
response. Restoration Ecology 12:85–96.
Weng, C., and S. T. Jackson. 1999. Late-glacial and Holocene vegetation
history and paleoclimate of the Kaibab Plateau, Arizona. Paleo-
geography, Paleoclimatology, Paleoecology 153:179–201.
Westerling, A. L., H. G. Hidalgo, D. R. Cayan, and T. W. Swetnam. 2006.
Warming and earlier spring increase western U.S. forest wildﬁre
activity. Science 313:940–943.
Does It Make Sense to Restore Wildland Fire?
DECEMBER 2008 Restoration Ecology
531
