 
 
Kyl: NAU forest research still a funding priority 
By SETH MULLER 
Sun Staff Reporter 
12/04/2003 
After the Healthy Forests Restoration Act was signed into law on Wednesday after tons 
of testimony and research, U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl said that he will continue to seek out federal 
money for Northern Arizona University's Ecological Restoration Institute.  
In a Wednesday conference call, Kyl commended the work of the Flagstaff-based ERI in 
providing the scientific basis for the Healthy Forests Restoration Act. The institute is 
headed up by Wallace Covington, whose name has become synonymous with the science 
of forest health.  
"There is no question that Dr. Covington's work and his testimony significantly 
influenced this legislation," Kyl said. "Without his scientific work and without his 
willingness to be coming back here and pushing good science, we wouldn't have this 
legislation today."  
Kyl said he is currently working to get additional funding and he would have an 
announcement shortly. He did not indicate the potential dollar amount of funding 
available.  
He did say that he wants to continue to support research that pushes the science of 
forestry, on which Covington and his staff have taken the lead.  
"We need to look at this from a science-based point of view the way he does," Kyl said of 
Covington.  
"He'd like to get the forests back to the way the were 100 years ago."  
Elements of forest restoration became part of NAU's forestry program under Covington 
in the late 1970s. Ecological restoration became an NAU department in 1996 and three 
years later the Arizona Board of Regents formally approved creation of the Ecological 
Restoration Institute.  
The institute now has 58 employees and 42 undergraduate and graduate students on the 
payroll, and has taken the lead on forest health research. It's receiving about $3.5 million 
annually in federal grants and other funding.  
In its first year, ERI landed $8.8 million in federal funds, and Kyl, along with U.S. Rep. 
J.D. Hayworth, R-Cave Creek, has provided major support.  

For three years, a deadlock in the Senate had prevented the passage of legislation 
intended to speed forest treatment. But 15 raging fires driven by Santa Ana winds 
through Southern California prompted Democrats to compromise on the bill. The 
wildfires burned more than 750,000 acres, destroyed 3,640 homes, 33 businesses and 
1,141 other structures.  
The bill -- the first major forest management legislation in 25 years -- has similarities to 
the Bush Administration's Healthy Forests Initiative. The measure streamlines the 
approval process for projects to cut excess trees out of thick, overgrown forests or stands 
of trees killed by insect infestation.  
Judges would have to weigh the environmental consequences of inaction and the risk of 
fire in cases involving thinning projects. Any court order blocking such projects would 
have to be reconsidered every 60 days.  
Reporter Seth Muller can be reached at 913-8607 or smuller@azdailysun.com  
 
