Forest Ecology and Management, 14 (1986) 193--203 
193 
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam -- Printed in The Netherlands 
CHANGES IN UNDERSTORY PRODUCTION FOR THREE 
PRESCRIBED BURNS OF DIFFERENT AGES IN PONDEROSA PINE 
STEVEN W. ANDARIESE and W. WALLACE COVINGTON 
School of Forestry, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011 (U.S.A.) 
(Accepted 8 October 1985) 
ABSTRACT 
Andariese, S.W. and Covington, W.W., 1986. Changes in understory production for three 
prescribed burns of different ages in ponderosa pine. For. Ecol. Manage., 14: 193-- 
203. 
The general lack of resource response information severely limits economic evaluation 
of prescribed burning in most forest types. This paper presents changes in understory 
production at three sites on basalt soils following prescribed burning in ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa Laws.) in Arizona. The sites were burned during the fall 2, 5, and 7 
years before sampling in 1981. Regression equations were developed to predict produc- 
tion from plant basal area for four common grass species; production of remaining 
herbaceous vegetation was measured by harvesting. Based on the results of our study and 
other studies of fall prescribed burning on volcanic soils in Arizona ponderosa pine, un- 
derstory production response appears to be variable for 1--2 years following burning. 
Herbage production exhibits no change or an increase; forage production exhibits no 
change or a decrease. Studies of understory response more than 2 years following both 
wildfire and prescribed burning in Arizona ponderosa pine, however, show a general 
trend toward increased production. Thus, prescribed burning in southwestern pine on 
basalt soils produces long-term benefits in increased understory production, particularly 
in pole stands, which dominate much of the region. 
INTRODUCTION 
Understory production in the ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Laws.) 
region of the southwestern United States has declined since the advent of 
European settlement. Early explorers recorded the area as open and park- 
like with large, widely spaced trees and an abundant understory of grass and 
forbs (Beale, 1858; Dutton, 1881). Today's decreased understory produc- 
tion is attributed in part to the exclusion of periodic, naturally occurring 
surface fires and resultant increased tree density and heavy forest floor 
accumulation (Cooper, 1960; Biswell, 1972). 
Fire is being reintroduced to some areas of the southwestern ponderosa 
pine region through prescribed burning. The original objective was to de- 
crease wildfire hazard by fuel reduction (Kallander, 1969). More recently, 
0378-1127/86/$03.50 
© 1986 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 

194 
however, prescribed burning has also been advanced as a treatment for a 
variety of resource yields (e.g., Biswell, 1972; Martin and Dell, 1978). Com- 
plete economic evaluation of prescribed burning should include both the 
benefits of wildfire hazard reduction, which have been the focus of most 
economic studies to date, and its effects on resource yields. Studies on the 
effect of prescribed burning on understory production in Arizona ponderosa 
pine, however, are few. 
Gaines et al. (1958) reported reduced grass density for only 1 year fol- 
lowing a low intensity burn. Grass density was reduced for 2 years, however, 
following a more intense burn. The authors cautioned that their results 
were not adequate for drawing final conclusions due to small sample sizes. 
Ffolliott et al. (1977) recorded herbage production following prescribed 
burning on two sites. On one area, herbage production increased from 3 
kg/ha before to 45 kg/ha 1 year after the fire and remained at that level 11 
years after burning. On a second area, with a greater tree density and a more 
intense burn, herbage production was 6 kg/ha before burning with no change 
1 year later; however, by 11 years after burning it had increased to 19 kg/ha. 
Harris and Covington (1983) examined understory production on burned 
and control plots 1 year after a prescribed burn on basalt soils. They re- 
ported significantly greater production on burned plots for intermediate 
(dominated mainly by trees 7.6--28 cm dbh) and dense (dominated mainly 
by trees less than 7.6 cm dbh) overstory strata where overstory basal area 
reduction by the fire was minimal. 
Oswald and Covington (1984) recorded understory production on burned 
and control plots 4 years after a prescribed burn on limestone soils. They 
reported an increase of 195 kg/ha on burned plots. A portion of this in- 
crease, however, was Pteridium aquilinum (L.) Kuhn., a relatively unpalat- 
able species for livestock and wildlife, which increased in composition on the 
burned plots. 
Due to this limited number of studies, the extent and duration of pro- 
duction changes can, for the most part, be only speculated. In this study we 
measured changes in both herbage and forage production at three sites, 
prescribe burned during the fall 2, 5, and 7 years ago on basalt soils in 
Arizona ponderosa pine. This information, coupled with similar studies, will 
aid in determining the change in value of understory production required for 
a more complete economic analysis of prescribed burning. 
METHODS 
Study area 
Temperatures recorded at the Fort Valley Experimental Forest are repre- 
sentative of the ponderosa pine areas of central Arizona (Schubert, 1974). 
High temperatures may reach 32°C in the summer and 20°C in the winter. 
Low temperatures can drop to -4°C in the summer and -34°C in the winter. 

195 
The mean monthly temperature is about 16°C in the summer and -2°C in 
the winter. The growing season is generally between 117 and 160 days 
(Clary, 1975). Annual precipitation averages about 50 cm, but may be great- 
er than 64 cm in some areas and less than 43 cm in others (Schubert, 1974). 
The majority falls during two pronounced periods, winter and late summer 
(Clary, 1975). 
To minimize intersite variation, sites were chosen with similar soil type 
(basaltic parent material), overstory (exclusively ponderosa pine), elevation 
(2210 to 2350 m), and season of burn (fall). Due to the need for understory 
production estimates, sites grazed by livestock during the current growing 
season were not considered. Only three sites were located which met the 
above selection criteria. Each site had been burned initially after decades of 
fire exclusion and all are on the Coconino National Forest in central Arizona. 
Howard Seep, the 2-year burn site, was burned in November of 1979 using 
backfires. Portions of the burn and control areas were thinned in 1974 and 
1975 (K. Porter, personal communication, 1981). Grazing by livestock was 
light in 1980 and excluded in 1981 (P. Boucher, personal communication, 
1981). 
Chimney Spring, the 5-year burn site was burned in November of 1976 
using strip headfires. It is a part of the Interval Burning Study on the Fort 
Valley Experimental Forest (Sackett, 1980). Grazing by livestock has been 
excluded since the burn. 
Hostetter, the 7-year burn site, was burned in October of 1974 using strip 
headfires. Portions of the burn and control areas were thinned in 1970. 
Grazing by livestock has been minimal since the burn (C. Gutierrez, personal 
communication, 1981). 
Research design 
Production data were obtained from the three study sites during the 1981 
growing season. Sampling at each site was stratified by overstory type. Pole 
stands were defined as those dominated by trees 10--30 cm dbh; mature 
stands were defined as open, old growth areas dominated by trees greater 
than 30 cm dbh. Basal area was 40--55 m2/ha in pole stands and greater than 
70 m2/ha in mature stands. (Stand area measurements were based on canopy 
dripline in mature stands.) Stands on slopes greater than 25% were not con- 
sidered for sampling due to possible differences in understory response to 
burning on steep slopes. 
Burned and nearby control stands were generally greater than 20 by 25 m 
in size. Due to limited availability, stands smaller than this were sampled in 
some instances. In fact, at the 5-year and 7-year burn sites some mature 
stands consisting of only one tree were sampled. Within a stand, areas with 
greater understory production are often associated with large gaps in the 
canopy. To reduce this source of variation, canopy openings not caused by 
the fire and greater than 5 m in diameter were excluded from sampling in 
both overstory types. 

196 
Dry weight of green material was used as a measure of annual production 
of above-ground standing crop; however, this can give a somewhat inaccurate 
estimate. The inclusion of a portion of last year's standing crop which re- 
mained green (P. Ogden, personal communication, 1981) could result in an 
overestimate and loss by death or grazing could result in an underestimate. 
In this paper, the terms production and weight are used interchangeably and 
are assumed to be estimates of annual production of aboveground standing 
crop. 
Production was measured using allometric regression equations and with 
actual harvest data. Due to relatively greater sampling efficiency when com- 
pared with harvesting (Reese et ah, 1980) vegetation allometric relationships 
are often used to predict weight (e.g., Payne, 1974; Brown and Marsden, 
1976; Ohmann et al., 1981). Regression equations were developed to predict 
plant weight from basal area for four common grass species: squirreltail 
(Sitanion longefolium J.G. Smith), muttongrass (Poa fendleriana (Steud.) 
Vasey), Arizona rescue (Festuca arizonica Vasey), and mountain muhly 
(Muhlenbergia montana (Nutt.) Hitchc.). Production of remaining herbaceous 
vegetation was measured by actual harvesting. 
Sampling for production data occurred from early September to mid- 
October which approximates the peak of understory standing crop accumu- 
lation. Within stands, plots were located systematically. For each stand, a 
baseline was established. Along this baseline, belt transects were randomly 
located and run through the stand perpendicular to the baseline. Each trans- 
ect was 2 m wide and plot divisions were established every 5 m giving a plot 
size of 10 m s. 
On each plot, individual plant basal diameter measurements were recorded 
for the four regression species. Since defining an individual of a bunch grass 
is difficult, an individual plant was defined in this study as green plant 
material with horizontal discontinuities no greater than 2.54 cm. For each 
plant, the longest basal diameter and the widest basal diameter perpendicular 
to this were recorded to the nearest 0.25 cm. The product of the two diame- 
ters was defined as plant basal area. 
Remaining herbaceous vegetation on each plot was clipped at ground level 
and classified as (1) miscellaneous grass (including Carex spp.), (2) palatable 
forb, or (3) unpalatable forb. Palatable forbs were defined as those listed as 
decreasers by the USDA Forest Service (Anonymous, 1981) and on our sites 
consisted mainly of deer-vetch (Lotus wrightii (Gray) Green) and vetch 
(Vicia spp.). Due to insufficient numbers for inclusion in the regression 
equation, Arizona fescue was clipped and classified as a miscellaneous grass 
in pole stands at the 7-year burn site. Clipped samples were returned to the 
lab and sorted. Green material was dried at 80°C to constant weight and 
weighed to the nearest 0.01 g. 
Regression equations for each species were then applied to plot basal area 
measurements to predict weight. Analysis of production data was based on 
regression estimated weight for these species and actual weight for the re- 
maining plant classifications. 

197 
Due to the violation of the normality assumption associated with para- 
metric tests, data were analyzed with the nonparametric Mann and Whitney 
Rank Sum Test. For each overstory type, significant difference (P < 0.05) of 
means between burn and control was tested for herbage and forage produc- 
tion. Only differences which were significant are reported. Herbage produc- 
tion was defined as the sum of all plant classifications {four regression spe- 
cies and three harvested classifications); forage production was defined as the 
sum of all plant classifications except unpalatable forbs. A two-tailed test 
was used due to the possibility of either an increase or a decrease in produc- 
tion. 
Since results of Pearson (1967) indicate that in the Arizona ponderosa 
pine region maximum flower stalk height is coincident with maximum dry 
matter production for Arizona fescue and mountain muhly, allometric 
regression data for each species were obtained after seed head production 
was complete. Muttongrass was sampled in late June and early July, Arizona 
fescue in mid-August, squirreltail in late August, and mountain muhly in 
early September. 
At each site, approximately 20 plants per treatment (burn and control) 
were sampled in pole stands and 15 plants per treatment were sampled in 
yellow pine stands for each species. Two basal diameter measurements were 
recorded for each plant in the manner previously discussed. The plant was 
then clipped at ground level. Samples were returned to the laboratory and 
sorted. Green material was dried at 80°C to constant weight and weighed to 
the nearest 0.01 g. 
A predictive equation for each species was developed with 80% of the 
data. Plant weight was the dependent variable and plant basal area (the 
product of the two basal diameters) was the independent variable. To ob- 
tain linearity and a constant variance (Gholz et al., 1979), the linearized 
form of the allometric equation 
In Y = In A + B(ln X) 
(1) 
was used in this study. To account for variations due to differences in site, 
overstory type, and treatment, dummy variables representing these factors 
and their interaction with basal area were entered into each equation using a 
stepwise procedure (Nie et al., 1975). Only dummy variables with significant 
F values (P < 0.05) were used in the final prediction equations. 
Final prediction equations for squirreltail, muttongrass, Arizona fescue, 
and mountain muhly all exhibited F ratios significant at the 0.05 probability 
level. Adjusted R 2 values ranged from 0.81 for muttongrass to 0.87 for 
Arizona fescue. The standard error of the estimate ranged from 0.436 for 
Arizona fescue to 0.515 for muttongrass. 
Equations were validated with the remaining 20% of the data. The regres- 
sion equations were applied to this data to predict In of dry weight for each 
species. The mean squared difference between predicted and observed In of 
dry weight was in close agreement with the residual mean square of the 

198 
equation in all instances (Table 1), indicating that the equations make ac- 
curate predictions of independent data (see Snee, 1977). 
When regression equations were applied to inventory data, direct antilog 
conversion of the predicted In of plant weight to arithmetic units would have 
given an underestimate of plant weight (Baskerville, 1972). To correct for 
this, predicted weight in arithmetic units (Y) was calculated with the equation 
= exp(fi + ~2/2) 
(2) 
where ~ is the predicted In of plant weight and ~2 is the sample variance of 
the logarithmic equation (Brownlee, 1967; Baskerville, 1972). 
TABLE 1 
Mean squared difference between predicted and observed In of dry weight for 20% of the 
data not used in predictive equations and residual mean square for each regression equa- 
tion 
Mean square difference 
Residual mean square 
predicted vs observed 
regression equation 
Squirreltail 
0.259 
0.245 
(Sitanion longefolium ) 
Muttongrass 
0.507 
0.265 
(Poa fendleriana ) 
Arizona fescue 
0.265 
0.190 
( Festuca arizonica ) 
Mountain muhly 
0.250 
0.208 
(Muhlenbergia montana) 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Herbage and forage production at each site are presented in Table 2 for 
pole stands and Table 3 for mature stands. At Howard Seep, the 2-year burn 
site, only forage production in mature stands showed a significant difference. 
Control plots produced 30.2 kg/ha more forage than burn plots. Greater fuel 
accumulations in mature than in pole stands may have resulted in a more 
severe fire and therefore more heat-related stress and mortality of understory 
plants. This decrease in forage production appears to have been offset by an 
increase in unpalatable forbs (burn plots 24.1 kg/ha greater than control 
plots), resulting in no change in herbage production. In pole stands either 
the effect of burning had not yet resulted in production changes or benefi- 
cial and detrimental effects were balanced. 
At Chimney Spring, the 5-year burn site, only herbage production in 
mature stands failed to exhibit a significant difference between burn and 
control plots. Forage production in mature stands was greater on control 
plots, but the difference (6.6 kg/ha) was less than the difference in mature 
stands on the 2-year study site. This suggests a partial recovery of forage 

199 
TABLE 2 
Total herbage and forage production a (kg/ha) on burn and control plots in pole stands 
Treatment 
Study site 
Howard Seep 
Chimney Spring 
Hostetter 
(2-year burn) 
(5-year burn) 
(7-year burn) 
Herbage production 
Burn 
19.5 (2.1) 
13.6 (2.1) 
26.2 (3.9) 
Control 
14.8 (1.5) 
6.8 (1.4) 
6.3 (0.8) 
Difference b 
-- 
6.8 
19.9 
Forage production 
Burn 
16.9 (2.1) 
9.6 (1.6) 
22.5 (3.4) 
Control 
14.7 (1.5) 
5,7 (1.2) 
4.9 (0.7) 
Difference b 
-- 
3.9 
17.6 
aHerbage is the sum of all understory plant classifications; forage is the sum of all plant 
classifications except unpalatable forbs. Data are mean (standard error); N ---- 
40. 
bBurn minus control -- reported only if burn and control are significantly different (P < 
0.05). 
TABLE 3 
Total herbage and forage production a (kg/ha) on burn and control plots in mature stands 
Treatment 
Study site 
Howard Seep 
Chimney Spring 
Hostetter 
(2-year burn) 
(5-year burn) 
(7-year burn) 
Herbage production 
Burn 
73.0 (10.5) 
41.6 (7.3) 
43.6 (9.1) 
Control 
79.1 (12.9) 
29.1 (4.6) 
15.2 (2.6) 
Difference b 
-
-
 
-- 
28.4 
Forage production 
Burn 
24.4 (3.9) 
11.8 (4.0) 
24.1 (4.4) 
Control 
54.6 (8.9) 
18.4 (3.7) 
10.1 (1.9) 
Difference b 
-30.2 
- 6.6 
14.0 
aHerbage is the sum of all understory plant classifications; forage is the sum of all plant 
classifications except unpalatable forbs. Data are mean (standard error); N = 28 for 
Howard Seep and N = 30 for Chimney Spring and Hostetter study sites. 
b Burn minus control -- reported only if burn and control are significantly different (P < 
0.05). 

200 
species by 5 years following prescribed burning. In pole stands, herbage and 
forage production were greater on burn plots. It appears that by 5 years after 
burning in pole stands, beneficial effects on the understory outweigh detri- 
mental effects and are reflected in increased understory production. 
At Hostetter, the 7-year burn site, herbage and forage production on 
burned plots were significantly greater than control plots in both overstory 
types. By 7 years after prescribed burning in pole and mature stands, herbage 
and forage production appear to have benefited from the effects of burning. 
Two factors complicate the interpretation of these results as a time- 
sequence. (1) Pole stands on the 2- and 7-year study sites were thinned prior 
to prescribed burning. Clary and Ffolliott (1966) reported no significant 
difference (P < 0.10) in herbage production between thinned and unthinned 
stands with equal basal area at basal areas greater than 16 m2/ha. Since resid- 
ual basal areas of pole stands in our study were greater than this, the effect 
of thinning on understory production is probably minimal; however, the in- 
teraction between thinning and burning is not known. (2) Despite our at- 
tempt to minimize intersite variation, understory production on control 
plots was variable between sites. (We do not feel that treatment differences 
reported here are simply a result of the general pattern of variability, as in- 
tersite distances -- minimum of 14 km -- were far greater than intrasite dis- 
tances between burn and control stands -- maximum of 0.5 km.) Because of 
this variability between sites development of a time-sequence depicting actu- 
al production changes is difficult. Using our results and those of other re- 
searchers, however, general trends of changes in understory production fol- 
lowing prescribed burning can be discerned. 
Results of our study and other studies of fall prescribed burns on volcanic 
softs in Arizona ponderosa pine show either no change or an increase in 
herbage production 1 to 2 years following burning. In our study, herbage 
production displayed no change in either pole or mature stands 2 years after 
burning. Harris and Covington (1983), however, reported an increase in 
herbage production (19 kg/ha) 1 year after prescribed burning in pole stands, 
but no change in open areas with old growth trees. Ffolliott et al. {1977) 
reported no change and an increase of 42 kg/ha in herbage production 1 year 
following prescribed burning on two separate areas. This variation in herbage 
response 1--2 years after prescribed burning is probably due to intersite 
variation as well as differences in the severity of the burn and the extent of 
overstory reduction resulting from the burn. 
Studies of understory response more than 2 years following prescribed 
burning in Arizona ponderosa pine show a general trend of increased herbage 
production similar to that illustrated in our study. Ffolliott et al. (1977) 
reported herbage production increases of 13 and 42 kg/ha 11 years after a 
fall prescribed burning on two separate areas with volcanic soils. Oswald and 
Covington {1984) reported significantly greater (P < 0.05) herbage produc- 
tion on burned versus control plots for a 4-year old prescribed burn on 
limestone soils. Their observed increase of 195 kg/ha was substantially larger 

201 
than any increase reported in our study, suggesting the importance of soil 
type and other factors in determining understory response to burning. 
In contrast to herbage production, which shows no change or an increase, 
forage production can initially decrease following prescribed burning. In a 
2-year study Gaines et al. (1958) reported reduced grass density for 1 and 2 
years after two separate prescribed burns on volcanic soils. In our study, 
forage production had decreased in mature stands and showed no change in 
pole stands by 2 years following burning. After a possible decrease initially, 
however, results of our study indicate that forage production also exhibits a 
trend toward increased production following prescribed burning. 
Although the response of understory production following wildfire 
generally differs in magnitude from that of prescribed burning, the trend 
reported in two long-term wildfire studies in Arizona ponderosa pine is 
similar to the general trend of increased production beyond year 2 after 
prescribed burning illustrated in our study. Oswald and Covington {1983) 
reported increased herbage production 3 and 9 years following wildfire on 
limestone soils. Changes in grass basal area following wildfire on basalt soils 
reported by Lowe et al. (1978) exhibit a trend similar to that of forage 
production in yellow pine stands presented in our study. They reported an 
initial decrease 1 year after wildfire, which was followed by a trend of in- 
creased grass basal area that peaked at year 7. Despite differences in season 
and severity of burn between wildfire and prescribed burning, as well as the 
fact that these wildfire burns were seeded with understory species, the trend 
toward sustained increases in understory production past year 2 after wild- 
fire is similar to our study and other prescribed burning studies. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Information presented here is suggestive of the long range effect of 
prescribed burning on herbage and forage production on basalt soils in 
northern Arizona ponderosa pine. In pole stands, the major component of 
the region, long-term benefits in increased understory production appear 
evident. In mature stands, initial costs (decreases in production) may be off- 
set by a trend toward increased production benefits after 2 years following 
burning. Further study is warranted; ideally, various burning conditions 
should be examined at replicated sites with appropriate controls. These 
sites should be studied prior to burning and then annually following burning. 
Such studies would provide the more detailed information necessary to 
determine the change in value of forage and herbage production following 
prescribed burning in Arizona ponderosa pine. 
REFERENCES 
Anonymous, 1981. Range Vegetation Scorecard Handbook. U.S. Dep. Agric., Forest 
Service Handbook, R3, 2209.21a. 

202 
Baskerville, G.L., 1972. Use of logarithmic regression in estimation of plant biomass. Can. 
J. For., 2: 49--53. 
Beale, E.F., 1858. Wagon road from Fort Defiance to the Colorado River. 35th Congress, 
1st Session, House Executive Document 124. 
Biswell, H.H.., 1972. Fire ecology in ponderosa pine--grassland. In: Proc. Tall Timbers 
Fire Ecol. Conf., 12: 69--97. 
Brown, J.K. and Marsden, M.A., 1976. Estimating fuel weights of grasses, forbs, and 
small woody plants. USDA For. Serv. Intermount. For. Range Exp. Stn. Res. Note 
INT-210, 11 pp. 
Brownlee, K.A., 1967. Statistical Theory and Methodology in Science and Engineering. 
John Wiley, New York, NY, 2nd edn. 
Clary, W.P., 1975. Range management and its ecological basis in the ponderosa pine type 
of Arizona: the status-of-our-knowledge. USDA For. Serv. Rocky Mount. For. Range 
Exp. Stn. Res. Pap. RM-158, 31 pp. 
Clary, W.P. and Ffolliott, P.F., 1966. Differences in herbage--timber relationships be- 
tween thinned and unthinned ponderosa pine stands. USDA For. Serv. Rocky Mount. 
For. Range Exp. Stn. Res. Note RM-74, 4 pp. 
Cooper, C.F., 1960. Changes in vegetation structure and growth of southwestern pine 
forests since white settlement. Ecol. Monogr., 30: 129--162. 
Dutton, C.E., 1981. Physical geology of the Grand Canyon district. U.S. Geol. Surv., 2nd 
Annu. Rep., pp. 47--166. 
FfoUiott, P.F., Clary, W.P. and Larson, F.R., 1977. Effects of a prescribed fire in an 
Arizona ponderosa pine forest. USDA For. Serv. Rocky Mount. For. Range Exp. Stn. 
Res. Note RM-336, 4 pp. 
Gaines, E.M., Kallander, H.R. and Wagner, J.R., 1958. Controlled burning in south- 
western ponderosa pine: results from the Blue Mountain plots, Fort Apache Indian 
Reservation. J. For., 56: 323--327. 
Gholz, H.L., Grier, C.C., Campbell, A.G. and Brown, A.T., 1979. Equations and their 
use for estimating biomass and leaf area of plants in the Pacific Northwest. For. Res. 
Lab., Oreg. State Univ., Corvallis, OR, Res. Pap. No. 41, 37 pp. 
Harris, G.R. and Covington, W.W., 1983. The effect of a prescribed fire on nutrient con- 
centration and standing crop of understory vegetation in ponderosa pine. Can. J. For. 
Res,.13: 501--507. 
Kallander, H., 1969. Controlled burning on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. In: 
Proc. Tall Timbers Fire Ecol. Conf., 9: 241--250. 
Lowe, P.O., Ffolliott, P.F., Dieterich, J.H. and Patton, D.R., 1978. Determining potential 
wildlife benefits from wildfire in Arizona ponderosa pine forests. USDA For. Serv. 
Rocky Mount. For. Range Exp. Stn. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-52, 12 pp. 
Martin, R.E. and Dell, J.D., 1978. Planning for prescribed burning in the inland North- 
west. USDA For. Serv. Pac. Northwest For. Range Exp. Stn. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-76, 
76 pp. 
Nie, N.H., Hull, C.H., Jenkins, J.G. et al., 1975. SPSS: Statistical Package for the Social 
Sciences. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 2nd edn. 
Ohmann, L.F., Grigal, D.F. and Rogers, L.L., 1981. Estimating plant biomass for under- 
growth species of northeastern Minnesota. USDA For. Serv. North Central For. Exp. 
Stn. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-61, 11 pp. 
Oswald, B.P. and Covington, W.W., 1983. Changes in understory production following a 
wildfire in southwestern ponderosa pine. J. Range Manage., 36: 507--509. 
Oswald, B.P. and Covington, W.W., 1984. Effect of a prescribed fire on herbage produc- 
tion in southwestern pine on sedimentary soils. For. Sci., 30: 22--25. 
Payne, G.F., 1974. Cover-weight relationships. J. Range Manage., 27 : 403--404. 
Pearson, H.A., 1967. Phenology of Arizona fescue and mountain muhly in the northern 
Arizona ponderosa pine type. USDA For. Serv. Rocky Mount. For. Range Exp. Stn. 
Res. Note RM-89, 4 pp. 

203 
Reese, G.A., Bayn, R.L. and West, N.E., 1980. Evaluation of double-sampling estimators 
of subalpine herbage production. J. Range Manage., 33: 300--306. 
Sackett, S.S., 1980. Reducing natural ponderosa pine fuels using prescribed fire: two 
case studies. USDA For. Serv. Rocky Mount. For. Range Exp. Stn. Res. Note RM-392, 
6 pp. 
Schubert, G.H., 1974. Silviculture of southwestern ponderosa pine: the status-of-our- 
knowledge. USDA For. Serv. Rocky Mount. For. Range Exp. Stn. Res. Pap. RM-123, 
71 pp. 
Snee, R.D., 1977. Validation of regression models: methods and examples. Techno- 
metrics, 19: 415--428. 
