/ L1635_C31 .qxd 
8/ 18/ 2004 
5: 20 PM 
Page 481 
chapter thirty-one 
Restoration of ponderosa pine forests in 
the interior western U.S. after logging, 
grazing, and fire suppression 
Merrill R. Kaufmann  
USDA Forest Service  
Peter Z. FuM  
Northern Arizona University  
William H. Romme  
Colorado State University  
Kevin C. Ryan  
USDA Forest Service  
Contents 
31.1 Introduction 
.481 
31.2 Historical fire regimes, stand structures, and landscape characteristics 
483
+
+ 
31.2.1 Variation in fire regimes and stand structures 
.483 
31.2.2 Historical landscape structure 
484 
31.3 Current condition of ponderosa pine forests 
485 
31.4 Restoration goals for ecologically sustainable landscapes 
.487 
31.5 Restoration treatment options 
488 
31.6 The concept of a landscape strategy 
490 
31.7 Case examples 
.490 
31.7.1 Northern Arizona, U.S.A. _ including the Greater Flagstaff Forests 
Partnership 
491 
31.7.2 Southwestern Colorado ­
the Ponderosa Pine Partnership 
.492 
31.7.3 East central Colorado ­
the Upper South Platte Watershed Protection 
and Restoration Project 
.493 
31.7.4 Western Montana ­
the Lick Creek Demonstration Study 
494 
31.8 Summary 
496 
References 
.496 
31.1 Introduction 
Ponderosa pine forests are a major forest type found in every state in the western 
Ll.S. They are readily accessible and aesthetically appealing, and they have provided valu­
able economic benefits from logging and grazing. Human activities ha ve contributed to 
1-5667Q-63S-1 / OS{SO.00+$1.50 
© 2005 by CRC Press LLC 
481 

IL1635_C3 1 . QXd 
8/18/ 2004 
5: 20 PM 
Page 48 2 
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests
482 
extensive alteration of these forests. While early Native American effects may have been 
locally Significant (Allen 2002; Allen et a1. 2002; Baker and Kipfmueller 2001; Barrett and 
Arno 1982;Kaye and Swetnam 1999),most impacts in much of the western Ll.S.have prob­
ably occurred during the last 130-150 years, since settlement by Euro-Americans. 
In many western U.S. regions, early photographs, journals written by explorers and 
surveyors, and scientific reports supplement physical evidence of historical forest struc­
ture. Physical evidence includes stand remnants of historical landscapes, fire scars pro­
viding insight into a major stand regulating influence, and residual stumps from early 
logging. Together, these sources of information provide considerable insight into the struc­
tural characteristics of natural ponderosa pine forests and their ecology prior to significant 
human influence (Moore et al. 1999; Swetnam et al. 1999). 
Three varieties of ponderosa pine occur. These are Pacific ponderosa pine (Pinus pon­
derosa var. ponderosa) along the West Coast (particularly Oregon and Washington), Arizona 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa var. arizonica) found in southern Arizona and New Mexico, 
and the Rocky Mountain variety (Pinus ponderosa var. scopulorum) in the interior western 
states (Oliver and Ryker 1990).Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffrey!), found in California and Mexico, 
closely resembles ponderosa pine but is a distinct species. Studies of packrat middens indi­
cate that Rocky Mountain ponderosa pine first occurred in northern New Mexico and 
Arizona about 10,000 to 12,000 years ago, central Colorado only about 5,500 to 7,000 years 
ago, and northern Wyoming and western Montana only about 2,000 years ago, suggesting 
a postglacial northward migration a. Betancourt, U.S. Geological Survey, pers. cornm.). 
+ 
Ponderosa pine generally occurs at the lower elevational life zone of western forests, 
above drier nonforest vegetation types such as grasslands, shrublands, and 
pinyon-juniper woodlands, but below subalpine forests. Because the geographic area nat­
urally occupied by ponderosa pine is very large, significant regional differences exist in 
climate, soils, and topography where ponderosa pine occurs (Oliver and Ryker 1990). In 
many areas of Arizona, Washington, Oregon, and California, and in other areas with suf­
ficient precipitation, site productivity is higher than in most of the interior Rocky 
Mountains where precipitation is lower. 
Historically, wildfire was a keystone regulating process in the ponderosa pine zone 
(Swetnam et al. 1999). Ponderosa pine often dominated this zone because it is consider­
ably better adapted to wildfire than other tree species climatically suited to the same zone. 
Traits associated with fire resistance include open crowns, self-pruning branches, and 
thick relatively inflammable bark (Keeley and Zedler 1998; Graham 2003). Thick scales 
protect buds, and tight needle bunches enclose and protect meristems but open into a 
loose arrangement that does not favor combustion or propagation of flames. The foliage 
generally has high moisture content, and the roots are deep. These fire adaptations 
favored ponderosa pine over fire-sensitive species lacking these features, and wildfire 
often allowed pure or nearly pure ponderosa pine stands to exist. Fires sometimes dam­
aged but did not kill trees, and the study of fire scars provides valuable insight into the 
role of past fires in the ecology of these forests (Swetnam and Baisan 1996;Agee 1998). 
Human effects on ponderosa pine ecosystems include loss of old-growth forests 
through logging, introduction of exotic and often noxious weed species, damaging effects 
of overgrazing, and alteration of natural disturbance patterns such as fire and insect activ­
ity. Many forests that had been pure or nearly pure ponderosa pine now include compet­
ing tree species such as Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesiii or pinon pine (Pinus edulis) and 
Rocky Mountain juniper Uuniperus scopulorum) (Biondi 1996). Nearly all ponderosa pine 
forests are far denser and more vulnerable to crown fire than they were historically. Thus, 
there is a clear need for forest restoration, both on publicly and privately owned lands. 
In this chapter, we begin by summarizing the natural range of variability in stand 
structure, landscape characteristics, and disturbance regimes of ponderosa pine forests 
+ 

IL16 35_C31 .qxd 
8/18/ 2004 
5: 20 PM 
Page 48 3 
+  
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration of ponderosa pineforests in the interior western U.S. 
483 
prior to Euro-American settlement. Next, we examine the changes in these forests that 
have occurred in the last 150 years. Finally, we explore restoration of sustainable pon­
derosa pine ecosystems, and cite four specific case studies from across the Rocky 
Mountain region. We focus on Rocky Mountain ponderosa pine forests, found from west­
ern Montana to Arizona and east through the Rocky Mountains and into the Great Plains. 
The interior variety occurs in the elevational zone between grasslands, desert scrub, or 
pinon-juniper forests at lower elevations and mixed conifer or subalpine forests at higher 
elevations. However, much of the content of this chapter is applicable for the Pacific and 
Arizona varieties and to Jeffrey pine. 
31.2  Historical fire regimes, stand structures, and landscape 
characteristics 
31.2.1 Variation in fire regimes and stand structures 
While fire historically maintained ponderosa pine forests throughout its range, regional 
differences in fire regimes had significant effects on the structure of historical forest stands 
and landscapes. Three categories of factors affect how a fire behaves: fuels or vegetative 
structure, topography and other physical site characteristics, and weather. Relatively sub­
tle differences in ponderosa pine stand development exist across the geographic range of 
the species, but in combination with physical site characteristics and weather, significant 
contrasts exist in fire behavior patterns and assemblages of stands into a landscape struc­
ture. In this chapter, we recognize two primary types of historical fire regimes in pon­
derosa pine forests: surface-fire regimes, in which fires burned at generally low to 
moderate intensity throughout a stand and caused little canopy mortality; and mixed­
severity fire regimes, in which fires burned at variable intensity, producing patches where 
canopy mortality was nearly complete as well as patches of low canopy mortality. 
Regional differences in historical fire behavior probably stemmed in large part from 
differences in understory productivity and fuel accumulation, which are influenced by 
precipitation and its seasonality, and crown base height, which may have been influenced 
by surface fire frequency and flame heights and by site productivity. In the southwestern 
U.S; frequent low-intensity surface fires were common in historical ponderosa pine 
forests, with mean fire intervals often less than 10 years (Swetnam and Baisan 1996;Brown 
et al. 2001;Allen et al. 2002).Stand-replacing fires were rare (Woolsey 1911;Cooper 1960), 
and tree mortality was more common among seedlings and small saplings than in larger 
trees. In the southwestern Ll.S; summer monsoon moisture flow provides enough rainfall 
for high understory productivity. When dry, the grass and forb biomass provided a con­
tinuous fuelbed for the spread of surface fire, particularly following wet EI Nifio events 
(Swetnam and Betancourt 1998).Trees grew taller in these sites, and self-pruning of lower 
branches (perhaps enhanced by surface fires) resulted in high crown base heights that lim­
ited the likelihood of crown fires (Figure 31.1). Furthermore, the frequent surface fires min­
imized the establishment of seedlings, which would have provided subcanopy fuel 
ladders to move fire from the surface into the canopy. 
Fires were less frequent farther north in the southern and central Rocky Mountains, 
where intervals between landscape-scale fires often exceeded 40 or even 50 years 
(Goldblum and Veblen 1992; Brown and Seig 1996; Brown et al. 1999, 2000; Brown and 
Shepperd 2001; Kaufmann et al. 2001; Donnegan et al. 2001). Frequently, fires in these 
more inland areas were mixed in severity, having a nonlethal surface fire component inter­
mixed with a lethal component that killed the overstory, often in a patchy pattern. Surface 
fuels may have been inadequate to spread surface fires during most years. In the absence 
of frequent surface fires, shrub communities often developed in the open forests, and fuels 
+ 

!L1635_C31. QXd 
8/18/2004 
5:2 0 PM 
Page 484 
484 
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests 
Figure 31.1 Historical low-density ponderosa pine forest in the southwestern U.S. (U.S. Forest 
Service file photo). 
+ 
accumulated beneath the crowns of trees. Furthermore, the crown base height was lower, 
and in the absence of surface fires small trees probably were more common and created 
fuel ladders. This resulted in portions of forests becoming vulnerable to crown fires, and 
in occasional periods of higher precipitation, grasses and forbs may have provided 
enough surface fuels for fire spread. The result was mixed-severity fires, with portions 
spreading only on the surface, and in other places killing some trees either by torching or 
scorching of individual trees or by localized crown fires (Figure 31.2). But in some places, 
fire completely killed all trees and created new openings having no trees. The type of fire 
behavior at any site undoubtedly depended on local understory and overstory fuel con­
ditions, topography, and weather. Evidence suggests that the proportions of each fire 
effect in mixed-severity fires varied widely (Brown et al 1999; Kaufmann et al. 2000a; 
Veblen et al. 2000; Huckaby et al. 2001). Furthermore, these fires historically burned 
through much of the year, which also would contribute to variable fire effects. 
The surface-fire regime was more common in the southwest, and the mixed-severity 
fire regime occurred more commonly in the eastern and northern portions of the Rocky 
Mountain ponderosa pine range. However, local variation in fire regimes undoubtedly 
occurred, and the transition geographically from surface to mixed-severity fire regimes 
was probably gradual across latitude and elevation. There is an analytical difficulty in 
sorting out fire regimes. Required data include not only evidence of fire frequency and 
mean fire return interval under historical conditions but also evidence of tree ages and 
spatial patterns of fires and tree survival. The ages of trees help determine specific loca­
tions within fire perimeters where fire was stand-replacing and where it was not. Without 
this critical information, it is often difficult to determine the actual historical fire regime 
governing landscapes over time. No evidence of a true crown-fire system (Romme and 
Despain 1989; Turner and Rornrne 1994) has been found in ponderosa pine-dominated 
landscapes, except for one study that suggested extensive 19th-eentury crown fires in part 
of the Black Hills, SD (Shinneman and Baker 1997). 
31.2.2 
Historical landscape structure 
The surface and mixed-severity fire behavior patterns, in combination with regional dif­
ferences in site productivity, resulted in very different landscape structures. More uniform 
forest landscapes developed where surface fires occurred frequently, particularly in areas 
+ 

IL1635_C31 . QXd 
8/18/2004 
5:20 PM 
Page 485 
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration of ponderosa pineforests in the interior western U.S. 
485 
Figure 31.2 Historical forest structure in December1896after a mixed severity fire in 1880(from 
Denver Waterphoto archives). 
+ 
with a relatively flat topography (Figure 31.1). These forests were generally low in density 
and dominated by large overstory trees. Forest stands were locally patchy with small 
clumps of trees and many small openings (generally considerably less than one ha). At a 
larger scale, landscapes may have included larger openings that were relatively stable 
over long periods, perhaps influenced by local variations in soil characteristics (Weaver 
1951; Cooper 1%0; White 1985; Covington and Moore 1994; Pule et al. 1997; Pule et al. 
2002a). 
In contrast, more complex and dynamic forest landscapes developed in regions where 
the mixed-severity fire behavior pattern predominated (Figure 31.2). Denser patches of 
trees may have existed but were not extensive, and open woodlands and openings with 
no trees were common. Landscapes were patchy and heterogeneous, and periodic fires 
and sporadic tree recruitment into openings or open woodlands contributed to constant 
changes in landscape structure over time. 
31.3 Current condition of ponderosa pine forests 
Ponderosa pine forests occur in relatively accessible terrain, and winter snow packs usu­
ally do not limit year-round access. Accordingly, pine forests throughout the west were 
widely exploited soon after Euro-American settlement, and more than a century of log­
ging and grazing, coupled with nearly a century of fire suppression, resulted in a very dif­
ferent forest structure than occurred historically in most areas (Kaufmann et al. 1992; 
Covington and Moore 1994). Fire exclusion began in most areas with the onset of exten­
sive, unregulated livestock grazing in the late 1800s, apparently because the animals con­
sumed the fine herbaceous fuels that formerly carried surface fires (Allen et al. 2002). 
Aggressive fire suppression policies instituted in the early 1900s resulted in continued 
exclusion of surface fires (Pyne 1982). Logging removed many of the larger and older trees 
and created an environment for germination and establishment of many new trees (Veblen 
+ 

IL1 635_C31. QXd 
8/18/2004 
5: 20 PM 
Page 486 
+  
486 
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests 
and Lorenz 1991; Covington and Moore 1994; Kaufmann et aI. 2000a; Friederici 2003). 
Livestock grazing, particularly cattle, reduced understory competition for seedlings and 
reduced fuels for the spread of surface fire, which further favored germination and sur­
vival of new seedlings (Belsky and Blumenthal 1997; Baisan and Swetnam 1997). 
Examples of forest condition prior to logging and change over time caused by logging and 
fire suppression are shown in Figure 31.3 and Figure 31.4. Fire suppression removed the 
major natural disturbance that historically kept tree density low, and large tree regenera­
tion events occurred during climatically favorable periods (Savage et al. 1996). Together, 
these practices resulted in dense, relatively uniform stands and landscapes dominated by 
young, small trees. 
During the 20th century, millions of ha of ponderosa pine forest developed much 
higher stand densities and canopy cover, and they became vulnerable to catastrophically 
large crown fires and damage to watersheds, and massive bark beetle epidemics. For 
Figure 31.3 Example of urban encroachment into ponderosa pine forest, creating a wildland/urban 
interface zone in which property and lives are at risk of fire (photograph by David Steinke, USDA 
Forest Service). 
Figure 31.4 Current condition of ponderosa pine forest on a north aspect near Cheesman Lake in 
the Colorado Front Range (photo by M.R. Kaufmann). 
+ 

IL1 635_C31 . QXd 
8/18 /2 004 
5:2 0 PM Page 487 
+  
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration ofponderosa pine forests in the interior western U.S. 
487 
example, in the Colorado Front Range on the east face of the southern Rocky Mountains, 
a series of large wildfires occurred since 1996,most exceeding 4,000ha, each having a large 
crown-fire component, and each well outside the range of fire severity that occurred his­
torically (Brown et al. 1999; Graham 2003; M. Kaufmann, unpublished data). The 55,000­
ha Hayman fire in June 2002 burned the Cheesman Lake landscape, a major research site 
for studies on historical ponderosa pine landscape characteristics (Brown et al. 1999; 
Kaufmann et al. 2000b, 2001, 2003; Huckaby et al. 2001; Fornwalt et al. 2002, 2003). Many 
of these forests also had large amounts of fuel created by a mountain pine bark beetle epi­
demic in the 1970s, exacerbated by high stand densities and tree crowding. 
Where surface-fire regimes occurred historically, the recent crown fires are highly 
atypical (Woolsey 1911; Weaver 1951). Where mixed-severity fires occurred historically, 
the current crown-fire patch size appears to be considerably larger than occurred histori­
cally because of a greater accumulation of fuels in the past century or more (Kaufmann et 
al. 2000b, 2001). In both the surface and mixed-severity fire systems, large crown fires are 
not consistent with ecological sustainability. They result in large areas of charred forest 
that are vulnerable to excessive erosion and invasion by exotic plant species (Griffis et al. 
2001), and they are unsuited for native species that favor historical forest structures. In 
addition, human population growth and urban encroachment into forests have placed 
people's lives and property at risk (Figure 31.3). More than half of the forest in many west­
ern counties is classified as a wildland/urban interface. 
31.4 Restoration goals for ecologically sustainable landscapes 
Large crown fires in ponderosa pine forests reset the forest landscape to an unforested con­
dition. Reestablishment of older forests takes at least several centuries, as the old-growth 
condition does not occur until ponderosa pine trees are about 200 years old (Kaufmann 
1996), and the oldest trees in unlogged landscapes are often more than 400 or even 600 
years of age (Huckaby et al. 2001). Re-formation of soils and recovery of genetic diversity 
takes even longer; thus, the negative effects of large crown fires persist for a long time. In 
contrast, carefully designed forest treatments offer opportunities to improve forest struc­
ture, composition, and processes while reducing the likelihood of an ecological reset by 
large crown fire. 
Differences in fire effects of the two natural fire behavior systems described above 
(surface and mixed-severity fire regimes) provide a basis for different approaches in for­
est restoration across the range of interior ponderosa pine forests. Where surface fire pre­
dominated historically, restored forests would be relatively uniform at a large scale, with 
fine-scale patchiness (on the order of tenths of a ha) provided by irregular tree distribution 
and small openings. Where mixed-severity fires occurred, however, the scale of pa tchiness 
would be larger (one to tens or hundreds of ha), reflecting the thinning or stand-replacing 
components of fire and irregular spatial and temporal patterns of tree establishment 
(Huckaby et al. 2001; Kaufmann et al. 2000a; Kaufmann et al. 2003). Because of differences 
in historical fire effects on landscape structure, no single set of management recommen­
dations for restoration is appropriate across the entire range of ponderosa pine . Other dif­
ferences, such as soil characteristics, patterns of nonfire disturbance, climate, or 
topography, also vary, underscoring the importance of site-specific restoration 
approaches. Finally, management goals and social issues commonly preclude "strict 
restoration" practices that are based exclusively on ecological factors (Higgs 1997). 
It is noteworthy that restoring forests to regionally specific conditions similar to those 
occurring historically would address both the sustainability and wildfire hazard issues. 
Where properties or other human values are at risk, thinning forests and creating fuel 
breaks having a very low overstory density could reduce wildfire hazards. Such thinning 
+ 

I L1635_C31 . QXd 
8/18/2004 
5 : 20 PM 
Page 488 
t  
488 
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests 
would also lead to improved ecological sustainability where surface fire predominated 
historically. The restoration of a more complex landscape structure where mixed-severity 
fires occurred would also require thinning, but restoring dispersed patches of open wood­
lands and openings would be necessary to provide an ecologically sustainable landscape. 
A restored complex landscape would also provide considerable reduction in wildfire haz­
ard. Therefore, forest restoration can mitigate wildfire hazards while also achieving eco­
logical goals appropriate for each region. 
Spatial scale is important. Forest restoration can be accomplished at nearly any scale, 
from stand to landscape. Even small-scaled restoration activities near a house may pro­
vide ecological benefits. However, landscape restoration requires that forest conditions be 
improved at a spatial scale of landscape processes such as fire or maintenance of viable 
species populations. Landscape restoration necessarily is a huge undertaking with many 
potential social, economic, and ecological issues and impediments. 
Ideally, ponderosa pine restoration would yield forests having appropriate tree age 
and size distributions, properly configured spatially across the landscape to support a tra­
jectory of future self-regulation of the landscape. Historically, ponderosa pine forests had 
a high percentage of old-growth trees, even in complex landscapes where mixed-severity 
fires often killed trees and created openings (Huckaby et al. 2001). Many current forests 
still have at least some old-growth trees, easily recognized by characteristic features of 
their tree crowns and branches (Kaufmann 1996; Huckaby et al. 2003). This aids in restor­
ing the appropriate tree age distribution in forest landscapes (Mast et al. 1999). Large, 
young trees approach the size of old trees found in historical forests (Kaufmann et al 
2000b; Allen et al. 2002). Where old trees are rare, these trees are candidates for retention. 
However, retention of all large trees ultimately leads to overstocked stands and increased 
wildfire hazard in some stands, and where openings should be re-created, such trees 
clearly must be removed. The number of smaller trees usually far exceeds historical den­
sities, however, and small trees contribute significantly to current wildfire hazards. 
31.5 Restoration treatment options 
Forest restoration at any scale requires a careful consideration of the result desired and of 
the social acceptability of restoration alternatives. Land managers have three basic 
options: continue current fire suppression policies with no other treatment to forests; 
attempt to restore more sustainable forest structure and dynamics by means of natural or 
prescribed fire only; and actively restore more natural stand and landscape structures by 
means of mechanical thinning, prescribed fire, and other techniques. The first two options 
probably are not feasible. While leaving forests alone or using fires without mechanical 
thinning is appealing for certain ecological and social reasons (Cole 2001), fire suppression 
is simply not reliable enough to protect forests from fire. Thus, relying on fire suppression 
to hold ponderosa pine landscapes in their current condition without attempting restora­
tion is difficult and hazardous. 
In certain remote wildlands, a bum-only approach to restoration may be useful (Miller 
and Urban 2000). In a vast majority of ponderosa pine landscapes, however, high tree den­
sities and biomass have already resulted in catastrophic crown fires well outside the his­
torical patterns. Thus, the best alternative both ecologically and socially is the third option: 
manipulate ponderosa pine forest structure to align it with conditions that occurred natu­
rally, thereby placing these forests on a trajectory of future self-regulation. Many agencies 
are carrying out fuel hazard and wildland fire use projects that involve the combination of 
thinning and prescribed fire, although the scale of the work is inadequate. 
Two major types of treatment, mechanical thinning accompanied by removal of bio­
mass, and the use of fire to reduce fuels, have proven useful for reducing forest density 
t  

I L1635_C31 . QXd 
8/18/ 2004 
5: 20 PM 
Page 489 
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration of ponderosa pineforests in the interior western U.S. 
489 
and biomass. In many ponderosa pine forests, there are 10 to 20 or more times as many 
trees as there were historically (Kaufmann et al. 2001). Compare a historical forest in the 
Colorado Front Range (Figure 31.2) with a current forest only 2 krn away (Figure 31.4), for 
example. Felling trees but leaving slash in the forest does not appear to be a viable option. 
Subsequent fires are too intense and generally kill the retained trees. Converting trees into 
mulch with grinding machines is another option considered below. 
Thinning from below in forests that historically had a surface fire regime can reduce 
the density of smaller trees while retaining both old trees and an appropriate diameter 
class distribution. Where mixed-severity fires occurred, some forest patches require thin­
ning, but in other areas treatment should lead to either openings (complete clearcut) or 
open woodlands, both of which remove Significant numbers of overs tory trees regardless 
of size or even age. In a Colorado Front Range ponderosa pine landscape, 42% of the land 
area was estimated to have a historical canopy cover of 10% or less, 40% had between 11 
and 30%, and only 7% had 35% canopy cover or higher (Kaufmann et al. 2001; Fornwalt 
et al. 2002; M. Kaufmann, unpublished data). In contrast, only 21% of current forests have 
a canopy cover of 10% or less, and 45% have a canopy cover of 35% or higher. At canopy 
covers of 35% or higher, crown fire occurs readily when other conditions are favorable for 
fire. 
Prescribed fire is used to reduce wildfire hazard by reducing forest biomass, especially 
fine fuels and small trees (Figure 31.5). By choosing conditions under which to use pre­
scribed fire, forest managers can effectively reduce wildfire hazards in many cases, and in 
rare instances may be able to recreate small openings or low-density patches by mortality 
of the overstory. However, prescribed burning by itself rarely can accomplish the changes 
in forest structure needed to make forests ecologically sustainable and safe from cata­
strophic fire. In many forests, a dense understory of smaller trees makes prescribed burn­
ing too likely to progress into a catastrophic crown fire. Furthermore, prescribed fire 
consumes deep litter accumulated beneath older trees, often producing enough heat to 
damage roots and kill trees that should be retained (Swezy and Agee 1991; Sackett et al. 
1996). In general, it is difficult to remove enough biomass with prescribed fire, or to 
achieve the appropriate patch and forest structure needed to restore the landscape. 
The use of both mechanical thinning and prescribed fire is very promising, however. 
Thinning can be used to reduce overstory density and canopy closure to levels found 
+ 
Figure 31.5 Use of prescribed fire in Arizona to reduce understory fuels. 

IL1 635_C31. QXd 
8/18/2004 
5:20 PM 
Page 49 0 
+  
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests
490 
historically, thereby reducing the likelihood of active crown fire (fire spread from crown to 
crown). One additional option is the use of machines that chop or grind entire trees into 
chunks and scatter them in the forest. This process converts living biomass to material 
scattered on the ground, leaving it in a form that can be consumed with prescribed fire but 
not resulting in flame heights that lead to crown fires. However, such tree mulching is 
costly and has no potential for economic return, and at least temporary shifts in site nitro­
gen balance are likely. 
Prescribed fire is useful for consuming slash and small trees left after mechanical treat­
ment operations. Furthermore, prescribed burning is a primary tool for treatment in sub­
sequent years, and in inaccessible areas. Frequently, soil disturbance during mechanical 
treatments and more open stand conditions creates favorable conditions for reproduction. 
In a few decades, treatment benefits are quickly lost. Prescribed fire may be an effective 
tool for limiting ingrowth after mechanical treatment. In areas having a historical surface­
fire regime, relatively frequent prescribed fire could be used to mimic the historical fire 
effects. In areas having a mixed-severity fire regime, prescribed fire might be timed to kill 
new seedlings a few years after mechanical treatment, but subsequent prescribed fire may 
not be required for several decades. 
31.6 The concept of a landscape strategy 
Millions of ha of ponderosa pine forests are in poor ecological condition and pose high risk 
to human lives and property; yet on an annual basis, restoration treatments involving 
mechanical thinning are applied to only thousands of ha. Given the staggering economic 
and human resources needed for large-scale restoration, a strategy for implementing 
restoration in stages is needed to optimize the use of limited resources. This strategy 
should provide the largest ecological and wildfire mitigation benefits over the greatest 
amount of land in a reasonable time and at a low cost per ha, while minimizing social dis­
ruption. Considerable information is available to develop at least parts of such a strategy. 
Like adaptive management, the development of a restoration strategy should be consid­
ered an iterative process that begins with locally relevant scientific information for devel­
oping the desired ecological outcome. 
The effect of fire behavior in the landscape is one strategic factor. For wildfire man­
agement, there is growing scientific evidence that under some circumstances, treating only 
a portion of a landscape in an appropriate treatment pattern may significantly alter crown 
fire spread for areas much larger than those treated (Finney 2001). Thus, carefully posi­
tioning fuel break treatments in areas having highly erosive soils or where critical habitats 
need protection may leverage treatment benefits to larger areas. More information of the 
ecological consequences of alternative treatment patterns across the landscape is needed. 
Similarly, mechanical thinning treatments may be made less costly by positioning 
them in areas already lower in tree density or that are more accessible, and optimizing the 
use of less costly prescribed fire in concert with mechanical treatments may expand treat­
ment benefits to larger areas at reduced cost. Furthermore, some trees may have economic 
value as forest products. 
31.7 Case examples 
Several ongoing projects in Arizona, Colorado, and Montana illustrate that forest restora­
tion of ponderosa pine forests at a landscape scale can be accomplished while accommo­
dating differences in regional fire behavior patterns and in the importance of issues at a 
local scale. Several features are common among all the case studies and are summarized 
here. First, all sites have suffered ecologically from the effects of logging, grazing, and fire 
+ 

IL 1635_C31 . QXd 
8 / 18 / 2004 
5: 20 PM Page 491 
+  
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration of ponderosa pineforests in the interior western U.S. 
491 
suppression that led to dense and fairly uniform forests dominated by young, small-diam­
eter trees (Figure 31.3 and Figure 31.4). Second, all are highly vulnerable to large crown 
fires and are ecologically unsustainable in their present condition. Third, each site had pre­
viously provided adequate material to support forest products industries, but industry 
presence is now limited or nonexistent. Fourth, all sites provide a range of other ameni­
ties, including hunting, firewood gathering, and general recreation. 
While similar in many ways, these sites vary in other features, such as the degree of 
urban encroachment, role as municipal watersheds, concern about endangered and inva­
sive species, and especially the approaches taken by partnerships to achieve improvement 
in ecological condition and reduction in wildfire hazard. They also differ in the potential 
to reestablish a viable industry that can assist in restoration activities through forest prod­
uct markets. The case studies below are presented in order of increasing latitude from 
Arizona to Montana, and generally reflect a transition from surface fire regimes to mixed­
severity fire regimes. 
31.7.1  Northern Arizona, U.S.A. -
including the Greater Flagstaff Forests 
Partnership 
The high country of Arizona and New Mexico supports nearly 3 million ha of ponderosa 
pine and lower mixed conifer forests (Fiedler et al. 2002; O'Brien 2002), distributed among 
several national forests, national parks, and Native American lands. In New Mexico, over 
90% of these forests are considered at moderate or high risk of crown fire due to dense 
stand structure and accumulated fuels (Fiedler et al. 2002). A long legacy of research has 
shown that the exclusion of frequent surface fires changed southwestern pine forests from 
open to dense conditions, dominated by fuel ladders of small, crowded trees (Weaver 
1951; Cooper 1960; Covington and Moore 1994;Swetnam et al. 1999). The consequences of 
increased fuels may have been masked by unusually wet conditions from the mid-1970s 
to mid-1990s (Salzer in press), but a drought period beginning in 1996 has led to large and 
severe wildfires such as the Rodeo-Chediski fire of 2002, which covered approximately 
190,000 ha . Recent landscape-scale bark beetle outbreaks, previously not seen in the south­
west (Sanchez-Martinez and Wagner 2002), may further exacerbate fire behavior. 
A pioneering attempt at restoring forest structure and function was initiated in 
Arizona in 1992 by Covington et al. (1997). Treated areas showed significant improve­
ments in old-growth tree photosynthesis, reduced moisture stress, increased insect resist­
ance (Feeney et al. 1998; Stone et al. 1999), higher understory plant productivity 
(Covington et al. 1997), and altered nutrient transformations and hydrological responses 
(Kaye and Hart 1998; Kaye et al. 1999). This set of findings provides a strong scientific 
basis for viewing treatments as restoring ecosystem-level patterns of structure and func­
tion, not simply as ameliorating fuel hazards. 
The largest restoration project to date, on Bureau of Land Management lands in north­
western Arizona, covers 1,200 ha (Moore et al. 1999; Waltz et al. 2003). This scale is large 
enough to address invertebrate (Meyer and Sisk 2001) and vertebrate responses (Germaine 
and Germaine 2002). Different silvicultural approaches also are being evaluated, including 
tests of multiple levels of thinning and burn-only treatments (Fule et al. 2001a, 2001b, 
2002b). The degree of thinning was directly related to reduction in potential crown fire 
behavior, as measured by fire behavior modeling (Scott 1998). Empirical evidence of the 
effectiveness of thinning in reducing wildfire intensity in Arizona was also reported by 
Pollet and Omi (2002). 
As in other areas of the U.S., the social context of forest restoration has been clouded 
with disagreement and distrust between some environmental activist groups and govern­
mental agencies such as the Ll.S. Forest Service. A novel collaboration ha s attempted to 
+ 

!L1635_C31 . QXd 
8/18 /2004 
5: 20 PM 
Page 492 
+  
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests
492 
create consensus. The Greater Flagstaff Forests Partnership (2004)was formed after severe 
wildfires in 1996 by nongovernmental organizations, Northern Arizona University, 
municipal and county governments, and other stakeholders, to work with the Coconino 
National Forest to restore forests around the city of Flagstaff, Arizona. 
The Partnership and its restoration efforts have not been free of controversy. However, by 
2004the first project was nearly complete, and a series of subsequent projects were also mov­
ing forward. The Partnership's work is becoming a useful example of the role of collabora­
tion and its limitations in southwestern forest restoration (Moseley and KenCaim 2(01). 
31.7.2 
Southwestern Colorado -
the Ponderosa Pine Partnership 
The Ponderosa Pine Partnership in southwestern Colorado began in 1992 with concerns 
about a dwindling supply of large trees for the local timber industry and overly dense 
forests of smaller trees vulnerable to destructive wildfires, insect outbreaks, and loss of 
biodiversity. A public partnership of local national forest administrators, government offi­
cials, and representatives of the timber industry sought constructive and sustainable solu­
tions to these problems. A scientific assessment of the ecological history and current state 
of the landscape (Lynch et al. 2000; Romme et a1. 2(03) demonstrated natural and human 
disturbance histories much like those documented in northern Arizona and many other 
places throughout western North America. Reconstructions of past canopy density in 
three representative stands ranged from 37 to 59 trees/ha, whereas current densities range 
from 178 to 338 trees/ha in the same stands (Romme et al. 2003). 
The Ponderosa Pine Partnership designed a restoration treatment experiment to test 
the effectiveness of reaching four goals: reduce canopy density and basal area, leaving 
clumps of trees interspersed with small openings similar to those of pre-1880 stands; rein­
troduce low-intensity fire; stimulate productivity and diversity of suppressed herbaceous 
plants on the forest floor; and provide timber for local sawmills, mostly from small-diam­
eter trees, and to find markets that would allow the companies to harvest small-diameter 
timber without losing money. 
The prescription for achieving these objectives included three stages: retention of the 
largest and oldest trees and a cluster of trees of all sizes surrounding each large or old tree; 
fuel reduction with prescribed fire; and ecological and economic monitoring, including a 
complete accounting of loggers' costs and revenues associated with the project (Romme et 
al. 2003). 
Treatments were conducted from 1995 to 1998, and monitoring was done from 1995 to 
2001. The ecological objectives were largely achieved, but monitoring results provided 
guidelines for improving the results as the project moved forward (Lynch et al. 2000; 
Romme et al. 2003). Treatments did not significantly reduce the quantity of downed 
woody fuels on the forest floor, and additional prescribed burning was recommended. The 
combination of canopy thinning and prescribed burning led to dramatic increases in 
herbaceous cover and diversity. The economic objective was only partially achieved, the 
largest obstacle being the lack of suitable markets for small-diameter material (Romme et 
al. 2003). Numerous creative alternatives for adding value to forest products were 
explored with only limited success. Overall, the loggers' profit in the entire operation was 
less than 1% of gross revenues. 
In 2001, a scientific review team generally endorsed the approach being taken, and 
encouraged the partnership to expand restoration treatments from the 20 to 40 ha experi­
mental stands to much larger units. The team recommended creating larger tree clusters 
and larger open areas than had been accomplished to date, to better emulate the pre-1880 
spatial pattern and to provide more appropriate wildlife habitat. The partnership is using 
these recommendations to develop restoration timber sales for much larger units. 
+ 

I L1635_C31 . QXd 
8/18 / 2 004 
5: 20 PM 
Page 493 
+  
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration of ponderosapine forests in the interior western U.S. 
493 
Overall, an ecologically sound restoration prescription has been developed, tested, 
and refined, and can now be applied more extensively throughout the 75,OOO-ha 
ponderosa pine landscape in southwestern Colorado. The local community has supported 
restoration treatments without legal challenges by environmental or industry groups that 
often hold up projects of this kind, in large part because of early involvement of 
researchers and all stakeholder groups in formulating restoration treatments, plus the 
transparent development and evaluation of the experimental prescription. The largest 
challenge is financial: the restoration prescription has been only marginally profitable at 
best. Ultimately, the single greatest economic need for forest restoration projects of this 
kind is the development of alternative, profitable markets for small-diameter material 
(Lynch and Mackes 2002). This challenge is being addressed by several institutions, such 
as the Interior West Center for the Innovative Use of Small Diameter Trees, located at 
Colorado State University. 
31.7.3  East central Colorado -
the Upper South Platte Watershed Protection 
and Restoration Project 
The Upper South Platte Project was initiated in the South Platte watershed southwest of 
Denver, CO, after the 5,OOO-ha Buffalo Creek fire in 1996. A series of subsequent fires in 
2000 and 2002, most spectacularly the 55,OOO-ha Hayman fire (Graham 2003), contributed 
to both local and national action on forest restoration. In nearly every case, fire severity 
was far worse than experienced historically, illustrating a major problem with respect to 
forest condition in the Colorado Front Range (Kaufmann et al. 2001; Graham 2003). Many 
structures were burned, and erosion introduced massive amounts of sediment into the 
metropolitan water supply for Denver, CO. Five firefighters were killed en route to the 
Hayman fire. Three pilots were killed during aerial suppression activities for a smaller fire 
near an urban area, and two residents died during postfire flooding. 
The continued occurrence of large fires in the Colorado Front Range ponderosa pine 
zone leads to several conclusions. First, a threshold of forest condition has been reached in 
which current forests have become particularly vulnerable to large crown fires. Second, 
there is an urgency to implement restoration and wildland fire hazard mitigation to pro­
tect both ecosystems and human values at risk. And third, the scale of treatments must be 
massive, given the spatial extent of the ponderosa pine zone in the Colorado Front Range 
and the huge amount of urban encroachment into this zone. 
The 1996 Buffalo Creek fire led to the establishment of a partnership to establish goals 
focused on protecting watersheds and improving the ecological condition of forests. After 
the 2000 and 2002 fires, a Front Range Fuel Treatment Partnership was formed to address 
the condition of ponderosa pine forests in the entire Front Range area (several million ha), 
with an increased focus on the wildland/urban interface. 
Research on the historical ecology of Front Range ponderosa pine forests has been a 
compelling factor guiding restoration efforts. A major portion of this research was con­
ducted on the Cheesman Lake ponderosa pine landscape in the South Platte watershed. 
While this unlogged 3,OOO-ha landscape was completely destroyed by the 2002 Hayman 
fire, it provided exceptional insight into the effects of natural fire behavior and tree recruit­
ment patterns on historical ponderosa pine landscape structure and change over time 
(Brown et a11999; Kaufmann et al. 2000b, 2001, 2003; Huckaby et al. 2001,2003; Fornwalt 
et al. 2002, 2003). This research demonstrated not only that the ecological condition of cur­
rent forests was poor, but that characteristics of historical forests could be used to guide 
treatment selection and implementation. 
Initial partners included the Ll.S, Forest Service (both national forest management and 
research), Colorado State Forest Service, Denver Water, Ll.S, Fish and Wildlife Service, 
+ 

IL1635_C31 . QXd 
8/18 / 2004 
5 :2 0 PM 
Page 494 
494 
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests 
U.S. Geological Survey, and U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service. More recently, 
environmental organizations have become constructively engaged in moving restoration 
activities forward. Efforts have been aided by large-scale landscape assessments to iden­
tify high-priority watershed and wildland/urban interface areas for initial restoration 
treatments on both publicly and privately owned land. Public meetings presenting the sci­
entific information available and demonstration sites aided early acceptance of restoration 
concepts. 
From the inception of the restoration project, activities focused on practicing good 
ecology by altering forest structure toward conditions found before Euro-American settle­
ment. These activities are reducing the probability of crown fires around structures and in 
watershed areas most critically in need of protection from erosion. Activities also focused 
on the protection of two endangered species: the Pawnee montane skipper (a butterfly) 
and the Prebles meadow jumping mouse. Both mechanical thinning and prescribed fire 
are being used to improve ecological sustainability and mitigate wildfire hazards. 
Thinning includes both decreasing tree density and canopy cover and creating openings 
similar to those found historically. This creates fuel breaks that protect property in the 
wildland/urban interface and limit the size of new crown fires. It also improves butterfly 
habitat by creating grassy openings. Prescribed fire is focused on reducing fuels where it 
is safe to do so and burning slash from mechanical treatments; fire will also be used to 
limit regeneration. Currently, the combined areas of mechanical thinning and prescribed 
burning treatments are approaching tens of thousands of ha annually. As with other proj­
ects, the low economic value of small-diameter trees is a major limitation for large-scale 
treatment. 
+ 
31.7.4 Western Montana -
the Lick Creek Demonstration Study 
In 1982,George Gruell, a pioneer in the use of repeat photography, and his associates pub­
lished a series of photographs that documented 70 years of management-era change on 
the structure and composition of ponderosa pine forests (Gruell et al. 1982). They pro­
posed the use of partial cutting and prescribed burning to restore ecological conditions. 
This led in 1991 to the initiation of the Lick Creek Demonstration Study on the Bitterroot 
National Forest in west central Montana, documented in a compendium by Smith and 
Arno (1999). Prior to 1900, light surface fires, believed to have been caused by lightning, 
burned the area on average every 7 years (Arno 1976; Gruell et al. 1982). The forest con­
sisted primarily of large mature and old-growth pines with grass and forb understory. 
Based on reconstruction of stand structure, the pines appear to have been predominantly 
in the 200- to 400-year range (Arno et al. 1995; Menakis 1994). 
Management of the Lick Creek site began in 1906. Gifford Pinchot, the first Chief of 
the U.S. Forest Service (1905 to 1910) and classically trained at the French National 
Forestry School in Nancy, France, instructed the marking of the trees for cutting (Smith 
and Arno 1999). The original stand averaged 124 trees per ha. About half the trees were 
cut favoring larger-diameter trees (trees over 48 em), and about two thirds of the volume 
was removed. In the 1950s and 1960s, multiple harvests that favored cutting of the larger 
pines, combined with fire suppression, led to substantial loss of ecological integrity and a 
conversion to a stand replacement fire regime (Figure 31.6) (Gruell et aI. 1982; Smith and 
Arno 1999). 
In 1991,a series of replicated treatments was located on 215ha. Three silvicultural sys­
tems were tested and combined with varying fuel treatments and controls, and commer­
cial harvesting was conducted in 1992. Treatment effects on trees, understory vegetation, 
soil nutrients and microbial populations, wildlife forage, and avian use were monitored 
and evaluated (Smith and Amo 1999). Silvicultural treatments included retention or 
+ 

/ ',1 63 5_C31 . QXd 
8/18/2004 
5 :20 PM Page 49 5 
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration of ponderosa pineforests in the interior western U.S. 
495 
+  
Figure31.6 Lick Creek restoration site in 1979. 
Figure31.7 Lick Creek restoration site after thinning treatment (U.S.ForestServicefilephoto). 
irregular shelterwood cutting, prescribed for areas that consisted predominantly of sec­
ond-growth pine 80 to 85 years old, followed by two levels of prescribed burning to treat 
fuels and rejuvenate understory vegetation; modified individual tree selection cut (Fiedler 
et al. 1988) with and without prescribed fire on an area of primarily uneven-aged pon­
derosa pine ranging from seedlings to old-growth trees up to 400 years in age; and com­
mercial thinning in an area where precommercial thinning had taken place in the 1960s, 
with and without prescribed fire. The cutting and burning prescriptions were designed, in 
general, to greatly reduce all Douglas fir and to reduce ponderosa pine primarily in the 
middle- and smaller-size classes. Additional mortality occurred predominantly in the 
smaller-size classes 2 to 5 years after treatments, due to fire injury and bark beetle attack. 
The early effects of the treatments on the various response variables are numerous and too 
complex to describe in this chapter, but are documented by Smith and Amo (1999). 
However, the treatments were generally successful at achieving the desired stand struc­
ture and species composition and at reducing fuels and fire potential in all of the areas 
(Figure 31.7). Total cover of understory species surpassed pretreatment levels by the 
+ 

IL1635_C31 . QXd 
8/ 18/ 2004 
5:20 PM 
Page 496 
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests
496 
second year, particularly in burned treatments. An increase in the presence of invasive 
weeds and heavy wildlife foraging, particularly in burned areas, compromised some of 
the restoration goals. Soil studies indicate few significant effects beyond the second year. 
The restoration of Lick Creek was not without public controversy. Despite many pub­
lic hearings and field trips, the treatments were appealed. The long history of documenta­
tion of management activities, the availability of repeat photography, and the efforts of a 
large number of scientists and educators were fundamental to getting this restoration proj­
ect off the ground. Sound baseline data combined with active monitoring provide a basis 
for adaptive management as we move forward with restoration projects throughout the 
region, projects that enjoy increasing public acceptance because of the Lick Creek 
Demonstration Area. 
31.8 Summary 
+ 
The condition of almost all ponderosa pine forests in the western U.s. is poor, but not irre­
versibly so, except where recently burned at high severity. While forest densities are high 
and in many cases there has been an invasion of more fire-sensitive species, there is ample 
opportunity for ecological restoration and return of ponderosa pine landscapes to an 
ecologically sustainable condition. The costs of restoration are enormous, however, 
because fuel treatments to improve ecological conditions and reduce wildfire hazards gen­
erally require subsidies in today's economic environment, even when biomass being 
removed may have some commercial value. Yet, the ecological costs of not treating forests 
are equally great and often long-lasting because of the nature of current fires. Large crown 
fires preclude the restoration of sustainable old-growth ponderosa pine forest for cen­
turies, during which many ecological services such as provision for biodiversity are absent 
or adversely affected . 
Evidence is accumulating that restoration activities can return ponderosa pine systems 
to a condition in which they can once again self-regulate. Restoring the structure of forests 
and landscapes can set the stage for protection and recovery of sustainable populations of 
plants and animals. Restoration activities that lead to more open forest structures similar 
to those found historically result in protection from severe damage during fire because of 
reduced fire severity, including avoidance of soils destabilized by severe fire. Protection of 
human lives and property is dramatically easier where crown fires are reduced by an open 
forest structure. And finally, experience is teaching that humans can adapt more readily 
than expected to a more open forest landscape structure that had once been considered 
undesirable, particularly when scientific evidence shows that the open landscape is more 
natural and ecologically sustainable, and safer for humans. 
References 
Agee, J-K, Fire and pine ecosystems, in Ecology and Biogeography of Pinus, Richardson, D.M, Ed., 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 193, 1998. 
Allen, CD., Lots of lightning and plenty of people: an ecological history of fire in the upland 
Southwest, in Fire, Native Peoples, and the Natural Landscape, Vale, T.R., Ed., Island Press, 
Washington, D.C, 143, 2002. 
Allen, CD., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F.Suckling, T.W. Swetnam, T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, 
M. Hoffman, and J.T.Klingel, Ecological restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa pine ecosys­
tems: a broad perspective, Ecol. Appl., 12, 1418, 2002. 
Arno, S.F.,The Historical Role cf Fire on the Bitterroot National Forest, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Research Paper INT­
187, Ogden, UT, 29 pp., 1976. 
+ 

8/18/2004 
5:20 PM 
Page 497 
+  
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration of ponderosa pineforests in the interior western U.S. 
497 
Arno, S.P.,J.H. Scott, and M.G. Hartwell, Age-elass Structureof Old Growth Ponderosa PineIDouglas-fir 
Stands and its Relationship to Fire History, U.s. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Research Station, Research Paper INT-RP-481, Ogden, UT, 25 pp., 1995. 
Baisan, CH. and T.W. Swetnam, Interactions of Fire Regimes and Land Use in the Central Rio Grande 
Valley, Ll.S, Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Research Paper RM-RP-330, Fort Collins, CO, 20 pp ., 1997. 
Baker, w.L. and KP. Kipfmueller, Spatial ecology of pre-Euro-American fires in a Southern Rocky 
Mountain subalpine forest landscape, Prof Geogr., 53, 248, 2001. 
Barrett, S.W. and S.P.Arno, Indian fires as an ecological influence in the Northern Rockies,'. For.,80, 
647,1982. 
Belsky,AJ. and D.M. Blumenthal, Effects of livestock grazing on stand dynamics and soils in upland 
forests of the Interior West, Conserv. Biol., 11,315,1997. 
Betancourt, J., U.s. Geological Survey, personal communication. 
Biondi, P., Decadal-scale dynamics at the Gus Pearson Natural Area: evidence for inverse (a)sym­
metric competition?, Can. J. For. Res.,26, 1397, 1996. 
Brown, P.M. and CH. Seig, Fire history in interior ponderosa pine communities of the Black Hill, 
South Dakota, USA, Int. J. Wildland Fire, 6, 97, 1996. 
Brown, P.M., M.R. Kaufmann, and W.D. Shepperd, Long-term landscape patterns of past fire events 
in a montane ponderosa pine forest of central Colorado, Landscape Ecol., 14,513,1999. 
Brown, P.M., M.G. Ryan, and T.G. Andrews, Historical surface fire frequency in ponderosa pine 
stands in Research Natural Areas, central Rocky Mountains and Black Hills, USA, Nat. Areas 
J., 20, 133, 2000. 
Brown, P.M. and W.D. Shepperd, Fire history and fire climatology along a 5° gradient in latitude in 
Colorado and Wyoming, USA, Paleobotanist, SO, 133, 2001. 
Brown, P.M., M.W. Kaye, L.S. Huckaby, and CH. Baisan, Fire history along environmental gradients 
in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico: influences of local patterns and regional 
processes, Ecoscience, 8, 115, 2001. 
Cole, D.N., Management dilemmas that will shape wilderness in the 21st century, J. For., 99, 4, 2001. 
Cooper, CP., Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwestern pine forests since white 
settlement, Ecology, 42, 493, 1960. 
Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore, Southwestern ponderosa forest structure and resource condi­
tions: changes since Euro-American settlement, J. For., 92,39, 1994. 
Covington, WW., P.Z.Fule, M.M. Moore, S.C Hart, T.E.Kolb, J.N. Mast, 5.5. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner, 
Restoration of ecosystem health in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. J. For.,95, 23, 1997. 
Donnegan, J.A, T.T. Veblen, and J.S. Sibold, Climatic and human influences on fire history in the 
Pike National Forest, Central Colorado, Can. J. For. Res., 31, 1526, 2001. 
Feeney, S.R., T.E. Kolb, W.W. Covington, and M.R. Wagner, Influence of thinning and burning 
restoration treatments on presettlement ponderosa pines at the Gus Pearson Natural Area, 
Can.]. For. Res., 28, 1295, 1998. 
Fiedler, CE., R.R. Becker, and S.A Haglund, Preliminary guidelines for uneven-aged silvicultural 
prescriptions in ponderosa pine, in Ponderosa Pine -
the Species and its Management, 
Baumgartner, D.M. and J.E., Loren, Comps., Washington State University Cooperative 
Extension, Pullman, WA, 235,1988. 
Fiedler, CE., CE. Keegan III, S.H. Robertson, T.A Morgan, Cw. Woodall, and J.T. Chmelik, A 
Strategic Assessment of Fire HaZJIrd in New Mexico, Final report to the Joint Fire Science 
Program, Boise, ID, 2002. 
Finney, M.A., Design of regular landscape fuel treatment patterns to modify fire growth and behav­
ior, For. Sci.,47, 219,2001. 
Fornwalt, P.J., M.R. Kaufmann, L.S.Huckaby, and J.M. Stoker, Using the forest vegetation simulator to 
reconstruct historical stand conditions in the Colorado Front Range, in Second Forest Vegetation 
Simulator Conference, Crookston, N. L. and R. N. Havis, Comps., RMRS-P-25,Ll.S, Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT,108, 2002. 
Fornwalt, P.J., M.R. Kaufmann, L.S. Huckaby, J.M. Stoker, and T.]. Stohigren, Non-native plant inva­
sions in managed and protected ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests of the Colorado Front 
Range, For. Ecol. Milnage., 177,515,2003. 
+ 

IL1635_C31 . QXd 
8/1 8/2004 
5:20 PM 
Page 498 
+  
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests
498 
Friederici, P.,Ed., Ecological restoration ofsouthwestern ponderosa pineforests, Island Press, Washington, 
DC, 2003. 
Fule, P.Z., MM. Moore, and WW. Covington, Determining reference conditions for ecosystem man­
agement in southwestern ponderosa pine forests, Ecol. Appl., 7, 895, 1997. 
Fule, P.Z., AE.M. Waltz, WW. Covington, and T.A Heinlein, Measuring forest restoration effective­
ness in hazardous fuels reduction, J. For., 99, 24, 2001a. 
Pule, P.Z., e. McHugh, T.A. Heinlein, and W.W. Covington, Potential fire behavior is reduced fol­
lowing forest restoration treatments, in Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems Restoration and 
Conservation: Steps Toward Stewardship, Vance, G.K., e.B. Edminster, WW. Covington, and 
J.A. Blake, Comps., RMRS-P-22, U'S, Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT,28, 200lb. 
Pule, P.Z., W.W. Covington, MM. Moore, T.A Heinlein, and A.E.M. Waltz, Natural variability in 
forests of Grand Canyon, USA, J. Biogeogr., 29, 31, 2002a. 
Fule, P.Z., WW. Covington, H.B. Smith, J.D. Springer, T.A. Heinlein, K.D. Huisinga, and M.M. 
Moore, Testing ecological restoration alternatives: Grand Canyon, Arizona, For. Ecol. 
Manage., 170, 19, zoozt. 
Germaine, H.L. and S.s. Germaine, Forest restoration treatment effects on the nesting success of 
Western Bluebirds (Sialia mexicana), Restor. Ecol., 10, 362, 2002. 
Goldblum, D. and T.T. Veblen, Fire history of a ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forest in the Colorado 
Front Range, Phys. Geogr., 13, 133, 1992. 
Graham, RT., Tech. Ed., Hayman Fire Case Study, u.s. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT, General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-114, 
396 pp., 2003. 
Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership, Website [Online]. Available at http://www.gffp.org, 2004. 
Griffis, K.L., J.A. Crawford, M.R Wagner, and W.H. Moir, Understory response to management 
treatments in northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests, For. Ecol. Manage., 146, 239,2001. 
Cruell, G.E., Schmidt, We., Arno, S.F., Reich, w.J., Seventy Years of Vegetative Change in a Managed 
Ponderosa Pine Forest in Western Montana -
Implications for Resource Management, U.s. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Ogden, UT,General Technical Report !NT-130, 42 pp., 1982. 
Higgs, E.s., What is good ecological restoration? Conserv. Biol., 11,338, 1997. 
Huckaby, L.S.,M.R Kaufmann, P.J. Fornwalt, and J.M. Stoker, Landscape patterns of montane forest 
age structure relative to fire history at Cheesman Lake in the Colorado Front Range, in 
Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems Restoration and Conservation: Steps toward Stewardship, Vance, RK., 
CB, Edminster, W.W. Covington, and JA. Blake, Comps. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT,RMRS-P-22, 19,2001. 
Huckaby, L.S., M.R Kaufmann, P.J.Fornwalt, JM. Stoker, and e. Dennis, Identification and Ecology of 
Old Ponderosa Pine Trees in the Colorado Front Range, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, RMRS-GTR-110, 47 pp., 2003. 
Kaufmann, M.R, To live fast or not: growth, vigor and longevity of old-growth ponderosa pine and 
lodgepole pine trees, Tree Physiol., 16, 139, 1996. 
Kaufmann, M.R, W.H. Moir, and W.W. Covington, Old-growth forests: what do we know about 
their ecology and management in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain Regions? in Old­
Growth Forest in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain Regions, Proceedings of a Workshop, M.R 
Kaufmann, W.H. Moir, and RL. Basset, Tech. Coords., U'S, Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, General Technical Report RM-213, 1, 1992. 
Kaufmann, M.R, L.S. Huckaby, and P. Gleason, Ponderosa pine in the Colorado Front Range: long 
historical fire and tree recruitment intervals and a case for landscape heterogeneity, in 
Proceedings from the Joint Fire Science Conference and Workshop, "Crossing the Millennium: 
Integrating Spatial Technologies and Ecological Principles for a New Age in Fire Management." Vol. 
1, L.F.Neuenschwander, K.e. Ryan, G.E. Goldberg, and J.D. Greer, Eds., University of Idaho 
and the International Association of Wildland Fire, Moscow, lD, 153, 2oo0a. 
Kaufmann, M.R, e.M. Regan, and P.M. Brown, Heterogeneity in ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir 
forests: age and size structure in unlogged and logged landscapes of central Colorado, Can. 
J. For. Res.,30, 1, zoooe. 
-+  

/ L1635_C31 . QXd 
8/18 /2004 
5: 20 PM 
Page 499 
+  
Chapter thirty-one: Restoration of ponderosa pineforests in the interior western U.S. 
499 
Kaufmann, M.R., P.J. Fornwalt, L.S. Huckaby, and J. Stoker, Cheesman Lake -
a historical pon­
derosa pine landscape guiding restoration in the South Platte watershed of the Colorado 
Front Range, in Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems Restoration and Conservation: Steps toward 
Stewardship, Vance, R.K., C.B. Edminster, W.w. Covington, and J.A. Blake, Comps., U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT, 
RMRS-P-22, 9, 2001. 
Kaufmann, M.R., L.S.Huckaby, P.J. Fornwalt, J.M. Stoker, and W.H. Romme, Using tree recruitment 
patterns and fire history to guide restoration of an unlogged ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir 
landscape in the southern Rocky Mountains after a century of fire suppression, Forestry, 76, 
231,2003. 
Kaye, J.P.and S.c. Hart, Ecological restoration alters nitrogen transformations in a ponderosa pine 
-
bunchgrass ecosystem, Ecol. Appl., 8, 1052, 1998. 
Kaye, J.c., S.c. Hart, R.C. Cobb, and J.E. Stone, Water and nutrient outflow following the ecological  
restoration of a ponderosa pine -
bunchgrass ecosystem, Restor. Ecol., 7, 252,1999.  
Kaye, M.W. and T.W. Swetnam, An assessment of fire, climate, and Apache history in the  
Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico, Phys. Geogr., 20, 305,1999. 
Keeley, J.E. and P.H. Zedler, Evolution of life histories in Pinus, in Ecology and Biogeography of Pinus, 
Richardson, D.M., Ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 219,1998. 
Lynch, D.L. and K.H. Mackes, Opportunities for Milking Wood Products from Small Diameter Trees in  
Colorado, Ll.S,Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Research Paper RMRS-RP-37, 2002.  
Lynch, D.L., W.H. Romme, and M.L. Floyd, Forest restoration in southwestern ponderosa pine, T.  
For., 98, 17, 2000. 
Mast, J.N., P.Z. Fule, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington, and A. Waltz, Restoration of pre-settlement age 
structure of an Arizona ponderosa pine forest, Ecol. Appl., 9, 228,1999. 
Menakis, J.P., A Summary of Ponderosa Pine (Pinus ponderosa) Management Activities in the Lick Creek 
Drainage of the Bitterroot National Forest, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, thesis, 79 pp., 
1994. 
Meyer, c.L. and T.D. Sisk, Butterfly response to microclimatic conditions following ponderosa pine 
regeneration, Restor. Ecol., 9, 453, 2001. 
Miller, C. and D.L. Urban, Modeling the effects of fire management alternatives on Sierra Nevada 
mixed conifer forests, Ecol. Appl., 10, 85, 2000. 
Moore, M.M., W.W.Covington, and P.Z. Fule, Evolutionary environment, reference conditions, and 
ecological restoration: a southwestern ponderosa pine perspective, Ecol. Appl., 9,1266,1999. 
Moseley, C. and B. KenCaim, Problem solving or social change? The Applegate and Grand Canyon 
forest partnerships, in Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems Restoration and Conservation: Steps Toward 
Stewardship, Vance, G.K., C.B. Edminster, W.W. Covington, and J.A. Blake, Comps., U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT, 
RMRS-P-22, 121,2001. 
O'Brien, R.A., Arizona'sForest Resources, 1999, U'S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO, RMRS-RB-2, 2002. 
Oliver, W.w. and R.A. Ryker, Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex. Laws. Ponderosa Pine. SilvicsofNorthAmerica. 
Volume 1. Conifers, U'S, Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington, D.C., 
Agriculture Handbook 654, 413,1990. 
Pollet, J. and P.N. Omi, Effectof thinning and prescribed burning on crown fire severity in ponderosa 
pine forests, lnt. J. Wildland Fire, 11, 1, 2002. 
Pyne, S.J., Fire in America: a culturalhistoryofwildland and ruralfire, University of Washington Press, 
Seattle, 1982. 
Romme W.H. and D.G. Despain, Historical perspectives on the Yellowstone fires, 1988, Bioscience, 
39,695,1989. 
Remme, W.H., M. Preston, D.L. Lynch, P. Kemp, L. Floyd-Hanna, D.O. Hanna, and S. Bums, The 
ponderosa pine forest partnership: ecology, economics, and community involvement in for­
est restoration, in Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa PineForests, Friederichi, P., 
Ed., Island Press, Washington, D.C., 99, 2003. 
Sackett, S.s., S.M. Haase and M.G. Harrington, Lessons Learned from Fire Use for Restoring 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems, U.s. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
+ 

IL1635_C31 . QXd 
8/18/2004 
5:20 PM 
Page 500 
Restoration of Boreal and Temperate Forests
500 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO, General Technical 
Report RM-GTR-278, 53, 1996. 
.. Salzer, M.W., Reconstructed temperature and precipitation on a millennial timescale from tree-rings 
in the San Francisco Peaks area of northern Arizona, Climatic Change, in press. 
sanchez-Martinez, G. and M.R. Wagner, Bark beetle community structure under four ponderosa 
pine forest stand conditions in northern Arizona, For. Ecol. Milnage., 170, 145,2002. 
Savage, M, P.M. Brown and J. Fedderna, The role of climate in a pine forest regeneration pulse in the 
southwestern United States, Ecoscience, 3, 310,1996. 
Scott, J.H., Fuel Reduction in Residential andScenic Forests:A Comparison ofThree Treatments in a Western 
Montana Ponderosa Pine Stand, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT, Research Paper RMRS-RP-5, 1998. 
Shinneman, D.J. and W.L. Baker, Nonequilibrium dynamics between catastrophic disturbances and 
old-growth forests in ponderosa pine landscapes of the Black Hills, Consero. Biol., 11, 1276, 
1997. 
Smith, H.Y. and S.P. Arno, Eds., Eighty-eight Years of Change in a Milnaged Ponderosa Pine Forest, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden UT, 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-23,55 p., 1999. 
Stone, J.E., T.E. Kolb, and W.W. Covington, Effects of restoration thinning on presettlement Pinus 
ponderosa in northern Arizona, Restor. Ecol., 7, 172, 1999. 
Swetnam, T.W. and c.H. Baisan, Historical fire regime patterns in the southwestern United States 
since AD 1700, in Proceedings of the 2nd La Mesa Fire Symposium, Allen, C.D., Ed., u.s. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, CO, General Technical Report RM-GTR-286, 11, 1996. 
+ 
Swetnam, T.W. and J.L. Betancourt, Mesoscale disturbance and ecological response to decadal cli­
matic variability in the American Southwest, J. Climate, 11,3128, 1998. 
Swetnam, T.W.,C.D. Allen and J.L. Betancourt, Applied historical ecology: using the past to manage 
for the future, Ecol. Appl., 9,1189,1999. 
Swezy, D.M. and J.K. Agee, Prescribed fire effects on fine-root and tree mortality in old-growth pon­
derosa pine, Can. J. For. Res., 21, 626,1991. 
Turner, M.G. and W.H. Romme, Landscape dynamics in crown fire ecosystems, Landscape Ecol., 9,59, 
1994. 
Veblen, T.T. and D.C. Lorenz, The Colorado Front Range: A century of ecological change, University of 
Utah Press, Salt Lake City 1991. 
Veblen, T.T.,T. Kitzberger and J. Donnegan, Oimatic and human influences on fire regimes in pon­
derosa pine forests in the Colorado Front Range, Ecol. Appl., 10, 1178,2000. 
Waltz, A.E.M., P.Z. Fule, W.W.Covington and M.M Moore, Diversity in ponderosa pine forest struc­
ture following ecological restoration treatments, For. Sci., 49, 885, 2003. 
Weaver, H., Fire as an ecological factor in the southwestern ponderosa pine forests, J. For., 49, 93, 
1951. 
White, A.S., Presettlement regeneration patterns in a southwestern ponderosa pine stand, Ecology, 
66,589,1985. 
Woolsey, TS; Western yellow pinein Arizonaand New Mexico, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Washington, D.C., Bulletin 101, 64 pp., 1911. 
+ 

Manuscript Queries 
Title:RESTORATION OF TEMPERATE AND BOREAL FORESTS 
Chapter 31/ Restoration of ponderosa pine forests in the interior western U.S. 
after logging, grazing, and fire suppression 
Page 
Query Number 
Query 
500 
AQ1 
Please update reference 
