FrontiersinEcology
and the Environment
Carbon protection and fire risk
reduction: toward a full accounting of
forest carbon offsets
Maatttthheeww  DD  H
Huurrtteeaau,,  GGeeoorrggee  W
W  KKoocchh,,  aanndd  BBrruuccee  AA  H
Huunnggaattee
Front Ecol Environ 2008; 6, doi:10.1890/070187
This article is citable (as shown above) and is released from embargo once it is posted to the
Frontiers e-View site (www.frontiersinecology.org).
© The Ecological Society of America
www.frontiersinecology.org
Please note: This article was downloaded from Frontiers e-View, a service that publishes fully edited
and formatted manuscripts before they appear in print in Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment.
Readers are strongly advised to check the final print version in case any changes have been made.
essaa
essaa

© The Ecological Society of America
wwwww..ffrroonnttiieerrssiinneeccoollooggyy..oorrgg
O
ver the past century, fire suppression has been the
primary management tool in many fire-prone forests
worldwide, and has increased tree density and forest fuels,
resulting in an increased risk of stand-replacing wildfire
(Veblen and Lorenz 1988; Covington et al. 1994; Fulé et
al. 2004; Ohlson et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2007). A number
of factors, including fire suppression, have probably con-
tributed to increased carbon (C) storage in US forests
during recent decades (Hurtt et al. 2002). Carbon in fire-
suppressed forests is now more vulnerable to catastrophic
release than is C in forests of pre-settlement condition
(Breshears and Allen 2002).
In forests of the western US, fire frequency and severity
historically ranged from high-frequency, low-severity fires
in ponderosa pine and Sierran mixed-conifer forests
(Covington and Moore 1994; McKelvey et al. 1996) to
low-frequency, high-severity fires in forests at higher ele-
vations, such as spruce–fir and northern latitude coastal
forests (Agee 1993; Schoennagel et al. 2004). The fre-
quency with which large and severe wildfires have
occurred has increased in recent decades, a pattern attrib-
uted to both land-use changes (Covington et al. 1994;
McKelvey et al. 1996) and climatic shifts (Westerling et al.
2006). Wildfires release massive amounts of CO2 to the
atmosphere (van der Werf et al. 2006; Wiedinmyer and
Neff 2007). Models indicate that even if current fire sup-
pression success is maintained, the US carbon sink is pre-
dicted to decline through the 21st century, because har-
vesting removes carbon and mortality occurs at rates
equal to sequestration resulting from tree regeneration
(Hurtt et al. 2002). Increased frequency and intensity of
wildfires will further contribute to this decline.
Currently, forest managers are implementing fuel-
reduction treatments in fire-prone forests historically
characterized by high-frequency, low-severity fire
regimes. In the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California
and the southwestern US, these treatments typically
involve removing small-diameter trees that have estab-
lished since the advent of fire suppression policy
(Covington et al. 1997; North et al. 2005). Figure 1
depicts the C storage consequences of two potential for-
est management strategies for dry western forests that
have historically experienced high-frequency, low-sever-
ity fire events. While the unthinned option stores more
C in the absence of fire, it is more likely to experience a
stand-replacing fire that results in a large C release, both
during the event and post-fire (Auclair and Carter 1993;
Kashian et al. 2006). Moreover, depending on the forest
type, the area burned by a stand-replacing fire does not
recover its pre-fire C stock for decades (Schulze et al.
2000; Wirth et al. 2002). The thinned scenario effec-
tively increases the “rotation length”, placing forest car-
CONCEPTS  AND QUESTIONS
Carbon protection and fire risk reduction:
toward a full accounting of forest carbon
offsets 
Maatttthheeww  DD  H
Huurrtteeaauu**,,  GGeeoorrggee  W
W  KKoocchh,,  aanndd  BBrruuccee  AA  H
Huunnggaattee
Management of forests for carbon uptake is an important tool in the effort to slow the increase in atmos-
pheric CO2 and global warming. However, some current policies governing forest carbon credits actually pro-
mote avoidable CO2 release and punish actions that would increase long-term carbon storage. In fire-prone
forests, management that reduces the risk of catastrophic carbon release resulting from stand-replacing wild-
fire is considered to be a CO2 source, according to current accounting practices, even though such manage-
ment may actually increase long-term carbon storage. Examining four of the largest wildfires in the US in
2002, we found that, for forest land that experienced catastrophic stand-replacing fire, prior thinning would
have reduced CO2 release from live tree biomass by as much as 98%. Altering carbon accounting practices for
forests that have historically experienced frequent, low-severity fire could provide an incentive for forest
managers to reduce the risk of catastrophic fire and associated large carbon release events.   
Front Ecol Environ 2008; 6, doi:10.1890/070187
Department of Biological Sciences and Merriam–Powell Center for
Environmental Research, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff,
AZ 86011 *(matthew.hurteau@nau.edu)
Inn  aa  nnuuttsshheellll::
• In current carbon accounting, forest management impacts on
potentially catastrophic disturbances are typically ignored
• In forests where fire suppression has caused fuel accumulation,
forest fuel-reduction treatments can diminish the risk of stand-
replacing fire, thereby promoting carbon storage 
• Carbon accounting should recognize the value of management
actions that reduce the risk of carbon loss through stand-
replacing fire

Carbon protection and fire risk reduction
MD Hurteau et al.
wwwww..ffrroonnttiieerrssiinneeccoollooggyy..oorrgg
©  The Ecological Society of America
bon in a longer residence-time pool (the remaining trees
continue to grow for a longer time period; Schulze et al.
2000). Additionally, as evidenced by wildfire simulations
in Sierran mixed-conifer forest, thinning not only
reduces the risk of a catastrophic C release, but also
results in C being concentrated in fewer, larger trees that
approximate the old-growth structure of pre-fire suppres-
sion forests (Hurteau and North in review).
Carbon registry groups require that forest managers
determine a baseline above which additional C stored
counts as a carbon credit. This one-size-fits-all methodo-
logy is fundamentally flawed, because it does not fully
account for the effect of variation in stand structure and
forest biomass on the risk of stand-replacing fire and
albedo (ie the ratio of outgoing to incoming radiation).
Under the regulations of the Kyoto Protocol and groups
such as the California Climate Action Registry, forest
thinning is considered a carbon source to the atmosphere,
because the amount of C stored on a given unit of land
area is reduced, at least temporarily (Penman et al. 2003;
California Climate Action Registry 2007), even though
thinning reduces the risk of substantially greater C losses
during stand-replacing wildfire. If, by contrast, that same
forest is not thinned and instead experiences a cata-
strophic fire, the C stock baseline is simply reduced, as if
no CO2 emissions had occurred during the fire. This
accounting is justified by the argument that management
actions have little influence on the risk of fire, especially
in forests that were historically typified by high-severity,
stand-replacing fire. Even though CO2 emissions do
occur, they are considered to be uncontrollable and, thus,
no land owner or manager’s carbon account is debited. In
many of the drier forest types of the western US, fires his-
torically burned with high frequency and low severity
(Covington et al. 1994). For example, southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests had a historic fire return interval that
ranged from 2 to 12 years, and the mean fire return inter-
val for Sierran mixed-conifer forests was 12 to 17 years
(McKelvey et al. 1996). In these systems, fire maintained
both the overstory structure and system processes
(McKelvey et al. 1996). Here, the current C accounting
methodology is faulty, because it penalizes actions that
reduce avoidable carbon release to the atmosphere and
that have been shown to restore ecosystem function in
forests historically maintained by fire (Carey 2005;
Zausen et al. 2005). Failure to recognize the threat of cat-
astrophic C release amounts to a perverse incentive to
increase fire risk through continued fire suppression.
 An example from the 2002 fire season
During the 2002 fire season in the western US, four major
fires – the Rodeo–Chediski, Hayman, Biscuit, and
McNally – burned some 508 000 hectares of forest land,
92 000 hectares of which experienced high-severity,
stand-replacing fire (Subirge and Lovely 2003; USDA
Forest Service 2003; Azuma et al. 2004; Odion and
Hanson 2006). To estimate pre-fire C storage for unman-
aged forest, we used field data presented in Kuenzi (2006)
for the 189 000-ha Rodeo–Chediski fire that occurred in
Arizona in 2002. For the other three fires, we used stand
characteristics from a dry, western forest comprised of two
Abies species, two Pinus species, and Pseudotsuga menziesii,
modeled by Agee and Skinner (2005). To calculate indi-
Fiigguurree  11.. (a) Two options for a given forest stand and the resultant
tree survivorship following a wildfire event. (b) The carbon account-
ing consequences of two possible options for a given forest stand and
the results following a wildfire event. The cubes represent the
amount of carbon remaining in the ecosystem after wildfire.
(a)
(b)

MD Hurteau et al.
Carbon protection and fire risk reduction
© The Ecological Society of America
wwwww..ffrroonnttiieerrssiinneeccoollooggyy..oorrgg
vidual tree C storage, we utilized allometric
models developed by Kaye et al. (2005) for
Pinus ponderosa, which allowed us to use the
modeled tree diameters from each fire event
to calculate C storage by tree component.
Using models derived from pine results in a
more conservative estimate of C stocks com-
pared to the fir and Douglas-fir allometric
equations in the California Carbon Action
Registry Forest Sector Protocol (2007). The
per hectare C values were then multiplied by
the number of hectares that experienced high-
severity fire at each site.
To estimate hypothetical pre-fire C storage
for the forests that had been thinned, we used
stand characteristics from Agee and Skinner’s
(2005) “low-thin” treatment. This treatment
is a thin-from-below harvest that most closely
matches a forest restoration and wildfire risk
reduction prescription; it involves removing a
majority of the small-diameter trees (which
accounted for 18% of the total biomass) and
retaining all of the larger diameter trees. 
To estimate post-fire C storage for thinned
forest, we utilized model outputs from Agee and Skinner
(2005), which had an 8% tree mortality rate. To estimate
post-fire C storage for unthinned forest, we utilized the
Kaye et al. (2005) allometric models, coupled with two
published combustion factors for emissions per unit of
aboveground biomass, to bracket a range of possible emis-
sions. Specifically, we used the average combustion fac-
tors for high-severity areas in the Biscuit fire (which
burned greater than 200 000 ha in southern Oregon and
northern California in 2002; Campbell et al. in press) and
the 30% combustion efficiency used by Wiedinmyer et al.
(2006) for woody fuels. Our calculated emissions values
are quite conservative, since we account only for emis-
sions from live trees. As noted by Campbell et al. (in
press), 57% of the Biscuit fire emissions were the result of
combustion of the litter and duff layers. Our analysis did
not account for the energy costs of thinning and trans-
porting biomass and their associated CO2 emissions.
Of the approximately 92 000 ha that experienced high-
severity, stand-replacing fire in these four wildfires,
approximately 4.2–6.1 million metric tons of CO2 equiv-
alent (MMTCO2e) were released from live tree biomass
(Figure 2). Thinning these same forests before they
burned would have removed 3.9 MMTCO2e and reduced
live tree fire emissions to only 0.07–0.3 MMTCO2e. 
Both strategies – forest thinning and fire suppression –
cost money. In the case of thinning to reduce fuels, small-
diameter trees are typically non-merchantable and
require that the manager pay for their removal. The
Healthy Forest Restoration Act (2003), the legislation
driving much of the recent fuel-reduction effort, allows
for project funding through operations revenue. This
approach could diminish forest C storage by requiring the
removal and sale of large trees to offset the cost of remov-
ing the smaller ones. 
Fire suppression and the inevitable wildfires that follow
are also expensive. The direct suppression costs for fighting
the four fires we assessed were approximately $277 million
(Graham 2003; Snider et al. 2003; The Wilderness Society
2003; Azuma et al. 2004). This figure includes only expen-
ditures for personnel and equipment actually employed in
fighting the fires, and does not include other costs, such as
property loss, land rehabilitation, and reforestation. A con-
servative estimate of these other costs for the Rodeo–
Chediski fire is $250 million (Snider et al. 2003). This puts
the cost of that fire at $1586 ha–1. If we assume similar
direct and indirect costs for the other fires, the high-sever-
ity areas of these four fire events cost approximately $145.8
million. An analysis of forest thinning costs for nine
national forests in the western US found that treatments
can range from $344–1097 ha–1 (Fight and Barbour 2006).
For the four fires considered here, this would have totaled
$100.9 million (using $1097 ha–1) and would have resulted
in 16.5 million metric tons of CO2e sequestered on the site
in live tree biomass, had these areas been thinned prior to
the fire event. This sequestered CO2 has a current market
value of $8.5 million (based on $1.90 per ton of carbon;
Chicago Climate Exchange, November 30, 2007).  The
revenue generated from the sale of offsets could potentially
be used by forest managers to pay for wildfire risk reduction
operations (see Figure 3 for costs by event). Allowing car-
bon credits for protecting forest carbon would provide rev-
enue that could be used in lieu of operations revenue,
thereby reducing reliance on larger diameter trees to pay
for fuel reduction operations under the Healthy Forest
Restoration Act.
Fiigguurree  22.. Millions of metric tons of CO2 equivalent released from wildfire. Red
bars show the range of CO2 released in each fire event in high-severity burn areas
using the two different combustion efficiencies. Blue bars show the range of CO2
that would have been released had the areas been thinned before wildfire, again
assuming the two different combustion efficiencies. 
Unmanaged
Thinned
Rodeo–Chediski     Hayman           Biscuit          McNally
Fire event
CO2e released by wildfire (mmt)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Carbon protection and fire risk reduction
MD Hurteau et al.
wwwww..ffrroonnttiieerrssiinneeccoollooggyy..oorrgg
©  The Ecological Society of America
 Conclusions 
Our “back-of-the-envelope” calculations indicate that
massive CO2 emissions from wildfire are avoidable in
forests that have historically been characterized by fre-
quent, low-severity fire (Figure 2). Forests thinned to
approach pre-settlement tree density and stand structure
harbor substantially more C after wildfire than adjacent
dense stands that have not been thinned (Wirth et al.
2002; Figures 4 and 5). Moreover, the biomass removed
by thinning is available for wood products or energy gen-
eration, the latter replacing fossil-fuel emissions (Pacala
et al. 2001). Thinning forests for C protection also
achieves many of the ecological goals of forest restoration
(Covington 2000). One of the ancillary benefits of thin-
ning these forests is a reduction in resource competition
that increases the growth of the remaining
trees (Sheriff 1996). This increase in growth
rates could potentially offset part of the pre-
dicted decline in the US carbon sink, while
concurrently storing carbon in fewer, larger
trees per hectare, thereby reducing the risk of
loss to catastrophic fire.  
Under the Kyoto Protocol (for unmanaged
lands) and the California Climate Action
Registry carbon accounting policies, emissions
of CO2e from stand-replacing fires are ignored,
and the C stock baseline is simply recalculated
based on the new carbon stock level (Penman
et al. 2003; California Climate Action Registry
2007). In our analysis, the carbon protection
leverage of forest thinning is strong. Assuming a
30% combustion efficiency, removing 3.9
MMTCO2e of the original forest C by thinning
prevents the direct loss of 5.7 MMTCO2e of the
carbon by catastrophic wildfire, if the same
wildfire burns over the thinned area after treat-
ment. Thus, even if all of the thinned forest
biomass is burned, there is still a net benefit of
protecting 
1.8 
MMTCO2e 
(5.7 
MMTCO2e–3.9
MMTCO2e) from release during wildfire. If the thinned for-
est biomass is used for wood products or energy generation,
the benefits are correspondingly greater.
Stand-replacing fires are a natural part of the distur-
bance regime for some forest types, and resetting the car-
bon baseline after fire may be appropriate in these situa-
tions. However, our analysis calls into question the
application of current carbon accounting practices in sys-
tems historically characterized by a low-severity and
high-frequency fire regime. Carbon accounting guidelines
should allow us to maintain the disturbance regimes that
shaped the diverse forest types in the western US, partic-
ularly in cases where the natural disturbance regimes also
favor long-term carbon storage. 
Fiigguurree  33.. Total estimated cost of each fire event plus the cost of offsetting the
CO2 release (US$; red) and total cost of thinning the same land area minus
the market value of the offsets gained from protecting the carbon stock (blue). 
Fiigguurree  44.. Post-fire forest conditions following the Rodeo–Chediski fire. (a) Taken approximately one year after the fire in an area
that had been thinned (to a basal area of about 15 m2 ha–1) and pile burned in 1997. (b) Taken immediately post-fire, in an area that
was not thinned prior to the fire. 
Courtesy of D Maurer, USDA Forest Service, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest
Courtesy of Arizona Division of Emergency Management
Rodeo–Chediski     Hayman            Biscuit          McNally
Fire event
Actual fire
Thinning simulation
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
US dollars (millions)
(a)
(b)

MD Hurteau et al.
Carbon protection and fire risk reduction
Carbon accounting guidelines may
also need to be revised to consider
more broadly the feedbacks from for-
est management and disturbance to
the climate system (eg the influence
of forest treatments on albedo). In
addition to promoting C storage, for-
est thinning probably contributes a
net cooling effect by increasing sur-
face reflectance: removing small trees
reduces leaf area index (McDowell et
al. 2007), exposing the grass, soil, or
snow below (depending on season
and latitude), each of which has a
higher albedo than coniferous trees
(Liu et al. 2005). On a regional scale,
increased albedo could cause net
cooling (Liu et al. 2005; Randerson
et al. 2006; Figure 6), creating
another possible benefit of fuel-
reduction treatments. Evaluating
this hypothesis will require measur-
ing changes in albedo with fuel-
reduction treatments, as well as
regional scaling of the consequences
for climate. It seems likely that, in
some situations, fuel-reduction treatments would offer
climate benefits, both by increasing C storage and by
increasing surface reflectance.
Current carbon accounting practices for forest sys-
tems that are characterized by frequent, low-severity
fire ignore the influence of management actions on
fire risk. Instead of being punished for reducing C
stocks, forest managers who take action to reduce the
risk of catastrophic wildfire in systems that histori-
cally experienced frequent, low-severity fire could be
rewarded with carbon credits. Allowing credits for
wildfire risk reduction would provide another means
of generating revenue to cover the cost of thinning
forests, especially in regions such
as the Southwest, where a major-
ity of the wood biomass that
needs to be removed is not cur-
rently merchantable.
 Acknowledgements
The authors thank V Leshyk from
the Bilby Research Center at Nor-
thern Arizona University for illustra-
tions. This research was supported by
the US Department of Energy’s
Office of Science (BER) through
the Western Regional Center of the
National Institute for Climatic
Change Research at Northern Ari-
zona University.
 References
Agee JK. 1993. Fire ecology of Pacific Northwest forests.
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Agee JK and Skinner CN. 2005. Basic principles of forest fuel
reduction treatments. Forest Ecol Manag 22111: 83–96.
Auclair AND and Carter TB. 1993. Forest wildfires as a recent source
of CO2 at northern latitudes. Can J Forest Res 2233: 1528–36.
Azuma DL, Donnegan J, and Gedney D. 2004. Southwest Oregon
Biscuit fire: an analysis of forest resources and fire severity.
Portland, OR: USDA Forest Service. Res Paper PNW-RP-560.
Breshears DD and Allen CD. 2002. The importance of rapid, dis-
turbance-induced losses in carbon management and sequestra-
tion. Global Ecol Biogeogr 1111: 1–5.
California Climate Action Registry. 2007. Forest Sector Protocol.
www.climateregistry.org/PROTOCOLS. Viewed 5 Mar 2008.
© The Ecological Society of America
wwwww..ffrroonnttiieerrssiinneeccoollooggyy..oorrgg
Untreated
Thinned and prescribe burned
Fire direction
Fiigguurree  55..  Stand conditions following the 2002 Cone fire at the Blacks Mountain
Experimental Forest. The white line approximates the border between the treated and
untreated areas prior to the wildfire. The area in the upper left was left untreated and
the remaining area was thinned and prescribe-burned prior to the Cone fire. 
M Jablonski, USDA Forest Service, Lassen National Forest
Fiigguurree  66..  Albedo of forest land under thinned and unmanaged conditions. Thinning
increases albedo by revealing more of the “brighter” grass, soil surface, or snow. 

Carbon protection and fire risk reduction
MD Hurteau et al.
Campbell J, Donato D, Azuma D, and Law B. Pyrogenic carbon
emissions from a large wildfire in Oregon, USA. J Geophys Res
Biogeosci. In press.
Carey AB. 2005. Active intentional management for biodiversity
and other forest values. In: Peterson CE and Maguire DA
(Eds). Balancing ecosystem values: innovative experiments for
sustainable forestry. Portland, OR: US Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research
Station. General Technical Report, PNW-GTR-635. 
Covington WW and Moore MM. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa
pine forest structure: changes since Euro-American settlement.
J Forest 9922: 39–47.
Covington WW, Everett RL, Steele R, et al. 1994. Historical and
anticipated changes in forest ecosystems of the inland west of
the United States. J Sustain Forest 22: 13–63.
Covington WW, Fule PZ, Moore MM, et al. 1997. Restoring
ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the southwest. J
Forest 9955: 23–29.
Covington WW. 2000. Helping western forests heal. Nature 44088:
135–36.
Fight RD and Barbour RJ. 2006. Financial analysis of fuel treatments
on national forests in the western United States. Portland, OR:
US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific
Northwest Research Station. Research Note, PNW-RN-555.
Fule PZ, Crouse JE, Cocke AE, et al. 2004. Changes in canopy fuels
and potential fire behavior 1880–2040. Ecol Model 117755: 231–48.
Graham RT (Ed). 2003. Hayman fire case study. Ogden, UT: US
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station. General Technical Report, RMRS-GTR-114.
Healthy Forest Restoration Act. 2003. http://frwebgate.access.
gpo.gov/cgibin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=108_cong_bills&docid=
f:h1904enr.txt.pdf. Viewed 6 Feb 2008.
Hurteau M and North M. Fuel treatment effects on tree-based car-
bon storage and emissions under modeled wildfire scenarios.
Front Ecol Environ. In review.
Hurtt GC, Pacala SW, Moorcroft PR, et al. 2002. Projecting the
future of the US carbon sink. P Natl Acad Sci USA 9999: 1389–94.
Kashian DM, Romme WH, Tinker DB, et al. 2006. Carbon storage
on landscapes with stand-replacing fires. BioScience 5566:
598–606.
Kaye JP, Hart SC, Fule PZ, et al. 2005. Initial carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorous fluxes following ponderosa pine restoration treat-
ments. Ecol Appl 1155: 1581–93.
Kuenzi AM. 2006. Pre-fire treatment effects and understory plant
community response on the Rodeo–Chediski fire, Arizona (MS
thesis). Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University.
Liu H, Randerson JT, Lindfors J, and Chapin III FS. 2005. Changes
in the surface energy budget after fire in boreal ecosystems of
interior Alaska: an annual perspective. J Geophys Res 111100:
D13101.
McDowell NG, Adams HD, Bailey JD, and Kolb TE. 2007. The
role of stand density on growth efficiency, leaf area index, and
resin flow in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Can J Forest
Res 3377: 343–55.
McKelvey KS, Skinner CN, Chang C, et al. 1996. An overview of
fire in the Sierra Nevada. In: Sierra Nevada ecosystem project:
final report to Congress. Vol II. Assessments and scientific basis
for management options. Davis, CA: Centers for Water and
Wildland Resources, University of California, Davis.
North M, Hurteau M, Fiegener R, and Barbour M. 2005. Influence
of fire and El Niño on tree recruitment varies by species in
Sierran mixed conifer. Forest Sci 5511: 187–97.
Odion DC and Hanson CT. 2006. Fire severity in conifer forests of
the Sierra Nevada, California. Ecosystems 99: 1177–89.
Ohlson DW, Berry TM, Gray RW, et al. 2006. Multi-attribute eval-
uation of landscape-level fuel management to reduce wildfire
risk. Forest Policy Econ 88: 824–37.
Pacala SW, Hurtt GC, Baker D, et al. 2001. Consistent land- and
atmosphere-based US carbon sink estimates. Science 22992:
2316–20.
Penman J, Gytarsky M, Hiraishi T, et al. (Eds). 2003. Good practice
guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry. Kanagawa,
Japan: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. www.ipcc-
nggip.iges.or.jp/public/gpglulucf/gpglulucf_contents.htm. Viewed
6 Feb 2008.
Randerson JT, Liu H, Flanner MG, et al. 2006. The impact of
boreal forest fire on climate warming. Science 331144: 1130–32.
Schoennagel T, Veblen TT, and Romme WH. 2004. The interac-
tion of fire, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain forests.
BioScience 5544: 661–76.
Schulze E-D, Wirth C, and Heimann M. 2000. Managing forests
after Kyoto. Science 22899: 2058–59.
Sheriff DW. Responses of carbon gain and growth of Pinus radiata
stands to thinning and fertilizing. Tree Physiol 1166: 527–36.
Snider GB, Wood DB, and Daugherty PJ. 2003. Analysis of costs
and benefits of restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction:
treatments vs no treatment. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona
University School of Forestry. Progress Report 1.
Subirge TG and Lovely C. 2003. Environmental impact statement
for Rodeo–Chediski fire timber salvage sale area. Springerville,
AZ: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Apache-
Sigreaves and Tonto National Forests.
The Wilderness Society. 2003. Summary of the McNally fire,
California: July 21–August 29, 2002. Washington, DC: Ecology
and Economics Research Department.
USDA (US Department of Agriculture) Forest Service. 2003.
Environmental assessment: Hayman fire timber salvage sale.
Colorado Springs, CO: USDA Forest Service.
van der Werf GR, Randerson JT, Giglio L, et al. 2006. Interannual
variability in global biomass burning emissions from 1997 to
2004. Atmos Chem Phys 66: 3423–41.
Veblen T and Lorenz D. 1988. Recent vegetation changes along
the forest/steppe ecotone of northern Patagonia. Ann Assoc Am
Geogr 7788: 93–111.
Wang X, He HS, and Li X. 2007. The long-term effects of fire sup-
pression and reforestation on a forest landscape in northeastern
China after a catastrophic wildfire. Landscape Urban Plan 7799:
84–95.
Westerling AL, Hidalgo HG, and Swetnam TW. 2006. Warming
and earlier spring increase western US forest wildfire activity.
Science 331133: 940–43.
Wiedinmyer C and Neff JC. 2007. Estimates of CO2 from fires in
the United States: implications for carbon management.
Carbon Bal Manage 22: 10.
Wiedinmyer C, Quayle B, Geron C, et al. 2006. Estimating emis-
sions from fires in North America for air quality modeling.
Atmos Environ 4400: 3419–32.
Wirth C, Czimczik CI, and Schulze E-D. 2002. Beyond annual bud-
gets: carbon flux at different temporal scales in fire-prone
Siberian Scots pine forests. Tellus 5544B: 611–30.
Zausen GL, Kolb TE, Bailey JD, and Wagner MR. 2005. Long-term
impacts of stand management on ponderosa pine physiology
and bark beetle abundance in northern Arizona: a replicated
landscape study. Forest Ecol Manage 22188: 291–305.
wwwww..ffrroonnttiieerrssiinneeccoollooggyy..oorrgg
©  The Ecological Society of America
