Herbaceous Vegetation a Factor in Natural Regeneration of Ponderosa Pine in the
Southwest
G. A. Pearson
Ecological Monographs, Vol. 12, No. 3. (Jul., 1942), pp. 315-338.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9615%28194207%2912%3A3%3C315%3AHVAFIN%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
Ecological Monographs is currently published by Ecological Society of America.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/esa.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri Mar 7 17:48:10 2008

HERBACEOvX YEGETATION A FACTOR I N  NATURAL  
REGENERATIOX O F  PONDEROXA P I K E   
I N  THE ROCTTIIWEXT*  
* A l , n o r ~ r ~ n lcost of illnstrations Ilorne 11g a u t h o r  

ThRIlE O F  COXTENTS 
P.\GI$ 
INTRODUCTION
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
317  
OB~ERVATIOX~I~
RECOR~. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S 
. 
319  
EXPERIJ~ENTAL
DATA 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
322  
1929 Seeding Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326  
1937 Seeding Experiniellt .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.328  
1938 Seeding E':spe~.inlellt . . . . . . . .  
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. . . . . .  330  
Planting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  331  
Transpiration 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
331  
335 
Shade Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COP~TCLUSIOPTS  
336  
Suaz31.i~~. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
337  
CITED
LITERATURE 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
338  

HERBACEOUS VEGETATION A FACTOR I N  NATURAL  
REGENERATION OF PONDEROSA P I N E   
I N  THE SOUTHWEST  
INTRODUCTION 
Subordinate vegetation, commonly called ground 
cover, plays an important role in the life of forests. 
Not only does it exert a direct influence upon soil and 
trees but its character may be an indicator of soil 
and moisture conditions. There are two broad types 
of ground cover-herbs 
and shrubs. Herbs, partic- 
ularly the grasses, tend to prevail on the heavier 
soils and shrubs on the lighter, more porous soils. 
Grasses have a relatively shallow and compact root 
system adapted to intensive feeding in superficial 
soil layers. Shrubs as well as trees prefer the more 
open soils which permit deep root development and 
deep moisture penetration. Shallow-rooted herbs are 
dependent on summer showers, whereas the deeper 
rooted shrubs and trees are able to grow with little 
or no summer precipitation if the soil is well saturated 
during the winter months. 
Grass is the prevailing type of ground cover in the 
pine forests of the Southwest. A pronounced mid-
summer rainy season as well as relatively heavy soil 
favors the grasses. In this region pine seldom germi- 
nates at any other time than during the summer rainv 
season, because the spring is usually either too cold 
or too dry. Copious summer rains are essential to 
early survival as well as germination; if the rains 
are deficient the young seedlings are at a disadvan-
tage in competing with older vegetation. Grass roots 
commonly form a dense network in the upper 6 
inches of soil, and a few go deeper (Fig. 1). Pine 
seedlings have some superficial roots which, however, 
are no match for the grass roots in dry periods. At 
such times, unless the pines have pushed their tap- 
roots below the intensive layer of grass roots, they 
perish. 
Some grasses offer keener root competition than 
others, depending on their growth habits. 
Up to 
June I soil moisture is usually adequate but the tem- 
perature is too low for vigorous growth of most 
plants, including the pines. By the middle of June 
temperatures begin to attain effective intensity but 
soil moisture becomes limiting for shallow-rooted 
vegetation. Two of the most common grasses, moun- 
tain muhly ( M u h l ~ n b ~ r g i a
montalza) and blue grama 
(Roziteloua gracilis), grow but little until the arrival 
of the July rains, unless much more than the occa-
sional light showers fall in May and June. Several 
other species, conspicuous among which is the aggres- 
sive bunchgrass, Arizona fescue (Festuca ari~onira), 
normally begin vigorous growth in May and continue 
anti1 they have exhausted the available moisture in 
the upper foot of soil. 
These relations suggest an 
explanation for the observation that pine reproduces 
better on sites occupied mainly by muhly or grama 
grass than on sites where fescue predominates. 
The widespread experience of foresters that tree 
seedlings are adversely affected by competing vege- 
tation has been confirmed experimentally by Clements, 
Weaver, and Hanson working in the prairies of the 
Middle West and by Pessin in the longleaf pine belt 
of Louisiana. In the light of age-long experience in 
agriculture, explanation may seem superfluous. 
No 
farmer would plant corn in a grass sod, nor would a 
nurseryman attempt to grow trees from seed without 
cultivation and weeding. 
But in extensive forestry 
practice a delicate pine seedling is expected to com- 
pete successfully with whatever vegetation has prior 
possession of the soil. 
A different picture is painted by soil conservation- 
ists and those who stress forage production. 
They 
point to the benefits of ground cover in stabilizing 
soil and promoting infiltration of water. They main- 
tain that an improved soil condition resulting from 
the presence of a protective soil cover more than off- 
sets any temporary adverse effect of root competition. 
A common viewpoint is that grass by shading the 
soil conserves surface moisture essential to germina- 
tion of seeds lying uncovered or but lightly covered 
by soil. There is a widespread belief that pine seed- 
lings require partial shade and winter protection 
until they are several years old. 
The foregoing viewpoints are in turn subject to 
modification by other considerations. I t  is true that 
anything which retards evaporation from the surface 
of the soil favors the germination of seeds; but it is 
also true that germination is but the initial chapter 
and not the most critical one in the early life of a 
tree. 
As for surface run-off, suffice it to say that 
pine lands in the Southwest are for the most part 
comparatively level and that the moisture supply on 
which trees depend mainly is derived from snow 
which normally melts slowly and filters into the soil 
without the aid of retarding agents other than forest 
litter. 
Infiltration capacity in granitic soils on 10 
percent slopes in Colorado has been found by John- 
son and Niederhof to increase significantly under a 
cover of mountain muhly but not under a cover of 
Arizona fescue, when compared with bare soil on the 
same site. 
In relation to regeneration, a forester 
thinks of vegetation control as only a temporary 
measure, knowing that once a full stand of trees be- 
comes established a supreme soil cover is in the 
making. 
Notwithstanding a preponderance of evidence in 
this country and abroad pointing to competing vege- 
tation as a handicap to successful forest regenera- 
tion, there are two sides to the question. 
Ground 
cover plays a useful role, within limits, and pine 
seedlings do gain a foothold in spite of a dominating 
grass cover, under certain conditions. 
What these 
conditions and limitations are and what can be done 

318 
G. A. PEARSON 
Ecological Monographs 
Vol. 12. No. 3 
FIG.1. An individual plant of Arizona fescue. 
The roots radiate in a thin, dense layer confined largely to 
the upper 6 inches of soil. A few deep roots enable the plant to grow through prolonged dry periods. 
The 
superficial roots offer intense competition to young pinee. 
The flat conforlnatioll of the root system is natural, 
but the spread is wider than indicated by photo (scale is 12 inches long). 

319 
J U ~ Y ,  1942 
HERBACEOUS 
A FACTOR 
REGENERATION
VEGETATION 
IN NATURAL 
to mitigate adverse influences is the subject of this 
competition, litter, and shade. 
Early observations 
studv. 
attached much importance to shade and shelter. but 
record plots over a period of 10 years gave negative 
OBSERVATIONAL RECORDS 
rcsults because there \\.as little survival anvwhere. 
Studies of natural reproduction of ponderosa pine 
3loreover, the picture was generally obscured by the 
from 190'3 to the present time have continually fo- 
dom nating influence of brows'ng by livestock. 
cused attention on the influence of soil, moisture, root 
In 1919 came the first opportunity to study the 
FIG.2. Luxuriant vegetation grows around stumps after litter has decayed. A, Pine seedlings 5 years old and 
2 feet tall in a stump group where grazing has held herbaceous vegetation in check. 
B, Stump group on area 
closed to grazing. 
Many pine seedlings started but died; clumps of seedlings in distance occur where grass is 
less luxuriant. 

Ecological Mo~lograph~ 
Val. 12, No. 3 
Two series of photographs from tile same point at 10-year intervals from 1909 to 1941. Photos in 1909 directly 
after logging; those of 1941 after a second logging 30 years later. Area closed to grazing througout the entire period. 
A, Arizona fescue promptly took possession. 
Many pine seedlings started in 1919, but died within a year. 

July, 1942 
FIGURE(continued)
3 
Where pine saplings appear in the distance (1938 and 1941 photos) the grass is predominantly muhly. B, Arizona 
fescue predominates on left side, adjoining A ;  on right muhly predon~inates. The two grasses are readily distin-
guishable, in the 1909 and 1930 photos, by the lighter color of fescue. 

Ecological Monographs
Vol. 12. No. 3 
behavior of seedlings in adequate numbers over a 
wide range of conditions. 
More than 100 seedling 
plots were followed through from 1919 to 1930. The 
findings. covering the whole field of natural repro-
duction, have been presented in a series of publica-
tions whose highlights bearing on the present subject 
are briefly summarized in the following paragraphs. 
Under tall grass or weeds, germination was gen-
erally good but survival and growth poor. 
On moderately or closely grazed areas, survival 
was better unless browsing was too severe, but growth 
was slow. 
On denuded spots, such as log landings and roads, 
germination was sometimes deficient because of high 
evaporation or because the seeds were swept away 
by water; but where seedlings occurred they grew 
more rapidly than where obliged to compete with 
herbaceous vegetation. 
Deep cultivation on 5 x 10-foot plots acted unfa- 
vorably, probably because it brought clay to the sur- 
face; moreover, denuding small plots was found to 
remove root competition only temporarily because the 
soil was invaded by roots from surrounding plants. 
In the shade and litter under tree groups seedlings 
were at first more abundant than elsewhere, but sub- 
sequent mortality was also highest and it took place 
under circumstances which pointed to deficient inso- 
lation rather than deficient moisture. 
Soil samples 
during critical drought periods showed more moisture 
in shaded situations than beyond the shade influence 
of the trees. 
Both survival and growth excelled on the littered 
areas around stumps where tree roots had ceased to 
be active, and where herbaceous vegetation had not 
yet entered; soil moisture was found to be much more 
abundant in these situations than where herbaceous 
vegetation was present. 
Three years after germination, pine seedlings 
around stumps were 6 to 9 inches tall while those in 
grass-covered, grazed areas were only 2 to 3 inches 
tall and those which started in dense buncherass
-
had become virtually extinct. Seedlings on log land- 
ings, roads, and other areas denuded and without 
litter were generally intermediate in size. 
Photographic records supplement the foregoing 
observations. 
Figure 2A shows the characteristic 
grouping of vigorous seedlings among stumps in 
1924, 5 years after germination. 
In this instance 
germination took place 6 years after logging, and 
before herbaceous vegetation had invaded the space 
left vacant by removal of the trees. 
Another area 
on which abundant germination followed logging by 
10 years, and on which herbaceous vegetation had 
taken full possession in the meantime was a complete 
failure as shown in Figure 2B. 
In Figure 3, repeated views from fixed points at 
decade intervals through 32 years from 1909 to 1941 
show the progress of pine reproduction in two types 
of grass within a fenced area closed to grazing. The 
camera fields in the two series were almost side by 
side in a large opening. Both 1909 photographs were 
taken a month after logging. In Figure 3A the main 
portion of the opening was dominated by Arizona 
fescue (Festuca arizonica); in Figure 3B the left 
side (adjoining 3 8 )  was fescue but on the right was 
a sparse stand of muhly (Muhlenbergia montana). 
The two species may be distinguished in the 1930 
photographs (taken in early spring) by the lighter 
color and matted appearance of fescue. In series B 
the transition between muhly and fescue follows 
closely an imaginary line from the camera point to 
the stump. As early as 1925 seedlings became con- 
spicuous in the muhly association, as seen on the 
right-hand side of B. Several 5 x 20-foot plots on 
the fescue side in 1919 revealed numerous seedlings, 
nearly all of which died during the ensuing winter 
and dry June period of 1920. The 1938 photographs 
show a full stand on the muhly side and only occa-
sional survivals in the fescue. A similar transition 
from fescue to muhly, accompanied by increasing 
density of seedlings, occurs in the distant border of 
the opening as seen in A. 
Figure 3 8  is typical of ungrazed fescue sites, 
Figure 4 of grazed sites. The 1909 photograph in 
Figure 4 indicates that only about half of the grass 
cover is fescue, other species being mostly muhly and 
beardless bunch (Blepharoneuron tricholepis). 
Graz-
ing was moderate to heavy from 1909 to 1925, light 
after 1925. The final result in this series indicates 
that grass competition could not have interfered seri- 
ously with the pine seedlings, and by comparison 
with Figure 3 leads to the inference that grazing may 
be beneficial. This view is typical of extensive areas 
on which the bunchgrasses were rather closely grazed. 
A question which naturally arises is whether the 
observed differences in pine reproduction as related 
to fescue and muhly are attributable to direct influ- 
ences of the grass or to soil differences which might 
account for the kind of grass as well as the ability 
of pine seedlings to become established. This, among 
other questions, receives attention in the experiments 
described in the following pages. 
EXPERIMENTAL DATA 
In order to check the earlier findings under con-
trolled conditions and evaluate the various factors, 
tests were begun in 1928 and have been carried on 
to the present time. 
The general plan has been to 
sow equal quantities of pine seed or to plant nursery- 
grown stock on plots representing different conditions 
of grass cover, within exclosures against livestock and 
rodents. 
Sowings were made in 1928, 1929, 1937, 
and 1938, and plantings in 1937 and 1938. The 1928 
sowing was a complete failure because summer rains 
were not properIy distributed for germination. In 
1938 germination was light and subsequent dry sum- 
mers resulted in such high mortality on all plots as 
to render comparisons of little significance. 
Both 
plantings were successful. Conclusions are therefore 
based primarily on the sowings of 1929 and 1937 and 
upon the plantings of 1937 and 1938. 

FIG.4. 
A series of photographs from the same point, 1909 to 1941. The grass is a mixed stand of fescue 
and muhly moderately grazed. The 1909 photo was taken directly after logging, the 1941 photo after a second 
logging 30 years later. 
(Camera elevated 8 feet above ground in 1941 photo.) 

Ecological Monographs 
Vol. 12. No. 3 
Series of grass plots variously treated, all seeded to ponderosa pine in 1929 and all within rodent exclosure. 
A, General view in 1936, plots in receding order: (1) Grass undisturbed (immediate foreground, only part of 
plot visible); (2) clipped to height of 6 inches; (3) clipped to height of 2 inches (stake in path between 2 and 

FIGURE
5 (continued) 
3) ; (4) denuded and weeded (dense stand). B, Photo in 1941. Left of path denuded plot; right, grass clipped 
to 2 inches. 
C, Photo in 1941. Left of path, grass c1ipp.d 
to L! inrhcs, right clipped to 6 inches. 
D, Photo in 
1941. Left of path, grass clipped to 6 inches, right no clipping. 

- 
- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
326 
G. A. PEARSON 
Erolog~cal Nonographs 
Vol. 12. No. 3 
Precipitation records during the growing seasons 
from 1928 to 1941, inclusive, as given in Table 1go 
far toward explaining failures and successes. As has 
been stated, germination almost invariably takes 
place in July or August, although it may be delayed 
until early September. Only in one year, 1919, has 
appreciable germination occurred earlier than July 1. 
Summer records on the experimental area (Table 2) 
vary considerably from those at Fort Valley for cur- 
rent months, partly because readings on the experi- 
mental area were made only at weekly intervals. 
Annual totals probably are in close agreement. 
TABLE1. Monthly precipitation at Fort Valley, 6 
miles from the experimental plots, 1928 to 1941. 
I 
Precipitation - inches 
TABLE2. Monthly precipitation, May to October, near 
the experimental plots, 1937 to 1941. 
Precipitation - inches  
Year  
1 
LIay 
1 
June 
( 
July 
August ~eptember 1 October 
1939.. .. 
0.15 
I 
Pine seed was sown on 1x 3-meter plots within an 
area of fescue undisturbed by grazing since 1910. 
Grass treatments and arrangement of plots were as 
shown in Table 3. Plots were separated by paths 2 
feet wide. 
These same plots were seeded in 1928 
but, as previously stated, germination failed. Prob-
ably some of the 1928 seed remained dormant and 
germinated in 1929, along with the seed sown in 
1929, which may in part explain the unequal numbers 
of seedlings recorded in August 1929. However, this 
variation appears to be unimportant inasmuch as all 
plots were adequately stocked in 1929, and ultimate 
survival was unrelated to initial numbers. 
Table 3 reveals interesting facts as tu sparsitv of 
grass cover as measured near the ground line. What 
is usually characterized as a dense stand of bunch- 
grass actually occupies but little more than one tenth 
of the ground surface. 
As the grasses grow to a 
height of 2 feet or more, however, the spreading 
leaves and flower stalks of neighboring grass clumps 
tend to merge and form a fairly close canopy. 
But 
when the leaves and stems are clipped or eaten off 
close to the ground, large bare spaces become ap-
parent. A normal reaction to such disturbance is the 
spontaileous appearance of weeds whose seeds are 
ever present and await only moisture and sunlight to 
assert themselves. 
TABLE3. 
Density of perennial grasses on the plots 
at the beginning of the experiment, as determined by 
charting in 1928. 
Density 1 
Plot 
Treatment of grass 
No. 
Fescue 
/ 
Others I 
Total 
- 
Natural, no clipping.. .. 
1 
0 . 0 8 2 3  
0.0033 
0.0856  
Clipped to 10 inches . . . 
2 
,0765 
,0277 
,1042  
Burned in 1928. .. . . .. . 
3 
,1259 
,0376 
,1635  
Denuded in 1928. . . . . . 
4 
, . . . .  
. . . . .  
.....  
Clipped to 2 inches. . . . 
5 
.I681 
,0226 
,1907  
Clipped to 6 inches. . . . 
6 
,1070 
,0083 
,1153  
Natural, no clipping. . . . 
7 
,1002 
.0032 
,1034  
'Assuming complete cover= 1. hleasurements 1 inch above ground. 
A preliminary paper published in 1934 has pre- 
sented the findings through the year 1933. They are 
briefly as follows: By far the best survival and 
growth of pine seedlings were obtained where grass 
and all other competing vegetation were completely 
removed and kept out by weeding. 
Results were 
noticeably improved where the grass was clipped 
twice annually to heights of 2 and 6 inches, as com- 
pared with undisturbed grass, and the 2-inch clipping 
plot was superior to the one clipped to 6 inches. 
Soil moisture determinations showed a decisive mar- 
gin in favor of the denuded plot during the June- 
July drought period. 
Survival and height growth from 1929 to 1941, 
inclusive, are shown in Table 4, and a visual com-
parison of the several plots may be obtained from 
Figure 5. 
Mortality practically ceased after 1932. 
The decline in numbers on the denuded plot is due 
to artificial thinnings in order to prevent stagnation; 
growth on this plot is probably still being retarded 
by intense competition between the trees themselves, 
the largest of which are now over 6 feet tall. 
The 
trees on all the grassy plots have recently increased 
their growth rate, evidently because the survivors 
now overtop the grass and have established root sys- 
tems which make them more or less independent of 
moisture in the superficial soil strata. 
The comparatively good results on the plot on 
which the grass was burned before seeding are not 
explained. Whether the chemical composition of the 
soil was affected by the ash is not known because no 
analyses were made. The burning took place in 1928 
snii was not repeated before the 1929 seeding. After 

-- 
-- 
IIERBACEOUS 
A FAC
'TOR IN SATURAIJ
REGENERATION 
327
duly, 1942 
VEGETATION 
TABLE4. 
Rccord of germination and survival of 
501 M u , s t u r c  
L I C E N O  
ponderosa pine seedlil~gs on seven grass plots treated 
Depth 9 906 Inches 
-Ilatu-a1 
Grass 
In different ways, pine seetl solmi in 1929. 
--- Denuded 
I--
I
Trcatrnent 
of grass 
Natural, no 
i
1 
i
i
l
i
l
! 
rlipping 
1 
Clipprd to 10 ' 
inches 
. 
Hurned in 
1 
1928 
Denuded in ' !  
Clipprd to 'fi ' 
inchrs . . 
Natural, no 
clipping 
the first year the grass corer was indistinguishable 
from that of the two natural plots. 
The last remaining seedling on the 10-inch clipping 
plot died in 1931. Whether the complete failure of 
this plot is related to clipping is not known. Except 
for absence of seed stalks the plot appeared little 
different frorn the unclipped plots because clipping 
removed few of the leaves. Since there were no more 
seedlings to record, the plot was denuded in 1932. 
After dei~uding, small sections of the plot were re-
sown in 1932 and 1937; both of these sowings pro- 
duced dense stantls of seedlings, similar to that of the 
original denuded plot. 
The major portion of the 
plot was used for soil sarrlpling to represent denuded 
areas, because the original denuded plot had becorne 
densely stocked with seedlings. 
Soil rnoisture determinations presented in the pre- 
vious paper were repeated in 1934; the results are 
given in Table .5 and Figure 6. Sarnples were taken 
at depths of 4 to 6 inches and 6 to 9 inches at 1.5-day 
intervals from hlay 15 to Sovemher 1. The 4- to 6-inch 
samples are considered as representing the layer of 
most intensive root activity on the part of the grasses 
and of small pine seedlings. 
The surface soil to a 
depth of one half inch is most cor~cerned in germina- 
tion, hut gerrninatioll is usually less of a prohlem 
than subsequerlt sul.vival. Previous tests have shown 
that su~face rnoizture fluctuates greatly and that al- 
most daily showers over a period of 3 to 4 wt.eks 
are necessary for germination. 
The 6- to 9-inch 
layer, though containing fewer grass roots than the 
4- to 6-inch layer, is perletrated by deell-rooted forhs 
and is on the whole well occupied. At about 9 inches 
the loamy top soil on this area gives way to a more 
clayey subsoil. 
As i r ~  the 1933 rnoisture detc~rn~iuatio~is, tle-
the 
11uded plot maintained a suhstaritial margin over the 
gmmsy plots tlurit~p the dry ljerir~rl of late June ant1 
FIG. 6. 
Soil ~noisture and precipitation in natural 
glass cover and on denuded plots, 1934. 
early July. Although the wilting coefficietlt was not 
(letermined for these samples, previous determinations 
in this immediate vicinity gave values of 12 to 14 
percent for the upper 6 inches of soil. 
Thus, it is 
apparent that the grassy plots must have been under 
severe stress not or~ly (luring the June-July drought 
but also during secondary droughts later in the sea- 
son. In all of these dry periods, except possibly a t  
the close of the season, the denuded plot appears to 
have maintained a safe margin. I t  is well to reprat 
that the tler~udecl plot 011 which the soil samples were 
takc.11 is not t h ~original delludecl plot which at the 
time of these soil samplings had become densely 
5.
T ~ R T . E  Soil li~oisture ill percent of dry weight at 
depths of 4 to 6 and 6 to 9 inches, at 15-day intervals 
from May 15 to Noven~ber 1, 1934. 
1 
AIoi,trlr. irr -oil on <lifTrr?nt dat:s 
Barnples at depth of 1 to 6 inches below surfacc 
Sanlplts at d ~ p t h  
of 6 to 9 inchrs b-10% surface 
Natural 
, 
19.8114.4'133 8.0119.X9.3,19.3:30.2'190'1'37 10 fi/ 9 9 
D ~ n u l e d19% 
1 7 . 9 2  I 
:3i12.7
1 4 . 1 9 . 4  1 . 7  1 9 . 2 4  4~18.:3i1~:~~13 
B11rnt.d 1928 
17.3i13.1:1~1.0 
021; 2 18.2 14.3 8 li 8.3
8.4 13iiIli..5%~ 

Ecolog~cal Monographs 
Val. 12. No. 3 
stocked wit11 pine sccdli~~gs. Jloisture detcrniinations 
irnlo~lg these sc>etllings ~voultl have been i~~teresting 
hut were not rnatle hecause of the soil ant1 root dis- 
turbance that would have resulted. 
A low trrnper- 
ature of 18"F. on Septemhrr 26 chrckecl the activity 
of nearly all hthrhaceous \-egt,tation. I t  is improhahle 
that root cornpetition was much of :I factor during 
the month of Octoher. 
b;xperiments ~vith pines in 
sealed pots have tlemoristrated that in a dormant state 
they can pcrsist for months in soil ~vhose moisture 
content is practically at the wilting point. 
Contrary to expectations, clipl)ii~g ('re11 as sllort as 
2 inches twice itnnunlly (lid not seriously affect the 
cover. 
Arizona fc~scue, after 10 ycLars of clil)ping 
t\vice il~lnually, hat1 give11 way almost entirely to 
nluhly, henrilless hunch (Blepltrrro~zeliron tricltolepis), 
:r~~tlforhs ~vhtjre clil)pctl to 2 inches hut less corn-
~)l(ltely \\-here clipped to 6 ir~chcs (Fig. 7). JIuh1)-
and bcnrtlless bunch have thrived under ti-inch clip- 
ping. 
After the 10th >,c:ur, clipping was curtailed 
to once annually-at 
the close of the gro\\-ing season. 
l[uhly appears to he capable of holding its o v n  mlder 
this program, cven when clipped as short as 2 inches. 
A p:urallel series of plots outside the rotlent ex-
closure \vas tliscor~tinued ill 1934 because, rodents 
having dt3stroyecl nearly all seedlings in the first years, 
thc.re was no further object in seedling recortls. An 
c>sa~nination of the glasses in the fall of 1937 indi- 
cated no apparcnt tleterioration of Arizona ft,scue 
(luring the 5 years \\-hen clippings \\-ere lnatle 2 or 3 
tirlles each summer. At that time, howerer, the con- 
trast with corresponding plots clipped continuously 
tl~uing 10 years was rery marked. 
For thr purpose of checking reiults of the 1929 
exl)eriment on a tlifferent site and in a different 
l)criod, a uew series of plots was seeded in 1937. -411 
a i w  100 feet square, clear of trees and don~inated by 
Arizona frscue, \vas enclosed with a rodent-proof 
fence. 
Like the area selected in 1928, it was a 
"fail spot" surrountled by areas which had restocked 
to pine in 1919 (Fig. 8). Although fescue was domi- 
nant, muhly was an important component of the grass 
association. 
The plots were 8 feet square in two 
ranks separated hy a path 2 feet wide. 
Two plots 
rcpresrilted each of the following treatments: (1) 
~ ~ a t u r a l ,undisturbed grass, (2) clipped to 4 inches 
twice annually, (3) denuded and weeded, (4) denuded 
hut not weeded. 
I n  order to insure nniform oppor- 
tunities for germination, the pine seeds were planted 
in "hills" of 2 or 3 seeds each, 100 hills to the plot. 
011 the grassy plots, hills were planted in different 
positions with reference to the tufts-in 
edges, in 
dead middles, and in bare spots between tufts. 
The purpose of the paths Jvas to facilitate ex-
amination rather than to provide isolation strips. 
Although isolation strips ~vould have been desirable, 
the idea was abandoned because of the small size of 
continuous areas of uniform grass cover. The dimen- 
sions of the 1937 plots were increased to 8 x 8 feet 
in order to permit stndyi~lg hortler effects. 
Such 
effects \\-ere llotieeable only in the case of denuded 
plots which clearly sho~vetl the influence of root action 
hy plants ill the paths aild on adjacent plots. 
Table 6 gives a 5-year rt1co1.d of survival and 
TABLE6. 
Snrvi\al and height gronth of pine seed-
lings gronn fro111 seed under different treat~nents of 
llerhaceous vegetation. 1937 seeding. 
Ileight of 
sun~ber of hills 
seediings 
un diKcrr.nt dates 
Sr.pten~brr 
I 
1041 
. \ r i .  
S u .  In. 
17 1 3  1 2 . 1  
gro\vth, ant1 Figure 9 prc2hents a picture of typical 
l o t s  in 1 9 1  I t  is ob\-ions that denutling and weed- 
ing brought what 
essc~~~tiallyrepetition of re-
was 
a 
sults obtained with similar treatments in the 1929 
seetlirig. TVhere tlenutling was not follo~vcd by weed- 
iug, muhly, alrllost to the exclusion of fescue, came 
back through root gro~vth and in 2 years had formed 
a complete stand. Pine survival and growth on these 
plots \vas noticeably below that on the drnuded and 
weeded plots, hut hetter t h a ~ ~  
on the clippecl or nat- 
ural plots. 
Clil)pi~~gthe grasses has undoubtedly 
aided survival, though to a less extent than denuda- 
tion. 
One of the rlatural plots contains several 
seedlings which promise to survive. 
This plot has a 
less dense stand of grass than its companion; all of 
the seedlings are directly iu or in the edge of open 
spaces 15 to 20 inches ~ I Itliarneter. 
Soil moistwe dett~rminations \\-we ~nadt. only in 
1938 and 1941, and then only in \\-hat was judged to 
be the height of the dry season. The results repeat 
the story of the 1929 experiment. 
Early in July, 
before the summer rains began, the denuded and 
weeded plots showed a margin of 4 to 5 percent above 
all others, but the clippetl plots a1)peared to hold no 
consistent advantage over those which were not 
clipped. The fact that a 11earl)- pure stand of muhly 
supplanted the original ftbscue association on the two 
plots which were tlrnntletl but not weeded has sug-
gested that these t\vo l~lots, (111 acconnt of the rela- 

J U ~ S  1942 
IIERBACEOVS
VEGETATION
A FACTOR 
REGENERATION
IK NATURAL 

Ecological Monographs 
Vol. 12, No. 3 
FIG.8. Plots inside rodent exclosure, 1937 sowing. A, General view in 1938, looking west. Designation of plots 
in the order of Table 6, beginning with Plot 1, L'denuded-weeded" on right side of path, and Plot 5 "natural" 
(dense grass) on left side of path. White sticks mark pine seedlings. B, Looking south at west end. Right, Plot 4, 
"clipped to 4 inches 
and Plot 8 "denuded-weeded." 
Left, Plot 3 ' 'denuded-not weeded" 
(dense growth of 
6-weeks grass), and Plot 7 "clipped to 4 inches." 
tively low early-summer activity of muhly, might 
offer better soil moisture conditions than the fescue 
plots. 
Such, however, was not the case in 1941, the 
only year in which a cornparkon was made after full 
recovery of the muhly. 
This finding is not regarded 
as conclusive because muhly made more growth than 
usual in the early summer of 1941. 
Seed spots sown in 1937 on an area adjoining this 
series of plots were a complete success (Fig. 10A). 
In all of these spots the grass was removed from :r 
space about 3 feet in diameter and kept out the first 
2 years. 
The seedlings, now in their 5th pear, are 
from 9 to 15 inches tall and comparable to those on 
the denuded-weeded plots previously described. Seed 
spots in placcs where deep litter has killed out herba- 
ceous vegetation have given similar results (Fig. 
10R). 
1938 SEEDIXG
ESPERIIIEST 
The 1937 seeding was replicated in all essential 
details in 1938. The summer rains were less contin- 

331 
J U ~ Y ,  1942 
HERBACEOUS 
A FACTOR 
REOENERATIOX
VEGETATION 
IN NATURAL 
uous in 1938 than in 1037, with the result that 
of most itense grass-root activity, the laterals evi- 
germination was irregular and generally incomplete; 
dently encountered severe competition from grass 
nevertheless, substantial numbers of seedlings ap-
roots. 
peared in most of the plots. In this instance all the 
denuded plots, whether weeded or not, were superior 
to the grass plots in point of germination. But 1939 
experienced one of the driest April-July periods on 
record, and 1940 the driest July on record. Both of 
these droughts took a heavy toll not only in outright 
mortality but also in retarding development. 
Al-
though the late summer and fall of both 1939 and 
1940 brought heavy rains, the weakened seedlings 
failed to respond. 
Ground heaving during the ex-
tremely wet winter of 1940-41 made the loss almost 
complete. One of the denuded not-weeded plots (Plot 
13) proved an exception to the rule with 18 hills 
surriving on May 8, 1941. No explanation can be 
offered. excewt that frost heaving - was less severe on 
this plot than on some others. Muhly forms a sparse 
stand-noticeably 
less dense than on the companion 
plot. 
The fact that summer mortality was high on de-
nuded-weeded as well as grassy plots indicates that 
in extreme drought elimination of competition may 
not be an adequate safeguard. 
Soil moisture deter- 
minations in July of 1939 and 1940 would have been 
enlightening. 
A reasonable conjecture is that the 
moisture content fell below or very near the wilting 
point on denuded as well as on grassy plots. 
TABLE7. Survival of pine seedlings grown from seed 
under different treatments of herbaceous vegetation. 1938 
seeding. 
Number of hills on different dates 
Plot 
o 
I 
r e t e n  
/ 
1 ; 
y 
1 h.". 
1941 
9 .  . Denuded- 
not weeded.  
10 . Natural... . . . 
11. . Clipped to  
4 inches. . . .  
12. . Denuded- 
weeded . . . .  
13.  Denuded- 
not weeded.  
14. . Clipped to 
4 inches. . . .  
1 5 . .  Natural.. . . .  
16. . Denuded- 
weeded . . .  
In 1938, 3-year-old nursery-grown ponderosa pines 
were planted in denuded and grassy spots. 
Four 
plants nere set in a space 6 feet square and the 
squares were located randomly. The results in Table 
8 show a deckive margin in favor of the denuded 
plots. In this case, the effect of grass is attributed 
entirely to root competition since the planted trees, 
4 inches or more in height, were tall enough to evade 
intense shading. Although the tree roots were for 
the most part long enough to reach below the zone 
TABLE8. Survival of 3-year-old nursery-grown stock 
planted May 2, 1938, in natural grass cover and on 
denuded spots. 
Survival  
Grade of stock 
;;;!xi 1 
1 
-4uaust 1 
October 28
I 
1 
1 
Percent 
1 
Percent 
Planted in natural grass cover 
First. ... . . .... .. . . 
Second. .. . .. . .. . . . 1 
1 ::::
1 
4i:i 
P:anted on denuded spots 
First. . . . ... . . ... . . 
56 
94.8 
1 
91.1 
Second . . . . . . . . . . . .  
63.8 
57.2 
In the two grades of stock, root development was 
the main enterion. On the average, first-grade plants 
had roots about 10 inches long, well branched and 
well supplied with fine rootlets; second-grade plants 
had shorter roots with fewer and weaker laterals and 
presenting only about one-half the absorbing area of 
the roots in grade 1. The superiority of grade 1 
plants is decisive in both grassy and denuded spots; 
but it is most striking in the grassy spots, indicating 
that here root competition is most keen. 
Follow-up records are not presented in this in-
stance because deer browsing has all but destroyed 
the plantation. 
The surviving plants are nearly all 
in denuded squares, where occasional stems are over 
2 feet tall. 
As a result of this and similar tests in 
1935, 1936, and 1937, removal of competing vegeta- 
tion around planted trees or "seed spots" has been 
adopted as standard practice in the Fort Valley Ex-
perimental Forest. 
In view of the generally accepted experience that 
transpiration is dkectly related to leaf area, the fail- 
ure of clipping to show a clear-cut response in soil 
moisture may call for explanation. Measurements of 
water loss by transpiration of potted plants plus 
evaporation were made in 1935 and 1936 with clipped 
and unclipped grass, forbs, and control pots of bare 
soil. Seven clumps of Arizona fescue were dug with 
a ball of earth attached to the roots and fitted into 
5-gallon cans. 
The grass was removed from three 
clumps by cutting below the root collar; in two of 
these cans the soil was kept hare by weeding, while 
in one a volunteer stand of forbs or "weeds" was 
permitted to grow. After heavy watering had raised 
the water content to the calculated capacity of the 
soil, the cans nere allowed a period of adjustment; 
then, when vigorous growth was in progress, two of 
the grass clumps were clipped to a height of 2 inches 
and the other two allowed to grow undisturbed. Be-
cause of the large size of the grass clumps, sealing 
against evaporation and rain was not considered 
feasible. JIoreover, since grass covered the soil sur- 

Ecologirnl Mo~lographs  
Vol. 12. No. 3  
1937 seeding plots photographed in 1941. The plot numbers following refer to Table 6.  
A, Foreground, Plot 4 (clipped to 4 inches) and beyond it Plot 3 (denuded-not weeded) now has dense stand  

FIGURE
9 (continued) 
of muhly. B, Foreground, Plot 4 and beyond Plot 8 (denuded-weeded). C, Foreground, Plot 8 and beyond Plot 7 
(before clipping). D,Foreground, Plot 5 (dense grass with lupine) and beyond Plot 1 (denuded-weeded). E, Fore-
ground, Plot 1 (denuded-weeded) and beyond Plot 2 (sparse grass with lupine). 
face almost completely, evaporation in the grass cans 
was reduced to a low quantity. 
During a rainless period of 17 days from June 13 
to July 5, 1935, average daily water losses were: 
bare soil 141 grams, weeds 405 grams, clipped grass 
249 grams, unclipped grass 339 grams. 
In 1936, during a rainless period of 17 days from 
June 2 to June 19, average daily losses from the same 
cans were: bare soil 82 grams, weeds 144 grams, 
clipped grass 114 grams, unclipped grass 210 grams. 
The consistently lower water losses in 1936 than in 
1935 are attributed to lower maximum temperatures 
and less advanced growth in the 1936 period which 
was nearly 20 days earlier than the 1935 period. 
Although this simple test is lacking in refinement as 
a measure of transpiration in relation to leaf sur-
face, it is adequate for the purpose intended. 
The relatively low water loss from the cans of 
bare soil as compared with cans containing grass or 
weeds is in accord with the widely accepted finding 
that plants may extract more water from a soil than 
is lost by direct evaporation. 
The dry air of the 
Southwest removes water from superficial layers of 
bare soil very rapidly, hut after evaporation has 
dried the top layer to a depth of several inches, this 
layer acts as a blanket to retard evaporation from 
lower depths. If plant roots extend into the moist 
substratum, they may remove water more rapidly 
from the entire soil mass than is possible through 
evaporation alone. 

Ecological Monographs 
Vol. 12, No. 3 
FIG.10. Seed spots. A, Grass removed in space 3 feet in diameter. 
Seed sown in 1937, photo 1941. B. Seed 
sown in disintegrated brush pile, 1938; photo 1941. 
Broad-leaved plants are capable of removing water 
Water loss in the cans containing clipped grass 
quite as rapidly as grasses. 
Obviously, the density 
was consistently below the loss from unclipped grass. 
and character of the weed composition is a factor. 
This was true of individual cans as well as when the 
In this case several species, both annuals and peren- 
results were averaged; and the relation held for cur- 
nials, mere represented, all coming from seeds or 
rent losses, shown by weighing at 3-day intervals, as 
roots which happened to be in the soil. 
\\-ell as for totals. 
Since the grass cans were almost 

335 
J U ~ Y ,  1942 
HERBACEOUS 
A FACTOR 
REGENERATION
VEGETATION 
IN NATURAL 
completely stocked with grass, weeds were not a dis-
turbing factor. 
Any comparison of clipped and unclipped grass 
with respect to water consumption under field con-
ditions must recognize that leaf area of the grass is 
only one of several factors involved. 
Increased 
evaporation from the soil surface as a result of light- 
ening the grass cover may compensate, in part, for 
any lowering of 
transpiration through the grass 
leaves. 
Ailother factor which tends to restore the 
balance is that clipping the grass encourages weed 
growth. Finally, even if it were demonstrated that, 
notwithstanding the above compensations, clipping 
results in a net decrease of water loss, the saving iri 
soil moisture might be only temporary. I n  the course 
of a prolonged dry period, even the reduced leaf 
surface of the clipped plants might be capable of 
exhausting all available soil moisture. 
Putting it 
another way, lack of soil moisture might prevent the 
plants which have the larger leaf area from exerting 
their full transpiring capacity. 
SHADEEFFECTS 
The interception of heat rays by a screen of plant 
leaves is easily demonstrated in the effect on soil tem- 
perature. 
Under tree crowns soil temperature at a 
depth of 6 inches is commonly 10" F. lower than in 
situations exposed to full sunlight. 
But this differ- 
ence is most pronounced when the sky is clear or 
nearlv so: on cloudv davs tem~eratures are the same 
" 
" 
under tree crowns as in the open. A similar effect 
is reflected in evaporation from a moist surface. 
Table 9 gives the results of measurements with 
Piche evaporimeters on 3 days in September 1937. 
The first day, September 21, was characterized as 
part cloudy with moderate wind; the other 2 days 
were clear with light wind. 
Wind was not much of 
a factor in any case because the site is surrounded 
by a dense stand of young trees, and therefore evap- 
oration differences may be attributed almost entirely 
to insolation. 
The Piche evaporimeter lends itself 
well to measuring the effect of low p!ant cover be-
cause the flat evaporating disc can be placed under- 
neath the foliage close to the ground. 
TABLE9. Water loss from Piche evaporimeters placed 
2 inches above the ground in different densities of grass 
rover. 
Water loss, cubic centimeters 
I 
1 
Cover 
CC 
CC 
CC 
1 .  . . Bare soil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I 
14.0 
I 
1 ::::
1::; 
1 
1 
22.3 
2 
a
s
.
 o
n s t a n d . .  
6 
I 8 5  
4 .  . . Grass clipped to 4 in.. . . . 
11.6 
14.4  
5 ,. . Dense 
. . , . , . , , , 
1/12 
13.4  
5a . Dense grass . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . 
12.6  
8 .  . . Bare soi!. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14.1 
1 6 . 0  
2 4 . 2  
lings, it does not follow that the shade effect is 
mholly beneficial. 
An experiment begun in 1929 in 
~vllich ponderosa pine seedlings were grown under 
artificial shade, with root competition from other 
vegetation eliminated, has demonstrated that seed-
l'ngs in half shade assume a form so slender that 
the stems bend over, and that when insolation is re- 
duced to about 15 percent of full sunlight the seed- 
lings become dwarfed and finally die (Fig. 11). 
B 
FIG.11. Effect of shade. Two-year-old pine seedlings 
planted in 1934 within lath screen, lath spaced to admit 
15 aercent of full sunlipht. Photos in 1940. A, Screened 
*]though the shade of grass and other living vege-
oveihead as well as on sydes. out of 10 seedlings planted 
only 4 survive. 
B, Screened only on sides, open over-
tation retards evaporation from the soil surface and 
head. 
seedlings ,vere identical with those in A when 
presumahlp also lowers transpiration in pine seed-
planted. 

336 
G. A. PEARSON 
Ecological 3Ionograyh5 
I t  has been pointed out in a previous paper that 
shading involves not only "light" in the technycal 
sense but also heat and other forms of energy in- 
eluding the short wave lengths which are said to give 
rigid~ty to plant items. Because high temperatires 
induce drought it is customary to think of heat as 
harmful; but there is much evidence that the highest 
temperatures that occur in the ponderosa pine type 
of this region are none too high for ponderosa pine 
and that the species does not function effectively if 
the normal heat supply is materially reduced. 
A 
small pine seedling under a clump of tall grass is 
sub,jected to the same influence as the disc of a Piche 
evaporimeter. 
The seedling, like the evaporimeter, 
saves water but the seedling also is deprived of solar 
energy for photosynthesis and other functions neces- 
sary for growth. 
Seedlings which ultimately survive in dense stands 
of unclipped Arizona fescue are almost invariably in 
fair-sized openings between grass tufts or in the edge 
of a clump where they have access to direct sun-
light. They remain subnormal in size for many years. 
Soil moisture has been found rather lower in these 
situations than in the shade of the grass, which is 
to be expected because root action is no less and 
evaporation is higher in the open spots. A somewhat 
similar situat:on is found in the edges of the denuded 
plots adjacent to grass plots or grassy paths. Sur-
vival is poorer and the seedlings are noticeably smaller 
than those well within the denuded plots. 
Within 
the two "denuded-weeded" plots of the 1937 series, 
the seedlings on a strip 1foot wide along the border 
were all below 6 inches tall, whereas those inside of 
this border strip were commonly above 9 inches and 
as much as 16 inches tall. 
In these instances root 
competition is thought to be the sole retarding factor. 
CONCLCSIONS 
Experimental and observational data gathered over 
a period of more than 20 years confirm the findings 
elsewhere in this country and in Europe that domi- 
nance of herbaceous vegetation retards and may pre- 
vent regeneration of forest trees. 
Since pine seed- 
lings were found in this study to grow well after 
removal of the grass on sites where failure was 
previously experienced, it is fair to conclude that the 
presence of grass rather than an inherent soil con-
dition was primarily responsible for the failure. 
Soil moisture seems to play the leading role. The 
critical factor is not so much surface moisture for 
germination as moisture below the surface, required 
to sustain life and growth after germination. Grasses 
and other herbaceous plants are able to appropriate 
the moisture in the upper 9 inches of soil at the ex- 
pense of young pine seedlings. If, however, the pine 
is able to survive several years, its roots may even-
tually extend below the dense network of grass roots; 
the pine in that case also develops strong superficial 
roots and gradually gains the upper hand. The small 
seedlings in Figure 12 illustrate the effect of com-
petition upon both stem and root development; the 
Vol. 12. No 3 
roots were found literally embedded in a maze of 
grass roots. 
Figure 5 illustrates 1.'-year seedlings 
which have emerged from suppression. 
FIG.12. The large seedling is an average specimen 
from denuded-weeded Plot 1 (Table 6). 
The small 
seedlings are samples of the few survivors in the grass 
of Plots 2 and 5. Note that roots as well as tops of the 
small seedlings are underdeveloped; they are full length 
as found enmeshed in a network of grass roots. 
The 
tops were partially covered by grass. Both large and 
small seedlings are 5 years old. 
Although the influence of soil moisture has beel? 
clearly demonstrated, this does not prec!ude the pos- 
sibility of other influences due to grass competition. 
Insolation may be an important factor. Many small 
seedlings are completely covered by mats of dead 
grass; others are in continuous shade under the dense 
foliage of Arizona fescue. Seedlings in the unclipped 
grass plots commonly show the characteristic symp- 
toms of etiolation. 
When the apparently conflicting evidence has been 
reduced to elementary terms, the confusion clarifies. 
The findings here presented point to certain guiding 
principles or, more correctly, to a confirmation of old 
silvicultural teachings. European silviculture stresses 
control of competing vegetation in both natural and 
artificial reforestation. 
I t  also stresses care of the 
soil by maintaining what is called "forest conditions." 
Trees, like any other crop, respond to cultivation. 

Old field pine in the South is a familiar example; 
examplrs may also be found in the Southwest. Ex-
tensive cultivation is not generally practical in a 
mountain country, on account of stony soils and 
topography subject to erosion, but the principles 
apply there as anywhere ?]st. The old observation 
often cited by timbermen that tree regeneration is 
favord by scarification and denudation of the soil in 
the course of logging operations is scientifically 
sound; but these operations must be conducted with 
due regard for soil stability. 
Grazing can aid re-
forestation if 
directed toward silvicultural ends. 
Grazing confined to late summer and fall, and utiliz- 
ing the forage in a degree comparable to that on the 
'1-, 4-, and 6-inch cl.'pping plots in this study, has 
distinct silricultural pos~ibiliti~s. Grazing to the ex- 
tent of destroying grass corer over large areas is 
inadvisable as a general practice because of resultant 
soil deterioration. 
In artificial reforestat:on, as already related, it has 
bern found feasible to denude a spot about 3 feet in 
diameter for each planted tree or "seed spot." The 
spot must 
during 2 years after planting. 
be ~ r e ~ d e d  
This practice results in much higher survival and 
more rapid growth than if the young tree is subjected 
to competition with other vegetation during the first 
few years of its life. In fact, as sho~rn in Table 8, 
even ~rell-developed transplant stock is unable to 
compete successfully where grass has possession of 
t h ~soil. I t  is often practical to take advantage of 
localized breaks in the grass co~er, such as old roads, 
log landings, decayt~d brush piles, bare spaces around 
stumps or decayed lops, and arras covered by leaf 
litter and logging debris. 
The foregoing measures apply mainly to lands on 
\\-hich the forest has suffered from past misuse, 
through overcutting, overgrazing, and fire. 
Usually 
it is only under these circumstances that pine re-
generation presents a problem. 
Good silviculture 
encourages nature to bring about automatically favor- 
able conditions \\-hich, under mismanagement, can be 
obtaind only through artificial measures. I n  a well- 
inanaged forest, young trres start in small openings 
beheen groups of older trees; a mat of leaf litter 
kecps the soil mellow and promotes infiltration of 
water; openings in the crown canopy are seldom 
large enough to permit grasses to assume dominance. 
Ponderosa pine, though light-demanding, is less so 
than Arizona fescue, which thrives only in relatively 
large openings such as occur mainly after heavy cut- 
ting. Pine seedlings will endure side shade if the^ 
have access to direct sunlight from overhead; in fact, 
they develop the best timber form under these con-
ditions. I n  a well-managed pine forest on the Col- 
orado Plateau, Arizona fescue will eventually give 
way to the more shade-tolerant muhly, more desirable 
silviculturally and more palatable to livestock than is 
ilrizona f rscue. 
Once the forest has regained dominance, the best 
cure for grass competition is forest management 
which does not permit grasses to assume a domi-
nating position. Management must begin in the vir- 
gin stand by encouraging advance reproduction in 
open spaces before they are enlarged by cutting. 
Unlike some forest trees, ponderosa pine is a climax 
species which is capable of directly succeeding itself. 
Given the active co-operation of man, the ponderosa 
pine forests of the Southwest will remain as pure 
stands of ponderosa pine and they can be made to 
improve rather than decline with use. 
Grass is the prevailing type of herbaceous vegeta- 
tion or "ground cover" in the ponderosa pine forests 
of the Southwest. 
In general, grasses predominate 
on the heavier soils and shrubs on the lighter soils. 
A pronounced midsummer rainy period in the 
Southwest favors grass vegetation whose intensive 
superficial root system is well adapted for utilization 
of the water from summer showers. 
Trees, like shrubs, prefer porous soils favorable to 
deep root penetration. 
TVhere winter precipitation 
is sufficient to saturate the soil to a depth of several 
feet, old trees are relatively independent of summer 
showers. 
Pine seedlings require moisture in the superficial 
soil layers during the first fexr years of their life, or 
until they hare developed a deep root system. Dur-
ing this period grass competition places thrm at a 
serious disadvantage. 
The intensity of root competition varies accorcling 
to the growth habits of difierent grasses. Arizona fes- 
cue, a tall bunchgrass, is the most aggressire compet- 
itor because it gro~r-s during May and June when 
precipitation is at a minimum; other bunchgrasses, 
such as mountain rnuhly and beardless bunch and the 
short grass, blue grama, compete less because they 
remain almost dormant during the early summer dry 
period. 
The foregoing relationships, observed over a long 
period of years, hare been checked experimentally 
since 1928 on plots artificially seeded to pine, pro- 
tected against rodents, and otherwise treated unl-
forrnly with respect to all factors except herbaceous 
vegetation. 
On some plots grass was permitted to grow undis- 
turbed; on others it was clipped to various heights; 
some were denuded by "scalping" the soil to a depth 
of about 2 inches and kept clean by weeding; others 
were scalped but not weeded, allowing vegetation to 
return at will. 
The first installation in 1928 was repeated on dif-
ferent sites in 1929, 1937, and 1938. 
Excellent 
germination took place on all plots in 1929 and 1937, 
and both of these sets of plots are thought to afford 
a reliable test of the influence of grass. 
In both the 1929 and the 1937 series, by far the 
best surxival and growth were obtained on plots 
which nere denuded and kept continually free of all 
competing vegetation; results were poorest in undis- 
turbed grass and intermediate in cl~pped grass. De-
nuding vithout subsequent weeding gave variable 
rtsnlts, pcnerally most comparable to clipping. 

338  
G. A. PEARSON 
Ecologiral Monographs 
Val. 12. No. 3 
Soil moisture is thought to account more than any 
other factor for the difference in behavior under dif- 
ferent treatments. During wet periods the soil mois- 
ture content was rather higher on the plots densely 
covered by grass than on the denuded plots, but 
during drought periods the relation was reversed. 
Clipping did not appreciably influence soil mois- 
ture. Although clipped grass was found in a sep-
arate test to use less water than unclipped grass, 
this saying is apparently offset under field conditions 
by increased evaporation and by increased activity 
of forbs on clipped plots. 
Light appears to be an important secondary factor 
favoring development on denuded and closely clipped 
plots. 
Young seedlings in tall grass exhibited the 
familiar characteristics of etiolation. Ultimate sur-
vival on unclipped grass plots was invariably in open 
spaces a foot or more in diameter. 
Lnder a program of 
clipping twice annually 
through 10 years, Arizona fescue was replaced almost 
completely by mountain muhly, beardless bunch, and 
forbs when clipped to 2 inches, but less completely 
when clipped to 6 inches. 
On plots denuded once 
and not subsequently disturbed, muhly by sprouting 
from the roots recovered completely whereas very 
little fescue returned. 
Managed grazing can aid pine reproduction mate-
rially; but grazing to the point of denudation is not 
generally advisable because it results in the browsing 
of seedlings and the packing of soil in valleys and 
erosion on slopes. 
Cut-over lands on which Arizona fescue has be- 
come dominant may require artificial measures to aid 
pine reproduction; but pine stands in good silvicul- 
tural condition when logged the first time can be 
managed in such manner that grass will not introduce 
a reproduction problem. 
Clements, F. E., J. E. Weaver, & H. C. Hanson. 
1929. 
Plant competition: An analysis of community func-
tions. 
Carnegie Inst. Washington Pull. 398. 
340 ~ p .  
Johnson, W. M., & C. H. Niederhof. 
1941. 
Some rela-
tions of plant cover to run-off, erosio~l and infiltration 
on granite soils. 
Jour. Forestry 39: 854-858. 
Fearson, G. A. 
1923. 
Natural reproduction of western 
yellow 1:ine in the Southwest. IT. S. Dept. Agr. Bul. 
1105. 144 pp. 
1930. 
Light and nloisture in forestry. 
Ecology 11: 
145-160. 
1931. 
Forest types in the Southwest as deternlinerl 
by climate and soil. 
U. S. Dept. Agr. Tech. Bul. 
247. 
143 pp.  
1934. 
Grass, pine seedlings, and grazing. 
Jour. For-  
estry 12: 545-555.  
1936. Some observations on the reaction of pine seed-  
lings to shade. 
Ecology 17: 270-276.  
1940. Shade effects in ponderosa pine. Jour. Forestry 
38: 778-780. 
Pearson, G. A., & R. E. Marsh. 1936. Timber growing 
and logging practice in the Southwest and in the 
Black Hills region. U. S. Dept. Agr. Tech. Bul. 480. 
79 PP. 
Pessin,  L. J. 1938. 
The effects of vegetation on the 
growth of longleaf pine seedlings. 
Ecol. lfonog. 8: 
115-149. 
