Restoration News
Fall 2010
Reports from the Field
The Ecological Restoration Institute Ecological Research
Unit had a busy summer field season in 2010. Here are
reports from some of this year’s field research trips.
Barney Springs—Mike Stoddard
Barney Springs, which is a privately owned property located
south  of  Flagstaff  along  the  Mogollon  Rim,  is  unique
because of the unharvested, old-growth ponderosa pine
stand found there. Given this rare opportunity to study a
relatively pristine forest, an ERI research team set out to
explore the spatial arrangement of old-growth ponderosa
pine to determine whether ponderosa pine actually do grow
in distinct groups. We also wanted to determine the age
distribution of the trees and see if big trees are really old
trees (a recurring question in the ongoing diameter cap
debate). The team of Mike Stoddard (team leader), Eryn
Schneider, Ashlee Simpson, Isaac Bickford, Chris Adakai,
Alicia Formanack,  and Avianna  Acid  set  up  a  basic
research grid and measured ponderosa pine trees at the
160-acre  site.  The  team  found  many  large,  old  trees--
roughly 57 trees per acre that were at least 14.75 inches in
diameter. Most of these trees were fairly tall, ranging from
Alumni News
By Robin Long
The  ERI  family  welcomes  a  new  baby! 
Jason Jerman (BS Forestry ’02) and his wife
are now the proud parents of a baby girl,
Valerie Lynnae Jerman, born May 24th. He
writes, “Much less importantly, I’ve accepted
a  job  on  the  Coeur  d’Alene  River  Ranger
District as their silviculturist.”  Congratulations
to Jason and his family.
 
0
0
view past issues |
RSS
subscribe to list
 
translate

36 feet to 148 feet, with an average height of about 82 feet.
Definitely,  some  of  the  tallest  ponderosa  pines  I  have
measured! In order to follow-up on this initial baseline work,
the ERI and NAU are discussing with the owner, Phoenix
businessman, Warren Smith, about the possibility of using
the site for multiple restoration experiments. You can read
more about the Barney Springs Project here.
Sudden Aspen Decline Research—Isaac Bickford
Various  teams  of  NAU  Forestry  graduate  student
researchers (Tom Zegler, Mary-Bridget Nowicki) and ERI
staff  and  students  (Susan  Nyoka,  Robin  Long,  Isaac
Bickford, Mark Daniels, Justy Leppert,  Patrick Shin, Alicia
Formanack,  Jeremy  McWhorter,  Zac  Timmons,  Kelcey
Adelmeyer, Zach Bastrow, Taylor Orriss, and Chris Adakai)
visited 21 high-elevation sites and eight low-elevation sites
west of Flagstaff to study the regional phenomenon known
as sudden aspen decline or SAD. High-elevation sites were
located  on  Bill  Williams  Mountain,  Sitgreaves  Mountain,
Kendrick Mountain, and the tops of Government Mountain
and  Government  Hill.  Low-elevation  sites  were  located
south of Williams and north of Parks. The team worked
cheerfully and diligently to collect high-quality data despite
long hikes to the research sites (up to 10 miles per day),
snow on the plots, and bear sightings. They also had the
best seats in the house for viewing the mid-June Eagle
Rock Fire on Sitgreaves Mountain, which was first spotted
by Patrick Shin. They were able to see the fire grow from a
single  point  to  more  than  800  acres  by  Wednesday
evening, when they decided to leave the field to escape the
risk of road closures.
Various members of the Aspen Trip ﬁeld crew: (clockwise from
the upper right): Isaac Bickford, Mary-Bridget Nowicki, Kelcey
Adelmeyer, Alicia Formanack, Zach Bastrow, Tom Zegler, Taylor
Orriss, and Chris Adakai.
Aspen Fire Scar Research—John Paul Roccaforte
The  team  of  John  Paul  Roccaforte,  Walker  Chancellor,
Megan  Nasto, Katelynn  Jenkins,  Taylor  Orriss,  and  Joe
Smithson had a successful outing collecting fire scars from
13 aspen sites on the South Kaibab National Forest. In all,
the team collected 109 fire-scarred samples mostly from
This summer brought another sweet little girl
with the arrival of Sena Rae Stoddard born
on July 10th to Mike (MS Forestry ’06) and
Juliana
 
(Suby)
 
Stoddard
 
(B.A.
Spanish/International  Affairs  ’03).  Everyone
is  doing  well  and  Sena  makes  guest
appearances  at  ERI  functions  to  much
fanfare. Mike says fatherhood is “dreamy.” 
Does  that  mean  he’s  not  getting  enough
sleep? 
 
Jenny Hartman (BA International Affairs ’08)
checks in from Flagstaff where she had been
working as an advocate at Northland Family
Help  Center,  a  domestic  violence  shelter,
until resigning to volunteer with Amigos de
las Américas.  She  just  returned  from
an 11-week  trip  to  Nicaragua  as  a  project
supervisor  for  AMIGOS,  where  she  led
volunteers in community-based development
and  environmental  education  projects.  A
surprise  awaited  her  when  fellow ERIer,
Bobby Benedetto (BS Engineering student),
0
0
view past issues |
RSS
subscribe to list
 
translate

ponderosa pines, but also a few white pines. A sample from
the Mud Seep Tank site had about 30 fire scars; most
samples had an average of eight scars. The crew did some
crazy hikes and carried some heavy equipment up and
down steep slopes.
John Paul Roccaforte (left) and Walker Chancellor collecting ﬁre
scars
The crew from left to right: Megan Nasto, John Paul Roccaforte,
Taylor  Orriss,  Katelynn  Jenkins,  Joe  Smithson,  Walker
Chancellor.
Pinyon-Juniper Wildfire Studies—Dave Huffman
 
ERI research teams made four trips to the Tusayan District
of  the  Kaibab  National  Forest  to  study  the  long-term
responses  of  pinyon-juniper  ecosystems  to  wildfire.  The
researchers  are particularly  interested  in  vegetation
development  following  wildfire;  the  dynamics  of  coarse,
woody material (dead trees); and the importance of coarse
wood in providing “safe sites” for tree regeneration.
 
The  Trip  2  Team,  led  by  Joe  Crouse,  included
came to Nicaragua and proposed!   The ERI
matchmaking service continues.
Niki  Steffens  (BS  Forestry  ’08)  Niki  has
been busy as ever. Last summer and this
summer  she  worked  for  the  U.S.  Forest
Service.  In  2009,  she  worked  out  of
Norwood, Colorado as a biological sciences
technician  spraying  weeds  on  the
Uncompahgre National Forest. This summer
she worked as a forestry tech on the Tongass
National Forest, where she helped repair and
improve the Perseverance Trail. During the
winter season, Niki heads south to work at a
resort in Telluride.
 
0
0
view past issues |
RSS
subscribe to list
 
translate

Megan Nasto, Taylor Orriss, and Zac Timmons. This team
measured ten plots for tree sizes and conditions; amount of
woody,  surface  fuel; number  of  tree  seedlings;
and association  between  young  trees  and coarse  wood.
Four plots were in a moderately old fire (60-100 yrs), five
plots were located where fire has had minimal occurrence
for a few centuries, and one plot in an older fire (100-150
yrs). The trip not only included hard, sometimes repetitive,
work  but  good  meals  and  conversation  around  the
campfire, seeing antelope and elk, hearing coyotes, and
watching the sunset at Shoshone Point in Grand Canyon
National Park.
 
Trip 3, which was led by Mike Stoddard, included the team
of Avianna Acid, Katelynn Jenkins, Brian Moss, and Tyler
Wade. They installed and completed measurements on five
sample plots inside the area burned by the 1960 Dillman
Fire; completed measurements on two sample plots in the
Red Butte East Fire area, which burned about 1900; and
completed measurements on one sample plot at the Griffin
Fire  Control.  In  addition,  they  enjoyed  the  company  of
cedar gnats (“no-see-ums”), had fantastic dinners (thanks
Avi!), observed enormous cliffrose, discovered pictographs,
and enjoyed views of the Eagle Rock Fire.
 
The researchers completed their work near Tusayan during
Trip 4 and then spent the rest of the trip working in the San
Francisco Peaks. By the end of Trip 4, they added the
following sites to the ERI’s PJ fire chronosequence study:
Tusayan District--Griffin  Fire  (2006),  Dillman  Fire  (1960),
'Red Butte West' (ca. 1930), 'Red Butte East' (ca. 1900),
Griffin Fire Control (no significant fire ~200-300 yrs.), and
Red Butte Control (no significant fire ~200-300 yrs.).
Young sapling emerging under the protection of coarse, woody
material.
Mt. Trumbull Understory Report—Judy Springer
There were two trips to Mt. Trumbull this summer to study
the  effects  of  previous  restoration  treatments  on  the
understory. Joining me on the first trip in late May were
Mark  Daniels, Justy  Leppert,  Brian  Moss,  Kristen  Shive,
Ashlee  Simpson,  Mike  Stoddard,  Jason Vignochi,  and
Yolanda Williams. This team of researchers revisited 108 of
Barb Strom (MS Forestry ‘05) is our most
far-flung  alum  to  write  to  us  for  this
newsletter.  She  lives  in  beautiful  Portland,
Maine, where she works for L.L. Bean. Barb
provides market analysis as well as GIS to
support retail store site selection and retail
trade  area  definitions.  She  volunteers  with
The  Nature  Conservancy  on  prescribed
burns  in  pitch  pine/scrub  oak  ecosystems.
But the most interesting news is that she’s
taken up American Tribal Style bellydancing!
 
That Randi Walker (BS Advertising ’10) is
always  up  to  something!  Here  she  is  as
Ranger Randi teaching education camps at
Montezuma Castle and Montezuma Well this
summer.  During  the  school  year,  Randi
teaches 4th graders at Chino Valley and says
she has been blessed with an amazing group
of kiddos.
Steven Martin (BS Biology '04) writes that
the  Martin  family  now  resides  in  Dallas,
Texas where he is the Division Manager for
Trutech Inc. in Texas responsible for Texas
and  soon  Oklahoma  and  Arizona.  Steven
0
0
view past issues |
RSS
subscribe to list
 
translate

180  plots  that  ERI staff  and  students  installed,  in
cooperation with BLM personnel, at Mt. Trumbull in 1997
and 1998. These blocks were thinned and burned in 1999
and  2000,  and  then received  a  second  re-entry  burn in
2007. Post-treatment data was last collected in 2005. The
team found that the shrub community in a treated plot in
Experimental Block  1  (EB1) was  responding  nicely  with
vigorous
 
growth
 
of
 
Amelanchier utahensis (Utah
serviceberry),  Artemisia tridentata  (big  sagebrush),
Ribes cereum  (gooseberry),  and  a healthy  mat
of Ceanothus fendleri  (buckbrush).  We  found  very  few
non-native species.
Mt. Trumbull EB1
In nearby EB2, the researchers discovered quite a contrast
between  the  treated  and  control  portions  of  the
experimental block (see photos). Dense stands of small-
diameter ponderosa pine remain in the control plots, while
the treated plots have released ponderosa pine, Quercus
gambelii (Gambel oak), Robinia neomexicana (New Mexico
locust),  and  Bromus  tectorum  (cheatgrass). Ground-
disturbing gophers are also prevalent in the treated block.
Mt. Trumbull Experimental Block 2, Treated
always did like reptiles. Here's a picture of
him holding one of 31 rattlesnakes removed
from  a  commercial  property  where  the
snakes  had  denned  under  a  storage
container. He reports that his sons are the
best of buds and love to do anything with
daddy, especially fishing.
 
And finally, wedding bells continue to ring for
ERI couples…….
 
Brandon Oberhardt (B.S. Photography ’03)
married  Stacey  Marlatt  on  a  fall  October
weekend up in the Peaks. It was a glorious
outdoor wedding at a remote cabin. In a neat
ERI  twist  (this  is  so  Flagstaff),  the  happy
couple was married by your correspondent’s
husband,  Pastor  Bob  Norton,  giving  me  a
front row seat to the happy event!
 
0
0
view past issues |
RSS
subscribe to list
 
translate

Mt. Trumbull Experimental Block 2, Control
Part of the team, while on an evening hike, talked with a
turkey hunter from Show Low while he was eviscerating a
large gobbler. He told them that he admired the restoration
research  they  were  conducting  and  that  they  are  his
"heroes"  for  working  to  protect  the  forests  of  northern
Arizona--a really quite gratifying comment.
 
The team for the second trip included Judy Springer, Mark
Daniels, Marissa Joe, Justy Leppert, Chris McGlone, Taylor
Orriss,  and  Jason  Vignochi.  We  completed  understory
measurements on the remaining EB plots and spent the
final day collecting trait data on several species of plants,
assisted the overstory crew (see below), and helped Chris
Erickson  (NAU  Forestry  grad  student) find  some  elusive
ecosystem  monitoring  plots.  The  data  collected  this
summer at Mt. Trumbull will be combined with data from
Grandview (South Rim) and Fort Valley (near Flagstaff) to
create  a  multi-site  analysis  of  understory  responses  to
restoration treatments in ponderosa pine forests.
Mt. Trumbull Overstory Studies—John Paul Roccaforte
 
ERI crews made two trips to Mt. Trumbull to remeasure the
overstory following restoration treatments. The crew Trip 3 
consisted  of  John  Paul  Roccaforte  (trip  leader),  Joe
Crouse, Madison Daniels, Taylor Orriss, Joe Smithson, and
Kelsey Adelmeyer. NAU Forestry graduate student, Chris
Erickson, and several of the ERI botanists also helped out.
We  remeasured  72 EB  plots  in EB1  and EB2  for  tree
diameters, conditions, dwarf-mistletoe rating, crown base
height,  regeneration  and  shrub  inventories,  and  fuel
loading. In addition, we took two reference photos at each
plot. The treated units look good in terms of overstory tree
survival.
 
During Trip 4 to Mt. Trumbull, the crew of John Paul, Justy
Leppert, Isaac Bickford, Karin Kralicek, Patrick Shin, and
Steve  Booher,  along  with  help  from  Chris  Erickson,
continued  the  monitoring  work  on  the EB  plots.  Joe
Seidenberg  and  I  finished  up  the  overstory
remeasurements in late September.
Finally, we called it the “ERI wedding of the
century” when Chris Sorensen (BS Forestry
‘08  and MS Forestry  ‘10) and Jen Tsonis
(BS Forestry ‘07 ) tied the knot in June at a
lovely outdoor ceremony presided over by Dr.
Thom Alcoze (NAU School of Forestry). Of
course, the wedding served as a mini ERI
reunion, too! Chris and Jen moved to Twain
Harte,  California.  Chris  works  as  a  forest
planner with the Stanislaus National Forest,
while Jen serves as the interim fire program
coordinator for the NAU School of Forestry.
ERI "Let's Restore"
wins four Emmy
Awards!
By Krista Coquia
Saturday, October 9 the Public Service
Announcement "Let's Restore," featuring
NAU Regents' Professor and ERI Executive
Director Wally Covington, along with ERI
researchers and students, won four Rocky
Mountain Emmy awards in Phoenix.  The
ERI 'commercial' played in Flagstaff’s Harkins
Theaters last winter and was televised on
Fox Sports and northern Arizona cable
channels throughout the year.
The spot produced by the ERI and NAU
Television Services received emmy awards in
four categories: best photography (Jerry
Anderfuren), best post-production directing,
best editing and best audio (Jesse Vaughan).
The ERI production team included Jerry
Anderfuren, Chris Boyes, Bonnie Stevens
0
0
view past issues |
RSS
subscribe to list
 
translate

Abundant Gambel oak and New Mexican locust regeneration in
the EB4 treatment.
and Jesse Vaughan.
The Rocky Mountain Southwest Chapter of
the National Academy of Television Arts and
Sciences is a membership organization
dedicated to excellence in television by
honoring exceptional work through the
prestigious Emmy® Award. Each year, the
NATAS Chapters across the country
recognize and reward excellence in their
broadcasting communities. For more than 30
years, the Rocky Mountain Southwest
Chapter has done this through the annual
Rocky Mountain Emmy Awards.
In the spring of each year, the Chapter sends
out a Call for Entries, encouraging
broadcasters throughout the region to submit
their best work to be considered for
nomination. Those pieces are sent to another
Chapter to be judged. Each entry is judged
individually on its own merit against a
standard of excellence. The Emmy statuette
symbolizes the excellence for which we all
strive. Watch the video
 
Unsubscribe <<Email Address>> | Update your profile | Forward to a friend
Copyright (C) 2011 Ecological Restoration Institute All rights reserved.
Sent to <<Email Address>>: unsubscribe | update profile | forward to a friend
 
0
0
view past issues |
RSS
subscribe to list
 
0
translate
