544? NEW MEXICO HISTORICAL REVIEW
VOLUME 79, NUMBER 4
In Fire's Way:A PracticalGuide to Life In the Wildfire Danger Zone. By
Tom Wolf. (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2003. viii + 168
pp . Halftones, notes, glossary, bibliography, index. $16,95 paper, ISBN 0-
8263-2096-1.)
Smokechasing. By Stephen Pyne. (Tucson: University ofArizona Press, 2003.
xi + 260 pp. $19.95 paper, ISBN 0-8165-2285-5.)
Tom Wolf does not want your house to burn down in a forest fire. He
offers some useful tips for reducing home flammability similar to the guide-
lines available from an extension agent or Firewise (www.{irewise.org). He
shares an interesting personal experience of the "don't try this at home"
variety, describing how a prescribed burn that he initiated got out of con-
trol, but the rest of the book is disappointing. Wolf wrestles with the most
intractable issue in western fire policy today: how to live in our fire-prone
environment. Despite an impressive array of statistics, In Fire's Way floun-
ders amidst an overabundance of disconnected data.
Wolf raises key questions about contradictions in the conventional per-
spectives on fire problems. For instance, should fuel treatments focus on
the immediate vicinity of homes or the broader landscape? Should public
agencies or private organizations assume responsibility for home fire pro-
tection? These kinds of questions cannot be easily answered, but Wolf fails
to provide a sound analysis that allows the reader to evaluate the issues.
Instead, the questions are superficial, leaving the reader less, not more en-
lightened. The majority of the research, culled from newspaper or maga-
zine articles, further indicates Wolf's lack of depth. Toward the end of the
book, he presents numerous bulleted lists of "successful" fuel projects that
he apparently gathered from organizational brochures rather than devel-
oped through actual investigation. One such list was omitted entirely (p,
127), perhaps due to a failure on the part of author and editor to pay atten-
tion to the less engaging parts of the text.
The most frustrating element of the book is the reiteration of antigovern-
ment rhetoric. Certainly, federal and state agencies are cumbersome'and could
benefit from many useful reforms. Wolfs attack on "the government"-while
he fails to note that subdivisions springing up throughout western wildlands
are made possible only by large-scale federal subsidies in the form of water
projects, military bases, and other projects-is disingenuous. An extended
critique of the 2000 Cerro Grande fire, for example, occupies all of chapter 5

FALL 2004
BOOK REVIEWS? 545
and reappears throughout the book. Overall, homeowners concerned with
wildfire hazards would do better to pick up Flames in our Forest: Disaster or
Renewal? by Stephen F. Arno and Steven Allison-Bunnell (2002) for a supe-
rior treatment of fire ecology, fire behavior, and practical waysin which fuels
can be modified for a safer environment.
The essays collected in Stephen Pyne's Smokechasing are also about fire,
but their coverage encompasses the globe (Africa, Europe, Mexico, Austra-
lia, and the American West). The themes range widely as well, from the
eco-social assessment of fire policies in "A Land Between" to the brief but
deeply personal "Why I Do It." Pyne's keynote essay, after which the collec-
tion is named, defines the term smokechasing on several levels: pursuing a
thread of smoke through rugged terrain, tracking the vaporous documents
that record the history of fire, and approaching the deeper question of how
humans comprehend fire. Pyne scoffs at postmodern irony: "Those at a
desk have the luxury of asking whether one can ever truly 'find' a smoke" (p.
190), while the "groundpounder" must deal with the dangerous reality of
steep hillsides and burning snags.
The theme that links the essays is how-and how poorly-humans un-
derstand fire. We have the "dumb problem" of having our houses burn up
because of our inability to reconcile the many facets of fire. In reviewing
the Cerro Grande fire in "An Incident at Praxis," for example, Pyne offers a
perspective that is more subtle than Wolfs litany of governmental screwups.
He suggests that National Park Service managers were caught in a worldview
centered on the "natural" role of fire to the exclusion of adequate attention
to the constraints of modern environments. Their myopia led them to push
too hard to burn. In "An Exchange for All Things?" Pyne argues ultimately
for a comprehensive scholarship that integrates fire ecology, fire manage-
ment, and fire philosophy.
Pyne's essays are sometimes repetitious and occasionally lacking detail
(the fire history of Europe sounds just like the fire history of Mexico), but
the diversity and depth of his thought make this collection a valuable addi-
tion to "the literature of forest fires, if there is such a literature" (a quotation
Pyne borrowed from Norman Maclean). My favorite essay is "Doc Smith's
History Lesson," because it encapsulates the connection between people
and fire. Pyne links Doc 's personal history as a Forest Service district ranger
and fire-suppression boss to the natural history found in tree rings and fire
scars and to the political history of western settlement and forestry. The
author contends with the choices that face contemporary society: forest

546-+ NEW M EX I C O H ISTORICAL RE V IEW
V O L U M E 7 9, N UM B E R 4
restoration, a new way to live with fire or a continued losing battle to control
this most ubiquitous of disturbance forces. Pyne presents Doc as a living
example of the integrated scholarship that he sees as the greatest hope for
finding this new path.
Unlike Wolf, Pyne is not trying to offer practical or businesslike recipes
for how many trees to cut. But in the accelerated crush of increa singly se-
vere fire seasons, and with the shock of burned hom es and shrill voices
raised in accusation, Pyne provides a broader perspecti ve and raises the most
important questions. Do we know what smoke we are chasing?What should
we do when we find it?
PeterFuZe
NorthernArizona University
