30
October 2000
U
niversities today struggle to
prepare students for an in-
creasingly 
interdisciplinary
world while maintaining focus in the
academic major and still graduating
students in four years. Even long-
standing disciplinary programs of
study, such as forestry, are continually
being revised to address the changing
skills required of college graduates (Fox
et al. 1996). Ecological restoration is
rapidly developing as an independent
field of study, coalescing around a
growing theoretical, philosophical, and
practical body of knowledge (Higgs
1997; Lavendel 1999). But restoration
per se is a complement—not a substi-
tute—for specific skills in resource
management, hydrology, policy, envi-
ronmental communication, or other
aspects of human-wildland interaction.
At Northern Arizona University, we
have developed a flexible program to
offer restoration theory and practice.
Students may take just one class or en-
roll in a program leading to a restora-
tion emphasis with an independent
senior research and fieldwork project
and paid employment experience.
Courses are hands-on, using contem-
porary literature and examples from a
global perspective, for a real-world ap-
proach to learning (Dewhurst and
Kessler 1999) that benefits both stu-
dents and their future employers and
colleagues. Students from all academic
majors and class standings collaborate
In the Southwest,where forest ecosystems
have been widely degraded,Northern Arizona
University has begun offering an interdiscipli-
nary focus on forest restoration. A course in
the principles of restoration addresses such
issues as reference conditions,the impact of
indigenous peoples on the landscape,and
natural variability versus accelerated anthro-
pogenic change. An applications course in-
cludes hands-on experience in restoring a
ponderosa pine forest and calculating the
costs of implementation.Through practical
study and applied research,the program is
intended to support the preparation of future
participants in a growing field.
Education and Communication
By W. Wallace Covington, Peter
Z. Fulé, Thomas M. Alcoze, and
Regina K. Vance
by Doing
Learning by Doing
Education 
in Ecological 
Restoration at 
Northern Arizona
University
Forest Restoration
Above: Students in the ecological
restoration applications class at 
Northern Arizona University work with
ﬁre managers from the Flagstaff Fire 
Department to carry out a prescribed
burn in August 1998,as part of a campus
restoration treatment.The university’s
stadium dome is in the background.
Courtesy of Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration Institute

to strengthen traits recognized as criti-
cal professional skills (Sample et al.
1999): teamwork, communication,
critical thinking, and respect for alter-
native viewpoints. 
Context
The outlines of ecological degrada-
tion in the Southwest are broadly and
sadly familiar. Overuse of water, tim-
ber, and forage; the introduction of ex-
otic plants and animals and the extir-
pation of native species; replacement of
Native American land management
practices with poorly adapted Euro-
American techniques; the disruption of
powerful natural ﬂood and ﬁre distur-
bance regimes—all have contributed to
the debilitation and fragility of modern
ecosystems (Leopold 1924; Kauffman
et al. 1997; Moore et al. 1999). 
Examples abound. The southwest-
ern forests that evolved to incorporate
frequent surface fires as regulators of
ecosystem structure and nutrient cy-
cling are now in peril of landscape-
scale devastation by fire each summer
(Covington et al. 1999). In the low-
lands, native riparian forest species
adapted to regeneration in the moist
mud of ﬂooded riverbanks are outcom-
peted by exotic tamarisk that thrive
under today’s dam-regulated hydro-
logic regime (Stromberg 1993). De-
structive changes are occurring in each
component of southwestern wildlands,
from invasion of exotic red brome
bringing unprecedented fires to the
desert, through effects of climate
change and recreation on the shrinking
alpine tundra. Compounding the cu-
mulative effect of these problems is the
rapid growth of sprawling cities like
Phoenix and Las Vegas.
Restoration of natural diversity and
productivity is central to management
of southwestern ecosystems. Well-
known examples include controlled
ﬂooding of the Grand Canyon, reintro-
duction of the Mexican wolf and Cali-
fornia condor, and broad initiation of
forest thinning and burning. Restora-
tive approaches extend throughout
management, affecting such routine de-
cisions as the use of native seed and the
design of campgrounds. 
The challenges are only beginning to
be understood: What does ecological
restoration really mean and how should
it be done? Broad generalizations about
“restoring nature” sound pleasing to al-
most everyone. Implementing concrete
restoration activities, however, often re-
quires difﬁcult decisions, compromises,
and action based on incomplete infor-
mation. Not surprisingly, controversy
and stalemate often occur. Forest
restoration activities in northern Ari-
zona, for instance, have been criticized
by deep ecology environmentalists as
well as proponents of the forest prod-
ucts industry, despite nearly unanimous
agreement about the nature and extent
of ecological degradation. 
Ecological Restoration Program
People trained in the principles of
ecological restoration and with experi-
ence in restoration techniques are ur-
gently needed in the Southwest, but tra-
ditional academic programs have rarely
taught the kind of integrated, interdisci-
plinary ecological and social skills re-
quired. At Northern Arizona University
(NAU), we are developing a program to
meet these needs. NAU has served the
Colorado Plateau and rural Southwest
for 100 years, pioneering forestry edu-
cation in the Southwest since 1958 and
developing an innovative integrated
curriculum (Fox et al. 1996). NAU has
the highest Native American enrollment
of all large US universities and also
serves many Hispanics, and thus it ad-
dresses the educational needs of the
largest and fastest-growing southwest-
ern minority populations. 
The Ecological Restoration Institute
was officially established in NAU’s
College of Ecosystem Science and
Management in 1997. The program is
designed to bring the university’s acad-
emic and research expertise to bear on
addressing ecological and social prob-
lems in southwestern ecosystems. Our
approach is three-faceted: 
Research on major restoration issues,
especially focused on adaptive manage-
ment experiments in collaboration
with agencies such as the Bureau of
Land Management, Forest Service, and
National Park Service to seek practical
answers in a real-world setting.
Outreach to facilitate sharing of ideas
and information among resource man-
agers, the public, interest groups, and
academics, through sponsoring confer-
ences and workshops, a website (www.
nau.edu/ecorest), and a quarterly pub-
lication, Regaining Lost Ground.
Education at the undergraduate and
graduate levels to provide interdiscipli-
nary training in the science and prac-
tice of restoration.
Throughout the Institute, our em-
phasis is on “learning by doing” to de-
velop strong skills of critical thinking,
writing, and research—in the broad
sense of asking and answering thought-
ful questions—by involvement in real
issues. Helping students participate in
restoration projects gives an immediacy
and relevance to what they learn; in
turn, the new ideas that students bring
to restoration invigorate the discussion
and challenge professors and resource
managers to look at resource questions
from new perspectives.
The Courses
Courses in the principles and appli-
cations of ecological restoration form
the core of the program and are open
to both undergraduates and graduates
in any discipline. 
Ecological Restoration Principles,
taught every spring semester, explores
the theoretical and philosophical foun-
Journal of Forestry
31
Restoration activities in northern Arizona
have been criticized by deep ecology 
environmentalists as well as proponents of
the forest products industry.

dations of restoration. We use current
scientiﬁc literature as the basis for sem-
inar discussions led and moderated by
student teams. Guests, invited from
among restorationists, resource man-
agers, environmental activists, scien-
tists, and policymakers, bring their ex-
pertise to the seminar. Beginning with
deﬁnitions of restoration—still an area
of flux in this emerging field—we
move to concepts of reference condi-
tions, the evolutionary environment,
and the role of indigenous peoples in
landscapes. Natural climatic and evolu-
tionary ﬂux are compared with the ac-
celerated atmospheric change, extinc-
tion rate, and ecological degradation
associated with modern industrial soci-
ety. Examples from a variety of ecosys-
tems include deserts, rivers, coastlines,
prairies, and forests. Although each set-
ting is unique, common concepts of
determining reference conditions, de-
signing treatments, and monitoring re-
sults are explored in diverse environ-
ments.
Social aspects of restoration are as
important as ecological characteristics.
Close attention is paid to the variety of
restoration alternatives for society. As
with any aspect of resource manage-
ment, ecological restoration is not a
one-size-ﬁts-all “scientiﬁc” solution to
complex problems. Instead, restoration
in practice involves determining appro-
priate trade-offs between “ecological ﬁ-
delity” (Higgs 1997) and the myriad
goals and constraints found in society
and the environment. Examples from
around the world present opportuni-
ties to look at strikingly different or
surprisingly similar approaches to re-
versing ecological damage in diverse
societies, including the application of
traditional knowledge in indigenous
cultures (Alcoze 1999).
Ecological Restoration Applications is
a field class taught every fall, the best
semester for outdoor work around our
high-elevation campus. The applica-
tions class connects restoration theory
with practice. We alternate visits to on-
going restoration research and treat-
ment sites across the region with work
on a restoration project on NAU’s
forested campus. 
Site visits cover all the ecosystem
types in northern Arizona, from alpine
tundra to desert grasslands. Guests in-
clude faculty in forestry, biology, envi-
ronmental science, religion, and geol-
ogy, as well as Forest Service and Na-
tional Park Service resource managers
and ecologists from nongovernmental
organizations, such as the Nature Con-
servancy and the Society for Ecological
Restoration.
The class restoration project takes
place each year on a new 2- to 3-acre
area of ponderosa pine forest on an un-
developed area of the NAU campus.
Students assess the site at the beginning
of the semester and establish perma-
nent plots to measure current condi-
tions and reconstruct the forest struc-
ture before fire regime disruption.
Class members analyze the data and
collaborate with faculty and peers to
develop treatments aimed at restoring
conditions of trees, understory plants,
and wildlife habitat that more closely
resemble the predegradation landscape.
Together, we implement the restora-
tion prescriptions we have designed. 
Specialized tasks, such as tree thin-
ning, are done by professionals on the
program staff, but all students partici-
pate in carrying logs off the site (wood
is donated to families in need and
NAU’s wood-fired ceramic kiln) and
raking accumulated fuels away from
the base of old-growth trees. Class
members measure the time needed to
do tasks and use the data to estimate
the cost and efficiency of larger pro-
jects. Prescribed burning, performed
by the wildland fuel crew of the
Flagstaff fire department, completes
the initial restoration treatments.
Restoration of our own university
campus is possible only because of
strong support from the administration
and an extraordinary collaboration
among departments and agencies. The
very word “campus” conjures images of
walkways, manicured lawns, and speci-
men plantings, but the NAU Facilities
Department has chosen to manage un-
developed areas of the campus in har-
mony with the native ponderosa pine
habitat rather than creating an artiﬁcial
environment. Taking a similar proactive
approach, Flagstaff’s ﬁre department is
working with the Forest Service and
other organizations to advance restora-
tion and fuel treatments around the city.
A 25-acre area of campus has been
designated for restoration; this will
allow a decade of classes to practice and
experiment. As small areas are treated
each year, the site will form a time se-
ries of responses. The “living labora-
tory” is valuable not only for students
but also as a site for demonstration and
discussion with professionals and with
citizens attending meetings and work-
shops on campus.
The Students
Graduates and undergraduates con-
vene in both the principles and the ap-
plications courses. The inherently mul-
tidisciplinary nature of ecological
restoration makes it an especially well-
suited field for multiaged education,
and the enrollment of students with di-
verse experience, backgrounds, ages,
and academic majors makes for an in-
teresting exchange of views. Students at
undergraduate and graduate levels re-
ceive separate assignments and are
graded differently but share the work
of the class. Both courses have inten-
sive writing and presentation require-
ments to develop multiple communi-
cation abilities.
In the principles course, graduate
students tend to come primarily from
ecology and forestry, and their depth of
biological expertise is frequently com-
plemented by the wider perspective of
undergraduate political science and
journalism majors. We mix graduate
and undergraduate students in teams,
32
October 2000
A 25-acre area of campus has been 
designated for restoration; this 
“living laboratory” will allow a decade of
classes to practice and experiment.

Journal of Forestry
33
which helps build mentoring and
teaching skills for the graduate students
while supporting the learning process
for undergraduates. 
In the applications class the situa-
tion is often reversed: Our students
with the greatest experience in practical
skills, like tree thinning, tend to be un-
dergraduates. Although students come
from all academic majors, the forest
environment in which we work most
closely is inﬂuential, and students leave
with a good practical understanding of
the methods and challenges of modern
forest management.
The BS with Emphasis 
A select group of undergraduate stu-
dents receive positions as research assis-
tants with the Ecological Restoration
Institute, leading to an independent re-
search or fieldwork project that be-
comes their senior thesis and capstone
experience. Students select a faculty or
staff mentor with whom to work in de-
veloping and analyzing their projects.
Student projects demonstrate the wide
range of opportunities available in
restoration; projects include creation of
an elementary education program on
restoration, internship at an environ-
mental organization focused on restora-
tion, restoration of Native American
land, comparison of mycorrhizal re-
sponses at restoration sites, bat use of
snags and artiﬁcial habitats in a restored
forest, and germination ecology of ri-
parian trees for reintroducing floods.
Most senior thesis projects have been
presented at professional meetings and
many have led to peer-reviewed publi-
cation (e.g., Horton and Clark, in
press) and external funding.
In addition to their two restoration
courses and senior capstone experience,
the undergraduate research assistants
receive paid job experience on research
crews working at field sites across the
Southwest, from Grand Canyon Na-
tional Park to the Gila National Forest.
These students also take an additional
course, selected in consultation with an
adviser, to develop skills speciﬁc to their
field of interest. Courses may include
traditional ecological knowledge, fire
ecology and management, or special-
ized classes in the sciences or humani-
ties. Completion of the program is rec-
Internet and Distance Learning
In the thinly populated western states, universities have had to develop in-
novative ways to reach a dispersed student population.For example,North-
ern Arizona University (NAU) has a long-standing interactive television sys-
tem designed to meet its mission for serving the rural areas of the state. Ef-
forts to incorporate the internet have been increasing with the establish-
ment of the Western Governors’ University, a virtual university supported
by a consortium of western states.
Currently NAU offers several options for distance learning.
Interactive television is designed for classes taught in a studio at one cam-
pus to be broadcast live to satellite campuses. Students at the distant sites
also attend class in studios, which allows them to interact with the instruc-
tor and students at the home campus. Interactive television is the experi-
ence most similar to attending class in person,but the classes can be offered
only where studio facilities are available.
Webstreaming is the ﬁlming of a course in a campus studio for release in
digital form on the Internet.Students at distant sites download the video and
audio and can watch at their convenience; they do not, however, have the
beneﬁt of direct interaction. Instructors use e-mail and Web pages to trans-
mit written information, assignments, and feedback.Webstreaming is highly
ﬂexible in terms of student locations and schedules, but picture and sound
quality are currently relatively poor and the student must have an adequate
computer, which is not always the case on the Native American lands and
rural sites we serve.
Web-based courses provide information and assignments on Web pages,
usually organized as a series of lectures. Instructors and students communi-
cate via e-mail or a discussion forum. As with webstreaming,Web-based
courses can reach broad areas but the opportunities for interaction and col-
laboration are highly limited.
Web-enhanced courses use the Web to post and exchange information as
a supplement to regular class attendance on campus. Web-enhanced
courses increase the efﬁciency and reduce the paperwork of a course but
are of only limited use for distance learning.
Electronic library reserves consisting of scanned papers readable with a free
reader support all the types of distance learning. The ability to read online
or print out reserve readings is very useful for local students and indispens-
able for distance learning.
In choosing how to apply these technologies, the university must balance
the goal of reaching a larger student population with the need to maintain
individual contact with students. Distance learning at present is best suited
to courses in which material is readily organized into lectures; it is least ap-
propriate for discussion and lab courses.
Ecological restoration courses at NAU are currently Web-enhanced and
rely on electronic library reserves, but we have not yet found an appropri-
ate way to extend the seminar discussions in the principles class and the
ﬁeldwork in the applications class for distance learning. However, one of us
(Alcoze) has effectively taught a course in traditional ecological knowledge
via webstreaming.
Continuing technological improvements will rapidly alter the distance
learning environment.In a few years we may well be on ﬁeld sites with com-
pact digital cameras transmitting high-quality visual, audio,and even olfactory
signals over fast internet connections, with student cameras sending back
comments and questions in real time. As these new technologies change the
traditional academic setting, it’s our responsibility to ensure that the quality
of the course content and the intellectual experience are not lost.

ognized on the student’s diploma as an
emphasis in ecological restoration.
Looking Ahead
Our students’ experience in restora-
tion is proving useful in today’s job
market. Recent graduates have ac-
cepted positions with a wide range of
public and private organizations, and
others have gone on to graduate study.
The number of positions related to
restoration is rising rapidly.
The challenges of restoration and
conservation show no signs of dimin-
ishing in the future as human popula-
tions continue to rise and the effect of
greenhouse gases is expected to become
increasingly evident. We anticipate that
students, staff, and faculty of the Eco-
logical Restoration Institute will have a
growing role in working on regional is-
sues in cooperation with research and
management organizations. As the for-
mal study of restoration ecology in-
creases around the world, we also hope
to foster links with other programs to
share experiences and ideas through
personal contact and via electronic in-
teractions (Lavendel 1999) (see “Inter-
net and Distance Learning,” p. 33).
Ecological restoration is generally
viewed as a relatively recent concept, a
newcomer to academic study and re-
source management. But in fact many
restoration ideas have deep roots in
natural history, silviculture, fire ecol-
ogy, and other ﬁelds (Covington et al.
1999). Furthermore, the kinds of re-
search and management questions
raised in restoration can frequently be
answered from existing knowledge and
experience, especially at small scales.
There is a wealth of information, for
example, on cottonwood seed estab-
lishment after flooding, and on grass-
land recovery after grazing and ﬁre ex-
clusion. 
In a southwestern forest, the differ-
ences between a restorative manage-
ment approach and traditional multi-
ple-use, sustained yield might be rela-
tively small (uneven-aged management
of native species with underburning) or
large (dense, even-aged monoculture).
The issue is one of untangling the dif-
ferences in restoration goals and tech-
niques from among the myriad ways
we could interact with ecosystems,
learning about the biological and social
implications, then applying this under-
standing to informing the debate about
management direction. Through prac-
tical study and applied research, we
hope to support the preparation of fu-
ture participants in this arena.
Literature Cited
ALCOZE, T. 1999. Ethnobotany from a Native American
perspective: Restoring our relationship with the earth.
Roots: Botanic Gardens Conservation International Ed-
ucation Review 19:20–22.
COVINGTON, W.W., W.A. NIERING, E.E. STARKEY, and
J.L. WALKER. 1999. Ecosystem restoration and man-
agement of public lands: Principles and concepts. In
Ecological stewardship: A common reference for ecosystem
management, eds. N.C. Johnson, A.J. Malk, W.T. Sex-
ton, and R. Szaro. Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science.
DEWHURST, S.M., and W.B. KESSLER. 1999. Scenario
planning: Wading into the real world. Journal of For-
estry 97(11):43–47.
FOX, B.E., T.E. KOLB, and E.A. KURMES. 1996. An inte-
grated forestry curriculum: The Northern Arizona
University experience. Journal of Forestry 94(3):
16–22.
HIGGS, E.S. 1997. What is good ecological restoration?
Conservation Biology 11:338–48. 
HORTON, J.L., and J.L. CLARK. In press. Water table de-
cline alters growth and survival of Salix gooddingii and
Tamarix chinensis seedlings. Forest Ecology and Man-
agement.
KAUFFMAN, J.B., R.L. BESCHTA, N. OTTING, and D.
LYTJEN. 1997. An ecological perspective of riparian
and stream restoration in the western United States.
Fisheries 22(5):12–24.
LAVENDEL, B. 1999. Ecological restoration in academia.
Ecological Restoration 17(3):120–25.
LEOPOLD, A. 1924. Grass, brush, timber, and fire in
southern Arizona. Journal of Forestry 22:1–10.
MOORE, M.M., W.W. COVINGTON, and P.Z. FULÉ.
1999. Reference conditions and ecological restora-
tion: A southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. Eco-
logical Applications 9(4):1266–77.
SAMPLE, V.A., P.C. RINGGOLD, N.E. BLOCK, and J.W.
GILTMIER. 1999. Forestry education: Adapting to the
changing demands on professionals. Journal of For-
estry 97(9):4–10.
STROMBERG, J.C. 1993. Fremont cottonwood–Gooding
willow riparian forests: A review of their ecology,
threats, and recovery potential. Journal of the Arizona-
Nevada Academy of Sciences 26:97–110.
W. Wallace Covington is Regents’ Profes-
sor, Peter Z. Fulé (e-mail: peter.fule@nau.
edu) is assistant research professor,
Thomas M. Alcoze is associate professor,
and Regina K. Vance is program coordi-
nator, Ecological Restoration Institute,
Northern Arizona University, PO Box
15018, Flagstaff, AZ 86011. The Ecolog-
ical Restoration Institute receives support
from the Bureau of Land Management
(Arizona Strip District), USDA Forest
Service, and National Park Service.
34
October 2000
