Broadening Participation 
in Biological Monitoring: 
Handbook for Scientists 
and Managers
David Pilz, Heidi L. Ballard, and Eric T. Jones
United States  
Department of  
Agriculture
Forest Service
Pacific Northwest  
Research Station
General Technical 
Report
PNW-GTR-680	
September 2006

Authors
David Pilz was a visiting scientist, Institute for Culture and Ecology. He also 
operates a consulting business, PilzWald, and is a faculty research assistant 
(forest mycologist), Department of Forest Science, Oregon State University. He 
may be contacted at P.O. Box 2238, Corvallis, OR 97339; Heidi L. Ballard was a  
visiting scientist, Institute for Culture and Ecology, and is an assistant professor 
of environmental science education, School of Education, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616; and Eric T. Jones is an environmental 
anthropologist, Institute for Culture and Ecology, P.O. Box 6688, Portland,  
OR 97228-6688.
The Forest Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture is dedicated to the principle of 
multiple use management of the Nation’s forest resources for sustained yields of wood, 
water, forage, wildlife, and recreation. Through forestry research, cooperation with the 
States and private forest owners, and management of the National Forests and National 
Grasslands, it strives—as directed by Congress—to provide increasingly greater service to a 
growing Nation.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and 
activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, 
marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, 
political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual’s income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, 
large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice 
and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) 
or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
This publication is a product of an Institute for Culture and Ecology research 
project funded by the National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry. 
The Pacific Northwest Research Station has provided technical and financial 
assistance toward the publication of this manuscript. For consulting informa-
tion and additional materials related to the project and participatory biological 
monitoring, visit http://www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssf3/.
Cover photograph by Eric T. Jones.

Abstract
Pilz, David; Ballard, Heidi L.; Jones, Eric T. 2006. Broadening participa-
tion in biological monitoring: handbook for scientists and managers. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-680. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 131 p.
Participatory (collaborative, multiparty, citizen, volunteer) monitoring is a 
process that has been increasing in popularity and use in both developing and 
industrialized societies over the last several decades. It reflects the understand-
ing that natural resource decisions are more effective and less controversial 
when stakeholders who have an interest in the results are involved in the 
process. An adequate number of such projects have now been organized, tried, 
and evaluated such that sufficient information exists to recommend a compre-
hensive approach to implementing such processes. This handbook was written 
for managers and scientists in the United States who are contemplating a par-
ticipatory approach to monitoring biological resources, especially biodiversity. 
It is designed as a how-to manual with discussions of relevant topics, checklists 
of important considerations to address, and resources for further information. 
Worksheets for developing, implementing, and evaluating a monitoring plan 
are posted on a companion Web site. The subject matter is divided into 3 stages 
of a monitoring project encompassing a total of 22 topical modules. These 
modules can be used in any sequence on an ongoing basis. Stages and modules 
include (1) planning—documentation, goals, indicators, collaboration, deci-
sions, context, organization, participants, communication, incentives, design, 
and resources; (2) implementation—training, safety, fieldwork, sampling,  
data, and quality; and (3) followthrough—analysis, reporting, evaluation, 
and celebrations. Collaboration always involves colearning, so documenting 
choices, plans, and activities with the Web site worksheets is integral to the 
manual’s effectiveness.
Keywords: Participatory inventory, participatory monitoring, participatory 
research, biodiversity, collaborative monitoring, multiparty monitoring,  
monitoring plan, forest managers, scientists.

Preface 
The importance of inventories (one-time enumerations) and monitoring (repeated 
inventories or observations to detect change over time) for conserving and man-
aging the biodiversity (biological diversity) of temperate and boreal forests was 
recognized in an international cooperative effort called the Montréal Process.1 
International working groups, through a series of meetings, developed criteria and 
indicators of sustainable forest management. By their definitions, a criterion is a 
category of conditions or processes by which sustainable forest management could 
be assessed. Such criteria are characterized by a set of related indicators that are 
monitored periodically to assess change. Criterion 1 (the first of six) is the Conser-
vation of Biological Diversity. Indicators are quantitative or qualitative variables 
that can be measured or described and that when observed periodically, demon-
strate trends. Monitoring is the periodic and systematic measurement and assess-
ment of change in an indicator. Hence this international team of experts selected 
the monitoring of biodiversity as their first means of ascertaining sustainable forest 
management. Forestry organizations worldwide are now adapting the Montréal 
Process criteria and indictors to improve and evaluate their forestry practices. A 
review of global progress and needed work with indicators is provided.2
In 2002, the National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry 
(NCSSF) was organized under the auspices of the National Council for Science 
and the Environment and was sponsored by the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation, 
Surdna Foundation, The David and Lucile Packard Foundation, and the National 
Forest Foundation. The NCSSF’s mission is “to improve the scientific basis for the 
development, implementation, and evaluation of sustainable forestry in the United 
States.” The NCSSF focused on the Montréal Process criterion 1: Conservation of 
Biological Diversity. The commission emphasizes developing knowledge and tools 
directly relevant to improving sustainable forestry practices on the ground over 
the next 5 years. The scope of their mandate includes the needs of managed forest 
lands, industrial and nonindustrial, in the continental United States. This mandate 
is being carried out through a series of annual competitive grants that are progres-
sively focused on “syntheses of knowledge, surveys of decision-makers’ needs, 
assessment of applications, and development of practical tools.” 3 
1 Montréal Process Working Group. 1999. Criteria and indicators for the conservation and 
sustainable management of temperate and boreal forests. 2nd ed. Ottowa, ON: Montréal 
Process Liaison Office. http://www.mpci.org/. (25 August 2006).
2 Balmford, Andrew; Bennun, Leon; Brink, Benten [and others]. 2005. The convention on 
biological diversity’s 2010 target. Science. 307: 212–213.
3 National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry. 2005. Science, biodiversity, 
and sustainable forestry: a findings report of the National Commission on Science for 
Sustainable Forestry (NCSSF). Washington, DC. 52 p.

In June 2002, the Institute for Culture and Ecology (IFCAE) received a grant 
from the commission to study the relationship between nontimber forest products 
(NTFP) and biodiversity in the United States. A key finding was that national forest 
managers and state forestry departments currently lack the capacity to develop and 
implement NTFP inventory and monitoring programs, but that precedents exist in 
other natural resource management arenas, as well as in NTFP management, for 
involving harvesters in participatory inventory and monitoring.4 Through a series 
of meetings with NTFP stakeholders, IFCAE enumerated recommendations for the 
establishment of participatory NTFP inventory and monitoring processes.5 6 Chal-
lenges to monitoring the vast array of NTFPs that are harvested from forests in the 
United States mirror the challenges of monitoring the even greater number of spe-
cies (biodiversity) in any given forest ecosystem. In both cases, however, managers 
have a resource they can tap to help them in their task, namely other interested 
parties, or “stakeholders.” As a followup to the recommendations regarding partici-
patory monitoring, NCSSF sponsored this project to develop tools for managers to 
use in their quest to sustain forest biodiversity through effective monitoring. 
Definitions of biodiversity differ, but it is defined in this publication as the 
variation among all living organisms, including diversity within species (genetic), 
between species, among habitats and ecosystems, and within the biosphere.7 8 
This biological heritage, of which we are an integral part, provides all our food 
resources, much of our energy, many materials, breathable air, climate control, 
regulation of hydrologic cycles, protection from solar radiation, and the many won-
ders of sharing our planet with related beings. The numerous ways in which human 
activity has reduced biodiversity, especially in the last century, have led to a wide 
range of international efforts to develop sustainable societies that do not further 
degrade the diversity or function of life on Earth. 
4 Jones, Eric T.; McLain, Rebecca J.; Lynch, Kathryn A. 2004. The relationship between 
nontimber forest product management and biodiversity in the United States. Portland, OR: 
Institute for Culture and Ecology. 59 p. http://www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssf1/. (25 August 
2006).
5 Lynch, Kathryn A. 2004. Workshop guide and proceedings: harvester participation in 
inventory and monitoring of nontimber forest products. Portland, OR: Institute for Culture 
and Ecology. 151 p. http://www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssf1/. (25 August 2006).
6 Lynch, Kathryn A.; Jones, Eric T.; McLain, Rebecca J. 2004. Nontimber forest  
product inventorying and monitoring in the United States: rationale and recommenda-
tions for a participatory approach. Portland, OR: Institute for Culture and Ecology. 50 p. 
http://www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssf1/. (25 August 2006).
7 Lovejoy, Thomas E. 1997. Biodiversity: What is it? In: Reaka-Kudla, M.L.; Wilson, D.E.; 
Wilson, E.O., eds. Biodiversity II. Washington, DC: Joseph Henry Press: 7–14.
8 Noss, Reed F.; Cooperrider, Allen Y. 1994. Saving nature’s legacy: protecting and  
restoring biodiversity [Defenders of Wildlife]. Washington, DC: Island Press. 416 p.

 Inventory and monitoring programs face a particularly difficult challenge when 
their focus turns to biodiversity. The magnitude of the challenge lies in the sheer 
numbers of organisms in any given ecosystem and their diverse natural histories. 
Various approaches have been used to address these difficulties, but monitoring 
biodiversity can stress the budget and resources of any land management agency, 
organization, or company. At the same time, stakeholders interested in the sustain-
able management of forests often have an interest in and sometimes already engage 
informally in biological monitoring, and have knowledge and skills that can help 
future projects meet monitoring goals.
Although we discuss aspects of participatory approaches that relate specifically 
to biodiversity monitoring, almost all the topics we cover apply equally well to a 
broader topic of biological monitoring. We therefore chose to target a wider audi-
ence of managers and scientists by focusing on biological monitoring in general and 
addressing biodiversity monitoring as an important subset of monitoring issues.

Contents
	 1	
Introduction
	 3	
How to Use This Handbook
	 3	
Design
	 6	
Overview of Stages and Modules
	 7	
Planning Stage
	 9	
Implementation Stage
	11	
Followthrough Stage
	12	
Planning Stage
	12	
Documentation: Documenting a Participatory Monitoring Project
	14	
Goals: Determining Monitoring Goals and Indicators
	16	
Indicators: Selecting Biological Indicators and Measures
	19	
Collaboration: Evaluating the Usefulness and Goals of Collaboration
	24	
Decisions: Making Systematic and Collaborative Decisions
	26	
Context: Evaluating the Context of a Participatory Monitoring Project
	31	
Organization: Organizing the Structure of a Participatory Monitoring Project
	35	
Participants: Recruiting, Selecting, Authorizing, and Dismissing Participants
	41	
Communication: Developing Good Understandings and Agreements
	44	
Incentives: Understanding Motivations, Concerns, and Anticipated Benefits
	48	
Design: Involving Participants in Project Design
	51	
Resources: Obtaining and Allocating Funds, Resources, and Support
	54	
Implementation Stage
	54	
Training: Providing Participants With Requisite Training
	57	
Safety: Ensuring Safety and Planning for Emergencies
	59	
Fieldwork: Planning Field Activities
	61	
Sampling: Developing Sampling Designs and Data Collection Procedures
	64	
Quality: Ensuring the Quality and Credibility of Collected Data
	67	
Data: Making Arrangements for Handling, Storing, and Using Data
	70	
Followthrough Stage
	70	
Analysis: Arranging for Periodic Data Analysis
	72	
Reporting: Arranging for Reporting Results
	75	
Evaluation: Evaluating and Improving the Project
	78	
Celebrations: Ensuring the Project Is Rewarding and Appreciated

	81	
Acknowledgments
	81	
Annotated References
	117	 Appendix 1—Organizations
	129	 Appendix 2—Case Studies of Collaboration and Partnerships
	130	 Appendix 3—Project Web Site and Additional Resources

1
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Introduction 
The guidelines in this handbook are specifically designed to help forest manag-
ers and scientists address the challenge of inventorying or monitoring biological 
phenomenon (especially biodiversity), by providing a “how-to” manual for incor-
porating other participants in such projects and for documenting that process. 
Specifically, these guidelines are intended for use on discrete monitoring projects 
that could also be parts of a larger monitoring program. Some projects within a 
monitoring program might lend themselves to involving participants, whereas other 
projects might not. These guidelines will help managers and scientists decide which 
are appropriate for a participatory approach and offer guidance for broadening 
participation.
Throughout these guidelines we use a number of related terms such as par-
ticipants, collaborators, stakeholders, and sponsors. These terms are interpreted 
differently throughout the literature and organizations referenced herein, so we 
define our usage as follows:
•	
Stakeholders are all individuals and organizations that have an interest in the 
project, its outcome, and its products, regardless of whether they are directly 
involved or not.
•	
Participants are any stakeholders actively involved in a project. Depending on 
the level of their involvement they might or might not have input into the design 
or implementation of the project. For the purpose of these guidelines, we define 
“participants” as lacking decisionmaking authority in the project.
•	
Collaborators are any stakeholders actively involved in the management or 
administration of a project. They have or share decisionmaking authority.
•	
Sponsors are any organization or group providing official long-term financial  
or in-kind support of a project, regardless of active participation.
Managers and scientists might consider a participatory approach to monitoring 
for a variety of reasons, including stretching limited resources, building under-
standing among user groups, improving community relations, building cohesion 
through group learning, reducing conflict and litigation, providing educational 
opportunities, supporting community development, addressing public concerns, or 
incorporating local and traditional knowledge into monitoring designs. Participa-
tory or collaborative monitoring may be an effective way to meet National Envi-
ronmental Policy Act (NEPA) requirements, for example. Once other stakeholders 
are involved, however, the spectrum of project goals may change according to their 
unique interests and motivations. Participation helps pool intellectual and physical 
resources and converts potentially adversarial relationships into mutually beneficial 
ones. Participatory monitoring is inherently collaborative in the sense that we 
choose to work together to reach common goals. Participation can be initiated and 
sponsored by land management agencies and organizations, community groups, 
resource users, government agencies, nongovernment organizations, or special 
interest groups. In “Annotated References” and appendix 1, we list references and 
organizations that have materials on collaboration specific to their interests or  

2
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
situations. Often participation is described as a spectrum with different levels of 
relative responsibility and control that are arranged in categories such as consulta-
tion, cooperation, collaboration, or colearning; although each participant’s role 
often overlaps these categories and changes over time.
Although these guidelines (and the companion curriculum, app. 3) are 
primarily designed for forest managers and scientists in the United States who 
wish to start participatory biological monitoring projects, or who would like to 
incorporate other participants into ongoing projects, we believe that they will also 
be useful for community groups or other organizations that want to initiate their 
own participatory monitoring projects. Similarly, the guidelines also should be 
widely applicable to other forms of natural resource monitoring.
We discuss sampling designs and methods only to the extent that such topics 
pertain to involving participants. The first reason is that statistical considerations 
and the details of species and ecosystems must be tailored to the specific project 
and its context. Secondly, voluminous information exists on monitoring methods 
and statistical designs. Elzinga and others (2001) and Mueller and others (2004) are 
good examples. Third, most forest management organizations already have special-
ists on their staff, or appropriate expertise can be obtained. Not all such experts, 
however, are familiar with how participants differ from employees in practical or 
logistical considerations, so reference to this handbook will allow them to make 
better decisions about sampling designs and methods.
While preparing the guidelines, we encountered a wide array of pertinent and 
useful resources for designing participatory monitoring projects. Much can be 
learned from the numerous organizations that have compiled syntheses of lessons 
learned. We discuss the focus and applicability of each resource in our “Annotated 
References” section and appendix 1. The information available in these documents 
and on the organization Web sites, however, usually differ from this handbook in 
one or more of the following ways. Some are focused on helping community groups 
or other organizations (rather than managers) create their own monitoring projects. 
Some concentrate on sampling designs and methods for certain organisms or 
environmental conditions. Others concentrate on overseas sustainable development 
activities. In most instances, the participants, context, and monitoring goals are  
predefined. None of the other resources that we have encountered provide a generic, 
comprehensive, and broadly applicable “how-to” manual for managers to use in 
planning, implementing, documenting, and evaluating a participatory monitoring 
project. We hope the user will find these guidelines to be a versatile and useful  
tool that engages interested stakeholders in becoming participants, collaborators,  
or sponsors in projects that monitor the biological diversity of forests in the  
United States.
These guidelines also are accompanied by a teaching curriculum that training 
personnel can use to instruct managers on effective use of this handbook for plan-
ning, implementing, documenting, and evaluating participatory monitoring projects 
(see http://www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssf3/).
A teaching curriculum 
is available that 
training personnel 
can use to instruct 
managers on effective 
use of this handbook.


Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
How to Use This Handbook
Design
The guidelines in this handbook are designed for ease of use; that is, as a “how-to” 
manual for starting or supporting a participatory monitoring project. The follow-
ing tabulation shows the handbook’s two parts: a set of participatory monitoring 
guidelines and documentation workbook forms available on the project’s Web site 
(app. 3). 
The guidelines contain:
Workbook forms allow the user to:
Topical modules that can be referenced  
 as needed
A brief discussion of the important  
 aspects of each topic
Citations relevant to the module’s topic
Checklists of relevant considerations
Annotated references
A list of pertinent organizations
Document a monitoring plan
Track plan implementation progress
Collect information to evaluate  
 the project
Ensure transparency and build trust  
 by collaborating on decisionmaking
Enhance data credibility with  
 documented protocols and plans
The guidelines were designed as a comprehensive resource for use by managers 
and scientists new to participatory processes as well as for advanced users who 
would benefit from having a reference tool. Thus, the way in which the handbook 
is used will in part depend on the prior experience managers or scientists have with 
participatory monitoring. Ideally, users will have participated in a workshop in 
which the training curriculum was used. The curriculum (app. 3) was specifically 
developed as a companion product to assist trainers with introducing users to the 
guidelines and workbook, and to help them get started on designing a participatory 
project.
Getting started—
The guidelines are organized according to the broad stages of a monitoring project: 
planning, implementation, and followthrough. Within each section are modules 
focused on particular topics that will be most useful to consider during that stage. 
Please see the “Modules Overview” section for a quick synopsis of the content of 
the guidelines, including the concepts covered in each module and how they inter-
relate. Stakeholders might be advantageously engaged at any stage of a monitoring 
project, and relevant modules can be consulted in any sequence. Most importantly, 
the “Modules Overview” will help users quickly decide if a participatory approach 
for a given project is appropriate.
Documentation—
Integral to the use of these guidelines is documenting decisions, events, resources, 
protocols, and plans relevant to each topic by addressing checklist items. Doing 
so collaboratively is an excellent exercise in building trust, transparency, effective 
The guidelines are 
a comprehensive 
resource for use 
by managers and 
scientists new 
to participatory 
processes as well  
as for advanced  
users who would 
benefit from having  
a reference tool.

4
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
communication, and clear agreements. Sharing such documentation as it accrues 
can provide all participants with a continual record of the project. Shared informa-
tion can be useful for avoiding or resolving conflicts and disagreements. Such 
documentation also demonstrates a thoughtful and systematic approach to data 
quality. The project record also can be used to evaluate progress and determine 
needed improvements. Portions of the project plan, such as sampling protocols or 
field emergency procedures, can be copied and carried for use in the field.
Modules—
Although we arranged the subject matter into stages of a monitoring project and 
topical modules, the modules can be used in any sequence. We suggest the user 
peruse all the modules before beginning to use the guidelines and workbook. 
Aspects of the various topics inevitably overlap each other and browsing through 
our arrangement of topics will provide the user with a better understanding of how 
to customize the guidelines for their specific project.
Discussions—
We begin each module with a brief introduction to the topic. Managers inexperi-
enced in participatory monitoring or related fields will benefit from these explana-
tions and descriptions in each module. We also include brief examples, suggestions, 
and recommendations based on lessons learned from organizations with experience 
in implementing participatory projects, both public and private. The organizations 
we mention in our discussions are listed in appendix 1. The purpose of the module 
discussions is to provide the user with a concise synthesis of key points from other 
resources available on these topics.
Checklists—
Following the discussion, we present a concise checklist of relevant considerations 
for that topic. Our intent is to help the user verify that no potentially important 
issues are accidentally overlooked. We encourage users to address and document 
each checklist item that is germane to their project. Blank forms available on the 
project Web site (app. 3) provide the means for documenting decisions, events, 
resources, protocols, and plans relevant to each pertinent checklist item in each 
module. The workbook forms also allow users to create and document customized 
checklist items.
Sources—
After each module’s overview, we list relevant references. Mutual learning is an 
excellent trust-building exercise in its own right, and we encourage stakeholders 
to collaborate in detailed study of the topics that interest them. More citations are 
provided for topics on which managers are likely to be less familiar than on those 
of greater familiarity. In the Web site version of this document, each citation is 
hyperlinked to the reference in the “Annotated References” section so that the 
usefulness of the reference can be quickly appraised (see http://www.ifcae.org/ 
projects/ncssf3/).

5
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Annotated literature—
All of the references in the “Annotated References” section are annotated with 
information describing the nature of the document and the topics it covers. Our 
intent is to help the user decide whether a particular document is worth the effort, 
time, or expense to acquire. We focused our literature search on readily available 
literature from national organizations in the United States, although we made 
exceptions for particularly useful or representative international documents. When-
ever possible, we provide Web links for downloading documents directly. There is 
a large volume of information from international rural development programs that 
we did not include because it is outside the scope of these guidelines. If the user is 
interested, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, The Euro-
pean Tropical Forestry Network, and the Center for International Forestry Research 
are good starting points for searching this body of information.
Organizations—
Appendix 1 provides contact information and Web site addresses for organizations 
we found to have extensive experience with conducting collaborative or participa-
tory projects or programs, and from whom we obtained many of our references 
and feedback on development of the guidelines. Again, we focused on nationwide 
programs in the United States, but included a few local, state, and international 
organizations we considered relevant. Most of these organizations have additional 
pertinent information (that we did not cite) available on their Web sites.
Case-study links—
Appendix 2, “Case Studies of Collaboration and Partnerships,” provides a few  
Web sites that have extensive links to examples of specific collaborative or 
participatory ventures. These provide opportunities to network with individuals 
involved in similar or nearby projects.
Workbook—
On the Web site that accompanies this publication (see app. 3 for more information), 
a workbook with the checklists from each module is provided. These “Workbook 
Documentation Forms” serve as an outline of key items in a participatory monitor-
ing project, and individual sheets can be carried in the field or elsewhere. The blank 
sheets can be reproduced and customized to create your project plan, along with 
other relevant appended documents. When an explanation of an item in the work-
book is needed, the user can consult the guidelines. The handbook is of greatest 
value to all concerned stakeholders if it is actually put to use to create a project 
plan by using the workbook forms. We suggest creating a separate plan for each 
participatory monitoring project if multiple projects are part of a larger monitoring 
program. Project plans can be kept in electronic format, filed in three-ring binders, 
and photocopied, or in any other desired filing system. Importantly though, the 
documentation format and filing system should be easily accessible to all collabora-
tors to enhance the sense of inclusion, participation, ownership, and trust.


GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Overview of Stages and Modules
This section provides the reader with a quick overview of the topics addressed in 
each of our modules. It is intended to illustrate the range of pertinent topics and 
how they interrelate. The major topics and issues to consider for a participatory 
monitoring project can be divided into three major stages: planning, implementa-
tion, and followthrough. Table 1 lists our modules and which stage they occupy as 
well as the type of information each contains.
Table 1—Stages and modules of a participatory monitoring project
Project stage
Module name
Type of Information
Planning
Documentation
Documenting a participatory monitoring project
Goals
Determining monitoring goals
Indicators
Selecting biological indicators
Collaboration
Evaluating the usefulness and goals of collaboration
Decisions
Making systematic and collaborative decisions
Context
Evaluating the context of a participatory monitoring project
Organization
Organizing the structure of a participatory monitoring project
Participants
Recruiting, selecting, authorizing, and dismissing participants
Communication
Developing good understandings and agreements
Incentives
Understanding motivations, concerns, and anticipated benefits
Design
Involving participants in project design
Resources
Obtaining and allocating funds, resources, and support
Implementation
Training
Providing participants with requisite training
Safety
Ensuring safety and planning for emergencies
Fieldwork
Planning field activities
Sampling
Developing sampling designs and data collection procedures
Quality
Ensuring the quality and credibility of collected data
Data
Making arrangements for handling, storing, and using data
Followthrough
Analysis
Arranging for periodic data analysis
Reporting
Arranging for reporting results
Evaluation
Evaluating and improving the project
Celebrations
Ensuring the project is rewarding and appreciated
Not every monitoring project that involves participants needs to address all of 
the stages or module topics in these guidelines; however, becoming familiar with 
them can help the user avoid obstacles and improve current or future projects. 
Depending on the goals and context of a particular monitoring project, participants 
could be involved in any or all of the three stages of the project, or they might be 
involved with different levels of intensity and commitment at each stage. For exam-
ple, participants might be included in the planning stage and invited to meetings to 
identify the goals and objectives of an upcoming monitoring project. Or participants 
could be included in the implementation stage of a monitoring project by involving 
them in data collection (in which case the training, safety, and fieldwork modules 


Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
would be most appropriate). If a monitoring project has already collected data, 
participants can help examine the results and suggest further steps for disseminat-
ing the information to interested parties. In this case, the analysis and reporting 
modules of the followthrough stage would be most useful. The stages are simply 
conceptual; therefore, the modules may be used independently, in any combination, 
or in any sequence, depending on the needs of each project and its participants.
Planning Stage
The importance of clear goals cannot be overemphasized. Developing clear goals 
for the monitoring project is the first step in determining whether a participatory 
approach is appropriate and will influence all the remaining parts of the project 
planning. For example, the goal might be to collect presence and absence informa-
tion on invasive weeds across a large area, in which case large numbers of partici-
pants can be involved with little training needed. Conversely, the goal might be to 
inventory the entire flora of a park, possibly requiring extensive botanical training. 
A project goal might primarily be to increase public awareness and education about 
management practices in an area, or it could be to ground-truth remote sensing 
data. Each monitoring goal can lend itself to participant involvement in different 
ways and to different extents. Similarly, every monitoring project operates within 
an organizational structure that must be taken into account when involving partici-
pants. Although these guidelines provide an overarching synthesis of participatory 
monitoring literature and lessons from practitioners, many agencies and organi-
zations provide publications or offices that can help the reader address their own 
organization’s peculiarities and requirements.
Documentation: Documenting a Participatory Monitoring Project Plan—
Clear documentation, shared by all, can turn a participatory monitoring project into 
an exercise in building trust, resolving conflict, and colearning. This module offers 
suggestions for how to document everything about the project so that anyone can 
review and understand the process and results.
Goals: Determining Monitoring Goals—
Defining the purpose and intended results for monitoring goals can be a way of 
involving participants early in the project. However, even if a project is already 
underway when participants become involved, taking the time to make sure every-
one understands and agrees on the goals of the project will make the overall process 
more efficient and enjoyable. This module alerts the reader to issues explored in 
greater depth in later modules, including the regulatory and land ownership context 
in which a project is taking place.
Indicators: Selecting Biological Indicators—
This module provides background on the use of biological indicators, organizations 
that can provide detailed information on the selection process, as well as ways to 
involve participants with local ecological knowledge in the selection of indicators.
The modules may be 
used independently, 
in any combination, 
or in any sequence, 
depending on the 
needs of each project 
and its participants.


GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Collaboration: Evaluating the Usefulness and Goals of Collaboration—
Before entering into a collaboration or participatory project, it is a good idea to 
evaluate the potential advantages and disadvantages to involving participants 
in biological monitoring. Participants can be involved in any and all stages of a 
monitoring project and at varying levels of intensity.
Decisions: Making Systematic and Collaborative Decisions—
Making decisions in a clear, systematic, and jointly agreed upon manner will 
greatly improve trust among managers, participants, and stakeholders. Participants 
can be involved in decisionmaking at any stage of the monitoring project process. 
This module offers suggestions for ways managers can incorporate collaborative 
decisionmaking into their projects, including education, training, neutral facilita-
tion, and general principles for making collaboration work.
Context: Evaluating the Context of a Participatory Monitoring Project—
The political, social, cultural, and economic context will likely affect project design 
and the type and extent of participant involvement. This module suggests ways 
managers and stakeholders can cooperatively analyze the context of a project and 
the implications for project design that emerge from such analyses.
Organization: Organizing the Structure of a Participatory  
Monitoring Project—
Participatory monitoring projects can involve several organizations, each with their 
own structures and goals. This module offers suggestions for sponsorship organi-
zations, defining roles and responsibilities, and developing contracts and formal 
agreements between organizations. The effectiveness of the project, and the ease of 
pursuing similar future projects, can be facilitated by explicitly defining the roles 
and responsibilities of each organization in the early stages of planning. 
Participants: Recruiting, Selecting, Authorizing, and  
Dismissing Participants—
This module offers suggestions about identifying participants, fostering leaders 
within the group, and setting ground rules for respectful behavior. Also included 
are specific suggestions for working with representatives of stakeholder groups.
Communication: Developing Good Understandings and Agreements—
This module offers suggestions for addressing different communication styles, 
perspectives, and languages among collaborating individuals and groups. Although 
monitoring projects work better when effective communication builds trust between 
participants, managers, and scientists, such trust also is often an important goal. 
Facilitation, communication, and trust-building are such important and specialized 
skills that this module includes suggestions for obtaining help.


Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Incentives: Understanding Motivations, Concerns, and Anticipated Benefits—
This module provides examples of the variety of incentives participants might 
have for becoming involved in a project, both as stakeholders and as individuals. 
Discussing these incentives during the planning stage can help avoid conflict later. 
Also included are suggestions for finding common ground among participants 
and ensuring that everyone benefits from the experience of being involved in the 
monitoring project.
Design: Involving Participants in Project Design—
Although many people initially assume that participation in a monitoring project is 
limited to helping with data collection, some of the most successful projects involve 
participants in the project design or are initially designed by community groups. 
Stakeholders generally have a variety of skills and expertise they can contribute to a 
monitoring project. This module offers suggestions for how to determine if collabo-
rating with participants on project design is appropriate, and if so, ways to match 
their roles in the project to the knowledge, skills, or abilities that each possesses. 
Resources— 
This module addresses obtaining and allocating funds, resources, and support. 
Involving participants in a monitoring project can affect the budget in a number 
of ways, especially by creating opportunities to leverage funds from sources that 
support public participation in natural resource management and science. Although 
monitoring projects sometimes involve volunteers, participants can be compensated 
for their time and effort in a variety of ways. Thorough budgeting and tracking of 
expenditures can be especially important to the development and maintenance of 
clear agreements among participants. Also included are suggestions for fundraising, 
in-kind contributions, and community support.
Implementation Stage
Although it might be ideal to include participants in the early stages of a monitoring 
project (to build trust and establish common goals), many of the benefits of partici-
pation can still be effectively achieved by involving participants after a project has 
begun. The implementation stage consists of such topics as training, safety, plan-
ning field activities, creating sampling designs, devising data collection procedures, 
and ensuring the data are of high quality and handled responsibly.
Training: Providing Participants With Requisite Training—
This module discusses development and documentation of training programs to 
suit the needs of the project and match the skills of participants. Any skills that are 
needed to conduct a participatory monitoring project, and that are lacking among 
participants, are potential candidates for training. However, training can be time 
consuming or costly, so resources and time can be saved by assigning priorities, 
matching training to needs, and investigating cost-effective training strategies. 
Although many 
people assume that 
participation in a 
monitoring project 
is limited to helping 
with data collection, 
some of the most 
successful projects 
involve participants in 
project design or are 
initially designed by 
community groups. 

10
10
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Appropriate and documented training helps ensure good communication,  
data credibility, safety, and self-esteem.
Safety: Ensuring Safety and Planning for Emergencies—
This module offers suggestions for creating and documenting safety and 
emergency plans that ensure everyone has a safe and enjoyable experience  
while collecting monitoring data.
Fieldwork: Planning Field Activities—
Careful planning of logistics for fieldwork is essential to the smooth operation  
of a monitoring project. Involving participants in fieldwork need not be signifi-
cantly more time consuming if travel, schedules, equipment, safety, and support 
activities are explained and clearly discussed before fieldwork begins. 
Sampling: Developing Sampling Designs and Data Collection Procedures—
Experts should create sampling designs, but participants are more likely to 
implement sampling protocols carefully and appropriately if they understand the 
rationale behind the design. Participants might also be able to lend insights that 
make the design more efficient. Understanding the reasoning behind the chosen 
sampling designs and protocols will enhance participant understanding of, and 
trust in, the monitoring results. 
Quality: Ensuring the Quality and Credibility of Collected Data—
Developing a quality assurance plan does much to effectively address concern 
on the part of managers and scientists about the credibility of data collected by 
participants. Many projects use third party auditing to alleviate concerns about 
data quality. This module offers suggestions for developing a quality assurance 
plan, quality control procedures, a quality assessment plan, and other ways to 
address the issue of data quality.
Data: Making Arrangements for Handling, Storing, and Using Data—
This module discusses data handling, backup, filing, compatibility with other 
databases, and accessibility. Also addressed are issues of data ownership, use, 
and distribution; topics that are of particular importance in the context of former 
grievances or mistrust among collaborators.

11
11
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Followthrough Stage
Even if participants were not involved in the planning or implementation stages of 
a monitoring project, involving them in the analysis and reporting of the monitor-
ing data can ensure that results are useful to stakeholders and might help build 
trust for the next monitoring project. This followthrough stage is yet another 
opportunity for participants and managers to learn from each other and to deter-
mine the next steps for the monitoring project and the collaborative relationship 
that has been built.
Analysis: Arranging for Periodic Data Analysis—
Although statistical analyses should be conducted by experts, participants can 
contribute insight and local expertise to the review and interpretation of the results. 
This module offers suggestions for anticipating the time and money required to 
conduct periodic analysis of monitoring data, as well as ways to involve partici-
pants in interpretation of the results.
Reporting: Arranging for Reporting Results—
Disseminating project results to interested parties, and ensuring they are used, is 
a followup process that rewards participants with the feeling that their time and 
efforts were worthwhile. If monitoring results are being used to resolve conflicts 
over land management, prior agreements about how results are reported and used 
can prevent or alleviate subsequent animosity. This module offers suggestions for 
reporting results, addressing concerns, archiving publications, and making sure 
everything is disseminated in formats and languages that all stakeholders can 
understand.
Evaluation: Evaluating and Improving the Project—
Evaluation of a participatory monitoring project mirrors the cyclical process 
of adaptive forest management. As with adaptive management, the process 
(implementation, monitoring, evaluation, adjustment) is most effective when it is 
inclusive of all stakeholders and points of view. This module offers suggestions 
for ways to continually evaluate whether the participatory monitoring project is 
meeting both its biological and collaboration goals and to revise the process if 
goals are not being met.
Celebrations: Ensuring the Project Is Rewarding and Widely Appreciated—
Rewarding and celebrating everyone’s contributions to the monitoring project helps 
sustain motivation and is fun. Public acknowledgement is usually highly appreci-
ated and provides a forum that also enhances community appreciation and support.
Involving participants 
in the analysis and 
reporting of the 
monitoring data can 
ensure that results are 
useful to stakeholders.

12
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
DOCUMENTATION
Purpose—
Documenting a participatory monitoring project with the “Workbook Documen-
tation Forms” provided at the project Web site that accompanies this publication 
(see app. 3 for more information) creates (1) a project plan; (2) a means of track-
ing implementation of the plan; and (3) material for review, evaluation, and revi-
sion of the plan. There are a variety of reasons for doing this; examples include:
•	
Strategic planning.
•	
Establishing credibility.
•	
Improving communication.
•	
Ensuring high-quality data and results.
•	
Creating institutional memory for future reference.
•	
Protection against liability claims or litigation.
•	
Providing a source for contact information.
•	
Providing material for periodic review and evaluation.
•	
Providing reference materials for funding applications.
•	
Providing reference material for outreach or education.
•	
Documenting agreements such as contracts or memoranda of understanding.
•	
Documenting processes such as decisionmaking methods or communication 
norms.
•	
Documenting protocols such as how to conduct meetings or field sampling 
procedures.
•	
Documenting safety, emergency, or quality assurance plans.
Process—
Documentation can require upfront time commitment that will likely save time 
throughout the project. The effort expended should be commensurate with 
perceived benefits and the complexity of the project. Consideration should be 
given to who should be responsible for documentation tasks and how much time 
should be devoted to them. Key points to document about process are:
•	
When major decisions are made.
•	
What formal or informal agreements are made.
•	
How, when, where, and by whom data are collected.
•	
How participants are trained.
•	
How and by whom data analysis is conducted.
•	
How results are generated and reviewed.
Documentation can take a variety of forms depending on the object to be 
recorded. Examples include: 
•	
Contact information for participants
•	
Meeting notes
•	
Informal agreements
Documentation: 
	
Documenting a Participatory Monitoring Project
Planning Stage

13
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
DOCUMENTATION
•	
Narrative descriptions of the project plan
•	
Signed forms
•	
Contractual agreements
•	
Evaluation forms
•	
Training manuals
•	
Sampling protocols
•	
Reference materials
•	
Reports of monitoring results
•	
Published articles
•	
Computer files
•	
Databases
•	
Audio tapes
•	
Photographs, electronic images, or videos
Whatever the form or purpose, documentation should cover the essential 
categories of who, what, when, where, and how. Making all the documentation 
available to all participants helps build trust. Understanding and communication  
are facilitated by deciding in advance who keeps, copies, and distributes documen-
tation, and how often or under what circumstances. It also is important to identify 
any sensitive or proprietary information and collaboratively decide how it will be 
handled. For example, traditional knowledge held by the local Native American 
tribe about the location of particular plant species might need to be handled sepa-
rately from other data.
Checklist—
	 What are the objectives for documenting various aspects of the project?
	 What should be documented and how often should it be updated?
	 Who will be responsible for maintaining the various aspects of  
documentation?
	 How much time will be required to document each facet of the project  
and who will do it?
	 If more than one party or individual updates the same documentation files,  
how will their work be coordinated?
	 What will be the process for sharing documentation among participants?
	 What information can or should be kept in a central file; what parts can be 
accessed by participants, and how will they be able to access it?
	 Will there be any sensitive or proprietary information gathered, and  
how will it be handled?
Sources—
Behar 1996; Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003; Daly, n.d.a; Dukes  
and Firehock 2001; Herron and others 2004b; Hunt and others 1996; NRCS, n.d.
Documentation should 
cover the essential 
categories of who, 
what, when, where,  
and how.

14
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
GOALS
Purpose and intended results—
Beginning with a clear understanding of the purpose and intended results of a 
monitoring project is essential to success. Clear understanding of goals is especially 
important in collaborative endeavors. If there is not a common understanding 
of purpose, stakeholders will follow divergent paths. If there is not a common 
understanding of what all the collaborators wish to achieve, efforts are likely to be 
misdirected or unfocused, and disappointment can be expected. Documentation of 
such understandings can take the form of vision statements, mission statements, 
goals, or objectives. Often it is useful to create a series of such statements from the 
more general to the more specific. Many groups find that holding one or more meet-
ings solely for the purpose of establishing the goals and objectives of a monitoring 
project is time well spent.
Indicators and measures—
Once all collaborators understand and agree on the project’s purpose and intended 
results, then it is much easier to select indicators that are likely to yield useful 
information within the budget and timeframe of the project. Indicators are what will 
be measured or evaluated. Indicators (such as the viability of the population of an 
endangered species) can then be tracked with specific measures (for instance, abun-
dance of reproductive females in a given area). Often there is historical data avail-
able about past ecological conditions in an area, including stories and observations 
made by local people. Exploring these sources of information before defining goals, 
indicators, and measures can sometimes help focus and improve the efficiency of 
monitoring efforts. 
Biodiversity monitoring—
Because it is not possible to monitor every organism, monitoring of biodiversity 
must, by its very nature, involve abstractions and assumptions about what to 
monitor. Examples of approaches include focusing on endangered species, 
economically important species, charismatic macrofauna, indicator species, 
native or introduced species, rapid diversity appraisals, or creating species lists 
(of organisms that are easy to see and identify). The means of inventorying 
or monitoring biodiversity will depend largely on the goals of the project and 
the available resources. Although inventories, that is, one-time enumerations, 
are occasionally the goal of a biodiversity project, we focus predominantly 
on monitoring trends in biodiversity. Details on indicators and measures for 
biodiversity monitoring are discussed in the “Indicators” module.
Goals: 
	
Determining Monitoring Goals and Indicators
Many groups find 
that holding one or 
more meetings solely 
for the purpose of 
establishing the goals 
and objectives of a 
monitoring project is 
time well spent.

15
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
GOALS
Context—
The purpose of monitoring biodiversity is always imbedded in a larger context. 
For example, federal land management agencies sponsor ongoing scientific data 
collection such as Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) Program in response to 
legal, policy, or regulatory requirements. For corporate forest landowners, the 
requirements of the Endangered Species Act or Habitat Conservation Plans might 
motivate monitoring projects. For local communities, it could be the desire to create 
local forest employment opportunities that are sustainable. For Native Americans, 
the context could be maintaining the health of important natural resources for 
cultural use or traditional livelihoods. Often, the context of a monitoring project has 
many aspects that overlap, especially if there are multiple stakeholders involved. 
If a monitoring project is part of a larger monitoring program such as FIA, then 
careful attention must be paid to the degree of compatibility between the goals of 
the local project and those of the larger program, including how much effort will be 
allocated to meet the needs of each. Considering the total context of a monitoring 
project is essential to developing clear understandings about purposes and intended 
results. We address these and other aspects of context in greater detail in the 
“Context” module.
Checklist—
	 What are the specific monitoring goals of the project?
	 What is the process used to reach agreement on those goals?
	 If the project is part of a larger program, what are the goals of that  
program?
	 Is there overlap or conflict between local and larger scale monitoring goals?
	 How will project resources be allocated between the project and larger  
programs? 
	 What will be the overall context of the monitoring project?
	 For each monitoring goal, what indicators and measures will be used to  
address each goal?
Sources—
Bliss and others 2001; Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2004a, 2004b, 
2004e; Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network Coordinating Office and 
the Canadian Nature Federation 2003; Elzinga and others 2001; Kerns and others 
2002; Krishnaswamy 2004; Lawrence and Ambrose-Oji 2001; Lindenmayer 1999; 
Lynch and others 2004; National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry 
2005; Ottke and others 2000; The Secretariat of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity 2001a, 2001b; Wright, n.d.

16
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
INDICATORS
Definitions—
Indicators are quantitative or qualitative variables that are monitored periodically 
to reveal trends. Data collection and analysis in biological monitoring programs is 
usually organized around indicators. Monitoring biodiversity might include chemi-
cal indicators (water quality) or physical or structural indicators (coarse woody 
debris or snags in a forest), but often focus on the use of biological indicators such 
as indicator species (cavity nesting birds).
Background—
In 1995 the United States signed on to the Montreal Process as a member country 
and agreed to adopt and develop the use of indicators to measure and advance sus-
tainable forestry in the United States. One aspect of sustainable forestry identified 
by the Montreal Process is the conservation of biodiversity. Diversity is important 
at all levels of biological organization (genetic, population-species, community-eco-
system, and regional-landscape) and consists of structural, functional, and composi-
tional attributes (for instance, age classes, nutrient cycling, and successional-stage, 
respectively). Hence, indicator variables for monitoring biodiversity would ideally 
be chosen at all levels of organization and for all three attributes of ecosystems. 
However, this is rarely possible with limited time and resources; hence, selecting 
indicators that serve multiple purposes and are tightly correlated with attributes of 
concern will improve efficiency in a monitoring project.
Selecting indicators—
Developing reliable and cost-effective indicators of forest health is a relatively 
recent and ongoing pursuit in conservation biology. A major challenge is to refine 
the broad indicators established for assessing sustainable forestry at a large scale 
(across forest ecosystem types and ownerships) to be locally appropriate, credible 
indicators. Scientists and other stakeholders are developing several useful tools 
to aid in the process of selecting and using indicators. The following list provides 
several examples (see app. 1 for details): 
•	
Manomet Center for Conservation Science 
•	
Roundtable on Sustainable Forests: Criteria and Indicators 
•	
Local Unit Criteria and Indicators Development Project 
•	
Sustainable Forest Data Working Group 
•	
Forest Stewardship Council (use of indicators in forest certification) 
After collaborators agree upon a project’s goals and objectives, they can select 
the specific indicators to measure the progress toward achieving those objectives. 
At this point, it can be useful to explore the variety of sources of historical ecologi-
cal conditions in the area in order to determine what indicators might be most 
Indicators: 
	
Selecting Biological Indicators and Measures

17
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
INDICATORS
sensitive to change. Local archives, county records, and older members of the com-
munity are all places to look for background data when selecting indicators. Stating 
explicitly what attribute of an indicator is to actually be measured (such as the 
spatial extent of habitat for a species of concern) can help ensure that the indicators 
selected will be appropriate. Choosing indicators with preexisting baseline informa-
tion also can reduce the project’s workload or build on existing knowledge. 
Selecting measures—
Once indicators have been selected, determining how they will be measured and 
evaluated is the next step. Measurable characteristics that change in response to 
disturbance or threat might be especially pertinent to project goals. For example, 
if the selected indicator of ecosystem health were the population viability of a bird 
species threatened by nesting habitat loss, then an appropriate measure might be 
the abundance of currently used nests in the target area. A measurement variable 
can be broad, such as species richness, or narrow, such as the abundance of a single 
species or population. For a given indicator, there might be several variables to 
measure, and different sampling designs or methods might be necessary for each. 
It is possible that at the research design stage, collaborators will realize that they do 
not have the resources to measure the indicators they have chosen, and thus might 
need to revise the project goals and choice of indicators to match their capacity.
One approach suggested by the Manomet Center uses three types of measures 
for any biodiversity indicator (such as habitat for cavity-nesting birds): a condition 
measure (such as density of snags), a pressure measure (such as area of timber 
harvesting per year), and policy-response measure (such as the presence of a 
management plan for snags). These indicators are only beginning to be field tested, 
so keep in mind that selecting indicators for biodiversity monitoring and sustainable 
forestry is a rapidly evolving area of science subject to change. Also, for nar-
rowly focused biological monitoring projects, nonbiological indicators like policy 
response may not be appropriate. Likewise, broader studies may need additional 
indicators such as cultural use indicators (for example, presence of subsistence 
harvesting of a species).
Considerations for participatory approaches—
The level and involvement of different participants in the indicator and measures 
selection process is partly determined by who initiates the monitoring project. For 
example, established monitoring projects might wish to invite local volunteers or 
contractors to assist only with data collection, because the indicators and mea-
sures have already been selected and are no longer easily changed. Other types of 
monitoring projects involve community members, managers, scientists, and other 
stakeholders from the beginning. Involving stakeholders can have many practical 
benefits. For example, involving local participants can improve the indicator selec-
tion process by drawing on their knowledge of local ecosystems. Knowledge such 

18
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
INDICATORS
as where certain species exist, unusual ecosystem phenomena, or existing cultural 
use patterns might be useful for selecting indicators that are practical, important, 
or essential to measure. A variety of other reasons exist for involving stakeholders; 
many of them are listed in the “Collaboration” module. Every biological monitoring 
project will have some level of social, cultural, economic, managerial, and political 
context that can affect, as well as be affected by, the project results. Having a deci-
sion process that involves stakeholders will likely improve the chance that appropri-
ate and useful indicators and measures are selected.
Checklist—
	 Should stakeholders be involved in the indicator selection process, and if so, 
how?
	 If circumstances warrant, how will stakeholders be contacted and invited to 
participate?
	 What specific indicators of biodiversity or other biological values will  
be monitored? 
	 Do the indicators address the goals of the project?
	 Do the selected indicators have useful background information or  
baseline data?
	 Are the indicators useful in ascertaining disturbances or threats to biodiversity?
	 How will indicators be measured?
	 How will indicators and measures be evaluated for efficacy, cost effectiveness, 
and practicability?
Sources—
Balmford and others 2005; Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2004a; Hilty 
and Merenlender 2000; Kelly and Harwell 1990; Lindenmayer 1999; Montreal 
Process Working Group 1999; Morrison and Marcot 1995; National Commission on 
Science for Sustainable Forestry 2005; Noss 1990; The Secretariat of the Conven-
tion on Biological Diversity 2001b; Whitman and Hagan 2004; Working Group on 
Criteria and Indicators 2001; Wright, n.d.

19
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
COLLABORATION
Overview—
All humans collaborate; it is part of our social nature. Generally we collaborate 
with those with whom we share much in common, but at other times we differ in 
many regards yet share some common interests. Collaboration helps pool intellec-
tual and physical resources and converts potentially adversarial relationships into 
mutually beneficial ones. Participatory monitoring is inherently collaborative in the 
sense that we choose to work together to reach common goals. Successful collabo-
ration depends on understanding where our goals overlap with those of others, and 
determining whether it is worth our while to work together to achieve these com-
mon goals. Some of our sources describe collaboration as a spectrum with different 
levels of relative responsibility and control that are arranged in categories, such as 
consultation, cooperation, collaboration, or colearning, although each participant’s 
role often overlaps these categories and changes through time.
Incentives for collaborating differ widely. Sometimes participants in a monitor-
ing program share many common interests. The Audubon Society’s international 
bird counting program (“The Christmas Bird Count”), conducted by volunteer 
bird-watching enthusiasts, is an example. Sometimes participants in a monitoring 
program have an economic interest in sustaining a resource. For instance, non-
timber forest product harvesters (such as ginseng or mushroom collectors) might 
participate in agency monitoring of target species in exchange for access to the 
resource. Sometimes collaboration arises from adversarial circumstances such as 
frustration with litigation of natural resource management decisions or threats of 
legal mandates. In each case, a thorough and shared understanding of the reasons 
that motivate stakeholders to collaborate is essential to the success of the project. 
In this module’s discussion section, we emphasize the need for clarity regarding 
reasons to collaborate, mention some forms of collaboration, list advantages, dis-
advantages, and barriers to collaborating, and suggest means to make collaboration 
work. Many of the essential elements of making collaboration work are detailed  
in subsequent modules.
Collaboration goals—
Common reasons that managers might consider a participatory approach to  
monitoring include:
•	
Stretching limited resources.
•	
Building understanding among user groups.
•	
Improving community relations.
•	
Reducing conflict and litigation.
•	
Providing educational opportunities.
•	
Supporting community development.
•	
Addressing public concerns.
•	
Incorporating local or traditional knowledge into monitoring designs. 
Collaboration: 
	
Evaluating the Usefulness and Goals of Collaboration
A thorough and  
shared understanding 
of the reasons that 
motivate stakeholders 
to collaborate is 
essential to the 
success of the 
project.

20
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
COLLABORATION
Once other stakeholders are involved, however, the spectrum of collaboration 
goals often expands to accommodate their unique interests and motivations. These 
will be explored in greater detail in the “Incentives” module, but examples include 
personal enrichment, economic self-interests, or influencing management decisions. 
If collaborations are to be successful, it is essential that all stakeholders reach a 
clear, explicit, mutual, and, preferably, written understanding of the purpose and 
focus of their collaborative effort before proceeding further.
 Because collaborations that revolve around participatory monitoring might 
involve diverse stakeholders, beginning with broad vision statements or mission 
statements can provide a useful means of establishing common ground for proceed-
ing to the more difficult tasks of developing specific goals, objectives, processes, 
and means.
Types of participatory monitoring—
Collaborating with other participants to monitor biodiversity or other biological 
resources can be as simple as cooperating with “Jane Doe” to count the number of 
butterflies that migrate through her backyard or as complicated as a nationwide, 
volunteer-based, water-quality monitoring program (such as the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency’s National Water Quality Assessment Program). Some projects 
will involve participants through all stages of the project; others might only need 
participants to assist with data collection. Managers or scientists often initiate 
projects, but others could develop when a community approaches managers with 
monitoring needs. Some complex programs that coordinate many local projects  
can be tightly prescribed and centralized (such as the Atlantic Coastal Cooperative 
Statistics Program), whereas others are decentralized and open to innovation (such 
as the Canadian Community Monitoring Network). Reasons for collaborating can 
derive from mutual interest, job requirements, economic concerns, traditional uses, 
cultural identity, legal requirements, or unresolved conflicts. Collaboration can be 
initiated and sponsored by land management agencies and organizations, commu-
nity groups, resource users, government agencies, nongovernment organizations, or 
special interest groups. In the “Annotated References” and “Appendix 1,” we list a 
number of references and organizations that provide information on collaboration 
geared to particular interests or situations. Not only does participatory monitoring 
vary widely in the forms it can take, but it is always molded by the context in which 
it occurs, and is usually dynamic and evolving. The precise form of a particular 
participatory monitoring project will determine the constellation of advantages 
and disadvantages that are associated with collaboration. These considerations also 
differ by the participant’s perspective. Here we list some of the potential advantages 
and disadvantages of collaboration.
Potential advantages—
•	
Work is shared.
•	
Scope, relevancy, and efficiency of ecological monitoring is increased.
•	
Efforts are coordinated and duplicate efforts avoided; participant  
competencies complement each other.

21
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
COLLABORATION
•	
Collaboration entails an innovative and entrepreneurial approach  
to problemsolving.
•	
Collaboration focuses on problems and solutions rather than  
positions and advocacy.
•	
Participants’ viewpoints and knowledge are identified, appreciated,  
and can inform and improve decisions.
•	
Decisions made more effectively, are more durable, are more likely  
to foster action, and can be implemented.
•	
Monitoring results are considered more credible by all stakeholders.
•	
The process addresses ecological complexity and is integral to  
adaptive management.
•	
All collaborators are accountable and responsibility is shared.
•	
Participants become interdependent.
•	
Stakeholders are empowered to potentially influence management  
decisions and policy.
•	
The capacity of local participants is improved by enhancing their  
knowledge, skills, and abilities; by improving social relationships;  
and by developing leadership skills.
•	
The capacity of local communities is enhanced through economic  
development, and by developing organizations that can sponsor or  
facilitate new community improvement projects.
•	
Decisions are decentralized and power is shifted toward the  
stakeholders most affected.
•	
Mutual understanding and trust are enhanced by a transparent process.
•	
Greater understanding reduces conflict.
•	
Public support for management decisions is increased.
•	
Local communities develop a stake in ensuring forest resource use  
is sustainable.
•	
Public appreciation of the importance of biodiversity is enhanced  
through education.
•	
Power-sharing promotes social justice.
•	
Monitoring is based on multiple sources of ecological knowledge  
(local, conventional, and traditional).
Potential disadvantages and barriers—
•	
Collaboration requires time, effort, mutual trust, and clear understanding  
to build effective communication.
•	
Participants might lack familiarity with collaboration or opportunities  
for training.
•	
The time and effort needed to create successful collaborations  
increases with greater levels of conflicting interest, mistrust, diverging  
values, or hidden agendas.
•	
Needed time and effort also increase with projects of increasing  
scale or complexity.
•	
Collaboration might require long-term commitments on the part of participants.

22
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
COLLABORATION
•	
Important or essential stakeholders might not want to collaborate.
•	
Collaborative decisions reached through an agreed-upon process might  
run counter to a participating stakeholder’s interest or agenda.
•	
Collaborative decisions might reflect least controversial alternatives rather  
than most useful or effective choices.
•	
Collaborative organizations might lack the authority to enforce their  
choices or decisions.
•	
Concerns over validity of data collected by stakeholders with conflicts  
of interest could dissuade potential supporters.
•	
Even after extensive effort, participants run the risk that collaboration  
might not meet the project goals.
•	
Projects that fail can discourage others that would otherwise be more  
likely to succeed.
•	
Divergent or irreconcilable interests, values, attitudes, perceptions,  
cultural paradigms, or agendas might exist among stakeholders.
•	
Government policies, regulations, procedures, laws, and lack of political  
will can interfere.
•	
Lack of institutional capacity, funding, staff, or resources can be an 
impediment.
•	
Staff members that experiment with collaboration can lack agency support  
in the form of job assignment, training, and advancement opportunities.
•	
Training, organizational capacity, participant skills, or commitment to 
improvement might be needed.
•	
Unrealistic expectations, or lack of immediate tangible results can be 
discouraging.
•	
Lack of trust, discomfort, or lack of commitment to group processes  
can impede progress.
•	
Fear of inappropriate use or sabotage of results can discourage involvement.
•	
Issues of ownership or custody might need to be settled.
•	
Unequal power relationships among stakeholders can hinder interaction.
•	
Educational, language, and literacy barriers or unfamiliarity with formal  
scientific methods can slow progress.
•	
Labor relations and issues of compensation might need to be resolved.
•	
Welfare, disability, or legal status can hinder involvement.
•	
Perceived grudges for past or ongoing injustices might complicate 
communication.
•	
An ongoing collaborative monitoring process might lead to complacency  
about urgently needed action.
•	
Agency personnel might be frustrated by continuous and conflicting  
public criticism, shifting management objectives, lack of appreciation  
and job insecurity.
•	
Community resources, organizational capacity, participant skills, or  
long-term commitment might be lacking.
•	
Participants might fear regulatory reprisals from inadequate or  
poor-quality data.

23
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
COLLABORATION
Weighing the advantages and disadvantages—
The process of weighing the advantages and disadvantages of a participatory 
approach to monitoring entails determining which of the advantages, disadvan-
tages, and barriers apply to your particular circumstances, determining how 
important each is, and deciding how difficult the barriers will be to surmount. A 
useful exercise to put the analysis in perspective is to ask: “Compared to what?” 
The current situation might include unmet goals, inefficient or unsuccessful 
management strategies, a nonholistic approach, continued contention or litigation, 
wasted time, government intervention, threatened livelihoods, legislative man-
dates, or harm to the resource. Put in this perspective, the status quo might be less 
acceptable than the risks that could accompany a collaborative approach. For sug-
gestions on how to navigate these challenging decisions, see the resources listed in 
the following “Decisions” module for methods that facilitate good decisions about 
complex issues.
Checklist—
	 Who will document the collaboration goals of a participatory monitoring  
project and how?
	 How were the goals derived and who participated in that process?
	 What are the advantages of a participatory approach for this project?
	 What are the disadvantages of a participatory approach for this project?
	 What seem to be the barriers to implementing a participatory approach  
for this project?
	 How will the relative importance of each advantage, disadvantage, and  
barrier be determined?
	 What process will be used to analyze the relative benefits and drawbacks  
to using a participatory approach to monitoring?
	 What is the plan for minimizing the disadvantages and barriers and  
making the collaborative effort work?
Sources—
Abbot and Guijt 1998; Balcazar and others 1998; Ballard 2004; Ballard and others 
2002; Behar 1996; Bliss and others 2001; Brechin and others 2002; Christoffersen 
2003; Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003; Collaborative Stewardship 
Team 2000; Cornwall and Jewkes 1995; Coughlin and others 1999; Daly, n.d.a, 
n.d.c; Dukes and Firehock 2001; Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network 
Coordinating Office and the Canadian Nature Federation 2003; Everett 2001; 
Godfrey 1994; Guijt and others 1998; Jones and others 2004; Krishnaswamy 2004; 
Kusel and others 2000; Lawrence 2003; Lawrence and Ambrose-Oji 2001; Lynch 
2004; Lynch and others 2004; McNeely 1995; Moote and Becker 2003; North-
South Environmental, Inc. 2004; Resolve, n.d.; Sirmon and others 2002a, 2002b; 
Sithole 2002; Stockdale and Corbet 1999; Sullivan 2000; University of Maine 
Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine Coastal Program of the 
Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; Voluntary Sector Initiative 2002a; Wondolleck 
and Yaffee 2000; Yaffee 2002; Yaffee and Wondolleck 2000.

24
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
DECISIONS
Systematic decisionmaking—
Collaboration involves many decisions. Sometimes decisions are complex and must 
be forged from disparate values and perspectives. Making systematic decisions 
involves using clear, understandable, and jointly agreed-upon processes so that 
choices are perceived to be fair and logical. Doing so improves the likelihood that 
all parties to the decision will be satisfied with the results. 
Collaborative decisionmaking—
Decisionmaking within groups can take a variety of forms such as majority rule 
(Robert’s Rules of Order), group consensus (in which all agree), or mediated discus-
sions such as principled negotiation (based on interests rather than positions). The 
process of deriving decisions in a transparent (open, clear, and understandable), 
inclusive, systematic, and fair manner can be a powerful trust-building exercise, but 
outside help often is needed. Facilitation of the decisionmaking process by a neutral 
party, especially in large or diverse groups, can be crucial in reaching positive out-
comes. Facilitation services abound, both locally and on the Web. Getting recom-
mendations for good facilitators can be worth the effort, because use of unskilled 
facilitators can be counterproductive.
Essentially, collaborative decisionmaking processes can be considered “mic-
ropolitics,” and many of the dynamics of interaction revolve around the relative 
power and persuasive abilities of the participants. Prior agreement about decision-
making principles and procedures will improve acceptance of decisions even if 
some parties disagree with the results. This can be especially important in con-
sensus-based processes where unanimous agreement on some aspects of a project 
might be an unattainable goal that would stall progress. 
Education and training—
Understanding how to apply systematic and collaborative decisionmaking in 
monitoring projects is a valuable skill. Depending on the existing skills of the 
project coordinators and scope of the project, organizers might benefit from formal 
training. Such opportunities are widely available in the pubic and private sector, 
as well as in a large body of literature and on Web sites. Our citations provide a 
small sampling of the literature that covers avoidance of common decisionmaking 
mistakes; organized step-by-step methods for identifying, evaluating, and selecting 
alternatives; and ways to document the reasoning that leads to specific choices. In 
one instance, this process has been codified into a user-friendly software program 
(see “Sources” below).
Decisions: 
	
Making Systematic and Collaborative Decisions
Prior agreement 
about decisionmaking 
principles and 
procedures will 
improve acceptance  
of decisions.

25
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
DECISIONS
Making collaboration work—
Listed here are several fundamental strategies for improving the effectiveness  
of collaborative decisionmaking:
•	
Start with small, noncontroversial projects to build relationships, trust,  
and shared vision.
•	
Try to make every step of the process a collaborative venture, at least  
within subcommittees or working groups.
•	
Remain open to new approaches and ideas.
•	
Make stakeholders feel welcome and create opportunities for their involvement.
•	
Allow adequate time.
•	
Provide prompt feedback to all participants at each stage of the process.
•	
Make sure participant expectations and needs are explicitly understood by all.
•	
Treat each other with respect.
•	
Illustrate with positive examples.
•	
Get help when needed.
Checklist—
	 How familiar are participants with alternative decisionmaking processes?
	 What training will be used so that participants become familiar with 
the principles, advantages, disadvantages, and applicability of various 
decisionmaking methods?
	 What decisionmaking processes will be used in various circumstances  
and how did issues like group size, level of dissention, or importance of  
the decision affect the choice of process? 
	 Who will make decisions for each part of the project, and how will such  
individuals or groups be held accountable? 
Sources—
Berg and others 1998; Coughlin and others 1999; Daly n.d.a; Dukes and Firehock 
2001; Justice and Jamieson 1999; Kaner and others 1996; Russo and Schoemaker 
1989; Schmoldt and others 2001; Sirmon and others 2002a, 2002b; Sithole 2002; 
University of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine  
Coastal Program of the Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; Voluntary Sector  
Initiative 2002a.

26
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
CONTEXT
Definition—
“Context” is used here to describe the circumstances, events, or environment of a 
participatory monitoring project. We discuss various aspects of the overall context 
and how these interact, including political, legal, policy, environmental, regula-
tory, procedural, organizational, community, land tenure, economic, and cultural 
aspects. The overall context of a monitoring project is invariably multifaceted and 
each aspect of the context affects the collaborative process and the design of a 
monitoring project. For example, monitoring of biodiversity on corporate timber 
plantations could entail political issues for environmental groups and economic 
or property rights issues for timber companies. Time spent building trust could be 
especially important in this context, and the monitoring project might work bet-
ter if explicit understandings were reached in advance. Mutual understanding of 
the motivations to collaborate could lead to win-win situations where species are 
conserved and timber companies avoid onerous regulation. 
Collaborative description of the context—
Stakeholders can be invaluable in helping to explicate the context of the monitor-
ing project, but not all participatory monitoring projects will merit the same levels 
of involvement from stakeholders. Time and budget permitting, however, the 
more opportunities that are created for participants to be involved in defining the 
relevant context, the greater will be their vested interest in success of the project. 
All stakeholders have different perspectives on what the important factors are, how 
important they are, and how they interact. By soliciting and weighing all these 
perspectives, a more accurate picture of the context of the project will emerge to 
inform subsequent decisionmaking.
Political context—
No natural resource management issues exist outside a political context. Relation-
ships between more powerful stakeholders (such as well-educated, higher income, 
English-speaking, or politically connected people) and less powerful stakeholders 
(such as people with less formal education, low income, or poor English-speaking 
skills) often influence the tactics that such parties employ to influence decisions. 
For instance, less powerful stakeholders sometimes feel they have few effective 
choices other than to be obstructive. Political considerations also influence the 
likelihood that various stakeholders would be inclined to join a participatory  
project. For instance, less powerful stakeholders might worry that the project lead-
ers will take advantage of them or that the process will work against their interests; 
thus, they could fear that by participating they might lose their right to protest 
decisions that end up being adverse to their interests. Or parties might anticipate 
regulatory reprisals from what they consider inappropriate interpretation and use  
of results. Addressing the political context often entails paying careful attention and 
Context: 
	
Evaluating the Context of a Participatory Monitoring Project
The more opportunities 
that are created for 
participants to be 
involved in defining 
the relevant context, 
the greater will be 
their vested interest in 
success of the project.

27
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
CONTEXT
dedicating sufficient time to building trust among participant stakeholders. Unless 
powerful stakeholders (for instance, government agencies) approach participa-
tory projects with integrity and long-term commitment of policy, personnel, and 
resources, other stakeholders can easily become disillusioned and mistrustful. Mak-
ing a series of consecutive short-term commitments that are periodically reviewed 
and renewed is one approach to avoiding broken promises in a changeable world.
Legal context—
Laws can constrain or expand the options of agency personnel. They also can affect 
the legal status of participants. They affect safety, liability, compensation, organi-
zation, access, real estate property rights, and intellectual property rights. Laws 
also can provide incentives to collaborate in order to avoid litigation or legislative 
mandates. For example, collaborative monitoring can be an excellent way to help 
meet NEPA requirements. Invariably laws are complex. Collaborators might wish 
to consult experts or lawyers to help them fully understand the legal context and 
ramifications of a participatory monitoring project.
Policy context—
Policies drive the relative allocation of resources within an organization to differ-
ent tasks. If an organization does not have an official policy of encouraging col-
laborative partnerships, employees might have little official incentive to risk such 
innovations. The official policy of many federal agencies and other organizations 
has shifted toward support for collaborative efforts during the last decade, but these 
policy directions have yet to filter down to managers in many cases. The process of 
implementing policy can be bureaucratically complex, involving changes in regula-
tions, procedures, forms, norms of behavior, and sometimes recalcitrant personnel. 
Nevertheless, there is a growing array of collaborative and participatory monitoring 
projects for air, water, fisheries, and forestry that demonstrate strategic benefits 
of participation. Policy accords to promote such projects also can be developed 
between organizations. Policy incentives for such endeavors are likely to continue 
increasing.
Regulatory context—
Regulations are the means by which organizations implement policy. Designing 
new regulations to supplant old ones takes time and teamwork, and if the results 
are not clearly communicated, employees can be confused about which regulations 
apply or are given the greatest emphasis. Regulations regarding use of volunteer 
labor or contracting authority to compensate participants are several examples. 
Training is often required for managers to become familiar with new regulations. 
However, once a system is set up for volunteers or others to work on monitoring 
activities, subsequent projects will be progressively easier to implement. Some 
agencies have developed guidelines for navigating regulations related to volunteer 
involvement, such as the USDA Forest Service’s Managing Volunteers and Partner-
ship Guide referenced below.

28
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
CONTEXT
Procedural context—
Regulations are executed with procedures and documentation forms. Such proce-
dures are often driven by accounting or liability considerations. Although follow-
ing such procedures can be very time consuming, they also prevent subsequent 
problems and serve to make agreements and arrangements explicit. All stakeholders 
should understand the procedural requirements of the participating organizations 
so they can comply as needed and appreciate the work that others need to perform. 
Although using the workbook portion of this handbook to document a participa-
tory monitoring project will add an additional layer of paperwork, much of the 
documentation might already be required by an organization and can simply be 
incorporated as part of the project plan.
Organizational culture context—
Organizational culture is too often one of the largest barriers to effective col-
laborations. Reasons differ but include lack of support for personnel who wish to 
experiment with collaboration or recalcitrant attitudes on the part of key personnel. 
Lack of support can take the form of not listing collaboration among job duties, 
performance evaluations that do not value such efforts, lack of training opportuni-
ties, and frequent personnel transfers. Negative attitudes toward collaboration on 
the part of managers might be the result of previous negative experiences; lack of 
training or experience with collaborative processes; fear of the process owing to 
perceived lack of control over the situation; lack of appreciation for the opinions, 
needs, and abilities of others; avoidance of controversy or additional work; and 
inherent complacency. 
Environmental context—
Every project has an environmental context that consists of temporal and spatial 
components as well as the structure, function, and process of the ecosystem. 
Temporally, relevant questions might include: At what stage of succession, decline, 
improvement, trend, or risk are the environmental conditions? Is the goal of the 
project to detect early warnings of change, or to determine trends in improvement 
or decline? Spatially, possible questions include: Where in the landscape will this 
project occur? What is the relationship of the project site to surrounding properties? 
To help define how a monitoring project relates to issues of ecosystem components, 
functions, or processes, participants might help create a conceptual map or model 
of critical species, benefits derived from the local forest, and how forest conditions 
respond to human activities.
Community context—
Many successful collaborative projects in recent years have been community 
sponsored. Such efforts typically arise from the lack of local resource-related jobs 
or land use controversies. Some collaborative efforts arise in response to resource 
threats (such as the spread of invasive species or development of forest stands 
susceptible to catastrophic fire), and community groups join managers to address 

29
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
CONTEXT
the problem. To the extent that such endeavors offer forest managers unique oppor-
tunities to accomplish their monitoring goals in a context of declining budgets, such 
individuals are becoming increasingly willing to work with community groups. 
Many successful collaborative monitoring projects have resulted from managers 
remaining open to community-based leadership and initiative.
Land tenure context—
Land ownership is a human concept. Organisms will occupy available forested 
habitat regardless of whoever owns the land, so forest biodiversity issues cross all 
ownership boundaries. Land ownership, management goals, and forest practices do, 
however, have a great deal of impact on habitat availability and quality. Public lands 
typically have different management goals than tribal or private lands, resulting 
in varied forest management practices and concerns. For any given participatory 
monitoring project, land tenure will influence issues such as access rights, relative 
support for the project, allowable monitoring procedures, interactions with other 
land users, and publicity.
Economic context—
The economic context of collaboration can be exceedingly important to some stake-
holders and secondary to others, often depending on factors such as each partici- 
pant’s employment status. Recognizing and accommodating these differences is 
critical to a sense of fairness, full participation on the part of all stakeholders, and 
appropriate benefits accruing to each. Stakeholder groups might have economic 
interests, for instance in rural economic development through sustainable natural 
resource use. Some participants in a collaborative monitoring project might have a 
vested interest in the harvest of the particular natural resource that is being moni-
tored, such as a water resource or a nontimber forest product like wild mushrooms. 
Whenever participants that favor a particular outcome are involved in a collabora-
tive project, safeguards to ensure accurate data and nonbiased interpretation (such 
as thorough training or third-party auditing) become more important for producing 
results that all parties accept as credible. 
Cultural context—
The cultural context involves the norms of the participants, stakeholder groups, and 
the local communities. Such norms can be as simple as when people like to start 
work or where they are comfortable meeting. People often use different modes of 
expression or entirely different languages. Planning with these factors in mind will 
greatly improve the experience and efficiency of a participatory project. Organiza-
tions in turn, whether public or private, have their own “culture” that might be very 
foreign to participants from outside the organization. Often individuals from differ-
ent cultural backgrounds can have fundamentally divergent epistemologies (ways 
of understanding and viewing the natural world). Such differences often result in 
divergent opinions about, and conventions regarding, the rights and responsibilities 

30
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
CONTEXT
of humans as they interact with nature. For instance, local ecological knowledge 
or traditional ecological knowledge are terms currently being used to describe the 
ways that local cultures come to understand their world through long experience 
interacting with nature in a specific place. The knowledge and experience that  
local people contribute can be a valuable asset to the design and implementation  
of a monitoring project. Meshing these ways of understanding the natural world  
and our place in it with scientific perspectives can be challenging and involves 
mutual understanding, respect, and open minds. Clear communication is essential 
to bridging cultural divides.
Checklist—
	 What are the important aspects of the project’s context, political, legal, policy, 
environmental, regulatory, procedural, organizational culture,  
community, land tenure, economic, cultural, or others?
	 What are the issues and considerations for each aspect of the project’s context?
	 How do these contextual issues interact in ways that might affect the project?
	 What are the supportive aspects of each aspect of context, and how can they  
be used to optimal advantage?
	 What contextual aspects might be barriers to collaboration, and how can  
participants plan to address these issues?
Sources—
ACCSP 2002; Ballard 2004; Coughlin and others 1999; Ecological Monitoring 
and Assessment Network Coordinating Office and the Canadian Nature Federa-
tion 2003; Godfrey 1994; Krishnaswamy 2004; Kusel and others 2000; Liegel and 
others 1998; Lynch and others 2004; Moote and Becker 2003; Moote and Loucks 
2003; Moseley and Wilson 2002; National Forest Foundation; U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Partnership Office 2005; North-South 
Environmental, Inc. 2004; National Resources Conservation Service [NRCS], n.d.; 
Resolve, n.d.; Sirmon and others 2002a, 2002b; Sithole 2002; Stockdale and Corbet 
1999; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 2004; Voluntary Sector 
Initiative 2001, 2002a; Wong and others 2002.

31
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
ORGANIZATION
Organizational structure—
Other than small or simple participatory monitoring projects, most will benefit from 
an explicit organizational structure. Such a structure could entail modification of 
an existing project (in an established organization) to be more participatory, or it 
might involve the creation of an entirely new organizational structure or program. 
The complexity of such an organization depends on factors such as who initiates 
the project, the number of stakeholders, the context, anticipated duration, degree 
of needed coordination, or the complexity of arrangements. In some instances, one 
organization sponsors the project and collaborates with participating individuals. 
In other cases, multiple organizations collaborate to address common goals. Orga-
nization can be hierarchical or decentralized, and in either case it can be multi-
layered such as numerous projects collaborating to form a monitoring program. 
For instance, NatureMapping in Canada is a decentralized program of voluntary 
monitoring projects, whereas the Atlantic Coastal Cooperative Statistics Program is 
a highly organized and hierarchically structured collaboration of multiple political 
jurisdictions, agencies, organizations, companies, and individuals. Organizational 
structure can take the form of abstract policy accords or specific contractual agree-
ments. In all cases, the organization stems from the recognition that coordination is 
useful and that having an common governing body, that represents all collaborators, 
is often the most efficient way to conduct business.
Forming organizations (such as advisory groups or task forces) is usually more 
efficient than communicating with all the members in each stakeholder group. 
Improving communication and building trust takes time, so collaborators often  
benefit from starting with small, noncontroversial projects such as joint fact-finding 
or field trips. As participants become more comfortable with each other, incremen-
tal steps can lead to organizing more elaborate projects or means of interacting.
Sponsorship organizations—
“Sponsors” are any organization or group providing official long-term financial or 
in-kind support of a project, regardless of active participation. Sometimes spon-
sors initiate the projects, and other times they are approached for assistance after 
a project is underway or organizers are seeking funding to maintain a program. 
Public land management agencies can provide long-term institutional support for a 
project, but sometimes are perceived as biased or subject to the whims of politics. 
Universities are good long-term sponsors because they typically have fewer vested 
interests in resource management decisions, are perceived as more objective, and 
are deemed less susceptible to political influence. They also have the capability to 
provide project coordination, logistical support, data archiving, statistical analysis, 
and peer-reviewed reporting. For example, undergraduate and graduate research 
projects, under the supervision of a professor, can provide a respected link between 
Organization: 
	
Organizing the Structure of a Participatory Monitoring Project
Other than small or 
simple participatory 
monitoring projects, 
most will benefit 
from an explicit 
organizational 
structure.

32
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
ORGANIZATION
agencies and community groups while also fulfilling educational goals. Indepen-
dent nongovernmental organizations are also good sources of project coordination 
and logistical support. Depending on their mission, they also can act as interme-
diaries between stakeholder groups and land managers. For instance, when the 
collaborative context involves controversy, neutral facilitative organizations can 
provide safe common ground.
Roles and responsibilities—
Whatever organizational structure is chosen by the collaborators, roles and 
responsibilities must be clearly delineated if the effort is to function smoothly. 
For instance, if an organizational structure is multilayered, explicit understanding 
concerning the roles and responsibility of each layer of the organization will  
reduce the risk of working at cross-purposes and thus improve coordination. As 
another example, the role that each participant plays in representing other stake-
holders or collaborating organizations should also be explicit if the individual is to 
be accountable to both the participatory project and to the group or organization 
they represent.
Designating a selected individual responsible for project oversight can foster 
project stability. The success of partnerships can revolve around capable, commit-
ted leaders who champion the project (see “Participants”). Assistants to project 
leaders, who become equally familiar with the details of a project, provide backup 
for project continuity if a leader resigns or is unable to continue with their duties. 
Leaders are not necessarily the decisionmakers of a project. Who is authorized and 
expected to make various decisions should be clearly defined to avoid overlooking 
issues or generating disputes (see “Decisions”). For instance, most organizations 
have treasurers or financial assistants responsible for tracking the use of funds. A 
volunteer coordinator might be responsible for arranging field activities. Leadership 
roles and organizational structure also have legal ramifications such as liability for 
personal injury, property damages, or misuse of data. Whatever the role, determin-
ing clear responsibilities and authority can facilitate leadership and coordination.
Contracts and formal agreements—
All participants, collaborators, and sponsors on a project can benefit from formal-
izing their roles and responsibilities in written agreements. For a short-term volun-
teer, the contract might be a simple release form (see app. 3 for more information). 
For longer term commitments or roles with greater responsibility, participants 
might wish to negotiate the terms of their involvement. The more detailed the writ-
ten agreements, the less margin for misunderstanding or disagreements, especially 
when organizational relationships become complex, issues are divisive, personnel 
come and go, or when legal ramifications or substantial funds are involved. Con-
tracts can include any necessary liability waivers that project manager desire or that 
might be required by insurance companies or other entities. Some financial spon-
sors, such as federal agencies, also might require paid participants to verify that 
they are citizens or have documentation allowing them to work in the country.

33
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
ORGANIZATION
In addition to contracts there are other types of formal agreement that can 
benefit a project. One such document is a memorandum of understanding. This 
is an especially common means of formalizing collaborative relationships among 
government agencies, or among different hierarchical layers within an agency. 
Another such approach is the formation of a new organization such as a nonprofit 
corporation. Creating a new organization also can be a method to raise funds for  
the project, manage the money, and create a lasting institutional structure. What-
ever the mechanism for formal agreements, the intent is to provide clarity and 
mutual understanding, thus avoiding conflicts, disagreements, or overlooked issues. 
Checklist—
	 Is there an organization that is willing to collaborate as a sponsor of the 
participatory monitoring project, and do all the potential collaborators  
endorse this idea?
	 Should the participatory monitoring project have an independent organizational 
structure, and why?
	 What type of organizational structure is best suited to the project, considering:
	
•	
Hierarchical or decentralized structure.
	
•	
If it is an independent project or part of a larger program.
	
•	
Degree of complexity.
	
•	
Anticipated duration.
	
•	
The number and kind of stakeholders, participants, or collaborators.
	
•	
Potential for controversy.
	
•	
Funding considerations.
	
•	
Liability considerations.
	 What roles and responsibilities will each participating group or organization 
assume?
	 Who will be the representatives from each stakeholder group or organization, 
and how will they be accountable to both the collaborative effort and the 
interests they represent?
	 Within the organization that is coordinating the participatory project, who  
will be the leader and what will be their role and responsibilities?
	 How can the leader be contacted and who can act as a backup person?
	 What are the other critical functions in the organization, who will be the 
responsible individual for each, how can this person be contacted, and who  
will offer backup help when needed?
	 What formal arrangements are most appropriate for making agreements  
among organizations or levels within organizations?
	 What are all the elements such agreements should contain?
	 How can such formal arrangements be renegotiated or changed?
	 How will the agreements be implemented and documented?

34
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
ORGANIZATION
Sources—
ACCSP 2002; Behar 1996; Christoffersen 2003; Collaborative Forest Restoration 
Program 2003; Coughlin and others 1999; Daly, n.d.a; Dukes and Firehock 2001; 
Dvornich and others 1995; Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network Coor-
dinating Office and the Canadian Nature Federation 2003; Everett 2001; Kusel and 
others 2000; Moote and Loucks 2003; National Forest Foundation; U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Partnership Office 2005; North-South 
Environmental, Inc. 2004; Resolve, n.d.; Savan and others 2003; Sirmon and others 
2002a, 2002b; Voluntary Sector Initiative 2001, 2002a; Wondolleck and Yaffee 
2000.

35
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
PARTICIPANTS
Participants—
Participants are any stakeholders actively involved in a project. Depending on 
the level of their involvement they might or might not have input into the project 
process but lack decisionmaking authority. Whoever the participants are, mutually 
beneficial outcomes are more probable if affected stakeholders are represented in 
a balanced and fair manner, and if they can all participate equitably regardless of 
their financial status, available resources, or social and political power. Understand-
ing each participant’s incentives early in the project’s development can help achieve 
these mutually beneficial outcomes (see “Incentives”). Similarly, honoring and 
rewarding participants for their work throughout the project can ensure that the 
project is enjoyable for all, as well as productive (see “Celebrations”).
Stakeholder groups—
“Stakeholders” are all individuals and organizations that have an interest in the 
project, its outcome, and its products, regardless of whether they become directly 
involved in the actual monitoring process or not. There are numerous types of 
individuals, groups, or organizations that might be interested in joining a  
participatory monitoring project. Examples include:
•	
Nonaffiliated volunteers
•	
Land managers
•	
Forest workers
•	
Landowners
•	
City, county, state, and federal government agencies
•	
Native American tribes
•	
Community groups
•	
Schools
•	
Educational organizations
•	
Rehabilitation organizations
•	
Religious groups
•	
Businesses
•	
Corporations
•	
Economic development organizations
•	
Trade associations
•	
Researchers
•	
Colleges and universities
•	
Clubs
•	
Recreational groups
•	
Hunting or sporting associations
•	
Park associations
Participants: 
	 Recruiting, Selecting, Authorizing, and Dismissing Participants

36
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
PARTICIPANTS
•	
Environmental or conservation organizations
•	
Habitat restoration groups
•	
Other nongovernment organizations or special interest groups
Representatives—
Individuals will often be selected, or select themselves, to represent a stakeholder 
group or organization in a participatory project. Several considerations apply to 
representatives. In collaborative processes, an individual might need to distinguish 
between representing themselves and others. For instance, a government agency 
representative might need to be very clear about when they are expressing personal 
opinions and when they speak for government policy. The same is true for repre-
sentatives of other groups. Conflicts and misunderstandings can also arise when 
collaborators assume that an individual’s opinion, word, or agreement represents 
the consensus of the stakeholder group they represent, when in actuality the group’s 
members are in disagreement or the representative does not have conferred author-
ity to speak for the group as a whole. In fact, some stakeholders might not even 
be aware that a particular individual is claiming to represent them, so it can be 
useful to check. Additionally, individual representatives come and go, such as when 
agency personnel are transferred, thus creating the need to form new relationships 
and renegotiate agreements. Clear understanding of how and to what extent an indi-
vidual represents others can prevent troublesome misunderstanding and disputes. 
When participants representing a group continually keep their members informed 
of the progress of the monitoring project, they enhance two-way communication 
and avert potential misunderstandings; for instance, by distributing notes from 
project meetings or making sure members have access to planning documents.  
The stakeholder group might refrain from complaining publicly about agency  
decisions and ask their representative to convey concerns.
Individuals—
Individuals can also participate on their own behalf. Volunteerism is a long and 
honored tradition in the United States. When individuals are participating on their 
own behalf rather than representing an organization, they are most like employees. 
For instance, managers who plan to work with volunteers often find such individu-
als appreciative of recognition in the form of position statements that detail job title, 
purpose, responsibilities, qualifications, timeframe, location of work, evaluation 
of work, benefits, and other factors. Individuals also have some motivations for 
participating that differ from those of representatives or stakeholder groups. These 
are discussed in “Incentives” module that follows.
Recruitment—
Although stakeholders often express their own interest in participatory projects, 
active recruitment is sometimes necessary to acquire enough help or ensure 
equitable representation. Sometimes an announcement in the newspaper, a brain-
storming session, or calls to selected organizations will meet the need. In other 
circumstances, formal scoping processes might be necessary to identify public 

37
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
PARTICIPANTS
concerns and willingness to participate. This process can include activities such as 
broadly advertising in appropriate media and venues, or hosting outreach activities 
for minorities or traditionally underrepresented groups. Some stakeholders might 
be harder to reach than others and are therefore often excluded from agency or 
community-based projects. Yet these people might have an interest in the goals of 
the monitoring project and extensive applicable knowledge. For example, organiza-
tions such as Wallowa Resources in rural eastern Oregon have made efforts to 
involve hard-to-reach people and skeptical citizens in local monitoring projects. 
They were rewarded with greater acceptance of the monitoring results and broader 
public education.
Selection—
Individuals can make or break a collaborative effort, hence thoughtful selection 
of participants is important. To avoid hard feelings and disagreements, however, 
the selection process should be carefully designed, objective, fair, transparent, 
and agreed-upon by all collaborating organizations. For instance, determining 
minimum skill requirements for particular duties or physical fitness standards 
for fieldwork can be appropriate criteria if they are not misused to discriminate. 
Usually the knowledge, skills, abilities, as well as the available time and motivation 
of each volunteer, can be matched to some important task. Willingness to help, or 
to make long-term commitments to a project, are important criteria regardless of 
personal qualifications or impediments. It thus behooves organizers to match skills 
with needed work in inventive ways, and provide training as needed. Some individ-
uals who could otherwise bring needed competencies to a collaborative effort might 
need support if they are to participate. Examples include financial help; transporta-
tion; care for children, pets, or other dependants; permission or leave from job 
supervisors; translation services; or accommodations for physical disabilities.
Roles, responsibilities, and authorization—
Participants can play a variety of roles in a project. In addition to the typical contri-
butions of data collection and fieldwork, their contributions can include voting on 
decisions made during the monitoring project, providing expertise, convening and 
leading meetings, facilitating processes or interactions, acting as an observer, or 
taking notes. Rotating roles and responsibilities is a good way of sharing perspec-
tives, broadening collective competencies, and providing for backup skills within 
the group. If individuals who are selected to represent the project, or who are 
assigned specific responsibilities, are conferred official authorization, certification, 
or credentials by the project, then they can verify such authority when questioned 
by individuals who are unfamiliar with the arrangement. For instance, if field 
personnel are confronted about their activities by landowners, leaseholders, or law 
enforcement officials, they should have documentation to show their authorization 
to be where they are and do what they are doing. Background checks and photo 
identification might be a good idea if participants will have access to sensitive 
properties or proprietary records, or will be working with minors. Certification or 
credentials can also confer a sense of self-worth and of being valued by the group.
Willingness to help, 
or to make long-term 
commitments to a 
project, are important 
criteria regardless of 
personal qualifications 
or impediments.

38
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
PARTICIPANTS
Leaders—
One of the most important roles that any participant can assume is that of a leader 
or champion for the project. Such an individual might be the hired president or 
chief executive officer of a nonprofit organization coordinating the participatory 
monitoring project, or it might be a manager with the vision to try new ideas. 
Whatever the case, such individuals will be more effective if they are capable, 
competent, well-rounded, responsible, respectful, tactful, active, and motivated. 
Certainly other descriptors are applicable, but a good leader can play a key role 
in the efficacy and success of a participatory project, so such individuals should 
be encouraged and supported. Project managers might wish to consider enticing 
participants to assume leadership roles by providing rewards such as compensation, 
letters of recommendation for work well done, school credit for students, access 
to resources for forest workers, or other benefits within their means. Empowering 
individuals to take on leadership should not result in disempowering other 
participants or making them feel less valued. Participants that recognize the 
opportunities of assuming a leadership role can feel empowered to undertake  
a variety of project tasks, such as:
•	
Recruiting, training, and mentoring new participants.
•	
Coordinating participant schedules or logistics such as travel to the  
field and lodging.
•	
Facilitating group discussions.
•	
Helping to assure quality control in data collection and management.
•	
Helping to maintain continuity in long-term projects.
•	
Documentation.
Disruptors—
Individuals with assertive personalities who habitually engage in disruptive, 
obstructive, distracting, self-aggrandizing, or disrespectful behavior can greatly 
hinder or doom a collaborative effort. On the other hand, such individuals can 
become useful participants in the collaborative process if there is adequate facilita-
tion, training in communications skills, agreement about appropriate norms of 
behavior, time to develop trust, and support from others. Fostering a supportive 
environment with open communication will likely take care of most disruptive 
behavior. In extreme cases, the group might need to dispassionately examine the 
tradeoffs between continuing to include such individuals and finding a means of 
dismissing or excluding them. Such actions can of course have negative unforeseen 
consequences, so groups might wish to develop guidelines for respectful behavior 
that each new participant must affirm before they join the project. With such clear 
frameworks for personal behavior and group norms, dismissing uncooperative par-
ticipants becomes less about personal likes or dislikes and more focused on making 
the group function effectively.

39
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
PARTICIPANTS
Checklist—
	 Which stakeholder groups will be involved in the project, how will this  
decision be made, and how will it be documented?
	 Will outside experts in the fields of facilitation, community organizing, or 
communication and outreach be sought to help the project? If so, which 
organizations or individuals are possible options?
	 What outreach or recruitment activities are needed to ensure equitable  
and balanced representation of all parties with an interest in the project?
	 What opportunities exist to involve other types of organizations in  
the project?
	 How will clear and explicit understanding about the role of individuals who 
represent other groups or organizations be documented, especially if they 
contribute both personally and as a representative?
	 How will representatives verify their authority to speak on behalf of those  
they represent?
	 How will agreements and understandings with organizations and their  
representatives be evaluated and revised in the event that new representatives 
replace departing ones?
	 If participants are individuals acting on their own behalf, what will be  
the mechanisms that ensure they are valued as a part of the participatory  
project or sponsoring organization?
	 If recruitment is necessary to ensure adequate help or balanced representation, 
what rationale and criteria will guide the selection process?
	 What support or incentives might be needed to involve reluctant or  
disenfranchised participants?
	 What criteria will be used for selecting participants? How will these  
be documented?
	 What knowledge, skills, or abilities does each participant possess that  
pertain to the project? 
	 How will individuals be matched to project tasks? 
	 How can roles and responsibilities be rotated or shared in order to  
spread competency and create backup skills?
	 How will natural leaders be supported and encouraged?
	 Do norms of personal behavior need to be developed in advance of  
selecting participants? If so, how and by whom will they be developed  
so that they are widely acceptable?

40
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
PARTICIPANTS
Sources—
Ballard 2004; Behar 1996; Bliss and others 2001; Bramson 1981; Brinkman 2002; 
Canadian Information System for the Environment 2001; Collaborative Forest 
Restoration Program 2003, 2004a; Coughlin and others 1999; Daly, n.d.a; Dukes 
and Firehock 2001; Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network Coordinating 
Office and the Canadian Nature Federation 2003; Everett 2001; Godfrey 1994; 
Kaner and others 1996; Krishnaswamy 2004; Kusel and others 2000; Lengeler, 
n.d.; Lynch and others 2004; McNamara, n.d.; Moote and Loucks 2003; Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, n.d.; North-South Environmental, Inc. 2004; 
Resolve, n.d.; Sirmon and others 2002b; Sithole 2002; Stockdale and Corbet 1999; 
University of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine Coastal 
Program of the Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service 2004; Voluntary Sector Initiative 2001; Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.

41
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
COMMUNICATION
Building trust—
To effectively collaborate, participants must trust one another. Building trust 
requires clear and nonthreatening communication, but engaging in clear commu-
nication with individuals who do not share our background can be very difficult. 
Developing trust takes time and shared experiences. The more different individuals 
are, and the greater their original distrust of each other, the longer mutual trust 
takes to develop. Communication is a process, however, and there are methods to 
improve its effectiveness. 
Means for improving the effectiveness of communication can involve appro-
priate styles of communication, focusing on each other’s perspectives and use of 
language, meeting and communicating in appropriate venues, and getting help 
or training in effective communication techniques. Inevitably, the process of 
building trust requires spending time together, getting to know each other, and 
reaching clear understanding and agreements. One of the best ways to do this is 
to participate in projects. For this reason, working with each other to address all 
the applicable considerations listed in the modules of this handbook is an excellent 
trust-building exercise in and of itself.
Communication styles—
People differ in the way they communicate. For instance, some individuals are 
action oriented and others focus on building relationships, some wait for others to 
finish their thoughts and others interrupt frequently in a fluid brainstorming style, 
some like to hear themselves talk and others concentrate on listening carefully. All 
are appropriate styles in some circumstances and not useful in others. Learning to 
understand and appreciate these various styles can prevent hard feelings or frustra-
tion. Regardless of style, communication is facilitated when it is respectful, civil, 
open-minded, inclusive of all viewpoints, thoughtful, frank, honest, nonaccusatory, 
noncoercive, unrushed, and safe. In situations where some individuals feel intimi-
dated by differences in power, education, language skills, or feared repercussions, 
providing the time and support for them to be heard and appreciated is especially 
important. The references listed below include a variety of helpful documents for 
addressing various communication styles.
Perspectives—
All humans perceive their world through the lens of their past experiences, and 
those experiences differ widely. Fundamental differences such as worldviews or 
paradigms consist of sets of assumptions about the way the world works, what 
humans are like, how we should behave, and what is important. These assump-
tions often lead to preconceived notions about what people in other cultures or 
socioeconomic groups are like. We also have preconceived notions about the best 
way to understand the world, be it science, tradition, religion, or direct personal 
Communication: 
	
Developing Good Understandings and Agreements
Building trust requires 
spending time together, 
getting to know each 
other, and reaching 
clear understanding 
and agreements.

42
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
COMMUNICATION
experience. When our worldviews, assumptions, perspectives, and preconceived 
notions differ significantly from those of other individuals with whom we are 
trying to collaborate, clear communication often requires additional effort. Build-
ing trust and providing a comfortable context to begin the process of appreciating 
each other’s viewpoints can be facilitated by activities such as visiting each other’s 
homes or places of work; taking field trips together; joint fact finding; undertaking 
small projects; or sharing informal meals, music, or recreational activities. Struc-
tured communication and learning exercises are other ways to explore alternative 
perspectives. Examples include:
•	
Framing issues.
•	
Creating vision statements.
•	
Hosting guest speakers.
•	
Sharing reading assignments or movies.
•	
Hosting training courses that compare the scientific method with  
traditional ecological knowledge. 
•	
Exploring each other’s expectations.
Language—
Because language is the medium through which we communicate our varied 
perspectives, our use of different words, phrases, acronyms, terminology, or native 
tongues is natural. A rancher is unlikely to describe a creek in the same man-
ner as a university researcher. A retired elementary school teacher is unlikely to 
understand the management acronyms of a Bureau of Land Management forester. 
A Hispanic migrant worker or Asian immigrant could have difficulty understand-
ing English. Outside facilitators or translators also can be helpful with our use of 
language. Nobody should feel embarrassed or hesitant to ask others for clarification 
or help with translation. Neither need we take our differences too seriously. To 
promote sensitivity with language differences, participants might consider tools 
such as humorous skits and role playing.
Meetings—
Getting things done in a group usually requires meetings, so meetings often are the 
context where communication difficulties become apparent. Meeting coordinators 
or project leaders might not be the best individuals to facilitate communication. 
Often professionals have more training and an objective perspective. Early deci-
sions about whether professional outside facilitation will be worthwhile can avert 
later difficulties. Some suggestions are discussed in the next section, “Getting 
help.” Meetings work better in venues where all the attendees feel comfortable 
sharing their opinions candidly, and where they are comfortable with the location, 
facilities, access, schedule, and activities. Elements as simple as chair and table 
arrangement can help or hinder open and balanced communication. Group size and 
the diversity of the participants are important determinants of social dynamics and 
personal interactions. Meetings usually result in more useful outcomes when they 
are focused by leaders, ground rules, agendas, note-takers, and shared minutes. 

43
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
COMMUNICATION
First meetings can be awkward if participants do not know each other. One way to 
engage everyone in such a meeting would be to ask each person to describe how 
he or she envisions a vista or landscape located in the area that will be monitored. 
Individuals will likely emphasize positive and negative attributes they recognize 
and can relate to in each other’s images.
Getting help—
Clear communication is such an important facet of modern society that human 
resources for assisting the process are abundant. One need only look as far as 
city or county courts to find local professionals who specialize in facilitation and 
mediation services. Library books and Web sites abound; some are listed in the 
“Annotated References.” Local community colleges or other schools likely teach 
courses on the topic. The group need not spend a lot of money on a consultant if 
selected members of the group receive training. Sometimes overcoming hurdles can 
be as simple as agreeing to group norms of behavior or taking time to let emotions 
cool. Or the entire group could take training in effective communication skills or 
decisionmaking processes. Ongoing evaluation, feedback, and reality checks can be 
useful techniques. The bottom line is that if clear communication or the conduct of 
meetings is a problem for the group, help is readily available.
Checklist—
	 What are the plans and methods for building mutual understanding and trust 
among participants?
	 How do communication styles differ among participants in the project?
	 How do perspectives differ among participants?
	 What differences exist among participants in their languages,  
terminology, or use of words?
	 How will different communication styles, perspectives, and  
languages among participants be addressed during meetings and  
other communications?
	 How will meetings be planned and conducted to facilitate or enhance  
clear communication?
Sources—
Adler and Birkhoff, n.d.; Ballard 2004; Behar 1996; Christoffersen 2003; Collab-
orative Forest Restoration Program 2003; Coughlin and others 1999; Daly, n.d.a; 
Dukes and Firehock 2001; Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network Coor-
dinating Office and the Canadian Nature Federation 2003; Everett 2001; Justice 
and Jamieson 1999; Kaner and others 1996; Krishnaswamy 2004; Lynch and others 
2004; Moote and Becker 2003; Sirmon and others 2002a, 2002b; Sithole 2002; 
Stockdale and Corbet 1999; University of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea 
Grant Program, Maine Coastal Program of the Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; 
Voluntary Sector Initiative 2001; Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.

44
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
INCENTIVES
Stakeholder motivations and concerns—
Stakeholders typically anticipate benefits and express concerns about participation, 
as do individuals. Although both stakeholder groups and individuals share some 
motivations, we discuss stakeholders and individuals separately because incen-
tives often differ too. The tabulation below lists the major goals and concerns that 
motivate stakeholder groups with respect to participating in monitoring projects.
Major goals of participation that 
motivate stakeholder groups
Major concerns with respect  
to participation on the part  
of stakeholder groups
• Stretching limited resources, sharing 
work, working more effectively.
• Reducing conflict and litigation.
• Influencing policy or management decisions.
• Improving land stewardship.
• Shared accountability and responsibility.
• Simultaneously meeting local and 
larger-scale needs for information.
• Ensuring access to a resource for 
economic or traditional use.
• Community development, capacity, 
building and employment opportunities.
• Market-based incentives.
• Public education.
• Ensuring social and economic justice.
• Improving community relations.
• Freedom to complain or  
object might be coopted by  
the collaborative process.
• Too expensive or time consuming.
• Risk of failure.
• Data might lead to unwelcome  
consequences.
• Data might not be trusted or used.
• Others might have unrealistic  
expectations or lack willingness  
to commit to common action.
• Fear that others might sabotage or 
misuse the process. 
• Collaborative decisions might 
counter vested interests.
Personal incentives and concerns—
Individuals can share the same motivations and concerns as stakeholder groups  
and still have their own set of incentives or concerns about being involved in a 
participatory project (see the following tabulation).
Incentives: 
	 Understanding Motivations, Concerns, and Anticipated Benefits

45
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
INCENTIVES
Examples of personal incentives
Examples of personal concerns
• Increased ability to influence others or policy.
• Ensuring access to a commercial resource.
• Contributing to a valuable cause.
• Improving one’s resume.
• As an extension of one’s job.
• Contrast to paid work.
• Testing leadership skills.
• Learning, gaining experience, and acquiring  
self-confidence.
• Using knowledge, skills, or abilities.
• A sense of power, success, and personal  
achievement.
• Gaining recognition or impressing others.
• Affiliation with a project or feeling a part  
of a team.
• Expressing concerns or ideas.
• Exploring job opportunities or testing a  
career change.
• Keeping track of what is happening “on  
the land.”
• Maintaining family or cultural traditions.
• Enhancing one’s quality of life.
• Meeting new people.
• Setting an example for children.
• Mutual involvement with family or friends.
• Getting compensated to visit nice places.
• Keeping physically active by getting  
outdoors or enjoying nature.
• Fear of change.
• Shyness or lack of  
self-confidence.
• Lack of time.
• Being exploited.
• Lack of training.
• Exposing one’s ignorance.
• Embarrassment, appearing 
foolish, or ridicule.
• Insufficient support from  
family, friends, community,  
or employer.
• Lack of trust in others.
• Working hard on a project only 
to see it fail or be ignored.
Finding common ground—
Because participants bring such diverse incentives and concerns to the collaborative 
process, it behooves all involved to understand what is motivating the other partici-
pants. In many cases, incentives overlap or at least are complementary. Motivations 
also can diverge or conflict. For instance, an individual who is motivated by a 
strong sense of self-importance and a need to demonstrate their worth can intimi-
date other participants who are shy or hesitant to become involved. Or, for example, 
a person who is motivated predominantly by the need to find new employment 
might not be willing to make a long-term commitment to the group. Stakeholders 
interested in a particular outcome might not be willing to fully participate in an 
objective group process if they suspect it could result in decisions they consider 
onerous. Because motivations are so varied, and because they often change, clear 
understanding of each other’s motivations improves communication and allows 
collaborators to craft inventive ways to ensure all participants find the project 
rewarding. 

46
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
INCENTIVES
Ensuring all benefit—
“Win-win” or mutually beneficial outcomes can occur fortuitously, but often 
require intention and focused effort. The simple process of listing each participant’s 
incentives, hopes, visions, and concerns, then sharing and discussing them, can go 
a long way toward building mutual appreciation, rapport, and understanding. Of 
course, honesty aids the process. Where incentives are divergent or potentially in 
conflict, or where serious concerns are expressed, participants might wish to follow 
a more formal process of reconciliation or remedies. If participants have conflicting 
motivations and feel disparity in their ability to influence outcomes, the less power-
ful among the group might need more support or attention to ensure an equitable 
collaborative process. If the group considers the exercise useful, participants might 
document explicit understandings of each other’s needs and expected benefits or 
outcomes. Periodic review of how well expectations are being fulfilled can forestall 
conflicts or disappointment.
Checklist—
	 What are the motivations (incentives and concerns) of each  
stakeholder group?
	 What process will be used to identify and share these motivations?
	 What are each individual’s motivations for participating (or not) in  
the project?
	 How will personal motivations be identified and shared?
	 To what extent do different stakeholder group’s incentives and  
concerns overlap, diverge, or conflict?
	 To what extent do different participant incentives and concerns  
overlap, diverge, or conflict?
	 How best can the expectations and incentives of stakeholder groups  
be fulfilled or rewarded?
	 How best can the expectations and incentives of participants be  
fulfilled or rewarded?
	 How will each group’s concerns be addressed?
	 How will participants’ concerns be addressed?
	 How will conflicting motivations be kept to a minimum or resolved?
	 How will participant motivation and enthusiasm be sustained over time?
	 How will any explicit understandings or agreements be documented?  
How often will they be reevaluated?
Periodic review of 
how well expectations 
are being fulfilled can 
forestall conflicts or 
disappointment.

47
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
INCENTIVES
Sources—
Christoffersen 2003; Collaborative Stewardship Team 2000; Daly, n.d.a; Ecologi-
cal Monitoring and Assessment Network Coordinating Office and the Canadian 
Nature Federation 2003; Everett 2001; Guijt and others 1998; Kusel and others 
2000; Lawrence and Ambrose-Oji 2001; Lynch and others 2004; Moote and Becker 
2003; Moote and Loucks 2003; Sirmon and others 2002b; Sithole 2002; University 
of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine Coastal Program 
of the Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service 2004; Voluntary Sector Initiative 2002a; Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.

48
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
DESIGN
Matching roles to expertise—
Participants can be usefully involved in any phase of designing a participatory 
monitoring project as long as their level of knowledge and expertise is matched to 
the role they will play. An important consideration is the concern that resultant data 
be viewed as credible by the users of the information. If monitoring data are not 
trusted, then the collaborative effort has been wasted and all parties involved in, or 
familiar with, the project will be discouraged. Discussing, during the design phase, 
how data will be analyzed and how results will be distributed can help ensure the 
information is both credible and useful to all. Details are discussed in the “Quality,” 
“Analysis,” and “Reporting” modules.
That said, even individuals without formal education in a topic can contribute 
to the most complex project design if they have unique knowledge, information, 
or perspectives that might otherwise not have been considered. For instance, local 
participants often have a familiarity with locations, local habitat, forest conditions, 
specific organisms, or practical considerations that managers, specialists, or scien-
tists do not. All of these types of information can be exceedingly useful in develop-
ing efficient sampling designs, avoiding mistakes, planning logistics, efficiently 
using time and resources, and maintaining safe work conditions. 
Determining appropriate roles for participants in planning sampling protocols, 
fieldwork procedures, data analysis and management, record keeping, equipment 
care, and other aspects of the project design and management depends not only 
on factors such as project complexity, sophistication, need for long-term support, 
but also on the qualifications of the individuals involved. For instance, perhaps 
a retired statistician or taxonomic specialist volunteers to assist the project, thus 
obviating the need for outside technical expertise on that topic. Such experts can, 
however, threaten the job security of hired staff (if they are not already too busy), 
so sensitivity to this possibility can prevent problems. Other participants might 
come to projects with previous leadership experience or show aptitude or interest in 
leadership during the course of a project. The greater the number of participants in 
a project, the more likely there will be a need for some participants to assume extra 
responsibilities as leaders. Ways to promote leadership are discussed in the “Partici-
pants” module. Matching participants to the roles they play in project design is best 
done on a case-by-case basis. Issues of efficient sampling designs and statistical 
validity will be discussed further in the modules on “Sampling” and “Quality.”
Design: 
	
Involving Participants in Project Design
Individuals without 
formal education in a 
topic can contribute 
to the most complex 
project design.

49
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
DESIGN
Matching indicators and measures to goals—
As discussed more thoroughly in the “Indicators” module, most participants can 
certainly participate in determining what indicators will best serve to meet project 
monitoring goals, and often they can help identify and select the particular mea-
sures that would best reflect trends in the indicators. Sometimes such indicators are 
not biological, but rather geophysical, social, economic, cultural, or other. 
Feasibility, practicality, affordability, and continuity—
The practical experience of local participants can also serve as a reality check on 
the enthusiasm of specialists or novices who have less experience with the logistical 
implications or expense of planned activities. Individuals or stakeholder groups 
that are familiar with local resources and conditions often make more accurate 
estimates of the time, effort, resources, and labor needed to attain a particular goal. 
This practical knowledge qualifies them to better match available resources to long-
term plans, and thus help the project avoid overcommitment or participant fatigue. 
Involving participants in appropriate aspects of project design improves the likeli-
hood that expended time, resources, and labor will be efficiently used to achieve 
project goals. Maintaining long-term commitment to a project can be challenging, 
so engaging participants in planning or designing incremental results and rewards, 
while striving for long-term goals, will help sustain project continuity.
One way to involve participants in project design is to evaluate the utility, 
propriety, suitability, efficacy, and feasibility of the proposed project. Evaluating the 
utility of the project might include questions such as: “How widely will the results 
of this project be used? Is it only applicable to the monitored area or can the results 
be extrapolated over a broader region? Could project activities help managers meet 
information and participation requirements associated with the National Environ-
mental Policy Act? Propriety issues could include: Is the proposed project legal 
and ethical? Is it consistent with other formal agreements and compliant with the 
Federal Advisory Committee Act? To evaluate suitability, questions might include: 
Will it benefit stewardship objectives? Are the selected indicators appropriate for 
answering questions posed by project goals? Regarding efficacy: Is the project 
designed to be scientifically defensible? Will the collected data provide reliable 
information about the actual state of the indicator or detect meaningful change? Is 
the project cost-effective? Does project design take advantage of opportunities for 
partnerships with other organizations or agencies? To evaluate feasibility: Are the 
project activities and objectives realistic, prudent, and frugal? Can goals be accom-
plished in the allotted time and within the proposed budget? Involving participants 
in this preproject evaluation process can increase the likelihood of success as well 
as contribute to trust between monitoring coordinators and participants.

50
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
DESIGN
Checklist—
	 If appropriate, how will a collaborative design process be conducted?
	 Who will participate in designing each aspect of the monitoring project and 
why?
	 What skills or qualifications can each participant apply to project design? How 
will such contributions be documented?
	 Which aspects of the project design would benefit from the advice or skills of 
experts or specialists that are not represented among the participants?
	 Who will participate in selecting indicators and measures? Why?
	 How will traditional or local ecological knowledge be incorporated into the 
design process?
	 How will practical considerations be incorporated into the design process?
	 How can the project be designed to enhance continuity?
	 How will the project be evaluated for feasibility?
Sources—
Bliss and others 2001; Herman and others 1997; Daly, n.d.a; Dukes and Firehock 
2001; Everett 2001; Godfrey 1994; Herron and others 2004b; Krishnaswamy 2004; 
Lengeler, n.d.; Ottke and others 2000; Stockdale and Corbet 1999; Whitman and 
Hagan 2004; Wong and others 2002; Wright, n.d.

51
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
RESOURCES
Budgeting—
Available resources (such as money, equipment, facilities, services, supplies, and 
labor) are among the most important constraints on what a participatory monitoring 
project can accomplish. Obtaining sufficient quantities to meet project goals, 
using the resources wisely, and keeping track of progress also are important tasks 
collaborators will undertake.
An especially salient issue is the relative allocation of resources among partici-
pants, especially if some are struggling financially or are donating their time while 
others have dedicated budgets or are getting paid for their work. If participants start 
keeping track of the time they contribute to a project from the very beginning (see 
the “In-kind support” section in this module’s discussion), this information could 
prove useful in subsequent discussions of fair compensation.
Budgeting must begin with an analysis of what is needed to achieve project 
goals. To do so, participants must start with a relatively clear picture of the entire 
project and the process of meeting goals. This can be difficult with participatory 
projects because the group often does not know how much time and effort will be 
required in advance to build trust, develop clear communication, develop succinct 
goals, and figure out methods for achieving those goals. A conservative assumption 
is that it will likely take more time and effort than anticipated. 
Once the participants have a clear idea of project goals and how they want to 
achieve those goals, then careful consideration must be paid to matching available 
resources to every phase of the project (including the “Evaluation” and “Celebra-
tions” modules) if satisfactory results are to be achieved, resources wisely spent, 
and participants rewarded for their efforts. Frequently overlooked steps (that are 
particularly crucial if participants are involved) are data analysis, and the reporting 
and disseminating of the results. Planning these steps in advance and discussing 
their place in the budget can help to solidify long-term commitment to the project 
and avoid misunderstandings later. Details are discussed in the “Analysis” and 
“Reporting” modules. Matching resources to goals usually entails setting priorities 
and attempting to acquire additional resources. Addressing the considerations that 
are listed in many of the modules in this handbook will help provide a comprehen-
sive picture of needed resources, but wise planners also allow some allocation for 
miscellaneous needs, unforeseen expenditures, and emergencies.
Fundraising—
Because collaborative projects are becoming more popular, the spectrum of poten-
tial funding sources is surprisingly broad. That is not to say that acquiring funds  
is necessarily easy or quick, simply that a range of opportunities exist. Federal  
land management agencies have a variety of funding mechanisms including  
challenge grants and stewardship contracting, as well as budgets for existing moni-
toring programs that could be modified to include participatory ventures.  
Resources: 
	
Obtaining and Allocating Funds, Resources, and Support

52
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
RESOURCES
Various government agencies provide grants for innovative and collaborative 
resource management enterprises. Private foundations are especially keen to sup-
port multistakeholder participatory projects in order to improve the probability that 
their money will be well spent. Nongovernmental organizations can be particularly 
well-positioned to raise project funds that agencies cannot access. Mentioning the 
use of participatory guides such as this one might increase the chances of obtaining 
funds from both private and public sources. Two strategies for enhancing fund-
raising achievements are diversity of effort and leveraging success. This entails 
approaching a variety of potential funding sources and emphasizing how further 
contributions will supplement an already productive enterprise. Individual and 
corporate giving are additional possibilities. Whoever is approached for funding, 
well-documented project plans improve the likelihood of success because they dem-
onstrate to grantors that project supporters are serious and the project is carefully 
conceived. Lastly, funding organizations typically focus their giving on discrete, 
short-term projects that can demonstrate quick results, but participatory monitor-
ing projects are often long-term in nature. This discrepancy can be addressed by 
designing participatory projects that have interim goals and accomplishments, and 
by educating funding organizations about the need for long-term support. Endow-
ments are particularly appropriate for long-term projects.
Accounting—
Keeping track of resource expenditures is important in any enterprise, but assumes 
heightened significance when participants are still developing mutual trust. For 
this reason, accounting for funds and other resource use in a multistakeholder, 
collaborative project should be especially accurate, understandable, transparent, 
widely shared, frequently updated, carefully reviewed, and independently verified. 
Selecting individuals who are widely trusted and competent contributes greatly to 
building trust that resources will be expended sensibly and ethically.
In-kind support—
Participatory projects, by their very nature, entail a great deal of individual time 
and effort that is not commonly tracked by measures such as work hours or wages. 
Other participants can easily overlook these contributions if they are not explicitly 
documented. Such oversights can lead to misunderstanding and disputes about fair-
ness or commitment. Avoiding these troubles is a good reason to have all partici-
pants document their time commitments to the project. Doing so also demonstrates 
to outside contributors the level of commitment on the part of participants. 
Other types of in-kind support also should be assigned monetary value and 
explicitly included in budgets. Examples include donations of office space, equip-
ment, vehicles, supplies, meals, lodging, or transportation. Where project sponsors 
require matching contributions, in-kind contributions are often considered accept-
able. Thus, for individuals or community groups with few financial resources, 
documentation and acknowledgment of in-kind contributions can be an effective 
strategy for securing their participation and funding a project.

53
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
RESOURCES
Community support—
Some forms of support for a project are difficult to appraise monetarily. Nonethe-
less, they can be critical to a project’s chances of success. Community support is 
valuable because awareness of, and appreciation for, collaborative efforts in a com-
munity can lead to other more quantifiable resource contributions. For this reason, 
it often behooves participants to engage in outreach activities that acquaint the local 
community with the goals, methods, and resource needs of the project. Outreach 
can consist of activities like presentations to community or interest groups, booths 
at fairs or festivals, nature walks, field trips, invited speakers, slide shows, photo 
opportunities, newspaper articles, radio or television programs, seminars, special 
classes, retreats, conferences, pamphlets, Web sites, or other methods only limited 
by the imagination of project participants or community supporters. Public award 
ceremonies and celebrations of work accomplished by the participants can also 
generate community support, as well as help participants feel good about their work 
on the project (see “Celebrations” module). Engaged volunteers or participants also 
can benefit communities by partaking in other community development activities. 
Examples include planting trees or beautification projects.
Checklist—
	 What process will be used to create a budget that addresses all pertinent  
aspects of a monitoring project? Who will do it?
	 With whom will the budget be shared?
	 How will it be documented, updated, and shared? 
	 What financial resources or other assets already exist?
	 How will additional funds, resources, or in-kind support be acquired?
	 How will the contributions of all participants be evaluated and documented, 
especially time and other in-kind support.
	 If appropriate, how will financial compensation for participants be arranged?
	 How will decisions about changes in resource allocations be documented?
	 Who will be the responsible individual for the project budget?
Sources—
Behar 1996; Christoffersen 2003; Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003, 
2004c; Daly, n.d.a; Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network Coordinating 
Office and the Canadian Nature Federation 2003; Everett 2001; Godfrey 1994; 
Lindenmayer 1999; Moote and Becker 2003; National Forest Foundation; U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Partnership Office 2005; 
North-South Environmental, Inc. 2004; Resolve, n.d.; The Volunteer Monitor,  
n.d.; University of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine 
Coastal Program of the Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; Voluntary Sector 
Initiative 2002a; Wright, n.d.
Community support 
can be gained by 
involving participants 
to engage in outreach 
activities that acquaint 
the local community 
with the goals, 
methods, and resource 
needs of the project.

54
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
TRAINING
Training topics—
Some monitoring project coordinators might find it most manageable to start with 
a small project that capitalizes on skills participants already have. In other cases, 
official training is an effective means of quickly providing or enhancing needed 
skills. Not only do participants find such learning to be a rewarding experience, but 
training enables them to plan and implement the project more effectively and safely. 
High-priority training topics include:
•	
Safety and emergency plans and procedures.
•	
First aid and CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation techniques).
•	
Sampling protocols.
•	
Quality-control protocols for data.
As needed, collaborators might wish to consider formal training in the  
following topics:
•	
Effective communication skills.
•	
Systematic and collaborative decisionmaking processes.
•	
Conducting meetings effectively.
•	
Facilitation, negotiation, mediation, and dispute resolution.
•	
Leadership skills.
•	
Dealing with difficult individuals.
•	
Budgeting and accounting.
•	
Use of computers or computer programs.
•	
Benefits and limitations of the scientific method or traditional and  
local ecological knowledge.
•	
Species identification.
•	
Field equipment use.
•	
Scientific, inventory, or monitoring methods.
Tailoring training to needs, opportunities, and resources—
The expense and time needed for training will depend on the goals and objectives 
of the project in relation to the existing skills and knowledge of the participants. 
Careful assessments of needed training helps project planners allocate limited 
resources where they will produce the greatest benefit. Innovative approaches to 
training can also save time and money. For instance, certain participants might 
already have the skills to train others on particular topics. Outside experts might 
be convinced to volunteer their time. Training resources could be freely available 
in books or on Web sites, and by using these materials the participants could train 
themselves as a group process. Larger participating organizations might already 
have such training experts on their staff. Many companies and nonprofit organiza-
tions offer various training programs, often for a fee.
Implementation Stage
Training: 
	
Providing Participants With Requisite Training

55
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
TRAINING
Developing a training program—
Developing, documenting, and implementing an official training program is a good 
way to convince outside reviewers that the project is being taken seriously by the 
participants. Benefits include enhancing enthusiasm for the project, increasing 
financial support, avoiding liabilities, and improving the credibility of the data 
and results. The training needs of volunteers and participants might be somewhat 
greater than that of employees, because participants are often selected on the basis 
of their willingness to help rather than on their knowledge, skills, and abilities.
Learning works best when the subject matter of a training program is clearly 
organized and the information is either frequently used, or the training is peri-
odically repeated. When skills learned in training programs are first applied, 
immediate feedback is very useful for reinforcing correctly learned behavior and 
for catching errors before they become habits. Hence, training programs are bet-
ter viewed as ongoing processes rather than discrete events. Part of this process is 
evaluating the efficacy of the training and incorporating needed revisions. Often 
training occurs in groups, but when a new individual joins the project, repeating 
the training for the entire group might not be feasible or cost-effective. Orientation 
programs or mentors can help new participants more quickly become familiar with 
the project and needed skills. Because training takes time and can soon be forgot-
ten, it is best scheduled when participants are not busy with other tasks and shortly 
before the learned skills will be put to use. Lastly, formal recognition, documenta-
tion, or certification of training accomplishments or acquired skills is rewarding to 
the participants and useful for demonstrating their new competencies to others. For 
instance, requiring first aid certification can be important for mitigating liability 
for accidents, and formal testing and documentation of sampling or quality control 
skills can enhance the credibility of collected data. Certifying progressive levels 
of skills can reward participants incrementally as they continue to train, and such 
documentation provides a logical means for matching individuals with increasingly 
difficult tasks.

56
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
TRAINING
Checklist—
	 How will the knowledge and skills that participants bring to the project  
be evaluated and documented?
	 What training should be provided to all participants?
	 How will individual training needs be determined?
	 What training resources are available? 
	 What innovative means exist to meet expensive training needs?
	 How will the importance, urgency, and resources available for each  
training topic be weighed to prioritize training?
	 Who will be responsible for each topic of training?
	 How and when will training be reiterated, evaluated, and revised?
	 Under what circumstances would orientation programs and mentors be  
useful for bringing new participants up to speed with needed skills?
	 What are the ways to test, document, and certify training accomplishments?
	 How will all training programs be documented?
Sources—
Coughlin and others 1999; Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network 
Coordinating Office and the Canadian Nature Federation 2003; Herron and others 
2004a, 2004b; Hunt and others 1996; Lengeler, n.d.; McNamara, n.d.; North-South 
Environmental, Inc. 2004; Sirmon and others 2002a, 2002b.

57
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
SAFETY
Safety plan—
A safety plan is designed to prevent harm, injury, or death to individuals partici-
pating in the monitoring project. In almost all respects, such a plan for volunteers 
would differ little from a plan for employees. Safety cannot be overemphasized. 
An equivalent commitment of resources, training, planning, and assumption of 
liability should be implicit if all participants are to be equally valued. Safety plans 
should include a job hazard analysis, including steps to mitigate risks. For field 
personnel, the job hazard analysis should include use of unfamiliar vehicles, driving 
on secondary roads, negotiating difficult terrain, dealing with extreme weather, 
avoiding harm from dangerous plants and wildlife, protecting care providers from 
bloodborne diseases, and treating allergies. Safety plans should also cover needed 
safety equipment and use; appropriate clothing; personal medical conditions 
pertinent to safety or emergencies; appropriate safety procedures; first aid/CPR 
training and certification; periodic scheduled sessions to acquaint participants with 
the safety and emergency plans; provisions for medical coverage; contact informa-
tion for whom to notify in the case of an emergency or death, and appropriate or 
required liability forms. Acquiring project liability insurance is wise, and insurance 
providers might have their own forms for participants to complete.
Emergency plan—
When safety plans fail to prevent an accident, emergency plans are designed to 
keep injuries to a minimum, facilitate the arrival of help, ensure important consid-
erations are not overlooked during the crisis, and provide the means to learn from 
past mistakes. Elements of an emergency plan should include all field personnel 
carrying the emergency plan with them in the field, adequate proximity of team 
members trained in first aid and CPR, availability of appropriate first aid equipment 
and supplies, knowledge of medical conditions that could complicate or worsen 
injuries, functional communications equipment, periodic check-in times, a plan for 
handling encounters with threatening individuals, contact information for emer-
gency assistance, evacuation routes, maps and descriptions of rendezvous points 
for ambulances or helicopters, checklists and forms for documenting the incident, 
accident forms for vehicles, and evaluation procedures to learn from mistakes.
Checklist—
	 What is the safety plan for the project? Include in this plan:
	
•	
Ways to mitigate for field hazards such as difficult terrain, extreme  
	
weather, dangerous plants and wildlife, hazardous interactions with  
	
other people or activities, bloodborne diseases, and allergies.
	
•	
Document provisions for needed safety clothing, equipment, and supplies.
	
•	
Create standards for periodic first aid-CPR training.
Safety: 
	
Ensuring Safety and Planning for Emergencies

58
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
SAFETY
	
•	
Evaluate potential need for driver’s education regarding unfamiliar  
	
vehicles or secondary road hazards.
	
•	
Identify medical conditions that might need special attention.
	
•	
Ensure all personnel are officially covered by adequate medical insurance  
	
if possible.
	
•	
Ensure all personnel are officially covered by adequate liability protection.
	
•	
Ensure all personnel have provided information about who to contact  
	
in an emergency.
	 What is the emergency plan for this project? Ideally this plan should:
	
•	
Provide all field personnel with a copy of the emergency plan to keep  
	
available constantly.
	
•	
Create standards for all field personnel to be in proximity to individuals  
	
trained in first aid and CPR.
	
•	
Create procedures to ensure that all field personnel have access to  
	
emergency first aid equipment and supplies in good condition.
	
•	
Ensure that all first aid providers are familiar with the medical conditions  
	
of others that could require special attention.
	
•	
Ensure that all personnel have access to functional communications  
	
equipment needed to summon emergency help.
	
•	
Set regular schedules for field personnel to report their location and status.
	
•	
Provide training in how to deal with threatening or dangerous wildlife.
	
•	
Provide training in how to deal with threatening or dangerous people.
	
•	
Document complete emergency contact information for emergency  
	
responders.
	
•	
Document evacuation routes and rendezvous points for ambulances  
	
or helicopters.
	
•	
Create checklists of things to consider and document in an emergency.
	
•	
Provide accident forms.
	
•	
Stipulate reporting criteria, forms, and procedures so that accidents are  
	
evaluated for means to improve safety.
	 How often and when will training be conducted to periodically acquaint  
all personnel with the safety and emergency plans?
Sources—
San Bernardino National Forest 2002; University of Maine Cooperative  
Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine Coastal Program of the Maine State 
Planning Office, n.d.; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 2004.

59
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
FIELDWORK
Scheduling field activities—
Managers usually have experience with planning field activities, but participants 
might or might not have such experience. Often travel, safety procedures, or 
support activities take longer than anticipated so planning extra time for unfore-
seen circumstances can help keep fieldwork on schedule. A variety of factors can 
influence or determine when fieldwork needs to occur, such as lifecycles of the 
organisms being sampled, weather, hunting seasons, or logging activities. Time 
needed to get to and from the work site, travel conditions, traffic patterns, how 
much can safely be accomplished in a day, the number of field personnel available, 
time needed to prepare for field visits and wrap-up afterwards, or coordinating with 
visitors can all affect the schedules of field activities. Ideally a field crew leader or 
supervisor coordinates these factors.
Field travel, logistics, equipment, and safety—
Traveling in motor vehicles is one of the most dangerous things that people do, so 
adequate time should be allocated to travel safely, especially on hazardous remote 
roads. If distances are great, overnight lodging, campsites, or remote field stations 
might be necessary for efficiency and safety. Insurance, agency, or organization 
policies often limit the amount of time any one person may drive in a day or with-
out rest, so it is important to determine these requirements and plan accordingly. 
Personnel should be informed about sanitation practices in the field and be provided 
garden trowels, both for personal comfort and to avoid polluting bodies of water or 
leaving unsightly messes. Other considerations include maps, traversing difficult 
terrain, adequate food and water, appropriate safety clothing and equipment, com-
munication devices, and data collection equipment. Two safety considerations are 
especially important. Accidents can be reduced by designing work hours and breaks 
to avoid fatigue and to eliminate the need to work hastily to complete a task. Also, 
working in teams is always safer than working alone, because in the event of an 
accident, immediate care is available. Working in teams can be more efficient too. 
For instance, one individual can make measurements while the other records them. 
Team members also can check each other’s work for accuracy.
Support activities—
Most fieldwork involves support activities both before and after a day in the field. 
Whereas these activities might not be as appealing to participants as the actual 
fieldwork, they are essential to ensuring data quality and reliable results. Therefore, 
explaining and training participants in the handling, storing, and backing-up of 
data can be as important as training for fieldwork. Examples include vehicle and 
tool maintenance, food preparation, cleanup, record keeping, laboratory work, or 
the identification, processing, and storage of specimens. Allocating adequate time 
Fieldwork: 
	
Planning Field Activities
Explaining and training 
participants in the 
handling, storing, and 
backing-up of data 
can be as important as 
training for fieldwork.

60
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
FIELDWORK
to these activities improves safety, reduces fatigue, and ensures important tasks are 
not overlooked or slighted. Lastly, individuals who plan the fieldwork might wish 
to allocate time and resources to acquiring a photographic record of all activities. 
Although this can be time-consuming, many participants find it very rewarding. 
The images can be shown in celebratory gatherings or used for promoting the 
project. Pictures with people in them are usually of greater interest to audiences 
than pictures without people, so make sure your field personnel are prominently 
highlighted performing their various tasks. Some individuals prefer not to be 
photographed, so it is polite and respectful to ask first.
Checklist—
	 What tasks need to be done before, during, and after field visits?
	 For each task, who will be responsible for ensuring the work is completed in a 
timely manner?
	 Who can take responsibility for a task if the lead individual is unable to  
be present or participate?
	 How will each task be scheduled (including time for breaks to reduce fatigue)?
	 What equipment is needed for each task?
	 What maps, instruction for traversing difficult terrain, appropriate clothing and 
equipment, communication devices, and data collection equipment will field 
personnel need?
	 What arrangements will be made for transportation, food, and lodging?
	 How will vehicle use, trip preparation, fuel purchasing, maintenance,  
storage, care, security, repair, record-keeping, and accident procedures  
be documented?
	 How will equipment handling, maintenance, storage, care, security, and 
replacement procedures be documented?
	 What information (sampling protocols, emergency procedures) should  
personnel carry in the field?
	 How will daily events in the field be documented?
	 Who should be informed about needed revisions to sampling protocols or such 
noteworthy incidents such as accidents, threats, or illegal activities? How and 
how soon should they be informed?
	 What contingency plans should exist for both anticipated and unforeseen events 
that could interfere with timely and complete field sampling?
	 What plans are appropriate for making, handling, and archiving a  
photographic record of activities?
Sources—
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2004d; Stockdale and Corbet 1999.

61
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
SAMPLING
Choosing valid, appropriate, and effective sampling designs and methods—
Although any participant can be included in the process of developing sampling 
designs and methods, creating ones that are feasible, efficient, statistically valid, 
and trusted to produce credible data requires a great deal of specialized knowledge 
and experience. Valid and appropriate sampling designs and methods must match 
project goals, available resources, participant skills, logistical and practical consid-
erations, quality standards, criteria for statistical rigor, and intended analyses. If 
data will be combined with other monitoring projects, development of standardized 
measures, common formats, comparable units, and uniform sampling protocols 
greatly facilitate the process. Some preliminary research into similar projects 
could provide ideas for addressing these issues. If the expertise to balance all these 
considerations is not available among the participants, then outside help should 
be acquired. This issue is so important that even the work of experts is improved 
by peer review. For this reason, project coordinators might consider review of the 
sampling design and measurement protocols by technical panels, advisory groups, 
other specialists, or program managers. 
The “Design” module discusses the benefits of involving participants in all 
stages of project design, including technical aspects such as sampling. Although 
participants might not make decisions about complex sampling considerations, their 
insights can be valuable, and their understanding of the choices provides them with 
confidence and ownership in the project. Participants can be involved in develop-
ment of sampling design and data collection procedures in several ways:
•	
If participants are unfamiliar with the concepts, they could benefit from 
question and answer discussions or readings.
•	
Some participants might be comfortable with phone conferences and email, 
whereas others might prefer one-on-one interactions or small focus groups 
where they can take sufficient time to clarify complex ideas and better engage 
in the process.
•	
A site visit can engage participants in thinking about the project in the  
context of what they know about the local environment.
•	
Specific questions can stimulate thinking about sampling. For example,  
if the participants are gatherers of a medicinal plant root, asking them if they 
know of areas where plots could be located could help avoid potential conflict 
between their traditional activities and data collection.
Sampling: 
	 Developing Sampling Designs and Data-Collection Procedures

62
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
SAMPLING
Sampling protocols—
We define sampling protocols as planned and systematic sets of methods and proce-
dures for collecting data. Such protocols depend not only upon the chosen statistical 
design for sampling in a nonbiased manner, but also the targeted organisms, field 
conditions, and other practical considerations. Protocols must match worker knowl-
edge, skills, or training if they are to be effectively applied. Standardized protocols 
that are used consistently by all data collectors are integral to obtaining uniform 
data that can be validly compiled or compared. Examples include determining how 
and where to locate plots or orient transects, criteria for what to sample, precisely 
how to measure an attribute, or how to identify an organism. All aspects of how, 
what, where, and when to sample must be carefully considered, meticulously 
documented, and thoroughly taught if requisite consistency is to be achieved and 
maintained. Our references include several comprehensive manuals discussing 
these details for various organisms and for nontimber forest products. Deciding how 
to actually record the data depends on factors like equipment availability, the skills 
and training of field personnel, ease of checking for errors or making corrections, 
and anticipated weather conditions. Both manual and electronic data recording 
methods and procedures have advantages and disadvantages. Careful design of data 
forms or electronic data entry programs can reduce errors of omission by remind-
ing the crew of information that needs to be collected. Following common system-
atic protocols, attention to detail, and double-checking for accuracy are essential 
components of quality control. Thorough training is necessary to implement the 
protocols consistently and properly. If data are not considered credible, then the 
efforts of the participants, and the resources expended, will be largely wasted, 
hence we address this critical issue separately in the following “Quality” module.
Training, oversight, evaluation, and revisions—
Many of the aforementioned considerations will be obvious to managers and 
employees who routinely engage in monitoring activities or field research, but 
additional attention to detail, oversight, and training might be necessary if 
participants conducting the fieldwork are unfamiliar with why things are done the 
way they are instructed to do them. Careful oversight and immediate feedback 
are especially helpful at correcting mistakes and encouraging good habits 
when participants first start collecting data. Additionally, those who designed 
and documented the sampling protocols are unlikely to have anticipated all the 
exceptions and contingencies that will be encountered in the field. Knowledgeable 
supervisors who regularly accompany field crews in the early stages of sampling 
can quickly incorporate needed changes to the protocols. Once sampling methods 
and procedures are running smoothly, the project might wish to consider creating 
a training video for new personnel that join a field season already in progress. If 
field crews understand the goals of the project, the reasons for the sampling design, 
and why particular data collection methods are used, they will be more likely to 
make appropriate impromptu decisions when encountering unforeseen field or data 
collection circumstances.
Careful oversight and 
immediate feedback 
are especially helpful 
at correcting mistakes 
and encouraging 
good habits when 
participants first start 
collecting data.

63
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
SAMPLING
Checklist—
	 How will both participants and specialists (especially statisticians) be  
engaged in planning and documenting the sampling design and protocols?
	 Is it worthwhile to have independent specialists, advisors, or program  
managers review the sampling design and procedures?
	 Does the resulting design match project goals, participant skills, and  
intended analyses?
	 How will uniform data formats, units of measure, and sampling protocols  
be developed if data are combined with other projects?
	 Who will document sampling protocols for training, for use as a field  
reference, and for ensuring consistent sampling methods are used by all  
data collectors?
	 What training will be provided to explain the purpose for, the reasoning 
behind, and proper implementation of the sampling protocols?
	 What provisions will be made for oversight, review, and revision of  
sampling protocols, especially early in their implementation, but also  
periodically thereafter?
Sources—
Baker 2001; Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2004d; Elzinga and others 
2001; Engel and Voshell 2002; Herron and others 2004b; Hunt and others 1996; 
Lawrence and Hawthorne 2006; Lund 1998; Mueller and others 2004; North-South 
Environmental, Inc. 2004; Ottke and others 2000; Schreuder and others 2004; 
Stockdale and Corbet 1999; Wong 2000; Wong and others 2001.

64
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
QUALITY
Rationale—
Although it is possible that the dominant goal of a participatory monitoring project 
is simply to improve relationships among stakeholders, in almost all instances 
obtaining high-quality data that is widely trusted is the central goal of monitoring. 
Differences do exist in how important data credibility is to the users of the data. For 
instance, local commercial resource users who are collecting data predominantly 
for themselves might have less concern for outside validation of their data than 
would a major federal monitoring program that has to make contentious environ-
mental decisions based on data collected by volunteer groups scattered around 
the country. Scientific credibility, legal liability, fear of regulatory reprisals, and 
defensibility in court litigation can also be factors for deciding how much emphasis 
to put on data quality. Federal agencies are mandated by law to meet certain quality 
requirements for data that are shared with the public, and most agencies have their 
own guidelines and quality assurance plans. Examples can be found in the “Anno-
tated References” section.
Data credibility plan—
The process of assuring others that data are trustworthy can be divided into three 
components that all improve credibility: quality assurance, quality control, and 
quality assessment (discussed in the following sections). Data credibility can be 
defined as everything that is done to convince others that the collection of data 
was done in a thoughtful, systematic, unbiased, and careful manner. Documenting 
a detailed monitoring project plan through use of the workbook forms (app. 3) 
assures the reviewer that all aspects of the monitoring project were given due 
consideration. Documenting the plan’s implementation assures reviewers that 
the monitoring methods that were selected actually addressed project goals, 
participants communicated well with each other, all parties were motivated to make 
the project work well, adequate resources were allocated to training, and that data 
were collected, analyzed, and interpreted in a nonbiased and collaborative manner. 
A well-documented project plan and records detailing its implementation are an 
important context for the more specific quality assurance plan that focuses on 
sampling design, sampling protocols, and quality control methods.
Quality assurance plan—
Quality assurance plans are commonplace in business and industry as well as in 
established federal monitoring programs. Many examples exist, and elements differ 
according to the specific context and purpose of the monitoring. A particularly 
effective way to ensure credibility in a participatory monitoring project is third-
party verification or auditing. Common elements include: 
Quality: 
	
Ensuring the Quality and Credibility of Collected Data
In almost all instances, 
obtaining high-quality 
data that is widely 
trusted is the central 
goal of monitoring.

65
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
QUALITY
•	
Documenting a data quality control plan (see below).
•	
Employing experts to design sampling plans and peer-reviewing  
their recommendations.
•	
Developing standard operation procedures (SOPs) such as documented 
sampling protocols.
•	
Writing reference manuals for the SOPs.
•	
Designing and conducting training programs for implementing SOPs,  
including manuals, curricula, or teaching aids.
•	
Deciding on procedures for periodically evaluating the efficacy and  
appropriateness of the SOPs.
•	
Documenting changes in the SOPs and providing training to implement  
the changes.
•	
Evaluating, documenting, and certifying training accomplishments and  
learned skills.
•	
Conducting continuous oversight or supervision of data gathering.
•	
Periodic third party or independent field checks of data accuracy.
•	
Developing a process for evaluating the efficacy of quality assurance plans  
and revising them as necessary (see quality assessment below).
•	
Ensuring that the data are analyzed properly and interpreted objectively  
(see “Analysis” module). 
Quality control—
A critical element of any quality assurance plan is quality control. Quality control 
is a set of standard procedures for ensuring useable and reliable data. Fundamental 
elements of all quality control plans include ascertaining these characteristics of 
your data:
•	
Accuracy—Confidence that the measurement reflects the actual value,  
that is, both nonbiased and precise. 
•	
Lack of bias—The measurements are not systematically skewed.
•	
Precision—Degree of agreement between repeated measurements of  
the same sample.
•	
Completeness—Sufficient samples are acquired to provide useful  
information.
•	
Representativeness—Extent to which the measurements you take  
actually reflect the state of the indicator that you wish to monitor. 
Other factors such as detection limits, instrument sensitivity, or sampling 
at appropriate scales, places, and times can also be pertinent to quality control 
depending on what is being measured and how. A variety of methods exist for 
calibrating measurements and preventing data errors. Standard reference materials 
can be used to calibrate instruments. If field measurements seem to be interpreted 
differently by each crew member, then field personnel should compare their meth-
ods until everyone agrees upon useful criteria to reduce variability or bias in their 
measurements. Those criteria should then be documented in the sampling protocols 

66
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
QUALITY
and uniformly applied. Data errors can be reduced by double entry, checking for 
reasonableness, and by having team members review the data for correctness 
and completeness as it is entered in the field. Quality checks can be conducted by 
other teams that resample the same plots. Regardless of the actual techniques and 
processes for confirming data validity, methods can always be improved; therefore, 
convincing outsiders that project participants are sincerely committed to data qual-
ity also involves periodic evaluation and review of the quality assurance plan. This 
is sometimes called a quality assessment plan.
Quality assessment plan—
Are the selected indicators the most appropriate monitoring targets to meet the 
goals of the project? Do the collected data reflect meaningful changes in the status 
of the indicators that are being monitored? What components of the quality assur-
ance plan merit improvement? Is the sampling design achieving monitoring objec-
tives in the most effective or efficient manner? Are sampling protocols appropriate, 
sufficiently documented, adequately taught, and consistently applied? Do users of 
the data have any concerns about its credibility, and how could those concerns be 
addressed? These and related questions are all relevant concerns for assuring end 
users that sufficient attention is being paid to the issue of data quality; thus develop-
ing a written plan to periodically review these topics also demonstrates foresight 
and commitment.
Checklist—
	 How important is data credibility to the participants in the project,  
and why?
	 In what manner do participants plan to address the issue of data credibility?
	 If a quality assurance plan is deemed useful, what elements should  
it include?
	 If a quality control plan is deemed useful, what elements should it include?
	 If a quality assessment plan is deemed useful, what elements should it include 
and how often should it be reviewed?
	 How and when will intended or potential data users review each plan? Should 
experts review the plans?
Sources—
Bliss and others 2001; Dukes and Firehock 2001; Engel and Voshell 2002; Federal 
Data Quality Legislation 2001; Forest Inventory and Ananlysis, n.d.; Godfrey 1994; 
Hanson n.d.; Herron and others 2004b; Hunt and others 1996; Office of Manage-
ment and Budget 2002; Ottke and others 2000; Pollard and others 1999; University 
of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine Coastal Program 
of the Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; U.S. Department of Agriculture, n.d.; U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency 2001a, 2001b, 2002; Wright, n.d.

67
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
DATA
Data handling, storage, and backup—
Acquiring high-quality data is a major step in the monitoring process but is of 
little use unless the data are stored, handled, summarized, analyzed, interpreted, 
and reported properly. Handling involves such activities as transferring raw data 
to formatted databases, compiling new and old data, doing checks for reasonable-
ness, and preparing data for analysis. Storing data involves categorizing types of 
data, labeling files with names that are easy to understand, and organizing files in 
logical folders. It also entails collecting information about the type of information 
in each file (see Metadata below). All of this is a great deal of work, and if data are 
not likely to be used, this work is wasted effort. For instance, one common form 
of overcommitment is the natural inclination to collect as much information as 
possible while in the field. If the effort expended to collect miscellaneous or non-
essential data is not commensurate with the effort needed to store, manage, analyze, 
and interpret this additional information, then such data becomes superfluous and 
participants could become discouraged by not seeing the results of their labor. Such 
unfocused or misguided endeavors can also detract from more important activities.
The effort put into routines to regularly back up data should be tailored to the 
risk of losing data and the consequences of squandering the effort to collect it. All 
computer hard drives eventually fail and new hardware technologies constantly 
replace older ones. Other catastrophes such as fire, floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, 
theft, or vandalism can destroy data too. Reducing the risk of losing data entails not 
only keeping multiple copies and updating each on a regularly scheduled basis, but 
in keeping copies in separate locations in the event of unforeseen physical destruc-
tion in any one location. Organizations such as schools, universities, businesses, or 
government agencies virtually always have such mechanisms and policies for data 
protection already implemented; hence they are obvious choices as data reposito-
ries. Another effective method of backing up data is to routinely distribute copies  
to all the participants in the project. Sharing data, however, brings up the issue of 
who owns it and controls its use.
Data ownership and use—
Although participants in a collaborative monitoring project would naturally expect 
to have a right to share the data collected, some information could be sensitive 
or proprietary. For instance, if a rare or endangered species is being monitored, it 
might be in the best interest of all concerned not to release information about the 
location of threatened populations. Similarly, private landowners or timber compa-
nies concerned about restrictive regulations that could be imposed on their property 
if data are misinterpreted by advocacy groups might wish to ensure that the collab-
oratively collected information is first analyzed and interpreted in an objective and 
peer-reviewed manner. Tribes also might be concerned that the data include cultur-
ally sensitive information or they might wish to be recognized for contributing 
Data: 
	
Making Arrangements for Handling, Storing, and Using Data
Data are of little use 
unless they are stored, 
handled, summarized, 
analyzed, interpreted, 
and reported properly.

68
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
DATA
traditional knowledge to the project. Prior discussions about the ownership and use 
of local participants’ ecological knowledge (especially if they consider it specialized 
or valuable) can be important for acknowledging their contributions or establish-
ing intellectual property rights. Issues of ownership could also arise in the case of 
bioprospecting when, for example, pharmaceutical companies wish to capitalize on 
discoveries of organisms with unique and useful medicinal properties. Even if data 
are not particularly sensitive, some participants might wish to recuperate expenses 
by selling it. Regardless of the specific circumstances, all these concerns are best 
addressed when the participants are delineating and examining their motivations 
and concerns for joining a participatory monitoring project (“Communication” and 
“Incentives” modules). At that stage, mutual agreements such as policy accords or 
contractual stipulations can be arranged in advance for determining how data will 
be shared, used, or sold (“Organization” module). If these issues arise as an after-
thought, then involving all participants in resolving the issue as quickly as possible 
will prevent subsequent conflicts and controversies and allow the data to be applied 
to the original goals of the project. If data are sensitive or proprietary, forethought 
given to methods for safeguarding data against unauthorized access will contribute 
to data security. Passwords and locked rooms are simple strategies.
Data distribution—
If the data are not controversial or proprietary, and if summaries or simple analyses 
can be arranged in advance, then prompt distribution of results can be very reward-
ing for both participants and other users of the data. Routinely updated Web sites 
are an excellent means of distributing such information, although some participants 
or stakeholders might not have Internet access. More organized networks or clear-
inghouses for information can provide the service of combining current data from 
multiple projects or sources so managers or policymakers have the most recent facts 
for informed decisions.
Data syntheses—
Meta-analysis refers to combining disparate data from numerous sources to reach 
conclusions that data or analyses from individual sources would not be sufficient 
to justify. Typically such analyses are conducted at larger geographical scales than 
are feasible to address by any one project. The process of drawing valid conclusions 
from different kinds and sources of data is complex, but similarity in data formats, 
measurement methods, or sampling protocols facilitate the process. Therefore, 
examining other similar projects and anticipating this potential use of the data is 
a useful consideration during the stage of sampling design and sampling protocol 
development (see the “Sampling” module for further discussion). Incorporating 
common data elements from other similar projects also is useful. Likely the best 
example is ensuring that data are spatially explicit. With the advent of inexpensive 

69
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
DATA
geographical information system recorders, this process is now easy and cheap. 
Interpretation of biodiversity information is invariably linked to location and 
habitat, so recording coordinates of sample locations provides a common ground for 
many types of metadata analysis.
Metadata—
Meta-analyses are greatly facilitated by the collecting of metadata. Metadata is 
literally data about data and refers to information that describes attributes of data 
such as information content and format, data quality, the history of the project, 
contact information, database condition, and more. The National Biological Infor-
mation Infrastructure Web site provides authoritative information about standard-
ized types of metadata. In their words, “Metadata records preserve the usefulness 
of data over time by detailing methods for data collection and data set creation….
Metadata makes it possible for data users to search, retrieve, and evaluate data set 
information.” Perusal of this Web site will give users a detailed understanding of 
the types of information that are useful to record. Although recording metadata 
might seem like yet another time-consuming documentation task, doing so can 
truly guarantee the data remain useful for a long time and also provides additional 
credence to claims of data credibility. Most institutions that expend the resources to 
maintain multiple databases also require the collection of metadata, so it behooves 
the project coordinators to become familiar with the particular requirements of the 
organization that might act as a repository of their project’s data.
Checklist—
	 How will data be processed and compiled?
	 How will data be backed up and secured?
	 If information is sensitive, proprietary, cultural, traditional, or commercially 
valuable, how will issues of ownership and distribution be resolved?
	 If data can be shared freely, what methods can be used for prompt,  
equitable, and wide distribution?
	 How will data be made compatible with related projects?
	 What metadata will be compiled and why?
Sources—
Bliss and others 2001; Canadian Information System for the Environment 2001; 
Coughlin and others 1999; Kusel and others 2000; Lawrence 2003; North-South 
Environmental, Inc. 2004; Ottke and others 2000; The Volunteer Monitor, n.d.; 
Voluntary Sector Initiative 2002a; Wright, n.d.

70
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
ANALYSIS
Planning analyses—
Data are of little value if they are not used. Because participatory monitoring takes 
a lot of time and effort, all participants have a stake in the analysis and reporting of 
the data they have collected. Not doing so is a sure way to discourage participation 
in subsequent projects. Careful budgeting and foresight is required to ensure that 
sufficient resources exist in advance to complete analyses and report the results. 
Cost estimates can be obtained through consultation with a statistician. Having the 
analysis planned in advance will also ensure the sampling and project design will 
produce usable results. Hoping that support will come along later, if the data are 
simply collected now, is a risky strategy.
Data analyses should be planned at the stage of sampling design so the intended 
use of the data is consistent with the statistical design of the sampling procedures, 
the measurements taken, and the format of the databases. Advance planning of 
the analysis not only speeds the process when the data are ready, it also averts the 
natural, but bias-inducing, inclination to simply explore the data for any meaningful 
results that might be found. For instance, searching for any significant correlations 
that might be found among multiple factors in a large data set might seem to yield 
meaningful insights when, if enough combinations of factors are compared, some 
percentage of these factors are likely to seem statistically correlated simply by 
chance.
Analyses can range in complexity from simply charting the data to the applica-
tion of sophisticated statistical techniques. Any combination of valid methods that 
meet project goals and user needs is appropriate. Regardless of the selected analy-
ses, it is essential that the individuals designing and conducting the analyses have 
an adequate understanding of the statistical methods involved. Even experienced 
scientists routinely consult with statisticians, and a participatory monitoring project 
should be no different in this regard.
Reviewing and interpreting results—
Once data have been analyzed, results are usually subject to interpretation. Such 
interpretation typically is more informed and objective if approached from the 
multiple perspectives that participants impart. Collaborative interpretation of results 
also contributes to the ongoing process of enhancing mutual trust. Involving par-
ticipants in the interpretation of results need not be a difficult process, if for exam-
ple, the findings are presented graphically as well as numerically and discussed in a 
group setting. Reaching collaborative interpretations, especially if consensus can be 
attained, does much to prevent disagreements or controversy that might arise from 
the way managers or policymakers use the results. If criteria for reaching stipulated 
conclusions are agreed to in advance, then the data analysis can speak for itself, 
reducing the likelihood of dissention about the meaning of the results.
Analysis: 
	
Arranging for Periodic Data Analysis
Followthrough Stage
The interpretation of 
results is typically 
more informed and 
objective if approached 
from the multiple 
perspectives of 
participants.

71
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
ANALYSIS
Checklist—
	 How will data be analyzed? Who will conduct the analyses? 
	 Will analyses be planned and documented during the sampling design  
phase and in advance of data collection?
	 How will appropriate statistical expertise be retained to conduct the  
analyses? Will a professional statistician review them?
	 How will all participants be included in the review and interpretation  
of results? 
	 If useful, what advance criteria will be used to interpret results? How  
will these criteria be collaboratively developed and applied?
	 If any of the participants have concerns about the means of analysis,  
potential results, interpretation of the results, or use of the information,  
how will these concerns be addressed?
	 If consensus cannot be reached about interpretation of the results, how  
will results be reported? Can alternate interpretations be included for  
comparison?
Sources—
Canadian Information System for the Environment 2001; Ecological Monitoring 
and Assessment Network Coordinating Office and the Canadian Nature Federation 
2003; Wright, n.d.

72
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
REPORTING
Planning—
Just as collected data are of little value if not used, analyzed and interpreted data 
are of little value to anyone outside the collaborative project if results are not 
disseminated. As with data analysis, the means of reporting results are ideally 
planned and budgeted for in the project design and budgeting phases (“Design” and 
“Resources” modules). Reports in any format are invariably improved by review, 
both informally and through a systematic peer-review process. Allowing time for 
review is an integral part of producing high-quality reports, hence it also should be 
planned and scheduled as part of the reporting process.
Few things in life are as reinforcing to an individual or group as the sense that 
their opinions are appreciated and can influence others. “Making a difference” 
with collaborative efforts not only leads to these rewards, but also creates a sense 
of group ownership in the accomplishment. If one of the goals of the participatory 
monitoring project is to influence policy or management decisions, then results 
should be reported in a timely manner, to the appropriate audiences, and through 
credible and readily accessible means of communication. Just making sure that 
information is delivered to the appropriate audience, however, does not guarantee 
they will make use of it. Participants might wish to consider formal arrangements, 
agreements, memoranda of understanding, accords, or contracts with endusers of 
the information to increase the chances that results are actually applied to their 
decisions. A less formal, but potentially very effective approach to ensure the use 
of results, is to discuss the project with the intended users of the data from the very 
beginning, in effect engaging them as participants in the collaborative project.
Concerns—
Again, as with interpreting the analyses, participants with vested interests might 
have concerns about how results are reported, especially if they are likely to influ-
ence policy or management decisions affecting their interests. As with all phases of 
the collaborative project, airing and discussing these concerns as early as possible 
will help prevent subsequent controversies or disagreements, especially if some 
resolution is reached about how to handle objectionable results (see the “Organiza-
tion,” “Communication,” and “Design” modules).
Another concern that might crop up is the issue of acknowledgment and credit. 
For instance, professional relationships are too often strained by disagreements over 
authorship. As with any other such quarrel, having criteria that are mutually agreed 
upon in advance averts many disputes. Most universities and research organiza-
tions have guidelines for authorship that can serve as examples. The contributions 
of participants can be acknowledged in other ways, even if their effort does not 
merit authorship on a document (see “Celebrations” module). As mentioned earlier, 
a sense of worth is one of the most rewarding feelings humans can experience. 
Reporting: 
	
Arranging for Reporting Results

73
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
REPORTING
Providing participants with this powerful reinforcement entails being careful not to 
overlook any significant contribution, being creative about means of acknowledg-
ing help, and being as inclusive as possible in credit for accomplishments. Some 
participants might not be aware of the employment-related incentives for research-
ers to publish extensively, but the opportunity to report a project’s findings can be 
a strong motivation for scientists to become involved. This also provides another 
avenue for reporting the results of the project to a wider audience. 
Format and timing of reports—
Results can be reported in many ways, but whatever means is chosen they should 
be readily accessible to all participants. Ask participants how they would like to 
see the results distributed to their communities and stakeholder groups. Examples 
include:
•	
Web sites
•	
Newsletters
•	
Emailed reports
•	
Slide shows
•	
Video tapes or DVD movies
•	
Newspaper or magazine articles
•	
Radio or television programs
•	
Pamphlets, brochures, or booklets
•	
Official reports
•	
Peer-reviewed journal articles
•	
Book chapters or books
Reported information is most effective at influencing policy or decisions, 
hence also most rewarding to participants, if it is delivered in a periodic and timely 
manner. Web sites, interim reports, and newsletters help maintain interest as more 
indepth analyses and interpretation of data are being prepared.
Archiving—
Lastly, project managers often find that a formal process of indexing and archiving 
written information, images, videos, and promotional materials not only provides 
a master copy that is always accessible, but can greatly reduce the time to find a 
particular item. For instance, such archiving can ease the process of subsequent 
grant writing, preparing presentations, or of organizing a promotional event. 
Often individuals involved in similar projects elsewhere will request information 
or materials that the project has already developed. As with data backup, keeping 
multiple originals in separate locations can be a useful policy if the effort is deemed 
warranted. Distributing copies to all participants is another effective approach. 
By providing each participant with multiple copies, they can be asked to store one 
while the other is shared or used.
Web sites, interim 
reports, and 
newsletters help 
maintain interest as 
more indepth analyses 
and interpretation 
of data are being 
prepared.

74
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
REPORTING
Checklist—
	 How much is budgeted for reporting results?
	 How will reports be reviewed?
	 What will be done to ensure results are actually used?
	 How will any concerns about the use or dissemination of results be addressed? 
	 What advance criteria should be used for determining authorship?
	 How will every participant’s contributions be acknowledged?
	 How will results be communicated and how often? 
	 Are informal interim reports useful?
	 How much effort should be spent on archiving reports and promotional 
materials? How should it be done and by whom?
Sources—
Canadian Information System for the Environment 2001; Ecological Monitoring 
and Assessment Network Coordinating Office and the Canadian Nature Federation 
2003; Godfrey 1994; Herman and others 1997; North-South Environmental, Inc. 
2004; Ottke and others 2000; Stockdale and Corbet 1999; The Volunteer Monitor, 
n.d.; University of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program,  
Maine Coastal Program of the Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; Voluntary  
Sector Initiative 2002a; Wright, n.d.

75
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
EVALUATION
Evaluation plan—
Any action plan requires periodic evaluation and revision to remain relevant and 
effective at meeting its stated goals. Additional reasons for periodic review include:
•	
Updating objectives.
•	
Incorporating new information, contextual circumstances, funding, or  
participants.
•	
Shifting the allocation of resources or focus of efforts.
•	
Improving efficiencies.
•	
Documenting accomplishments.
•	
Determining what worked and what did not.
•	
Creating an institutional memory.
•	
Sustaining confidence in the credibility of the data.
To meet these evaluation objectives, participants might ask themselves the 
following questions:
•	
Is the chosen participatory approach the best way to meet identified needs for 
biodiversity information and other project goals?
•	
Should the project be discontinued at some point, and if so when or under what 
circumstances?
•	
Is the documented project plan adequate and useful?
•	
Do project monitoring goals or targeted indicators need to be altered? 
•	
Were any contextual considerations overlooked?
•	
Is the organizational structure of the project meeting the needs of the  
participants and achieving the goals of the project?
•	
Does the project adequately represent all interested stakeholders and have a 
sufficient number of participating individuals?
•	
Are the cooperating parties communicating and making decisions well?
•	
Are participants’ needs and expectations being met? Are there any difficulties 
with sustaining involvement and commitment? Is the project stagnating or 
becoming inflexible?
•	
Are the participants finding the experience personally rewarding?
•	
Have participant skills and expertise been appropriately matched to tasks?
•	
Are resources being budgeted and used efficiently? Are additional resources 
needed to achieve the goals?
•	
Is the project being conducted in a safe manner?
•	
Are training, field procedures, logistical arrangements, and support  
activities adequate?
•	
Are the sampling design and protocols adequate and appropriate?
Evaluation: 
	
Evaluating and Improving the Project

76
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
EVALUATION
•	
Are the data valid and of consistently high quality?
•	
Are data being analyzed correctly, and are results being interpreted  
collaboratively?
•	
Are results being disseminated in a manner that rewards participation and 
influences decisionmaking?
•	
Are accomplishments being achieved in a timely manner?
•	
How can the evaluation process itself be improved?
•	
How can lessons learned be communicated and applied to other projects?
•	
What are the plans for accomplishing needed revisions?
•	
How can the project be made more rewarding for all concerned?
Answers to these questions can be either quantitative (for instance, numerically 
scored questionnaires) or qualitative (such as group discussions). Either way, results 
that are recorded, summarized, and documented can be more easily incorporated 
into revision plans. Where controversies arise about the results of evaluation or 
needed changes, participants will need to use their growing communication and 
decisionmaking skills to achieve suitable resolutions.
Scheduling periodic reviews of the monitoring plan, and who will perform 
them, improves the likelihood that they will be conducted when needed. All aspects 
of the monitoring plan need not necessarily be reviewed at the same time, by the 
same individuals, or at the same intervals. Participants might wish to tailor reviews 
to anticipated need for periodic revision of various components of the monitoring 
plan. Regardless of these considerations, occasionally reviewing the whole plan 
provides perspective on how well the various components are interacting and 
whether the relative effort dedicated to each aspect of the project is appropriate. 
Independent reviewers who do not have a vested interest in the project can assist the 
review process by providing an outside perspective and by addressing issues that 
participants might find controversial or hard to discuss honestly. Outside reviewers 
also lend credibility to the project. Scientists or government researchers can recom-
mend independent reviewers. 
Action plan for revisions—
Lastly, evaluating and reviewing the monitoring plan and how well the project 
is functioning is inadequate unless needed changes are identified and a plan to 
achieve the changes is implemented. If any or all participants were not involved in 
developing the monitoring project plan (or portions thereof), their involvement in 
the evaluation process will enable them to become more familiar with the plan and 
gain a new or expanded interest in the project’s success.

77
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
EVALUATION
Checklist—
	 What are the objectives for evaluating the monitoring plan and  
its implementation?
	 What questions should be asked about each component of the plan?
	 How will responses to these questions be recorded, summarized, and  
documented?
	 If controversies arise regarding the results of the evaluation or needed  
changes, how will they be resolved?
	 How often and under what circumstances will the monitoring plan,  
or specific parts thereof, be reviewed? Who will be responsible for  
coordinating each review?
	 Should independent reviewers evaluate the monitoring plan or any of  
its parts? Why, when, and by whom?
	 How will revisions or changes be implemented?
Sources—
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003; Daly n.d.a; Dukes and Firehock 
2001; Herman and others 1997; Kusel and others 2000; Moseley and Wilson 2002; 
Sirmon and others 2002b; University of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea 
Grant Program, Maine Coastal Program of the Maine State Planning Office n.d.; 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 2004; Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000; 
Wright, n.d.

78
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
CELEBRATIONS
Rewarding participants—
Individuals, groups, or organizations that contribute their time, energy, and 
resources to collaboratively meeting common goals deserve to be rewarded for their 
contributions. Ensuring that their expectations are adequately met goes a long way 
to accomplishing this goal, regardless of whether they are financially compensated 
(see the “Participants” and “Incentives” modules). In many cases, the greatest 
reward for participants is to see that the results of their efforts are being used to 
improve forest management practices, even if the management changes are minor. 
In some cases, extra effort is needed to inform participants that their participation 
actually made a difference. Stakeholders who traditionally have little influence, 
or are seldom acknowledged, can be particularly appreciative of this courtesy. A 
variety of other rewards exist. Public recognition and acknowledgment is usually 
highly appreciated, even by shy individuals. Celebrations are both fun and reward-
ing. There are many ways to thank participants for their hard work and dedication. 
Examples include:
•	
Special reports about individuals in newsletters
•	
Field tours
•	
News reports about accomplishments
•	
Educational events
•	
Dedications
•	
Award ceremonies
•	
Potlucks
•	
Guest speakers
•	
Gifts
•	
Parties
Official acknowledgment might be provided in the form of: 
•	
Plaques
•	
Certificates
•	
Official letters of appreciation
•	
Signed photographs
•	
Monetary awards
•	
Employment referrals
•	
Letters of reference
•	
Jobs
Celebrations: 
	
Ensuring the Project Is Rewarding and Appreciated
Project participants 
deserve to be 
rewarded for their 
contributions.

79
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
CELEBRATIONS
Gifts could include items with a logo of the project on them, such as:
•	
Hats
•	
T-shirts
•	
Bandannas
•	
Posters
•	
Pins
•	
Labels
•	
Stickers
Another approach is letting participants keep items acquired by the  
project, such as:
•	
Field equipment
•	
Maps
•	
Safety equipment or clothing
•	
Books
•	
Furniture
•	
Computers or software
Ensuring community appreciation and continued support—
Expressing acknowledgment and appreciation for participants in public events is 
an excellent way to build visibility for the project and garner public involvement 
and support. There is no need to wait until a project is well advanced or completed 
to celebrate accomplishments. Periodic public events, presentations, and gifts lend 
momentum and continuity to participatory projects. They are also an excellent 
means of educating the public about the importance of conserving biodiversity and 
the efforts being made to do so in their own communities.
Learning to stretch our limits, trying new approaches to old problems, and 
making a difference in the world are powerful rewards in their own right. Best 
wishes! (And let others know how it works out.)
Checklist—
	 How will participants be acknowledged, thanked, and rewarded for  
their contributions?
	 What ceremonies or gatherings can be arranged to publicly celebrate 
accomplishments?
	 How can promotion and advertisement of such events be used to  
enhance visibility and community support for the project?
	 What gifts are appropriate for participants?
	 Would a project logo printed on clothing or other gifts be useful for  
promoting pride in the project?
	 How can potlucks, barbeques, dances, parties, or other group  
celebrations be organized and sponsored?
	 What will make the celebrations memorable and fun?

80
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
CELEBRATIONS
Sources—
Behar 1996; Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network Coordinating Office 
and the Canadian Nature Federation 2003; Everett 2001; National Forest Founda-
tion; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Partnership Office 
2005; National Resource Conservation Service, n.d.; Sithole 2002; University of 
Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine Coastal Program 
of the Maine State Planning Office, n.d.; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service 2004; The Volunteer Monitor, n.d.; Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000.

81
81
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the National Commission on Science for Sustainable 
Forestry for their financial support of this project. The commission receives funding 
from the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation, the Surdna Foundation, the Packard 
Foundation, and the National Forest Foundation. Its program is conducted under 
the auspices of the National Council for Science and the Environment, a nonprofit 
organization dedicated to improving the scientific basis for environmental decision-
making. We also wish to thank the University of California Berkeley Cooperative 
Extension for their financial and logistical support of the California workshop.
We are grateful to several individuals who provided early endorsement of 
the project and guidance throughout its implementation: Colin Donohue of Rural 
Action, Ajit Krishnaswamy of the National Network of Forest Practitioners, and 
Christina Getz of the University of California Berkeley Cooperative Extension. 
We thank the many people who provided us feedback during workshops in New 
Mexico, Virginia, Colorado, and California. We also thank the many technical 
advisors, too numerous to name, who supplied critical reviews, greatly improving 
the quality of our research.
We appreciate the help of individuals who provided us with important back-
ground materials, including Patrice Janiga, Peter Williams, and Sandy Winkler 
of the USDA Forest Service Inventory and Monitoring Institute, Elisabeth Kilvert 
of the Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network program in Canada, Anne 
Moote of the Ecological Research Institute, Anna Lawrence of the Environmental 
Change Institute in England, Catlain Cusack of Rural Action, and Esperanza 
Stancioff of the University of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant. Lastly, 
thanks to our project steward Nils Christoffersen of Wallowa Resources for his 
encouragement and helpful suggestions during the project.
Annotated References
Abbot, Joanne; Guijt, Irene. 1998. Changing views on change: participatory 
approaches to monitoring the environment. Sustainable Agriculture and Rural 
Livelihoods (SARL) Discussion Paper 2. London, United Kingdom: International 
Institute for Environment and Development. 96 p.
This paper reviews participatory approaches to monitoring environmental 
change. It draws on published literature, interviews with practitioners, and 
the practical experiences of a research project on participatory monitoring of 
sustainable agriculture in Brazil. This project sought to develop a viable and 
relevant monitoring process with farmers, farmer unions, and nongovernmental 
organizations to help assess the social and environmental impacts of their efforts 
in developing more sustainable forms of agriculture. This publication provides 
practical examples that can be drawn upon to support or refute claims regarding 
participatory monitoring and evaluation.

82
82
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Atlantic Coastal Cooperative Statistics Program [ACCSP]. 2002. Program 
design. Washington, DC. http://www.accsp.org/pdesign.htm. (25 August 2006).
This document provides an organizational overview of one of the most complex 
multistate, multistakeholder collaborative monitoring programs in the United 
States that relies on data collectors whose economic interest is at stake. This 
is one of many documents available on their Web site and provides a useful 
example of how to accommodate potentially conflicting interests and still obtain 
credible data.
Adler, Peter S.; Birkhoff, Juliana E. [N.d.]. Building trust: when knowledge 
from “here” meets knowledge from “away.” Portland, OR: The National Policy 
Consensus Center. http://www.policyconsensus.org/publications/reports/index.
html. (25 August 2006).
Although brief, this report is a concise, cogent overview of how to build trust 
among diverse participants. It addresses the perspectives, attitudes, concerns, 
suspicions, and communication styles of several major categories of likely 
collaborators, focusing especially on the role of traditional and Native American 
knowledge. Points are summarized in logical, easy-to-understand tables. It 
discusses 20 “tips, tools, and trust-building strategies.”
Baker, Nell. 2001. Developing needs-based inventory methods for non-timber 
forest products: application and development of current research to identify 
practical solutions for developing countries. [Report on workshop organized by 
the European Tropical Forest Research Network]. London: United Kingdom, 
Department for International Development. 95 p. http://www.etfrn.org/etfrn/
workshop/ntfp/. (25 August 2006).
This report summarizes presentations given and concerns expressed at the Food 
and Agriculture Organization workshop so titled. As such, it has less information 
than Wong (2000), but the views and opinions of the workshop presentations 
informed the final FAO publication (Wong and others 2001).
Balcazar, Fabricio E.; Keys, Christopher B.; Kaplan, Daniel L. [and others]. 
1998. Participatory action research and people with disabilities: principles and 
challenges. Canadian Journal of Rehabilitation. 12(2): 105–112.
The benefits of participation are not unique to biological monitoring. This paper 
outlines the advantages of involving individuals with disabilities in research 
programs designed to help them improve their lives. Although not specific to 
biological monitoring, this article underscores the common benefits that can 
accrue from the participation of key stakeholders in any research or monitoring 
program.

83
83
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Ballard, Heidi L. 2004. Impacts of harvesting salal (Gaultheria shallon) on  
the Olympic Peninsula, Washington: harvester knowledge, science, and 
participation. Berkeley, CA: University of California. 213 p. Ph.D. dissertation.
This dissertation describes a participatory experiment focused on sustainable 
harvesting of a nontimber forest product (salal) in Mason County, Washington. 
Importantly, it documents how the local ecological knowledge of the primarily 
immigrant Latino harvesters can be incorporated into a research project. Chapter 
3 reports experimental methods and project results, including notes about how 
harvesters contributed to design, data collection, and interpretation of results. 
Chapter 4 provides a literature review of how local ecological knowledge can be 
integrated with conventional scientific knowledge for adaptive management and 
scientific research. Chapter 5 includes a more general literature review on the  
topic of participatory research and then compares in detail the steps, challenges, 
and successes of conducting participatory research with both the salal harvesters 
and a Native American tribe on the Olympic Peninsula, Washington.
Ballard, Heidi; Kraetsch, Ralph; Huntsinger, Lynn. 2002. Collaborative 
monitoring in Walnut Creek, California. In: Sandiford, R.B.; McCreary, D.; 
Purcell, K.L., eds. Proceedings of the fifth symposium on oak woodlands: oaks 
in California’s changing landscape. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-184. San Diego, 
CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research 
Station: 617–624. http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/documents/gtr-184. (25 
August 2006).
This case study of a collaborative monitoring project illustrates the substantial 
synergistic benefits that can accrue when each collaborating stakeholder group has 
a unique set of competencies that addresses the needs and constraints of others. 
Balmford, Andrew; Bennun, Leon; Brink, Benten [and others]. 2005. The 
convention on biological diversity’s 2010 target. Science. 307: 212–213.
This recent article discusses progress and needed action for a global approach to 
biodiversity conservation through the tracking of indicators.
Behar, Sharon. 1996. Building a sustainable organization. Promoting watershed 
stewardship, fifth national volunteer monitoring conference. EPA 841-R-97-007. 
Washington, DC: Environmental Protection Agency. http://www.epa.gov/OWOW/
volunteer/proceedings/concur1.html#session1a.
The findings from this workshop summary conclude that what helps collaborative 
projects persists over time are strong programs with a clear focus, strategic and 
regular multiple-stakeholder planning, active people and leadership, an effective 
governing body, diverse fundraising efforts, transparent financial management, 
clear communication and a “learning” environment, and community networking 
and visibility.

84
84
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Berg, Joy; Bradshaw, Bill; Carbone, Joe [and others]. 1998. Decision protocol: 
roadmap to the U.S. Forest Service Decision Protocol Version 2.0. Washington, 
DC: Ecosystem Management Coordination, U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/emc/nepa/includes/dp2roadmap.htm.  
(25 August 2006).
This online document was designed by U.S. Forest Service staff to introduce 
teams to systematic processes for making and documenting their decisions. It 
is based on the principles of decisionmaking science (for instance, Schmoldt 
and others 2001), but compared to other systems, it results in a more structured 
approach for strategic, long-term decisions, and a quicker, more intuitive 
approach when decisions are routine or already clearly structured. It consists of 
sets of questions that elicit clarity, consistency, completeness, and efficiency of 
effort. The questions are divided into five cycles called: (1) process—agreement 
on the decision process; (2) problem—description of problem, goals, information 
available, elements of uncertainty, and needed information; (3) design—devel-
opment of alternative proposals; (4) consequences—description of anticipated 
consequences of each alternative; and (5) action—documenting the rationale for 
alternative selection and an implementation plan. Adaptable to diverse stake-
holders, this protocol seeks to accurately describe the problem and the criteria 
for solving it; use available information effectively; collect new information 
wisely; generate and choose from a wide range of alternatives; distinguish facts, 
myths, values, and unknowns; describe consequences associated with alternative 
problem solutions; and lead to choices that are consistent with personal, organi-
zational, stakeholder, or other important values.
Bliss, John; Aplet, Greg; Hartzell, Cate [and others]. 2001. Community-based 
ecosystem monitoring. In: Gray, G.J.; Enzer, M.J.; Kusel, J., eds. Understanding 
community-based forest ecosystem management. New York: The Hawthorn 
Press: 143–167.
This book chapter provides a comprehensive overview of lessons learned regard-
ing the challenges and benefits of multistakeholder community monitoring of 
local ecosystems. It is especially relevant for managers or participants who are in 
the process of selecting monitoring goals and evaluating the potential usefulness 
of a collaborative approach. A number of brief case examples are provided to 
illustrate monitoring goals, monitoring methods, and selection of participants.
Brechin, Steven R.; Wilshusen, Peter R.; Fortwangler, Crystal L. [and others]. 
2002. Beyond the square wheel: toward a more comprehensive understanding 
of biodiversity conservation as social and political process. Society and Natural 
Resources. 15: 41–64.
This article provides a critical analysis of the importance of involving people and 
social justice issues in international strategies to conserve biodiversity.

85
85
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Bramson, Robert M. 1981. Coping with difficult people. Garden City, NY:  
Anchor Press. 226 p.
This book provides suggestions for dealing effectively with aggressive,  
complaining, unresponsive, overly nice, negative, know-it-all, or indecisive 
personality types.
Brinkman, Rick. 2002. Dealing with people you can’t stand: how to bring out  
the best in people at their worst. Revised and updated edition. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 226 p.
This easy-to-read and comprehensive book begins by analyzing modes of  
behavior that interfere with group process. It explains typical motives and  
how to overcome these behavioral obstacles with skillful communication and 
bringing out the best in people at their worst. It concludes with a section on  
clear communication in the electronic age. Well illustrated with diagrams,  
bullet lists, and examples, it provides win-win avenues for overcoming  
difficulties with individuals who are interfering with group processes.
Canadian Information System for the Environment. 2001. Sharing 
environmental decisions: final report of the Task Force on a Canadian 
Information System for the Environment. Hull, Quebec. 48 p. http:// 
www.cise-scie.ca/english/library/library_reports.cfm. (25 August 2006).
This report is similar to the Voluntary Sector Initiative accords (Voluntary 
Sector Initiative 2001, 2002a, 2002b) in that it is an overview of a program and 
agreed-upon accords, but it differs in that the focus is on a clearinghouse for 
environmental data. The report provides reasons for sharing information, a 
description of the system and its implementation, the role of multiple stakehold-
ers (in particular Aboriginal peoples), expected benefits, and a few examples of 
early projects. Topics discussed include multiple stakeholder participation and 
benefits, feedback on priorities, integration of diverse data, credibility and neu-
trality of data, common standards, and identifying gaps in needed information. 
It also discusses mutual principles of cooperation and making the information 
available and useful to policymakers.
Christoffersen, Nils D. 2003. Rural community realignment with adjacent public 
lands: the case of Wallowa Resources. Turning natural resources into assets:
strong communities—sustained livelihoods—restored environments. 13 p. 
Unpublished document. On file with: Wallowa Resources, P.O. Box 274,  
200 W North St., Enterprise, OR 97828. http://www.wallowaresources.org/
publications.htm. (25 August 2006).
This paper describes a case study in participatory resource management. It is an 
example of a neutral organization facilitating collaborative planning and action 
in a contentious management context characterized by declining resource-related 

86
86
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
employment, critical ecological concerns, and legislative mandates. It illustrates 
relationship-building starting with small-scale and noncontroversial projects that 
lead to broader community and stakeholder involvement in solving larger, more 
contentious issues. Inclusiveness, a transparent process, fundraising, leadership, 
and organizational policies that support collaborative solutions are identified as 
critical components to an effective program.
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program. 2003. Multiparty monitoring and 
assessment guidelines for community based forest restoration in southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Southwest Region, State and Private Forestry. 94 p. http://www.
fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/monitoring/. (25 August 2006).
This report is a result of the joint effort of 43 individuals. They included com-
munity forest restoration practitioners and specialists from six organizations: the 
USDA Forest Service-Collaborative Forest Restoration Program, the National 
Forest Foundation, the Ecological Restoration Institute, the Four Corners Insti-
tute, the Pinchot Institute for Conservation, and Forest Trust. The team came 
together to address lack of monitoring guidance specific to forest restoration 
projects, especially in the Southwest United States. A collaborative effort itself, 
the manual begins with recommendations on organizing collaborative monitor-
ing programs and then provides guidance on monitoring activities specific to 
both ecosystem and socioeconomic monitoring.
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program. 2004a. Handbook 1–What 
is multiparty monitoring? The multiparty monitoring handbook series. 
Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwest 
Region, State and Private Forestry. 13 p. http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/
monitoring/. (25 August 2006).
This series of handbooks (Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2004a–
2004e) was conceived during several workshops in 2003 and builds on the initial 
multiparty monitoring report (Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003). 
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (2004a through 2004c) provide more 
extensive information on organizing a multiparty collaborative monitoring 
program, whereas Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (2004d and 2004e) 
provide additional detail on monitoring ecological and socioeconomic goals and 
indicators. Although the program was designed around forest restoration in the 
Southwest, many of the principles have broad applicability.

87
87
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program. 2004b. Handbook 2—Developing 
a multiparty monitoring plan. The multiparty monitoring handbook series. 
Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwest 
Region, State and Private Forestry. 13 p. http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/
monitoring/. (25 August 2006).
(See Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003, 2004a)
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program. 2004c. Handbook 3—Creative 
budgeting for monitoring projects. The multiparty monitoring handbook series. 
Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwest 
Region, State and Private Forestry. 17 p. http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/
monitoring/. (25 August 2006).
(See Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003, 2004a)
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program. 2004d. Handbook 4–Monitoring 
ecological effects. The multiparty monitoring handbook series. Albuquerque, 
NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southwest Region,  
State and Private Forestry. 71 p. http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/monitoring/.  
(25 August 2006).
(See Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003, 2004a)
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program. 2004e. Handbook 5–Monitoring 
social and economic effects of forest restoration. The multiparty monitoring 
handbook series. Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Southwest Region, State and Private Forestry. 35 p. http://www.fs.fed.
us/r3/spf/cfrp/monitoring/. (25 August 2006).
(See Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 2003, 2004a)
Collaborative Stewardship Team. 2000. Collaborative stewardship within 
the Forest Service: findings and recommendations from the National 
Collaborative Stewardship team. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Partnership Resource Center. 62 p. http://www.
partnershipresourcecenter.org/resources/publications/index.php. (25 August 
2006).
This document reflects the movement on the part of the U.S. Forest Service to 
expand and improve its collaborative partnerships in resource management. It 
reports findings and recommendations from focus group sessions held around 
the country to clarify its collaborative stewardship vision, identify barriers and 

88
88
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
incentives to collaboration, report on the state of such collaborations within the 
Forest Service, and recommend actions to achieve the program goals. A key 
finding is that managers and collaborators close to the resources being managed 
are ready for support and encouragement for their projects. The introduction 
summarizes what collaboration is and is not, its basic principles, and opportuni-
ties and means for Forest Service leadership in collaborative efforts. Relevant 
attachments, in the form of checklists of key points, cover key attributes of 
successful collaborations, negative conditions or “red flags” for collaboration, 
a continuum of collaborative involvement by partners, lessons learned, barriers 
and incentives, and proposals for action.
Cornwall, Andrea; Jewkes, Rachel. 1995. What is participatory research?  
Social Science and Medicine. 41(12): 1667–1676.
This article provides a summary and rationale for participatory research in the 
fields of public health and medicine, but applies to participatory research in 
natural resource management as well. It is an academic analysis of participa-
tory research as response to traditional or conventional research, involving 
local people in the research rather than using them as experimental subjects. It 
discusses the importance of power in the relationships between researchers and 
subjects. It also analyzes several participatory research methods and the chal-
lenges that accompany these methods.
Coughlin, Chrissy; Hoben, Merrick; Manskopf, Dirk [and others]. 1999. A 
systematic assessment of collaborative resource management partnerships. Ann 
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan. M.S. thesis. http://www.snre.umich.edu/
ecomgt/pubs/crmp.htm. (25 August 2006).
This thesis is a detailed analysis of collaborative resource management partner-
ships. It draws extensively on published literature and provides excellent lists 
of bibliographic references for each topic. It also is based on a number of rep-
resentative case studies around the Nation and interviews with key individuals 
in those partnerships. Chapters of the thesis that are pertinent to this handbook 
include topics such as the context and rationale for partnerships, critiques of 
collaboration, reasons for and alternatives to collaboration, ensuring equitable 
stakeholder representation, accommodating diverse interests and capabilities, 
and dealing with scientific issues.

89
89
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Daly, Carol. [N.d.a]. The collaboration handbook. Red Lodge Clearinghouse.  
40 p. http://www.redlodgeclearinghouse.org/resources/handbook.html.  
(25 August 2006).
This handbook is a concise and informative introduction to, and analysis of, the 
collaborative process as it applies to natural resource management. Its sections 
cover (1) evaluating whether collaboration is appropriate to one’s circumstances, 
(2) selecting and recruiting appropriate participants, (3) how to hold effective 
meetings, (4) how to plan the collaborative process and organization, (5) gath-
ering financial and nonfinancial resources, (6) organizational structures and 
administrative support for increasingly elaborate projects, (7) challenges and 
problems that could be encountered along the way, (8) and challenges that often 
crop up as projects mature.
Daly, Carol. [N.d.b]. The collaboration handbook outline. Helena, MT: Red Lodge 
Clearinghouse. 14 p. http://www.redlodgeclearinghouse.org/resources/handbook.
html. (25 August 2006).
A condensed outline of The Collaboration Handbook (Daly, n.d.a)
Daly, Carol. [N.d.c]. Frequently asked questions about collaboration. Helena,  
MT: Red Lodge Clearinghouse. http://www.redlodgeclearinghouse.org/resources/
faq.html#a. (25 August 2006).
This list of questions is written for someone who is new to the collaborative 
process and is in the early stages of judging its usefulness for their purposes. 
The questions cover a definition of collaboration, the usefulness of collaborative 
approaches, who to include, means of making decisions, whether the process can 
be hastened, realistic expectations, and whether the net result will matter. 
Dukes, E. Franklin; Firehock, Karen. 2001. Collaboration: a guide for 
environmental advocates. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia, The 
Wilderness Society, and National Audubon Society. 72 p. http://www.virginia.
edu/ien/publications.htm. (25 August 2006).
Well-reasoned and clearly written, this comprehensive guide is especially useful 
for evaluating the usefulness and appropriateness of a collaborative approach. 
The focus and target audience is broad, but the principles discussed are widely 
applicable. The authors explain how formal and disciplined the collaborative pro-
cess should be to ensure success in a variety of circumstances. Additional topics 
include decisionmaking, facilitation, legal considerations, special considerations 
negotiating with tribes, power imbalance among stakeholders, group behavioral 
norms, dealing with difficult individuals, “good science” issues, monitoring, 
adaptive management, formal agreements, group process protocols, recording 
group memory, criteria for evaluating success, and when to end a collaboration. 
Appendixes provide useful checklists and resources for further information.

90
90
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Dvornich, Karen M.; Tudor, Margaret; Grue, Christian E. 1995. 
NatureMapping: assisting management of natural resources through public 
education and participation. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 23(4): 609–614.  
http://www.fish.washington.edu/naturemapping/pubs.html. (25 August 2006).
This short article describes the University of Washington’s NatureMapping 
program, which is designed to involve private citizens in biodiversity monitoring 
through the auspices of a national network. 
Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network Coordinating Office and the 
Canadian Nature Federation. 2003. Improving local decision-making through 
community based monitoring: toward a Canadian Community Monitoring 
Network. Ottawa, Ontario. 22 p. http://www.ccmn.ca/english/library.html.  
(25 August 2006).
This pamphlet provides an overview of the Canadian Community Monitoring 
Network, how it works, and its benefits. The chart on page 14 provides a sum-
mary of community participation, participation assessment, capacity building, 
and information handling. Page 19 summarizes lessons learned along the way, 
and page 20 lists critical success factors. It is especially useful for broad-scale 
participatory monitoring programs that coordinate many individual projects.
Elzinga, Caryl L.; Salzer, Daniel W.; Willoughby, John W. [and others]. 2001. 
Monitoring plant and animal populations. Malden, MA: Blackwell Science, Inc. 
360 p.
This manual is a comprehensive and current overview of sampling design, 
statistical considerations, and field methods for monitoring plant and animal 
populations. The statistical discussion is written for practitioners facing the 
unique challenges of monitoring these organisms in their natural environment. It 
is likely to be most useful to project managers, students, or skilled participants, 
and less so to professional statisticians. 
Engel, Sarah R.; Voshell, J. Reese, Jr. 2002. Volunteer biological monitoring:  
Can it accurately assess the ecological condition of streams? American 
Entomologist. 48(3): 164–177.
This article reports a meticulous research project to ascertain whether volun-
teer-collected water quality data provided information that was as good as that 
collected by professionals. After adjusting the standard procedures for compara-
bility, the study demonstrated that volunteer programs can provide equally reli-
able information but that every sampling protocol must be validated by standard 
quantitative methods.

91
91
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Everett, Yvonne. 2001. Participatory research for adaptive ecosystem management: 
a case of nontimber forest products. In: Gray, G.J.; Enzer, M.J.; Kusel, J., eds. 
Understanding community-based forest ecosystem management. New York:  
The Hawthorn Press: 335–357.
This article details one case example of participatory research and management 
focused on the harvesting of nontimber forest products in northern California 
and provides an analysis of important considerations and lessons learned. Topics 
related to this handbook include institutional frameworks, coordinating the par-
ticipatory process with specific participants, initiating the collaborative process, 
identifying problems, developing goals, defining research questions, document-
ing and disseminating information, learning by example, and communication 
among collaborators and agencies. Lessons include the need to involve more 
stakeholders, improved relations that resulted from doing so, limits to participant 
resources, the effort and resources needed to build community capacity, and the 
foundation laid for future collaborative efforts.
Federal Data Quality Legislation. 2001. P.L. 106-554, Section 515. http://www.
thecre.com/quality/PL06-554Sec515.html. (25 August 2006).
Federal legislation that requires affected agencies to issue guidelines ensuring 
and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of the informa-
tion they obtain and use, and to establish administrative mechanisms allowing 
affected persons to seek and obtain correction of information that affects them.
Forest Inventory and Analysis [FIA]. [N.d.]. Forest inventory and analysis: 
quality assurance. Program fact sheets. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, FIA National Program Office. 2 p. http://fia.fs.fed.
us/library/fact-sheets/. (25 August 2006).
This short fact sheet provides an overview of how the nationwide FIA federal 
forest monitoring program addresses quality assurance concerns. 
Godfrey, Paul J. 1994. Report on the regional conference. Shared water & 
common goals: enhancing partnerships in water quality monitoring and  
decision-making. Amherst, MA: Water Resources Research Center, University 
of Massachusetts. 28 p.
The conference summarized by this document entailed a broad array of stake-
holder representatives convening to address the barriers that continue to confront 
citizen monitoring of water quality in many states. Barrier identification and 
ranking was conducted by the stakeholder groups—universities, federal agen-
cies, state agencies, local governments, the private sector, and citizen monitoring 

92
92
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
coordinators—and then the results were combined. Subsequently the participants 
divided into breakout groups of mixed affiliation and geographic coverage to 
devise recommended solutions to the most important perceived barriers: lack 
of standardization of methods, need for quality assurance and control, lack of 
clarity and focus on missions and policy, funding challenges, lack of credibility 
and trust, lack of community support, need for technical support and expertise, 
lack of long-term commitment by volunteers, and fear of regulatory reprisals 
from poor data or inappropriate use of results. The details documented for each 
working group provide a succinct overview of concerns about collaborative 
monitoring from a variety of perspectives.
Guijt, Irene; Arevalo, Mae; Saladores, Kiko. 1998. Tracking change together. 
Participatory Learning and Action (PLA Notes). Special Issue: Participatory 
Monitoring and Evaluation. (31): 28-36. http://www.iied.org/NR/agbioliv/pla_
notes/pla_backissues/31.html. (25 August 2006).
Much of the work conducted by the International Institute for Environment and 
Development and reported in its newsletter series PLA Notes focuses on inter-
national development issues and case studies. This special topic issue examines 
the diverse motivations for participating in collaborative monitoring and the 
factors that enhance the probability of successful programs. Examples of factors 
influencing participation include perceived benefits, relevance, quick feedback, 
flexibility, effective organization, meeting short-term needs, and local history. 
Examples of factors that enhance success include decentralized and democratic 
decisionmaking, openness to new approaches, skills in conflict resolution, 
empowerment, community awareness, learning from positive examples,  
sufficient time, and prompt feedback.
Hanson, Steve. [N.d.]. Volunteer monitoring quality assurance project plan review 
checklist. Portland, OR: State of Oregon Department of Environmental Qualiity. 
8 p. http://www.deq.state.or.us/lab/wqm/volunteermonitoringresources.htm.  
(25 August 2006).
Similar to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (2001b) checklist for review-
ing EPA quality management plans, this also is a water quality monitoring 
assurance plan evaluation form. Unlike the former checklist, however, it is more 
focused on activity elements and details than policy and process elements. Used 
together, these two checklists provide good examples for designing a customized 
quality assurance evaluation checklist for a specific monitoring project.

93
93
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Herman, Joan; Lyons Morris, Lynn; Fitz-Gibbon, Carol T. 1997. Evaluator’s 
handbook. Los Angeles, CA: Center for the Study of Evaluation, University of 
California. 160 p.
This volume is the core of the Program Evaluation Kit from the Center for the 
Study of Evaluation, and provides a broad overview of evaluation planning as 
well as a guide to designing and managing programs in general (not specific to 
natural resource management). It describes how to design evaluations during and 
at the end of a project for both qualitative and quantitative approaches to evalua-
tion. Monitoring and evaluation of ongoing projects is emphasized.
Herron, Elizabeth; Green, Linda; Stepenuck, Kris [and others]. 2004a. 
Factsheet V: Training volunteer water quality monitors effectively. Washington, 
DC: National Facilitation of Cooperative State Research Education Extension 
Service Volunteer Monitoring Efforts. 12 p. http://www.usawaterquality.org/
volunteer/links.html#manuals. (25 August 2006).
This fact sheet provides a succinct overview of general considerations regard-
ing training volunteers. It emphasizes that training is an ongoing process and 
addresses group versus individual training, elements of a conducive learning 
environment, tips for successful orientation of new volunteers, the importance 
of a monitoring manual for reference to standard procedures, and considerations 
pertinent to field training. It notes the importance of scheduling training care-
fully, avoiding information overload, using experts as instructors, and providing 
quick feedback when the volunteer first puts their new skills to use.
Herron, Elizabeth; Green, Linda; Stepenuck, Kris [and others]. 2004b. 
Factsheet VI: Building credibility, quality assurance and quality control for 
volunteer monitoring programs. Washington, DC: National Facilitation of 
Cooperative State Research Education Extension Service Volunteer Monitoring 
Efforts. 14 p. http://www.usawaterquality.org/volunteer/. (25 August 2006).
This fact sheet provides a succinct overview of general considerations regarding 
the credibility of volunteer-collected data for water quality monitoring programs. 
Although some of the information is specific to this monitoring purpose, it 
provides a cogent overview of the essential elements required to ensure the data 
is well documented and defensible. By dividing the process into three phases 
(quality assurance planning, quality control procedures, and quality assessment 
reviews), it documents the steps and components required to improve the proba-
bility that participatory monitoring data is trusted and used. Subtopics addressed 
in these three phases include (1) study design, a quality assurance plan, and 
training programs and materials; (2) training, monitoring manuals, standard 
operating procedures, documenting changes, and proficiency testing; (3) data 
proofing and review, independent evaluation, reconciling data with objectives, 
and revising procedures as needed. A continuum of rigor, depending on intended 
use of data, also is described.

94
94
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Hilty, Jody; Merenlender, Adina. 2000. Faunal indicator taxa selection for 
monitoring ecosystem health. Biological Conservation. 92: 185–197.
This article reviews the scientific literature on using animal species as indicators 
of ecosystem health, specifically focusing on the criteria used to select species. 
They propose a step-wise selection process for selecting indicators. They point 
out that many faunal indicators suggested by scientists actually lack correlations 
to ecosystem changes and make recommendations for choosing appropriate 
indicators that could be useful for monitoring projects.
Hunt, Margo; Mayio, Alice; Brossman, Martin [and others]. 1996. The 
volunteer monitor’s guide to quality assurance project plans. EPA 841-B-96-
003. Washington, DC: Office of Wetlands, Oceans, and Watersheds, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. 67 p. http://www.epa.gov/owow/monitoring/
volunteer/qappcovr.htm. (25 August 2006).
Although this guide is written specifically for water quality monitoring by vol-
unteers, it provides a thorough explanation of many key concepts. For instance, 
it defines precision, accuracy, representativeness, completeness, and compara-
bility as they apply to data quality. It distinguishes between quality assurance 
and quality control. It also discusses the chain of documentation needed to 
ensure and demonstrate attention to quality throughout the course of a project. 
In general terms, it examines quality assurance teams and goals, collecting 
background information, project design, sampling procedures, implementation 
plans, standard operating procedures, and review, evaluation, and revision of the 
quality assurance plan. Then it more specifically lists the critical elements of a 
quality assurance project plan; the major categories are project management, data 
acquisition, oversight, and data validation and usability. Blank forms for docu-
mentation are appended.
Jones, Eric T.; McLain, Rebecca J.; Lynch, Kathryn A. 2004. The relationship 
between nontimber forest product management and biodiversity in the United 
States. Portland, OR: Institute for Culture and Ecology. 59 p. http://www.ifcae.
org/projects/ncssf1/index.html. (25 August 2006).
This report, conducted for the National Commission on Science for Sustainable 
Forestry, details a year-long survey of nontimber forest product harvesting in 
several bioregions of the United States and the effect such activity has on bio-
diversity. Among its findings are the lack of adequate monitoring and potential 
usefulness of involving harvesters in participatory monitoring. This recommen-
dation is elaborated upon in Lynch and others (2004) below.

95
95
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Justice, Thomas; Jamieson, David W. 1999. The facilitator’s fieldbook: step-by-
step procedures, checklists and guidelines, samples and templates. Amherst, 
MA: [American Management Association] HRD Press, Inc. 455 p.
This book is an indepth implementation manual that is divided into four sections: 
preparation, working with the group, followup, and special meetings. The prepa-
ration section discusses organizing groups, setting group norms, and planning 
meetings. The section on working with groups covers getting started right, group 
memory, group databases, decision modes, handling conflicts and common 
problems, and evaluation and closure. The section on followup talks about meet-
ing records, reviewing recommendations, and implementation planning. The last 
section, special meetings, covers meetings to plan mission or vision statements, 
electronic meetings, and technological tools. 
Kaner, Sam; Lind, Lenny; Toldi, Catherine; Fisk, Sarah; Berger, Duane. 1996. 
Facilitator’s guide to participatory decision-making. Gabriola Island, British 
Columbia: New Society Publisher. 255 p.
This is a “how-to” book for decisionmaking in small groups. Although written 
for helping facilitators, the information also can be used by participants in the 
group. The book begins by contrasting participatory and conventional decision-
making processes and group dynamics, then continues with methods of facilita-
tion and how to build inclusive and sustainable agreements. It is well illustrated 
with clear diagrams, case studies, and examples.
Kelly, John R.; Harwell, Mark A. 1990. Indicators of ecosystem recovery. 
Environmental Management. 14(5): 527–545.
This article addresses the difficulties of assessing the effects of disturbances 
on ecological systems, and suggests that suites of indicators, rather than single 
indicators, will be most useful for addressing ecosystem complexity. Specifically 
focused on ecosystem recovery from human-caused disturbance, the authors 
suggested that both functional indicators of ecosystem processes, as well as 
biotic indicators, should be used to assess the early stages of ecosystem recovery.
Kerns, Becky K.; Liegel, Leon; Pilz, David; Alexander, Susan J. 2002. 
Biological inventory and monitoring. In: Jones, E.; McLain, R.; Weigand, J., eds. 
Nontimber forest products in the United States. Lawrence, KS: University Press 
of Kansas: 237–269.
Nontimber forest product monitoring is one monitoring goal that rivals biodi-
versity monitoring in its complexity, not only because there are multiple species 
involved, but because there are many stakeholders, some with vested economic 
interests. This book chapter provides an overview of monitoring approaches 
and considerations and illustrates the point that the greater the complexity of a 
monitoring program, the more useful it is to invest time in selecting appropriate 
monitoring goals, designs, and methods, (including collaboration).

96
96
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Krishnaswamy, Ajit. 2004. Participatory research: strategies and tools. 
Practitioner: Newsletter of the National Network of Forest Practitioners.  
22: 17–22. http://www.nnfp.org/. (25 August 2006).
This article provides an overview of strategies and tools that have been integral 
to successful participatory research projects in developing countries where there 
is a longer history of such programs. It emphasizes cultural context, clarity of 
purpose and goals, identifying and involving key stakeholders, means of build-
ing trust and common understanding, and evaluating alternative research and 
management alternatives.
Kusel, Jonathan; Williams, Lee; Keith, Diana [and others]. 2000. A report 
on all-party monitoring and lessons learned from the pilot projects. Tech. Rep. 
101-2000. Taylorsville, CA: Forest Community Research. 27 p. http://www.
sierrainstitute.us/HTML/Publications.html. (25 August 2006).
This report summarizes work and lessons learned by the Lead Partnership 
Group, a consortium of northern California and southern Oregon community-
based organizations focused on improving forest health and community 
well-being. It details an all-party monitoring project sponsored by the Surdna 
Foundation and facilitated by Forest Community Research (FCR) to examine 
ways to broaden the range of stakeholders in collaborative monitoring and 
forest management projects. By coordinating and evaluating three regional pilot 
projects, FCR-derived lessons learned and recommendations for enhancing 
such collaborations in land management contexts that are at times contentious. 
Lessons and recommendations address the importance of common goals; 
working with the varied motivations of the diverse stakeholders; issues of 
data consistency, ownership, and access; the larger institutional context of 
collaborations; agency barriers; definitions of science and knowledge; and 
benefits of collaboration that transcend forest management.
Lawrence, Anna. 2003. The unmeasurable whole: assessing forest biodiversity 
with multiple stakeholders. XII World Forestry Conference. Québec City, 
Quebec: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. http://www.
fao.org/docrep/article/WFC/XII/0822-B1.htm. (25 August 2006).
This paper analyzes the challenges of deriving meaningful large-scale biodiver-
sity assessments from diverse participatory monitoring projects with different 
goals and motivations. It examines the types of information needed at different 
scales and by various interest groups, how to retain flexibility in methods while 
combining results and interpretations, and the process of collaboration between 
multiple participatory projects to synthesize their results.

97
97
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Lawrence, Anna; Ambrose-Oji, Bianca. 2001. Participatory assessment, 
monitoring and evaluation of biodiversity: the art and the science. A background 
paper for the ETFRN workshop on participatory monitoring and evaluation of 
biodiversity. Oxford, United Kingdom: Environmental Change Institute. 24 p. 
http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/humaneco/etfrn.html. (25 August 2006).
This background paper approaches biodiversity assessment from a global 
perspective in light of the recommendations of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity. It focuses on the role that local participatory assessments of species 
diversity can play in simultaneously addressing the needs and concerns of local 
participants while providing information that is useful in ecosystem analyses 
of biodiversity. A variety of participatory methodologies and approaches are 
examined asking who, what, how, and why. Involving institutions in facilitating 
communication, meeting local needs, enhancing areas of mutual understanding 
and building local capacity are discussed as means to address the huge task of 
assessing biodiversity. 
Lawrence, Anna; Hawthorne, William. 2006. Creating user-friendly field guides 
for biodiversity and management. People and plants conservation series. London, 
UK: Earthscan. 256 p.
This book describes how potential authors can use participatory processes to 
design user-friendly field guides to identify plants for monitoring, sustainable 
use, or conservation purposes. It describes pertinent issues and appropriate pro-
cesses for producing the guides, and it emphasizes design methods, identification 
techniques, and information media that are appropriate for the context in which 
the guide will be used. Topics such as budgeting, illustrations, and publishing are 
also covered.
Lengeler, Jane Carter [N.d.]. Theme 2: participatory approaches to forest 
management. In: Earthwatch Institute. Local people’s participation in  
forest resource assessment: a review of field experience. Oxford, United 
Kingdom: Earthwatch Institute. http://www.earthwatch.org/site/ 
pp.asp?c=crLQK3PHLsF&b=479715. (25 August 2006).
This online document reports an analysis of seven participatory forest resource 
assessment projects in developing countries and lessons learned including “the 
need to recognise local people’s strengths and weaknesses; to build on local 
knowledge; to take particular care in species identification; to conduct data 
collection in a systematic, planned manner; to apply statistical rigour; and to 
conduct appropriate training.” It emphasizes the need for expert consultation in 
statistical considerations and rigor in procedures and documentation, but notes 
no inherent conflict between these needs and participatory approaches.

98
98
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Liegel, Leon H.; Pilz, David; Love, Thomas; Jones, Eric T. 1998. Integrating 
biological, socioeconomic, and managerial methods and results in the MAB 
mushroom study. In: Liegel, Leon H., comp. The biological, socioeconomic, and 
managerial aspects of chanterelle mushroom harvesting: The Olympic Peninsula, 
Washington State, U.S.A. AMBIO, A Journal of the Human Environment. 
Stockholm, Sweden: Royal Swedish Academy of Science (Special Report No. 9): 
26–33.
This article summarizes lessons learned from a collaborative research program 
involving several private and public land management organizations, several 
universities, commercial mushroom harvesters, and mycology club volunteers. 
It is an example of how involvement of diverse stakeholders can provide a more 
inclusive and complete analysis of a resource management issue that crosses 
boundaries of geographic scales, land ownerships, forest types, management 
philosophies, economic interests, livelihoods, cultures, and scientific disciplines.
Lindenmayer, David B. 1999. Future directions for biodiversity conservation in 
managed forests: indicator species, impact studies and monitoring programs. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 115: 277–287.
This journal article analyzes approaches to monitoring and management of 
biodiversity in forested landscapes. Topics include the usefulness of indicator 
species; studies of management impacts on forest biodiversity; stand, landscape, 
and regional approaches to conserving diversity; and needed changes in institu-
tional support of long-term monitoring, research, and management. Collabora-
tion between scientists and managers is mentioned, but not working with other 
stakeholders. 
Lovejoy, Thomas E. 1997. Biodiversity: What is it? In: Reaka-Kudla, M.L.; 
Wilson, D.E.; Wilson, E.O., eds. Biodiversity II. Washington, DC: Joseph  
Henry Press: 7–14.
Although there are a variety of excellent books on the topic of biodiversity, this 
book is a good update on the general topic up to 1997. Starting with an introduc-
tory chapter by Thomas Lovejoy who coined the phrase, the book goes on to 
address patterns of biodiversity in the biosphere, threats to biodiversity, under-
standing and using biodiversity, and practical approaches to its conservation.

99
99
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Lund, H. Gyde, ed. 1998. IUFRO guidelines for designing multipurpose resource 
inventories: a project of IUFRO research group 4.02.02. Vienna: International 
Union of Forestry Research Organizations. 216 p.
One approach to reducing monitoring costs is to monitor a variety of resources 
or attributes in the same program (or during the same field visits). Although 
promising in some regards, target organisms or attributes typically require dif-
ferent sampling strategies or methods, that might result in less efficient sampling 
for each particular type of information gathered. Nevertheless, multiple resource 
sampling is often of interest to community groups involved with collabora-
tive monitoring. Lund discusses the advantages, disadvantages, tradeoffs, and 
opportunities presented by a multiple-resource monitoring approach, placing 
special emphasis on evaluating goals and efficacy. The information and examples 
are international. 
Lynch, Kathryn A. 2004. Workshop guide and proceedings: harvester 
participation in inventory and monitoring of nontimber forest products. Portland, 
OR: Institute for Culture and Ecology. 151 p. http://www.ifcae.org/projects/
ncssf1/index.html. (25 August 2006).
This report details the results of a series of meetings held with managers, non-
timber forest harvesters, and interested organizations held as part of a project 
for the National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry (NCSSF) to 
examine the effects of nontimber forest products harvesting on biodiversity 
(Jones and others 2004). The focus of the workshops was to examine opportuni-
ties for participatory monitoring of these forest resources. Recommendations 
derived from the workshop, and further consultation with experts, are detailed in 
Lynch and others (2004). Although this document focuses mainly on the process 
of inclusive workshops, the results demonstrate the wide interest on the part 
of many stakeholders in participatory monitoring of biological resources with 
economic value.

100
100
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Lynch, Kathryn A.; Jones, Eric T.; McLain, Rebecca J. 2004. Nontimber 
forest product inventorying and monitoring in the United States: rationale and 
recommendations for a participatory approach. Portland, OR: Institute for 
Culture and Ecology. 50 p. http://www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssf1/index.html.  
(25 August 2006).
The recommendations from this report to the NCSSF were the impetus for pre-
paring this publication you are reading, and the companion curriculum entitled 
“Training Curriculum: Participatory Biological Monitoring Guidelines for 
Scientists and Managers.” Although the Lynch and others (2004) report specifi-
cally focused on involving harvesters of nontimber forest products in monitoring 
the commercially valuable species they collected, many of the recommenda-
tions apply to all forms of participatory biological monitoring. Specifically with 
respect to monitoring biodiversity, participants can be motivated by general 
interest in conserving diversity or by an economic interest in continued sus-
tainable harvest of particular biological resources. Motivation, incentives, and 
degrees of trust can differ depending on such incentives, but the participatory 
process has benefits that apply regardless. This report discusses reasons for par-
ticipatory monitoring and types of participation, as well as barriers, incentives, 
and benefits of collaboration. Building trust, effective communication among 
diverse groups, matching effort and process to goals, ensuring data usefulness, 
and guaranteeing that collaborations are mutually worthwhile are emphasized. 
McNamara, Carter. [N.d.]. Developing and managing volunteer programs. 
Free Management Library. Minneapolis, MN: Authenticity Consulting, 
LLC. http://www.managementhelp.org/staffing/outsrcng/volnteer/volnteer.
htm#anchor140375. (25 August 2006).
This free information Web site provides management system guidance for both 
nonprofit and for profit organizations. The section on volunteers emphasizes 
that the appropriate management of volunteers is not much different than the 
appropriate management of employees and provides relevant information for 
designing a systematic program. Major topics include establishing or modifying 
volunteer management systems; an online tutorial for designing such systems; 
the role of volunteer managers; staffing analyses; legalities and risk; policies and 
procedures; jobs and task descriptions; volunteer recruitment, screening, select-
ing, orienting, training, and supervising; volunteer-staff relations; and assessing 
volunteer management practices. Numerous related resources are provided.

101
101
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
McNeely, Jeffrey A. 1995. Expanding partnerships in conservation. Washington, 
DC: Island Press. 302 p.
This book is a compilation of case examples of partnerships with local peoples 
and communities to enhance management of protected areas (parks, wildlife 
preserves, wilderness areas, etc.). It does not address participatory monitoring 
but does summarize some of the benefits of collaboration and strategies for  
making participatory management work.
Montréal Process Working Group. 1999. Criteria and indicators for the 
conservation and sustainable management of temperate and boreal forests.  
2nd ed. Ottowa, Ontario: Montréal Process Liaison Office. http://www.mpci.org/. 
(25 August 2006).
The Montréal Process is a multinational working group formed in Geneva, 
Switzerland, in June 1994 to develop and implement internationally agreed-upon 
criteria and indicators for the conservation and sustainable management of 
temperate and boreal forests. A criterion is a category of conditions or processes 
for assessing sustainable forest management. These broad criteria are in turn 
characterized by a set of related indicators that are monitored periodically to 
assess change. Indicators are quantitative or qualitative variables that can be 
measured or described and that, when observed periodically, demonstrate trends. 
By applying a mutually agreed-upon set of criteria and indicators, meta-analyses 
of trends in forest management can reflect global trends and comparative strate-
gies in sustainable management.
Moote, Ann; Becker, Dennis, eds. 2003. Exploring barriers to collaborative 
forestry: report from a workshop. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute. 
24 p. https://library.eri.nau.edu:8443/handle/2019/116. (25 August 2006). 
This report summarizes the findings of a workshop convened to examine the root 
causes of frustration and “burnout” that were plaguing some early attempts at 
collaborative resource management between community groups and federal land 
management agencies. In short, the identified barriers to successful collaboration 
include unrealistic expectations; government policies, procedures, and cultures; 
litigation obstacles; inadequate funding; lack of experience with new contracting 
procedures; inadequate capacity of community forestry groups; needed local 
economic development; and lack of resources and commitment to monitoring. 
Recommendations (targeted to congress, land management agencies, or collabo-
rators as appropriate) are presented for addressing each barrier. 

102
102
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Moote, Ann; Loucks, Andrea Bedell 2003. Policy challenges for collaborative 
forestry: a summary of previous findings and suggestions. Prepared for policy 
dialogue on collaborative forestry. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration 
Institute. 13 p. https://library.eri.nau.edu:8443/handle/2019/332. (25 August 
2006). 
This paper provides a summary of the workshop findings detailed in Moote 
and Beckner (2003), focusing more on needed federal land management policy 
changes. Its findings and recommendations are divided into (1) laws and policies, 
(2) funding issues, and (3) agency culture and practices.
Morrison, Michael L.; Marcot, Bruce G. 1995. An evaluation of resource 
inventory and monitoring program used in National Forest planning. 
Environmental Management. 19(1): 147–156.
This article addresses the issue of multiresource inventories and monitoring on 
national forests, evaluating the structure and use of current inventory and moni-
toring programs and recommending a framework for gathering data to improve 
forest planning. Potentially useful to monitoring coordinators is the discussion of 
spatial and temporal scales in the design of inventory and monitoring programs, 
ecological indicator selection, sampling bias, and statistical rigor in design.
Moseley, Cassandra; Wilson, Lisa J. 2002. Multiparty monitoring for sustainable 
natural resource management. Hayfork, CA; Watershed Research and Training 
Center; Eugene, OR: Ecosystem Workforce Program, University of Oregon. 13 p. 
http://ewp.uoregon.edu/guidebook/. (25 August 2006).
Many federal land management agencies define three types of monitoring to 
ascertain how well their management strategies and plans are working: imple-
mentation, effectiveness, and verification monitoring. This publication addresses 
effectiveness monitoring, namely, how to monitor the biophysical, social, 
economic, and administrative impacts of agency involvement in participatory 
natural resource management programs. For the categories of worker surveys, 
employment records, resource use, grants and cooperative agreements, and 
ecological impacts, it provides examples of addressing four monitoring ques-
tions: Why monitor? What information do you need? Where do you get informa-
tion? and How do you calculate the results? It is a useful guide for analyzing the 
broader outcomes of the participatory monitoring approach we discuss. 

103
103
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Mueller, Gregory M.; Bills, Gerald F.; Foster, Mercedes S., eds. 2004. 
Biodiversity of fungi: inventory and monitoring methods. New York:  
Elsevier Academic Press. 777 p.
Fungi constitute a large branch on the tree of life and are of immense importance 
to humans and ecosystems, but they are often overlooked in surveys of biodiver-
sity owing to their cryptic nature, the lack of monitoring methods, and limited 
expertise in identification. Over 90 contributors combined their knowledge to 
produce this first and comprehensive manual detailing inventory and monitoring 
methods for all types of fungi. As such, it is a unique and invaluable reference 
for efforts to include fungi in biodiversity surveys.
National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry [NCSSF]. 2005. 
Science, biodiversity, and sustainable forestry: a findings report of the National 
Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry. Washington, DC. 52 p.
This report summarized progress to date by the NCSSF, specifically some of 
their key findings regarding the management of biodiversity and how the com-
mission is contributing to this aspect of sustainable forestry in the United States. 
They outline findings in four areas of focus: (1) The effectiveness of biodiversity 
conservation is largely determined by interactions between stand- and landscape-
level patterns, (2) Sustaining disturbance dynamics within appropriate ranges 
sustains biodiversity and ecosystem services, (3) Biodiversity indicators must 
be matched to land use objectives, and (4) Sustainable forestry and biodiversity 
conservation require management that recognizes and adapts to new informa-
tion, changing environments, and shifting social priorities.
National Forest Foundation; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
National Partnership Office. 2005. Partnership guide: the power of people 
working together, a living document. http://www.partnershipresourcecenter.org/
resources/partnership-guide/. (24 August 2006).
This partnership guide was produced specifically for and by the USDA Forest 
Service to assist their employees with questions they might have about how to 
create partnerships with other government or nongovernmental organizations 
while meeting all the legal, regulatory, policy, and procedural guidelines that 
direct their agency and the work it does. It focuses on the organizational context 
of partnerships, how to obtain resources, clear and documented communication, 
ethical and legal conduct, and rewards for successful joint enterprises.

104
104
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
National Resources Conservation Service [NRCS]. [N.d.]. Title 360–Human 
Resources, Part 428—National NRCS Volunteer Services—Earth Team. 
Unpublished document. On file with: NRCS, Conservation Communications 
Staff, P.O. Box 2890, Washington, DC 20013. http://policy.nrcs.usda.gov/scripts/
lpsiis.dll/GM/gm_360_428.htm. (25 August 2006).
This Web site (a document is also available for downloading) provides a specific 
example of a federal agency designing a volunteer management system for 
incorporating the use of volunteers (see McNamara (n.d.) for a more generic 
approach). Major topical headings include authorization, program responsibili-
ties, eligibility, volunteer status, documentation and forms, security and financial 
disclosure, recognition of volunteer services, reporting requirements, and various 
pertinent exhibits (examples).
North-South Environmental, Inc. 2004. Enhancing community based monitoring 
in Canada: the role of Environmental Canada. Burlington, Ontario: Ecological 
Monitoring and Assessment Network-Coordinating Office. 30 p. http://www.
eman-rese.ca/eman/reports/publications/2004/ecbm/intro.html. (25 August 
2006).
This report was commissioned by the government agency Environment Canada 
to explore and analyze the best approaches for interfacing with the voluntary 
sector to manage collaborative environmental monitoring in Canada. The report 
is based on meetings and interviews where opinions were solicited regarding 
expected benefits and anticipated challenges facing such a program. Factors 
addressed include starting and promoting such programs, funding, monitoring 
protocols, stakeholder communication, data handling and networking, training 
needs, capacity building, and recognition of participant contributions. Concerns 
expressed in the discovery phase included whether long-term commitment was 
adequate, how to standardize monitoring protocols, whether adequate resources 
were available, appropriate feedback mechanisms among the participating 
organizations, the complexity of the issue of sustainability, and lack of trust in 
the government. The report also elaborates the expected benefits of collaboration 
and provides an overview of the structure of Canada’s participatory monitoring 
programs including Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network and other 
environmental agencies.

105
105
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Noss, Reed F. 1990. Indicators for monitoring biodiversity: a hierarchical approach. 
Conservation Biology. 4(4): 355–364.
This article describes a holistic and comprehensive framework for choosing  
indicators and can be useful for helping collaborators and stakeholders 
understand the complexity of ecosystems and select indicators for monitoring 
programs. Noss suggests that indicators should be chosen from all levels of bio-
logical organization, including the regional/landscape, community-ecosystem, 
population-species, and genetic levels. He then suggests that for each of these 
levels, indicators be selected for each of the three components of an ecosystem: 
composition, structure, and function. These levels and components overlap to 
compose a nested hierarchy and matrix that can be used to specifically address 
the questions posed by the monitoring project.
Noss, Reed F.; Cooperrider, Allen Y. 1994. Saving nature’s legacy: protecting  
and restoring biodiversity. Washington, DC: Island Press. [Defenders of 
Wildlife]. 416 p. 
This book, written from the perspective of an environmental conservation 
organization, is a thorough overview of strategies for biodiversity conserva-
tion in various ecosystem types of the United States. It analyzes the ecosystem 
processes creating and changing biodiversity, past examples of conservation 
strategies, the usefulness of reserves and reserve networks, and the active man-
agement of forests, rangelands, and aquatic ecosystems to conserve biodiversity. 
It concludes with a discussion of monitoring and future directions.
Office of Management and Budget. 2002. Guidelines for ensuring and 
maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information 
disseminated by federal agencies. [Notice; republication]. Federal Register. 
67(36): 8452-8460. http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/fedreg/final_information_
quality_guidelines.html. (25 August 2006).
Federal legislation mandates federal agencies to arrange peer review of  
information they disseminate to the public.

106
106
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Ottke, Christian; Kristensen, Peter; Maddox, David [and others]. 2000. 
Monitoring for impact: lessons on natural resources monitoring from 13 NGOs. 
Washington, DC: World Resources Institute. 90 p. http://biodiv.wri.org/pubs_
description.cfm?PubID=3003. (25 August 2006).
This research report provides a comprehensive overview of how to monitor natu-
ral resources from the perspective of globally active nongovernment conserva-
tion organizations. It provides detail about the components of monitoring without 
dwelling on specific circumstances. It emphasizes the importance of focusing 
on the goals and reasons for monitoring, keeping the program simple and direct, 
deriving credible bias-free information, and communicating the information for 
effect. It divides the monitoring process into planning, implementation, evalu-
ation, and communicating. In each of these categories, it elaborates on more 
specific steps that constitute an effective monitoring approach. Appendices 
include additional tools, resources, and example forms. Although oriented 
towards conservation advocacy, the elements of a complete monitoring program 
are cogently presented.
Pollard, J.E.; Smith, W.; Palmer, C.E. 1999. Forest Health Monitoring 1999 plot 
component quality assurance implementation plan. Research Triangle Park, 
NC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Forest Health 
Monitoring Program. 66 p. http://www.fs.fed.us/institute/about/design_qual.html 
(25 August 2006).
Forest Health Monitoring is a national monitoring program that seeks to obtain 
environmental data that are scientifically defensible and of acceptable quality to 
achieve the goals of the Forest Inventory and Analysis Program. This document 
builds on current Quality Assurance Project Plans for Detection Monitoring 
and a Field Methods Manual for standard sampling procedures by providing a 
unified national approach to quality assessment (review and evaluation of quality 
assurance plans and quality control methods).
Resolve. [N.d.]. U.S. Forest Service: partnership capacity assessment tool. 
Washington, DC: Resolve, Inc. 23 p. http://www.partnershipresourcecenter.org/
resources/tools/index.php. (25 August 2006).
This U.S. Forest Service document is the product of a Partnership Task Force 
that in 2003 led to the creation of a new National Partnership Office and program 
within the agency. It is intended as a tool to help managers and local agency 
offices evaluate their capacity to undertake new partnerships or improve ongoing 
ones. It begins by summarizing the elements of successful partnerships and also 
what participating collaborative organizations need to ensure. The tool itself 
begins with fill-in forms to detail priorities and goals. Next follows a series of 
evaluation forms addressing time; staff; resources; attitudes; experiences and 

107
107
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
opportunities; incentives and barriers; staff knowledge, skills, and abilities;  
and external relations. A process for analyzing numerical scores is described, 
and guidance for planning the next steps is provided. Additional resources  
are appended.
Russo, J. Edward; Schoemaker, Paul J.H. 1989. Decision traps: the ten barriers 
to brilliant decision-making and how to overcome them. New York: Simon and 
Schuster. 280 p.
This book is written to teach people the process of making good decisions by 
avoiding common mistakes. Based on a field of research entitled “behavioral 
decision-theory,” the lessons are derived from how people actually make  
decisions, and then suggestions are made for improving the process.
San Bernardino National Forest. 2002. Volunteer safety program desk guide. 
Unpublished document. On file with: San Bernardino National Forest, 1824 S 
Commercenter Circle, San Bernardino, CA 92408.
This document is an example of a safety plan specifically targeted to volunteers.
Savan, Beth; Morgan, Alexis J.; Gore, Christopher. 2003. Volunteer 
environmental monitoring and the role of the universities: the case of Citizens’ 
Environment Watch. Environmental Management. 31(5): 561-568.
This article discusses the usefulness of universities as stable institutions to 
provide support and continuity to collaborative projects and programs, especially 
when land management agencies do not, for whatever reason, take a lead role.
Schmoldt, Daniel L.; Peterson, David L.; Smith, Robert L. 2001. The analytic 
hierarchy process and participatory decision-making. In: Power, J.M.; Strome, 
M.; Daniel, T.C., eds. Proceedings: decision support—2001. Combined events of 
the 17th annual geographic information seminar and the resource technology ’94 
symposium. Bethesda, MA: American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote 
Sensing. Vol. 1.
This somewhat technical article describes a decisionmaking and support process 
that could be particularly useful for making systematic, explicit, rigorous, robust, 
and well-documented decisions in groups of users with diverse subjective opin-
ions. As such it is highly applicable to complicated collaborative decisionmaking 
processes. The model itself is more complex than most users would care to learn, 
but a private company called Expert Choice (http://www.expertchoice.com/) 
provides subscription access to a Web-based, user-friendly interface with the 
model so that users can customize the analysis to their circumstances. The Web 
interface also allows multiple users to work on the same model in simultaneous 
sessions from any location with Web access. 

108
108
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Schreuder, Hans, T.; Ernst, Richard; Ramirez-Maldonado, Hugo. 2004. 
Statistical techniques for sampling and monitoring natural resources. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RMRS-GTR-126. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 111 p. http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/main/
pubs/electronic/rmrs_gtr.html. (25 August 2006).
This publication provides a thorough statistical overview of methods and consid-
erations for monitoring natural resources. Written by individuals with extensive 
experience in the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Inven-
tory and Analysis Program, its audience is inventory and monitoring personnel 
tasked with designing, implementing, or managing a natural resource monitoring 
program. As such, it covers not only rigorous statistical approaches but also 
practical considerations common in field applications.
The Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. 2001a. Handbook 
of the convention on biological diversity. London, United Kingdom: Earthscan. 
A 2nd edition dated 2003 is available online: http://www.biodiv.org/convention/
articles.asp. (25 August 2006). 
The publication details the technical agreements of the International Convention 
on Biodiversity.
The Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. 2001b. Sustainable 
management of non-timber forest resources. [CBD technical series No. 6]. 
Montreal, Quebec. http://www.biodiv.org/doc/publications/cbd-ts-06.pdf. 
(25 August 2006).
This document provides a broad overview of considerations for sustainable 
nontimber forest product management including developing monitoring systems 
that include a combination of monitoring at large spatial scales and monitoring 
high-value indicator species at a population level.
The Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. [N.d.]. Sustaining 
life on Earth. Convention on biological diversity. Montreal, Quebec. http://www.
biodiv.org/programmes/outreach/awareness/publications.asp. (25 August 2006).
This publication explains in simple language the importance of biodiversity  
and how the international convention seeks to conserve biodiversity.

109
109
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Sirmon, Jeff M.; Rana, Naureen; Kostishack, Peter. 2002a. Report to the USDA 
Forest Service on Phase I of the Partnership Development Program; contract  
43-9138-2-3120. Washington, DC: Pinchot Institute for Conservation. 20 p. 
http://www.partnershipresourcecenter.org/resources/partnership_task_force/
documents/PDP_Phase_I_Report.pdf. (25 August 2006).
This report summarizes Phase I of a project by the USDA Forest Service 
Partnership Task Force to design a program to facilitate agency partnerships. It 
provides brief discussions and useful checklists to “[1] define the core skill-set 
required of program managers and partnership specialists who are responsible 
for advancing solutions to natural resource management using collaboration and 
partnerships; [2] catalogue existing training opportunities related to the develop-
ment of core skills; [3] explore the cultural, procedural, and skill-related barriers 
to the advancement collaborative solutions; and [4] identify some of the more 
promising, and perhaps necessary, approaches to developing competency in part-
nerships and collaborative stewardship.” Written from an agency perspective, its 
key points and findings nevertheless reflect many of the recommendations often 
discussed from the perspective of collaborators. The report lists training oppor-
tunities for relationship building and understanding communities, facilitation 
and mediation, and the business side of partnerships, as well as experts within 
and outside the Forest Service who may be consulted.
Sirmon, Jeff M.; Rana, Naureen; Kostishack, Peter. 2002b. Report to the USDA 
Forest Service on Phase II of the partnership Development Program “Learn 
While Doing:” a model for working in collaboration and through partnerships; 
contract 43-9138-2-3120. Washington, DC: Pinchot Institute for Conservation. 35 
p. http://www.partnershipresourcecenter.org/resources/partnership_task_force/
documents/Learn_While_Doing_Model.pdf. (25 August 2006).
This report summarizes Phase II of a project by the USDA Forest Service 
Partnership Task Force to design a program to facilitate agency partnerships. It 
builds upon the analysis in Sirmon and others (2002a) to propose a model that 
Forest Service front-line managers, collaborators and the agency can use to 
revamp institutional barriers to including stakeholders in resource management. 
The model addresses six stages of collaboration: (1) assessing, (2) preparing, 
(3) framing issues, (4) making collaborative decisions, (5) implementing deci-
sions, and (6) maintaining relationships. For each stage of this model it discusses 
desired outcomes, needed skills, and available training (including experts).

110
110
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Sithole, Bevlyne. 2002. Where the power lies: multiple stakeholder politics over 
natural resources. Jakarta, Indonesia: Center for International Forestry Research. 
87 p.
Although this guide was developed from experiences in developing nations, 
the principles discussed are applicable to any collaborative process and address 
the important issue of power relations among participants. Example of sources 
of disparate power include land tenure, legal authority, knowledge and skills, 
wealth, available time, constituency support, reputation, cultural norms, and 
social attitudes. All human interactions involve multilayered power relations, 
or what has been termed “micro-politics.” Large discrepancies in actual or 
perceived power can be particularly important in the success or failure of col-
laborative efforts involving diverse stakeholders. This publication provides an 
indepth analysis of forms of power and how they are expressed, relations among 
participants with different levels of power, and how to appreciate and manage 
these dynamics. 
Stockdale, M.C.; Corbet, J.M.S. 1999. Participatory inventory: a field manual 
written with special reference to Indonesia. Tropical Forestry Paper No. 38. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford Forestry Institute, Department of Plant 
Sciences, University of Oxford. 383 p.
Although this manual about participatory inventories is written specifically about 
involving local communities in Indonesia, it provides a good example of address-
ing all the field and training-related specifics of such programs. The process of 
developing a collaborative project with villagers is also discussed.
Sullivan, Patrick, chair. 2000. Improving the collection, management, and use 
of marine fisheries data. Committee on Improving the Collection and Use of 
Fisheries Data. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. http://www.nap.edu/
books/0309070856/html/. (25 August 2006).
This online book provides a detailed example of the controversies and issues that 
can arise between scientists and resource users when they depend on each other’s 
collaboration to manage a valuable resource.
University of Maine Cooperative Extension and Sea Grant Program, Maine 
Coastal Program of the Maine State Planning Office. [N.d.]. Environmental 
stewardship in the Gulf of Maine: a coordinator’s manual for volunteer 
monitoring. 79 p. & appendixes. Unpublished document. On file with: University 
of Maine Cooperative Extension, Know-Lincoln County Office, 377 Manktown 
Road, Waldoboro, ME 04572.
This manual is well written and highly applicable to many of the modules in our 
manual. It is not currently published and is therefore only available by contacting 
the offices of the Maine Cooperative Extension agency (above). It is a manual for 

111
111
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
how to organize specific monitoring projects within a larger marine environmen-
tal monitoring program. Chapters cover topics such as vision statements, goals, 
quality assurance plans, budgets and fundraising, working with volunteers, 
safety, data analysis and reporting, communication, leadership, conducting 
effective meetings, outreach activities, and project evaluation. Each topic has 
useful lists of pertinent considerations and references. The appendixes provide 
examples of brainstorming techniques; visioning processes; a goals and objec-
tives form; sample volunteer position descriptions, applications, and timekeeping 
forms; a training agenda; leadership competencies; team-building activities; 
meeting guidelines; group member’s roles and functions; group communication 
problems and skills; dealing with problem behaviors; conflict management styles; 
an agenda form, facilitation techniques, action plan record form, and evaluation 
tools for meetings; how to write a news release and give media interviews, and 
how to evaluate the monitoring project.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. [N.d.]. Quality of information guidelines. 
Washington, DC: Office of the Chief Information Officer. http://www.ocio.usda.
gov/qi_guide/index.html. (25 August 2006).
This online resource is intended for employees of the U.S. Department of Agri-
culture but provides a useful perspective on the quality of information issues of 
concern to federal land managers. Only a portion of the information applies to 
participatory monitoring projects, but it is illustrative of managerial concerns. 
Managers in the U.S. Forest Service can benefit by perusing the topics with 
regard to organizing participatory projects in order to ensure the credibility and 
usefulness of collected data. The basic principles that are outlined are informa-
tive to any collaborators.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 2004. Managing volunteers: 
a field guide for USDA Forest Service volunteer coordinators, R6/PNW. 
Unpublished document. On file with: The Volunteer Program, USDA  
Forest Service, Human Resources Staff, P.O. Box 3623, Portland, OR 97208. 
http://www.partnershipresourcecenter.org/resources/volunteers/index.php.  
(25 August 2006).
Intended for in-house use, this Forest Service manual provides a good overview 
of considerations regarding the use of volunteers from a federal land-manage-
ment agency perspective. Although participatory monitoring is not covered, 
many of the contextual considerations are applicable. It starts with an overview 
of applicable federal legislation (detailed in the appendixes), and then addresses 
such topics as recruitment, volunteer motivation, identification of volunteers in 
the field, agreements, liability, insurance, safety, use of government vehicles and 
equipment, reimbursement, reporting accomplishments, and appropriate recogni-
tion and awards. Applicable forms are also appended.

112
112
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]. 2001a. EPA requirements 
for quality assurance project plans. In: EPA QA/R-5 Quality System Series. 
Washington, DC: Office Of Environmental Information. 40 p. http://www.
epa.gov/quality/qmps.html. (25 August 2006).
The EPA is a leading federal agency for developing quality assurance plans. 
This document provides an overview of their requirements for quality 
assurance in project plans as well as discussing the process of quality 
assurance at the program and policy levels. See Hunt and others (1996) 
for a detailed explanation of a quality assurance plan for data collected by 
volunteers monitoring water quality.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2001b. Checklist for reviewing 
EPA quality management plans. Washington, DC: Office Of Environmental 
Information. 13 p. http://www.epa.gov/quality/qmps.html. (25 August 2006).
This document is a short but informative checklist of the elements of a 
quality assurance plan. The elements listed are general and policy oriented, 
contrasting nicely with the more detailed approach of the other quality assur-
ance plan checklist that we cite (Hanson, n.d.).
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2002. Guidelines for ensuring and 
maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information 
disseminated by the Environmental Protection Agency. EPA/260R-02-008. 
Washington, DC: Office Of Environmental Information. 61 p. http://www.
epa.gov/quality/informationguidelines/. (25 August 2006).
These guidelines are general in nature and apply to policy concerning 
information the EPA disseminates.
The Volunteer Monitor. [N.d.] The National Newsletter of the Volunteer 
Water Quality Monitoring Program. http://www.epa.gov/owow/monitoring/
volunteer/issues.htm. (25 August 2006).
This newsletter of the Environmental Protection Agency’s nationwide 
Volunteer Water Quality Monitoring Program covers a wide range of top-
ics of interest to individuals who collaborate on local monitoring projects. 
Of particular interest are issues dedicated to themes such as “staying afloat 
financially” “managing and presenting your data” “program management” 
and “community outreach.”

113
113
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Voluntary Sector Initiative. 2001. An accord between the government of 
Canada and the voluntary sector. Ottowa, Ontario. 16 p. http://www.vsi-isbc.
ca/eng/relationship/accord.cfm. (25 August 2006).
This short official document lists principles of collaboration, respect, com-
munication, and relative responsibilities of the government and the private 
sector in the joint Canadian program to involve volunteers in programs to 
monitor the environment. In particular, this accord applies to the Canadian 
Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network, Canadian Community 
Monitoring Network, and Canadian Information System for the Environ-
ment.
Voluntary Sector Initiative. 2002a. A code of good practice on policy 
dialogue. Ottawa, Ontario. 16 p. http://www.vsi-isbc.ca/eng/relationship/
accord.cfm. (25 August 2006).
This short document presents a mutually agreed-upon code of practice 
concerning dialogue between the government and the private volunteer 
sector on communication about collaborative policies. It addresses values, 
principles, and commitments to action. In the appendix, it provides a useful 
diagram highlighting public policy processes and methods for involvement.
Voluntary Sector Initiative. 2002b. A code of good practice on funding. 
Ottawa, Ontario. 26 p. http://www.vsi-isbc.ca/eng/relationship/accord.cfm. 
(25 August 2006).
This short document describes principles of collaborative funding for 
environmental monitoring, summaries of volunteer and government funding 
sources and mechanisms, and an overview of how to implement mutual 
funding of collaborative monitoring.
Whitman and Hagan. 2004. Biodiversity indicators for sustainable forestry:  
final report to the National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry. 
Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences, Bruswick, ME: Manomet 
Center for Conservation Sciences. http://www.ncseonline.org/ewebeditpro/
items/O62F3301.pdf. (25 August 2006).
This document reports Manomet Center’s review and evaluation of scientific 
information that is available to aid forest managers on selecting biodiversity 
indicators. It includes recommendations for selection criteria and a Web-
based decision-support tool derived from the literature and their survey 
of scientists and decisionmakers around the United States. It also includes 
useful analyses and conclusions regarding the feasibility of using biodiver-
sity indicators in sustainable forest management and levels of understanding 
among foresters.

114
114
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Wilson, E.O., ed., Peter, Frances M., assoc. ed. 1988. Biodiversity. Washington, 
DC. National Academy Press. http://books.nap.edu/books/0309037395/html/
R1.html. (25 August 2006).
This book (also available online) is one of the first definitive compilations treat-
ing the issue of biodiversity from such perspectives as human importance, risks, 
monitoring, science, restoration, alternatives, policies, and prospects.
Wondolleck, Julia; Yaffee, Steven L. 2000. Making collaboration work: lessons 
from innovation in natural resource management. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
277 p.
This book provides a comprehensive and cogent analysis of lessons learned from 
natural resource management programs regarding how to make collaborative 
efforts work. The authors analyze 10-years-worth of examples in the United 
States to present a rationale for collaboration, the various challenges and impedi-
ments that are likely to be encountered, and how to make a collaborative program 
succeed. It is an excellent reference for judging the pros and cons of initiating a 
participatory monitoring program. Both forest managers and participants will  
find it useful.
Wong, Jennifer L.G. 2000. The biometrics of non-timber forest product resource 
assessment: a review of current methodology. [Background paper for the 
European Tropical Forest Research Network workshop: developing needs-based 
inventory methods for non-timber forest products. London, United Kingdom: 
United Kingdom Department for International Development. 62 p. http://www.
etfrn.org/etfrn/workshop/ntfp/. (25 August 2006).
This report is a comprehensive global overview of strategies and methods for 
monitoring nontimber forest product resources and ascertaining if their harvest is 
sustainable. It emphasizes statistical rigor while acknowledging a wide spectrum 
of monitoring goals and methods and the usefulness of incorporating traditional 
knowledge into monitoring project design and implementation. This background 
paper was presented at the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) conference 
noted in the citation and subsequently edited down to the less comprehensive and 
for-sale FAO publication listed immediately below (Wong and others 2001).

115
115
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Wong, Jennifer L.G.; Thornber, Kirsti; Baker, Nell. 2001. Resource assessment 
of non-wood forest products. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations. 109 p.
Although this publication provides less detail than the original report from which 
it was produced (see Wong 2000 above), it does provide a concise conceptual 
overview of monitoring approaches for nontimber forest products. As with the 
original report, the target audience is international, with an emphasis on develop-
ing nations in the tropics. As such, community economic development is empha-
sized as the context of collaborative monitoring.
Wong, J.L.G.; Healy, J.R.; Phillips, O.L. 2002. Introduction to theme 2: 
incorporating values into biodiversity assessment and monitoring—an 
introduction to some current issues. Participatory Assessment, Monitoring 
and Evaluation of Biodiversity. London, United Kingdom. University of 
Oxford: Environmental Change Institute. http://www.etfrn.org/etfrn/workshop/
biodiversity/index.html. (25 August 2006).
This outline highlights many of the issues regarding the incorporation of local 
values into biodiversity conservation strategies through participatory programs.
Working Group on Criteria and Indicators. 2001. Scaling national criteria 
and indicators to the local level. Ottawa, Ontario: Science Branch, Canadian 
Forest Service, Natural Resources Canada. http://www.mpci.org/rep-pub/2001/
2001scaling_e.pdf. (25 August 2006).
This report discusses the issue of scale and challenges inherent in the aggrega-
tion of data on indicators of sustainable forest management, looking at sub-
national to national levels in Canada. It then analyzes the possible application  
of the Montreal Process National Criteria and Indicators on the subnational  
level. Lastly, examples of mechanisms to develop, identify, and implement  
those subnational indicators are provided, as well as how they could be linked  
to national-level indicators.

116
116
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Wright, Pam. [N.d.]. Program guidance for development of a forest/grassland 
monitoring and evaluation program. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Inventory and Monitoring Institute, Forest 
Monitoring Group. 66 p. [plus app. F]. http://www.fs.fed.us/institute/lucid/ 
final_report/Desk_Guide.htm. (25 August 2006). 
Central to any monitoring program is asking the right questions and tailoring 
the program to goals and needs. Although this document is written for a broad 
array of monitoring questions specifically pertinent to management of Forest 
Service lands, it provides an example of designing monitoring program compo-
nents before tailoring specifics to meet the identified goals and needs. Section 2 
(Design and implementation of a forest monitoring program) addresses scope, 
conceptual framework and approach, purposes and questions, measurable items 
(elements) for each question, sampling protocols for each element, selection of 
elements applicable to the monitoring goals, development of a monitoring plan 
based on budget constraints, implementation of the monitoring, evaluation of 
the data and results, documentation and reporting of the results, and revision 
of the program as needed. Appendix F provides a matrix of (columns) potential 
monitoring purposes and indicators cross-referenced with (rows) monitoring 
questions, elements to be measured, sampling protocols, units of measure, 
quality assurance and control procedures, data sources, spatial extent and scale, 
frequency of measurement, reference value, analysis approach, estimated costs, 
priority, data management, responsible individuals, reporting interval, and  
reference notes. 
Yaffee, Steven L. 2002. Benefits of collaboration. Ann Arbor, MI: Ecosystem 
Management Initiative, School of Natural Resources and Environment, 
University of Michigan. 4 p. http://www.snre.umich.edu/ecomgt/lessons/why.
htm. (25 August 2006).
This bulleted list of points is derived from a presentation highlighting the major 
benefits that can be expected from collaborative natural resource management 
efforts.
Yaffee, Steven L.; Wondolleck, Julia M. 2000. Making collaboration work: 
lessons from a comprehensive assessment of over 200 wide-ranging cases of 
collaboration in environmental management. Conservation Biology in Practice. 
1(1): 17-25. http://www.snre.umich.edu/ecomgt/lessons/stages/getting_started/
Benefits_of_Collaboration.pdf. (25 August 2006).
This short article presents several key points about collaborations. Collaborations 
(1) consist of interdependent people, (2) produce better decisions than adversarial 
processes, (3) improve the chances of decisions being implemented, (4) are 
integral to ecosystem management, (5) focus on problems and solutions rather 
than positions and advocacy, and (6) epitomize an entrepreneurial approach to 
problemsolving.

117
117
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Appendix 1—Organizations
This appendix contains contact information and Web site addresses for organi-
zations with experience in conducting participatory monitoring projects or 
that have produced useful supporting materials. The list consists primarily of 
nationwide programs in the United States with a few local, state, and international 
organizations relevant to this manual. 
Appalachian Forest Resource Center
Rural Action
P.O. Box 157
Trimble, OH 45782 
Phone:	 740.767.4938 
Fax:	
740.767.4957
Email:	 info@ruralaction.org
URL:	 http://www.appalachianforest.org/ 
Atlantic Coastal Cooperative Statistics Program 
1444 Eye Street NW, Suite 410
Washington, DC 20005
Phone:	 202.216.5690
Fax: 	
202.289.7265
Email:	 support@accsp.org 
URL:	 http://www.accsp.org/ 
Biodiversity Virtual Resources, Inc.
[No street address]
Ottawa-Hull, ON
Canada
Phone:	 613.294.9014
Email:	 info@bvrr.com 
URL:	 http://www.bvrr.com/ 
Canadian Community Monitoring Network
Nature Canada
85 Albert St., Suite 900
Ottawa, ON K1P 6A4
Canada
Phone:	 800.267.4088. 
Fax:	
613.562.3371
URL:	 http://www.ccmn.ca/english/
URL:	 http://www.ccmn.ca/english/tools.html (toolkit)

118
118
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Canadian Information System for the Environment
Environment Canada
70 Crémazie, 7th Floor
Gatineau, QC K1A 0H3
Canada
Phone:	 819.934.1004
Fax:	
819.994.5738
Email:	 cisesec@ec.gc.ca
URL:	 http://www.cise-scie.ca/english/home.cfm 
Center for International Forestry Research
P.O. Box 6596, JKPWB
Jakarta 10065
Indonesia
Phone:	 +62 251.622.622
Fax: 	
+62 251.622.100
Email:	 cifor@cgiar.org 
URL:	 http://www.cifor.cgiar.org/ 
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program
State and Private Forestry 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
Southwest Region
333 Broadway SE
Albuquerque, NM 87102
Phone:	 505.842.3292
URL:	 http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/spf/cfrp/ 
Community-Based Collaboratives Research Consortium
c/o University of Virginia
164 Rugby Road
Charlottesville, VA 22903
Phone:	 434.924.5041
Email:	 cbcrc@virginia.edu 
URL:	 http://www.cbcrc.org 
URL:	 http://www.cbcrc.org/php-bin/resources/resourceSearch.php  
	
  (bibliographic database)
Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service
Volunteer Water Quality Monitoring National Facilitation Project
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Program Leader’s Office 
Mail Stop 2210 
1400 Independence Avenue, SW 
Washington, DC 20250-2210
URL:	 http://www.usawaterquality.org/volunteer/ 

119
119
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Earthwatch Institute (Europe)
267 Banbury Road
Oxford, OX2 7HT 
United Kingdom
Phone:	 +44 (0) 1865.318.838
Fax: 	
+44 (0) 1865.311.383
Email:	 info@earthwatch.org.uk
URL:	 http://www.earthwatch.org/europe/ 
Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network
(Citizen Science)
Coordinating Office 
Environment Canada 
Canada Centre for Inland Waters 
867 Lakeshore Road 
Burlington, ON L7R 4A6 
Canada
Phone:	 905.336.4414 
Fax: 	
905.336.4499 
Email:	 eman@ec.gc.ca 
URL:	 http://www.eman-rese.ca/ 
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
Phone:	 928.523.7182
Fax:	
928.523.0296
Email:	 eri-info@for.nau.edu 
URL:	 http://www.eri.nau.edu/cms/
Ecosystem Management Initiative
c/o Steven Yaffe
School of Natural Resources and Environment
University of Michigan
Dana Building
430 E University
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1115
Phone:	 734.763.5451
Email:	 yaffee@umich.edu 
Fax:	
734.615.7100
URL:	 http://www.snre.umich.edu/ecomgt/ 
Ecosystem Workforce Program 
Institute for a Sustainable Environment
130 Hendricks Hall
5247 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-5247 
Phone:	 541.346.0676 
Fax: 	
541.346.2040
URL:	 http://ewp.uoregon.edu/guidebook/ 

120
120
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Environmental Change Institute
Oxford University Centre for the Environment
Dyson Perrins Building, South Parks Road
Oxford OX1 3QY
United Kingdom
Phone:	 +44 (0) 1865.275.848
Fax:	
+44 (0) 1865.275.850
Email:	 enquiries@eci.ox.ac.uk 
URL:	 http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/
Environmental Protection Agency Quality System
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Quality Staff (2811R)
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
Phone:	 202.564.6830
Fax:	
202.565.2441
Email:	 quality@epa.gov
URL:	 http://www.epa.gov/quality/
European Tropical Forest Research Network
c/o The Tropenbos Foundation
P.O. Box 232
6700 AE Wageningen
The Netherlands
Phone:	 +31 317.495516
Fax: 	
+31 317.495521
Email:	 etfrn@etfrn.org
URL:	 http://www.etfrn.org/etfrn/ 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Forestry Department
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Italy
URL: http://www.fao.org/forestry/
Forest Community Research
c/o Sierra Institute
P.O. Box 11
4438 Main Street
Taylorsville, CA 95983
Phone:	 530.284.1022
Fax:	
530.284.1023
Email:	 info@sierrainstitute.us
URL:	 http://www.fcresearch.org/

121
121
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Forest Guild
P. O. Box 519 
Santa Fe, NM 87504 
Phone:	 505.983.8992 
Fax:	
505.986.0798 
Email:	  info@forestguild.org
URL:	  http://www.forestguild.org 
Forest Inventory and Analysis
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
National Office
1601 North Kent St.
Suite 400
Arlington, VA 22209
Phone:	 703.605.4189
URL:	 http://fia.fs.fed.us/ 
Forest Stewardship Council
1155 30th Street NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20007
Phone:	 202.342.0413
Fax:	
202.342.6589
Email:	 info@fscus.org
URL:	 http://www.fscus.org/ 
Four Corners Institute
1477 1/2 Canyon Road
Santa Fe, NM
Phone:	 505.983.8515
Email:	  forests@ucla.edu 
URL:	 http://www.fourcornersinstitute.org/ 
Free Management Library
Authenticity Consulting, LLC
4008 Lake Drive Avenue North
Minneapolis, MN 55422-1508
Phone:	 800.971.2250
Fax:	
763.592.1661
Email:	 carter@authenticityconsulting.com 
URL:	 http://www.authenticityconsulting.com/ 
Institute for Culture and Ecology
P.O. Box 6688
Portland, OR 97228-6688
Phone:	 503.331.6681
Email:	 ifcae@ifcae.org 
URL:	 http://www.ifcae.org/ 

122
122
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Institute for Environmental Negotiation
104 Emmet St.
Charlottesville, VA 22903 
Phone:	 434.924.1970
Fax: 	
434.924.0231
Email:	 envneg@virginia.edu 
URL:	 http://www.virginia.edu/ien/about.htm
Inventory and Monitoring Institute
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
Natural Resources Research Center
2150 Centre Ave. Building A 
Fort Collins, CO 80526
URL:	 http://www.fs.fed.us/institute/
Local Unit Criteria and Indicators Development Project 
URL:	 http://www.fs.fed.us/institute/lucid/ 
c/o Pam Wright
USDA Forest Service
Inventory and Monitoring Institute
2150 Centre Ave.
Fort Collins, CO 80526-1891
Phone:	 970.295.5712
Fax:	
970.295.5885 
Email:	 pwright@fs.fed.us
URL:	 http://www.fs.fed.us/institute/ 
Manomet Center for Conservation Science 
81 Stage Road 
P.O. Box 1770
Manomet, MA 02345
Phone:	 508.224.6521
Fax: 	
508.224.9220
URL:	 http://www.manomet.org/ 
Montréal Process Liaison Office 
8th Floor, Sir William Logan Building, 
580 Booth Street 
Ottawa, ON K1A 0E4 
Canada 
Phone:	 613.947.9061 
Fax: 	
613.947.9033
URL:	 http://www.mpci.org/

123
123
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
National Biological Information Infrastructure
National Program Office
U.S. Geological Survey Biological Informatics Office
302 National Center
Reston, VA 20192
Phone:	 703.648.6244
Fax:	
703.648.4224
URL:	 http://www.nbii.gov/
URL:	 http://www.nbii.gov/issues/biodiversity/ (organizations working on  
	
  biodiversity) http://www.nbii.gov/datainfo/metadata/ (concise  
	
  definition of metadata)
National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry
1707 H Street NW, Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20006-3918
Phone:	 202.207.0006
Fax: 	
202.628.4311
URL:	 http://www.ncseonline.org/NCSSF/
National Council for Science and the Environment
1707 H Street NW, Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20006-3918 
Phone:	 202.530.5810
Fax:	
202.628.4311
Email:	 info@NCSEonline.org
URL:	 http://NCSEonline.org/
NatureMapping Program
University of Washington, Washington Cooperative Fish & Wildlife Research Unit
Box 357980
Seattle, WA 98195 
Phone:	 206.543.6475 
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife
600 Capitol Way N
Olympia, WA 98501
Phone:	 360.586.3105
URL:	 http://depts.washington.edu/natmap/ 
National Forest Foundation
Building 27 Suite No. 3
Fort Missoula Road
Missoula, MT 59804
Phone:	 406.542.2805
Fax:	
406.542.2810
Email:	 info@natlforests.org
URL:	 http://www.natlforests.org/ 

124
124
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
National Forest Health Monitoring Program 
USDA Forest Service  
1992 Folwell Avenue  
St. Paul, MN 55108  
Phone:	 651.649.5243  
FAX: 	 651.649.5238  
URL:	 http://fhm.fs.fed.us/ 
National Network of Forest Practitioners
305 Main Street
Providence, RI 02903
Phone:	 888.252.1008
Fax:	
401.273.6508
Email:	 info@nnfp.org
URL:	 http://www.nnfp.org/
National Partnership Office
Partnership Resource Center
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
National Partnership Office
201 14th St. SW
3NE, Mailstop 1158
Washington, DC 20024-1158
Phone:	 202.205.1072
URL:	 http://www.fs.fed.us/aboutus/partnership/
URL:	 http://www.partnershipresourcecenter.org/ (online resources)
National Woodland Owners Association
374 Maple Ave. E, Suite 310
Vienna, VA 22180
Phone:	 800.476.8733
Fax:	
703.281.9200
Email:	 info@woodlandowners.org 
URL:	 http://www.woodlandowners.org/ 
Northwest Connections
Community Based Conservation and Education 
P.O. Box 1309
Swan Valley, MT 59826
Phone:	 406.754.3185
FAX: 	 406.754.3330
Email:	 nwc@montana.com
URL:	 http://www.northwestconnections.org/ 

125
125
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality
Volunteer Monitoring Resources
811 SW 6th Ave.
Portland, OR 97204-1390
Phone:	 800.452.4011
Fax:	
503.229.6124
Email:	 deq.info@deq.state.or.us
URL:	 http://www.deq.state.or.us/lab/wqm/volunteermonitoringresources.htm 
Pacific Northwest Research Station
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 
333 SW First Avenue
Portland, OR 97204
Phone:	 503.808.2592
URL:	 http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/ 
Pacific Southwest Research Station
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 
800 Buchanan Street
West Annex Building
Albany, CA 94710-0011
Phone:	 510.559.6300
URL:	 http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/ 
Participatory Learning and Action Notes
Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods Programme
International Institute for Environment and Development
3 Endsleigh Street
London WC1H 0DD
United Kingdom 
Phone:	 +44 (0) 20.7388.2117
Fax: 	
+44 (0)20.7388.2826
Email:	 info@iied.org 
URL:	 http://www.iied.org/NR/agbioliv/pla_notes/
Pinchot Institute for Conservation
1616 P Street
NW, Suite 100
Washington, DC 20036
Phone:	 202.797.6580
URL: 	 http://www.pinchot.org/ 
Policy Consensus Initiative
P.O. Box 1762
Portland, OR 97207
Phone:	 503.725.9096
URL:	 http://www.policyconsensus.org/ 

126
126
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Red Lodge Clearinghouse
Ross Johnson
Communications Coordinator
32 South Ewing No. 326
Helena, MT 59601
Phone:	 888.495.0757
Fax: 	
406.495.1074
Email:	 contactus@redlodgeclearinghouse.org 
URL:	 http://www.redlodgeclearinghouse.org/ 
Resolve, Inc.
1255 23rd Street, NW, Suite 275
Washington, DC 20037
Phone:	 202.944.2300 
Fax	
202.338.1264
Email:	 info@resolv.org 
URL:	 http://www.resolv.org/ 
Rocky Mountain Research Station
USDA Forest Service
Natural Resources Research Center
2150 Centre Avenue, Building A
Fort Collins, CO 80526-8121
Phone:	 970.295.5926
Fax:	
970.295.5927
URL:	 http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/main/headquarters.html 
Roundtable on Sustainable Forests: Criteria and Indicators 
URL:	 http://www.sustainableforests.net/criteria-indicators.php
c/o Shawn Walker
Meridian Institute
1920 L Street, NW, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20036
Phone:	 202.354.6450
Fax: 	
202.354.6441
Email: shawnwalker@merid.org
URL:	 http://www.merid.org/ 
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity
United Nations Environmental Programme
World Trade Centre
413 St. Jacques Street, Suite 800
Montréal, QC H2Y 1N9
Canada
Phone:	 514.288.2220 
Fax: 	
514.288.6588
Email:	 secretariat@biodiv.org
URL:	 http://www.biodiv.org/

127
127
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Southern Appalachian Volunteer Environmental Monitoring 
Southern Appalachian Man and the Biosphere 
314 Conference Center Building 
Knoxville, TN 37996-4138 
Phone:	 865.974.4583
Fax:	
865.974.4609
Email:	 samab@utk.edu 
URL:	 http://samab.org/Focus/Monitor/monitor.html
Sustainable Forest Data Working Group
(Federal Geographic Data Committee)
URL:	 http://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/brd/sfd.htm 
c/o Paul Geissler 
U.S. Geological Survey
Patuxent Wildlife Research Center
BARC-East, Bldg. 308
10300 Baltimore Avenue
Beltsville, MD 20705
Phone:	 301.497.5780
Fax: 	
301.497.5624
Email:	 Paul_Geissler@usgs.gov
or c/o Rich Guldin
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
Forest Insect and Disease Research 
National Headquarters
P.O. Box 96090
Washington, DC 20090-6090
Phone:	 703.605.4177
Fax:	
703.605.5131
Email:	 RGuldin@fs.fed.us
Voluntary Sector Initiative–Voluntary Sector Forum
130 Albert Street, Suite 1705
Ottawa, ON K1P 5G4
Canada
Phone:	 800.821.8814
Fax: 	
613.238.9300
Email:	 info@vsi-isbc.org
URL:	 http://www.vsi-isbc.ca/eng/ 

128
128
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Voluntary Sector Initiative (VSI)–Government of Canada Community  
Development and Partnerships Directorate Human Resources and  
Social Development Canada
Place Vanier, Tower A, 2nd Floor
333 North River Rd.
Ottawa, ON K1A 0L1
Canada
Phone:	 800.821.8814
Fax:	
613.238.9300
Email:	 info@vsi-isbc.org 
URL:	 http://www.vsi-isbc.ca/eng/
Volunteer Monitor Project
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Wetlands, Oceans, and Watersheds (4503T)
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
Phone:	 202.566.1191
Email:	 ow-owow-internet-comments@epa.gov 
URL:	 http://www.epa.gov/volunteer/ 
Wallowa Resources
P.O. Box 274
200 W North St. 
Enterprise, OR 97828
Phone:	 541.426.8053
Fax: 	
541.426.9053
Email:	 info@wallowaresources.org
URL:	 http://www.wallowaresources.org/
The Watershed Research and Training Center 
P.O. Box 356 
Hayfork, CA 96041 
Phone:	 530.628.4206 
Fax:	
530.628.5100
Email:	 wrtc@hayfork.net 
URL:	 http://www.thewatershedcenter.org/ 
World Resources Institute
10 G Street, NE (Suite 800)
Washington, DC 20002
Phone:	 202.729.7600
Fax: 	
202.729.7610
URL:	 http://www.wri.org/
World Wildlife Fund
1250 24th Street, NW
P.O. Box 97180
Washington, DC 20090-7180
Phone:	 202.293.4800
URL:	 http://www.worldwildlife.org/

129
129
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Appendix 2—Case Studies of Collaboration and 
Partnerships
The Web sites listed in this appendix provide a list of links or maps to search  
for case studies of collaborations and partnerships throughout the United States  
and Canada.
Appalachian Forest Resource Center Cooperators—2003  
http://www.appalachianforest.org/RFP/coopsum.html. 
Canadian Ecological Monitoring and Assessment Network
(Citizen Science) 
http://dev.stewardshipcanada.ca/communities/citizenScience/home/csnIndex.asp
Ecosystem Management Initiative  
http://www.snre.umich.edu/ecomgt/cases/map.htm. 
Red Lodge Clearinghouse—Collaboration Stories  
http://www.redlodgeclearinghouse.org/stories/. 

130
130
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PNW-GTR-680
Appendix 3—Project Web Site and Additional Resources
The Web site http://www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssf3/ accompanies this publication. 
Users of these guidelines should periodically check the Web site for revisions and  
for additional information and resources, including the following:
Training curriculum—
The Web site also includes a downloadable training curriculum on how to use 
the guidelines. The purpose of this curriculum is to provide government and 
nongovernment trainers with a tool for introducing participatory biological 
monitoring and use of the guidelines for local managers and scientists during a  
1-day workshop. In addition to learning how to use the guidelines, the curriculum 
will help forest managers and scientists explore the reasons for a participatory 
approach to monitoring and the logistics of implementing such a project. Training 
sessions also provide an opportunity to network with nearby colleagues that have 
similar interests. The curriculum is divided into five units, each containing teaching 
objectives, a materials list, background and teaching strategies for instructors, 
masters for handouts and overhead transparencies, and five case studies. The five 
units of the curriculum are: unit 1—Introduction to participatory monitoring, 
unit 2—Essential considerations of a participatory biological monitoring project, 
unit 3—Participants and incentives, unit 4—Building skills for a participatory 
monitoring project, and unit 5—Peer-learning for next steps.
Web site version of guidelines—
The Web site version of these guidelines allows users an alternative access and  
distribution option. The Web site includes a downloadable .pdf file as well as a 
hyperlinked version that simplifies accessing references and additional information.
Workbook documentation forms—
As noted throughout this manual, the most effective use of the information we 
provide is to create a project plan and document its implementation. At the Web  
site address above, we provide forms that can be used as a template for this process. 
To that end, they can be reproduced, modified, printed, organized, filled out, and 
filed for quick reference and documentation. Users are encouraged to improvise as 
their needs dictate. The workbook contents include:
•	
Monitoring plan cover page
•	
Overview of modules 
•	
Module checklists 
•	
Generic documentation sheets
•	
Generic sheets for other sources of information
On the Institute for 
Culture and Ecology 
Web site, we provide  
forms that can be used 
as a template to help 
with the documentation 
process.

131
131
Broadening Participation in Biological Monitoring: Handbook for Scientists and Managers
Project participant release form examples—
A project participant release form is intended to clarify legal rights of project 
participants and is typically used to release project organizers and sponsoring 
organizations from legal liabilities (for example, job injuries) associated with 
projects involving volunteers and other types of participants. Although the Web 
site provides examples of releases, it is recommended that forms be adapted to 
specific projects and reviewed by a lawyer before being distributed to partici-
pants.
Job hazard analysis guideline examples—
A job hazard analysis is an exercise that helps identify job hazards before they 
occur. It typically focuses on the relationship between the worker, the tools, and 
the work environment. Ideally, after uncontrolled hazards are identified, project 
organizers will take steps to eliminate or reduce them to an acceptable risk level. 
The Web site provides a link to example guidelines for assessing job hazards.


Pacific Northwest Research Station 
Web site	
http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/
Telephone	
(503) 808-2592
Publication requests	
(503) 808-2138
FAX	 	
(503) 808-2130
E-mail	
pnw_pnwpubs@fs.fed.us
Mailing address	
Publications Distribution 
	
	
Pacific Northwest Research Station 
	
	
P.O. Box 3890 
	
	
Portland, OR 97208-3890

U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Pacific Northwest Research Station 
333 SW First Avenue 
P.O. Box 3890 
Portland, OR 97208-3890
Official Business 
Penalty for Private Use, $300
