 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
COLLABORATION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL EVIDENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW No. 60 
 
 
WORKING TITLE: Does seeding after severe forest fires in western 
USA mitigate negative impacts on soils and plant communities? 
 
 
 
 
 
REVIEW PROTOCOL 
 
 
 
 
Lead Reviewers: 
Peter Fulé, Jan Beyers, Carolyn Sieg, Molly Hunter, Donna 
Peppin 
 
 
Postal Address: 
Northern Arizona University 
 
P.O. Box 15018 
 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 USA 
 
E-mail Address: 
Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
Telephone: 
00+1+928-523-6906 
Fax: 
00+1+928-523-0296 
 
 

 
2 
COVER SHEET 
 
Title 
Working title: Does seeding after severe forest fires in 
western USA mitigate negative impacts on soils and plant 
communities? 
Systematic review  
No.60 
Reviewer(s) 
Peter Fulé, Jan Beyers, Carolyn Sieg, Molly Hunter, 
Donna Peppin 
Date draft protocol 
published on website 
 
Date final protocol 
published on website 
 
Date of most recent 
amendment 
23th December 2008 
Date of most recent 
SUBSTANTIVE 
amendment 
 
Details of most recent 
changes 
 
Contact address 
Northern Arizona University 
P.O. Box 15018 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 USA 
 
Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
Sources of support 
Joint Fire Science Program (USA) 
Conflicts of interest 
The review is led by researchers from Northern Arizona 
University and the USDA Forest Service who have 
contributed to the literature on this topic.  We will address 
the possibility of conflict of interest by following the 
review process through CEBC and additional reviews 
solicited from scientists who are not on the review panel 
and not affiliated with the lead institutions.  
 

 
3 
1. 
BACKGROUND 
 
Rehabilitation efforts following severe forest fires, the largest and mostly damaging of which 
tend to burn on public lands of the western United States, commonly focus on re-
establishment of a growing plant community to stabilize soils, minimize erosion, and reduce 
colonization by undesirable non-native species.  Substantial resources are invested in these 
treatments but relatively little is known about their ecological effects or cost:benefit ratios.  
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) identified a need for better information on the 
effectiveness of post-fire emergency stabilization and rehabilitation methods used by the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service and Department of Interior (DOI) 
agencies (GAO 2003), based in large part on reviews by Robichaud et al. (2000) and Pyke 
and McArthur (2002). The most widely used post-fire treatment is seeding, primarily with 
native or non-native grasses, on which there has been considerable research and continued 
debate over effectiveness and ecosystem impacts (Beyers 2004). The success of seeding 
depends on many factors, including species selection, climate, terrain, competition with other 
species, seedbed preparation, and post-seeding management (Monsen et al. 2004). Beyers 
(2004) pointed out a lack of data on then-emerging seeding practices, especially increased use 
of native species and sterile cereal grains for erosion control as well as seeding to prevent 
spread of invasive non-native plants. The GAO report and the published reviews have 
sparked an upsurge in research on seeding effectiveness and agency monitoring of post-fire 
treatments. This new information is scattered and largely unavailable to burned area 
assessment teams on tight timelines to recommend stabilization measures. 
 
Since publication of the recent reviews (2000-2004), several important developments have 
altered the context of post-wildfire seeding: 
 
• Areas of high-severity forest fires have increased by as much as an order of 
magnitude in the Intermountain West, including mega-fires such as the Hayman (CO) 
and Rodeo-Chediski (AZ).  Climate projections consistently indicate that trends in 
increasing size and severity of wildfires will continue (McKenzie et al. 2004). 
• Severe burning up to and within urban areas has presented new challenges for post-
fire rehabilitation, for instance in the Cerro Grande fire, Los Alamos (NM). 
• Scientific studies of post-wildfire seeding and plant community interactions have 
increased dramatically since 2000, with an extensive body of developing knowledge 
on the use of native seeds as well as the ecological consequences of non-native 
seeding. 
• Signing of Executive Order 13112 establishing the National Invasive Species Council 
to prevent the introduction of invasive species and provide for their control and to 
minimize the economic, ecological, and human health impacts that invasive species 
cause. 
• Burned Area Emergency Rehabilitation (BAER) teams and agency staff have shifted 
from relying on non-native species to native species, allocating substantial sums for 
native seed mixes in the hopes of fostering post-fire environments characterized by 
native plant communities that are well-adapted to these habitats and resilient to further 
disturbance (Wolfson and Sieg, in review). 
 
Because of these striking trends, it is clear that the opening decade of the 21st century has 
been characterized by a sea change in the scale of severe fires, the scientific information 
available to support management decisions, and the choices made by managers for post-fire 
seeding.  Our goal in the present review is to develop a practical, complete, and up-to-date 

 
4 
synthesis that puts the latest information on burn rehabilitation seeding in the hands of 
managers and scientists.  
 
2. 
OBJECTIVE OF THE REVIEW 
2.1 
Primary question 
Does seeding after severe forest fires mitigate negative impacts on soils and plant 
communities? 
 
2.2 
Secondary question (if applicable) 
Secondary questions include: 1) What are seeding effects on soil stabilization and 
invasion by non-native species?  2) What are trends in seeding of specific species, 
especially the use of native species, over time?  3) What are the findings in regions 
beyond the western USA? 
 
3. 
METHODS 
3.1 
Search strategy 
• Internet search engines and databases supported by Cline Library, 
Northern Arizona University: Ingenta, Forest Science Database (Ovid), 
JSTOR, Google Scholar. 
• U.S. government databases (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service publications and proceedings) 
• Libraries at universities with Forestry programs (M.S. and Ph.D. 
theses). 
Search terms to include: seeding AND fire, seeding AND wildfire, seeding AND 
burn, seeding AND native species, seeding AND erosion. 
 
3.2 
Study inclusion criteria  
• Relevant subject(s): forests of the USA, predominantly coniferous forests 
of the West but information from any burned forests will be included. 
• Timeframe: There are multiple timeframes to consider.  First, studies 
since the review by Robichaud et al. (2000) will be exhaustively assessed 
for inclusion.  Second, any relevant studies from 1970-present will be 
included as appropriate, especially if these studies were not included in 
previous reviews.  References that appear in the literature to relevant 
earlier research will be tracked down. 
• Types of intervention: 
• Seeding of herbaceous plants. 
• Seeding of shrubs. 
• Combinations of seeding in conjunction with other post-fire 
rehabilitation activities such as mulching, water-bars, tree-
felling on terrain contours, etc. 
• Methods and timing of seed delivery. 
• Types of comparator: 
• Replicated randomized experiments 
• Before-after control-impact (BACI) studies 
• Observational studies 
• Expert opinion 
• Types of outcome:  
• Cover and biomass of herbaceous plants. 

 
5 
• Cover and biomass of shrubs. 
• Cover and biomass of invasive non-native plants. 
• Plant community composition: nativity, richness, diversity. 
• Species selected for seeding (non-native and native). 
• Soil stabilization variables 
• Costs of seeding. 
• Types of study:  
Studies investigating effects of seeding after severe forest fires. 
• Potential reasons for heterogeneity: 
There is substantial heterogeneity in the forests of the USA, even among the 
western forests where the greatest amount of information is likely to be found.   
This heterogeneity is associated with the latitudinal and elevational gradients 
where these forests occur and ecotones with adjacent ecosystems.  Wildfires 
burn heterogeneously as well and important post-fire effects can have a 
stochastic component (e.g., erosion is not a simple function of terrain and fire 
severity, but also of the chance of a strong rainstorm occurring soon after the 
fire).  There is heterogeneity in pre-existing propagule sources (seed bank) and 
nearby sources.  Finally, management interventions vary widely in terms of 
the species selected for seeding and the timing and methods of seed delivery. 
3.3 
Study quality assessment 
 
Studies will be evaluated based on the types of methodology comparator, with 
the greatest weight given to replicated randomized experiments and less to 
observational and opinion studies.   
3.4 
Data extraction strategy 
 
All studies included at full text will be read by two members of the review 
panel.  We will assemble review information in a master spreadsheet, 
recording qualitative and quantitative aspects of the studies.   
3.5 
Data synthesis 
 
Data synthesis will be done by the review panel after reading the studies.  We 
will assemble basic data about the studies reviewed (e.g., number of studies 
identified in the search, number and percent deemed relevant for review, 
distribution of geographic locations and information type).  We will focus on 
evidence from literature regarding the specific outcome variables.  These will 
probably be grouped into a few categories: success of seeded plant 
establishment (cover, biomass, community dominance), ecological effects 
(soil stabilization, non-native plants), and management trends (costs, species 
selected).  We will draw inferences about the similar and different effects of 
treatments and highlight areas where further research is needed. 
 
4.  
POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND SOURCES OF SUPPORT 
 
 
The review is led by researchers from Northern Arizona University and the USDA 
Forest Service who have contributed to the literature on this topic.  We will address 
the possibility of conflict of interest by following the review process through CEBC 
and additional reviews solicited from scientists who are not on the review panel and 
not affiliated with the lead institutions. 
 
 
Support for this review is provided by a grant from the Joint Fire Science Program 
(USA). 
 

 
6 
5. 
REFERENCES 
 
Beyers, J. L. 2004. Postfire seeding for erosion control: Effectiveness and impacts on native 
plant communities. Conservation Biology 18(4): 947-956. 
 
GAO (General Accounting Office). 2003. Wildland fires: Better information needed on 
effectiveness of emergency stabilization and rehabilitation treatments. GAO-03-430. 
56p. 
 
McKenzie D., Z. Gedalof, D.L. Peterson, and P. Mote.  2004.  Climatic change, wildfire, and 
conservation. Conservation Biology 18:890–902 
 
Monsen, S.B., R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw. 2004. Restoring western rangelands and 
wildlands. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-136. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO. 884 
p. + index. 
 
Pyke, D.A., and T.O. McArthur. 2002. Emergency fire rehabilitation of BLM lands in the 
Intermountain West: Revegetation and monitoring. Interim Report to the BLM. 41 p. 
 
Robichaud, P.R., J.L. Beyers, and D.G. Neary. 2000. Evaluating the effectiveness of postfire 
rehabilitation treatments.  General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-63. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. 85 p. 
 
Wolfson, B.A.S., Sieg, C.H. in review.  40-year post fire seeding trends in Arizona and New 
Mexico.  Rocky Mountain Research Station General Technical Report. 
 
