 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Summer Habitat Use by Adult Female Mule Deer in a  
Restoration-Treated Ponderosa Pine Forest 
By Fenner Yarborough, Arizona Game and Fish Department Research Biologist  
INTRODUCTION 
Mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) populations in the Southwest have experienced declines in the past 50 years 
due to habitat degradation from fire suppression, exotic species invasion, and increased livestock grazing. Habi-
tat requirements of mule deer include an abundance of high-quality herbaceous forage, vegetation cover that pro-
vides protection from predators and weather, and access to reliable water sources. Summer forage availability 
and quality affects doe productivity and lactation, and fawn survival and growth prior to a resource-limited win-
ter; therefore, high-quality summer habitat is essential for maintaining healthy populations. 
 
In northern Arizona, mule deer summer home ranges commonly 
include ponderosa pine-dominated vegetation types, including 
extensive areas where large-scale restoration treatments have 
been implemented or are currently being planned. Restoration 
treatments that open tree canopies in ponderosa pine and mixed-
conifer forests often increase forage abundance and diversity and 
subsequent use by mule deer; however, these treatments may 
also reduce hiding cover and alter the microclimate and physical 
characteristics of day-bed sites. In this study, we sought to ex-
amine the effects of forest restoration on the relative intensity of 
summer habitat-use patterns of mule deer. Our objectives were 
to 1) spatially define individual home range and core areas, 2) 
develop a spatially explicit statistical model of intensity of habi-
tat use, and 3) make recommendations that will help land man-
agers provide essential forage and cover attributes for mule deer 
while restoring forest structure and reducing the risk of uncharacteristic, high-intensity wildfire. 
 
METHODS 
We examined a managed herd of mule deer occupying ponderosa pine-dominated areas and that had been recent-
ly treated in the Grand Canyon–Parashant National Monument in northern Arizona. Throughout the study area, 
forest restoration treatments were initiated in 1996. The restoration prescription followed pre-1870 reference 
conditions for tree species composition and spatial arrangement. Treatments were designed to include thinning, 
burning, and reseeding with a native herb mix dominated by grasses and all Gambel oak, Utah juniper, and New 
Mexican locust were retained during thinning treatments. By 2003, >1,110 acres of ponderosa pine forest had 
received thin and burn treatment and an additional 790 acres were only thinned. An untreated control area of ap-
proximately 1,235 acres was present in the southeastern portion of the study area, along with five 25–75-acre 
controls embedded among treated areas. Within a rigorous statistical modeling framework, we leveraged high 
temporal and spatial resolution Global Positioning System (GPS) collar data from 10 adult female mule deer 
from 2003–2005, and determined home range size and deer-habitat associations.  
   Fact Sheet: Summer Habitat Use by Adult Female Mule Deer in a Restoration-treated Ponderosa Pine Forest 
 
 
 
 
  
 
February 2014 
Restoration treatments that open tree canopies often increase 
forage abundance and subsequent use by mule deer. Photo 
courtesy of the Arizona Game and Fish Department 

 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
 The estimated home range size ranged from 237–2,693 acres and averaged 909 acres.  
 Deer were observed in all treatments across the study area. 
 Thin-only areas were not used as intensively as thin and burn areas. 
 Gentle slope, thin and burn treatment areas, and ponderosa-pine dominated land cover had positive 
associations with mule deer summer habitat use on our study area. 
 Increased pinyon-juniper land cover and rugged areas had less use by female mule deer. 
 We found that mule deer intensively used areas closer to reliable water sources. 
 Elevation, northness, and thin-only areas had less important positive associations when compared to 
other variables. 
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
 
 Maintain the surface fire regime to stimulate 
herbaceous understory vegetation, which is an 
important dietary component for mule deer in 
the summer months. 
 Since oak stands can be the primary mid-story 
canopy component in a treated ponderosa pine 
forest, develop treatment prescriptions that pro-
mote the retention of this species. 
 Maintain adequate water levels at developed 
wildlife waters; haul water during periods of 
low water levels, if necessary. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Contact 
Fenner Yarborough, ryarborough@azgfd.gov  
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
Prescribed fire stimulates herbaceous understory vegetation, provid-
ing an important dietary component for mule deer. Photo courtesy 
of the Arizona Game and Fish Department 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
 
Horncastle, V.J., R.F. Yarborough, B.G. Dickson, and S.S. Rosenstock. 2013. Summer Habitat 
Use by Adult Female Mule Deer in a Restoration-Treated Ponderosa Pine Forest. Wild-
life Society Bulletin. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/D2014001.dir/
doc.pdf  
