 
Feb. 25, 2003 
 
CONTACT: Bonnie Stevens at (928) 527-9344 
Conference Features Computer Games That Highlight Most at Risk 
Forest Areas 
FLAGSTAFF, Ariz.- Mark Finney has been helping firefighters design their strategies for 
fighting wildfires from the Fire Science Laboratory in Missoula, Mont. since the mid-90s. 
Now, he's demonstrating another computer program - this one to help land managers 
identify forest areas most at risk for crown fires to help them prioritize forest restoration 
projects. 
Finney, a research scientist with the U.S. Forest Service, will be sharing his work on 
spatial optimization programs with Flagstaff, 9 a.m., Tuesday, April 29, in the du Bois 
Center Ballroom at NorthernArizona University. 
"One thing we really needed was a means to evaluate how successful fuel treatments 
will be," Finney said. "Some say forest restoration treatments are needed only in the 
urban interface, some say a band or strip around forest communities is needed, others 
say a wider area of treatment is necessary in the wildlands. 
"But this debate has been taking place on the emotional level, usually without any data 
to help with the decision. What I'll be talking about is a quantitative method that will help 
land managers make and justify their decisions." 
Data about any landscape can be entered into Finney's computer programs. For 
example, using Geographic Information System (GIS) data, local land managers can 
simulate how effective thinning efforts around Kachina Village would be in the face of a 
catastrophic fire. 
"These computer fire models work like a video game," said Pete Fulé, associate director 
of the Ecological Restoration Institute at NAU. "You can select weather conditions and 
watch what a fire will do under different circumstances." 
Finney's talk will kick off the Southwest Fire Initiative Conference, sponsored by the ERI 
at NAU. His keynote presentation will be free to the public. However, registration for the 
conference is $12; $16 includes lunch and parking. 
The conference will be showcasing two years of forest research funded by the ERI 
through federal grant money. Topics will range from the ecological effects of severe 
wildfires to ways in which western communities are developing collaborative restoration 
projects. The conference is part of the Forest Festival, April 26 through April 29. 
Registration and other conference information is available on the ERI website, 
www.eri.nau.edu. 
 
 
# # # 
