 
 
NAU's forest health institute to get $2 million 
By SETH MULLER 
Sun Staff Reporter 
12/12/2003 
When he gives his commencement speech today to graduating Northern Arizona 
University students, Sen. Jon Kyl plans to announce that the Forest Service is allocating 
$2 million to NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute.  
The institute has taken the lead nationwide in addressing the science of forest health and 
forest restoration for the Southwest. Director Wally Covington testified this year before 
Congress on what became the Healthy Forests law that President Bush signed earlier this 
month.  
"The work of the ERI is important if we are to reduce the threat of unnatural, catastrophic 
fire today and restore forests for generations of Arizonans to come," Kyl wrote in a 
released statement. "Our responsibility to future generations must be at the forefront of 
our work. We must never let this important work be held hostage to partisan bickering."  
Fall 2003 Commencement will be 10 a.m. at the J. Lawrence Walkup Skydome. Kyl will 
be awarded the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from NAU.  
The $2 million in funding will come next year, and represents more than half of the $3.5 
million in grants and government funding ERI has received in an average year.  
Kyl's support for NAU, the School of Forestry and the ERI extends back to 1995 when he 
worked with then-Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt to fund the first, large-scale 
forest restoration research project. It was located at Mount Turnbull on the Bureau of 
Land Management's Arizona Strip District north of the Grand Canyon.  
"Senator Kyl has helped NAU build a nationally recognized program that is relevant and 
critical to developing solutions to the problem of forest restoration and wildfire," said 
NAU President John Haeger.  
In an interview earlier this month, Kyl said that ERI and Covington's testimony 
"significantly influenced" the healthy forests legislation that was signed into law.  
"Without his scientific work and without his willingness to be coming back here and 
pushing good science, we wouldn't have this legislation today," Kyl said.  
Elements of forest restoration became part of NAU's forestry program under Covington 
about 25 years ago. Ecological restoration developed into its own university department 

in 1996. Within three years, the Arizona Board of Regents formally approved creation of 
the Ecological Restoration Institute.  
The institute now has 58 employees and 42 undergraduate and graduate students on the 
payroll, and has taken the lead on forest health research.  
ERI works with multiple federal, state and local agencies to apply, monitor and evaluate 
scientific treatments that restore forest health and reduce the risk of wildfire.  
Reporter Seth Muller can be reached at 913-8607 or smuller@azdailysun.com.  
 
