36
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Working Paper No. 36
Wildlife and Fire:  
Impacts of Wildfire and 
Prescribed Fire on Wildlife 
and Habitats in Southwestern 
Coniferous Forests
December 2015
SOUTHWEST 
FIRE     SCIENCE 
CONSORTIUM

Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing 
native species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological
Restoration International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that 
initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity 
and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” 
(Society for Ecological Restoration International Science and Policy Working Group 2004).
Most frequent-fire forests throughout the Intermountain West have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many of these forests are now dominated by unnaturally dense thickets 
of small trees, and lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests 
in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased 
insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, 
low-severity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive 
understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in 
researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of frequent-fire forests of 
the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, such as low-severity fire, to resume 
self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem 
services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and 
policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best available science 
used to make management decisions and scientists working on the questions managers 
need answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop scientific 
information and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through an inclusive and 
open process.
ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers and 
practitioners in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide guidance on 
management decisions surrounding ecological restoration topics. This publication would not 
have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service and the Southwest Fire 
Science Consortium. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the 
author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United 
States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute 
their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
Author: Tzeidle N. Wasserman
Reviewers: Jessica Gist, Shaula Hedwall, and David W. Huffman
Series Editor: Tayloe Dubay
Cover Photo: Abert’s squirrels (Sciurus aberti), like this one climbing a ponderosa pine tree, depend on mature 
forests for nesting and cover. Abert’s squirrels can be negatively affected by wildfire if high amounts of canopy 
cover and structural diversity are lost.
Please use the following citation when referring to this Working Paper:
Wasserman, T.N. 2015. Wildlife and Fire: Impacts of Wildfire and Prescribed Fire on Wildlife and Habitats in 
Southwestern Coniferous Forests. ERI Working Paper No. 36. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest 
Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 9 p. 

Table of Contents
Introduction............................................................................................................................... 1
Direct and Indirect Effects of Fire on Wildlife...................................................................... 1
Measuring Species Response................................................................................................ 2
Fire Regimes and Fire Severity............................................................................................... 2
Species Response to Wildfire: Examples in Dry Coniferous Forests................................ 2
	
Avifauna.............................................................................................................................. 2
	
Small Mammals.................................................................................................................. 3
	
Herbivores and Carnivores................................................................................................ 4
	
Herpetofauna...................................................................................................................... 5
Fire in a Forest Restoration Context....................................................................................... 5
Summary.................................................................................................................................... 6
Management Implications...................................................................................................... 7
Literature Cited......................................................................................................................... 8

1
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE  
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
Introduction
The southwestern United States has experienced over 
a century of fire suppression that has altered natural 
fire regimes and caused an increase in fuel loads and 
increased fire frequency, severity, intensity, and size 
of wildfires (Covington and Moore 1994, Moore et al. 
1999, Swetnam et al. 2001). Long-term fire exclusion, 
livestock grazing, and management practices have 
resulted in more dense forest structure that is departed 
from its natural range of variability, and forests that once 
experienced frequent low intensity fires are now more 
susceptible to large scale, high intensity stand-replacing 
fires, drought, and insect attacks (Covington and Moore 
1994, Moore et al. 1999, Allen et al. 2002, Schoennagel 
et al. 2004). Large intense wildfires can have substantial 
effects on native plants and animals and their habitats. 
Changes in vegetative structure and composition, 
cover type conversions, habitat fragmentation, and the 
creation of edge effects are some of the major impacts 
that large-scale fires can have on wildlife habitat.
The return of fire-driven processes to dry coniferous 
forests in the Southwest can aid in restoring ecological 
processes, create ecologically important early successional 
habitats, and it helps maintain biodiversity of wildlife 
habitats (Brawn et al. 2001). Fire is natural disturbance 
that plays an important role in creating a mosaic of 
habitats and successional stages that support a suite of 
native plants and wildlife within a landscape (Angelstam 
1998). A mosaic of habitat types at the landscape scale 
increases the complexity of landscape structure and 
composition, and increases diversity on multiple levels by 
providing multiple seral stages that many animals can use 
throughout their life cycle. Historical fire exclusion along 
with other management activities has reduced landscape-
scale heterogeneity by reducing the amount of fire-
generated early successional forests and the complexity 
of habitats that were historically maintained by frequent 
low-severity fire (Noss et al. 2006a). Restoring and 
facilitating natural fire regimes can meet both restoration 
and conservation objectives, and return functional 
processes to our forests while reducing the risk of large 
catastrophic wildfires that impact wildlife species.
Understanding how fire severity, extent, seasonality, 
spatial complexity, and post-fire forest conditions 
influence species response is important for predicting 
the effects of wildfire and management actions on 
wildlife. Site specific factors, disturbance history, and 
fire severity are important elements in understanding 
species abundance and distribution after fire events. 
This paper focuses on the use and effects of wildfire 
(natural ignition), prescribed fire (purposeful ignition), 
and restoration treatments (thinning and prescribed 
fire) on terrestrial fauna in dry coniferous forests 
primarily in the southwestern U.S.
Direct and Indirect Effects of Fire on Wildlife
Impacts of fire on wildlife can be both direct and 
indirect. Direct effects include fatality, emigration 
out of burned areas, immigration into new areas, 
injury, increased predation from lack of cover, and 
decreased food availability. Most wildlife deaths 
occur due to smoke inhalation, suffocation, burns, or 
immobility (Lyon et al. 2000). Highly mobile animals 
(e.g. ungulates, birds) are capable of escaping fire and 
moving in to unburned refugia. Less mobile species (e.g. 
reptiles and frogs) can survive in burrows, crevices, and 
underground refugia. Fossorial animals such as some 
small mammals can survive fires if their subterranean 
tunnel systems are extensive and can protect them 
against heat intensity (Lyon et al. 2000). Spring wildfires 
can impact breeding, nesting, denning, burrows, 
or cavities or make individuals more susceptible 
to predation by reducing the amount of canopy or 
understory cover (Ward 1968). 
Indirect effects of fire on wildlife include changes 
in vegetative structure, diversity, species composition, 
and other components of their habitat. Fire burns 
heterogeneously across a landscape leaving a matrix of 
burned and unburned areas of varying fire severity in a 
patchy arrangement. Fire influences patch size, shape, 
connectivity, and juxtaposition (Shaffer and Laudenslayer 
2006) and the spatial arrangement of habitat at multiple 
scales, from the stand to the landscape level. The 
resulting mosaic of burned and unburned patches is key 
in maintaining diversity and spatial heterogeneity that is 
important to multiple species of wildlife that use an array 
of seral stages and habitat types both seasonally and for 
life history needs. In forests and woodlands, understory 
fires generally alter habitat structure less than mixed-
severity and stand-replacement fires, and their effects on 
animal populations using existing habitat are less severe. 
In the short term, patches of low-severity, lightly burned 
areas can provide refuge for wildlife; whereas high-
severity burns can kill trees, thereby limiting cover and 
available resources (Smith et al. 2000). New structural 
and habitat features are created post-fire, including 
stands with both live trees and some snags or stands with 
nearly 100 percent snags, and these variations in post-
fire structure translate into variations in wildlife species’ 
response to fire (Smucker et al. 2005). Standing dead and 
dying trees and downed logs are important structures 
to wildlife, particularly used for foraging, nesting, and 
roosting habitats (Saab et al. 2007). An increase in these 
dead and decaying trees may also increase bark and 
wood-boring beetle abundance, a primary food source 
for many woodpeckers and other insectivores. Plant 
regrowth post-fire can lead to an increase in vegetative 
sprouts, flowers, and seeds, thus increasing forage (Saab 
et al. 2007). Alternatively, high-severity wildfire can 
promote invasion by exotic plant species because many 
exotics respond to disturbance, space, and nutrients 
available post-fire and in turn can increase fuel loads, 
change fire regimes, and degrade available wildlife habitat 
and forage. 

2
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE 
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
Measuring Species Response
The effects of fire on wildlife species response are 
widely measured using changes in species abundance, 
distribution, and density, but vary across the body of 
literature. The best comparative studies allow measuring 
wildlife presence/absence, abundance, and stand 
conditions pre and post-fire, however many studies take 
advantage of large-scale wildfires that have occurred, 
thereby limiting the inference to one landscape and 
one point in time with no pre-fire stand or population 
information. Characteristics of the individual fire, site 
specific variability, burn severity, heterogeneity, pre 
and post-fire vegetation structure and composition, 
fluctuations in species populations, abiotic conditions, 
and time since fire should be taken in to account when 
making inferences on species responses. 
Fire Regimes and Fire Severity
Fire regimes impact forest structure, composition, 
and overall heterogeneity. Coniferous forests in the 
southwestern U.S. were historically characterized 
by frequent (every 0–35 years) low-severity fires in 
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) and recurrent low to 
moderate severity fires with variable fire return intervals 
in dry mixed conifer forests (Fulé et al. 2003, Reynolds 
et al. 2013). Animal communities have evolved with 
particular fire regimes and exhibit patterns of response 
to the vegetation changes that occur post-fire. The 
ability for wildlife species to persist post-wildfire 
depends on food availability, cover, mobility, behavior, 
and structural diversity. Fire return interval, severity, 
intensity, extent, and scale are important determinants 
of species habitat and therefore species abundance and 
distribution after a fire event. 
Fire severity is used to describe the loss or 
decomposition of organic matter, both aboveground 
and belowground, and describes the degree to which 
vegetation and soil have been modified by the fire 
(Keeley 2009). Different fire severities produce 
different post-fire structures in terms of standing 
and dead vegetation at both the stand and landscape 
scale, and successional stage of the forest post-fire 
should be considered when making inferences on 
changes in species response. Incorporating fire severity 
is important to understanding individual species 
response to post-fire conditions, as each species 
has distinct habitat requirements and will respond 
differently to varying levels of fire severity that result 
in a mosaic of forest structures. Responses are also 
related to uniformity and intensity (heat energy 
released) of the fire, and availability of food and cover 
post-fire (Smith et al. 2000).
Fire severity is not consistently defined in terms 
of the loss of the dominant vegetation across the body 
of literature. Most studies report burn severity as low, 
moderate, or high percent loss, however vagueness 
exists in the actual quantification of these descriptors 
(Kennedy and Fontaine 2009). This is especially 
problematic when describing a mixed-severity fire 
where a mosaic of burn severities exists across the 
landscape. Fire burns heterogeneously across a landscape 
leaving a mosaic of unburned and burned patches at 
various severities, thus patch size, shape, and severity 
can all influence wildlife distributions in a burned 
landscape. In general, low-severity, low-intensity fires 
burn on or above the forest floor; moderate severity, 
moderate-intensity fires are those that kill a portion but 
not all of the forest overstory; and high-severity, high-
intensity fires are those that result in complete or nearly 
complete mortality of the overstory. Other definitions 
focus more on soil effects than on vegetation. Metrics 
should describe vegetation mortality and structural and 
compositional changes such as percent loss of dominant 
and overstory vegetation, basal area loss, bole char, and 
canopy loss. Carefully defining these metrics can help 
elucidate the mechanisms behind the animal response.
Species Response to Wildfire:  
Examples in Dry Coniferous Forests
Avifauna
Birds are a well-studied taxon with regards to response 
to the effects of wildfire. Several species have evolved 
with fire (e.g. Kirtland’s warbler, American three-toed 
woodpecker) and have adapted to exploit the resources 
that occur post-fire. Many woodpeckers inhabit burned 
areas immediately post-fire, followed by a decrease 2–4 
years later (Covert-Bratland et al. 2006, Saab et al. 2007). 
For example, hairy woodpeckers (Picoides villosus) 
and American three-toed woodpeckers (Picoides 
dorsalis) are found in high-severity burned areas due 
to increased seed production and insect infestations 
post-fire and use moderate and high-severity patches 
during winter (Covert-Bratland et al. 2006, Kotliar et 
al. 2008). Black-backed woodpeckers (Picoides arcticus) 
favor high-severity burned areas and immigrate to 
these areas to exploit trees infested with insects and the 
abundance of newly created snags and cavities (Lyon 
et al. 2000). There are several species that respond 
positively and increase in abundance and/or densities 
post-fire, including Townsend’s solitaire (Myadestes 
townsendi), dark-eyed junco (Junco hyemalis), lazuli 
bunting (Passerina amoena), Cassin’s finch (Carpodacus 
cassinii), house wren (Troglodytes aedon), western wood 
pewee (Contopus sordidulus), and Western bluebirds 
(Sialia Mexicana), among others (Smucker et al. 2005, 
Kotliar et al. 2007). Other species such as the eastern 
meadowlarks (Sturnella magna) and Cassin’s sparrows 
(Aimophila cassinii) avoid burned areas 2–3 years post 
fire due to lack of shrub cover and grass cover (Bock and 
Bock 1992). 
Many insectivores rapidly colonize burned areas and 
then experience a decrease in density as time since fire 
increases, likely due to declines in bark and wood-boring 

3
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE  
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
beetles (Hoyt and Hannon 2002). In contrast, Lewis’s 
woodpecker (Melanerpes lewis), an aerial insectivore, 
is abundant in both recent burns (2–4 years post-fire) 
and older burns (10–25 years post-fire; Bock and Lynch 
1970, Saab and Vierling 2001). Other aerial insectivores 
and open-space foragers (e.g. western bluebirds (Sialia 
mexicana), mountain bluebirds (Salia currucoides), 
flycatchers (Empidonax spp.), and swallows (Tachycineta 
spp.) often use burned forests 10–20 years after fires 
in response to open conditions for aerial foraging 
following decreases in canopy cover and increases in 
insects associated with shrub regrowth (Lowe et al. 1978, 
Hobson and Schieck 1999, Hannon and Drapeau 2005). 
Avian responses to wildfire are a function of patch 
size, patch shape, burn severity, and post-fire structure 
on the landscape (Smucker et al. 2005, Kotliar et al. 
2008). Some species show a strong decline in density 
with increasing burn severity (e.g. mountain chickadee 
(Poecile gambeli), warbling vireo (Vireo gilvus), dark 
eyed junco), some species exhibited a neutral response 
with no change in densities (e.g. white breasted nuthatch 
(Sitta carolinensis), Virginia’s warbler [Oreothlypis 
virgiiae]), while others exhibit a positive density response 
with increasing burn severity (e.g. western bluebird, 
broad tailed hummingbird (Selasphorus platycerus), 
house wren, western wood pewee) (Kotliar et al. 2007). 
Many species respond to an increase in resources 
immediately following a fire, then declining 2–4 years 
post-fire (Smucker et al. 2005, Kotliar et al. 2007, Saab 
et al. 2007). There is spatial and temporal variability in 
avian responses to wildfire, and understanding changes 
in abundance and density in relation to fire severity, 
post-fire structure and composition, and time since fire 
have important implications for species response.
Small Mammals
Small mammals are widely distributed, have rapid 
population growth, and have immediate responses 
to disturbance. Availability of food and cover 
are important factors influencing small mammal 
abundance after fire and they influence species 
differently (Fa and Sanchez-Cordero 1993, Roberts 
et al. 2008). In the short term, patches of low-severity 
burn areas can provide refuge for small mammals, 
whereas severe high intensity burns can kill both 
the understory and trees thereby limiting cover and 
resources (Smith et al. 2000). Fire can increase the 
availability of coarse woody debris (stumps and logs) 
for hiding, nesting, and living space (Lowe et al. 1978), 
as well as increase the abundance of insects, seeds, and 
annual forbs and grasses, which are important food 
sources for small mammals (Floyd-Hanna and Romme 
1972, Lowe et al. 1978). 
Small mammal response to wildfire is variable 
throughout forest successional stages post-fire. Initially 
0–10 years post disturbance the abundance of small 
mammals can increase with the age of the stand, in 
accordance with species-specific habitat associations 
(Lee 2002, Fisher and Wilkins 2005). Shifts in relative 
abundance and evenness will occur within the small 
mammal community rather than complete species 
turnover. For example, in southern Arizona brush 
mice (Peromyscus boylii) had higher abundance in 
unburned areas than burned areas, while cactus mice 
(Peromyscus eremicus), a species most often associated 
with rocky, dry, and open areas, were only found in 
newly burned areas (2–3 years post fire) (Monroe et 
al. 2004). In recent low to moderate-severity burned 
areas the recently opened understory and canopy 
can increase the amount of food and cover to allow 
species to immigrate into a previously unused area. 
Pinyon mice (Peromyscus truei), a habitat specialist, 
were consistently more abundant in unburned areas 
and declined by 69–76 percent in moderate and high-
severity burned areas, whereas a generalist species the 
North American deermice (Peromyscus maniculatus) 
Box 1: Northern Goshawks and Fire
The northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) evolved in 
forests structured by fire. Goshawks occupy a variety 
of forest types with structural diversity, and use mature 
canopy forests with open understories for foraging 
and roosting (Reynolds et al. 2006). Their ability to 
hunt in the sub-canopy forest space is impaired when 
forest understories become dense with small trees and 
brush (Reynolds and Meslow 1984). In southwestern 
coniferous forests, the absence of frequent surface fire 
creates patches and clumps of dense saplings that can 
inhibit goshawk detection and access of ground prey, 
such as squirrels, rabbits, grouse, and other birds and 
small mammals (Reynolds 
et al. 1992). Frequent low-
severity surface fires can 
help maintain hunting 
and roosting habitats 
across their southwestern 
range and increase the 
productivity of habitat 
used by some of their 
main bird and mammal 
prey species on the 
Kaibab Plateau.
Northern goshawk (Accipiter gen-
tilis). Photo courtesy of the Arizona 
Game and Fish Department

4
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE 
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
increased 72–87 percent in burned areas (Borchert et 
al. 2014). Generalist species such as North American 
deermice often initially colonize an area post-fire, 
and recent burns may be dispersal sinks for juveniles 
(Fisher and Wilkinson 2005). Southern red-backed 
voles (Myodes gapperi), often considered old-growth 
or mature forest specialists, initially decline in burned 
areas, however they repopulate burns within three 
years following wildfire (Krefting and Ahlgren 1974). 
Other species, such as white throated woodrats 
(Neotoma albigula) had difficulty recolonizing burned 
areas likely because their middens were destroyed by 
fire, and were found to use unburned areas more than 
burned areas post-fire (Monroe et al. 2004). Burn 
severity, scale, site characteristics, successional stage 
and surrounding habitat also influence small mammal 
distribution, abundance, and density in burned areas 
(Roberts et al. 2008). 
Red squirrels (Tamias hudsonicus), Abert’s 
squirrels (Sciurus aberti), and other tree squirrels 
depend on mature forest stands for nesting, caching, 
and cover (Steele and Koprowski 2001). Squirrels are 
temporarily adversely affected by fire if nests, cavities, 
and food resources are reduced (Koprowski et al. 
2005). Abert’s squirrels can be negatively affected by 
wildfire if high amounts of canopy cover and structural 
diversity are lost. Endangered Mount Graham red 
squirrels (Tamius hudsonicus grahamensis) in southern 
Arizona selected unburned sites for midden locations, 
however the size of individual home ranges in a low-
intensity burned area decreased over time, indicating 
high availability of resources in a low-severity burned 
area (Blount and Koprowski 2012). Burn severity 
influences use of middens and nests, and can create 
edge effects and habitat fragmentation that can 
negatively affect species abundance and occupancy. 
Herbivores and Carnivores
Herbivores, primarily elk, deer, and bighorn sheep, are 
mainly impacted by wildfire over the short term due 
to loss of forage, understory vegetation, and changes 
in vegetation structure and composition. Wildfires 
can open dense canopies, allowing understory plants 
to increase in density, open up movement pathways, 
increase visibility and the ability to avoid predators 
(Krausman et al. 2001). In the San Francisco Peaks 
in northern Arizona, elk (Cervus elaphus canadensis) 
selectively browsed in stands that experienced high-
severity burns and consequent re-sprout of aspens 
(Bailey and Whittam 2002). Elk have been shown 
to browse in high-severity burned areas up to three 
years post-fire. Desert bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis 
Mexicana) used recently burned areas when dense 
canopies were opened (Cain et al. 2005). 
There is scant published literature discussing how 
carnivores, mesocarnivores, and other large mammals 
respond to wildfire or restoration treatments. Carnivore 
response to wildfire can include changes in recruitment, 
demographics, abundance, and home range size 
(Cunningham and Ballard 2004). In Arizona, female 
black bears (Ursus americanus) used unburned patches 
90 percent of the time (Cunningham et al. 2002), and 
females with cubs sought out cover and food resources 
in unburned patches. Male black bears primarily used 
burned areas and increased their home range post-fire. 
In central Arizona canids such as coyotes (Canis latrans) 
use both burned and unburned areas, whereas gray foxes 
(Urocyon cinereoargenteus) use unburned areas more 
frequently than burned. This was likely due to a short-
term reduction of cover and food availability post-fire, 
highlighting the importance of shrub and vegetation 
diversity for gray fox (Cunningham et al. 2006).
Research shows that pinyon mice (P. truei) are habitat specialists 
that are more abundant in unburned areas. Their numbers declined 
by 69–76 percent in moderate and high-severity burned areas.
Herbivores, such as elk (Cervus elaphus canadensis), can be impacted 
by wildfire in the short term. But wildfires can open dense canopies 
and allow an increase in understory plants that elk feed on. Photo by 
Michael Quinn, courtesy of Grand Canyon National Park  

5
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE  
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
Herpetofauna
Herpetofauna (reptiles and amphibians) are mainly 
impacted by wildfire due to changes in soil properties, 
vegetation structure and composition, and removal 
of understory (Russell et al. 1999). Many reptiles and 
amphibians seek cover underground or in the burrows 
of other species (e.g. tortoises, small mammals) to 
avoid surface fires and can survive low to moderate-
severity wildfire if the soil temperatures stay below a 
critical threshold. Amphibians such as toads and frogs 
have limited movement and poor dispersal capabilities 
(Sinsch 1990). Additionally, the moist and permeable 
skin and eggs of amphibians increases their vulnerability 
to heat and microhabitat drying (Stebbins and Cohen 
1995). Many species respond positively to post-fire 
conditions that include increased insects and food 
availability (Cunningham et al. 2002).
Fire in a Forest Restoration Context
Re-introducing fire to our ecosystem has been a 
primary objective and a preferred restoration approach 
in the southwestern U.S. Restoration treatments such 
as prescribed fire, thinning, thinning plus prescribed 
fire, and managed wildfire are a means of reducing 
fuel accumulation and the risk of large-scale, high-
severity wildfire. Restoration treatments are also a 
means to restore functional patterns and processes 
in southwestern forests. These treatments can return 
forest structure and composition to conditions within 
the natural range of variability and set landscapes on a 
trajectory toward ecological health and integrity. The 
importance of reintroducing fire (prescribed fire and 
managed wildfire) as a disturbance agent to represent 
the ecological effects of a natural fire regime, particularly 
in creating a mosaic of patches, can be an effective tool 
in maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem function.
Prescribed fire and thinning can be used to 
maintain complex landscapes with heterogeneous 
patch mosaics with multiple successional stages that are 
important to many species of wildlife. It is important 
to define the desired conditions on a landscape and 
which species would be present or absent under those 
specified conditions (Youngblood et al. 2007), and 
strive to emulate the natural range of variability in 
conditions for that particular landscape. The response 
of wildlife to prescribed fire and thinning varies by 
species and treatment type (Kotliar 2007). In the short 
term, a variety of restoration treatments in a patchy 
arrangement both spatially and temporally across the 
landscape is likely to result in the highest species and 
Box 2: Conserving the Jemez Mountains Salamander
The Jemez Mountains salamander (Plethodon 
neomexicanus) is a small terrestrial amphibian that 
spends most of its time underground in moist soils. 
More than 90 percent of the population resides within 
the Santa Fe National Forest in New Mexico and it is 
a federally endangered species. The range of Jemez 
Mountains salamander (JMS) is limited to the higher 
elevations (7,200–8,500 ft) of the Jemez Mountains and 
persists in highly fragmented populations of suitable 
habitat in coniferous forests and uses decayed logs and 
coarse woody debris to forage and burrow (Degenhardt 
et al. 1996, Petranka 1998). The JMS population has 
declined due to increased wildfire intensities, drought, 
climate change, and habitat fragmentation. 
High-severity wildfire that destroys canopy cover 
and removes ground cover is detrimental to JMS 
because they need cool, moist conditions for refuge 
and foraging. Large-scale stand replacing wildfires 
destroys JMS habitat, and over the last 20 years high 
severity fires in JMS habitat have negatively affected 
populations. The Dome Fire (1996) and Cerro Grande 
Fire (2000) destroyed one-third of JMS habitat in 
moderate to high severity patches. The Los Conchas 
fire (2012) burned JMS occupied stands and essential 
habitat, and burned 18,000 acres of essential habitat at 
high severity. Post-fire salvage logging removes JMS 
The Jemez Mountains salamander. Photo by Todd Pierson
habitat, disturbs substrates, and can increase the rate 
of soil desiccation, all factors detrimental to JMS. 
JMS likely evolved with frequent low-intensity 
surface fires and small patchy crown fires. Restoring 
conifer forests in the Jemez Mountains to a fire 
regime that more closely matches the historic 
range of variability that the JMS evolved with, and 
implementing fuel reduction and prescribed fire 
will likely allow for continued persistence of JMS 
habitat. Protecting large downed logs and using 
spring prescribed low intensity surface fires is 
recommended. 

6
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE 
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
habitat diversity compared to any one treatment (Noss 
et al. 2006a).
Most active restoration studies are dominated by 
birds and small mammals. Meta-analyses of thinning 
and prescribed burning treatments across the western 
U.S. found that many species of small mammals and 
birds responded positively in terms of abundance and 
density to treatments with thinning plus low/moderate 
severity fire (Kalies et al. 2010, Fontaine and Kennedy 
2012). Some species responded similarly to low/
moderate-severity prescribed fire and forest thinning 
treatments used as a fire surrogate, suggesting that 
at the stand scale and in the short term (0–4 years), 
thinning may adequately mimic low/moderate-severity 
fire in terms of its effects on vertebrates (Fontaine and 
Kennedy 2012). Species preferring open conditions (e.g. 
western bluebird, chipping sparrow [Spizella passerine]) 
and disturbance (e.g. hairy woodpecker) responded 
positively to thinning treatments, whereas species 
preferring closed canopy conditions (e.g. hermit thrush 
[Catharus guttatus]) had a negative response. Treatments 
that included thinning plus low/moderate severity fire 
provided a higher level of positive species responses (e.g. 
golden mantled ground squirrel [Spermophilus lateralis]) 
compared to low-severity fire alone (Fontaine and 
Kennedy 2012). Some species of small mammals (e.g. 
North American deermice [Peromyscus maniculatus]) 
respond similarly to both thinning and prescribed fire, 
suggesting that vegetative structure plays an important 
role in the post-fire responses of some wildlife species 
(Converse et al. 2006a, Kennedy and Fontaine 2009). 
In southwestern coniferous forests, species generally 
have positive density responses to restoration and fuels 
treatments including small-diameter tree removal, low/
moderate severity prescribed burning, and thinning 
and burning combined, and negative responses 0–10 
years after treatment to high-severity fire that removed 
overstory (Kalies et al. 2010, Fontaine and Kennedy 
2012). Most ground-dwelling rodents responded 
positively to thinning (e.g. gray-collared chipmunk 
(Tamias cinereicollis), Mexican woodrat (Neotoma 
Mexicana), least chipmunks (Tamius minimus), and 
North American deermice) and thin/burn treatments 
(e.g. goldenmantled ground squirrel (Spermophilus 
lateralis) and gray-collared chipmunk). North American 
deermice densities increased in both treatments and in 
response to wildfire (Kalies et al. 2010, Converse et al. 
2006c). However, some arboreal species such as Abert’s 
squirrels responded negatively to both thinning and 
burning that removed overstory and canopy cover. Total 
small mammal biomass generally increased following 
both thinning and wildfire (Converse et al. 2006b). 
Individual species and taxa have individualistic and 
variable responses to restoration and fuels reduction 
treatment types in different areas, however total small 
mammal biomass generally increases after treatments 
(Converse et al. 2006c). Restoration and fuels treatments 
such as mechanical thinning can be an alternative to 
fire use in areas located near urban populations or in 
the wildland-urban interface (Kennedy and Fontaine 
2009). When using thinning as a surrogate for fire it is 
important to note that vegetation regeneration, nutrient 
cycling, and fuel dynamics differ (Boerner et al. 2009) 
and should be considered when making inferences and 
expectations of vegetation and wildlife species response. 
When species were grouped into foraging guilds 
to summarize differences between species response to 
treatment type, ground-foraging birds and rodents had 
consistently neutral density responses to the treatments, 
whereas aerial foraging species respond positively to 
small diameter tree removal and burning treatments, 
tree-foliage and bole-foraging birds responded neutrally 
or positively to small-diameter tree removal and burning 
treatments, but negative responses to overstory removal 
and high-severity or stand-replacing wildfire (Kalies et 
al 2010). Sites that contained fuel reduction treatments 
in southwestern ponderosa pine forests in Arizona had 
western bluebird densities increase on all treatments 
with densities more than doubling on the burn-only and 
thin and burn treatments, mountain chickadee (Poecile 
gambeli) densities decreased on all treatment types, 
pygmy nuthatch (Sitta pygmaea) densities remained 
constant across treatments except the thin-and-burn 
treatments where densities increased by 500 percent, and 
yellow-rumped warbler demonstrated a mixed response 
to treatments, with the largest change in density on the 
thin-and-burn treatment, decreasing by 100 percent 
(Hurteau et al. 2008).
Summary
Research suggests forests in the southwestern U.S. 
should be managed for a range of conditions that take 
into account the natural range of variability, past land 
use, a range of fire severities, and overall landscape 
heterogeneity that provides multiple seral stages 
including early seral, mid seral, and old growth habitats 
for multiple wildlife species (Fulé et al. 2004, Noss et al. 
2006b, Kotliar et al. 2007, Kennedy and Fontaine 2009). 
The amount and distribution of these habitat types 
will vary within the ecosystem, and fire management 
that includes a broad range of variability and severity, 
including areas of severe fire, is more likely to preserve 
a broad range of wildlife habitat than restoration 
objectives based on narrowly defined historic fire 
regimes (Allen et al. 2002, Fulé et al. 2004, Schoennagel 
et al. 2004, Noss et al. 2006b, Kotliar et al. 2007, Kennedy 
and Fontaine 2009).
Fire has both positive and negative impacts on 
wildlife species depending upon the severity of the burn, 
spatial extent, post-fire structural and compositional 
elements, and the resulting habitat mosaic. Many 
species of wildlife inhabit forests that have evolved 
with structural conditions that depend on fire as a 
disturbance agent. Some species have evolved with fire 

7
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE  
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
and increase their abundance in burned areas whereas 
others have neutral or negative responses. The habitat 
mosaic is important, and fire can maintain ecosystem 
function and biodiversity. Early successional habitat 
created by fire is important to multiple species of wildlife 
and is limited in many forests across the western U.S. 
(Noss et al. 2006b). Overall, the impact of fire as a 
disturbance agent on wildlife habitat and consequently 
species abundance and density is ultimately species-
specific, and there will always be some species that 
respond positively, some that respond negatively, and 
others that have neutral responses. Given that most 
landscapes support specialists that require either early 
seral or mature older forests, as well as species that 
require multiple seral stages throughout their life cycle, it 
is likely that a mosaic of successional stages is needed in 
the landscape to maximize biodiversity (Fontaine et al. 
2009, Roberts et al. 2010).
Management Implications
• 
A fire’s patch size, shape, and severity can influence 
wildlife distributions across a burned landscape and 
post-fire vegetation structure and composition are 
important in determining species response.
• 
Explicitly defining fire severity as a percent of 
basal area loss or more descriptive severity catego-
ries other than low, moderate, and high is needed 
in order to provide more informative insights in to 
species response.
• 
Low to moderate-severity fire can benefit multiple 
species of wildlife by altering understory conditions, 
while high-severity fire can immediately alter habi-
tat structure and available resources. 
• 
High-severity fire most negatively affects canopy-
nesting and foliage foraging bird species, while many 
insectivores and cavity nesting birds increase due to 
the open conditions and snags created post-fire.
• 
Time since fire is important to species response. 
Often there is an increase in insects and seeds in the 
short term (0–4 years post-fire) that many species 
exploit, while others respond to overall structural 
characteristics over the long term.
• 
Many small mammal species respond positively 
to increased food sources post-fire such as forbs, 
grasses, seeds, and fungi. Squirrels are negatively 
affected when their middens or nests are destroyed 
and overstory is removed. 
• 
Many avian species in the Southwest respond posi-
tively in terms of density and abundance to low and 
moderate-severity fire (e.g. western bluebird, hairy 
woodpecker, Steller’s Jay, plumbeous vireo, dark-
eyed junco).
• 
Many insectivores rapidly colonize burned areas and 
then experience a decrease in density as time since 
fire increases.
• 
In some areas, prescribed fire and/or thinning may 
be used to mimic the role of wildfire; however, at the 
landscape scale these effects are not well understood 
and need more research.

8
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE 
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
Literature Cited
Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F. Suckling, T.W. Swetnam, 
T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman, J.T. Klingel. 
2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine 
ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecological Applications, 12:1418-
1433.
Angelstam, P. 1998. Maintaining and restoring biodiversity in 
European boreal forests by developing natural disturbance 
regimes. Journal of Vegetation Science, 9:593–602
Bailey, J.K. and T.G. Whitham. 2002. Interactions among fire, aspen, 
and elk affect insect diversity: reversal of a community response. 
Ecology, 83(6):1701–1712.
Blount, S.J. and J.L. Koprowski. 2012. Response of the Mount Graham 
red squirrel (Tamiasciurus hudsonicus grahamensis) to post-fire 
conditions. Southwestern Naturalist, 57(1): 8–15.
Bock, C.E. and J.H. Bock. 1992. Response of birds to wildfire in native 
versus exotic Arizona grassland. Southwestern Naturalist, 37(1): 
73–81. 
Bock, C.E. and J.F. Lynch. 1970. Breeding bird populations of burned 
and unburned conifer forests in the Sierra Nevada. Condor, 72(2): 
182–189.
Boerner, R.E.J. 2009. Impacts of fire and fire surrogate treatments 
on forest soil properties: A meta-analytical approach. Ecological 
Applications, 19: 338–358. 
Borchert, M.I., D.P. Farr, M.A. Rimbenieks-Negrete, and M.N. 
Palowski. 2014. Responses of small mammals to wildfire in a 
mixed conifer forest in the San Bernardino Mountains, CA. 
Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of Sciences, 113(2):81-
95.
Brawn, J.D., S.K. Robinson, and F.R. Thompson III. 2001. The role 
of disturbance in the ecology and conservation of birds. Annual 
Review Ecological Systems, 2001. 32:251–76
Cain III, J.W., H.E. Johnson, and P.R. Krausman 2005. Wildfire and 
desert bighorn sheep habitat, Santa Catalina Mountains, Arizona. 
Southwestern Naturalist. 50(4): 506–513.
Converse, S.J., W. M. Block, and G.C. White. 2006a. Small mammal 
population and habitat responses to forest thinning and 
prescribed fire. Forest Ecology and Management, 228, 263–273.
Converse, S.J., G.C. White, and W.M. Block. 2006b. Small mammal 
responses to thinning and wildfire in ponderosa pine-dominated 
forests of the southwestern United States. Journal of Wildlife 
Management, 70: 1711–1722.
Converse, S.J., G.C. White, K.L. Farris, and S. Zack. 2006c. Small 
mammals and forest fuel reduction: National scale responses to 
fire and fire surrogates. Ecological Applications 16, 1717–1729.
Covert-Bratland, K.A., W.M. Block, W.M., and T.C. Theimer. 2006. 
Hairy woodpecker winter ecology in ponderosa pine forests 
representing different ages since wildfire. Journal of Wildlife 
Management, 70: 1379–1392.
Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa 
forest structure: Changes since Euro-American settlement. Journal 
of Forestry, 92(1): 39–47.
Cunningham, S.C., Babb, R. D., Jones, T. R., Taubert, B. D., and Vega, 
R. 2002. Reaction of lizard populations to a catastrophic wildfire 
in a central Arizona mountain range. Biological Conservation, 
107(2): 193–201.
Cunningham, S.C., and W.B. Ballard. 2004. Effects of wildfire on black 
bear demographics in central Arizona. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 
32(3):928-937. 
Cunningham, S.C., L. Kirkendall, and W. Ballard. 2006. Gray fox and 
coyote abundance and diet responses after a wildfire in central 
Arizona. Western North American Naturalist 66(2):169-180.
Degenhardt, W.G., C.W. Painter, and A.H. Price. 1996. Amphibians 
and reptiles of New Mexico. University of New Mexico Press, 
Albuquerque, NM.
Fa, J.E., and V. Sanchez-Cordero. 1993. Small mammal population 
responses to fire in a Mexican high-altitude grassland. Journal of 
Zoology, 230:343-347.
Fisher, J.T., and L. Wilkinson. 2005. The response of mammals to 
forest fire and timber harvest in the North American boreal forest. 
Mammal Review, 35(1):51-81.
Floyd-Hanna, L., and B. Romme. 1972. Fire effects and fire history 
of Mesa Verde National Park. National Park Service semi-
annual report, Rocky Mountain Region, Moab, UT.
Fontaine, J.B., Donato, D.C., Robinson, W.D., Law, B.E., and 
Kauffman, J.B., 2009. Bird communities following high severity 
fire: Response to single and repeat fires in a mixed-evergreen 
forest, Oregon, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 257, 
1496–1504.
Fontaine, J.B., and P.L. Kennedy 2012. Meta-analysis of avian and 
small mammal response to fire severity and fire surrogate 
treatments in U.S. fire-prone forests. Ecological Applications 
22:1547-1561.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, T.A. Heinlein, M.M. Moore, W.W. 
Covington, G. Vankamp. 2003. Mixed severity fire regime in 
high-elevation forest of the Grand Canyon, Arizona, USA. 
Landscape Ecology, 18:465-486.
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, A.E. Cocke, M.M. Moore, W.W. Covington 
2004. Changes in canopy fuels and potential fire behavior 
1880-200: Grand Canyon, Arizona. Ecological Modelling, 
175:231-248.
Hannon, S.J., and P. Drapeau. 2005. Bird responses to burning 
and logging in the boreal forest of Canada. Studies in Avian 
Biology, 30: 97-115.
Hobson, K.A., and J. Schieck. 1999. Change in bird communities in 
boreal mixed-wood forest: harvest and wildfire effects over 30 
years. Ecological Applications, 9(3):849-863.
Hurteau, S.R., T.D. Sisk, W.M. Block, and B.G. Dickson. 2008. Fuel-
reduction treatment effects of avian community structure and 
diversity. Journal of Wildlife Management, 72(5):1168-1174.
Kalies, E.L., C.L. Chambers, and W.W. Covington. 2010. Wildlife 
responses to thinning and burning treatments in southwestern 
conifer forests: A meta-analysis. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 259:333-342.
Keeley, J.E. 2009. Fire intensity, fire severity and burn severity: 
a brief review and suggested usage. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire (18):116-126.
Kennedy, P.L., and J.B. Fontaine. 2009. Synthesis of knowledge on 
the effects of fire and fire surrogates on wildlife in U.S. dry 
forests. Special report 1096 Joint Fire Science Program. Oregon 
State University, Corvallis, OR.
Koprowski, J.L., M. I. Alanen, and A. M. Lynch. 2005. Nowhere to 
run and nowhere to hide: response of endemic Mt. Graham 
red squirrels to catastrophic forest damage. Biological 
Kotliar, N.B., P.L. Kennedy, and K. Ferree. 2007. Avifaunal 
responses to fire in southwestern montane forests along a burn 
severity gradient. Ecological Applications, 17, 491–507.
Kotliar, N.B., E.W. Reynolds, D.H. and Deutschman. 2008. 
American three-toed woodpecker response to burn severity 
and prey availability at multiple spatial scales. Fire Ecology, 4, 
26–45.
Krausman, P. R., W.C. Dunn, L.K. Harris, W.W. Shaw, and W.M. 
Boyce 2001. Can mountain sheep and humans coexist? 
Proceedings of the Second International Wildlife Management 
Congress. 2: 224–227.
Krefting, L.W., and C. E. Ahlgren. 1974. Small mammals and 
vegetation changes after fire in a mixed conifer-hardwood 
forest. Ecology 55:1391-1398.
Lee, P. 2002. Stages of forest succession. Pages 3.1–3.3 in The 
ecological basis for stand management in Alberta (S. Song, 
editor). Alberta Research Council, Vegreville, Alberta, Canada.
Lowe, P.O., P.F. Ffolliott, J.H. Dieterick, and D.R. Patton. 1978. 
Determining potential wildlife benefits from wildfire in 
Arizona ponderosa pine forests. USDA Forest Service, General 
Technical Report RM-52, Fort Collins, CO.
Lyon, L.J., E.S. Telfer, and D.S. Schreiner. 2000. Direct effects of 
fire and animal responses. In: Smith, J. K. Wildland fire in 
ecosystems: effects of fire on fauna. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-
GTR-42. Ogden, UT : U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service: 17–23.

9
Ecological Restoration Institute
WILDLIFE AND FIRE: IMPACTS OF WILDFIRE AND PRESCRIBED FIRE ON WILDLIFE  
AND HABITATS IN SOUTHWESTERN CONIFEROUS FORESTS
Monroe, L.M., S.C. Cunningham, and L.B. Kirkendall. 2004. Small 
mammal community responses to a wildfire on a central 
Arizona sky island. Journal of the Arizona Nevada Academy of 
Science. 37(2): 56–61
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 1999. Reference 
conditions and ecological restoration: A Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine perspective. Ecological Applications 9(4): 
1266-1277.
Noss, R.F., P. Beier, W.W. Covington, R.E. Grumbine, D.B. 
Lindenmayer, J.W. Prather, F. Schmiegelow, T.D. Sisk, D.J. 
Vosick. 2006a. Recommendations for integrating restoration 
ecology and conservation biology in ponderosa pine forests in 
the southwestern United States. Restoration Ecology 14, 4–10. 
Noss, R.F., J.F. Franklin, W.L. Baker, T. Schoennagel, and P.B. 
Moyle. 2006b. Managing fire-prone forests in the western 
United States. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 4, 
481–487.
Petranka, J.W. 1998. Salamanders of the U.S. and Canada. 
Smithsonian Press, USA.
Reynolds, R.T., and E.C. Meslow. 1984. Partitioning of food and 
niche characteristics of coexisting Accipiter in Oregon. Journal 
of Wildlife Management 46, 124-138.
Reynolds, R.T., R.T. Graham, M.H. Reiser, R.L. Bassett, P.L., 
Kennedy, D.A. Boyce Jr., G. Goodwin, R. Smith, E.L. 
Fisher. 1992. Management Recommendations for the 
Northern Goshawk in the Southwestern United States. 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-217. In: USDA 
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort 
Collins, Colorado, USA.
Reynolds, R.T., J.D. Wiens, S.R. Salafsky. 2006. A review and 
evaluation of factors limiting Northern Goshawk populations. 
Studies in Avian Biology 31, 260-273.
Reynolds, R.T., A.J. Sanchez Meador, J.A. Youtz, T. Nicolet, M.S. 
Matonis, P.L. Jackson, D.G. DeLorenzo, A.D. Graves. 2013. 
Restoring Composition and Structure in Southwestern 
Frequent-Fire Forests: A science-based framework for 
improving ecosystem resiliency. General Technical Report 
RMRS-GTR- 310. In: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
Roberts, S.L., J.W. van Wagtendonk, A.K. Miles, D.A. Kelt, and 
J.A. Lutz. 2008. Modeling the effects of fire severity and spatial 
complexity on small mammals in Yosemite National Park, 
California. Fire Ecology 4(2): 83-104.
Roberts S.L., J.W. van Wagtendonk, A.K. Miles, D.A. Kelt. 
2010. Effects of fire on spotted owl site occupancy in a late-
successional forest. Biological Conservation 144: 610–619. 
Russell, K.R., D.H. Van Lear, and D.C. Guynn Jr. 1999. Prescribed 
fire effects on herpetofauna: review and management 
implications. Wildlife Society Bulletin. 27(2): 374-384.
Saab, V., W. Block, R. Russell, J. Lehmkuhl, J., L. Bate, and 
R. White. 2007. Birds and Burns of the Interior West: 
Descriptions, Habitats and Management in Western Forests. 
General Technical Report PNW-GTR-712. USDA Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR.
Saab, V.A., and K.T. Vierling. 2001. Reproductive success of Lewis’ 
woodpecker in burned pine and cottonwood riparian forests. 
Condor 103:491-501.
Schoennagel, T., T.T. Veblen, and W.H. Romme. 2004. The 
interaction of fire, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain 
forests. BioScience 54(7):661-676.
Shaffer, K.E., and W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr. 2006. Fire and animal 
interactions. Pages 118-144 in: N.G. Sugihara, J.W. van 
Wagtendonk, K.E. Shaffer, J. Fites-Kaufman, and A.E. Thode, 
editors. Fire in California’s ecosystems. University of California 
Press, Berkeley, California, USA.
Sinsch, U. 1990. Migration and orientation in anuran amphibians. 
Ethology, Ecology, and Evolution 2:65-69.
Smith, J.K., L.J. Lyon, M.H. Huff, R.G. Hooper, E.S. Telfer, and D.S. 
Schreiner. 2000. Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects of fire on 
fauna. United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, 
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-42-1:1–84.
Smucker, K.M., R.L. Hutto, and B.M. Steele. 2005. Changes in bird 
abundance after wildfire: Importance of fire severity and time 
since fire. Ecological Applications 15, 1535–1549.
Stebbins, R.C., and N.W. Cohen. 1995. A natural history of 
amphibians. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey. 
Steele, M.A., and J.L. Koprowski. 2001. North American tree 
squirrels. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Swetnam, T.W., C.H. Baisan, and J.M. Kaib. 2001. Forest fire 
histories of the Sky Islands of La Frontera. Pages 95–119 in 
Changing plant life of La Frontera (G.L. Webster and C.J. 
Bahre, editors). University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Ward, P. 1968. Fire in relation to waterfowl habitat of the delta 
marshes. In: Proceedings, 8th annual Tall Timbers fire ecology 
conference. Proceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecological 
Conference. 8: 254–267.
Youngblood, A., H. Bigler-Cole, C.J. Fettig, C. Fiedler, E.E. Knapp, 
J.F. Lehmkuhl, K.W. Outcalt, C.N. Skinner, S.L. Stephens, and 
T.A. Waldrop. 2007. Making Fire and Fire Surrogate Science 
Available: A Summary of Regional Workshops with Clients. 
General Technical Report PNWGTR 727. USDA Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR.

For more information about forest restoration, contact the ERI at (928) 523-7182  or nau.edu/eri.
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
This report was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.
 NAU Printing Services/G1002747
 
Working Papers in Intermountain West Frequent-Fire Forest Restoration
1: 
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons  and Adaptive Management Practices
2: 
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: 
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: 
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: 
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6: 
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7: 
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8: 
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9: 
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological Restoration Treatments
20: Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas 
21: Managing Coarse Woody Debris in Frequent-fire Southwestern Forests
22: Restoring Spatial Pattern to Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
23: Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern Arizona
24: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning 
25: Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction 
in the Intermountain West
26: Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration
27: Fuel Treatment Longevity
28: Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments
29:  Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm/Dry Mixed-
Conifer Forests
30: Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles
31: Climate Change Impacts on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires
32. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods
33. The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest
34. Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest 
35. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and Management

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
nau.edu/eri
