Ecological Restoration 
Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Fact Sheet: Post-Wildfire Fuels and Regeneration Dynamics    March 2011 
Western forests are increasingly subject to large,  
severe wildfires that leave behind large quantities of 
standing and fallen woody debris. In areas that expe-
rience total overstory tree mortality, a lack of seed 
sources may affect future ecosystem trajectories. ERI 
researchers studied 14 ponderosa pine-dominated 
wildfire sites of different ages throughout Arizona to 
better understand snag and woody debris dynamics, 
and to assess post-fire regeneration in terms of  
probable future successional trajectories. 
What to expect following severe wildfires in ponderosa pine forests 
Research Findings 
 
 
Wildfire-damaged snags decayed over time, lost 
their bark and, eventually, broke apart.  
 
The majority of standing snags fell over about 
ten years after wildfire (Figure 1), which closely 
paralleles the results of a similar study of       
Flagstaff area wildfires by Passovoy and Fulé 
(2006). 
 
Coarse woody debris (CWD) was much higher at 
older sites than more recently burned sites. While 
CWD exceeded the “optimal” range for dry coni-
fer forests suggested by Brown et al. (2003) in 
the time period 6-12 years after fire, the peak  
period was brief and CWD rapidly dropped into 
the range of recommended values (Figure 2). 
 
Coarse woody debris was predominantly sound 
for several years after the wildfire but became 
predominantly rotten about 16 years after the fire 
event (Figure 2). 
 
Regeneration was variable across sites, but was 
often dominated by sprouting deciduous species, 
such as oak and aspen (Figure 3). 
 
Ponderosa pine regeneration was completely 
lacking at 57 percent of the sites; only one site 
had exceptional ponderosa pine regeneration. 
Figure 2. Coarse woody debris (CWD) loadings 
exceeded the “optimal” range (dotted horizontal 
lines) for dry conifer forests suggested by Brown 
et al. (2003) in the time period 6-12 years after 
fire. However, the peak period was brief and 
CWD rapidly dropped into the range of recom-
mended values. 
Figure 1. A model of snag dynamics based on 
data from 14 Arizona wildfire sites indicates that 
the majority of snags either broke or had fallen 
over by about ten years after the wildfire. 
(over) 

  References 
  Brown, J.K., E.D. Reinhardt, and K.A. Kramer. 2003. Coarse woody debris: Managing benefits and fire   
hazard in the recovering forest. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report. RMRS-GTR-105. 
  Thomas, J.W., R.G. Anderson, C. Maser, and E.L. Bull. 1979. Snags. Pages 60-77 in J.W. Thomas, ed., 
Wildlife habitats in managed forests: The Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. USDA Agricultural 
Handbook 553.  
  Passovoy, M.D. and P.Z. Fulé. 2006. Snag and woody debris dynamics following severe wildfires in     
northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management 223:237-246.  
 
Contacts 
John Paul Roccaforte John.Roccaforte@nau.edu 
Dr. Peter Fulé Pete.Fule@nau.edu 
Walker Chancellor Walker.Chancellor@nau.edu 
Dr. Daniel Laughlin Daniel.Laughlin@nau.edu 
  For more information:  
  Roccaforte, J.P., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Chancellor, and D.L. Laughlin. 2012. Woody debris and tree regeneration dynamics  
  following severe wildfires in Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 42: 593-604.
Figure 3. Regeneration was variable and included sites with a) prolific aspen regeneration (Outlet Fire); b) 
prolific pine regeneration (Pine Mountain Fire); c) abundant oak regeneration (Aspen Fire); and, d) no re-
generation (Pot Fire). 
 Management Implications 
 The widely used snag transition model developed by Thomas et al. (1979) is an appropriate management 
tool to assess snag dynamics in post-wildfire environments, although the “clean” snag category, which is 
relatively low in abundance, is not strongly correlated with time since fire. 
 Managers can expect that most snags will fall about a decade after a wildfire. Given this short timeframe 
and the habitat that snags provide for wildlife, there is little reason to consider removing standing snags.   
 Managers can expect that sound CWD will transition to rotten by about 16 years after a wildfire. 
 The highest fire hazard at post-wildfire sites may occur 6-12 years after fire when CWD may exceed the 
fuel loading range recommended by Brown et al. (2003). 
 Due to the potential for sprouting by deciduous species and low conifer regeneration, some post-fire sites 
may shift from a previously ponderosa pine-dominated forest to an alternate stable state, such as a     
shrubfield or grassland. 
 
a 
c 
b 
d 
  
