The two major mountain ranges of 
northern Mexico, the Sierra Madre 
Occidental in the west and the Sierra 
Madre Oriental in the east, conserve 
extraordinary forests of great biolog-
ical diversity.  In 2007 and 2008, we 
sampled study sites across both rang-
es for fire-scarred trees, measure-
ments of forest structure and species 
composition, and wildland fuels. 
Our research team from Northern 
Arizona University is collaborating 
with several Mexican and American 
partners, including Dr. José Villan-
ueva-Díaz from Mexico´s national 
forest research agency; Dr. Eladio 
Cornejo from the Universidad Narro 
in Coahuila, Mexico; Dr. Don Falk 
from the University of Arizona; and 
Dr. Peter Brown of Rocky Mountain 
Tree-Ring Research in Colorado. 
Climate patterns that we are assess-
ing include precipitation, drought, El 
Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 
Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), 
and Atlantic Multi-decadal Oscil-
lation (AMO). Using tree-ring 
analyses of past fires, we are exam-
ining the impact of climate on fire 
occurrence and synchrony over large 
regions. We investigate forest and 
fuel structures to see how past fires 
affected them and to predict how 
future fires might behave, especially 
under changing climate conditions. 
The information being developed in 
this project has many applications. 
Landowners and natural resource 
managers in northern Mexico can 
use the fire, climate and forest data 
to help develop management plans 
that are better suited to sustainable 
fire management as climate varies. 
Conservation of Mexican forests also 
has direct benefits for the U.S., be-
cause many migratory species cross 
the border during their life cycles 
and because both nations share 
important watersheds and airsheds. 
Another key application of the 
research is to improve understanding 
of large-scale climate and fire distur-
bance patterns of North America by 
adding sites in previously unstudied 
forests, such as in the northeastern 
region of Mexico, where El Niño/La 
Niña reverse their wet and dry ef-
fects. Improved knowledge about fire 
and climate interactions and trends 
over time will permit better forecast-
ing of the environmental effects of 
short-term and long-term climate 
change.
Our international partnership is 
supporting two doctoral students 
at NAU, one from the U.S. and one 
from Mexico. In addition, we are 
supporting two NAU undergradu-
ates carrying out thesis projects to 
reconstruct a climate chronology 
from tree rings and to investigate 
the sensitivity of co-occurring pine 
species to climate over an elevational 
gradient. In Mexico, the project as-
sisted a Mexican student to complete 
an M.S. study on forest fire his-
tory as well as two undergraduates 
working on thesis projects related 
to tree regeneration and manage-
ment history. The international scope 
Why do some forests burn more 
than others? How do El Niño and 
other climatic factors inﬂuence 
forest ﬁres? Do widespread climate 
events or local characteristics, such 
as fuel, topography and ignition 
events have the greatest eﬀect on 
ﬁre occurrence? These are questions 
we are trying to answer in this study 
focused on fire, climate and forest 
structure in the mountains of north-
ern Mexico. The findings that emerge 
from this study will have implica-
tions for regions in the United States 
and around the world that struggle 
with the challenge of forest fires. 
The project, funded by the National 
Science Foundation, is developing a 
new network of long fire and climate 
chronologies together with measure-
ments of fuel dynamics in northern 
Mexico. 
below:  The Sierra Madre Oriental in the Mexican State of Coahuila
NAU GLOBAL  Fall 2008   3
 What determines
(Continued on page 18)

United States. In fact, 2004–05 saw 
a decrease in the growth of interna-
tional students in the U.S. for the first 
time in about 30 years. A number of 
graduate programs experienced sig-
nificant declines in the enrollment 
of international students. Thankfully, 
changes have been made that allow a 
much smoother flow of international 
students to the U.S., a phenomenon 
that for all of its other virtues has far-
reaching implications for the global 
scramble for intellectual capital.
     It is a reasonable assumption that 
political leaders who have had sig-
nificant international experiences 
and possibly international academic 
experiences may be more inclined to 
support policies that advance global 
education. Most of John McCain’s 
international experience was acquired 
as a member of the armed forces, in-
cluding his imprisonment in Vietnam 
for five years and as a child of parents 
in the armed forces stationed around 
the world. Some of Barack Obama’s 
formative years were spent in Indo-
nesia with his American mother and 
Indonesian stepfather. Of course, 
his father’s Kenyan ancestry has led 
to his travel to and interest in that 
part of the world as well. Although 
neither candidate has made specific 
commitments to global education, 
they both understand by virtue of 
their professional and personal expe-
riences, and by our stunning failures 
in Iraq, that America’s standing and 
effectiveness on the global stage will 
require American citizens who can 
negotiate an increasingly interde-
pendent and interconnected world. 
The chaos recently witnessed in the 
global financial markets that had its 
genesis in the U.S. mortgage indus-
try should make this need even more 
urgent. The Bush administration’s 
rhetorical support for the Lincoln 
Commission’s recommendation that 
one million American students per 
year for the next 10 years be funded 
to engage in study abroad experienc-
es is noteworthy and demands our 
fervent advocacy for congressional 
approval and funding. Regardless of 
who wins in November, however, we 
all have an obligation as educators to 
first recognize the pivotal role that 
politics plays in education and ad-
vocate for policies that will advance 
the goal of preparing students to be 
globally competent
The Intersection of Politics 
and Global Education
Interaction of Fire, Climate, 
and Forest Structure in 
Northern Mexico
of the work has been broadened 
because two of the students working 
in Mexico are from Paraguay and 
a Spanish scientist joined our field 
campaign in 2008. The diversity of 
ecosystems, cultures and research 
interchanges has contributed to a 
valuable experience for both the 
students and scientists involved. 
Pete Fule is Associate Professor in the 
School of Forestry. Larissa Yocom and Cit-
lali Cortes Montano are doctoral students 
in the School of Forestry.
African Image, Mass Me-
dia and Popular Literature:  
Lessons for a Curious
Community
success in the West, yet the resolu-
tion of the conflicts in Sierra Leone, 
Rwanda and Southern Sudan was 
a collective community effort, with 
enormous grassroots input. Hardly 
are these efforts fodder for the West-
ern media, popular literature or the 
campus speaking circuit.
While these events are invariably in-
formative, even riveting, and broaden 
the NAU community’s exposure to 
global perspectives, it is important 
that they inspire a willingness to de-
construct stereotypes about various 
regions and ethnic groups in Africa. 
In effect, they provide an occasion to 
move beyond the messages that can 
lead to feeling overwhelmed, dis-
couraged or angry and see instances 
of positive engagement and hopeful 
activism by people taking control 
of their lives in the face of impos-
sible odds. Indeed, Ismael Beah’s 
presentation succeeded in convey-
ing exactly these sentiments.  NAU 
students need these perspectives 
now more than ever, as they prepare 
for life in an increasingly intercon-
nected and interdependent world 
and as some elect to pursue service 
learning experiences, be they in Af-
rica or other parts of the developing 
world, including areas in America 
where conditions mimic quite closely 
these very circumstances. Further, 
while fiscal constraints may preclude 
the possibility of an African Studies 
Department, a robust African Stud-
ies minor within the Ethnic Studies 
Department could be the linchpin for 
providing the critical tools necessary 
for the deconstruction of stereotypes 
about Africa.
Ishmael Munene is an Assistant Professor 
in the Department of Educational Leader-
ship.
Summer Study as a Window 
into Chinese History and 
Culture
such international settings and in 
acquiring greater sensitivity to the 
needs of international students on 
American campuses.  
     The program collaborates with 
partner universities in China that 
serve as hosts for one week at a time. 
In addition to room and board, host 
universities provide academic in-
struction. Students from these insti-
tutions who intend to enroll as 1+2+1 
students at NAU serve as guides to 
(CONTINUED)
18   NAU GLOBAL  Fall 2008 
