Will leaf litter unlock the Verde's secrets? 
By ANNE MINARD 
Sun Staff Reporter 
05/13/2001 
 
For Jane Marks, carbon isn't just an element 
uniformly present in all living things.  
To Marks, various forms of carbon also act 
as "stable isotopes," natural tracers that 
illuminate pathways throughout a biological 
system.  
She's using carbon as one tool to 
characterize interactions between native 
fauna -- such as suckers, chubs and speckled dace -- and introduced species -- green 
sunfish, crayfish, and small mouth bass -- in Oak, Beaver and Fossil creeks, all of which 
empty into the Verde River.  
On the surface, the study looks more fun than innovative -- Marks spends sunny days in 
shorts and sandals, dipping tiny creatures out of sunlit, red-rock-rimmed creeks with a 
long-handled net. On those days, her "office" is a backdrop of cottonwoods and willow 
trees that appear brightly alive despite the scorching heat of impending summer.  
But the work is complex, and takes advantage of processes that are seldom seen and even 
less often apt to be understood.  
Much of Marks' research hinges on the fact that stream food chains start with either algae 
or leaf litter that drop into the water. Algae and leaf litter carry different "chemical 
signatures" of, for example, Carbon 13.  
Marks has studied how that signature progresses up through the food chain. Stream 
insects called mayflies eat algae, and so they share its signature. And organisms called 
midges eat mostly leaf litter, so they carry a chemical signal identical to that of leaf litter. 
From there, her work is based on the adage, "You are what you eat," she says. Marks and 
fellow researchers take fin clips of fish, or toe clips and blood samples of lizards (all non-
lethal techniques), and see where the animal falls on the spectrum between the chemical 
signature of algae and that from leaves of trees growing at the water's edge.  
"They allow you to see ... who's competing with who, and who's eating who," she 
explained.  
 
 

The work has been funded with about $100,000 from the NAU-based Merriam-Powell 
Center for Environmental Research, the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Forest 
Service.  
Another aspect of Marks's work, funded with $60,000 from the Ecological Restoration 
Institute, will seek to understand how land management techniques like fire protection 
and ecological restoration affect stream processes, also on the Verde watershed.  
As part of the same project, Marks is also exploring the effects of rising carbon dioxide 
on leaf litter quality of cottonwoods. To do so, she grows the trees in greenhouses that 
mimic conditions now and conditions that are expected after several more decades of the 
so-called Greenhouse Effect that is expected to result from the continued burning of 
fossil fuels. Her overriding question is whether cottonwood leaves will become lower in 
proteins with increased levels of carbon dioxide. If so, it could affect the overall 
nutritional quality at all levels of streams.  
"A Michigan study showed leaves exposed to high carbon dioxide are not very nutritious. 
Part of our impetus is to see if that holds true in northern Arizona, where there are 
cottonwoods and it's sunny," Marks said, pointing out that the Michigan study was done 
in a shaded landscape forested by aspen trees.  
Also working on the project are Chris Williamson, a research technician; Cody Carter , 
who will soon begin a master's degree focusing on Fossil Creek through an Ecological 
Restoration Institute grant; and Jaina Lundburg, a senior undergraduate researcher in the 
lab.  
 
 
 
