Collaborative Flagstaff forest plan victimized by 
misrepresentation 
Is the Flagstaff Model a prescription or a process? 
09/23/2000 
 
That's the either/or choice that opponents to the forest thinning project in the Fort Valley 
area are offering, and it's a false one.  
The model, now recognized nationwide thanks to coverage in the national press this 
summer, calls for a combination of prescribed burns and thinning, the better to restore 
forest health and prevent catastrophic crown fires of the type that swept through the West 
this summer.  
Its primary author is NAU Professor Wallace Covington, and the test case for the model 
is the Fort Valley restoration project proposed for 1,700 acres of Coconino National 
Forest northwest of Flagstaff.  
Some opponents charge the model is too extreme in seeking to return the overgrown 
ponderosa pine forest to more open, park-like presettlement conditions. Others worry the 
model will used as an excuse for the big timber companies to return to the woods and 
remove the last large trees.  
Neither fear appears justified. As forest officials have taken pains to point out, the 
Flagstaff Model is the starting point for forest treatments that will vary according to the 
landscape and community needs and preferences. No single approach will be used across 
an entire landscape, nor in one community.  
The reason is that the model is indeed a collaborative one. It starts by sharing 
responsibility across various levels of government, a move that won the endorsement of 
six Western governors last week. Further, once state-level priorities on thinning have 
been set, the actual work will be done not by the big timber companies but by community 
agencies and partnerships. Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt has talked of a return to a sort 
of Civilian Conservation Corps of the 1930s, with forest restoration projects providing 
jobs in the woods for local residents.  
Opponents are singling out for criticism a Fort Valley test plot that showed 88 percent of 
the trees removed, leaving little tree canopy for goshawks and other animals.  
Forest officials says the test plot is only one approach used by the Flagstaff Model and 
will not be applied in the Fort Valley project. In fact, the Fort Valley project specifically 
protects all trees larger than 16 inches in diameter rather than the 24-inch threshold that 
would be needed to return to true pre-settlement conditions.  

Last week, U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl announced that Congress was close to passing an 
emergency $8.8 million appropriation for Covington's Ecological Restoration Institute at 
NAU that will help launch the collaborative Flagstaff Model in other communities 
endangered by overgrown forests. Part of the grant will also go to the Grand Canyon 
Forests Partnership in Flagstaff, the 16-member public/private group that has proposed 
the Fort Valley project and wants to begin thinning as soon as possible. Eventually, the 
partnership wants to treat a total of 100,000 acres in and around Flagstaff.  
Opponents have blocked the project once already on procedural grounds, claiming the 
environmental impact report was inadequate. Now they appear to be gearing up for an 
attack on the Flagstaff Model itself, one that they could have helped to shape had they 
agreed to join the partnership. Instead, they refused, choosing confrontation instead of 
collaboration. They are misrepresenting a part of the model for the whole, and they are 
using their own self-imposed outsider status as "proof" that the model is not about 
collaboration.  
It's time to get the Fort Valley project under way. The objections of fringe environmental 
groups are not only specious but bordering on disingenuous. The Flagstaff Model is 
flexible, not narrowly drawn. It is about selective thinning, not clearcutting. It calls for 
community participation and local jobs, not profiteering by the big timber industry. If 
opponents persist in misrepresenting the model and the project in the face of that 
evidence, they will only succeed in further marginalizing themselves and the larger 
environmental movement. It's time they saw the forest through the trees.  
 
