Welcome to the Ecological Restoration Institute newsletter!
.
UPCOMING EVENTS
ERI IN THE NEWS
NEW PUBLICATIONS
NEWS FROM THE FIELD
SPOTLIGHT: SWFSC
Ecological
Restoration
Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86001
nau.edu/eri
928-523-7182
 
Large, mature ponderosa pines
accompany a dense growth of
resprouting Gambel oak in the San Juan
National Forest near Pagosa Springs,
Colorado. Ecological Restoration
Institute, NAU
RESTORATION NEWS: Creative Solutions to
Funding Restoration
Arizona forests today are overstocked with trees, creating
conditions for high-intensity, severe wildfires on the scale of
several hundred thousand acres. These forests provide a
multitude of resources and are also home to critical watersheds,
which are greatly affected by too many trees. Research shows
that an overabundance of trees competing for resources can
yield less water for watersheds. In addition, devastating wildfires
that result from poor forest conditions can cause flooding and
erosion, which pollutes critical reservoirs downstream and
affects water quality.
Along with these challenges, we face many opportunities for
investing in the future health of our forests and, in turn, our
watersheds. In early October, ERI and other forest experts
convened in Scottsdale, Ariz. for a two-day conference to
discuss obstacles and explore solutions to restoring Arizona
forests. Hosted by the Salt River Project (SRP), the “Investment
Strategies to Restore Arizona Forests and Watersheds”
December 2013

conference featured a variety of speakers who offered creative
strategies to increase funding of current and future restoration
projects at the local, regional and national level.
Learn more about the 2013 conference.
 
 
ERI IN THE NEWS
ERI IN THE NEWS
Partners for the Flagstaff Watershed Protection
Project (FWPP) assess impacts and capabilities of
logging equipment on steep slopes during a FWPP
pilot project in July. The partnership is an example of
an innovative way to fund forest restoration. Photo
courtesy of FWPP
Saving Arizona’s Threatened Landscape
ERI’s Wally Covington and others discuss
solutions to funding costly forest thinning
projects—and why our future depends on it.
More...
Experts Discuss How to Preserve
Arizona’s Forests
Forest experts discuss investment strategies
to fund Arizona forest restoration projects.
More...
Wildfires Still Pose Risk for Arizona in
Slow Year 
Twenty-five percent of Arizona’s forests have
burned since 2000, and an estimated 3–3.5
million acres remain in danger of burning as
drought conditions continue and forests need
treatment.
More...
PUBLICATIONS:
PUBLICATIONS:
ERI FACT SHEETS:
Wyatt, C.J.W. 2013. Fact Sheet: How Restoration Thinning Treatments on Conifer-dominated
Watersheds Affect the Water Budget. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona
University. 2p.

The systematic review of 37 relevant experimental studies from around the world indicates
when 20–100% of a conifer-dominated watershed is thinned the water yield can increase 10–
35%, with differences due to variables such as climate, topography, and soil types.
Wyatt, C.J.W. 2013. Fact Sheet: Interpretive Model of Regional Semi-arid Aquifer Responses
to Large-scale Forest Restoration Treatments and Climate Change. Ecological Restoration
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2p. 
Researchers modified the Northern Arizona Regional Groundwater-Flow Model to see how
4FRI restoration treatments might affect groundwater in a sub-basin of the Verde River. The
model predicts a short-term increase in groundwater after treatments, then a decline due to
vegetative regrowth.
ERI WORKING PAPERS:
Margolis, E.Q., D.W. Huffman, and J.M. Iñiguez. 2013. Working Paper 28: Southwestern
Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration
Treatments. Ecological Restoration Institute/Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern
Arizona University, ERI Working Papers, 8 p.
These forest ecologists present in-field diagnostics for determining the compositional and
structural differences between warm/dry and cool/moist mixed-conifer forests in the Southwest.
Evaluating these conditions allows land managers to make informed decisions about
restoration activities.
Yocom, L. 2013. Working Paper 27: Fuel Treatment Longevity. Ecological Restoration
Institute/Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University, ERI Working
Papers, 8 p.
Dr. Yocom’s review of the relevant literature from studies across the West indicates that forest
restoration treatments and fuel hazard reduction efforts typically last 10–15 years before losing
their effectiveness and requiring further management action.
ERI REPORTS:
Crouse, J.E. and A.E.M. Waltz. 2013. Identifying priority forest treatment areas across the
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. Special report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests,
USDA Forest Service, Region 3. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University.
50 p.
ERI researchers used various GIS data layers to help U.S. Forest Service personnel working
on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests to 1) identify priority restoration treatment areas
and 2) locate forested areas within the Wallow Fire perimeter that remain vulnerable to
uncharacteristic wildfire.

Huffman, D.W., B. Greco, W.W. Chancellor, J.E. Crouse, J.D. Springer, A.E.M. Waltz. 2013.
White Mountain Stewardship Program Monitoring Report. Special report to the Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA Forest Service, Region 3. Ecological Restoration Institute,
Northern Arizona University. 33 p.
The White Mountain Stewardship Program’s 2011 forest treatments were studied to determine
whether: 1) there was a difference between pre- and post-treatment crown fire potential, 2)
treated acres exhibited a change in Fire Regime Condition Class, 3) untreated or lightly treated
areas are connected, and 4) invasive species are present in disturbed areas.
Roccaforte, J.P., M.T. Stoddard, P.Z. Fulé. 2013. Preliminary results from the Mineral
Ecosystem Management Area (EMA) experimental block study: One-year post-treatment.
Special report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA Forest Service, Region 3.
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 18 p.
This report presents early results of an experiment the ERI conducted to 1) determine
reference conditions, 2) measure and evaluate pre-treatment forest structure variables, and 3)
test responses to full restoration and burn only treatments—in a ponderosa pine forest on the
A-S National Forests.
Roccaforte, J.P. 2013. The Wallow Fire and its effects on mixed-conifer forest: A comparison
with reference conditions. Special report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA
Forest Service, Region 3. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 17 p.
This study evaluated high-severity burn patch characteristics in the Wallow Fire to determine if
they were within the historical range of variability (HRV) for Southwest mixed conifer forests.
From 28–69% of the dry mixed conifer burned outside the HRV, while wet mixed conifer was
entirely within the HRV. 
Sensibaugh, M., B. Greco, W.W. Chancellor, M.T. Stoddard. 2013. Larson Forest Restoration
Project Historic Range of Variation (HRV Reference Conditions) Assessment Report. Special
Report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, U.S. Forest Service, Region 3. Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 20 p.
The ERI worked with the Black Mesa Ranger District of the A-S National Forests to determine
the historic forest structure and composition, fire history, and current stand conditions of an
area of approximately 30,000 acres, dominated primarily by ponderosa pine. 
PUBLISHED IN JOURNALS:
Abella, S.R. and J.D. Springer. 2012. Soil seed banks in a mature coniferous forest landscape:
dominance of native perennials and low spatial variability. Seed Science Research 22:207-217.
Abella and Springer evaluate the composition and relationships of seed banks with forest
community types, vegetation cover, and environmental variables from 36 relatively undisturbed
sites ranging from low-elevation pinyon-juniper to high-elevation bristlecone pine in southern

Nevada.
Kalies, E.L. and S.S. Rosenstock. 2013. Stand structure and breeding birds: Implications for
restoring ponderosa pine forests. Journal of Wildlife Management 77(6):1157-1165.
These wildlife ecologists sampled birds and forest structural characteristics in 23 stands in
northern Arizona. Using multi-season and multi-species occupancy models, their results
suggest that restoration treatments will likely benefit a substantial portion of the breeding
songbird community.
Korb, J.E., P.Z. Fulé, and R. Wu. 2013. Variability of warm/dry mixed conifer forests in
Southwestern Colorado, USA: Implications for ecological restoration. Forest Ecology and
Management 304:182-191.
These researchers found that historical fire regime variability exists within warm/dry mixed-
conifer forests in a relatively small geographic area due to topographic variables. Their findings
demonstrate the need to develop site-specific reference conditions when restoring this forest
type.
Kurth, V.J., N. Fransioli, P.Z. Fulé, S.C. Hart, and C.A. Gehring. 2013. Stand-replacing wildfires
alter the community structure of wood-decay fungi in southwestern ponderosa pine forests of
the U.S.A. Fungal Ecology 6:192-204.
This effort to understand the effects of stand-replacing wildfires on wood-decay fungi suggests
that in semi-arid areas such disturbances may have substantial, long-term impacts on wood-
inhabiting fungal communities, which, in turn, may have consequences for wood decomposition
and carbon cycling.
Shive, K.L., C.H. Sieg, and P.Z. Fulé. 2013. Pre-wildfire management treatments interact with
fire severity to have lasting effects on post-wildfire vegetation response. Forest Ecology and
Management 297:75–83.
In a study of post-fire vegetation recovery following the Rodeo-Chediski Fire, these researchers
describe the plant community response, including exotic species and pines, eight years after
the fire. They compared areas that experienced high- and low-severity fire as well as those
treated prior to the fire.
Stevens-Rumann, C., K.L. Shive, P.Z. Fulé and C.H. Seig. 2013. Pre-wildfire fuel reduction
treatments result in more resilient forest structure a decade after wildfire. International Journal
of Wildand Fire http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/WF12216.
These forest ecologists studied the stand structure and surface fuel loadings on treated and
untreated sites within the 2002 Rodeo–Chediski Fire area. Their data from 140 plots on seven
sites provides vital information about basal area, stand density, snags, and coarse woody
debris following a severe wildfire. 

THESES AND DISSERTATIONS
Wyatt, C.J.W. 2013. Estimating groundwater yield following forest restoration along the
Mogollon Rim, Arizona. Master’s thesis. School of Earth Sciences and Environmental
Sustainability. Northern Arizona University. 100 p.
Wyatt presents an overview of the potential effects large-scale forest restoration, like that
envisioned by the 4FRI, on watershed surface water and groundwater. He also discusses
these effects within the context of the Northern Arizona Regional Groundwater-Flow Model and
climate change.
 
NEWS FROM THE FIELD
NEWS FROM THE FIELD
An example of historic forest structure found in the Larson project area on the Black Mesa
Ranger District of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. Photo courtesy of the
Ecological Restoration Institute, NAU
AGENCY OUTREACH

In addition to several other efforts to provide land managers with technical assistance, the
Agency Outreach Team has just completed the Larson Forest Restoration Project, Historic
Range of Variation (HRV Reference Conditions) Assessment Report. The Larson project is
located on the Black Mesa District of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. The project
covers approximately 30,000 acres, dominated by ponderosa pine, and it is designed to restore
forest conditions that exhibit forest health, promote large tree development, and reduce the risk
of a stand-replacing fire. The district engaged the ERI outreach group to establish reference
conditions that would serve as an important guide for management planning. 
The Outreach group also recently completed follow-up monitoring of the Bluewater Ecosystem
Management Project on the Mt. Taylor District of the Cibola National Forest. ERI has been
working with the district to participate in the collection of monitoring information on a series of
different restoration treatments. These treatments include burn-only and three different thinning
applications, including an evidence-based mark. The monitoring is designed to display the
tradeoffs and effects of the different treatments as they relate to restoration goals and
management objectives. The plots will be revisited in two years, before the report is finalized.
For more information on agency outreach, contact Outreach Program Coordinator Mark
Sensibaugh at (928) 523-6651.
ERI RESEARCH
Over the 2013 field season, ERI field crews were successful in collecting ecological data to
help answer important restoration questions related to reference conditions, management
influences on long-term, post-wildfire responses, and comparison of forest restoration
treatments across different forest types to enhance ecosystem resilience to increasing high-
intensity crown fire. Data was collected in Arizona, Colorado and New Mexico.
Six new undergraduate research assistants joined ERI field crews. Class standings range from
freshman to junior and academic majors include forestry, civil engineering, and environmental
studies. ERI Research and Development staff, along with undergraduate research assistants,
are busy processing samples and analyzing data collected throughout the field season. This
includes a large effort to process dendrochronology samples that will aid in determining tree
ages for questions related to reference conditions. For more information, contact Walker
Chancellor at (928) 523-7284, or John Paul Roccaforte at (928) 523-7229.
 
PARTNERS
Spotlight: Southwest Fire Science Consortium
www.swfireconsortium.org
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium (SWFSC) is a way for managers, scientists, and
policy makers to interact and share science. SWFSC’s goal is to see the best science used to
make management decisions and scientists working on the questions managers need
answered. The SWFSC tries to bring together localized efforts to develop scientific information
and to disseminate that to practitioners on the ground through an inclusive and open process.
This comprises a variety of products such as the upcoming event, “Fostering resilience in
Southwestern ecosystems: A problem solving workshop” in Tucson, Ariz., February 25–27,
2014. Travel grants are available.

SWFSC and ERI have successfully partnered on several projects, including the recently
released working papers, Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating reference
conditions to guide ecological restoration treatments and Fuel Treatment Longevity.
 
UPCOMING EVENTS:
UPCOMING EVENTS:
Fostering resilience in Southwestern ecosystems: A problem solving workshop
Southwest Fire Science Consortium 
Tucson, AZ 
February 25–27, 2014 
More Information
Rx510 – Advanced Fire Effects 
National Advanced Fire & Resource Institute (NAFRI) 
Tucson, AZ 
January 13–17, 2014
More Information         
Large Wildland Fires: Social, Political & Ecological Effects 
Association for Fire Ecology / International Association of Wildland Fire 
Missoula, MT 
May 19–23, 2014                                         
More Information
ERI - PO Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011 - nau.edu/eri - 928-523-7182
NAU is an equal opportunity provider. This research was supported by a grant from the USDA Forest Service and 
funding provided by the AZ Board of Regents through the Technology, Research and Innovation Fund (TRIF).
