T
he management of fire-prone forests, especially
within the national forests of the west, is one of the
most contentious natural resource issues in the US today.
One recent response to the controversy is the Healthy
Forests Restoration Act (HFRA) of 2003 (Public Law
108-V148). This law has potentially profound conse-
quences for forests and their biodiversity and must there-
fore be implemented on the basis of the best scientific
information and guidance. Towards this end, the North
American Section of the Society for Conservation
Biology convened a scientific panel to review issues
related to the ecology and management of fire-prone
forests of the western US. This article is adapted from the
unpublished report of that panel (Noss et al. 2006a).
The vegetation of North America has been shaped by
recurring fires over millions of years. Fossils of pines (Pinus
spp), which are closely associated with fire, date from the
Cretaceous Period, more than 100 million years ago
(Millar 1998). Fire remains the primary natural distur-
bance influencing plant and animal communities across
much of the continent today (Habeck and Mutch 1973;
Agee 1993). Many forests, however, have been degraded
over the past century by misguided fire management, as
well as other impacts such as logging and livestock grazing.
Uncharacteristic fuel loads contribute to altered fire
regimes in some forest types (Covington and Moore 1994;
Schoennagel et al. 2004). Key structural elements (eg old
“veteran” trees), terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity, and
habitats of many threatened and endangered species are
already greatly diminished and at continuing risk of loss.
Increased human habitation of wildlands has intensified
problems of managing fire, especially at the wild-
land–urban interface (Dombeck et al. 2004).
For this paper we evaluated the scientific literature that
is relevant to conservation, restoration, and management
of forests in the western US (excluding Alaska). Our
review addresses ecological science relevant to develop-
ing and implementing fire and fuel management policies,
including activities conducted before, during, and after
wildfires. Our focus is primarily on wildlands, rather than
the wildland–urban interface, where ecological values
may be secondary to fire-risk mitigation to protect people
and homes (DellaSala et al. 2004). In wildlands espe-
cially, sustainable forest management must be based on
well-grounded ecological principles.
 Fire in western forests
Fire provides fundamental services, including recycling
nutrients, regulating the density and composition of
481
© The Ecological Society of America
www.frontiersinecology.org
REVIEWS
REVIEWS
REVIEWS
Managing fire-prone forests in the western
United States   
Reed F Noss1, Jerry F Franklin2, William L Baker3, Tania Schoennagel4, and Peter B Moyle5
The management of fire-prone forests is one of the most controversial natural resource issues in the US today,
particularly in the west of the country. Although vegetation and wildlife in these forests are adapted to fire, the
historical range of fire frequency and severity was huge. When fire regimes are altered by human activity, major
effects on biodiversity and ecosystem function are unavoidable. We review the ecological science relevant to
developing and implementing fire and fuel management policies for forests before, during, and after wildfires.
Fire exclusion led to major deviations from historical variability in many dry, low-elevation forests, but not in
other forests, such as those characterized by high severity fires recurring at intervals longer than the period of
active fire exclusion. Restoration and management of fire-prone forests should be precautionary, allow or
mimic natural fire regimes as much as possible, and generally avoid intensive practices such as post-fire logging
and planting.
Front Ecol Environ 2006; 4(9): 481–487
In a nutshell:
• The complexity created by variability in fire regimes defies a
one-size-fits-all management prescription
• Restoration is warranted where fire exclusion has led to sub-
stantial alterations in ecosystem qualities
• Post-fire logging usually has no ecological benefits and many
negative impacts; the same is often true for post-fire seeding
• Although many forests will require continued management, a
common sense conservation goal is to achieve forests that are
low maintenance and require minimal repeated treatment
1Department of Biology, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL
32816 (rnoss@mail.ucf.edu); 
2College of Forest Resources,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195; 3Ecology Program
and Department of Geography, University of Wyoming, Laramie,
WY 82071; 4Department of Geography, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309; 
5Department of Wildlife, Fish, and
Conservation Biology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616

young trees, creating and shaping wildlife and fish habi-
tat, structuring the spatial pattern of landscapes, and
influencing water and sediment delivery across water-
sheds. Many plant and animal species are adapted to post-
fire conditions, and populations of some (eg many bird
species; Figure 1) decline after fire exclusion or post-fire
logging (Hutto 1995). Different species benefit from dif-
ferent fire severities and intervals between fires. 
Given fuel, lightning, and dry weather, wildfire is
inevitable. Nevertheless, the characteristic fire regime,
especially the extent and severity of fire and how often it
recurs, varies over a surprisingly large spectrum. Fires
Managing fire-prone forests in the US  
RF Noss et al.
recur in western forests from once a
decade or less in some dry ponderosa
pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests to a cycle
of 250–400 years or more in coastal
forests (Hemstrom and Franklin 1982;
Covington et al. 1997; Agee 1998).
Even within a forest type, fire fre-
quency may vary by two orders of mag-
nitude across sites, for example, from 6
to 600 years in redwood (Sequoia sem-
pervirens) forests (Noss 2000). Frequent
fires are typically lower in intensity
(energy output) and severity (impact
on vegetation) than infrequent fires,
such as those that occurred in and
around Yellowstone National Park in
1988 (Turner et al. 2003). 
Characteristic fire regimes (Panel 1)
result from a combination of forest
type, fuels, topography, climate, and
ignition sources (Schoennagel et al.
2004). Forests subject to high severity
fire typically support high tree densi-
ties. When dense fuels dry out and an
ignition source is present, the resulting fires can spread
rapidly and are almost impossible to suppress. High sever-
ity fires kill most or all trees in substantial portions of the
burn, although fire pattern is often a mosaic that includes
areas of unburned or less severely burned forest (Figure
2). This is true in such diverse forests as productive
coastal Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii; Agee 1993)
and low productivity, high elevation lodgepole pine
(Pinus contorta) in the Rocky Mountains (Wallace 2004).
Many large, high severity fires are associated with infre-
quent, severe droughts (Westerling et al. 2003), often
related to broad-scale climatic anomalies (Gedalof et al.
2005). Fire exclusion has had minimal effect on most
forests characterized by high severity fire – a fact that is
especially relevant to fire policy. High severity fires are
infrequent (from one to many centuries; Romme and
Despain 1989; Agee 1993; Kipfmueller and Baker 2000),
whereas the period of active fire exclusion in North
America is 50 years at most. Furthermore, many of these
forests are remote and occur at high elevations, making
access for fire fighting difficult. 
In contrast, dry, less productive forests may have annual
droughts that promote frequent fires. As a consequence of
lower productivity and higher fire frequencies, fuel accu-
mulations and fire intensities are characteristically lower
in such forests than in coastal or subalpine forests. Low-
severity fire regimes characterized many pine and mixed-
conifer forests at warm, dry sites prior to European settle-
ment (Table 1). Fires in ponderosa pine and dry,
mixed-conifer forests historically burned fine fuels (eg
grasses and litter on the forest floor) at regular intervals
(Veblen et al. 2000; Heyerdahl et al. 2001; Stephens and
Collins 2004). These surface fires rarely killed large, fire-
482
www.frontiersinecology.org
© The Ecological Society of America
Figure 1. A juvenile northern hawk owl (Surnia ulula) in a recently burned boreal
forest. This species and a number of other North American birds are closely associated
with post-fire forests and are typically absent from unburned or salvage-logged forests.
Courtesy of D Stepnisky
Panel 1. What are “characteristic” and “uncharacteris-
tic” fire regimes? 
“Characteristic” is a controversial concept among ecologists.We
use this term in reference to the dominant natural disturbance
regime and associated structural characteristics for a particular
forest type or site historically, before major disruption by Euro-
Americans.Conversely,the term “uncharacteristic” refers to dis-
turbances, forest structure, or fuel loads of a scale or type out-
side the historical range of variability, based on site-specific
vegetation reconstructions using tree rings, fire scars, pollen,
charcoal, or early historical records. Characteristic does not
imply uniformity, because substantial variability occurs within as
well as among forest types in fire regime and structure. A forest
type that was “historically characterized” by low severity fire
may, on many sites, experience high or moderate severity fire
(Ehle and Baker 2003).What is characteristic also changes over
time, sometimes radically, for example with changing climate
(Pierce et al. 2004). Despite difficulties with the concept, some
idea of the characteristic fire regime for a given forest is needed,
to give management strategies proper direction.

RF Noss et al.
Managing fire-prone forests in the US
resistant trees, but did kill smaller trees
of all species, thereby helping to main-
tain sparse, open stands. Human activ-
ities following European settlement –
including fire exclusion, grazing, log-
ging, and tree planting – dramatically
modified the fuel structure in these
forests. Grazing reduced the fine fuels
that carry surface fires and facilitated
dense tree reproduction by reducing or
eliminating herbaceous competition
(Rummell 1951; Savage and Swetnam
1990; Belsky and Blumenthal 1997).
Logging also promoted higher stand
densities in many dry ponderosa pine
forests by stimulating dense natural
regeneration (Agee 1993; Kaufmann
et al. 2000). These forests therefore
changed from relatively open stands
with low fuel loadings to dense stands
that can carry crown fires (Skinner
1995). Restoration of such forests (ie
guiding their composition, structure,
and function to a condition within the
historical range of variability) is often
desirable (Figure 3) and can involve active techniques
such as thinning of small trees and prescribed burning or
passive management such as allowing natural fires to burn
and removing livestock (Allen et al. 2002; Brown et al.
2004; Schoennagel et al. 2004). Large wildland land-
scapes are especially well-suited to passive restoration
(Noss et al. 2006b).
Fire is variable in severity in certain mid- and low-eleva-
tion forests of moderate to high productivity. In addition
to the effects of shifts in the weather during a fire, variable
fire severity can result from spatial heterogeneity in topog-
raphy (which affects microclimate), the relative abun-
dance of fuels, and the legacies of past episodes of fire and
other disturbances. Topographically complex mountain
landscapes may be especially prone to mixed severity fire,
because drier, south-facing slopes with lower fuel loads
may burn at low severity while adjacent, moister, north-
facing slopes that support higher tree densities experience
high severity fire (Taylor and Skinner 2003; Spies et al.
2006) or escape fire due to wetter conditions. Evidence of
mixed severity fire in moist ponderosa pine forests and
mixed evergreen–conifer forests is accumulating
(Shinneman and Baker 1997; Brown et al. 1999; Odion et
al. 2004). The inherent variability of mixed-severity fire
regimes precludes easy analysis of fire-exclusion effects,
because high tree density or an abundance of shade-toler-
ant trees is not necessarily the result of fire exclusion.
The complexity created by variability in fire regimes
defies a simple, one-size-fits-all prescription for restora-
tion. Fortunately, plant association groups, which have
predictable relationships to fire regimes (Table 1), pro-
vide a classification of this diversity that is useful for man-
agers, albeit plant association–fire relationships can be
expected to change as climate changes (McKenzie et al.
2004; Pierce et al. 2004).
 Forest management prior to wildfire
How can forests be managed to ensure that fire will play
its characteristic role in maintaining composition, struc-
ture, and function of forest ecosystems? Management will
vary greatly with the type of forest and its dominant fire
regime (Table 1). Developing a management and restora-
tion program requires that the effects of past land uses be
identified so that they can be remedied. In forests charac-
terized by low-severity fire regimes, restoration varies
along a continuum from restoring structure (eg reducing
densities of small trees and increasing the density of large
trees) to restoring the processes (eg low severity fire,
competition between grasses and tree seedlings) that cre-
ate and maintain that structure (Figure 4). The contin-
uum also represents a gradient from symptoms (eg
uncharacteristically high tree densities) to causes (eg
exclusion of fire). The following are some of our key find-
ings that relate to decisions about fire management. (1)
Fire exclusion and other human activities led to significant
deviations from historical variability in some, but not all,
forests. Restoration treatments are warranted, sometimes
urgently, only where such activities have resulted in major
alterations in ecosystem structure, function, or composi-
tion. (2) Fire exclusion has had little effect on fuels or forest
structure in forests characterized by high severity (stand-
replacement) fire. High severity fires are relatively infre-
quent, occurring at intervals of one to many centuries,
483
© The Ecological Society of America
www.frontiersinecology.org
Figure 2. A mosaic fire pattern in Madison Canyon, Yellowstone National Park,
approximately one year after the major 1988 fires.
Courtesy of J Peaco

Managing fire-prone forests in the US  
RF Noss et al.
whereas active fire exclusion, especially in remote forests,
began only decades ago. Because fuel structures or tree den-
sities are usually within the historical range of variability,
active restoration is ecologically inappropriate in these
forests. (3) Restoration of dry ponderosa pine and dry mixed-
conifer forests – where low severity fires were historically
most common – is ecologically appropriate on many sites.
Active (eg mechanical thinning of small stems, prescribed
fire) or passive (eg wildland fire use, livestock removal) man-
agement can restore stand densities to the levels that existed
prior to fire exclusion, livestock grazing, logging, and planta-
tion establishment. Retention of old live trees, large snags,
and large logs in restoration treatments is critical. Also,
restoring other key components of these ecosystems, such as
native understory plants, is essential for full recovery of nat-
ural conditions, including the characteristic fire regime. (4)
Scientific understanding of mixed severity fire regimes is
limited, making it difficult to provide defensible guidelines
for restoration. These are often complex landscape mosaics;
it is therefore necessary to plan and conduct activities at
large spatial scales. Where sufficient ecological and fire-his-
tory information is available, a combination of thinning and
prescribed fire may be useful in restoration. Nevertheless,
only portions of these land-
scapes may warrant treatment.
(5) Restoration plans should
systematically incorporate fire
to maintain restored forests.
Forests are dynamic; therefore,
any restoration program must
provide for sustained fire man-
agement to maintain the desired
condition. Low-maintenance
forests, which can often be
achieved through managed nat-
ural fire, are an appropriate
restoration goal in many cases;
where this is not possible, pre-
scribed fire should mimic the
characteristic fire regime as
closely as possible. Because fire
regimes vary tremendously on a
regional scale, managers should
allow for a range of fire severi-
ties. (6) Species closely associ-
ated with late- or early-succes-
sional conditions in fire-prone
landscapes need special man-
agement consideration. For
example, managed forests are
often fragmented by periodic
logging and road-building, or
consist only of stands of trees
too small or too open to meet
the needs of late-successional
dependent species, such as the
spotted owl (Strix occidentalis).
 Forest management during wildfire
Fire management policies focus on responses to wildfire,
including such basic decisions as whether to suppress it.
A generalized policy of fire suppression is inappropriate
given the documented negative ecological impacts of fire
suppression during the 20th century. Responses to fire
must take into consideration many ecological and social
factors, beginning with the nature of the forest type and
societal goals. 
Our findings indicate that allowing fires to serve their
natural role is ecologically beneficial. Although fire must
be managed when close to human infrastructure, in many
wilderness areas, national parks, and large areas of public
land there is opportunity to increase the use of wildland
fire. Such management benefits species that require the
shifting mosaics of post-fire habitats found in natural
landscapes (Smucker et al. 2005). Furthermore, fire sup-
pression may be ecologically warranted in some cases,
particularly where special values are at risk. For example,
it may be appropriate where habitat of critically imperiled
species could be lost, where uncharacteristic fuel accumu-
484
www.frontiersinecology.org
© The Ecological Society of America
Table 1. Fire regimes of major western forests and some examples of plant
association groups in each type
Dominant fire type(s) General forest type 
Common plant association groups
High severity
Coastal temperate forests 
Sitka spruce, western hemlock,
western red cedar, Douglas-fir
Coastal subalpine forests 
Mountain hemlock, Pacific silver fir
Pinyon pine–juniper woodlands
Colorado pinyon, singleleaf pinyon,
Utah juniper, western juniper
Interior Northwest montane forests
White pine, western red
cedar, western hemlock
Interior subalpine forests
Engelmann spruce–subalpine fir,
lodgepole pine, bristlecone pine,
limber pine, whitebark pine,
quaking aspen
Mixed severity
Coastal oak woodlands
Rocky Mountain ponderosa pine–
Ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir,
Douglas-fir forests 
western larch
Interior mesic mixed conifer forests 
Douglas-fir, white fir, aspen
Klamath–Siskiyou mixed evergreen
forests
Sierra Nevada red fir forests
Shasta red fir
Sierra Nevada giant sequoia forests
Giant sequoia
Low severity
Dry ponderosa pine forests
Ponderosa pine, Jeffrey pine
Dry mixed conifer forests 
Ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, dry 
grand fir
Sources: Agee 1993, 1998; Arno 2000

RF Noss et al.
Managing fire-prone forests in the US
lations have created the potential for a
fire outside the historical range of vari-
ability, or where high severity fires are
not now viewed as ecologically desir-
able (eg old-growth forests in the
Pacific Northwest). Finally, ecologists
should be included on fire management
teams to ensure that decisions consider
the ecological costs and benefits of
management actions.
 Forest management after wildfire
Forest landscapes that have been
affected by a major natural disturbance,
such as a severe wildfire or wind storm,
are commonly viewed as devastated.
Such perspectives are usually far from
ecological reality. Overall species diver-
sity, measured as number of species – at
least of higher plants and vertebrates – is
often highest following a natural stand-
replacement disturbance and before
redevelopment of closed-canopy forest
(Lindenmayer and Franklin 2002). Important reasons for
this include an abundance of biological legacies, such as
living organisms and dead tree structures, the migration
and establishment of additional organisms adapted to the
disturbed, early-successional environment, availability of
nutrients, and temporary release of other plants from dom-
inance by trees. Currently, early-successional forests (nat-
urally disturbed areas with a full array of legacies, ie not
subject to post-fire logging) and forests experiencing nat-
ural regeneration (ie not seeded or planted), are among
the most scarce habitat conditions in many regions.
Our key findings on post-fire management are as fol-
lows. First, post-burn landscapes have substantial capac-
ity for natural recovery. Re-establishment of forest fol-
lowing stand-replacement fire occurs at widely varying
rates; this allows ecologically critical, early-successional
habitat to persist for various periods of time. Second,
post-fire (salvage) logging does not
contribute to ecological recovery;
rather, it negatively affects recovery
processes, with the intensity of impacts
depending upon the nature of the log-
ging activity (Lindenmayer et al. 2004).
Post-fire logging in naturally disturbed
forest landscapes generally has no
direct ecological benefits and many
potential negative impacts (Beschta et
al. 
2004; 
Donato 
et 
al. 
2006;
Lindenmayer and Noss 2006). Trees
that survive fire for even a short time
are critical as seed sources and as habi-
tat that sustains biodiversity both
above- and belowground. Dead wood,
including large snags and logs, rivals live trees in ecolog-
ical importance. Removal of structural legacies, both liv-
ing and dead, is inconsistent with scientific understand-
ing of natural disturbance regimes and short- and
long-term regeneration processes. Third, in forests sub-
jected to severe fire and post-fire logging, streams and
other aquatic ecosystems will take longer to return to
historical conditions or may switch to a different (and
often less desirable) state altogether (Karr et al. 2004).
Following a severe fire, the biggest impacts on aquatic
ecosystems are often excessive sedimentation, caused by
runoff from roads, which may continue for years. Fourth,
post-fire seeding of non-native plants is often ineffective
at reducing soil erosion and generally damages natural
ecological values, for example by reducing tree regenera-
tion and the recovery of native plant cover and biodiver-
sity (Beyers 2004). Non-native plants typically compete
485
© The Ecological Society of America
www.frontiersinecology.org
Figure 3. A restored ponderosa pine stand, Grand Canyon National Park (North
Rim).
Figure 4. Forest restoration varies along a continuum from restoring structure (which
requires periodic retreatment) to restoring potentially self-sustaining processes.
High
Low
Restore structure          Restore processes
Need for
periodic
retreatment
Tree
thinning
Prescribed
fire
Reform
land
uses
Restore competition
from understory
grasses, forbs,
and shrubs
Restore
natural
fire

Managing fire-prone forests in the US  
RF Noss et al.
with native species, reducing both native plant diversity
and cover (Keeley et al. 2006). Fifth, the ecological
importance of biological legacies and of uncommon,
structurally complex early-successional stands argues
against actions to achieve rapid and complete reforesta-
tion. Re-establishing fully stocked stands on sites charac-
terized by low severity fire may actually increase the
severity of fire because of fuel loadings outside the histor-
ical range of variability. Finally, species dependent on
habitat conditions created by high severity fire, with
abundant standing dead trees, require substantial areas to
be protected from post-fire logging (Hutto 1995). 
 More ecological science is needed in fire
management
Despite the complexity of fire ecology in western forests
and uncertainty over the effects of particular manage-
ment actions, the scientific basis for rational decision-
making about fire has improved dramatically in recent
years. It is time to systematically incorporate principles of
ecological science and existing knowledge of individual
forest ecosystems into forest fire and fuel policies. 
One barrier to better use of ecological science is that
individuals involved in developing fire policies and prac-
tices have tended to be specialists in fire and fuel man-
agement, not ecologists, conservation biologists, or other
broadly trained scientists. It is not surprising, therefore,
that current forest law does not adequately incorporate
ecological considerations in its implementation and
tends to promote a narrow definition of restoration that
focuses almost exclusively on fuels (DellaSala et al. 2004;
Schoennagel et al. 2004). 
True ecological restoration requires the maintenance
of ecological processes, native species composition, and
forest structure at both stand and landscape scales.
Because forests are highly variable over space and time,
few universal principles exist for integrating insights
from ecology and conservation biology into fire manage-
ment policies. Nevertheless, one fundamental principle
is that managed forests should not only support the
desired fire regime but also viable populations of native
species in functional networks of habitat (Hessberg et al.
2005). A common-sense conservation goal is to achieve
forests that are low maintenance and require minimal
repeated treatment. With time, in a landscape of suffi-
cient size, the right end of the restoration continuum
(Figure 4) could be reached, where natural fire maintains
the system in the desired state. Indeed, wildland fire use
is the cheapest and most ecologically appropriate policy
for many forests. We envision a future where fire is seen
by land managers and the public as the key to healthy
forests, but where each forest and each patch of the for-
est mosaic is recognized for its individuality and man-
aged accordingly. Above all, a guiding principle of forest
management should be a precautionary approach that
avoids ecological harm.
 Acknowledgements
We thank the North American Section of the Society for
Conservation Biology for sponsoring this project, with
funding from the Wilburforce Foundation and 444 S
Foundation.
 References
Agee JK. 1993. Fire ecology of Pacific Northwest forests.
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Agee JK. 1998. The landscape ecology of western forest fire
regimes. Northwest Sci 72: 24–34.
Allen CD, Savage M, Falk D, et al. 2002. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective.
Ecol Appl 12: 1418–33.
Arno SF. 2000. Fire in western forest ecosystems. In: Brown JK and
Smith JK (Eds). Wildland fire in ecosystems. Fort Collins, CO:
Rocky Mountain Research Station. USDA Forest Service
General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-42 – volume 2.
Belsky A and Blumenthal D. 1997. Effects of livestock grazing on
stand dynamics and soils in upland forests of the interior west.
Conserv Biol 11: 315–27.
Beyers JL. 2004. Post-fire seeding for erosion control: effectiveness
and impacts on native plant communities. Conserv Biol 18:
947–56.
Beschta R, Rhodes J, Kauffman J, et al. 2004. Postfire management
of forested public lands of the western United States. Conserv
Biol 18: 957–67.
Brown PM, Kaufmann MR, and Shepperd WD. 1999. Long-term
landscape patterns of past fire events in a montane ponderosa
pine forest of central Colorado. Landscape Ecol 14: 513–32.
Brown RT, Agee JK, and Franklin JF. 2004. Forest restoration and
fire: principles in the context of place. Conserv Biol 18: 903–12.
Covington WW and Moore MM. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa
pine forest structure and resource conditions: changes since
Euro-American settlement. J Forest 92: 39–47.
Covington WW, Fule PZ, Moore MM, et al. 1997. Restoration of
ecosystem health in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. J
Forest 95: 23–29.
DellaSala DA, Williams JE, Williams CD, and Franklin JF. 2004.
Beyond smoke and mirrors: a synthesis of fire policy and sci-
ence. Conserv Biol 18: 976–86.
Dombeck MP, Williams JE, and Wood CA. 2004. Wildfire policy
and public lands: integrating scientific understanding with
social concerns across landscapes. Conserv Biol 18: 883–89.
Donato DC, Fontaine JB, Campbell JL, et al. 2006. Post-wildfire
logging hinders regeneration and increases fire risk. Science
311: 352.
Ehle DS and Baker WH. 2003. Disturbance and stand dynamics in
ponderosa pine forests in Rocky Mountain National Park,
USA. Ecol Monogr 73: 543–66.
Gedalof Z, Peterson DL, and Mantua NJ. 2005. Atmospheric, cli-
matic and ecological controls on extreme wildfire years in the
northwestern United States. Ecol Appl 15: 154–74.
Habeck JR and Mutch RW. 1973. Fire-dependent forests in the
northern Rocky Mountains. J Quaternary Res 3: 408–24.
Hemstrom MA and Franklin JF. 1982. Fire and other disturbances
of the forests in Mount Rainier National Park. J Quaternary Res
18: 32–51.
Hessberg PF, Agee JK, and Franklin JF. 2005. Dry forests and wild-
land fires of the inland northwest USA: contrasting the land-
scape ecology of the pre-settlement and modern eras. Forest
Ecol Manage 211: 117–39. 
Heyerdahl EK, Brubaker LB, and Agee JK. 2001. Spatial controls of
historical fire regimes: a multiscale example from the interior
west, USA. Ecology 82: 660–78.
Hutto RL. 1995. Composition of bird communities following
stand-replacement fires in northern Rocky Mountain (USA)
486
www.frontiersinecology.org
© The Ecological Society of America

RF Noss et al.
Managing fire-prone forests in the US
conifer forests. Conserv Biol 9: 1041–58.
Karr JR, Rhodes JJ, Minshall GW, et al. 2004. The effects of postfire
salvage logging on aquatic ecosystems in the American west.
BioScience 54: 1029–33. 
Kaufmann MR, Regan CM, and Brown PM. 2000. Heterogeneity
in ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forests: age and size structure in
unlogged and logged landscapes of central Colorado. Can J
Forest Res 30: 698–711.
Keeley JE, Allen CD, Betancourt J, et al. 2006. A 21st century per-
spective on postfire seeding. J Forest 104: 103–04.
Kipfmueller KF and Baker WL. 2000. A fire history of a subalpine
forest in south-eastern Wyoming, USA. J Biogeogr 27: 71–85.
Lindenmayer DB, Foster DR, Franklin JF, et al. 2004. Saving forests
or saving fiber? Salvage harvesting policies after natural distur-
bance impairs ecosystem and species recovery. Science 303:
1303.
Lindenmayer DB and Franklin JF. 2002. Conserving forest biodi-
versity. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Lindenmayer DB and Noss RF. 2006. Salvage logging, ecosystem
processes, and biodiversity conservation Conserv Biol 20:
949–58.
McKenzie D, Gedalof Z, Peterson DL, and Mote P. 2004. Climatic
change, wildfire, and conservation. Conserv Biol 18: 890–902.
Millar CI. 1998. Early evolution of pines. In: Richardson DM (Ed).
Ecology and biogeography of Pinus. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Noss RF (Ed). 2000. The redwood forest. Washington, DC: Island
Press.
Noss RF, Beier P, Covington WW, et al. 2006b. Integrating restoration
ecology and conservation biology: a case study from ponderosa
pine forests of the southwestern USA. Restor Ecol 14: 4–10.
Noss RF, Franklin JF, Baker WL, et al. 2006a. Ecology and man-
agement of fire-prone forests of the western United States.
Society for Conservation Biology, North American Section.
www.conbio.org/sections/namerica/napolicy.cfm. Viewed 21
Aug 2006.
Odion D, Frost E, Strittholt J, et al. 2004. Patterns of fire severity
and forest conditions in the western Klamath Mountains,
California. Conserv Biol 18: 927–36.
Pierce JL, Meyer GA, and Jull AJT. 2004. Fire-induced erosion and
millennial-scale climate change in northern ponderosa pine
forests. Nature 432: 87–90.
Romme WH and Despain DG. 1989. Historical perspective on the
Yellowstone fires of 1988. BioScience 39: 695–99.
Rummell RS. 1951. Some effects of livestock grazing on ponderosa
pine forest and range in central Washington. Ecology 32:
594–607.
Savage M and Swetnam T. 1990. Early nineteenth-century fire
decline following sheep pasturing in a Navajo ponderosa pine
forest. Ecology 71: 2374–78.
Schoennagel T, Veblen TT, and Romme WH. 2004. The interac-
tion of fire, fuels, and climate across Rocky Mountain forests.
BioScience 54: 661–76.
Shinneman DJ and Baker WL. 1997. Nonequilibrium dynamics
between catastrophic disturbances and old-growth forests in
ponderosa pine landscapes of the Black Hills. Conserv Biol 11:
1276–88.
Skinner C. 1995. Change in spatial characteristics of forest open-
ings in the Klamath Mountains of northwestern California,
USA. Landscape Ecol 10: 219–28.
Smucker KM, Hutto RL, and Steele BM. 2005. Changes in bird
abundance after wildfire: importance of fire severity and time
since fire. Ecol Appl 15: 1535–49.
Spies TA, Hemstrom MA, Youngblood A, and Hummel S. 2006.
Conserving old-growth forest diversity in disturbance-prone
landscapes. Conserv Biol 20: 351–62.
Stephens S and Collins B. 2004. Fire regimes of mixed conifer
forests in the north-central Sierra Nevada at multiple spatial
scales. Northwest Sci 78: 12–23.
Taylor AH and Skinner CN. 2003. Spatial patterns and controls on
historical fire regimes and forest structure in the Klamath
Mountains. Ecol Appl 13: 704–19.
Turner MG, Romme WH, and Tinker DB. 2003. Surprises and
lessons from the 1988 Yellowstone fires. Front Ecol Environ 1:
351–58.
Veblen TT, Kitzberger T, and Donnegan J. 2000. Climatic and
human influences on fire regimes in ponderosa pine forests in
the Colorado Front Range. Ecol Appl 10: 1178–95.
Wallace LL (Ed). 2004. After the fires: the ecology of change in
Yellowstone National Park. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Westerling A, Gershunov A, Brown T, et al. 2003. Climate and
wildfire in the western United States. B Am Meteorol Soc 84:
595–604.
487
© The Ecological Society of America
www.frontiersinecology.org
