SEPTEMBER 2001 Restoration Ecology Vol. 9 No. 3, pp. 293–303
293
© 2001 Society for Ecological Restoration
Design and 
Implementation of 
Monitoring Studies to 
Evaluate the Success of 
Ecological Restoration 
on Wildlife
William M. Block1,2
Alan B. Franklin3
James P. Ward, Jr.1
Joseph L. Ganey1
Gary C. White4
Abstract
Restoration projects are often developed with little
consideration for understanding their effects on wild-
life. We contend, however, that monitoring treatment
effects on wildlife should be an integral component
of the design and execution of any management activ-
ity, including restoration. Thus, we provide a concep-
tual framework for the design and implementation of
monitoring studies to understand the effects of resto-
ration on wildlife. Our underlying premise is that ef-
fective monitoring hinges on an appropriate study de-
sign for unbiased and precise estimates of the response
variables. We advocate using measures of population
dynamics for response variables given that they pro-
vide the most direct measures of wildlife status and
trends. The species to be monitored should be those
constituting an assemblage of umbrella species that
represent the range of spatial and functional require-
ments of wildlife in a restored ecological system. Se-
lection of umbrella species should be based on strong
empirical evidence that justifies their usage. We also
advocate that monitoring be designed as true experi-
ments or quasi-experiments rather than as observa-
tional studies to allow for stronger inferences regard-
ing the effects of restoration on wildlife. Our primary
message is that if monitoring is to be done, it must be
scientifically based.
Key words: wildlife, monitoring, status and trends,
restoration effects, experiments, quasi-experiments,
scale.
Introduction
T
he ultimate goal of many ecological restoration
projects is to return ecosystem structures, func-
tions, and processes to “natural” or reference condi-
tions. This is typically accomplished by manipulating
vegetation and/or the physical environment to move
the system towards pre-defined reference conditions
that presumably existed at some point in the past.
These manipulations alter habitat conditions in various
ways for numerous species of wildlife, potentially af-
fecting their population dynamics. A key and implicit
assumption is that successful restoration will provide
favorable conditions for the native biota. This assump-
tion is rarely tested, but it should be.
The process of testing responses of wildlife to restora-
tion falls under the umbrella of monitoring studies (cf.,
Thompson et al. 1998). Monitoring treatment effects on
wildlife should be an integral component of the design
and execution of any management activity, including
restoration. This is especially true in the case of adap-
tive management, which relies heavily on feedback ob-
tained through monitoring results to assess the success
of management activities (Walters 1986; Gibbs et al.
1999). Unfortunately, monitoring is rarely done, and
when it is done, it often suffers from poor design and
lack of statistical rigor.
A complicating factor in designing monitoring pro-
grams is defining the appropriate variable(s) to mea-
sure wildlife response to restoration. This complication
is not trivial. The term “wildlife” includes numerous
species that represent diverse life histories. Should res-
toration focus on responses of the population dynamics
of selected species, groups of functionally similar spe-
cies such as guilds (sensu Root 1967), broad taxonomic
groupings such as birds or mammals, or communities
of organisms? Further, what benchmark should be used
to measure the success or failure of restoration? Should
this benchmark be a measure of habitats or populations,
1USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 
2500 S. Pine Knoll Dr., Flagstaff, AZ 86001, U.S.A.
2Address correspondence to W. M. Block, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, 2500 S. Pine Knoll Dr., Flagstaff, AZ 86001, 
U.S.A., email wblock@fs.fed.us
3Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, U.S.A.
4Department of Fishery and Wildlife, Colorado State Univer-
sity, Fort Collins, CO 80523, U.S.A.

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
294
Restoration Ecology
SEPTEMBER 2001
or some surrogate measure such as indicator species,
keystone species, or stressor variables (Noon et al.
1999)? Given that information on wildlife populations
and community structure is generally unavailable for
target restoration conditions, investigators are charged
with developing objective and scientifically defensible
criteria by which the success of restoration can be as-
sessed. We know of no established methodology for es-
tablishing such benchmarks.
Here we outline some primary considerations for de-
signing monitoring studies that will evaluate effects of
restoration on wildlife. We begin by reviewing basic
concepts of monitoring and then provide a conceptual
framework to be considered for monitoring restoration
effects on wildlife. As a frame of reference, we draw
upon some ecological restoration projects occurring
within southwestern 
 
Pinus ponderosa
 
 (ponderosa pine)
forests to emphasize relevant points (USDA Forest Ser-
vice 1998; USDI Grand Canyon National Park, Science
Center, unpublished draft environmental assessment
1999). Our underlying premise is that sampling designs
must be appropriate for unbiased and precise infer-
ences about the target population. Failure to conduct
monitoring correctly leads to erroneous conclusions
and wasted resources.
Basic Aspects of Monitoring
Monitoring is typically done to assess the change or trend
in one or more resources. As such, it assesses the dynam-
ics of the resource, not just its state. Thus, monitoring re-
quires repeated sampling of the variable(s) of interest to
measure change or trend. As with any ecological study,
monitoring must be scaled to the variable and question
being addressed (White & Walker 1997). If one is assess-
ing the change in a species’ habitat resulting from restora-
tion treatments, monitoring must be scaled temporally to
address how vegetation or other environmental features
related to that habitat respond to the treatments over
time. Also, because short-term wildlife population re-
sponses may differ from long-term responses, monitoring
must be conducted over a sufficiently long time to ensure
that the population has time to adjust to time-dependent
changes resulting from restoration treatments. Monitor-
ing should also be done over a long enough time to incor-
porate the range of environmental conditions allowing
for valid estimates of process variation (USDI Fish and
Wildlife Service 1995; White & Walker 1997; Seamans et
al. 1999). For example, population trends measured dur-
ing favorable weather conditions may not represent those
occurring during unfavorable conditions, or those occur-
ring within a longer period that includes both favorable
and unfavorable weather.
In addition to the time scale, it is equally important to
consider spatial scales when monitoring wildlife re-
sponse to restoration. The size of a restoration treatment
must be large enough to provide space for placement of
enough samples to detect any changes. For example, 8-ha
treatment units such as those implemented in south-
western Pinus ponderosa restoration (USDA Forest Ser-
vice 1998; USDI Grand Canyon National Park Science
Center, unpublished draft environmental assessment
1999) are probably too small to include enough individ-
uals of most wildlife species to understand effects of the
treatment. Thus, both the treatment and the monitoring
study design must be scaled to the species or commu-
nity monitored.
Monitoring effects of restoration can be fundamen-
tally different than monitoring typical applications. In
typical applications, the monitoring design is struc-
tured to determine when a null hypothesis of no signifi-
cant change has been rejected. Often the hypothesis is
cast as a one-tailed test with some measure of popula-
tion decline as the alternative hypothesis. With restora-
tion monitoring, however, we might define the system
as “restored” when the specified level of population de-
cline is neither met or exceeded. In this case the goal of
restoration monitoring is to fail to reject the null hy-
pothesis. Here the statistical power of the monitoring
design is probably more important than for typical
monitoring because a poorly designed study will often
fail to reject the hypothesis when in fact it should be re-
jected (that is, a type II error). For this reason, valid
monitoring of a restoration project requires develop-
ment of and adherence to a properly designed study.
Types of Monitoring
Monitoring can be classified into four overlapping cate-
gories: implementation, effectiveness, validation, and
compliance monitoring (Noss & Cooperrider 1994;
Morrison & Marcot 1995). The two types particularly
relevant to restoration are implementation and effec-
tiveness monitoring. Implementation monitoring is used
to assess whether or not a directed management action
has been carried out as designed. For example, tree
thinning is done to reduce stem densities and achieve a
desired size-class distribution of trees as part of restora-
tion of ponderosa pine forests. Implementation moni-
toring would evaluate whether the target densities and
tree distributions were met immediately following thin-
ning. In the context of restoration, implementation
monitoring quantifies changes immediately after treat-
ments, and evaluates whether treatments were done as
prescribed. Effectiveness monitoring is used to determine
whether the action achieved the ultimate objective. For
example, was the ecosystem restored to reference con-
ditions? Effectiveness monitoring requires response vari-
ables to be clearly articulated so that they can be mea-
sured accurately and precisely. Typical response variables

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
SEPTEMBER 2001 Restoration Ecology
295
for wildlife are related to species’ habitats or popula-
tions. A difficulty arises, however, because we rarely
have accurate or detailed information on populations or
habitats of individual species, or on wildlife community
structure that existed during reference periods. As a re-
sult, we cannot conclude with certainty that species’
populations or wildlife community structure have been
restored. This uncertainty probably can never be over-
come, so alternative approaches that measure popula-
tion dynamics of selected species are needed as an in-
dex of successful restoration. These species could be a
group of umbrellas species that collectively represent
the spatial, ecological, and functional needs of species
likely to occur in a restored ecological system (Lambeck
1997).
Monitoring Steps
Monitoring involves a series of steps and feedback
loops designed to answer some basic questions, namely:
Why, what, when, where, and how to monitor? These
steps include (1) setting monitoring goals, (2) identify-
ing the resource(s) to monitor, (3) establishing a thresh-
old or trigger point, (4) developing a sampling design,
(5) collecting data, (6) analyzing the data, and (7) evalu-
ating the results (Fig. 1). Once monitoring results are
obtained and evaluated, the first question should be:
Were monitoring goals met? That is, does monitoring
demonstrate that restoration was effective with respect
to wildlife, or should the restoration prescription be
modified to strive for more acceptable results?
Setting Monitoring Goals
The first step in designing monitoring for a restoration
project is to clearly state the goals. In clarifying moni-
toring goals, a clear description of reference conditions
should be stated, preferably in quantitative terms. Ref-
erence conditions can be defined along a gradient from
pre-settlement conditions (for example, conditions ex-
isting prior to European settlement in North America of
the area under consideration) to existing conditions. In
terms of restoration, reference conditions are usually es-
tablished between these two ends of the spectrum. The
primary goal or objective of many restoration projects is
to provide appropriate conditions for the native biota.
Implied in this objective is that the wildlife community
following restoration will resemble that occurring dur-
ing reference conditions. This goal is broad and proba-
bly impossible to study, however, whereas monitoring
goals should be feasible. These goals are perhaps best
cast as testable research hypotheses, or as monitoring
objectives to estimate appropriate parameters with
specified precision (see Establishing Thresholds and
Trigger Points).
Monitoring goals can be general or project specific.
By project specific, we mean the effects on wildlife of a
restoration treatment done on a particular piece of land
during a specified time. Here a study would be de-
signed to adequately sample that area, and the results
would apply only to the place and time of study (cf.,
Green 1979; Hurlbert 1984). In contrast, were the objec-
tive to understand more broadly the effects of a specific
treatment on wildlife across a wider area, a different
sampling design would be needed. Of the two, project-
specific restoration is probably most prevalent.
Identifying Resources to Monitor
The next step is to decide what to monitor. Should the
investigator monitor populationsor habitats, or both, or
perhaps some surrogate measure? Should the focus be
single species, guilds, taxonomic assemblages, or entire
communities? Measuring population response is per-
haps the most direct way to understand effects of resto-
ration, and wildlife science has developed the capabil-
ity to monitor populations of many species (White et al.
1999). However, costs of monitoring single-species pop-
ulations are not trivial (Verner 1983; USDI Fish and Wild-
life Service 1995) and exceed the total budgets of many
projects. Habitat is often monitored in lieu of popula-
tions because it costs less to sample. Unfortunately, we
have limited knowledge of most species’ relationship
with their habitat, and especially lack information that
links habitat conditions to population status. Without a
clear understanding of a species’ habitat and how it re-
Figure 1. Flow diagram of steps involved with monitoring. 
Letters A through F signify feedback points when monitoring 
methods and results are evaluated.

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
296
Restoration Ecology
SEPTEMBER 2001
lates to the population, inferences drawn from monitor-
ing habitat are tenuous and probably inaccurate. In
monitoring habitat alone, numerous other factors (such
as disease, weather, predation, or events that occur on
wintering grounds or along migration routes) can de-
press populations even when the habitat could support
a larger population, further complicating our under-
standing of species–habitat relationships.
Surrogate measures such as indicator species, um-
brella species, or guilds are often monitored rather than
the populations or habitats of all individual species. Se-
lection of indicator species involves three key steps. The
first is to develop a conceptual model that outlines how
the community is organized, including interrelations
among system components (Fig. 2), and then to antici-
pate changes in pathways among components follow-
ing restoration treatments (Noon et al. 1999). The sec-
ond step identifies potential indicator species. Parameters
monitored for indicator species should be (1) objective
and quantitative, (2) accurately and precisely measured,
(3) cost-effective, (4) used at the appropriate spatial and
temporal scales, and (5) clearly linked to the parame-
ter(s) that they indicate (Landres et al. 1988; Noon et al.
1999). The third step entails completing a pilot study to
validate that the indicator meets the five criteria listed
above. Caution is warranted when using indicator spe-
cies, as the literature is replete with examples of their
shortcomings (Mannan et al. 1984; Morrison 1986; Block
et al. 1987; Landres et al. 1988). Thus, the use of indica-
tors should not be simply a matter of convenience, but
must be based on strong empirical evidence that sup-
ports their usage.
One possible use of surrogates would be to identify a
set of indicator or umbrella species that would constitute
a “restoration assemblage” (Lambeck 1997). The spatial
and functional requirements of species in this assemblage
should include those of all other species expected to be
present in the restored ecological system. Populations of
these species could be monitored to assess the success of
restoration on wildlife. Selection of these species must fol-
low the guidelines outlined above for indicator species.
Monitoring populations, habitats, or even indicators
for all species in a community is impossible in most sit-
uations and may not provide the appropriate metrics
for understanding community responses. Investigators
often use various indirect measures to index commu-
nity structure, such as species richness, composition,
similarity, diversity, and evenness (Pielou 1977; Hayek
1994). By and large, these indices are ad hoc and lack
theoretically valid sampling distributions. Further, bio-
logical interpretation of many of these indices, espe-
cially those that index species diversity, is difficult
(Hayek 1994; Austin 1999). Community metrics may
have some value, however, when one compares an area
before and after restoration, or a treated area with an
untreated one. Unfortunately, we lack information for
interpreting when these metrics indicate that the sys-
tem has been restored.
We conclude that monitoring population dynamics is
most appropriate for evaluating effects of restoration on
wildlife for the following reasons. First, population re-
sponse by species is the most direct measure. Second,
documentation of strong relationships between habitat
and population is lacking for most species. Third, the
use of surrogate measures such as indicator species is
fraught with numerous shortcomings. Finally, we know
of no clear measure of wildlife community response to
restoration.
Establishing Thresholds and Trigger Points
Monitoring is a critical step in adaptive management
whereby decisions are made to continue, modify, or
discontinue management actions depending on moni-
toring results. This is particularly relevant to restora-
tion, which represents a relatively new management
approach. Because restoration ecology is a developing
Figure 2. Conceptual model of the components and interrela-
tionships of forested ecosystems inhabited by California Spot-
ted Owls (from Verner et al. 1992).

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
SEPTEMBER 2001 Restoration Ecology
297
field, information detailing whether and how well
treatments move ecological systems towards restored
conditions is often unavailable. Consequently, thresh-
old values or trigger points would provide periodic
benchmarks to evaluate whether treatments are effec-
tive (points F and G in Fig. 1). Examples of benchmarks
could be that the population size of a selected species
exceeds or falls below a specified level, that certain spe-
cies are present or presumed absent in an area follow-
ing restoration treatments, that a certain percentage of a
project area possesses specified habitat types (such as
old-growth forest or gallery riparian forest), or that pri-
mary productivity meets or exceeds a minimal level.
Essentially, thresholds and trigger points are values
towards which the restoration activity is striving to
achieve or to avoid. When a threshold value is achieved
(such as reaching a population size of 1,000 for a given
species), it signals that conditions are appropriate to ini-
tiate the next phase of restoration or to continue on the
present course. In contrast, when a trigger point is
reached (such as falling below a population size of 1,000
for a given species), it signals the need to cease or alter
restoration activities and possibly to mitigate their ef-
fects. Different targets or threshold values can be estab-
lished for various stages during and after restoration.
However, the parameter being estimated (for example,
population size) during monitoring will always have
some level of precision associated with its estimation.
Therefore, establishing values for trigger points also re-
quires that the parameter linked with the trigger point
be measured at some predefined level of precision. This
requires an a priori study design that considers the pre-
cision of the estimated parameters that will be used as
the response variable.
Monitoring Study Design
Accurate and precise information on wildlife responses
to restoration requires that the study be designed to in-
corporate the effects of the treatment on selected wild-
life populations as a primary objective. In the following,
we briefly touch on some key points to consider when
monitoring effects of restoration on wildlife.
Many of the considerations involved with proper de-
sign of any research study apply to monitoring studies.
The foundation of any proper study design is applica-
tion of the appropriate sampling design. The choice of
sampling design depends on numerous factors includ-
ing the biology of the monitored species, the species’
spatial distribution, sampling variances, logistics, costs,
and efficacy of field methodologies. Study designs can
be broadly classed as either 
 
experimental
 
, where one
wants to test ideas about how things function (cause
and effect), or observational, where one wants to accu-
rately and precisely measure patterns (Manly 1992).
The key difference between the two types is that experi-
mental studies, if properly designed, allow for infer-
ences about cause and effect (e.g., Did the restoration
result in a population increase for the focal species?)
(James & McCullough 1995). Observational studies, in-
cluding those based on probability (survey) sampling
or just observations of some phenomena, do not allow
for any inferences with respect to cause and effect. In
the case of restoration, we want to know whether resto-
ration (the treatment) had an effect on whatever re-
sponse we are monitoring. Therefore, we discuss here
only experimental study designs.
Experiments can be categorized as either 
 
true (con-
trolled) experiments
 
 or 
 
quasi-experiments
 
 (Eberhardt &
Thomas 1991; Manly 1992; James & McCullough 1995).
The key differences between the two categories are out-
lined in Table 1. The ideal is the true experiment where
treatments and controls are randomly assigned to ex-
perimental units and experimental units are replicated,
because strong inference depends on a controlled ex-
periment (Eberhardt & Thomas 1991). However, con-
ducting a true experiment usually is not feasible in nat-
ural settings or under specific management conditions
(Michener 1997). Therefore, an alternative is the quasi-
experiment, which can have some of the properties of a
true experiment though it lacks the randomization of
treatments and controls (Table 1). By and large, restora-
tion projects are planned. This allows restoration to be
considered a treatment.
Design of True Experiments.
The purpose of any experi-
mental design is to provide the maximum amount of in-
formation relevant to the problem under investigation
(Ostle 1983). A true experiment provides this in terms
of monitoring restoration activities because it assesses
not only whether change has occurred, but more impor-
tantly, whether that change is due to the restoration ac-
tivity. There are three basic principles in designing an
experiment: replication, randomization, and local con-
trol (Ostle 1983). Replication is the ability to repeat a
treatment and is not merely repeated observation of the
same units (Hurlbert 1984; Eberhardt & Thomas 1991);
replication provides the estimate of experimental error.
Randomization ensures that replicates are independent
(assuming adequate spacing among units), thus making
statistical comparisons valid by meeting assumptions of
independence among experimental units. More impor-
tantly, random assignment of treatments and controls
to experimental units helps ensure that treatments will
not be affected by extraneous sources of variation over
which there is no control by “averaging” out effects of
those factors (Ostle 1983). Both randomization and rep-
lication provide a framework for estimating variability
in experimental units that are treated alike (Eberhardt
& Thomas 1991). Finally, local control refers to refine-

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
298
Restoration Ecology
SEPTEMBER 2001
ments in experimental design, such as balancing block-
ing and grouping of experimental units to make the ex-
perimental design efficient and reduce the magnitude
of the experimental error (Ostle 1983). Because many
textbooks cover the design of true experiments, we will
not attempt to cover this topic in detail here. Some po-
tential designs for restoration monitoring experiments
are shown in Table 1.
A key point is that inferences are strongest with the
use of true experiments (Table 1). The further a study
design deviates from a true experiment, the weaker its
inferences become. However, a strictly experimental
approach in large-scale studies is often difficult and ex-
pensive to achieve (Eberhardt & Thomas 1991; Michener
1997). Thus, quasi-experiments, observational studies,
and modeling represent alternatives in restoration mon-
itoring designs. Because the literature is more scattered
in the design of quasi-experiments, we consider some
potential designs in more detail here.
Design of Quasi-Experiments.
Given prior knowledge of a
restoration prescription, one could collect before imple-
menting the treatment and an unrestored “control” site.
This quasi-experimental design comes under the aus-
pices of the general “Before-After-Control-Impact” (BACI)
design commonly used for impact assessments (Green
1979; Stewart-Oaten et al. 1992). The control site should
be as similar as possible to the restored site and should
be distant enough from the treated site to be regarded
as an independent sample (that is, the chance is small
that individuals sampled on the treated unit are also
sampled on the control unit). Typically, subsamples are
taken at both the treated and control sites before and af-
ter treatment. The two sites are regarded as the popula-
tion to which inferences can be extended based on the
subsamples.
Commonly, restoration projects are done on a site-
specific basis with no replication. In this case, a restora-
tion effect would be indicated by a significant inter-
action between the difference between the control and
restored site before the treatment and that difference af-
ter the treatment (Underwood 1994, 1997). A problem
with this design is that the changes may result from nat-
ural variation over time and not from the treatment. To
partially account for this possibility, Underwood (1991)
proposed taking measurements at multiple times before
and after the treatment. Each measurement is assumed
to be an independent, temporally replicated sample,
and each replicate is regarded as an estimate of true
change. The timing of taking repeated samples must be
based on previous information that documents that
they are not serially correlated and can be considered
independent, or based on time-series data that are ana-
lyzed using a mixed-model repeated measures design
that allows correlations to be partitioned from other
sources of variation (Littel et al. 1996).
Another major shortcoming of the basic BACI design
is that the lack of replication limits the inferences that
can be drawn from the results (Green 1979; Hurlbert
1984). Results derived from a BACI study with no repli-
cation would apply only to the place and time of study.
In the case of only one treated area, one way to strengthen
inferences drawn from treatment effects would be to
have multiple controls. Using multiple controls allows
for a clearer interpretation of temporal variation, be-
cause they expand the scope of the sampled population
and thus the scope of inference. That is, multiple con-
trols allow one to distinguish temporal from spatial
variability within the population, providing a perspec-
tive for evaluating variation on the treated site. If the
variation among controls in both space and time is less
than the variation within the restored site, then it is de-
duced that the change detected in the restored site is
greater than expected based on just natural variability
and results from the effects of the restoration treatment.
Even with replicated controls, extrapolation of results
to other locations may be limited. If an objective was to
acquire results with broader application, it would be
desirable to have multiple restored sites with multiple
controls. This general design provides a certain amount
of flexibility in the exact experimental design used. For
example, treated and control sites could be paired, or
Table 1. Differences in the design aspects of true experiments and quasi-experiments.
Design Aspect
Type of Experimental Design
True Experiment
Quasi-experiment
Treatments
randomly allocated to experimental units
self-assigned to experimental units
Controls
randomly allocated to experimental units
randomly allocated to experimental units, self-
assigned, or lacking
Confounding factors
controlled by design
not controlled by design
Cause and effect
directly inferable
not directly inferable
Inference
strong
weak
Potential design
randomized complete block; completely 
randomized; factorial treatments;
split plot
nonequivalent controls; interrupted time series;
before-after-control-impact

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
SEPTEMBER 2001 Restoration Ecology
299
they could be randomly selected or stratified across the
landscape. If this level of replication is feasible, then a
true experimental design should be considered, as long
as treatments and controls can be randomly allocated to
sites.
Beyond the basic designs discussed above, investiga-
tors may choose or be relegated to using less optimal
approaches. For example, if no control is available, the
comparison is simply one of before and after treatment
at the treated site(s), which is essentially a time-series
design (Green 1979). However, under this design, natu-
ral temporal change cannot be separated from treat-
ment effects because changes detected following treat-
ment may be of the result of factors extraneous to the
treatment.
Other Design Considerations.
Once a general study design
is established, numerous sampling aspects must be ad-
dressed. These include defining the target population,
selecting sampling units or plots, and determining plot
size and shape, field methodologies to use, and timing
and frequency of data collection.
A major step in designing a monitoring study is to
clearly establish the target population and sampling
frame. Generally, defining the target population defines
the sampling universe and the extent to which infer-
ences can be extrapolated. In rare cases, the sampling
frame is small enough to permit a complete sampling of
the entire area. More typically, however, the entire sam-
pling frame cannot be measured, so a sample of popula-
tion units is required. Some primary considerations for
establishing sampling units are (1) what constitutes an
independent member of the population, (2) their size
and shape, (3) the number needed, and (4) how to place
them within the sampling frame.
The size and shape of sampling units depends on the
methods used to collect data, biological edge effects,
spatial distribution of the species studied, biology of the
species, and logistics of collecting data. Thompson et al
(1998:44–48) summarize the primary considerations and
tradeoffs in choosing a plot design; for example, long
and narrow plots may allow for more precise estimates,
but square plots will have less edge effect. They con-
clude that no single design is optimal for all situations,
and they suggest trying several in a pilot study. Plot
size depends largely on the biology and distribution of
the species under study. Larger plot sizes are needed
for species with larger home-range sizes (such as Strix
occidentalis [Spotted Owl]) and for species with clumped
distributions (such as 
 
Oreortyx pictus
 
 [Mountain Quail]).
The number of sample units and allocation of those
units depends on sampling variances, which are largely
influenced by species’ distribution and abundances. Sam-
ple size is largely guided by the number of plots needed
to provide precise estimates of the parameter(s) of inter-
est. Sample plots should be allocated to minimize sam-
pling variances. Species with clumped distributions
generally require more samples to achieve a desired
precision than species with regular distributions. This
can be accomplished in various ways, depending on
characteristics of the population to be sampled. Some
basic sampling designs include simple random, system-
atic random, stratified, one-stage and two-stage cluster,
and ratio estimators (Cochran 1977; Thompson 1992).
Other key parts of any study design include the tim-
ing of data collection and the length of time over which
data should be collected. The choice of timing and
length is influenced by the biology of the organism, the
objectives of monitoring, intrinsic and extrinsic factors
that influence the parameter(s) to be estimated, and the
resources available to conduct monitoring. Obviously,
studies of breeding animals should be conducted dur-
ing the breeding season, studies of migrating animals
during the migration period, and so on. Within a sea-
son, however, timing can be critical. For example, many
passerines are more detectable during the early part of
the breeding cycle when males are displaying as part of
courtship and territory display. Thus, detection proba-
bilities for many species will be greater during this pe-
riod than during others. Another consideration is that
the very population being monitored can change within
a season. For example, age–class structures and num-
bers of individuals change during the breeding season
as juveniles fledge from nests and are recruited to the
population. This is typical of many temperate small
mammal species, whose populations are low in late
winter and early spring and peak in late summer and
fall. As a result, population estimates for a given species
may change depending on when data were collected.
However, once it is decided when to collect data, it is
crucial that data be collected during the same phase in
the phenology of the species during subsequent years
to control within-season variation.
Length of study refers to how long a study must be
continued to estimate the parameter of interest. Effects
of restoration treatments may occur at different tempo-
ral scales, from immediate wildlife responses to those
that occur decades or even centuries post-treatment.
Given time-varying effects, monitoring should occur
over corresponding periods. A primary consideration
for monitoring studies should be temporal qualities of
the ecological parameter being measured. Temporal
qualities include frequency, magnitude, and regularity,
which are influenced by biotic and abiotic factors acting
stochastically and deterministically (Franklin 1989). For
example, proposed population monitoring for 
 
Strix oc-
cidentalis lucida
 
 (Mexican Spotted Owl) should occur for
15 years or longer, a period that would include a full
generation and encompass varying environmental con-
ditions (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 1995).

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
300
Restoration Ecology
SEPTEMBER 2001
Alternatives exist for conducting long-term studies
(Michener 1997) such as retrospective studies (Davis
1989), substituting space for time (Pickett 1989), using
systems with fast dynamics as analogies for those with
slow dynamics (Strayer et al. 1986), and modeling
(Shugart 1989). Each of these alternatives has merits
and limitations that must be understood before they are
used as an alternative to long-term data collection.
In summary optimal monitoring of restoration effects
requires a rigorous study design. To ensure that reliable
information can be obtained on wildlife responses, the
restoration project should be designed and imple-
mented with that in mind. Failure to do so may greatly
reduce the ability to monitor and understand effects on
wildlife.
Analyzing the Data
If monitoring is designed correctly at the inception of
planning a restoration project, the analysis is deter-
mined beforehand by the experimental design. The ex-
perimental design defines the sources of variation or
factors to consider. Thus, specific analytical methods
and/or statistical tests should be determined prior to
data collection and should be appropriate to the experi-
mental design.
We must note that the analysis of ecological data is
moving away from traditional hypothesis testing and
towards parameter estimation with associated mea-
sures of precision (Johnson 1999). Often, a “significant”
hypothesis test indicates that a treatment effect exists,
but not that a key threshold was met or exceeded,
which is an important consideration for monitoring res-
toration effects. The magnitude of the response parame-
ters, their levels of precision, and their relationship to
established threshold levels are more important than
simply whether a statistically significant effect exists
(Fig. 3). To address this information need, hypothesis
tests can be designed using the threshold value and its
confidence interval as the reference point. An alterna-
tive to hypothesis testing is the use of model selection
procedures for a given analysis, such as regression (Burn-
ham & Anderson 1998). For example, linear and nonlin-
ear regression in an analysis of covariance framework
could be used to model the parameters in Figure 3, us-
ing model-selection criteria to determine which regres-
sion model best explains the data. Using this approach
does not alter the experimental design, just the interpre-
tation of the results stemming from the analysis dic-
tated by that design.
Another consideration in analysis of the data is incor-
poration of detection probabilities. A detection proba-
bility is the chance of confirming the presence of an ani-
mal at a given place and time (Thompson et al. 1998).
Numerous factors, including vegetation structure, be-
havior of individuals, and sampling methods can influ-
ence the probability of detecting an animal. The proba-
bility of detecting a bird, for example, might be greater
in an open forest than in a dense one. If more birds are
detected in an open than in a dense forest, one could
mistakenly conclude that the open forest contained
more birds when the difference between forests was in
detectabilities and not population numbers. This is par-
ticularly relevant to ecological restoration where treat-
ments often entail modifications to vegetation structure.
Failure to adjust for heterogeneous detection probabili-
ties adds a source of bias that may render the results of
monitoring invalid.
Evaluating the Results
If monitoring is conducted properly, results provide in-
formation that can be used to evaluate and adjust resto-
ration practices. If results indicate that restoration treat-
ments meet or exceed wildlife objectives, such treatments
can be duplicated in future restoration projects. If ef-
fects are deleterious to the species or habitat(s) consid-
ered, then prescriptions should be modified to amelio-
rate or mitigate those impacts. These scenarios fall under
the auspices of adaptive management (Gibbs et al. 1999).
The concept of adaptive management rests largely on
monitoring effects of land-management activities, in
this case restoration, on key resources, and then using
monitoring results as a basis for modifying those activi-
ties when warranted (Walters 1986; Gibbs et al. 1999).
Adaptive management is an iterative process whereby
management practices are initiated and their effects
monitored at regular intervals. Effectively, restoration
treatments are conducted incrementally and desired out-
Figure 3. Example of data from a hypothetical BACI design 
with a single control site (solid line) and a single treatment site 
(dashed line) to illustrate use of parameter estimates and their 
confidence intervals to examine whether a pre-established 
threshold (dotted line) has been reached after a restoration 
treatment.

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
SEPTEMBER 2001 Restoration Ecology
301
comes are evaluated at each step. If outcomes are con-
sistent with predictions, the project continues as de-
signed. If outcomes deviate negatively from predictions,
then restoration can continue, end, or be modified.
These feedback loops assume that monitoring was cor-
rectly designed and that both treatments and monitor-
ing efforts were implemented as designed. If not, the
problem rests not with restoration and monitoring but
with how they were implemented.
Conclusions
Current Situation
Restoration of degraded ecosystems is a relatively new
management approach, and effects of most restoration
treatments on various system processes and compo-
nents are poorly understood. How restoration affects
native wildlife is a primary question or concern in
many areas. This question is addressed most efficiently
when monitoring wildlife response is considered dur-
ing the design phase of restoration. In reality, most res-
toration projects are not designed to consider wildlife
primarily, so options for addressing these concerns are
limited. Consequently, investigators often settle for
suboptimal study designs for monitoring restoration ef-
fects on wildlife. These designs include observational
studies, unreplicated comparisons of restored and natu-
ral sites, small study areas, spatial dependence between
sampling units, and studies of short duration (Patten
1997; Kus 1998; Brown 1999). Certainly, past wildlife-
restoration studies have provided useful information
for the species studied, and they represent a solid foun-
dation for the development of more rigorous monitor-
ing approaches.
We are encouraged by some of the designs of recent
restoration projects in northern Arizona in ponderosa
pine forests within Grand Canyon National Park (USDI
Park Service 1999) and Coconino National Forest (USDA
Forest Service 1998). The general experimental designs
consist of three blocks, each consisting of three treated
units and an untreated control. Although the applica-
tion of an experiment is a step forward, limitations still
exist for understanding treatment effects on wildlife.
For example, experimental units are relatively small
(about 8 ha) and are placed in close proximity to each
other. Also, blocks differ with respect to management
histories, vegetation, topography, and edaphic features,
and therefore cannot be considered valid replicates. The
small size of treatment units, edge effects of adjoining
treatments, and lack of replication will greatly limit in-
ferences related to effects of the treatments on wildlife.
Even so, understanding these limitations will provide a
basis for improving the design of future projects.
Future Directions
We contend that monitoring restoration activities should
always involve experiments because researchers want
to know not only if there was an effect after restoration,
but also whether that effect was due to restoration.
Given this, we also argue that whenever feasible resto-
ration monitoring should be designed as a true experi-
ment rather than a quasi-experiment.
Given that restoration is a relatively recent manage-
ment approach, we have an opportunity to establish a
monitoring framework that results in a logical flow of
information. This approach should be standardized to
enable broad-based questions to be addressed, yet re-
main flexible to allow for answers to more local, site-
specific questions. Replicated projects could be imple-
mented across an ecotype (such as ponderosa pine forest,
valley oak woodland, shortgrass prairie) to understand
effects on the appropriate restoration assemblage. Once
general relationships are established, then more project-
specific studies can be done to understand restoration
effects on selected species such as threatened or endan-
gered species, species of high societal value, or ecologi-
cal keystone species, or on selected groups of species.
Core study designs and field methods for collecting
data on a limited set of variables could be standardized
to permit pooling data from different projects across
large geographic areas for future meta-analyses. Inves-
tigators would then have latitude to collect beyond the
standardized base design by adding to the sampling de-
sign or collecting data on additional variables to ad-
dress project-specific questions.
Still unresolved is deciding exactly what species to
monitor. Some choices are politically driven, such as the
mandate to monitor populations of threatened and en-
dangered species or species that are highly valued by the
public. These species may or may not be the best mea-
sures of the effectiveness of restoration for wildlife.
Clearly a procedure is needed for selecting appropriate
umbrella species to represent the range of ecological
needs and population responses by species expected to be
present in restored ecological systems. For some systems,
these choices are readily apparent based on previous
work; in other systems, research is needed to determine
the appropriate species. Until we tackle this immediate
and pressing need, we will lose opportunities to gain reli-
able information and move restoration ecology forward.
Acknowledgments
We thank Michael Morrison for involving us in the wild-
life session at the SER meetings in San Francisco. Eliza-
beth Ammon, Rudy King, and an anonymous reviewer
provided comments on an earlier draft that greatly im-
proved this paper.

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
302
Restoration Ecology
SEPTEMBER 2001
LITERATURE CITED
Austin, M. P. 1999. A silent clash of paradigms: some inconsisten-
cies in community ecology. Oikos 86:170–178.
Block, W. M., L. A. Brennan, and R. J. Gutiérrez. 1987. Evaluation
of guild-indicator species for use in resource management.
Environmental Management 11:265–269.
Brown, S. C. 1999. Vegetation similarity and avifaunal food value
of restored and natural marshes in northern New York. Res-
toration Ecology 7:56–68.
Burnham, K. P., and D. R. Anderson. 1998. Model selection and in-
ference: a practical information-theoretical approach. Springer-
Verlag, New York.
Cochran, W. G. 1977. Sampling techniques. 3rd edition. John
Wiley and Sons, New York.
Davis, M. B. 1989. Retrospective studies. Pages 71–89 in G. E. Lik-
ens, editor. Long-term studies in ecology: approaches and al-
ternatives. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Eberhardt, L. L., and J. M. Thomas. 1991. Designing environmen-
tal field studies. Ecological Monographs 61:53–73.
Franklin, J. F. 1989. Importance and justification of long-term
studies in ecology. Pages 3–19 in G. E. Likens, editor. Long-
term studies in ecology: approaches and alternatives. Springer-
Verlag, New York.
Gibbs, J. P., H. L. Snell, and C. E. Causton. 1999. Effective monitor-
ing for adaptive wildlife management: lessons from the Gal-
apagos Islands. Journal of Wildlife Management 63:1055–1065.
Green, R. H. 1979. Sampling design and statistical methods for
environmental biologists. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Hayek, L. C. 1994. Analysis of amphibian biodiversity data. Pages
207–269 in W. R. Heyer, A. Donnelly, R. W. McDiarmid, L. C.
Hayek, and M. S. Foster, editors. Measuring and monitoring
biological diversity: standard methods for amphibians.
Smithsonian Press, Washington, D. C.
Hurlbert, S. A. 1984. Pseudoreplication and the design of ecologi-
cal field experiments. Ecological Monographs 54:187–211.
James, F. C. and C. E. McCullough. 1995. The strength of infer-
ences about causes of trends in populations. Pages 40–51 in
T. E. Martin and D. M. Finch, editors. Ecology and manage-
ment of neotropical migratory birds: a synthesis of critical is-
sues. Oxford University Press, New York.
Johnson, D. H. 1999. The insignificance of statistical significance
testing. Journal of Wildlife Management 63:763–772.
Kus, B. E. 1998. Use of restored habitat by the endangered Least
Bell’s Vireo (Vireo belli pusillus). Restoration Ecology 6:75–82.
Lambeck, R. J. 1997. Focal species: a multi-species umbrella for
nature conservation. Conservation Biology 11:849–856.
Landres, P. B., J. Verner, and J. W. Thomas. 1988. Ecological uses
of vertebrate indicator species: a critique. Conservation Biol-
ogy 2:316–328.
Littel, R. C., G. A. Milliken, W. W. Stroup, and R. D. Wolfinger.
1996. SAS system for mixed models. SAS Institute, Cary,
North Carolina.
Manly, B. J. F. 1992. The design and analysis of research studies.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Mannan, R. W., M. L. Morrison, and E. C. Meslow. 1984. Com-
ment: the use of guilds in forest bird management. Wildlife
Society Bulletin 12:426–430.
Michener, W. K. 1997. Quantitatively evaluating restoration ex-
periments: research design, statistical analysis, and data
management considerations. Restoration Ecology 5:324–377.
Morrison, M. L. 1986. Birds as indicators of environmental
change. Current Ornithology 3:429–451.
Morrison, M. L., and B. G. Marcot. 1995. An evaluation of re-
source inventory and monitoring program used in national
forest planning. Environmental Management 19:147–156.
Noon, B. R., T. A. Spies, and M. G. Raphael. 1999. Conceptual basis
for designing an effectiveness monitoring program. Pages 21–
48 in B. S. Mulder, B. R. Noon, T. A. Spies, M. G. Raphael, C. J.
Palmer, A. R. Olsen, G. H. Reeves, and H. H. Welsh, technical
coordinators. The strategy and design of the effectiveness mon-
itoring program in the Northwest Forest Plan. General Techni-
cal Report PNW-437. U.S. Forest Service, Portland, Oregon.
Noss, R. F., and A. Y. Cooperrider. 1994. Saving nature’s legacy:
protecting and restoring biodiversity. Island Press, Washing-
ton, D.C.
Ostle, B. 1983. Statistics in research. Iowa State University Press,
Ames.
Patten, M. A. 1997. Reestablishment of a rodent community in re-
stored desert scrub. Restoration Ecology 5:156–161.
Pickett, S. T. A. 1989. Space-for-time substitutions as an alterna-
tive to long-term studies. Pages 110–135 in G. E. Likens, edi-
tor. Long-term studies in ecology: approaches and alterna-
tives. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Pielou, E. C. 1977. Mathematical ecology. John Wiley and Sons,
New York.
Root, R. B. 1967. The niche exploitation pattern of the Blue-gray
Gnatcatcher. Ecological Monographs 37:317–350.
Seamans, M. E., R. J. Gutièrrez, C. A. May, and M. Z. Peery. 1999.
Demography of two Mexican Spotted Owl populations.
Conservation Biology 13:744–754.
Shugart, H. H. 1989. The role of ecological models in long-term
ecological studies. Pages 90–109 in G. E. Likens, editor.
Long-term studies in ecology: approaches and alternatives.
Springer-Verlag, New York.
Stewart-Oaten, A., J. R. Bence, and C. W. Osenberg. 1992. Assess-
ing effects of unreplicated perturbations: no simple solu-
tions. Ecology 73:1396–1404.
Strayer, D., J. S. Glitzenstein, C. G. Jones, J. Kolas, G. Likens, M. J.
McDonnell, G. G. Parker, and S. T. A. Pickett. 1986. Long-
term ecological studies: an illustrated account of their de-
sign, operation, and importance to ecology. Occasional Pa-
per 2. Institute for Ecosystem Studies, Millbrook, New York.
Thompson, S. K. 1992. Sampling. John Wiley and Sons, New
York.
Thompson, W. L., G. C. White, and C. Gowan. 1998. Monitoring
vertebrate populations. Academic Press, San Diego, California.
Underwood, A. J. 1991. Beyond BACI: experimental designs for
detecting environmental impacts on temporal variations in
natural populations. Australian Journal of Marine and
Freshwater Research 52:569–587.
Underwood, A. J. 1994. On beyond BACI: sampling designs that
might reliably detect environmental disturbances. Ecological
Applications 4:3–15.
Underwood, A. J. 1997. Experiments in ecology: their logical de-
sign and interpretation using analysis of variance. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
USDA Forest Service. 1998. Fort Valley environmental assess-
ment. Unpublished report. Peaks Ranger District, Coconino
National Forest, Flagstaff, Arizona.
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1995. Recovery plan for the Mex-
ican Spotted Owl (Strix occidentalis lucida). Vol. 1. U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
USDI Park Service. 1999. Draft environmental assessment Grand
Canyon forest restoration research. Unpublished report.
Grand Canyon National Park, Science Center, Grand Can-
yon, Arizona.
Verner, J. 1983. An integrated system for monitoring wildlife on
the Sierra Nevada Forest. Transactions of the North Ameri-
can Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 48:355–366.
Verner, J., R. J. Gutiérrez, and G. I. Gould, Jr. 1992. The California

Monitoring Restoration on Wildlife
SEPTEMBER 2001 Restoration Ecology
303
Spotted Owl: general biology and ecological relations. Pages
55–77 in J. Verner, K. S. McKelvey, B. R. Noon, R. J. Gutiér-
rez, G. I. Gould, Jr., and T. W. Beck, technical coordinators.
The California Spotted Owl: a technical assessment of its
current status. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Re-
port, PSW-GTR-133. Pacific Southwest Research Station, Al-
bany, California.
Walters, C. J. 1986. Adaptive management of renewable re-
sources. Macmillan, New York.
White, G. C., W. M. Block, J. L. Ganey, W. H. Moir, J. P. Ward, Jr.,
A. B. Franklin, S. L. Spangle, S. E. Rinkevich, J. R. Vahle, F. P.
Howe, and J. L. Dick, Jr. 1999. Science versus political reality
in delisting criteria for a threatened species: the Mexican
Spotted Owl experience. Transactions of the North Ameri-
can Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 64:292–306.
White, P. S., and J. L. Walker. 1997. Approximating nature’s vari-
ation: selecting and using reference information in restora-
tion ecology. Restoration Ecology 5:338–349.
