Forestry research goes global 
By CYNDY COLE 
Sun Staff Reporter 
04/29/2005 
 
Foresters who've been battling record wildfires in Spain will be getting a little help from 
Northern Arizona University.  
Associate forestry Prof. Pete Fulé is headed to the pine forests outside of Barcelona to aid 
in determining what some of Spain's forests looked like historically with low-level fires, 
before regions were settled or logged.  
His research could be used as a guide for thinning or changing forests there, much the 
same way NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute research provides data for forest 
management in the Southwest. Fulé is the associate director of the ERI.  
He'll be NAU's ninth Fulbright scholar sent overseas in the past eight years.  
The western Mediterranean bears a resemblance to the Southwest and Mexico, where 
Fulé researches fire history and conducts experiments on how to return forests to the way 
they were before the Industrial Revolution.  
There, like here, elevation determines the type of vegetation.  
Sitting in his office behind a desk of tree ring samples, Fulé explains his plans to map out 
the fire history of black, or Austrian, pines.  
He may study others as well.  
He takes a slab of a tree off his desk and points out black lines on it, each a place where 
the tree was burned and survived a low-intensity fire. Nearest the bark is a wide, 
yellowish band of unblighted wood, the result of more than a century without fires in the 
Forest Service's era of suppression.  
"In Spain this is a pressing problem because there have been many very large and very 
severe forest fires in recent years," he said.  
Getting Fulé to talk about himself can be a little like prying a pearl from an oyster.  
He's 41, a father of two, and a husband.  

He wouldn't casually mention that he publishes much more than is typically required 
from faculty in his position each year, and brings in 28 times the research money usually 
expected.  
He answers students' questions with questions, making them think and review scientific 
literature. And he has some of the highest-ranking student reviews in his department.  
Fulé applied for the Fulbright scholarship last year and found out last month that he was 
chosen.  
He'll seek out Spanish forests that are old and undisturbed, but he isn't sure precisely 
where he'll do research yet, or what he'll find.  
He could be based along the coast, or the foothills of the Pyrenees. He'll likely have to get 
into remote areas.  
He and his family plan to head to Spain on July 1 and stay for a year.  
Reporter Cyndy Cole can be reached at 913-8607 or ccole@azdailysun.com.  
 
