 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Forest Change and Water Balance:  
Investigating Forest Restoration Treatment Effects on Soil Water Storage, Evapotranspiration,  
Groundwater Recharge and Surface Water Discharge 
 
By Sharon Masek Lopez 
 
PURPOSE AND NEED 
Previous watershed experiments in ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest have investigated how changes in forest 
cover affect surface water runoff. However, those treatment prescriptions differed from forest restoration treatments 
and the water balance as a whole was not addressed. Therefore, there is a need to research restoration treatment effects 
on evapotranspiration, soil water storage, and groundwater 
recharge as well as surface water runoff. By understanding the 
water, mass and energy balance of hydrologic processes in 
restored forests (Figure 1), adaptive management plans for the 
Four Forest Restoration Initiative, or 4FRI, can be shaped to 
promote a forest that is more resilient to climate variability, 
thereby safeguarding habitat for many dependent species.  
 
DESIGN 
 
Paired watersheds, which compare treated “experimental” and 
untreated “control” watersheds, are standard practice for eval-
uating hydrologic effects of forest management practices. 
They require years of pretreatment and post-treatment data to 
draw conclusions. The size of watersheds may vary between 
studies, but it is best to have consistent watershed sizes within 
a single study to reduce extraneous sources of variability. A 
single untreated watershed can serve as the control for several 
treated watersheds with which it is paired.  
 
Multiple pairs with relatively consistent characteristics 
(similar elevation, aspect, topography, geology, etc.) are preferred for determining the significance of findings across 
the landscape. Three control and nine experimental watersheds are proposed for the first analysis area for the 4FRI 
paired watershed study. Six watersheds are within the Sycamore Canyon watershed on Kaibab National Forest; and six 
watersheds are in the Walnut Creek watershed (or more specifically the Lake Mary watershed) on Coconino National 
Forest (Figure 2, page 2). Most of these watersheds are between 700 and 1,000 acres, are all in predominantly pondero-
sa pine forest, and all have basalt or basalt and volcanic surficial geology (Table 1, page 2).  
In contrast to earlier experimental watersheds in Arizona, the treatments are not designed to affect surface water yield. 
Instead, the paired watershed study works within the context of the treatment prescriptions selected for multiple objec-
tives of 4FRI. This study proposes to evaluate changes in water, mass, and energy balance in forest restoration pre-
scriptions of low, medium, and high-intensity treatments and various degrees of change in basal area and forest struc-
ture. One hypothesis of the study is that a 30% to 70% decrease in basal area will elicit the greatest water balance re-
sponse in terms of decreased evapotranspiration and increased soil water storage, groundwater recharge, and surface 
water discharge.  
        Fact Sheet: Four Forest Restoration Initiative Paired Watershed Study     
    May 2013     
 
Figure 1. Conceptual model of the water balance. 

 
All watersheds will be instrumented to measure 
precipitation, weather, soil moisture, snow water 
equivalence, evapotranspiration, surface water dis-
charge, water quality, and recharge through chlo-
ride mass balance.   
Data collection will include a seven-year pre-
treatment period, followed by initial mechanical 
thinning and burn treatments. This will be fol-
lowed by a 21-year post-treatment data collection 
period. The post-treatment period will include fol-
low-up burn treatments in seven-year intervals. 
Researchers will monitor hydrological effects from 
a fire regime that resembles a more natural fire 
return interval, something that hasn’t been done 
before. Data will be statistically analyzed and used 
in models to better understand hydrologic process-
es in restored ponderosa pine forest.  
 
INTEGRATED RESEARCH 
 
The 4FRI Paired Watershed Study is part of a network of forest restoration research activities that build on a long his-
tory of forest research in the Southwest. In the vicinity of the paired watershed study are other forest restoration study 
sites including the Fort Valley Experimental Forest (which includes the Gus Pearson Natural Area), Fire and Fire Sur-
rogate Study sites (part of a nation-wide network of study sites), the Centennial Forest, and numerous current and past 
study sites investigated by Northern Arizona University’s biol-
ogy, forestry, geology, and environmental science graduate stu-
dents. The Fort Valley Experimental Forest has extensive forest 
ecology data dating back to 1906. The Beaver Creek Experi-
mental Watersheds, while using hazardous fuel reduction treat-
ments that are not considered restoration treatments, neverthe-
less inform much of what is known about the hydrologic re-
sponse to forest treatments in Arizona. Other experimental wa-
tersheds in the eastern half of 4FRI, including Workman Creek, 
Willow Creek, Thomas Creek, and Castle Creek, similarly pro-
vided insights that can be built on as restoration treatments and 
associated research progresses eastward.  
 
   
 
Contact 
Dr. Abe Springer, abe.springer@nau.edu 
Sharon Masek Lopez, sharon.masek_lopez@nau.edu 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Location of 12 proposed experimental watersheds in the 
4FRI Paired Watershed Study 
 
Surveying a channel cross-section for a flume  
Table 1. 4FRI Paired Watershed Study watershed properties 
