Welcome to the newly designed Ecological Restoration Institute newsletter!
Is this email not displaying correctly?
View it in your browser.
Restoration News
Upcoming Events
ERI in the News
New Publications
News from the Field
Spotlight: Apache-Sitgreaves
Ecological
Restoration
Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86001
eri.nau.edu
928-523-7182
RESTORATION NEWS
As of September 1, 2012,
more than 7.6 million
acres have burned
nationally. Foresters,
ecologists, fire managers,
and climate change
experts have long
predicted that, as fuels
steadily accumulate in
frequent fire forests
(absent natural fires), the
trajectory of increasing
frequency, size, and
severity of fires would
continue, eventually
reaching catastrophic
levels. Since the 1940s,
deep-digging research has sought to find ways to head off this trend, as
well as to restore not only appropriate fire, but also naturalness to forest
and rangeland ecosystems.
Since May, ERI crews have been working on the Apache-Sitgreaves
National Forests collecting data on the record-breaking 2011 Wallow fire—
a fire which burned 579,000 acres in east central Arizona and western New
Mexico. Working with the U.S. Forest Service and other agencies the ERI
is studying forest restoration treatments applied 10 years prior to the
Wallow fire to determine how effectively these treatments were in
protecting communities and restoring forest health. Results from this work
will assist land managers to better understand ecological restoration and
hazardous fuel reduction treatments so they can better plan future forest
restoration activities, and do so quickly.  With large, unnaturally severe and
devastating fires occurring annually and at scales measured in tens to
hundreds of thousands of acres, we must act and act boldly but with the
humility to monitor, learn and adapt treatments to new knowledge.
In addition to studying restoration treatments, ERI is studying the
relationship between forest restoration and watershed health. In
cooperation with Salt River Project we are supporting and will monitor
forest restoration on millions of acres in the Salt and Verde watershed
ecosystems. ERI is proud to work with SRP to expand the scientific
knowledge that contributes to the protection and preservation of our
 

precious water sources.
 
UPCOMING EVENTS:
 
2012 Society of American Foresters National
Convention
Date: October 24-28, 2012
Spokane, WA
More Information
Association for Fire Ecology (AFE)
5th International Fire Ecology and Management
Congress
Date: December 3-7, 2012
Portland, OR 
More Information
2013 Society for Ecological Restoration 5th
World Conference
Date: October 6-11, 2013
Madison, WI
More Information
Proposal submission closes Dec. 1
Flagstaff, Arizona, in September
ERI IN THE NEWS
This panorama, taken about 10 miles west of Flagstaff, Ariz.,
shows a nearly 360-degree view of forest land. The trees on the
left side of the road have been thinned by foresters; the stand
on the right has been left untouched. Link Copyright David
Gilkey/NPR
 
NPR: Is it too late to defuse the danger of
megafires? In the fourth installment of this 5-part
series, NPR's Christopher Joyce talks to ERI's Dr.
Wally Covington about the fate of our forests.
More...
ERI's Forests Under Fire DVD released in June
2012. More...   
Order a free copy

ERI's Wally Covington appointed to Federal
Forest Policy Committee
On June 5 Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack
appointed Covington, NAU Regents’ Professor of
Forest Ecology in the School of Forestry and
Executive Director of the Ecological Restoration
Institute at NAU, to represent the scientific
community on a federal advisory committee for
the new US Forest Service Planning Rule. More...
 
 
NEW PUBLICATIONS:
ERI Fact Sheets:
Allen, J.A., and K. Ramstead. 2012. Fact Sheet: Evidence-based Conservation Systematic Review:
Effectiveness of Wet Meadow Restoration Projects. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona
University, 2 p.
Dubay, C.T. 2012. Fact Sheet: Adding Value to Forest Restoration: ERI Accomplishments 2011-2012.
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2 p.
Huffman, D.W., Sanchez-Meador, A.J., and Greco, B. 2012. Fact Sheet: Canopy Cover and How it Relates to
Other Forest Attributes as an Indicator of Forest Conditions. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona
University, 4 p.
Springer, J.D. 2012. Fact Sheet: Conserving Rare Plants in National Parks and Protected Areas. Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2 p.
Springer, J.D. 2012. Fact Sheet: Exotic Species Management at Landscape Scales. Ecological Restoration
Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2 p.
Vosick, D.J. 2012. Fact Sheet: Fiscal Year 2013: ERI Federal Appropriations and Budget. Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 2 p.
Vosick, D. (Ed.). 2012. Fact Sheet: Estimating Flagstaff Residents’ Willingness to Pay for Forest Restoration in
the Lake Mary and Upper Rio de Flag Watersheds: A Pilot Study.  Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern
Arizona University, 2 p.
Waltz, A.E.M.2012. Fact Sheet: Impacts of Fire Hazard Assessment and Fuel Reduction Priorities on Mega-fire
Outcomes: A Hypothetical Test Using the Wallow Fire in Arizona. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern
Arizona University, 3 p.
ERI Working Papers:
Springer, J.D. and D. Egan. 2012. Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the
Face of Climate Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West. Working Paper 25, Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 8 p.
Published in Journals:
Abella, S.R., and J.D. Springer. 2012. Soil Seed Banks in a Mature Coniferous Forest Landscape: Dominance
of Native Perennials and Low Spatial Variability. Seed Science Research 22:207-217.
Abella, S.R., J.C. Hurja, D.J. Merkler, C.W. Denton, and D. Brewer.  Overstory-Understory Relationships along
Forest Type and Environmental Gradients in the Spring Mountains of Southern Nevada, USA. Folio Geobot
47:119-134.
Barrett, K.J., E.L. Kalies, and C.L. Chambers. 2012. Predator Occupancy Rates in a Thinned Ponderosa Pine
Forest, Arizona: A Pilot Study. Wildlife Society Bulletin 36(2):232-239.
Zegler, T.J., M.M. Moore, M.L. Fairweather, K.B. Ireland, and P.Z. Fule. 2012. Populus Tremuloides Mortality
Near the Southwestern Edge of its Range. Forest Ecology and Management 282:196-207.

Most of the untreated Auger Creek watershed burned with stand-
replacing crown fire
For more articles, please visit: http://library.eri.nau.edu
NEWS FROM THE FIELD
WALLOW FIRE UPDATE
ERI field crews are keeping busy this summer collecting ecological data within the largest wildfire on record in
Arizona. Located in east-central Arizona, the Wallow Fire burned more than 500,000 acres in 2011. In the
decade before the fire, many sites had been treated for restoration or to reduce hazardous fuels. These sites
are providing the Institute with an opportunity to determine how effective treatments were on conserving
ecosystem integrity with respect to forest structure, wildlife habitat, and understory plant communities.
Since mid-May, field crews have been staying in beautiful Greer, Arizona while conducting field data collection. 
Data collection includes installing monitoring plots within treated and untreated sites. The overall study design
pairs treated sites with adjacent untreated areas which burned on the same day and have similar topography
and soils. Data collected on these plots will allow researchers to examine the fire’s effect on overstory trees,
regeneration and shrub dynamics, surface fuel loads, and understory plant communities. In addition, crews are
installing “edge effects” transects which run from severely burned untreated areas into adjacent treated areas to
determine how long it takes for active crown fires to transition to surface fires once the fires enter treated areas.
Lastly, camera “traps” are also being installed to capture wildlife activity on previously treated and untreated
sites.
Preliminary on-site observations indicate high variability but in general, it appears that treatments were usually
effective at limiting the levels of tree mortality seen in untreated areas. Crews will continue to work in the White
Mountains for the remainder of the summer. Reports from this study will be available in spring of 2013.
Treated site had limited tree mortality one year after it burned in the
Wallow Fire
 
PARTNERS
Spotlight: Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests

 
http://www.fs.usda.gov/asnf
About the Forest
Administered as one national forest, the Apache-Sitgreaves is one of six national forests in
Arizona and encompasses more than 2 million acres of magnificent mountain country in east-
central Arizona. The forest’s headquarters is located in Springerville, with five additional
ranger stations in Alpine, Clifton, Heber-Overgaard, Springerville, and Lakeside.
Our Vision Statement:
“We believe in the diversity of natural resources, the long-term view, and multiple uses!” The Apache-Sitgreaves
National Forests effectively manage for resiliency across the landscape. We ensure the perpetuation of a broad
range of diverse habitats, exceptional recreation opportunities, functioning watersheds, robust rangelands, and
a balanced flow of forest resources for future generations. We integrate community values and protection into all
aspects of forest management.
Importance of Partnerships:
Managing a national forest as large and varied as the Apache and Sitgreaves National Forests requires the
efforts of not only dedicated employees, but numerous partners and volunteers who contribute greatly to the
successful management of forest resources. Our partners help maintain recreation sites and trails, reduce
hazardous fuels, restore watersheds, monitor wildlife populations, improve wildlife and fisheries habitat,
inventory and monitor archeological and historic sites, provide input to proposed management activities,
conduct conservation education programs, and respond to emergency incidents. Our partners include a number
of federal agencies, tribes, State of Arizona, conservation organizations, universities, public entities and private
citizens.
Big Lake Reflections. Photo Courtesy Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, 2012

PO Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011 - eri.nau.edu - 928-523-7182
 
 follow on Twitter| forward to a friend 
Copyright © 2013 Ecological Restoration Institute, All rights reserved.
You are receiving this email because you opted in at our website,
http://nau.edu/eri. 
Our mailing address is: 
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011
Add us to your address book
 unsubscribe from this list | update subscription preferences | view email in browser 
