Figure 2. Rope wick used to apply herbicides to smooth sumac (Rhus  
glabra). Photo by I. Stubbendieck  
We waited until June to allow new smooth sumac shoots 
to grow above the prairie plants before wiping the herbicide 
directly onto the smooth sumac foliage (Figure 2). When 
the tallest prairie grasses were about 0.5 m tall, the rope 
wick was set at a height of about 0.7 m. Where smooth 
sumac was dense, we had to drive slowly or make an 
immediate second application perpendicular to the first 
to apply an adequate amount of herbicide for control. 
The label guidelines need to be followed, but the herbicide 
concentration is greater (about 2: 1 or 3:1 ratio ofwater to 
herbicide) for a rope wick application than for a broadcast 
application. Since all tested herbicides controlled smooth 
sumac, herbicide selection can be based on cost. 
We coupled smooth sumac control on Nine Mile Prairie 
with the three-year prescribed burning rotation. Each year, 
we shredded the sumac and applied the herbicide to the 
smooth sumac in the burned portion ofthe prairie. Before 
treatment, some portions of the prairie had a nearly com­
pleteoverstory ofsmooth sumac. Those areaswere returned 
to open prairie. We estimated 95%-98% overall control 
of smooth sumac on Nine Mile Prairie, and we expect to 
have to repeat the control measures in five to eight years. 
References 
Kaul, R.B. and S.B. Rolfsmeier. 1987. Ihe characteristics and 
phytogeographic affinities of the flora of Nine Mile Prairie, 
a western tallgrass prairie in Nebraska. Transactions IJfthe 
Nebraska Academy ofSciences 15:23-35. 
Stubbendieck, ] .• M.]. Coffin and L.M. Landholt. 2003. weed> 
IJftheGreatPlains. Lincoln: Nebraska Department of 
Agriculture. 
Tunnell, S.].,]. Stubbendieck, S. Palazzolo and R.A Masters. 
2006a. Reducing smooth sumac dominance in native tallgrass 
prairie. GreatPlainsResearch 16:45--49. 
_. 2006b. Forb response to herbicides in a degraded tallgrass 
prairie. Natural Areas jlJumal26:72-77. 
----------1@)I-----­
- 
Effects ofFuel-Reduction Treatments on 
Pollinators in a Pinyon-Juniper Woodland 
(Arizona) 
Susan Nyoka (Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Ari­
zona University, PO Box 15017, FldgstafJ, AZ86011-5017, 
susan.nyoka@nau.edu) 
C
oncern about uncontrollable wildfire in pinyon-juni­
per woodlands has led public land managers in the 
American Southwest to aggressively seek alternatives for 
reducing hazardous fuel loads. Currently, treatment meth­
ods are focused on reestablishment ofwoodland structure 
and reduction of fire hazards, yet restoration of functional 
processes such as pollination is critically important for 
long-term ecosystem susrainabiliry, Insect pollinators, par­
ticularly bees, are vital for maintaining understory plant 
diversity and productivity in natural plant communities. 
The study I describe here suggests that managers can simul­
taneously reduce fire hazards and support insect pollina­
tors in southwestern pinyon-juniper woodlands through 
overstory thinning followed by prescribed burning. 
Pinyon-juniper woodlands occupy more than 19 mil­
lion hectares in the western United States, representing 
the most common vegetation type in Arizona and New 
Mexico. Studies of non-pollinating insects (e.g., Kendall 
2003) and butterflies (Kleintjes et al. 2004) suggest that 
fuels-reduction treatments may improve habitat for insect 
pollinators in this system. To date, however, no published 
studies have specifically examined the effects of restora­
tion treatments on pollinator assemblages. Native bees, 
including bumblebees (Bombus) and a wide variety of 
solitary and semisocial species, are the principal pollina­
tors in most ecosystems (Michener 2000). Flies, especially 
the Syrphidae (flower flies), Bombyliidae (bee flies), and 
Muscideae (house flies), are considered the second most 
important insect pollinator group (Larson et al. 2001), 
though they are often overlooked. The goal of this study 
was to determine how bees and flies vary in abundance 
and species richness in response to different fuels-reduction 
treatment options versus untreated controls in a pinyon­
juniper woodland. 
This study was conducted at an established research site 
in the Kaibab National Forest, just south of Grand Canyon 
National Park in northern Arizona. The study area ranges 
from 2,005 to 2,073 meters in elevation and supports an 
overstory of pinyon pine (Pinus edulis) and Utah juniper 
(juniperus osteosperma) in upland areas, with ponderosa 
pine (Pinus ponderosa) and Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii) 
occupying canyon draws. Common floral resources include 
shrubs, such as Mexican cliffrose (Purshia mexicana) and 
broorn.snakeweed (Gutierrezia sarothrae), and a sparse but 
diverse array of forbs, such as buckwheat (Eriogonum), 
beardtongue (Penstemon), milkvetch (Astragalus), and a 
wide variety of composites (Asteraceae). 
June 2010 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION 28:2 
l~ 
119 

0.7 
a)
• May!'! August 
B
0.6 
~ 
'+ 0.5 
~ 0.4 
II 0.3
e! 02 
0.1 I
I  
o +  
Control 
Thin 
Bum 
Thin+Bum 
Treatment 
Burn 
Thin-Bum 
b) 
Control 
Thin 
Treatment 
Figure 1. Treatment effect on bees in a pinyon-Juniper woodland In 
Arizona: a) mean (± SE) species richness (May: F,... = 3.19, P = 0.03; 
August: F". = 2.73, P = 0.02); and b) mean (± SE) abundance (May: F,2. 
= 2.95, P .; 0.005; August: F.,. = 2.30, P = 0.02). Means with different' 
letters are statistically diffe~ent from one another (a = 0.05). 
We used a randomized complete block design for this 
study, with sixexperimental blocks encompassing approxi­
mately 770 ha. Witrun each block, eight 1 ha experimental 
treatment units were randomly located within a systematic 
grid of points (200 m spacing) and assigned one of four 
treatments (two treatment replicates per block, n = 48): 
no treatment (Control); tree thinning from below (Thin); 
prescribed fire (Burn); and thinning from below followed 
by prescribed fire (Thin + Burn). Thinning treatments 
were completed in spring 2005, and burning in fall 2006. 
Insect and floral resource data were collected over the 
course ofeight days both pre- and post-monsoon (May and 
August 2008). All bee and fly species observed attending 
flowerswere considered potential pollinators. Surveyswere 
conducted along three 50 m transects within a 10m x 50 
m belt centered on the middle of each treatment unit, 
and consisted of an observer walking linear transects over 
a 30-minute period during hours of maximum pollinator 
activity (10:00 a.m.-3:30 p.m.). All bees and flies detected 
within 1.5 m of the observer were recorded to morpho­
species, along with the identity of the flowering species 
attended by each insect. To ensure that field identification 
was comparable among workers, a reference collection was 
made prior to field surveys and easily memorable code 
names were assigned to species. Insects that could not be 
unambiguously identified on the wing were captured and 
retained for identification in the lab. Sufficiently distinct 
specieswithin the same genus were analyzed independently, 
120 
lrt-
June 20ID 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION 
- 
while those that could not be reliably distinguished in 
the field were pooled to genus for analysis (for example, 
Osmia, Colletes). 
Floral and nesting resources were measured, since both 
are important factors in determining habitat occupancy by 
insect pollinators. We used 10 ern x 10 cm clear acrylic 
cards to visually estimate cover for each species ofthe sparse 
floral resources found in the understory throughout the 
sampling belts. To determine nesting habitat availability, 
we measured cover of various substrates. Approximately 
75% of solitary bee species construct nests in soil, while 
other species nest in holes in snags, stumps, and downed 
logs that have been excavated and vacated by beetles. 
Bumblebees may utilize abandoned cavities in snags for 
nesting and undisturbed litter/duff for winter hibernation. 
Some flower-visiting Diptera such as hoverflies (Syrphidae) 
are also dependent on dead or dying trees for some stage 
of their life cycle, while other species utilize the litter/duff 
layer for egg laying. We estimated cover ofbare soil.Iitter, 
and wood (> 7.6 cm diam.) in ten 2 m x 0.5 m quadrats 
placed at 5 m intervals along a 50 m transect parallel to 
the topographic gradient at the center of the treatment 
unit. After treatment in 2007, snags were tallied on 0.04 
ha plots established around the center of each treatment 
unit. Canopy cover was also measured at 3 m intervals 
along the central transect of each plot using a spherical 
densiometer because pollinating insects use sunlight for 
thermoregulation and preferentially forage in sunlit areas. 
I used JMP software (vers. 8.0 SAS Institute, Cary NC) 
to conduct two-way ANOVAs with block and treatment 
as factors to determine possible treatment effects on insect 
abundance and richness, followed by pairwise comparisons 
(Tukey-Kramer HSD). Data that did not meet ANOVA 
assumptions were log transformed before analyses. Kruskal­
Wallis nonparametric tests were performed on indepen­
dent variables that did not respond to transformation. To 
ascertain significant relationships between bees, flies, and 
measured habitat variables, I analyzed a correlation matrix 
(Spearman's rank correlations). 
Results indicate that solitary bees are the primary pol­
linators in this system, although flies may be important in 
cool, unsettled early spring conditions, when they greatly 
outnumbered bees during surveys (May: 125 bees, 430 
flies; August: 372 bees, 384 flies). The bee fauna was 
dominated by ground-nesting bee species (Lasioglossum, 
Melissodes) , although Osmia, which are typically cavity 
nesters, were commonly observed in May. Among flower­
visiting flies, species of Bornbyliidae and Syrphidae were 
most abundant. 
Bee abundance and diversity were significantly greater in 
thinned and burned treatments than in controls for both 
sampling periods (Figure 1). Flower cover was significantly 
greater in the thin plus burn plots than in other treatments 
and controls for both sampling periods (May: p =0.040; 
August: p < 0.0001), and among the measured habitat 
28:2 

---
-
- - -
Table 1. Significant Spearman's rank correlations (p) 
of bee abundance and species richness with habitat 
variables following application of a Bonferroni correc­
tion (IX level 0.05/14 = 0.004) for treatment units (thin 
only, burn only, thin + burn, and control) in a pinyon­
juniper woodland, Arizona. Nonsignificant findings are 
not shown. 
Total bees 
Bee species 
Habitat variable 
p
p 
p
p 
May 
Flower cover (per m2) 
0.58 
< 0.0001 
0.54 < 0.0001 
Number offlowering 
0.51 
0.0002 
0.48 
0.0005
species 
August 
Flower cover (per m2) 
0.44 
0.0020 
% cover litter 
-0.41 
0.0034 
% canopy cover 
-0.44 
0.0016 
variables, was most strongly correlated with bee abundance 
and speciesrichness (Table I). The high flowercover in the 
thin plus burn treatments may be attributed to the more' 
open canopy found in these units, since canopy cover in 
the thin only and thin plus burn treatments was signifi­
cantly lower than in the control and burn only plots (p < 
0.000 I). Cover of soil and litter did not differ significantly 
among treatments, indicating that these nesting substrates 
are equally available in both treated and untreated areas. 
The amount of coarse woody debris and number of snags 
did differ significantly among treatments, but neither 
substrate was correlated with bee abundance or diversity. 
This result is unsurprising, since most of the solitary species 
observed are from ground-nesting genera. There were no 
significant treatment effectson flyabundance and richness, 
or correlations with measured habitat variables for either 
sampling period. 
For land managersseeking to reduce hazardous fuelloads 
and sirnlutaneously support insect pollinators, overstory 
thinning followed by prescribed burning may be the best 
option. A study of fuels-mitigation alternatives at this site 
(Huffman et al. 2009), suggests that thin only or thinning 
plus prescribed burning treatments are the most effectivein 
terms offire hazard reduction, and the highest abundance 
and diversity of beeswere observed in thin plus burn units 
during this study. In addition, "lethal patches," in which 
high-intensity firekillsall ofthe overstory trees in a limited 
area, may be both typical of pinyon-juniper woodlands 
(Huffman et al. 2008) and of benefit to pollinating insects. 
Treatment units at the study site were imbedded within a 
partially treated matrix (approximately two-thirds thinned 
and burned, one-third either burned or untreated) includ­
ing several unintentional "lethal patches." Soil substrates 
in these areas were powdery and probably unsuitable as a 
substrate for ground-nesting bees, but they did support 
large patches of floral resources (mostly composites) that 
attracted many insects, including honeybees and bumble­
bees that were rarely observed on plots. Further studies are 
- 
needed to determine long-term effects offuels-mitigation 
treatments on pollinator assemblages in pinyon-juniper 
woodlands. 
Acknowledgments 
I wish [0 thank Dave Huffman for his support of this project, field 
assistants Nora Sutherland and Windy Edgar for their hard work 
and enthusiasm, Rachel Biggs for her meticulous data entry, and 
Dave Egan for his editorial review. 
References 
Huffman, D.W, P.Z. Fule, J.E. Crouse and KM. Pearson. 2009. 
A comparison of fire hazard mitigation alternatives in pinyon­
juniper woodlands of Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management 
257:628-635. 
Huffman, D.W, P.Z. Fule, KM. Pearson and .I.E. Crouse. 2008. 
Fire history of pinyon-juniper woodlands at upper ecotones 
with ponderosa pine forests in Arizona and New Mexico. 
CanadianJournal ofForest Research 38:2097-2108. 
Kendall, D.M. 2003. Effects of fire on insect communities in 
pinon-juniper woodlands in Mesa Verde country. Pages 279­
285 in M.L. Floyd (ed), Ancient Pinon-Juniper Woodlands: A 
Natural History ofMesa Verde Country. Boulder: University 
Pressof Colorado. 
Kleintjes, P.K, B.P.Jacobs and S.M. Fettig. 2004. Initial response 
ofbutterllies to an overstory reduction and slash mulching 
treatment of a degraded pifton-juniper woodland. Restoration 
Ecology 12:231-238. 
Larson, B.M.H., P.G. Kevan and D.W Inouye. 2001. Flies and 
flowers: Taxonomic diversity of anthophiles and pollinators. 
Canadian Entomologist 133:439-465. 
Michener, CD. 2000. ]he Bees o/the World. Baltimore MD: The 
John Hopkins University Press. 
-------1~I-----­
Germination and Survival ofTree Seeds 
in a Tropical Montane Forest Restoration 
Study (Costa Rica) 
Gabriel C. Sady (Environmental Studies Dept, University 
0/California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, gabriel.sady@gmail 
.com), Karen D. Holl (Environmental Studies Dept, Uni­
versitya/California, Santa Cruz, kholl@ucsc.edu), Rebecca 
j. Cole (Environmental Studies Dept, University o/Califor­
nia, Santa Cruz, cole.rebeccaj@gmail.com) and Rakan A. 
Zahawi (Organization for TropicalStudies, Apdo 73-8257. 
San Vito de Coto Brus, Costa Rica, zak.zahawi@ots.ac.cr) 
P
lanting tree seedlings is a common strategy to facilitate 
tropical forest recovery, but it is resource intensive. 
Planting trees in small patches or "island" as a restoration 
strategy (Zahawi and Augspurger 2006, Cole et al., forth­
coming) imitates the nucleation process that occurs natu­
rally over longer time scales from random dispersal events. 
Moreover, the island planting strategy is less expensive 
June 2010 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION 28:2 
t~ 
121 
