 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
An Example of Forest Restoration in a Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest 
 
By Michael T. Stoddard 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The structure and composition of warm, dry mixed-
conifer forests (Romme et al. 2009) have undergone 
considerable changes due to historical land uses and the 
disruption of frequent fire patterns that prevailed prior 
to Euro-American settlement of the western U.S. 
Warm, dry mixed-conifer forests of the Southwest that 
were historically more open and dominated by ponder-
osa pine have increased in tree density and shifted com-
positionally toward more mesic, shade tolerant tree spe-
cies such as white fir and Douglas-fir (see Fulé et al. 
2009). Structural and compositional changes have led 
to greater susceptibility to stand-replacing crown fires. 
Effects of a changing climate, particularly increased 
temperatures and an extended fire season in the next 
several decades may produce more frequent and intense 
fires and further complicate fire management.  
 
In an effort to restore forest structure and function, land 
managers have focused on tree thinning and prescribed 
fire to create stands that are more productive and poten-
tially more resilient to drought and stand-replacing 
crown fire. In this study, we set out to test alternative 
approaches that included evidence-based thinning, 
based on site-specific historical stand structure, and 
prescribed fire versus prescribed fire-only treatments. 
In 2003, we established a randomized, replicated exper-
iment in a warm, dry mixed-conifer forest on the San 
Juan National Forest in southwest Colorado. The objec-
tives of our study were to 1) compare the effects of 
treatments (Thin and Burn, Burn only, and untreated 
Control) on forest composition and structure; and 2) 
compare post-treatment stand structure with site-
specific reconstructed reference conditions, as reported 
in Fulé et al. (2009).  
      Fact Sheet: An Example of Forest Restoration in a Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest 
       May 2013     
 
Untreated Control: fire excluded for more than a century 
Thin and Burn Treatment: one year after treatment 
Burn Only Treatment: one year after treatment 

 
 
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
 
 
More open stands dominated by fire-resistant tree species, such as ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, not only rep-
resent historical conditions but are also more likely to be resilient to future disturbance and effects of climate 
change. 
 
 
Managers seeking to restore forest structure and function, and increase productivity and resilience, should con-
sider evidence-based thinning and prescribed fire prescriptions. 
 
REFERENCES 
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Korb, and R. Wu. 2009. Changes in forest structure of a mixed conifer forest, southwestern  
 
Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 258:1200-1210.  http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/
erilibra/index/assoc/HASH0125/c4755931.dir/doc.pdf 
 
Romme, W.H., M.L. Floyd, and D. Hanna. 2009. Historical range of variability and current landscape condition 
analysis: South central highlands section Southwestern Colorado and Northwestern New Mexico. Colo-
rado Forest Restoration Institute, Ft. Collins, Co, USA.  
 
   
 
Contact 
 
Dr. Julie Korb, korb_j@fortlewis.edu 
Dr. Peter Fulé, pete.fule@nau.edu 
Michael Stoddard, mike.stoddard@nau.edu 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Korb, J.E., P.Z. Fule, and M.T. Stoddard. 2012. Forest restoration in a surface fire-dependent ecosystem: An 
example from a mixed conifer forest, southwestern Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 
269: 10-18. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/HASH0144.dir/doc.pdf 
 
 
Figure 1. Trees per acre (TPA) by species for 1870 (reconstructed 
reference condition), pre-treatment (2003), and post-treatment 
(2009).  
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
 
Tree density and basal area were reduced 82% and 49% 
in Thin and Burn treatments compared to 37% and 16%, 
respectively, in Burn treatments. Younger and small 
white fir, Douglas-fir, and aspen were reduced the most 
(Figure 1). 
 
 
Thin and Burn treatment shifted forest structure and 
composition closer toward historic reference conditions 
compared to Burn only treatment. 
 
 
Surface fuels were reduced following both Thin and 
Burn and Burn only treatments as compared with the 
untreated Control group. 
 
 
Aspen regeneration (seedlings and suckers < 3.5 feet in 
height) increased following Thin and Burn treatment, 
whereas white fir and Douglas-fir regeneration de-
creased.  
