 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Do Fuel Treatments Reduce Fire Severity in Ponderosa Pine Forests?  
Tree Mortality Patterns One Year after the Wallow Fire 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent decades, more frequent, larger and more severe wildfires have 
erupted in dry forest types (e.g., ponderosa pine) across the western Unit-
ed States (Westerling et al. 2006). Given predictions for a warmer and 
drier climate across the interior West, such fires are likely to continue.  
 
In an effort to mitigate large, severe wildfires, fuel treatments are 
under way across the West. The priority sites for these fuel treatments are 
in the wildland urban interface (WUI), where relatively small treatment 
units are concentrated around towns and dispersed settlements (Ager et 
al. 2010). There is a growing body of anecdotal and empirical evidence 
that suggests WUI treatments are effective for reducing damage to com-
munities (Martinson and Omi 2013, Safford et al. 2009), but it remains 
unclear whether these treatments can mitigate today’s uncharacteristical-
ly large and severe wildfires. Computer modeling shows that by failing to 
invest in treatments beyond the WUI, high burn severities will persist at 
the greater landscape level (Waltz 2012).  
 
In this study, ERI researchers used a post-wildfire field measurement 
approach to study and describe the effectiveness of WUI hazardous fuels 
treatments in reducing fire behavior and conserving forest resiliency dur-
ing the Wallow Fire, a 538,000-acre uncharacteristically, high-severity 
wildfire that burned in Arizona in 2011. Our primary goals were to: 1) 
measure changes in burn severity as the wildfire transitioned from high-
severity untreated to treated areas, 2) compare ponderosa pine tree mor-
tality and basal area (BA) loss across paired treated and untreated areas, 
and 3) compare post-fire stand structure, tree regeneration, snag density, and coarse woody debris between treatments 
with respect to natural ranges of variability (NRV).  
 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
1. In two of three paired treatments, burn severity was reduced as the wildfire transitioned from untreated areas to 
treated areas (Figures 1 and 2). In all three cases, the wildfire killed significantly fewer trees in the treated areas 
than the paired untreated areas. In fact, treatment units showed no significant reduction in tree densities post-fire, 
although all treatment units had fire-killed trees. In both treated and untreated areas, the majority of trees killed 
were relatively small in size—less than 8 inches in diameter at breast height (DBH).  
2. The post-fire live tree density and BA remained substantially higher in all untreated units than treated units. Two 
of the three treated units remained in NRV in terms of tree density (Figure 3) and basal area. The wildfire also 
moved one untreated area toward NRV conditions, whereas tree densities were as much as twice the upper density 
ranges found historically in the other two untreated areas. We observed little tree regeneration in either treated or 
untreated units. Post-fire coarse woody debris was generally higher in untreated units (0.7–5.6 ton ac-1) than 
treated units (0.4–1.8 ton ac-1). Standing snag density (≥12 in. DBH) was slightly higher in two of the three treat-
ed units than in the untreated units, although not significantly different. 
       Fact Sheet: Do Fuel Treatments Reduce Fire Severity in Ponderosa Pine Forests? Tree Mortality Patterns  
 
One Year  after the Wallow Fire  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Paired treated (left) and untreated (right) units. 
December 2013 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS 
 This study showed changes in fire effects within treated areas as well as less overall tree mortality in treated units. 
In two cases, reduced tree mortality effects were seen within 300 feet into a treated stand.  
 Higher variability in burn severity occurred among sites than between paired treated and untreated areas of similar 
topography and fire progression times.  
 Untreated forests lost about100 trees per acre in the Wallow Fire, but are still twice as dense as pre-fire treatment 
areas. This suggests these stands may still be vulnerable to the extreme fire behavior seen in today’s uncharacteris-
tically large and severe “mega-fire” event.  
 
RESEARCH CHALLENGES AND NEEDS 
 Understanding variability in tree mortality among treated units 
was constrained by limited information on pre-fire treatment 
prescriptions and suppression tactics used within or adjacent to 
forest treatments during the Wallow Fire. 
 Future questions include how differing suppression activities 
within treated areas contribute to mortality in treated areas, and 
the relationship of total treatment size and fire effects.  
 Future studies in post-fire landscapes are needed to look at 
stand resilience to future wildfire and, subsequently, any need 
for prioritization of future treatments within burned landscapes. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Ager, A.A., N.M. Vaillant, and M.A.Finney. 2010. A comparison of landscape fuel treatment strategies to mitigate wildland 
fire risk in the urban interface and preserve old forest structure. Forest Ecology and Management 259:1556-1570. 
Omi, P.N. and E.J. Martinson. 2013. Fuel treatments and fire severity: Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-103WWW. Ft. Collins, CO: 
USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.  
Safford, H.D., D.A. Schmidt, and C.H. Carlson. 2009. Effects of fuel treatments on fire severity in an area of wildland–urban 
interface, Angora Fire, Lake Tahoe Basin, California. Forest Ecology and Management 258:773-787. 
Waltz, A.E.M. 2013. Impacts of fire hazard assessment and fuel reduction priorities on meg-fires outcomes: A hypothetical 
test using the Wallow Fire in Arizona. Fact Sheet. Flagstaff: Northern Arizona University, Ecological Restoration 
Institute. 
Westerling, A.L., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam. 2006. Warming and earlier spring increase western US 
forest wildfire activity. Science 313:940-943.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
Contact 
Amy Waltz, Amy.Waltz@nau.edu 
Mike Stoddard, Mike.Stoddard@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
Figure 2. Percent total mortality in relation to distance (feet) to treatment edge. Bars represent ± 1 standard deviation (SD). 
Figure 3. Live and killed tree densities by treated and un-
treated paired units (Bars represent ± 1 SD; mortality % in 
parentheses). 
 
 
