Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Muñoz-Erickson, T. A., B. Aguilar-González, and T. D. Sisk. 2007. Linking ecosystem health indicators
and collaborative management: a systematic framework to evaluate ecological and social outcomes.
Ecology and Society 12(2): 6. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Synthesis
Linking Ecosystem Health Indicators and Collaborative Management: a
Systematic Framework to Evaluate Ecological and Social Outcomes
Tischa A. Muñoz-Erickson 1, Bernardo Aguilar-González 2, and Thomas D. Sisk 3
ABSTRACT. Collaborative management has gained popularity across the United States as a means of
addressing the sustainability of mixed-ownership landscapes and resolving persistent conflicts in public
lands management. At the same time, it has generated skepticism because its ecological and social outcomes
are seldom measured. Evaluating the success of collaborative efforts is difficult because frameworks to
assess on-the-ground outcomes are poorly developed or altogether lacking. Ecosystem health indicators
are valuable tools for evaluating site-specific outcomes of collaboration based on the effects of collaboration
on ecological and socioeconomic conditions. We present the holistic ecosystem health indicator, a promising
framework for evaluating the outcomes of collaborative processes, which uses ecological, social, and
interactive indicators to monitor conditions through time. Finally, we draw upon our experience working
with the Diablo Trust, a community-based collaborative group in northern Arizona, USA, to illustrate the
development of an indicator selection model generated through a stakeholder-driven process.
Key Words: adaptive management; collaborative management; holistic ecosystem health indicator;
northern Arizona rangeland; outcome evaluation; participatory approach; socio-ecological systems;
sustainability
INTRODUCTION
Around the world, citizens are coming together in
partnerships, watershed councils, and community-
based groups to participate in the management of
public lands and natural resources. In the United
States, this trend has contributed to a growing
interest in collaboration as a promising decision-
making approach for resolving conflicts over the
management of public lands and natural resources
(Snow 2001). As collaboration gains popularity, it
is often greeted with skepticism because its benefits
for the environment and human communities
remain hypothetical. This has engendered a call for
more formal evaluation of the effectiveness of
collaborative processes in decision making for land
management (Moote et al. 2000).
Here we show that the growing literature on
evaluating the effectiveness of collaboration is
focused primarily on the internal dynamics of the
process itself, whereas efforts to measure specific
outcomes related to land and resource management
actions are few. Although recent work on process-
oriented evaluation has achieved great strides in
establishing the value of collaborative management,
we argue that the understanding of the effectiveness
of collaboration would be enhanced by the use of
assessment approaches that address both the
processes and outcomes of this management
approach. To address this challenge, we explore the
use of ecosystem health indicators to evaluate the
outcomes of collaborative processes. Specifically,
we focus on an approach that combines quantitative
and qualitative information regarding ecological
and socioeconomic factors that influence the
success or failure of collaborative approaches. We
illustrate the potential synergy between ecosystem
health and the collaborative process by developing
an indicator selection model that incorporates
stakeholder input. In the future, we will explore both
ongoing efforts to implement this collaboratively
developed monitoring program and the program’s
influence on decision making.
We have organized this paper into four sections. The
first section provides the theoretical background
underlying collaborative management to explain the
1Arizona State University, 
2Prescott College, 
3Northern Arizona University

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
complex nature of these social-ecological systems.
In the second section, we review the literature that
addresses the evaluation of collaborative processes
and demonstrate that the measurement of ecological
and 
social 
outcomes 
is 
necessary 
for 
a
comprehensive evaluation of this management
approach. The third section explores our central
argument that ecosystem health indicators provide
a suitable framework with which to characterize the
complexity of the collaborative process and link it
to environmental and social outcomes. Specifically,
we present the holistic ecosystem health indicator
(Aguilar 1999) as an appropriate framework with
which to evaluate outcomes of collaborative land
management because it uses ecological, social, and
interactive indicators that can be used to monitor
conditions through time. Finally, because the
selection of indicators involves negotiation among
diverse stakeholder values and perspectives of the
system, we describe the indicator selection model
that we used to identify core indicators with
stakeholders of the Diablo Trust, a community-
based collaborative group developing sustainable
rangeland management approaches for more than
170,000 ha of mixed-ownership lands in northern
Arizona, USA.
COLLABORATIVE MANAGEMENT AS
SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
Collaborative management, or co-management, is
commonly defined as the process by which citizens
and managers “come together across disciplinary,
management, and ownership boundaries to
collectively determine management goals, develop
management plans, implement those plans, and
monitor and adjust [them] as necessary” (Cortner
and Moote 1999:91). Increasingly, community-
based groups, partnerships, watershed councils, and
other forms of stakeholder organizations are using
collaborative decision making because it provides
an organizational structure that facilitates dialog and
equalizes the power distribution among a broad
range of stakeholders (Gray 1989, Cortner and
Moote 1999, Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000).
Collaborative processes for natural resource
management are based on a number of theoretical
models. The most influential to this study are
participatory and discursive democracy (Dryzek
1990), 
organizational 
theory 
(Gray 
1989),
collaborative learning (Daniels and Walker 1996),
and adaptive governance (Brunner et al. 2005).
More recently, collaborative management systems
have been viewed as social-ecological units that
behave as complex adaptive systems. As such, their
organizational structure and function continuously
change to link the ecological and social systems that
underlie ecosystem management (Olsson et al.
2004, Carlsson and Berkes 2005). Complex
adaptive systems are characterized as self-
organizing, with the ability to acquire information
about the environment and adapt to changing and
uncertain conditions (Gell-Mann 1994).
Because of this adaptive capacity, some authors
argue that collaborative forms of management are
suitable for maintaining and increasing ecosystem
resilience, a key component of sustainability
(Walker et al. 2002, Olsson et al. 2004, Armitage
2005). Resilience is defined as the ability of a system
to absorb and recover from disturbance (Holling
1978). The concept of resilience acknowledges that
the inherent variability in social-ecological systems
can result in more than one possible equilibrium
state. However, when an ecosystem moves from one
stable state to another as a result of some
disturbance, it may lose resilience, which in turn can
result in a decrease in important ecosystem services
produced in the desired state (Elmqvist et al. 2003).
Managing for ecosystem resilience recognizes that
managers should focus on maintaining those
elements associated with renewal and reorganization
through experimentation and mutual learning,
rather than relying solely on forecasting methods
(Berkes and Folke 1998, Walker et al. 2002).
To achieve success in managing ecosystem
resilience, stakeholders participating in collaborative
management must commit themselves to adaptive
strategies, especially monitoring and responding to
environmental feedback. At the core of adaptive
management, monitoring is what allows institutions
to learn as individuals do (Berkes et al. 2003).
Groups and management institutions that engage in
the collection and sharing of various sources of
information among stakeholders through monitoring
are able to anticipate systemic change and build
adaptive capacity (Gunderson 2003, Olsson et al.
2004). Monitoring also helps stakeholders to
negotiate complicated resource issues by providing
information that helps them arrive at collective
decisions. However, feedback loops linking
monitoring information to the revision of
management goals are critical in an adaptive
management framework (Moir and Block 2001).
Bliss et al. (2001) suggest that multiparty

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
monitoring approaches, in which both stakeholders
and experts collect and interpret ecological and
social data, are more likely to have multiple
feedbacks linking information to decision making
than efforts carried out by scientists alone.
However, despite a strong theoretical basis and
broad participation in collaborative management
efforts, critics often describe them as “unproven
experiments” (Kenney 2000). Environmental
groups, in particular, have questioned the
effectiveness of collaboration, given its susceptibility
to co-option by economic interests (Kenney 1999)
and the imbalance of power among stakeholders
(McCloskey 1996). The debates over the practical
implications of these concepts have led to
widespread interest in evaluating the effectiveness
of collaborative processes (Kenney 2000, Moote et
al. 2000).
METHODS TO EVALUATE
COLLABORATIVE MANAGEMENT
OUTCOMES
To determine the potential and limitations of
collaborative management, both proponents and
critics of the approach require an unambiguous
means to evaluate its effectiveness (Conley and
Moote 2003). However, identifying the appropriate
criteria, methods, and measurable variables for
assessing success is a difficult task. Most evaluation
research has focused on examining case studies that
describe 
lessons 
and 
keys 
to 
successful
collaborative processes (Kenney 1999, Sabatier et
al. 2005). The assessment of participant perceptions
is the most common sampling method used in this
type of evaluation (Conley and Moote 2003).
Studies regularly cited in the literature (i.e.,
Williams and Ellefson 1996, Cestero 1999,
Wondolleck and Yaffee 2000) have used similar
definitions for collaboration and have developed
rigorous criteria for success based on internal
processes and organizational dynamics, including
an effective consensus process, trust building, open
communication and information sharing, increased
learning, and the development of mutually
agreeable management plans.
A few studies have attempted to evaluate the
ecological and social impacts of collaborative
efforts. Most notably, Sabatier et al. (2005) recently
compiled the most comprehensive empirical
assessment of watershed collaborations that uses
qualitative and quantitative data to understand the
nature and consequences of collaboration. This
effort provided a second generation of scholarship
by 
going 
beyond 
descriptive 
analyses 
of
collaborative management to look at substantive
outcomes as indicators of effectiveness. However,
the evaluation primarily relied on measuring
people’s perceptions about the implementation and
results, rather than on-the-ground outcomes. Direct
measurement of change was difficult because of the
lack of scientific monitoring data linking
partnership activities to changes in ecological and
socioeconomic conditions and because of the time
required to monitor and test changes on the ground
(Sabatier et al. 2005).
Given the challenges that measuring on-the-ground
impacts pose, process evaluation remains an
important methodological approach to determine
whether collaborative management is leading to the
desired results (Conley and Moote 2003). Carlsson
and Berkes (2005) argue that, because collaborative
management is a continuous problem-solving
process and not a fixed state, research should
continue to give greater emphasis to the function of
the process as a result. Therefore, as Fernández-
Giménez et al. (2006) propose, the evaluation of the
collaborative group’s capacity to conduct and assess
its own learning process may serve as a surrogate
by which to measure environmental and social
outcomes. The assumption is that increased
adaptive 
capacity 
will 
lead 
to 
improved
management and ultimately, improved environmental
and socioeconomic conditions. However, given that
collaborative efforts happen in social-ecological
systems that are affected by factors beyond
management, this assumption requires further
empirical exploration.
Our intention here is not to undermine the
importance of evaluating the social processes of
collaboration, but rather to enhance it by linking it
to changes in ecological and social conditions. Our
motivation is also practical in that we recognize that
an effective and lasting process also depends on the
ability of stakeholders to evaluate the impacts of
their management decisions through site-specific
monitoring. Although we acknowledge the
difficulty in measuring collaborative management
outcomes, we think that there are tools available to
initiate this process. In this process, interdisciplinary
indicators are suitable tools that allow for the
biophysical and social outcomes of the collaborative
process to be measured in tandem.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
OUTCOME EVALUATION THROUGH
ECOSYSTEM HEALTH INDICATORS
Ecosystem health indicators provide a powerful
framework 
with 
which 
to 
address 
these
methodological challenges in evaluating collaborative
management outcomes. Ecosystem health is a
transdisciplinary concept that bridges the natural,
social, and health sciences. It can incorporate the
human values and perceptions that are inseparable
parts of management. A healthy ecosystem is
defined as a social-ecological unit that is stable and
sustainable, maintaining its characteristic composition,
organization, and function over time while
remaining economically viable and sustaining
human communities (Costanza 1992, Rapport
1998). The breadth of this definition indicates that
ecosystem health is an integrative notion that
acknowledges societal values in defining future
desired conditions while relying on scientific
criteria (Steedman 1994).
Because the concept of ecosystem health can
involve inherent value judgments about what
actions are socially desirable, its definition and use
require public involvement (Costanza et al. 1998a,
Lackey 2001). As an integrative notion, ecosystem
health is not meant to rely solely on its scientific
basis, in the hypothetico-deductive sense, nor does
it pretend to give predictive descriptions of causal
mechanisms of the complex behavior of social-
ecological systems; instead, it provides for case-by-
case evaluations in real-world settings with
stakeholder input (Wilcox 2001). Viewed in this
light, ecosystem health furnishes a theoretical
framework and practical methods for monitoring
and assessing the condition and quality of
ecosystems (Bertollo 1998). Because most people
have an intuitive idea of what constitutes health, the
term facilitates understanding among citizens,
managers, and scientists when formulating
management decisions (Rapport 1998).
We recognize that the concept of ecosystem health
indicators, and indicators in general for that matter,
is not without its critiques (see, for example, Lackey
2001). Nonetheless, managers and decision makers
find indicators useful in detecting stressors and
changes in ecosystem and social conditions by
consolidating large amounts of information
whenever the primary information of an object is
too extensive or complex to be handled without
aggregations (Müller et al. 2000). Indicators are
widely used to assess ecosystem health in both
protected and managed ecosystems and for
environmental planning purposes, as demonstrated
by the extensive compilation of case studies by
Rapport et al. (2003). Ecosystem health indicators
are particularly applicable for monitoring managed
ecosystems such as collaboratively governed
ecosystems in which the environment is highly
influenced by human activity and thus conditions
need to be assessed with respect to both ecological
integrity and societal goals (Rapport et al. 1998).
Beyond attempting to perform a reductionistic
exercise, the use of indicators allows the comparison
of different stages of the collaborative conservation
process and diverse collaborative organizations.
Practical approaches to assessing ecosystem health
involve the identification of ecological and social
goals and the development of important indicators
that measure progress toward these end points
(Costanza 1992). Assessments of ecosystem health
should encompass indicators that reflect properties
of resilience, organization, and vigor (Rapport et al.
1998). Vigor is measured in terms of the metabolism
or primary productivity of the existing organic base;
organization is assessed by examining the diversity
and number of interactions between system
components. These attributes are derived from
ecological perspectives, but they have analogous
measures in other fields and may be applied to the
biophysical, socioeconomic, and human health
dimensions of the ecosystem (Costanza et al.
1998b).
The holistic ecosystem health indicator as an
outcome evaluation framework
We propose that the integrative holistic ecosystem
health indicator (HEHI) is a powerful tool for
measuring ecosystem health (Aguilar 1999). We
think that it is particularly useful for assessing the
performance of collaborative processes. Developed
in 1999 by the Center for Sustainable Development
Studies to assess and evaluate ecosystem health in
managed ecosystems in Costa Rica, the HEHI is an
interdisciplinary methodology based on the
ecosystem health criteria proposed by Costanza et
al. (1998b) and Rapport (1998).
The HEHI provides an organizational framework
with which to integrate diverse ecosystem health
indicators, 
including 
ecological 
and 
social
variables. It follows a hierarchical structure based
on three main branches or dimensions of

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
sustainability: ecological, social, and interactive
(Fig. 1). The ecological branch focuses on measures
of the condition and trends of the ecosystem under
study. Socioeconomic measures of the human
communities dependent on the ecosystem or
affected by management decisions are organized
within the social branch. The interactive branch
considers measures related to land use and
management decisions that define the interactions
between the human communities and the
ecosystem. Each branch is subdivided into
appropriate categories reflecting attributes of the
management objectives for the particular system
under study. Indicators that reflect the conditions
and trends of important system variables are
selected and assigned a benchmark or threshold
value based on the current understanding of system
dynamics and the specific management objectives.
To prioritize the importance of each category and
indicator, weighting values are assigned to each in
a manner that reflects its relative importance to the
health of the system and to management goals
(Table 1). In this case, we structure the HEHI to
include a total of 1000 points for each branch. Other
applications might require a different point scale.
Weights are used to adjust indicator importance to
account for differences in data availability, quality,
and sampling considerations. Individual indicators
are then assigned a portion of the total points
available in each category (Fig. 1). The information
content increases as one moves upward in this
hierarchical structure from primary data collection
to the evaluation of each indicator to categories and
branches by aggregation (Fig. 1). Once data have
been collected for all indicators, they are compared
to the benchmark for each indicator and assigned
the points according to how well the data meet the
desired target. If the value of the data measured for
a particular indicator falls within the target or
benchmark range, all possible points are assigned
for that indicator; if the value falls below the
benchmark range, it receives an appropriate fraction
of the points. Once the scores have been assigned
to each indicator, the points for each of the indicators
are summed to obtain a total for the category, and
these are totaled for the three HEHI branches. Scores
can be viewed separately for all indicators,
categories, and branches, or as a combined, final
HEHI score. The final HEHI score provides an
integrated assessment of the ecological and social
outcomes of management, as well as the
management processes affecting the outcomes,
which are key elements to evaluating collaborative
management.
The selection of the appropriate number and type of
indicators and their benchmarks, as well as the
appropriate time frame for tracking management
progress, is critical to the success of the HEHI
approach (Muñoz-Erickson et al. 2004). Too often,
system complexity and uncertainty leads managers
to use a uniform set of indicators across broad
regions, even though the context of these variables
may vary substantially (Noon 2003). Our past
experience with the HEHI approach (Aguilar 1999)
led to similar limitations. To address these concerns
and assure that measures are identified based on the
context-specific conditions and success criteria of
the socio-ecological system under study, we used a
participatory approach to assist in the process of
developing appropriate indicators for the HEHI
framework for the case study documented here. In
the next section, we describe the methodological
steps involved in the framework used by the Diablo
Trust, a rangeland collaborative management group
based in Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
PROCESS MODEL TO DEVELOP THE
HOLISTIC ECOSYSTEM HEALTH
INDICATOR FOR COLLABORATIVE
MANAGEMENT: PRELIMINARY RESULTS
OF THE DIABLO TRUST CASE STUDY
Background
In 1993, a group of ranchers, representatives of
federal and state management agencies, research
scientists, and involved citizens, all of whom were
concerned 
about 
ongoing 
land-management
conflicts affecting 170,000 ha of mixed private and
public lands southeast of Flagstaff, Arizona, USA,
came together to form the Diablo Trust, a non-profit
land-management organization. Although the entire
area falls within the boundaries of two large ranches,
legal management responsibilities fall to a number
of public and private entities whose jurisdictions are
arrayed in a complex, overlapping patchwork
pattern across the landscape. The Diablo Trust
indirectly influences management decision making
by serving as the convener of multiparty
discussions, integrator of management perspectives,
and developer of management plans that reflect the
values of a large and diverse group of stakeholders.
Diablo Trust stakeholders have developed a
distinctive collaborative culture that has allowed the
group to overcome differences in interests over the
years and to agree on specific objectives and desired
future conditions that would satisfy the widely held
goals of sustainable use and conservation of public

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Fig. 1. Hierarchical structure of the holistic ecosystem health indicator (HEHI). Adapted from Aguilar
(1999).
resources. Over the initial two years of
collaboration, the group developed a three-part
holistic goal composed of objectives for quality of
life, goals for production, and goals for a future
landscape and resource base (Table 2; Diablo Trust
1999). Whereas the specific management actions
associated with each goal are routinely negotiated
among the stakeholders, they all, including the
federal and state agencies, agreed that the three-part
holistic goal should be used to define their measures
of progress (Muñoz-Erickson 2004). Therefore, this
statement of goals provided the essential foundation
from which we developed an assessment tool based
on the holistic ecosystem health indicator (HEHI).
After the failure of earlier attempts to develop a
monitoring plan using a method upon which all
stakeholders could agree, we began working with
the group to develop the HEHI as a monitoring
framework, and most importantly, to design a
process by which to select indicators collaboratively.
This project began in 2001 and built upon a 5-yr
collaborative research relationship with the group,
which allowed us to design a process for indicator
selection that incorporated multiple sources of
knowledge and values while maintaining the
researchers’ reflective independence. It is in this
spirit that we present the steps that we developed to
generate 
ecological, 
social, 
and 
interactive
indicators for the Diablo Trust.
Selection of core indicators for the Diablo Trust
We relied on three seminal papers on indicator
selection for guidance in developing an approach
that was both rigorous in incorporating multiple
sources 
of 
knowledge 
and 
practical 
for

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Table 1. Rationale for the holistic ecosystem health indicator weighted point system. Source: Aguilar (1999).
Weight
Category or indicator characteristics
High
Measures key resources and interactions, i.e., structure and function, in the social-ecological system and
reflects the management objectives of the area. Indicators that reflect a greater correlation between the
measurement and the actual health of the system receive a higher score.
Intermediate
Measures critical factors in the function and persistence of the system, but they are not central goals of the
management strategy of the area
Low
Interactions between the indicator and ecosystem health are still unclear or the methods are not well
developed. As the individual tests improve and information on their relevance to ecosystem health becomes
clearer, these can be allocated a greater weight.
implementation in a collaborative management
context. Noon (2003) proposed a series of steps to
select indicators that are relevant to the management
unit under consideration. Although these guidelines
use habitat-based variables as indicators of
conditions for sensitive species, they are based on
ecological integrity and were easily adapted to
broader management goals. We found the
methodology described by Salafsky and Margolis
(2001) useful for integrating community-level
economic and social concerns with ecological
indicators. Finally, we used the criteria to weight
indicator points identified by Tegler et al. (2001) to
select appropriate monitoring variables.
This integrated quantitative and qualitative
methodology 
combines 
the 
ecological 
and
socioeconomic factors involved in the management
of Diablo Trust lands. It also defines an approach
to identify the key variables for monitoring the site-
specific ecological, social, and interactive processes
that define the health of any managed ecosystem.
In defining ecosystem health indicators for this
system, we incorporated the best available science
while drawing on the collaborative process itself to
incorporate stakeholder views and knowledge.
Therefore, this approach to indicator selection
reflects the multiple values held by stakeholders and
integrates both normative and factual information
in the evaluation process. The steps that we followed
in developing the ecosystem health indicators (Fig.
2) are described below.
Step 1: Setting the social-ecological context
The first step was to describe the current ecological
and social conditions of the study area and define
the management objectives of the collaborative
group. To this end, we referred to the Diablo Trust’s
official vision and goal statements to clarify
numerous management objectives that would guide
actions and influence the health of the inclusive
social-ecological system. We also reviewed the
scientific literature to identify characteristics that
define the health of the ecosystem and the
community, especially if disagreements existed
regarding the desired conditions defined by the
Diablo Trust. The observations and input of Diablo
Trust members were also essential at this
preliminary stage of understanding the social-
ecological 
context. 
The 
synthesis 
of 
this
information became the basis for developing a
definition of ecosystem health that is specific to the
Diablo Trust land base.
Step 2: Characterizing complexity: a conceptual
model based on local site conditions
We next developed a conceptual model to describe
the explicit relationships between key variables of
the socio-ecological system. A conceptual model
specifies the relationship between the natural and
human driving forces or stressors affecting
ecosystem 
components, 
the 
structure 
and
composition of the intertwined ecological and social

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Table 2. Diablo Trust three-part holistic goal. Source: Diablo Trust (1999).
 
Goal or value
Specific objective
1. Quality of life
A. To have understanding, support, and acceptance that the rancher is the foundation for the
sustainable long-term health of the Diablo Trust lands and open spaces
B. To lead well-balanced lives with individual freedom to practice personal beliefs,
religions, and life-styles
C. To enjoy both immediate and extended family, harmony, and pride
D. To achieve life-long personal satisfaction, self-worth, and sense of well-being
E. To be constructive and respected members of our communities
F. To contribute economically, educationally, politically, socially, and spiritually to
community well-being
G. To live in safe, aesthetic, and ecologically sound settings
H. To foster rural and small-town lifestyles and community cohesion
I. To pass optimum options on to our children and future generations
2. Forms of production
A. To earn a reasonable return from management and equity from livestock, wildlife, wood
products, recreation, education, and other sources not in conflict with our values
B. To produce high-quality food from the management of land and water
C. To implement land and resource projects initiated by nonranchers in cooperation with the
Diablo Trust and the community
3. Future landscape and
resource base
Future human resource base:
 A. People who are open, accessible, and willing to listen and learn from
 others, as well as share what they are doing and learning
 B. People who are friendly and committed to the work that they are doing
 C. People who are honest, trustworthy, and consistent
 D. People who strive to communicate well and to be realistic in their
 commitments to each other, and who do not promise what they cannot
 deliver
Future land resource base:
 E. Viable and diverse faunal and floral communities throughout all zones of
 the area
 F. Some areas within each of the vegetative zones that appear not to be
 dominated by humans
 G. Forested areas with a mosaic of canopy closures and forest structures
 H. Water cycles, mineral cycles, energy cycles, and biological succession that
 are fully functional

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Fig. 2. Steps for developing the holistic ecosystem health indicator (HEHI) for a collaborative
management scenario.
systems, and the management objectives and target
conditions for the study area (Salafsky and Margolis
2001, Noon 2003). Conceptual models are also used
to identify: the ecosystem services that are most
important to the stakeholders; the components of
the system for which there is adequate information,
as well as areas of uncertainty; and the variables that
are essential in maintaining the resilience of the
system (Walker et al. 2002). The model was
intended to depict how the Diablo Trust system
functions and provide clues as to the outcomes or
target conditions that management actions are trying
to achieve. Our model for the 170,000-ha Diablo
Trust land base specifies natural and human-
induced drivers and suggests how management
objectives should influence the selection of
ecosystem health indicators (Fig. 3). We consulted
Diablo Trust stakeholders to provide practical
context and validate how well the model represented
their vision of the system. Although this model does
not formally depict causal relationships, which is a
daunting task given the system’s inherent

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
complexity, we think that it captures the influential
variables affecting the management unit as a whole.
Step 3: Stakeholder input
Local knowledge is invaluable in efforts to
characterize the management context and identify
appropriate desired future conditions for integrated
ecological and social systems (Fischer 2000, Olsson
et al. 2004). We used a variety of social research
methods, including focus groups, survey questionnaires,
and interviews, to gather local knowledge about
natural resources and local communities. In this
way, we were able to identify the ecological, social,
and interactive variables that were most relevant to
Diablo Trust lands and objectives. In addition, we
assessed the well-being of the community, sources
of conflict and uncertainty, and information gaps.
For the Diablo Trust case study, we conducted
interviews with key participants in the collaborative
organization, 
including 
ranchers, 
scientists,
environmentalists, community members, and
federal, state, and local government agencies. These
interviews inquired about the effectiveness of the
collaborative process and the factors that
stakeholders believed facilitated or limited success.
We also asked respondents to prioritize a
preliminary list of ecological, socioeconomic, and
management or institutional factors, identified in
the literature, that were believed to influence
outcomes. Using information gained from these
efforts, we revised the conceptual model and
proposed a candidate set of indicators with which
to monitor the effectiveness of collaborative
management based on stakeholder input.
Step 4: Assigning priorities to core indicators
Once the key aspects of the system and the candidate
indicators had been identified, we narrowed the list
to a smaller number of core indicators. We used a
selection matrix to aid in assigning priorities to
indicators based on the relevance of the indicator to
the ecosystem health criteria and management
objectives, along with other practical criteria such
as the availability and quality of baseline data,
sensitivity at multiple scales, clarity and relevance
to stakeholders, and cost-effectiveness (Table 3).
The value of the indicators as components of an
overarching evaluation tool depends on the ability
of the collaborative group to monitor them through
time; thus, they should be as practical as possible
without compromising the information requirements.
We consulted with stakeholders and outside experts
to help identify appropriate sampling protocols for
the indicators and to evaluate their cost-
effectiveness.
Step 5: Selection of a final list of indicators and
score ranking
A final list of indicators for the Diablo Trust was
completed and incorporated into the HEHI
framework. The indicators’ relative weights
represent a negotiated agreement with stakeholders
based on multiple scientific, practical, and social
criteria discussed in the collaborative process. As
part of this process, each indicator was re-evaluated
using both the selection matrix (Table 3) and the
abovementioned guidelines by Aguilar (1999;
Table 1). This process resulted in the selection of
19 indicators for the ecological branch (Table 4), 18
indicators for the social branch (Table 5), and 14
indicators for the interactive branch (Table 6).
The ecological branch focuses on the biophysical
parameters 
over 
which 
the 
Diablo 
Trust
collaborative has the most influence through
management; thus, they are outcome indicators
(Table 4). The indicators are grouped into five
categories, with vegetation and watershed health
receiving the highest point totals because they are
directly linked to the management objectives of the
collaborative and management agencies. Soil
quality and primary productivity follow in the
middle category because they are also directly
related to management and are critical to ecosystem
health, but they are costly parameters to collect in
the field. Finally, a wildlife category was included
because wildlife population sizes and habitat quality
play an important role in determining management
actions on public lands.
The social branch includes indicators relating to the
internal process of the collaborative, i.e., process
indicators, and outcome indicators for those social
aspects that the Diablo Trust directly influences
through management (Table 5). This branch also
includes measurements relating to the context of the
larger social system that influences stakeholder
decisions and the goals of the collaborative
organization, as well as variables that might also
affect environmental conditions but are out of the
control of the Diablo Trust. The indicators are
grouped into five categories. Collaborative social
outcomes received high point totals because of the
importance of evaluating the functional aspects of
the collaborative organization. Economic stability

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Fig. 3. The conceptual model developed for the Diablo Trust management unit (see Muñoz-Erickson
2004).
and community strength are direct measures of the
adaptive capacity of local communities and received
intermediate weights. Finally, demographics and
income, which are not direct measures of social
outcomes, provide a picture of the socioeconomic
context of the community.
The interactive branch includes indicators that
measure the direct interaction of management and
the environment through land uses, regulations, and
environmental awareness (Table 6). This branch
also includes context and process indicators that
further establish the social-ecological context of
these interactions. The indicators are grouped into
four categories, with land-use practices, which
includes indicators measuring the direct interaction
between humans and nature receiving the highest
point totals. Awareness and public attitudes and
collaborative-management outcomes measure the
indirect use of resources through stakeholders’
perceptions. As the final category, implementation
of agency management actions provides a context
of the effectiveness of the current institutional
framework in which the collaborative organization
functions.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Table 3. Evaluation criteria to prioritize and weight the final list of indicators. Adapted from Tegler et al.
(2001).
Criterion category
Specific evaluation criterion
Data availability
1. Information can be provided by experts or stakeholders in
office
2. Number of years of available data
1. Methods well documented
2. Specialized knowledge not required
Primary data collection methods for stakeholders
3. Specialized equipment not required for sampling
Data quality
1. Detection of trends or thresholds
2. Baseline conditions established
3. Repeatable
4. Accurate
Interpretation for stakeholders
1. Clarity of results
2. Information is easily communicated and presented
Human and financial costs
1. Cost to acquire available data, for secondary data only
2. Data collection methods, i.e., time investment, for primary
data only
3. Data collection costs, for primary data only
4. Data analysis, for both primary and secondary data
More detail on the original structure of the HEHI
(Aguilar 1999) and the selected indicators can be
found in Muñoz-Erickson et al. (2004, 2006).
However, we caution that the specifics of indicator
selection are place based, and the results presented
here should not be applied uncritically to other
regions (Noon 2003). Efforts are now underway to
measure each indicator and examine the outcomes
of the Diablo Trust collaborative based on the
performance of the indicators of the HEHI. The
steps outlined in this section are not meant to be
conclusive; rather, they are likely the first stage in
an iterative process. As learning and communication
increases among stakeholders in the implementation
stage of this project, and as stakeholders pick new
meanings and find new values within their social-
ecological system, the content of the HEHI may
change to better reflect the system’s feedback. After
several iterations of evaluating the HEHI,
stakeholders may find that some of the indicators
are no longer relevant or that new indicators are
necessary to better reflect changing ecological and
social conditions. Similarly, indicators may be re-
evaluated based on changes in agency policy or if
the 
Diablo 
Trust 
modifies 
its 
long-term
management goals. Therefore, the HEHI and the
steps to develop it are intended to be flexible enough
to accommodate changes in ecosystem conditions,
management context, and stakeholder values, as the
collaborative group learns and evolves. In this way,
the HEHI serves as a reflective tool to encourage
the adaptive capacity of collaborative groups,

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Table 4. Ecological branch indicators selected through the participatory approach to develop the holistic
ecosystem health indicator for the Diablo Trust collaborative organization. The maximum points allocated
are the estimated weighted points assigned to each category and nineteen indicators out of the total 1000
points. Each indicator may provide information related to the process, outcome, or context of the
collaborative organization. The relevance of the indicators to the management goals was classified according
to the Diablo Trust three-part holistic goal (Table 2).
Type of indicator
Category and indicator
Process
Outcome
Context
Maximum points
allocated
Relevance to management
Diablo Trust goal
Vegetation
250
 Perennial grasses
28
x
2B, 3E, 3H
 Perennial forbs
28
x
2B, 3E, 3H
 Annual grasses
28
x
2B, 3E, 3H
 Annual forbs
28
x
2B, 3E, 3H
 Trees
28
x
2B, 3E, 3G, 3H
 Shrubs
28
x
2B, 3E, 3G, 3H
 Native species richness
38
x
3E, 3H
 Riparian vegetation
44
x
3E, 3H
Watershed health
240
 Water quality
50
x
2B, 3H
 Soil surface stability
50
x
2B, 3H
 Ground cover
48
x
2B, 3G, 3H
 Tree canopy cover
48
x
2B, 3G, 3H
 Riparian vegetation
44
x
3E, 3H
Soil quality
180
 Organic matter
98
x
2B, 3H
 Compaction
82
x
3H
Primary productivity
180
 Tree canopy cover
83.2
x
3E, 3G, 3H
 Aboveground net
 primary productivity
96.8
x
2B, 3E, 3H
Wildlife
150
 Pronghorn population
75
x
3E
 Mule deer population
75
x
3E

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Table 5. Social branch indicators selected through the participatory approach to develop the holistic
ecosystem health indicator for the Diablo Trust collaborative organization. The maximum points allocated
are the estimated weighted points assigned to each category and eighteen indicators out of the total 1000
points. Each indicator may provide information related to the process, outcome, or context of the
collaborative organization. The relevance of the indicators to the management goals was classified according
to the Diablo Trust three-part holistic goal (Table 2).
Category and indicator
Maximum points
Type of indicator
Relevance to management
allocated
Process
Outcome
Context
Diablo Trust goal
Collaborative social outcomes
220
 Organizational capacity
44
x
3A, 3B, 3C, 3D
 Impact on ranches
44
x
1A, 1E, 1F, 1G, 1H, 1I, all of
2
 Representation and group process
40.6
x
3A, 3B, 3C, 3D
 Communication among participants
40.6
x
3A, 3B, 3C, 3D
 Decision-making process
40.6
x
3A, 3B, 3C, 3D
 Impact on resources
10.2
x
all of 2 and 3
Economic stability
200
 Local unemployment rate
67.7
x
1F, 1H
 Farm and agricultural services
 industry in the area
67.7
x
1F, 1H, 2A, 2B, 2C
 Economic status of ranches
64.6
x
all of 2
Community strength
200
 Access to services
66.6
x
1D, IF, 1G, 1H, 1I
 Level of local participation
66.7
x
1B, 1E, 1F, 1H,
 Community satisfaction
66.7
x
1B, 1D, IF, 1G, 1H, 1I
Demographics
190
 Population trends
65.1
x
1H, 3F
 Ratio of urban to rural areas
65.1
x
1F, 1G, 1H
 Education level
59.8
1D, 1F
Income
190
 Per capita income
67
x
1F, 1H, 2A, 2B
 Income inequality
67
x
1F, 1H, 2A, 2B
 Retirement income
56
x
1F

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Table 6. Interactive branch indicators selected through the participatory approach to develop the holistic
ecosystem health indicator for the Diablo Trust collaborative organization. The maximum points allocated
are the estimated weighted points assigned to each category and fourteen indicators out of the total 1000
points. Each indicator may provide information related to the process, outcome, or context of the
collaborative organization. The relevance of the indicators to the management goals was classified according
to the Diablo Trust three-part holistic goal (Table 2).
Category and indicator
Maximum points
Type of indicator
Relevance to management
allocated
Pro-
cess
Outc-
ome
Context
Diablo Trust goal
Land-use practices
305
 Forest thinning
68.7
x
all of 2, 3E, 3F, 3G, 3H
 Fencing improvement
63.9
x
2A, 3E
 Woodland treatments
63.9
x
all of 2, 3E, 3F, 3G, 3H
 Ungulate grazing
57.4
x
all of 2, 3E, 3H
 Recreation
51.1
x
1F, 1G, 2A, 2C, 3F
Awareness and public attitudes
253
 Awareness
63.25
x
1A, 1E, 1F
 Management effectiveness
63.25
x
1A, 1E, 1F, 2A, 2C
 Public attitudes towards land uses
63.25
x
1A, 2A, 2C
 Land uses
63.25
x
1A, 1B, 1F, 1H, 2A
Collaborative management outcomes
236
 Political support of collaborative goals
87.8
x
1A, all of 2 and 3
 Management effectiveness
81.1
x
1A, 1E, 1F, all of 2 and 3
 Impact of collaborative process
 on resources
67.1
x
2A, 2B, 3E, 3F, 3G, 3H
Implementation of agency management actions
206
 Resources available for implementation
105
x
3A, 3D
 Implementation effectiveness
101
x
3E, 3F, 3G, 3H

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
allowing them to incorporate new information and
adjust to changing levels of uncertainty.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed the use of ecosystem
health indicators as tools for evaluating the
ecological and social outcomes of collaborative
management. Using the case study of the Diablo
Trust, the holistic ecosystem health indicator
(HEHI) was identified as a promising method to
measure 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
collaborative
management because it allows for the evaluation of
outcomes based on an integration of ecological and
social criteria. The interactive branch of the HEHI
is particularly useful for collaborative management
because it can incorporate stakeholder perceptions,
awareness, and involvement in management
decisions, permitting the evaluation of the process
of collaboration, as well as its outcomes.
This case study from northern Arizona presents a
series of steps for the selection of appropriate
variables to serve as indicators within the HEHI.
These steps are part of the participatory process
itself, incorporating stakeholder knowledge and
organizing it in a form that facilitates integration
with expert information, when appropriate. From
our experience in this process, we conclude that the
indicators selected reflect what the stakeholders
value and how they view their social-ecological
system. Thus, as Norton (2005) argues, the process
of choosing indicators proved to be a way to
elucidate community values, which are at the core
of any definition of sustainability. The primary
result of these efforts was an HEHI-based
monitoring program for the Diablo Trust that will
guide the collaborative group’s decisions as they
pursue an informed, adaptive approach to
management. The Diablo Trust is currently
implementing and monitoring indicators across its
170,000-ha landscape; we expect that over the next
2 yr the group will be negotiating the specific short-
and long-term management actions needed in
response to the HEHI results. These management
responses and the utility of the HEHI as an
evaluation framework for collaborative outcomes
will be the subject of a forthcoming paper. Although
the indicators for the HEHI resulting from this
process are place based and thus are tailored to meet
the site-specific ecological and social information
needs of the Diablo Trust, we think that the process
used to identify indicators and structure the HEHI
will be applicable to any situation in which adaptive
approaches to ecosystem management involve
multiple stakeholders and a desire for collaborative
decision making.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/responses/
Acknowledgments:
We are grateful to the Diablo Trust, Flying M Ranch,
and Bar T Bar Ranch for their cooperation and
support throughout this project. We thank Matthew
R. Loeser, David Schlosberg, and David Ostergren
for their valuable input toward this research and
comments on drafts of this manuscript. This
research was supported by funding from the
Ecological Restoration Institute of Northern
Arizona University and T. and E., Inc., and by in-
kind contributions from the Cultural and Regional
Studies Program of Prescott College.
LITERATURE CITED
Aguilar, B. J. 1999. Applications of ecosystem
health for the sustainability of managed systems in
Costa Rica. Ecosystem Health 5:36-48.
Armitage, D. 2005. Adaptive capacity and
community-based natural resource management.
Environmental Management 35:703-715.
Berkes, F., J. Colding, and C. Folke, editors. 2003.
Navigating social–ecological systems: building
resilience for complexity and change. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Berkes, F., and C. Folke. 1998. Linking social and
ecological systems for resilience and sustainability.
Pages 1-25 in F. Berkes and C. Folke, editors.
Linking social and ecological systems: management
practices and social mechanisms for building
resilience. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Bertollo, P. 1998. Assessing ecosystem health in
governed landscapes: a framework for developing
core indicators. Ecosystem Health 4(1):33-51.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Bliss, J., G. Aplet, C. Hartzell, P. Harwood, P.
Jahnige, D. Kittredge, S. Lewandowski, and M.
L. Soscia. 2001. Community-based ecosystem
monitoring. Pages 143-167 in G. J. Gray, M. J.
Enzer, and J. Kusel, editors. Understanding
community-based forest ecosystem management. 
Food Products Press, Binghamton, New York,
USA.
Brunner, R. D., T. A. Steelman, L. Coe-Juell, C.
M. Cromley, C. M. Edwards, and D. W. Tucker. 
2005. Adaptive governance: integrating science,
policy, and decision making. Columbia University
Press, New York, New York, USA.
Carlsson, L., and F. Berkes. 2005. Co-
management: 
concepts 
and 
methodological
implications. Journal of Environmental Management 
75:65-76.
Cestero, B. 1999. Beyond the hundredth meeting:
a field guide to collaborative conservation on the
West’s public lands. Sonoran Institute, Tucson,
Arizona, USA.
Conley, A., and M. A. Moote. 2003. Evaluating
collaborative natural resource management. Society
and Natural Resources 16(5):371-386. 
Cortner, H. J., and M. A. Moote. 1999. The politics
of ecosystem management. Island Press, Washington,
D.C., USA.
Costanza, R. 1992. Toward an operational
definition of ecosystem health. Pages 239-256 in R.
Costanza, B. G. Norton, and B. D. Haskell, editors.
Ecosystem health: new goals for environmental
management. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Costanza, R., M. Mageau, B. Norton, and B. C.
Patten. 1998a. Social decision making. Pages
251-260 in D. Rapport, R. Costanza, P. Epstein, C.
Gaudet, and R. Levins, editors. Ecosystem health. 
Blackwell, Malden, Massachusetts, USA.
Costanza, R., M. Mageau, B. Norton, and B. C.
Patten. 1998b. Predictors of ecosystem health.
Pages 240-250 in D. Rapport, R. Costanza, P.
Epstein, C. Gaudet, and R. Levins, editors.
Ecosystem health Blackwell, Malden, Massachusetts,
USA.
Daniels, S. E., and G. B. Walker. 1996.
Collaborative learning: improving public deliberation
in ecosystem-based management. Environmental
Impact Assessment Review 16:71-102.
Diablo Trust. 1999. Diablo Trust area range
management plan and proposed action. Diablo
Trust, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
Dryzek, J. S. 1990. Discursive democracy: politics,
policy, and political science. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Elmqvist, T., C. Folke, M. Nyström, G. Peterson,
J. Bengtsson, B. Walker, and J. Norberg. 2003.
Response diversity, ecosystem change, and
resilience. Frontiers in Ecology 1(9):488-494.
Fernández-Giménez, 
M. 
E., 
B. 
Aguilar-
González, T. Muñoz-Erickson, and C. G. Curtin. 
2006. Assessing the adaptive capacity of
collaboratively managed rangelands: a test of the
concept and comparison of 3 rangeland CBCs.
Journal of Community Based Collaboratives
Research. Winter 2006. Available online at: http://
www.cbcrc.org/php-bin/news/showArticle.php?id=75
.
Fischer, F. 2000. Citizens, experts, and the
environment: the politics of local knowledge. Duke
University Press, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
Gell-Mann, M. 1994. The quark and the jaguar:
adventures in the simple and the complex. Freeman,
New York, New York, USA.
Gray, B. 1989. Collaborating: finding common
ground for multiparty problem. Jossey–Bass, San
Francisco, California, USA.
Gunderson, L. H. 2003. Foreward: learning to
monitor or monitoring to learn? Pages xi-xv in D.
E. Busch and J. C. Trexler, editors. Monitoring
ecosystems: interdisciplinary approaches for
evaluating ecoregional initiatives. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Holling, C. S., editor. 1978. Adaptive environmental
assessment and management. Wiley, London, UK.
Kenney, D. S. 1999. Are community-based
watershed groups really effective? Confronting the
thorny issue of measuring success. Chronicle of
Community 3(2):33-38.
Kenney, D. S. 2000. Arguing about consensus:

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
examining the case against western watershed
initiatives and other collaborative groups active in
natural resources management. University of
Colorado School of Law, Natural Resources Law
Center, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
Lackey, R. T. 2001. Values, policy, and ecosystem
health. BioScience 51(6):437-443.
McCloskey, M. 1996. The skeptic: collaboration
has its limits. High Country News May 13. Available
online at: http://www.hcn.org/servlets/hcn.Article?
article_id=1839.
Moir, W. H., and W. M. Block. 2001. Adaptive
management on public lands in the United States:
commitment or rhetoric? Environmental Management 
28(2):141-148.
Moote, A., A. Conley, K. Firehock, and F. Dukes. 
2000. Assessing research needs: a summary of a
workshop on community-based collaboratives. 
Udall Center for Studies in Public Policy, University
of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
Müller, 
F., 
R. 
Hoffmann-Kroll, 
and 
H.
Wiggering. 2000. Indicating ecosystem integrity—
theoretical concepts and environmental requirements.
Ecological Modeling 130:13-23.
Muñoz-Erickson, T. A. 2004. Evaluating the
ecological and social outcomes of collaborative
management: ecosystem health indicators for
monitoring effectiveness. Thesis. Center for
Environmental Sciences and Education, Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
Muñoz-Erickson, T., B. Aguilar-González, T. D.
Sisk, and M. R. Loeser. 2006. Assessing the
effectiveness of the holistic ecosystem health
indicator (HEHI) as a monitoring tool to assess the
adaptive capacity of community-based collaboratives.
Journal of Community Based Collaboratives
Research. Winter 2006. Available online at: http://
www.cbcrc.org/php-bin/news/showArticle.php?id=77
.
Muñoz-Erickson, T. A., M. R. Loeser, and B. J.
Aguilar-González. 2004. Identifying indicators of
ecosystem health for a semiarid ecosystem: a
conceptual approach. Pages 139-152 in C. van Riper
III and K. L. Cole, editors. The Colorado Plateau:
cultural, biological, and physical research. 
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona,
USA.
Noon, B. R. 2003. Conceptual issues in monitoring
ecological resources. Pages 27-71 in D. E. Busch
and J. C. Trexler, editors. Monitoring ecosystems:
interdisciplinary 
approaches 
for 
evaluating
ecoregional initiatives. Island Press, Washington,
D.C., USA.
Norton, B. G. 2005. Sustainability: a philosophy of
adaptive ecosystem management. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Olsson, P., C. Folke, and F. Berkes. 2004. Adaptive
comanagement for building resilience in social–
ecological systems. Environmental Management 34
(1):75-90.
Rapport, D. J. 1998. Defining ecosystem health.
Pages 18-33 in D. Rapport, R. Costanza, P. Epstein,
C. Gaudet, and R. Levins, editors. Ecosystem health. 
Blackwell, Malden, Massachusetts, USA.
Rapport, D. J., R. Costanza, and A. J.
McMichael. 1998. Assessing ecosystem health.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 13(10):397-402.
Rapport, D. J., W. L. Lasley, D. E. Rolston, N. O.
Nielsen, C. O. Qualset, and A. B. Damania,
editors. 2003. Managing for healthy ecosystems. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, USA.
Sabatier, P. A., W. Focht, M. Lubell, Z.
Trachtenberg, A. Vedlitz, and M. Matlock. 2005.
Collaborative approaches to watershed management.
Pages 3-21 in P. A. Sabatier, W. Focht, M. Lubell,
Z. Trachtenberg, A. Vedlitz, and M. Matlock,
editors. Swimming upstream: collaborative approaches
to watershed management. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA.
Salafsky, N., and R. Margoluis. 2001. Overview
of a systematic approach to designing, managing,
and monitoring conservation and development
projects. Pages 313-328 in L. E. Buck, C. C. Geisler,
J. Schelhas, and E. Wollenberg, editors. Biological
diversity: balancing interests through adaptive
collaborative management. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida, USA.
Snow, D. 2001. Coming home: an introduction to
collaborative conservation. Pages 1-11 in P. Brick,
D. Snow, and S. Van de Wetering. Across the Great
Divide: explorations in collaborative conservation
and the American West. Island Press, Washington,
D.C., USA.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art6/
Steedman, R. J. 1994. Ecosystem health as a
management goal. Journal of the North American
Benthological Society 13(4):605-610.
Tegler, B., M. Sharp, and M. A. Johnson. 2001.
Ecological monitoring and assessment network’s
proposed core monitoring variables: an early
warning of environmental change. Environmental
Monitoring and Assessment 67:29-55.
Walker, B., S. Carpenter, J. Anderies, N. Abel, G.
S. Cumming, M. Janssen, L. Lebel, J. Norberg,
G. D. Peterson, and R. Pritchard. 2002. Resilience
management in social–ecological systems: a
working hypothesis for a participatory approach.
Conservation Ecology 6(1):14. [online] URL: http:
www.consecol.org/vol6/iss/art14.
Wilcox, B. A. 2001. Ecosystem health in practice:
emerging areas of application in environment and
human health. Ecosystem Health 7(4): 317-325.
Williams, E. M., and P. V. Ellefson. 1996. Natural
resource 
partnerships: 
Factors 
leading 
to
cooperative success in the management of
landscape level ecosystems involving mixed
ownership. Staff Paper Series Number 113.
Department of Forest Resources, University of
Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA. Available
online at: http://fr.cfans.umn.edu/publications/staff
papers/Staffpaper113.pdf.
Wondolleck, J. M., and S. L. Yaffee. 2000. Making
collaboration work: lessons from innovation in
natural resource management. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
