Forest Health From Different Perspectives 
T. E. Kolb, M. R.Wagner, andW. W. Covington1 
Abstract.-Forest health is an increasingly important concept in natural resource 
management. However, definition of forest health is difficult and dependent on 
human perspective. From a utilitarian perspective, forest health has been de­
fined by the production of forest conditions which directly satisfy human needs. 
From an ecosystem-centered perspective, forest health has been defined by re­
silience, recurrence, persistence and biophysical processes which lead to sus­
tainable ecological conditions. Definitions and understanding of forest health are 
also dependent on spatial scale, with increasing ambiguity associated with in­
creasing land area and numbers of trees. 
INTRODUCTION 
The term /I forest health" is being increasingly 
used in the context of forestry and natural resource 
management. For example, the term has been the 
subject of several recent articles (e. g., Smith 1990, 
Burkman and Hertel 1992,Kessler 1992, Haack and 
Byler 1993,Sampson and Adams 1994)and a recent 
Society of American Foresters task force report, 
"Sustaining Long-Term Forest Health and Produc­
tivity" (SAF 1993). Forest health is also increasingly 
used in government mandates concerning forest 
management. For instance, the "Forest Ecosystems 
and Atmospheric Research Act of 1988" mandated 
the USDA Forest Service to develop surveys to 
monitor long-term trends in the health of forest 
ecosystems (see Burkman and Hertel 1992).More­
over, under new federal forest management operat­
ing philosophies, such as ecosystem management, 
forest health has emerged as a central objective for 
the desired future condition of forests that replaces, 
to some extent, management for sustained com­
modity output (USDA 1993a, SAF 1993). 
Despite its widespread use, the term"forest 
health" is frequently used without a clear defini­
tion, making its application to forest management 
difficult. In cases where the term has been defined 
'Assistant Professor of Forest Ecophysiology. Professor of Forest 
Entomology. and Professor of Forest Ecology. respectively: School of 
Forestry. Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff, AZ. 
(e. g., McIntire 1988,Monnig and Byler 1992, 
USDA 1992, 1993a), alternative definitions and 
viewpoints of forest health have not been thor­
oughly discussed (however, see O'Laughlin et al. 
1994). We feel that the overall concept of forest 
health needs to be more thoroughly examined 
given its growing use and importance as a manage­
ment objective. Like it or not, foresters and other 
natural resource professionals are currently, and 
will continue to be, participants in ,public debates 
over land management where health analogies and 
metaphors are used. The potential for miscommu­
nication in such debates is great. In fact, we believe 
that miscommunication about forest health is 
common in discussions between parties which 
have very different expectations from the forest. 
Therefore, it is essential that common definition 
and conceptual understanding of forest health be 
agreed upon each time it is introduced into the 
discussion. Moreover, the need for clarity is of 
considerable importance given that a healthy forest 
is viewed as a desired future condition and mainte­
nance of forest health is viewed as a constraint that 
may limit forest uses on public lands in the future. 
In this paper, we discuss different definitions of 
forest health, problems in scaling the concept of 
health from individuals to ecosystems, and the 
relationship between forest health and pest man­
agement, often using southwestern ponderosa 
pine, Pinus ponderosa var, scopulorum, forests as an 
example. A central point of this paper is that 
5 

ambiguity should be minimized by defining the 
term when it is used, or at least by discussing the 
concepts included in the term. 
FOREST HEALTH DEFINITION 
Aida Leopold 
Although forest health is a relatively new term in 
forestry, notions of land health have existed for 
millennia (Norton 1991,Callicott 1992).Most 
contemporary views of forest health stem from the 
writings of Aldo Leopold (Leopold 1949,Callicott 
and Flader 1992). In several of his essays, Leopold 
decried widespread symptoms of land "sickness," 
such as reductions in vegetation cover and ensuing 
soil erosion, resulting from land abuse. He argued 
for the practice of land health in which practitio­
ners would seek to maintain the sustainability of 
ecological conditions and processes by conserving 
the ecological integrity or coevolved diversity of 
the land. Leopold supported the restoration of 
sample native ecosystems present before industri­
alization of the American landscape. These re­
stored areas were to serve both as laboratories and 
as standards for comparison in his practice of land 
health (Flader 1974). 
Utilitarian Perspective 
More recent definitions of forest health range 
between utilitarian (anthropocentric) and ecosys­
tem (ecocentric) perspectives. The utilitarian 
perspective emphasizes forest conditions which 
directly satisfy human needs, while the ecosystem 
perspective emphasizes the maintenance sustain­
able ecosystems over the landscape. From a utili­
tarian perspective, a desired state of forest health 
can be considered "a condition where biotic and 
abiotic influences on forests (pests, pollution, 
silvicultural treatments, harvesting) do not 
threaten management objectives now or in the 
future" (McIntire 1988, USDA 1993a). That is, a 
forest is considered to be healthy if management 
objectives are satisfied, and unhealthy if they are 
not. 
"Consistency with objectives" is a theme com­
mon to both utilitarian and ecosystem definitions 
of forest health. Failure to meet objectives, stated 
by either human uses or ecological conditions, 
indicates an unhealthy forest. The utilitarian 
perspective is perhaps more deeply rooted in the 
"consistency with objectives" theme in that pests 
are traditionally defined as organisms that interfere 
with intended uses of forests (Barbosa and Wagner 
1989). The "consistency with objectives theme" in 
forest health definitions has been criticized in the 
context of ecosystem management philosophy 
(Wagner 1994).On one hand, a healthy forest 
depends on meeting management objectives, while 
on the other hand, a healthy forest is a manage­
ment objective according to recent ecosystem 
management philosophy. This results in circular 
logic and creates a paradox where a desired state of 
forest health depends on the occurrence of a 
healthy forest! Solutions to this paradox include 
removal ofthe "consistency with objectives" theme 
from forest health definitions or removal of forest 
health as an objective of ecosystem management. 
The utilitarian definition implies that a healthy 
forest can be described by many standards. A 
single forest condition could be viewed as healthy 
from one perspective or use but unhealthy from 
another. For example, a common component in 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests is dwarf 
mistletoe, Arceuthobium vaginatum sbsp. 
cryptopodum. Dwarf mistletoe is well-known to 
reduce the growth of ponderosa pine (Beatty 1982) 
and increase mortality (Hawksworth and Geils 
1990)and would be viewed as being unhealthy 
from the perspective of wood fiber production. 
However, abundance and species richness of birds 
is higher when dwarf mistletoe is present (Bennetts 
1991)and the northern spotted owl nests in 
witches' brooms caused by mistletoe in Douglas­
fir, Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirb.) Franco, (Martin et 
al. 1992). Consequently from a perspective of bird 
species habitat and diversity, the presence of dwarf 
mistletoe may constitute a healthy condition. Thus, 
dependency on objectives can create obvious 
problems in generating a definition of forest health, 
particularly when land management objectives are 
not static. 
The utilitarian perspective of forest health is 
especially appropriate for those situations where 
management objectives are unambiguous and 
consist of a small number of complementary 
6 

human uses. This situation is largely restricted to 
private industrial forest lands w~ich emphasize the 
production of wood fiber, and ~ilderness areas 
which emphasize the preservation of natural 
processes (i.e., processes with m~~im~l hum~~ . 
influence). Application of the utilitarian definition 
of forest health to forest lands managed for mul­
tiple objectives, such as most of the National Forest 
System, is a problem because manage~e~~ fo~ 
multiple objectives complicates the prioritization of 
objectives. Some authors have proposed a return to 
a land management philosophy that allo~ates.land 
to categories of similar uses as a way to simplify 
the formulation of objectives and consequently the 
evaluation of forest health (Seymour and Hunter 
1992,Wagner 1994). 
Ecosystem Perspective 
Difficulties in application of the utilitarian 
perspective of forest health to forest lands man­
aged for multiple uses suggests the need for an 
ecosystem perspective of forest he~lth that emp~a­
sizes basic ecological processes which charactenze 
forest ecosystems whose presence on the landscape 
can be sustained over time scales of at least many 
decades. Some examples of forest health defini­
tions from the ecosystem perspective are: "a forest 
in good health is a fully functioning community of 
plants and animals and their physical enviro~­
merit," and "a healthy forest is an ecosystem in 
balance" (Monnig and Byler 1992). These examples 
provide a starting point for thinking about forest 
health from an ecosystem perspective. Terms such 
as "balance" and "fully functioning" are effective 
in steering our thoughts towards ecosystem char­
.lcteristics which appeal to many segments of the 
public, especially those who believe that nature has 
an inherent equilibrium, or balance. Unfortunately, 
most ecologists agree that ecosystems tend to be 
chaotic in behavior, and not "in balance," espe­
cially when viewed over long time periods. 
Other ecosystem definitions of forest health 
mclude the idea of resilience. For example"a 
healthy forest is one that is resilient to changes.." 
(Joseph et a!. 1991), "the term forest health denotes 
the productivity of forest ecosystems and their 
.lbllity to bounce back after stress" (Radloff et a1. 
1qq1I. or "forest health can be defined as the ability 
of a forest to recover from natural and human­
caused stressors" (USDA 1992). A related idea is 
that a healthy forest is persistent on the landscape 
and recurs following disturbance (Botkin 1994). 
While we agree that resilience to dramatic 
change at the landscape level may be a desired 
component of a healthy forest, measuring the 
degree of resilience of a forest is difficult. Although 
lack of resilience is evident a posteriori when a 
forest has been significantly altered by stress or 
disturbance, the a priori presence of resilience is 
difficult to quantify, especially in the absence of 
detailed monitoring of physiological and ecological 
characteristics which promote recovery following 
stress or disturbance. In other words, we really 
don't know the degree of resilience of a forest until 
it has been exposed to and changed by stress or 
disturbance. Resilienceis a useful ecologicalconcept 
in the context of ecosystem health. However, diffi­
culty in quantifying resilience suggests problems in 
its use in defining and measuring forest health. 
A more useful definition of forest health from an 
ecosystem perspective should include specific 
types and rates of ecological processes and num­
bers and arrangement of structural elements that 
lead to and maintain diverse, productive, forest 
ecosystems. This perspective is based on a mecha­
nistic view of forest ecosystems where important 
ecological processes would be identified and 
objectively measured to assess the health of the 
system. An example is given by Haskell et a1. 
(1992) who offer that a healthy ecosystem should 
be "free-from distress syndrome." In this context, 
"distress syndrome" of an ecosystem is character­
ized by the following group of symptoms (Rapport 
1992): reduced primary productivity, loss of nutri­
ent capital, loss of biodiversity, increased fluctua­
tions in key populations, retrogression in biotic 
structure (a reversal of the normal successional 
processes whereby opportunistic species replace 
species more specialized in habitat and resource 
use in the absence of severe disturbance), and 
widespread incidence and severity of disease. 
Unfortunately, quantitative information on rates of 
essential ecosystem processes, such as net primary 
productivity, nutrient cycling, or decomposition, 
and structural characteristics, such as snags and 
landscape corridors, that create and maintain 
diverse, productive, sustainable forest ecosystems 
7 

is presently not available for many regions. This 
type of information may be available for some 
forest types in the future if efforts like the Environ­
mental Monitoring and Assessment Program, 
administered by the US. Environmental Protection 
Agency, are adequately supported for at least the 
next several decades. 
Of course, there are potential problems with this 
highly quantitative approach to defining and 
measuring forest health. One problem is the identi­
fication of threshold rates of important ecological 
processes which lead to degraded resource condi­
tions. In most cases, knowledge of the "normal" 
range of temporal and spatial variation for rates of 
important ecological processes is lacking. Specifica­
tion of "normal" rates and trajectories of succes­
.sion is a problem in some regions. Techniques for 
understanding ranges of variability in ecosystem 
structure and processes in past times are being 
developed (Morgan et al. 1994). However, the 
degree to which these techniques can be used to 
determine past levels of all important ecological 
processes is uncertain. Some have suggested a pre­
European settlement baseline of range of variabil­
ity for pine-dominated forests which evolved 
under the influence of frequent, low-intensity fires 
(e.g. Monnig and Byler 1992).Whether a baseline 
patterned after pre-European settlement or other 
past forest conditions is appropriate for other forest 
types is unclear. 
Another potential problem with the quantitative 
approach to defining and measuring forest health 
is the cost. Despite the public's willingness to 
support environmental protection in surveys, some 
of this apparent support may diminish when it is 
time to actually pay for this level of research and 
monitoring. Given our current knowledge of 
ecosystem ecology, long-term support for forest 
health research and monitoring will be required in 
order to implement a highly quantitative approach 
to defining and measuring forest health. Such an 
approach could yield scientifically defendable data 
on the health of forest ecosystems if previously 
identified problems could be surmounted. 
In the absence of detailed quantitative informa­
tion on desired rates of ecosystem processes, 
present definition of forest health from an ecosys­
tem perspective should at least include qualitative 
statements of the types of processes, structures, 
and resources needed to support productive forests 
in the sense of satisfying at least some of society's 
objectives. For example, we consider a healthy 
forest ecosystem to have the following 
characteristics: 
1) the physical environment, biotic resources, 
and trophic networks to support productive 
forests during at least some seral stages; 
2) resistance to dramatic change in populations 
of important organisms within the ecosystem 
not accounted for by predicted successional 
trends; 
3) a functional equilibrium between supply and 
demand of essential resources (water, nutri­
ents, light, growing space) for major portions 
of the vegetation; and 
4) a diversity of seral stages, cover types, and 
stand structures that provide habitat for many 
native species and all essential ecosystem 
processes. 
Specification within these four criteria allow for 
definitions of forest health which span the gap 
between landscapes which are natural, e. g. near 
pristine (i.e., pre-industrial or presettlement char­
acteristics) and landscapes which are artificial, e. g. 
intensively managed for industrial uses. 
We believe that a useful ecosystem concept of 
forest health must consider patterns and rates of 
change in forest composition and structure, or 
succession. This recognition of the temporal vari­
ability of forest vegetation was noted by Leopold 
(1949) who offered that "health is the capacity of 
the land for self-renewal." Thus, a definition of 
forest health must consider the capacity for forest 
replacement within the timespan of succession. 
Acceptable rates and patterns of forest replacement 
following disturbance will vary widely among 
different ecosystems and climatic regions, but 
should reflect historical rates and patterns to the 
extent that these rates and patterns sustain desir­
able ecosystems. For example, a long succession to 
forest cover following disturbance is not necessar­
ily an indication of poor forest health if slow 
succession is a historical characteristic of the 
ecosystem because of naturally harsh environmen­
tal conditions. 
Our definition also recognizes that dramatic 
change in vegetation composition and structure 
8 

following stress or disturbance is inevitable over 
portions of a landscape. For example, small open­
ings in the canopy are common due to root disease, 
windthrow, and other factors. Such openings are 
not necessarily unhealthy because they can in­
crease availability of resources to understory 
vegetation and tree regeneration and may enhance 
values such as wildlife habitat and aesthetics. 
However, dramatic change may be undesirable 
when it occurs at scales other than those experi­
enced over the recent evolutionary development of 
an ecosystem. For example, many ecologists be­
lieve that fire suppression activities in the western 
United States have led to the development of 
dense, homogeneous conifer stands over wide­
spread areas (e.g. Covington and Moore 1994). This 
is very different than the mosaic of stand ages, 
structures, and species mixtures which were likely 
maintained by fires prior to Euro-arnerican settle­
ment. Widespread, dense stands are particularly 
prone to attack by bark beetles and other biological 
agents which colonize heavily stressed trees. 
The emphasis in our definition of forest ecosys­
tem health on the balanced availability of resources 
for portions of the vegetation, instead of all the 
vegetation, recognizes succession as a process 
which can occur, at least in part, because of 
changes in resource supply to components of the 
vegetation. For example, the emergence of late­
successional species is partially a consequence of 
the decline of early successional species resulting 
from their failure to acquire resources at levels 
sufficient to meet their high nutritional and meta­
bolic demands. In other words, there are winners 
and losers when plants are competing for resources 
in a healthy forest. Thus, we should not automati­
cally assume that all instances of decline by a 
single species, or groups of species with similar 
ecological characteristics (i.e., early successional or 
pioneer types), reflect poor forest health. Evalua­
tion of forest health must be made within the 
context of successional processes and ecosystem 
dynamics. 
THE PROBLEM OF SCALE 
Much of the current ambiguity about forest 
health has arisen because of attempts to take a 
concept developed at the individual organism level 
and elevate it to describe a landscape process. Most 
dictionary definitions of "health" emphasize the 
condition or functioning of a single organism. 
Extension of this concept to a complex system, 
such as a forest, is based on the analogy between 
the functioning of an organism and an ecosystem. 
Kessler (1992),for example, makes an analogy 
between the health of a human and the health of a 
forest. This type of analogy is based on the 
Clementsian concept of community ecology 
(Clements 1916) where the ecosystem is viewed as 
a superorganism. Despite the apparent usefulness 
of the superorganism analogy fordescribing the 
status of ecosystems, Oementsian concepts have been 
discarded by most contemporary ecologists and thus 
are not recommended for discussions of forest health. 
There are other problems with the use of the 
term "health" to describe the status of ecosystems 
(Ehrenfeld 1992). From a scientific perspective, it is 
difficult to determine a normal state for communi­
ties whose characteristics are often in flux because 
of disturbance. From a practical perspective, 
attempts to define health in rigorous scientific 
terms may diminish its present value as an intui­
tive, general concept. In fact, Ehrenfeld (1992) 
concluded that health is not a valid ecological 
concept, but does have value in communication 
between scientists and non-scientists regarding the 
production of values by ecosystems. Although the 
limitations of the term suggest that it should not be 
used in a rigorous ecological context, it is likely 
that "health" will continue to be used to describe 
and mandate management objectives for forests. 
Health has been applied to forest ecosystems at 
several scales ranging from an individual tree to 
landscapes. The concept becomes more ambiguous 
with increasing complexity of the system to which 
it is applied. One definition of health, "absence of 
disease" (Haskell et al. 1992), actually leads to a 
precise definition for an individual tree because 
disease can be defined as a "deviation in the 
normal functioning of a plant caused by some type 
of persistent agent" (Manion 1991). Forest pathol­
ogy is a long-standing discipline in forestry that 
some refer to as "the study of tree health" (Tattar 
1978). In this context the health of a tree can be 
evaluated by such indicators as crown condition, 
growth rate, and external signs of disease-causing 
agents. A dead or dying tree is not healthy. 
9 

The health of a stand is complex and must 
consider many more dimensions than the health of 
a tree. The health of a stand relates to the manage­
ment objectives for that stand (utilitarian perspec­
tive) and to the long-term functioning of the organ­
isms and trophic networks which constitute the 
stand (ecosystem perspective). Tree mortality in a 
stand would not indicate an unhealthy condition 
as long as the rate of mortality was not greater than 
the capacity for replacement. Stand objectives such 
as wildlife habitat, soil and water protection, and 
preservation of biodiversity do not require a 
healthy condition for all trees in the stand. A dead 
tree is not healthy, but it may be part of a healthy 
stand! The health of a forest ecosystem (i.e. large 
watershed or landscape) is more complex than the 
health of a stand. The health of a forest ecosystem 
.depends both on society's objectives for the forest 
(utilitarian perspective), and upon the interaction 
of biotic (including humans) and abiotic processes 
that produce the range of habitats required for 
continued existence of native species (ecosystem 
perspective). 
A NEED FOR SIDEBOARDS 
There is a clear need to place bounds on the 
concept of forest health. Many forest pest manage­
ment specialists think of themselves today as forest 
health specialists. For example, the USDA recently 
formed a "National Center of Forest Health Man­
agement." The current emphasis of the center is on 
the development of pest management strategies 
and technologies (USDA 1993b). However, based 
on our definition of forest health, forest health 
specialists would require broad training in physiol­
ogy, ecology and ecosystem science. Traditional 
pest management has primarily focused on the 
influences of insects and diseases on commodity 
outputs. The role of insects and diseases in ecologi­
cal processes is frequently less emphasized in the 
traditional education of pest specialists, although 
entomologists and pathologists are not without 
appreciation for the ecological role of these organ­
isms (Haack and Byler 1993,Clancy 1994, 
Schowalter 1994). We suggest restricting the term 
"forest health" to the examination of the role of 
biotic and abiotic agents in ecosystem level pro­
cesses. Pest management would then be a sub­
discipline of forest health with an emphasis on the 
influence of biotic and abiotic agents in the produc­
tion of commodity outputs. Entomologists and 
pathologists would continue and hopefully in­
crease their examination of the role of insects and 
diseases in ecosystem-level processes. 
EVALUATING FOREST HEALTH­
SOUTHWESTERN PONDEROSA PINE FORESTS 
Given our definition of a healthy forest ecosys­
tem, when is a forest considered to be unhealthy? 
The type of thinking needed to answer this ques­
tion can be illustrated by using ponderosa pine 
forests in the southwestern United States as a case 
study. To address this question, we refer to the four 
essential elements in our definition of forest eco­
system health: 1) physical and biotic resources to 
support forest cover; 2) resistance to dramatic 
change; 3) functional equilibrium between supply 
and demand of essential resources; and 4) diversity 
of seral stages and stand structures. The physical 
and biotic resources are presently in place to 
support ponderosa pine forests in most areas of the 
Southwest that have historically supported them, 
except perhaps some riparian sites. Using this 
criterion, our ponderosa pine forests are probably 
healthy. However, for the other three criteria, it 
would be difficult to argue that we have a healthy 
forest. 
A significant threat of dramatic change in forest 
composition and structure at the landscape level 
exists in much of the southwestern ponderosa pine 
forest due to pine bark beetles, Dendrocionus spp., 
Ips spp. These insects are well-known to reach 
outbreaks when forest stand density exceeds the 
carrying capacity of the site (Sartwell and Stevens 
1971, Barbosa and Wagner 1989). Conditions are 
very favorable for pine bark beetle in northern 
Arizona and "it is probably only a matter of time 
before another large outbreak occurs" (Wilson and 
Tkacz 1994).Tree mortality associated with wide­
spread bark beetle outbreaks often increases the 
risk of severe, stand-replacing wildfire over large 
areas. 
Present high stand density and forest floor 
accumulations in many southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests compared with presettlement condi­
10 

tions (Covington and Moore 1992,1994)has in­
creased the destructive potential of wildfires to the 
degree where there is a significant risk of eliminat­
ing forest cover at the landscape level. These 
factors have also created an imbalance between 
demand and supply of water, nutrients, and grow­
ing space for major portions of the vegetation 
(Covington and Sackett 1986, unpublished data on 
file with T. E. Kolb in the School of Forestry, North­
ern Arizona University), especially herbaceous 
vegetation (Covington and Moore 1994). Nutrient 
cycling rates are likely low because of fire exclu­
sion and the lack of compensating factors such as 
microbial decomposition. This creates a situation in 
which large nutrient reserves are found in forest 
floor material in a form unavailable to plants 
(Covington and Sackett 1990). 
The relatively homogeneous nature of the south­
western ponderosa pine forest does not provide a 
balanced diversity of seral stages, cover types, and 
stand structures. Underrepresented types include 
native prairie vegetation, tree regeneration, and old 
growth (USDA 1993c). Forests tend to be even­
aged with a dense, uniform canopy and little recent 
regeneration. These dense stand conditions were 
created by past grazing practices, fire exclusion, . 
and other environmental conditions favorable for 
pine establishment in the early part of this century. 
Thus, many southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
fail to meet three out of the four criteria needed to 
satisfy our ecosystem definition of a healthy forest. 
FOREST HEALTH SUMMARY 
Although there are problems with the use of 
health concepts to describe the complex array of 
factors that influence ecosystems, the growing use 
of the term demands that natural resource manag­
ers understand health issues. It is also important to 
recognize that one's view of a healthy forest may 
vary considerably between utilitarian and ecosys­
tem perspectives, as well as over spatial scales. 
One solution to the present dichotomy which exists 
between utilitarian and ecosystem-centered defini­
tions of forest health is to combine elements of both 
viewpoints into a single definition. For example, 
O'Laughlin et al. (1994) offer that"forest health is a 
condition of forest ecosystems that sustains their 
complexity while providing for human needs." 
Moreover, the ecosystem perspective of forest 
health is not necessarily in conflict with the utilitar­
ian perspective if both are applied to large land­
scapes composed of a mosaic of different stand 
ages, structures, and levels of management inten­
sity appropriate for satisfying the range of de­
mands placed on the landscape by society. Satisfac­
tion of these demands will require maintenance 
over the landscape of many native species and all 
of the ecosystem processes that ultimately provide 
resources and habitat for their survival. 
Current forest health problems were caused by 
past lack of understanding of the importance of 
disturbance in forest ecosystems and poor under­
standing of public values by forest managers. 
Forest health problems certainly exist in areas in 
the western United States where conditions have 
been altered over the past several decades by 
concentrated harvesting of early successional 
species or fire exclusion in fire-adapted ecosystems 
(McIntire 1988, Covington and Moore 1992, 
Wickman 1992, O'Laughlin et al. 1993,Covington 
and Moore 1994, Covington et al. 1994). However, 
we believe that present concerns over forest health 
also reflect failures in defining management objec­
tives that are acceptable to society. In the absence 
of well-defined and widely publicized objectives 
for forest management which reflect the diversity 
of values held by society, forest health will con­
tinue to be a concern even with dramatic break­
throughs in our scientific understanding of forest 
ecosystem processes. On the other hand, public 
expectations must be tempered with the under­
standing that, in many cases, the range of values 
potentially delivered by forests is limited by bio­
logical constraints to insure sustainable forest 
ecosystems. Forest scientists and managers are 
obligated to clearly communicate these biological 
constraints to the public. In the current political 
system of the United States, identification of priority 
objectivesfor forest management within these bio­
logicalconstraints is a public decision which is often 
difficultand tedious and thus rarely achieved. 
LITERATURE CITED 
Barbosa, P; Wagner, M. R. 1989. Introduction to Forest and 
Shade Tree Entomology. Academic Press, San Diego. 639 pp. 
Beatty, J. S. 1982. Integrated pest management guide: south­
11 

western dwarf mistletoe, Arceuthobium vaginatum subsp. 
cryptopodum (Engelm.) Gill, in ponderosa pine. USDA 
Forest Service R-3, 82-13. 12 pp. 
Bennetts, R.E. 1991. The Influence of dwarf mistletoe on bird 
communities in Colorado ponderosa pine forests. MS 
Thesis, Department of Fishery and Wildlife Biology, 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO. 
Botkin, D. B. 1994. Preface . Pages xxii-xxiv In: Sampson, R. N.; 
Adams, D. L. eds. Assessing Forest Ecosystem Health in the 
Inland West. Food Products Press, Binghamton, N. Y. 461 
pp. 
Burkman, W. G.; Hertel, G. 0 .1992. Forest health monitoring. 
J. For. 90(9): 26-27. 
Callicott, J. B. 1992. Aldo Leopold's metaphor. Pages 42-56 In: 
Costanza, R.; Norton, B. G.; Haskell, B. D. eds. Ecosystem 
Health. Island Press, Washington, DC. 269 pp. 
Callicott, J. B.; Flader, S. L. eds. 1992.The River of the Mother 
of God and other Essays by Aldo Leopold. Univ. of Wiscon­
sin Press, Madison, WI. 384 pp. 
Clancy, K M. 1994. Research approaches to understanding the 
roles of insect defoliators in forest ecosystems. Page 25 In: 
Proceedings: Conference on Sustainable Ecological Systems. 
Flagstaff, AZ, 12-15 July, 1993. 
Clements, F. E. 1916. Plant Succession: An Analysis of the 
Development of Vegetation. Carnegie Institute Washington 
Pub. No . 242. 512 pp. 
Covington, W W; Everett, R.; Steele, R.; Auclair, A.; Daer, T.; 
Irwin, L. 1994. Historical and anticipated changes in forest 
ecosystems of the Inland West of the United States. J. 
Sustainable Forestry 2: 13-63. 
Covington, W. W.; Moore , M. M. 1992. Postsettlement changes 
in natural fire regimes: implications for restoration of old­
growth ponderosa pine forests . Pages 81-99 Ill: M. R. 
Kaufmann; Moir, W. H.; Bassett, R. L. tech. coords. Old 
Growth Forests in the Southwest, Proceedings of a Work­
shop. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and 
Range Expt. Stn. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-213. 201 pp. 
Covington, W. W; Moore, M. M. 1994. Southwestern ponde­
rosa pine forest structure: Changes since Euro-American 
settlement. J. For. 92(1): 39-47. 
Covington, W W; Sackett, S. S. 1986. Effects of periodic 
burning on soil nitrogen concentration in ponderosa pine. J. 
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. 50: 452-457. 
Covington, W. W.; Sackett, S. S. 1990. Fire effects on ponde­
rosa pine soils and their management implications. Pages 
105-111 [II: Krammes, J. S. tech. coord. Effects of Fire 
Management of Southwestern Natural Resources. USDA 
For. Ser. Gen. Tech Rep. RM-191. 293 pp. 
Ehrenfeld, D. 1992. Ecosystem health and ecological theories. 
Pages 135-143 In: Costanza, R.; Norton, B. G.; Haskell, B. D. 
eds. Ecosystem Health. Island Press, Washington, DC. 269 
pp. 
Flader, S. L. 1974. Thinking Like a Mountain: Aldo Leopold 
and the Evolution of an EcologicalAttitude Toward Deer, 
Wolves, and Forests. Univ. Missouri Press, Columbia, Mis­
souri. 284 pp. 
Haack, R. A.; Byler, J. W. 1993. Insects and pathogens. Regula­
tors of forest ecosystems. J. For. 91(9): 32-37. 
Haskell, B.D.; Norton, B. G.; Costanza, R. 1992. What is 
ecosystem health and why should we worry about it? Pages 
3-20 In: Costanza, R.; Norton, B. G.; Haskell, B. D. eds . 
Ecosystem Health. Island Press, Washington, DC. 269 pp. 
Hawksworth, F.G.; Geils, B. W 1990. How long do mistletoe­
infected ponderosa pines live? West. J. Appl. For. 5(2):47-48. 
Joseph, P.; Kieth, T.; Kline, L.; Schwanke, J.; Kanaskie, A.; 
Overhulser, D. 1991. Restoring forest health in the Blue 
Mountains: a 10 year strategic plan. Forest Log 61(2): 3-12. 
Kessler, W. B. 1992. A parable of paradigms. Personal welIness 
and forest health. J. For. 90(4): 18-20. 
Leopold, A. 1949. A Sand County Almanac and Sketches Here 
and There. Oxford Univ. Press, NY. 228 pp. 
Manion, P.O. 1991. Tree Disease Concepts. Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 402 pp. 
Martin, S. K; Beatty; J.; Hawksworth, F.G. 1992. Douglas-fir 
dwarf mistletoe brooms and spotted owl nesting habitat, 
Eastern Cascade Range, Washington. Pages 77-70 In: 
Frankel, S. compiler. Proceedings, 40th Annual Western Int. 
For. Disease Work Conf., Fort Lewis College, Durango, CO. 
July 13-17,1992. USDA For. Ser. Pacific NW Region, San 
Francisco, CA. 182pp. 
McIntire, T. ed . 1988. Forest health through silviculture and 
integrated pest management-A strategic plan. USDA For. 
Ser. Pub. 26 pp. 
Monnig, E.; Byler, J. 1992. Forest health and ecological integrity 
in the Northern Rockies. USDA For. Ser. FPM Rep. 92-7. 18 pp. 
Morgan, P.; Aplet, G. H.; Haufler, J. B.; Humphries, H. c, 
Moore, M. M.; Wilson, W D. 1994. Historical range of 
variability: A useful tool for evaluating ecosystem change. J. 
Sustainable Forestry 2: 87-111. 
Norton, B. G. 1991. Ecological health and sustainable resource 
management. Pages 102-177 In: Costanza, R. ed. Ecological 
Economics: the Science and Management of Sustainability. 
Columbia Univ. Press, NY. 
O'Laughlin, J.; Livingston, R. L.; Thier, R.; Thornton, J.; 
Toweill, D. E.; Morelan, L. 1994. Defining and measuring 
forest health. J. Sustainable Forestry 2: 65-85. 
0'Laughlin, J.; MacCracken, J. G.; Adams, D. L.; Bunting, S. 
c.; Blamer, K A.; Keegan, C. E. III. 1993. Forest health 
conditions in Idaho: executive summary. Policy Analysis 
Group, College For. Wildl. and Range ScL,Univ. Idaho, 
Moscow. Report No. 11. 
Radloff, D.; Loomis, R.; Bernard, J.; Birdsey, R. 1991. Forest 
health monitoring: taking the pulse of America's forests . 
Pages 41-47 In: Agriculture and the Environment - The 1991 
Yearbook of Agriculture. USDA. 
Rapport, D. J. 1992. What is clinical ecology? Pages 144-156 
Ill: Costanza, R.; Norton, B. G.; Haskell, B. D. eds. Ecosys­
tern Health. Island Press, Washington, DC. 269 pp. 
SAF, 1993. Society of American Foresters Task Force Report on 
Sustaining Long-Term Forest Health and Productivity. SAF 
Pub. 93-D2. 83 pp. 
Sampson, R. N.; Adams, D. L. eds. 1994. Assessing Forest 
Health in the Inland West. Food Products Press, 
Binghamton N. Y. 461 pp. 
Sartwell, c.;Stevens, R. E. 1971. Thinning ponderosa pine to 
prevent outbreaks of mountain pine beetle. Pages 41-52 In: 
Baumgartner, D. ed. Proceedings Precommercial Thinning 
of Coastal and Intermountain Forests in the Pacific North­
12 

west. Washington State University Cooperative Extension 
Sennce.Pullr.nan,WA. 
Schowalter, T. D. 1994. An ecosystem-centered view of insect 
and disease effects on forest health. Page 50 In: Proceedings: 
Conference on Sustainable Ecological Systems, Flagstaff, 
AZ, 12-15 July, 1993. 
Seymour, R. S.; Hunter, M. L. Jr. 1992. New forestry in eastern 
spruce-fir forests: principles and applications to Maine. 
Maine Experiment Station Misc. Publication 716. 
Smith, W. H. 1990. The health of North American forests: 
stress and risk assessment. J. For. 88(1): 32-35. 
Tattar, T.A. 1978. Diseases of Shade Trees. Academic Press. 
NY. 361 pp. 
Wagner, M. R. 1994. The healthy multiple use forest ecosys­
tem: an impossible dream? Page 54 In: Proceedings: 
Conference on Sustainable Ecological Systems. Flagstaff, 
AZ, 12-15 July, 1993. 
Wickman, B. E. 1992. Forest health in the Blue Mountains: the 
influence of insects and disease. USDA For. Ser. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. PNW-6TR-295. 15 pp. 
Wilson, J. L.; Tkacz, B. M. 1994. Status of insects and diseases 
in the Southwest: implications for forest health. Page 56 In: 
Proceedings: Conference on Sustainable Ecological Systems. 
Flagstaff, AZ, 12-15 July, 1993. 
USDA Forest Service, 1992. Northeastern Area Forest Health 
Report. USDA For. Ser. Rep. NA-TP-03-93. 57 pp. 
USDA Forest Service , 1993a. Healthy forests for America's 
future: A strategic plan. USDA Forest Service MP-1513. 
58pp. 
USDA Forest Service. 1993b. National Center of Forest Health 
Management. Strategic Plan. USD~ Forest Service Pub . 17 
pp. 
USDA Forest Service . 1993c. Changing conditions in South­
western forests and implications on land stewardship. 
USDA For. Ser. Pub. 8 pp. _ 
13 
