 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks.  Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological 
and socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
Tools for Planning Exotic Species Management at Landscape Scales 
Introduction 
Invasions by exotic plant species can threaten forest ecosystems in numerous ways. Identifying relationships be-
tween exotic species invasions and native vegetation, soil properties, and disturbance could be helpful for managing 
exotic plants by pinpointing the ecological conditions most susceptible to invasion. Ecosystem classification, such as 
the U.S. Forest Service’s Terrestrial Ecosystem Survey (TES) in Region 3, is a valuable tool for integrating factors 
like environment and disturbance that affect exotic species distributions across landscapes. However, its potential 
has been little explored for this purpose. For this study, exotic plants were measured on 66 plots in 10 ecosystem 
types encompassing a range of climatic regimes and soil parent materials in an area within the Coconino National 
Forest (Arizona) covered by a TES. Ecosystems ranged from xeric, nutrient-poor, black cinder ecosystems contain-
ing little understory vegetation, to moist basalt ecosystems with silt loam soils and productive understories. 
 
Research Findings 
 
A total of 271 plant species (251 native and 20 exotic) were recorded on the plots. Taraxacum officinale 
(common dandelion), Tragopogon dubius (yellow salsify), Bromus tectorum (cheatgrass), Verbascum thapsus 
(common mullein), and Poa pratensis (Kentucky bluegrass) were the most prevalent exotic species. 
 
 
The principle that native and exotic species 
richness and cover are positively correlated 
in landscape-scale sampling studies was 
supported (Stohlgren et al., 1999, Fornwalt 
et al., 2010). Sites with the highest number 
of native species were the most invaded, 
indicating that the most invaded sites were 
favorable for both native and exotic spe-
cies. 
 
 
Environmental variables were more strong-
ly related than disturbance to exotic species 
richness and cover within our sampling 
context of relatively undisturbed stands 
(e.g., wildfire burns were not sampled).  
 
 
Exotic species richness and cover were 
strongly related to ecosystem types (Fig. 
1). In general, moist ecosystems were 
more heavily invaded than dry ecosys-
tems. Black cinder soils contained the fewest, and park ecosystems the most, exotic species. 
 
 
The top two invaded ecosystems share the characteristic of a lack of ponderosa pine dominance—aspen eco-
systems have only small proportions of pine trees and park ecosystems have no tree overstories. 
       Fact Sheet:  Exotic Species Management at Landscape Scales            July 2012     
Fig. 1. Mean exotic species richness at the (a) m2 and (b) 500-m2 scale, and exotic spe-
cies (c) raw and (d) relative cover among 10 ecosystem types of northern Arizona pon-
derosa pine forests. Numbers at the bases of or on top of bars represent native species 
measures. 

Management Implications 
The findings have important implications for managing exotic species related to information needs identi-
fied by mandates such as U.S. Forest Service (2004) guidelines for managing species invasions. 
 
 Results can help to identify characteristics of forest sites that are most invaded (useful for mapping 
and monitoring of invasions); identify exotics that are most prevalent to partly help prioritize species 
for monitoring and management; and prioritize particular ecosystems for management and develop 
ecosystem-specific management strategies.  
 
 The U.S. Forest Service’s TES was valuable for understanding invasion patterns across the landscape 
and is useful for exotic species management planning. For example, management strategies may be 
ecosystem-specific. In the little-invaded black cinder ecosystem, early detection of new invaders may 
be a primary strategy, whereas containing existing invasions may be more important in heavily invad-
ed ecosystems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
Stohlgren, T.J., Binkley, D., Chong, G.W., Kalkhan, M.A., Schell, L.D., Bull, K.A., Otsuki, Y., Newman, 
G., Bashkin, M., Son, Y. 1999. Exotic plant species invade hot spots of native plant diversity. Ecological 
Monographs 69, pp. 25–46. 
 
Fornwalt, P.J., Kaufmann, M.R., Stohlgren, T.J. 2010. Impacts of mixed severity wildfire on exotic plants 
in a Colorado ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir forest. Biological Invasions 12, pp. 2683–2695. 
 
U.S. Forest Service. 2004. National Strategy and Implementation Plan for Invasive Species Management. 
USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C. 
 
 
 
   
 
Contacts 
Dr. Scott Abella, Scott.Abella@unlv.edu  
Cayenne Engel, Cayenne.Engel@unlv.edu  
Judy Springer, Judy.Springer@nau.edu 
Dr. Wallace Covington, W.Wallace.Covington@nau.edu 
Tragopogon dubius (yellow salsify). 
Photo by Max Licher. 
Verbascum thapsus (common mul-
lein). Photo by Max Licher. 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Abella, S.R., Engel, E.C., Springer, J.D., and Covington, W.W. 2012. Relationships of exotic plant communi-
ties with native vegetation, environmental factors, disturbance, and landscape ecosystems of Pinus ponderosa 
forests, USA. Forest Ecology and Management 271:65–74. 
Taraxacum officinale (common dan-
delion). Photo by Mix Licher. 
