29
June 2005
R
etired southwestern US Forest Service (USFS)
range technician Bill Kruse spoke the above words
when asked about range research work in the
1960s. His remarks indicate the scope of vital
work at hand yet with scarce available resources. The USFS
rangeland studies program has always eked along with few
funds and scientists attempting to do many types of projects
designed to sustain and improve rangelands for multiple
uses. But the early scientists who worked in the Southwest
reads like a “Who’s Who” list. This essay covers the south-
western range studies from the early 1900s until about 1970
when rangeland research became funded under other proj-
ects like watershed studies.
Before Rangeland Science Began:
1860s–1890s 
“…it looked as if a fire had gone through there—wasn’t a blade
of grass, wasn’t an oak leaf in reach of a cow, not one …” said
USFS ranger C. A. Merker about the rangelands of
Cameron and the Grand Canyon South rim in the 1920s.1
Beginning in the 1870s, thousands of cattle were moved
into the Southwest to feed on the open rangelands. Sheep,
of course, had already been in the Southwest for 300 years
before the cattle arrived, but sheep numbers also rapidly
expanded during the 1880s and 1890s, reaching their peak
around 1910.2 Those decades of heavy grazing altered and
deteriorated the range. Drought, a common occurrence in
the Southwest, further hindered plant recovery and result-
ed in heavy livestock losses. Eager settlers sought home-
steads, preferably with water sources, and most did not
understand the fragile ecosystems of the Southwest and
their need for rest.
Vegetation in the southwestern range types was unaccus-
tomed to grazing by large numbers of grazing animals; thus,
the plants had not evolved to resist or tolerate high amounts
of grazing pressure. People assumed the plant species would
naturally regenerate from grazing as they had seen in other
regions. However, the bunchgrasses in the higher elevations
and black grama grass in the southern areas did not recover.
In the Southwest, plants are so susceptible to injury that
game trails and wagon ruts stay visible for years, even after
the disturbance stops. Native plants have adapted to unpre-
dictable precipitation and await their cue from the summer
monsoon season to grow. But in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, hungry, grazing animals and their owners did not
wait for the plant’s optimal time, and plants were required to
work when they should have been resting. The tremendous
numbers of hooves treading on the soil promoted erosion
and the formation of arroyos because there was very little
vegetation to protect the soil surface.
Ranges were denuded in most places, causing statements
like Merker’s. Foraging animals invaded canyons and steep
slopes where juniper trees thrive. Tree and shrub seeds then
lodged in wool and hooves and were carried onto the open
grasslands where they dropped. The seeds were stomped into
the ground, which enabled them to become established. The
combination of overgrazing, seed dissemination, possible cli-
mate change, and fire cessation caused the junipers to spread
across the formerly open grassland.3,4 In the hot, drier areas,
mesquite and other desert shrubs spread the same way, fur-
ther diminishing the available grass.
By the late 1800s, the deterioration of the western ranges
was obvious. Local ranchers voiced concern because their
livelihoods depended on sustainable forage. Several visionary
“Doing the Best We Could With
What We Had”: USFS Range
Research in the Southwest
By Susan Deaver Olberding, John E. Mitchell, and 
Margaret M. Moore

botanists, such as James W. Toumey, University of Arizona,5
and Elmer O. Wooton, with the New Mexico College of
Agriculture (now New Mexico State University),6 warned of
the impending danger of overgrazing the range grasses.
Finally, Congress authorized funding for range research
through federal agencies in 1895.
Southwestern Rangeland Research Begins
By 1900, federal resource protection agencies evolved, among
them the precursor to the USFS. Washington bureaucrats
pushed to preserve watersheds and forests but not so much
the rangelands. Talk of limiting livestock on the forests to
protect watersheds reached the stockmen in the Southwest,
and some traveled to Washington to plead their case about
needing access to free grass to earn a living but yet also sup-
porting some regulation of the numbers of animals grazing.
Finally, Albert F. “Bert” Potter, livestock man from the
Holbrook/St. John’s area of Arizona, convinced two bureau-
crats to see the Arizona rangeland devastation first hand (Fig.
1). The account of this trip by Division of Forestry (now
USFS) Chief Gifford Pinchot and Bureau of Plant Industry
(BPI) botanist Frederick V. Coville in June 1900 has been
told.7 By the end of the three-week trip, the two Easterners
had proved their meddle with the hardy stockmen, and
respect for the Westerners was felt by the bureaucrats. As a
result, Pinchot asked Potter to join the USFS and direct the
establishment of a public lands grazing program.
Bert Potter moved to Washington, DC, but spent a lot of
time traveling to western livestock association meetings. He
addressed the 1911 National Woolgrowers Association with
“the first thing was to check the damage and waste with the
least possible curtailment of grazing privileges.” Ranchers
pushed for policies that applied to local conditions, not
nationwide rules. Potter hired former stockmen to develop
policy as he thought men who had “ridden the range” would
be the best advisors. He needed scientific studies on the
range and worked with Coville to form the USFS Office of
Grazing Studies in 1910. This division was headed by James
T. Jardine, a former Idaho cowboy and recent graduate of
Utah Agricultural College, who was initially hired by Coville
in 1907 to work on sheep grazing in Oregon’s Wallowa
National Forest. Jardine was appointed USFS Inspector of
Grazing in 1909, Chief of Grazing Studies in 1910 (which
later became the Division of Range Management Research),
and he visited many western National Forests making man-
agement recommendations. Jardine authored a publication
with Mark Anderson that is still considered a classic, Range
Management on the National Forests.8
In 1911, Jardine hired men who were to lead newly estab-
lished Regional Offices of Grazing Studies in the western
Districts of the USFS.9 It was groundbreaking work with no
precedence to follow. Jardine met up with these fledgling
researchers during the spring of 1911 on the Coconino
National Forest in northern Arizona for a five-week training
session on range reconnaissance, the nation’s first. The scien-
tists inventoried conditions, mapped range types, recorded
vegetation, and evaluated range conditions.10 They quickly
realized they knew little of the native plants and their attrib-
utes and collected many specimens to study.
Robert R. Hill was one of the team members. He had
already been involved in rangeland work for District 3 (now
USFS Region 3) when he became the District’s Chief of
Grazing Studies. In 1910, he and G. A. Pearson, Director of
the Fort Valley Experimental Forest Station (FVEFS) locat-
ed on the Coconino National Forest northwest of Flagstaff,
established grazing plots on the Coconino to ascertain graz-
ing effects on tree regeneration.11–13 By 1912, Hill focused
his efforts on permanent sample plots at Rees Tank, Rogers
Lake, Frye Park, Black Springs, and Big Fill in northern
Arizona.14,15 Hill, assisted by W.R. Chapline who later
became the USFS Director of Range Management
30
Rangelands
Figure 1. Associate Forester Albert F. “Bert” Potter, eastern Arizona
rancher and first administrator of the Forest Service grazing program,
with an elk calf in his arms. The caption reads: “This calf appears so
docile, one would hardly think that he is vigorous and strong and capable
of putting up a strong fight in his own defense, yet this is evidently not
his custom.” Photo taken on the Teton National Forest, Wyoming by Smith
Riley in 1918. Photo courtesy of Forest History Society.

Research, fenced about 2 acres per sample location to
exclude livestock and measured vegetation on quadrats with-
in the exclosures. He also set up other nearby quadrats,
which remained open to grazing. These plots were moni-
tored for three decades. Hill’s conclusions in 1923 were that
“The come-back of overgrazed ranges is much slower than
most people believed.”14 Periodic remeasurement of these
permanent sample plots continued until 1947,15,16 and
Northern Arizona University, School of Forestry graduate
student Jonathan Bakker has resurrected this work and
remeasured these historical plots (Fig. 2).17
Silviculturist G. A. Pearson hated livestock grazing
around his trees and initially tried to abolish grazing on the
National Forests.18 He set out to prove his case when he real-
ized this would not occur. In 1910, he established two large
study areas, both on the Tusayan (later the Kaibab) National
Forest, one at Willaha (in the pinyon/juniper type and a
sheep pasture) and the other at Wild Bill (in the pines and a
cattle pasture). Various experiments, backed by extensive
field records, studied injury to pine reproduction, seedling
establishment, forage production, bunchgrass fire hazard,
response to protection, and use standards. At the time, USFS
field employees kept diaries or notebooks that provide won-
derful glances into the activities of these early scientists. One
unidentified diarist wrote of his charges, named “Red Eye”
and “Herman,” at Wild Bill on June 25, 1932:19 “I notice that
these steers would be grazing contentedly and then would
reach up and delibertly [sic] eat some juicy pine. They would
chew this slowly with evident satisfaction.”
Conclusions about the Wild Bill and Willaha studies indi-
cated that pine shoots were not browsed after July 15th, the
start of the summer monsoon season, so Pearson suggested
withholding grazing until then. He also recommended a limit
of a one-night, bed ground to reduce needle browsing; more
watering tanks to lessen the impact on trees surrounding the
water holes; and providing salt for the livestock. He said infe-
rior grasses supplanted the best grasses because stock ate the
best grasses down to the ground so they could not reseed. His
summaries showed that influential factors affecting timber
reproduction include the amount of “tasty” forage available
during the summer months and the length of time livestock
are permitted to graze.20 Pearson’s stance against livestock did
not endear him to the range scientists, creating a controversy
that raged for three decades before his retirement.
Charles K. Cooperrider was among those scientists with
whom Pearson disagreed. “Coop” had accepted a USFS posi-
tion on the Santa Fe National Forest in 1915, hoping to
improve his fragile health in the arid Southwest. He quickly
realized the dangers of erosion from too many cattle. He
would later be assigned to District 3 headquarters as a range
scientist, and eventually was Director, but he is remembered
today for his watershed studies. “Coop” worked on the
Willaha and Wild Bill study areas, coauthored the 1924
Coconino Range Appraisal Survey with R. W. Hussey, led
range reconnaissance, surveyed conditions on private range-
31
June 2005
Figure 2. Repeat photographs of Black Springs, one of the original Hill
plots established in 1912. The 1923 photo (top) was taken by M. W.
Talbot (FS 184179), the 1947 photo (middle) by K. W. Parker (K-
1140A), and the 2003 photo (bottom) by J. D. Bakker. The 1923 photo
was taken from a slightly different angle than the other photos, although
some of the same trees are evident in all photos, especially the large
tree to the right and the large forked tree to the left (although this tree
is blocked by younger trees in the 2003 photo). The fence was moved
10 m to the right in 1931, and deteriorated between the 1947 and
2003 photos. Historical photos courtesy of USFS Rocky Mountain
Research Station, FVEFS Archives, Flagstaff, AZ.

land near the Gila National Forest (Fig. 3), directed the 1931
study of the Rio Grande watershed, established the Parker
Creek (later Sierra Ancha) Experimental Watershed in cen-
tral Arizona, among other projects. When appropriations
allowed the USFS to expand its range studies in the late
1920s, “Coop” was assigned to FVEFS as Director of Range
Studies where he and Pearson continued their dispute.
During World War II, “Coop” went to Mexico with the
Guayule rubber project where his poor health worsened, and
he died in 1944 at 55 years of age.
Research results emanating from southwestern scientists
caused local stockmen, especially sheep raisers, to protest
evidence that overgrazing impaired range health. Efforts to
discredit the scientists and their work and suppress the find-
ings led to political pressure to close FVEFS. During a joint
meeting of the Arizona Woolgrowers Association (of which
Bert Potter was once an officer) and the Arizona Cattle
Growers Association in July 1920, a resolution passed by the
conference members said the Fort Valley Experiment Station
was considered worthless because: “…the work has been an
entire failure and a useless expense to the amount of approx-
imately $20,000 per annum…be abandoned and that the
lands occupied by it be restored to entry…” reported the
Flagstaff Coconino Sun newspaper of July 9, 1920. A letter
from Secretary of Agriculture Edwin T. Meredith to Charles
Mullen,
president of the Arizona Cattle Growers
Association, asked for specifics as to where FVEFS had
failed. The apologetic response blamed “some sheepmen” for
the resolution that weary cattlemen approved without realiz-
ing what they were doing. FVEFS remained open.19
Scientist M. W. Talbot, in charge of District 3’s Office of
Grazing Studies by 1920, was instrumental in the develop-
ment of rangeland and watershed management as south-
western range work continued to focus on plant identifica-
tion, evaluations of grazing damage, use studies, and revege-
tation.21 In 1937, Talbot revised the 1919 publication target-
ed to USFS District 3 forest officers titled How to Judge
Southwestern Range Conditions under the new title Indicators
of Southwestern Range Conditions. It was published by USDA
as Farmers’ Bulletin No. 1782. This easy-to-read guide aided
both USFS rangers and stockmen.
Rangeland projects in the early years evaluated the seeding
of exotics and native species. A 1913 study looked at native
plants to see if they would survive and produce seed under
cultivation. Research was conducted using other rangeland
grazing animals such as goats, horses, and wildlife. For exam-
ple, Chapline led a 1917 study of goats in New Mexico in
response to high demand for mohair wool.22 He knew the
Forest officers wanted him to pull the goats, but he found that
controlled grazing was acceptable. Some discussions with
goat owners about grazing habits were necessary, however.
In the meantime, another controversial story was
unfolding on the Kaibab Plateau in northern Arizona.
President Teddy Roosevelt would designate the Plateau as
a National Game Preserve in 1906, with focus on the local
deer herds. Establishment of the game preserve meant no
deer hunting and aggressive predator control, which con-
tributed to an overabundant deer population. Continued
grazing (possible overgrazing) by livestock and deer, plus
periodic drought, led to a severely deteriorated rangeland,
which likely contributed to a deer population crash in the
1920s. In the early 1920s, Forest Examiner S. B. Locke
began investigations to examine the interaction of the
large deer herds, livestock grazing, and the degrading
range condition. He was joined in 1922 by E. A.
Goldman, from the Biological Survey, and in 1924, by
new Kaibab National Forest supervisor Walter G. Mann.
The Forest Service and Biological Survey worked togeth-
er to study problems associated with the large deer herd,
food supplies, and preferences of deer. They built 41 sam-
ple exclosures to protect vegetation from deer browsing.
Vegetation within these exclosures was inventoried, pho-
tographs taken, and fences maintained from 1925 until at
least 1948 under the direction of Mann and Odell
32
Rangelands
Figure 3. Repeat photos from a private range near the Gila National
Forest in New Mexico. The top photo, taken by C. K. Cooperrider in April
1926, shows the cover and erosion. The follow-up photo, taken in
October 1952 by J. F. Arnold, indicates the establishment of vegetation
in the gullies and a marked increase in shrubby species. Historical pho-
tos courtesy of USDAFS Rocky Mountain Research Station, FVEFS
Archives, Flagstaff, AZ.

Julander (Fig. 4).23 During this period, Locke had been in
close contact with USFS ranger Aldo Leopold, who visit-
ed the Kaibab Plateau in 1941. Leopold wrote a popular
account and several scientific articles about the Kaibab
deer story.24
The Kaibab controversy continued into the 1940s and
1950s when USFS Research range scientists Kenneth W.
Parker and Joseph F. Arnold were asked to join the
Arizona Game and Fish Department in several studies. A
detailed history of the Kaibab deer story and the political,
management, and environmental factors that may have
played a role in this controversy can be found in several
interesting reports.25–27
Southwestern Range Research Matures 
A new era in range research began in 1928 with the passage
of the McSweeney–McNary Forest Research Act, legislation
that specifically authorized experiments in range manage-
ment.28 Expanded funds meant more scientists on more
projects. The Fort Valley Experimental Forest Station
became the site of USFS Research’s headquarters with the
new name of USFS Southwestern Forest and Range
Experiment Station (SWFRES). This was a temporary
arrangement until 1930 when Research moved into rented
facilities in Tucson, Arizona. As part of their charge,
SWFRES was to coordinate existing range research in
District 3,
including the Santa Rita and Jornada
33
June 2005
Figure 4. Repeat photographs of Plot #28 on the Kaibab Plateau as part of the range-aspen-deer studies in 1927.23 Each study area had a closed
and open plot, and the closed plot or exclosure is shown here in 1930 (top left; photo by E. S. Shipp USFS 253659). On the top right is a 1942 repeat
photo by W. G. Mann (USFS 422883). The photo on the lower left shows showing aspen trees exceeding 4 m by 1948. The lower right photo includes
a different field of view (~ 50m out in the meadow) to capture the 76 years of aspen height growth (photo by D. Binkley, 2003). The exclosure fence
and posts are still evident under the trees. The open plot is located along the forest-meadow border to the right of the closed plot. Historical photos
courtesy of Kaibab National Forest, North Kaibab Ranger District, Fredonia, AZ.

Experimental Ranges. In 1940, the USFS also acquired the
Carnegie Institution’s Desert Laboratory located on
Tumamoc Hill near Tucson when Carnegie closed its opera-
tions.29 Later, in 1956, the Desert Lab was bought by the
University of Arizona. By 1953, the SWFRES was consoli-
dated with the Rocky Mountain Forest and Range
Experiment Station and headquartered in Fort Collins,
Colorado. In May 1997, the Rocky Mountain Forest and
Range Experiment Station and the Intermountain Research
Station in Ogden, Utah, merged to become the Rocky
Mountain Research Station.
Forester Edward Clayton Crafts began his USFS career
in 1932 at SWFRES when he worked on the continuing
study of the effect of livestock browsing on the forest.
During his seven years in the Southwest, Crafts created a
range use survey of all ranger districts in Arizona to describe
range conditions and develop guidelines for the proper use of
specific ranges.30 He was in charge of the Civilian
Conservation Corp (CCC) crews, acting as supervising tech-
nician for the camp at Mormon Lake where they worked on
tree-thinning. Crafts’ career eventually led him to being
named as Assistant Chief of the USFS in 1950.
Twenty years of efforts in southwestern rangeland policy
implementation resulted in praise as stated in District 3’s in-
house publication, Forest Pioneer, of October 1931:
The condition of Arizona ranges is rated 95% of normal
in a special report issued yesterday by the Bureau of
Agricultural Economics, USDA. The state’s rating stands
out by far the best of 17 western states mentioned in the
report…Next best in standing are the ranges of New
Mexico, rated at 89% of normal.
A few years later, Region 3’s Chief of Range Management
D. A. Shoemaker commented in the Forest Pioneer of July 1934:
The Forest Service has been receiving many applica-
tions recently from people outside of the forests for grazing
privileges on National Forest ranges…The stockmen who
are asking admittance to the Forests see feed there which is
better than that on many of the outside areas…and it is
natural that they should want access to it…But these more
favorable conditions on the forests are the result of years of
careful management…
Southwestern range studies continued through the
1940s with ongoing research on existing plots and the addi-
tion of new plots. Ranger study plots were established in
the late 1920s and 1930s, which used permanent livestock
exclosures and colocated plots open to grazing to examine
range trend, vegetation composition, and cover changes.31
Repeat photos showed changes visually. As a result of a
study begun about 1950 and involving hundreds of perma-
nent transects around the Southwest, K. W. Parker devel-
oped the three-step method for appraising trend in range
condition. Step 1 involved data collection on a transect.
Step 2 analyzed and classified the data, and Step 3 docu-
mented the transect and adjoining area with photographs.
Favorable initial reaction to this method was received
around the West on both public and private lands, but
within a few years, the study was discontinued, primarily
because of difficulties in interpreting the data.9,32 Parker’s
method was expanded to five-phase approach in 1973.33
Although USFS Districts are not required to remeasure
these historical transects, some Districts still use these data
as an additional means of examining vegetation change,
plant vigor, and erosion.
Experimental Ranges 
Santa Rita Experimental Range
Bert Potter and colleague Royal S. Kellogg traveled to
Tucson in 1901 to meet with Dr David Griffiths of the BPI
and Drs R. H. Forbes and J. J. Thornber of the Agricultural
Experiment Station at the University of Arizona to explore
part of the Santa Rita Forest Reserve that had been recom-
mended as a possible site for an experimental range. Located
south of Tucson, the Santa Rita was officially set aside in
1903 as the nation’s first Range Reserve. It was managed by
the BPI until 1915, when the USFS took it over. Its desert
grasslands contain more than 51,000 federally owned acres
and some 1,300 privately owned acres. Because of severe
overgrazing since the 1880s, livestock were excluded from
much of the Santa Rita until 1915 when the USFS reinstat-
ed year-long grazing with cooperators. In 1989, the USFS
transferred management of Santa Rita to the University of
Arizona which continues studies on this century-old
reserve.34 Literally hundreds of studies have taken place on
the Santa Rita to examine different livestock grazing sys-
tems, vegetation control and restoration practices, and
impacts of small mammals and other consumers.35
Jornada Experimental Range
Another major, long-term Experimental Range in the
Southwest is the Jornada, located in the Chihuahuan Desert
northeast of Las Cruces, New Mexico. In 1904, E. O.
Wooton, a visionary botanist with the New Mexico College
of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts, began a series of studies
in cooperation with C. T. Turney, a rancher who was grazing
the Jornada after gaining control of the local water sources.
More than 190,000 acres were set aside in 1912 by
Presidential Executive Order, thus forming the Jornada
Range Reserve. In 1915, management of the Jornada trans-
ferred from the BPI to the USFS, and W. R. Chapline estab-
lished the valuable Jornada Herbarium. The Jornada Range
Reserve was renamed the Jornada Experimental Range in
1927. Then in 1954, Jornada management was transferred to
the Agricultural Research Service, which manages the facil-
ity today along with New Mexico State University. The
Jornada Experimental Range is also designated as a Long
Term Ecological Research (LTER) site.36
34
Rangelands

Conclusions
USFS Range Research was born in the Southwest because of
people like Bert Potter and Will C. Barnes, stockmen who
worked to ensure rangeland and ranching sustainability. Initial
efforts between bureaucrats and ranchers were harmonious,
but tensions soon began and are still with us today. Research,
however, has proceeded carefully through the turmoil.
Range scientists first came into the Southwest with the
nation’s initial range reconnaissance survey. Southwestern
Forest Service scientists not already mentioned from the
1910s to the 1970s include Earl Aldon, Jack Bohning,
Dwight Cables, Robert S. Campbell, R. H. Canfield, J. T.
Cassady, Warren Clary, Pete Ffolliott, C. L. Forsling, G. E.
Glendening, B. A. Hendricks, Donald A. Jameson, E. L.
Little, Jr., S. Clark Martin, W. G. McGinnies, G. D.
Merrick, Enoch W. Nelson, H. A. Paulson, Jr., Henry A.
Pearson, F. W. Pond, Elbert H. Reid, and H. G. Reynolds,
among others.
USFS range research, per se, ended about 1970, and scien-
tific projects relating to rangeland use began to be funded under
the umbrella of watershed, wildlife, and ecological projects with
a shift from agricultural (increased forage) to conservation as
public image about forest and range use changed.Today’s USFS
scientists collaboratively work with other agencies and organi-
zations continuing studies under several venues, for example,
Northern Arizona University’s Ecological Restoration Institute,
the Malpai Borderlands Group in southeastern Arizona,
Sevilleta long-term ecological research (LTER) site in central
New Mexico, and traditional range and watershed departments
at New Mexico State University and University of Arizona.
Academicians at Arizona State University also undertake teach-
ing and research in rangeland science.
Changing climatic conditions, markets, cultural tradi-
tions, and other reasons factor into public lands grazing.
Sound research combined with multiple methods must be
employed to ensure the best sustainable use of the natural
resources in any given area with close attention paid to the
extremely diverse climate and topography of the Southwest.
It is a complex issue and everyone has his or her own opin-
ion. Edward Crafts said a final determination on whether
livestock did harm to pine tree reproduction was never deter-
mined one way or the other.30 Discerning, once and for all,
how to manage the range is impossible because so many
components affect any given forest and range area, and deci-
sions must be based on the resources of the individual area at
that time in its history. Controversy will continue, as will
rangeland research, because at any given moment, the value
of land ebbs and flows with cultural perception.
For a more comprehensive review of range research
throughout the western United States, the reader is referred
to the Journal of Range Management.37,38
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Dennis Lund for locating the
historic Kaibab photos. Special thanks to Rocky Mountain
Research Station Project Leader Carl Edminster for his sup-
port. And, thanks to all of the visionary ranchers, range sci-
entists, and range managers who cared about the rangeland
resources of the Southwest.
Authors are Archivist and Historian, USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Valley Experimental
Forest Station, Flagstaff, AZ (Olberding); Rangeland Scientist,
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort
Collins, CO (Mitchell); and Professor, School of Forestry,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ (Moore).
References and Other Reading
1.
TUCKER, E. A., AND G. FITZPATRICK. 1972. Men who matched
the mountains. USDA Forest Service, Southwestern Region.
2.
United States Department of Commerce (USDC). 1943.
Sixteenth census of the United States, 1940. Agriculture (Gen.
Rep.) 3:9–1092.
3.
MILLER, F. H. 1921. Reclamation of grass lands by Utah
juniper on the Tusayan National Forest, Arizona. Journal of
Forestry 19:6.
4.
HOLECHEK, J. L., R. D. PIEPER, AND C. H. HERBEL. 2004.
Range management: Principles and practices. 5th edition.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson and Prentice Hall Press, Inc.
5.
TOUMEY, J. W. 1891. Overstocking the range. Tucson, AZ:
Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Arizona.
Bulletin 2.
6.
WOOTON, E. O. 1908. The range problem in New Mexico. Las
Cruces, NM: New Mexico College of Agriculture and
Mechanic Arts. Agriculture Experiment Station. Bulletin 66.
7.
PINCHOT, G. 1947. Breaking new ground. New York, NY:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc.
8.
JARDINE, J. T., AND M. ANDERSON. 1919. Range management
on the national forests. Washington, DC: USDA. Bulletin 790.
9.
ROWLEY, W. D. 1985. U.S. Forest Service grazing and range-
lands: a history. College Station, TX: Texas A&M Press.
10. THORNBER, J. J. 1910. Grazing ranges of Arizona. Tucson, AZ:
Arizona Agriculture Experiment Station. Bulletin 65. p 245–360.
11. HILL, R. R. 1917. Effects of grazing upon western yellow pine
reproduction in the national forests of Arizona and New
Mexico. Washington, DC: US Department of Agriculture.
Bulletin 580.
12. PEARSON, G. A. 1923. Natural reproduction of western yellow
pine in the Southwest. Washington, DC: USDA Forest
Service. Bulletin No. 105.
13. PEARSON, G. A. 1933. A twenty-year record of changes in an
Arizona pine forest. Ecology 4:272–285.
14. TALBOT, M. W., AND R. R. HILL. 1923. Progress report on the
range study plots on the Coconino National Forest comprising
a description of project and digest of data. Unpublished report
on file at Fort Valley Experimental Archives, Flagstaff, AZ.
15. ARNOLD, J. F. 1950. Changes in ponderosa pine bunchgrass
ranges in northern Arizona resulting from pine regeneration
and grazing. Journal of Forestry 48:118–126.
35
June 2005

16. GLENDENING, G. E. 1941. Work plan—summer 1941: Hill
study plots, Coconino. Flagstaff, AZ: Fort Valley Experimental
Forest Station Archives.
17. BAKKER, J. D. 2005. Long-term understory dynamics of pon-
derosa pine forests [PhD dissertation]. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern
Arizona University. 175 p.
18. PEARSON, G. A. 1910. Reproduction of western yellow pine in
the Southwest. Washington, DC: USFS. Circular 174.
19. Diary found in Fort Valley Experimental Forest Station
Archives, USFS Rocky Mountain Research Station, Flagstaf,
Arizona.
20. PEARSON, G. A. 1950. Management of ponderosa pine in the
Southwest as developed by research and experimental practice.
Washington,
DC:
USDA Forest Service.
Agricultural
Monograph No. 6.
21. TALBOT, M. W., AND F. P. CRONEMILLER. 1961. Some of the
beginnings of range management. Journal of Range Management
14:95–102.
22. CHAPLINE, W. R. 1919. Production of goats on far western
ranges. Washington, DC: US Department of Agriculture.
23. MANN, W. G. 1941. The Kaibab deer: A brief history and pres-
ent plan of management. Williams, AZ: USDA Forest Service,
Kaibab National Forest (original 1931 report amended 1934
and 1941).
24. LEOPOLD, A. 1943. Deer irruptions. Wisconsin Conservation
Bulletin 8:3–11.
25. MITCHELL, J. E., AND D. R. FREEMANN. 1993. Wildlife-live-
stock-fire interactions on the North Kaibab: A historical
overview. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service Rocky
Mountain Research Station. General Technical Report RM-222.
26. BINKLEY, D., M. M. MOORE, W. H. ROMME, AND P. M.
BROWN. 2005. Was Aldo Leopold right about the Kaibab deer
herd? Ecosystems (in press).
27. YOUNG, C. C. 2002. In the absence of predators: conservation
and controversy on the Kaibab Plateau. Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press.
28. CHAPLINE, W. R., R. S. CAMPBELL, R. PRICE, AND G.
STEWART. 1944. The history of western range research.
Agricultural History 18:127–143.
29. OLBERDING, S. D. 2000. Fort Valley: the beginnings of forest
research. Forest History Today. Spring 2000.
30. CRAFTS, E. C., AND S. R. SCHREPFER. 1972. Edward C.
Crafts: forest service researcher and Congressional liaison—An
eye to multiple use. Forest History Society.
31. TURNER, R. M., L. H. APPLEGATE, P. M. BERGTHOLD, S.
GALLIZIOLI, AND S. C. MARTIN. 1980. Arizona range reference
areas. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Research Station. General Technical Report RM-79.
32. BRADY, W. W., J. W. COOK, AND E. F. ALDON. 1991. A
microplot method for updating loop frequency range trend
data: theoretical considerations and a computer simulation. Fort
Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research
Station. Research Paper RM-295.
33. REPPERT, J. N., AND R. E. FRANCIS. 1973. Interpretation of
trend in range condition for 3-step data. Fort Collins, CO:
USDA Forest Service. Research Paper RM-103.
34. UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA, COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE. 2004.
Santa Rita Experimental Range home page. Available at:
http://ag.arizona.edu/SRER.
35. MCCLARAN, M. P., P. F. FFOLLIOTT, AND C. B. EDMINISTER
[TECH. COORD.]. 2003. Santa Rita Experimental Range: 100
years (1903 to 2003) of accomplishments and contributions.
Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research
Station. P-30.
36. USDA,
AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH
STATION,
JORNADA
EXPERIMENTAL RANGE. 2005. Jornada Research. Available at:
http://usda-ars.nmsu.edu.
37. YOUNG, J. A. 2000. Range research in the far western United
States: the first generation. Journal of Range Management
53:2–11.
38. YOUNG, J. A., AND C. D. CLEMENTS. 2001. Range research:The
second generation. Journal of Range Management 54:115–121.
36
Rangelands
