Ecological Restoration Institute
ERI–Issues in Forest Restoration
Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into 
Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level

The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer 
in researching, implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in 
the Intermountain West. These forests have been significantly altered during the last century, with 
decreased ecological and recreational values, near-elimination of natural low-intensity fire regimes, 
and greatly increased risk of large-scale fires. The ERI is working with public agencies and other 
partners to restore these forests to a more ecologically healthy condition and trajectory—in the 
process helping to significantly reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfire and its effects on human, 
animal, and plant communities.
Cover photo: This ERI white paper discusses ways to restore and create quality habitat for 
domestic and wild ungulates as part of effective landscape-scale forest restoration efforts on federal 
lands across the western United States.
Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
928-523-7182
www.eri.nau.edu
Publication date: March 2011
Author: Dave Egan
Reviewers: Ethan Aumack, Dave Brewer, Dr. Wally Covington, Judy Springer, 
and Diane Vosick
Series Editor: Dave Egan
Please contact the ERI for reproduction policies: 928-523-5697
All material copyright © 2011 ERI, NAU
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
 NAU Printing Services/71482/04-11

Table of Contents
Executive Summary ......................................................................................................................... 2
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................  3
Implementing Restoration Treatments to Benefit Both Domestic and Wild Grazing Animals .. 3
Forage and Browse ...............................................................................................................  3
Water and Minerals ............................................................................................................... 4
Cover ...................................................................................................................................... 4
Resting Treatment Areas before Allowing Domestic Grazing to Resume ................................... 5
Integrating Grazing with a Prescribed Burning Schedule ............................................................ 6
Ungulates: Vectors and Regulators of Unwanted Plant Species ................................................. 6
Grassbanks: A New Form of Partnership between Ranchers and Restorationists ..................... 7
Establishing a Grazing Monitoring Protocol that Addresses Landscape-scale Forest Restoration .. 8
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................ 10
References ........................................................................................................................................ 11
1

Executive Summary
What issues will restorationists, ranchers, and managers of public lands face as landscape-scale forest restoration 
efforts, such as those funded by the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program, begin to intersect with 
grazing interests on public lands? At this juncture, restoration planners, land managers, and others have yet to 
address this important ecological-social aspect of landscape-scale forest restoration process. And for their part, 
many ranchers don’t yet realize these restoration efforts are being planned and how they may affect them. 
This ERI white paper provides land managers, ranchers, and others with insights from recent research literature 
to a set of issues that will likely arise as landscape-scale restoration efforts proceed across the Intermountain West. 
These issues include ensuring quality habitat for domestic and wild ungulates, how long to “rest” treated areas 
before allowing domestic livestock grazing, how to integrate grazing with prescribed fire, grazers as vectors as 
well as regulators of unwanted plant species, the potential of grassbanks as a conservation strategy, and improving 
grazing monitoring protocols to match the scope of landscape-scale restoration.
Land managers, forest restoration advocates, ranchers, and others concerned with how to integrate domestic and 
wild ungulate grazing into landscape-scale restoration efforts should consider the following points:
• Providing quality habitat for domestic and wild ungulates should be integrated with other planning concerns 
related to the timing and sequencing of forest restoration treatments across the landscape.
• More applied research is needed to determine how long a treated area should “rest” before domestic grazers 
are allowed to return to an allotment. Existing “guidelines” are supported by limited scientific data.
• Land managers, restoration planners, ranchers, and scientists need to discuss and research ways to integrate 
grazing with a prescribed burning schedule.
• Land managers, ranchers, and restorationists should be aware that ungulates, especially cattle and, to a lesser 
extent, elk, help spread unwanted plant species.
• The targeted use of domestic grazers to control or eliminate unwanted plant species has potential if the correct 
grazers are employed and the timing and intensity of grazing is coordinated to reduce the unwanted plant’s 
reserves.
• Grassbanks may provide another means of accomplishing needed restoration activities by exchanging forage 
rights for either conservation work or passive restoration.
• Monitoring grazing allotments within landscape-scale restoration treatments needs to address restoration-
related concerns, not only grazing concerns.
2

3
Introduction
The American West is in transition. The fundamental issues of water rights and resource uses remain, and many of 
the notable human and institutional actors are still in place, but the course of the West is beginning to shift from 
exclusively extractive endeavors to include large-scale restorative actions. For example, the once mighty, and still 
formidable, business of ranching remains active, although ranchers are now increasingly being asked to interact 
with multiple resource interests, including those of restorationists who plan to reestablish the health of frequent-
fire forests in the Intermountain West. How will these old and new interests learn to coexist during this period of 
change? More to the point, what are the issues restorationists, ranchers, and managers of public lands will face as 
landscape-scale forest restoration efforts, such as those funded by the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program (www.fs.fed.us/restoration/CFLR/index.shtml), begin to intersect with grazing allotments on public 
lands? At this juncture, restoration planners, land managers, and others have yet to address this important 
ecological-social aspect of landscape-scale forest restoration process. And for their part, many ranchers don’t yet 
realize this restoration effort is underway and how it may affect them. 
This ERI white paper provides land managers, ranchers, and others with insights from recent research literature 
to the following set of questions that will likely arise as landscape-scale restoration efforts proceed across the 
Intermountain West. 
• How should restoration treatments be implemented to ensure there is quality habitat for all grazing animals, 
both domestic and wild?  
• How long will a restoration treatment area need to “rest” following treatment before domestic livestock 
grazing can resume? 
• What is the best way to integrate domestic livestock grazing into a prescribed burning schedule?
• Will ungulates act as vectors for unwanted plant species following restoration treatments? Could domestic 
grazers be used to control unwanted plant species?
• What role might “grassbanks” play in landscape-scale forest restoration efforts?
• Can the current agency grazing monitoring protocols be improved to address issues related to landscape-scale 
forest restoration efforts?
Implementing Restoration Treatments to Benefit Both Domestic 
and Wild Grazing Animals
Domestic and wild ungulates, which in forested landscapes across the American West include cattle, sheep, elk, 
deer and pronghorn antelope, need four basic things: forage, water, minerals, and cover. With these needs in mind, 
a landscape-scale forest restoration treatment plan that creates a dynamic mosaic of forage and cover with access 
to a stable supply of water and minerals will help produce habitats for a wide variety of ungulates (Wisdom and 
others 2004, Milchunas 2006, Graham and others 2010). These restoration efforts can be enhanced by combining 
them with ranching methods and agency allotment oversight that limit the number of animals and control the 
means of resource dispersal (forage, water, minerals) through the use of appropriate grazing rotation schedules, 
exclosures (i.e., fencing), water and mineral placement, and herders (Graham and others 2010). The use of 
prescribed fire will also play an important role because it is often needed to maintain palatable forage cover and 
reduce standing, coarse herbaceous litter that ungulates avoid because it is difficult to digest.
Forage and Browse
Forage in the frequent-fire forests of the American West consists of cool- and warm-season grasses, sedges, 

4
forbs, while browse includes woody plants from shrubs to trees. Although each grazing ungulate species has its 
own forage preference (e.g., cattle and sheep are primarily grazers, deer are primarily browsers), they also tend 
to eat whatever is available depending on the season and the level competition from other ungulates. Various 
studies (McConnell and Smith 1970, Riegel and others 1991, Germaine and others 2004, Gibbs and others 2004, 
Laughlin and others 2008, Long 2008, Bartusvige and Kennedy 2009) and past experience suggest that within 
a few years after restoration treatments forage should become more plentiful as areas become more open and 
competition with trees is reduced. Browse, in turn, may decrease due to increased use of prescribed burning and 
the number of exotics could increase due to disturbance. Aspen may increase due to resprouting after prescribed 
burning and because of less elk herbivory due to increased forage levels. Domestic and wild ungulates will vie for 
this enhanced resource base and will likely increase their health and populations as long as it is available.
Water and Minerals
Water is a limiting factor for many creatures in the Interior West, and ungulates are no different. Domestic and 
wild ungulates find water in streams, ponds, lakes, rivers, and man-made structures, such as stock tanks. In arid and 
semi-arid landscapes, cattle, elk, and pronghorn tend to use habitats within one mile of water while white-tailed 
deer select habitat within 0.25 mile of water (Rosenstock and others 1999, Cook 2002). Managing ungulates in 
and around natural water sources is extremely important because they can cause significant damage to the water 
source, the surrounding vegetation, and adjacent soils. Fencing riparian areas and piping water from a natural 
source to a stock tank can help prevent this kind of damage. For example, Porath and colleagues (2002) found 
that by co-locating water tanks and mineral blocks 15 feet apart and 0.3 mile from a stream in a forested range 
in Oregon, they decreased the number of cattle using the adjacent riparian area, especially in the spring when 
forage was abundant. Similarly, Cooney (1952) found that salt dispersed throughout an elk range in Montana was 
effective in reducing animal concentrations.
Cover
Ungulates use cover (i.e., trees and shrubs or tall grasses) as rest areas, places to hide from predators, and for shade. 
As Graham and his colleagues (2010) note, “Water and forage are major determinants of how animals use a range 
but cover and its transition to openings are important determinants of range quality (Senft et al., 1987; Ganskopp, 
2001). These transitions or forest edges along with their inherent ecotones are rich in wildlife, both in numbers 
of individuals and number of species (Thomas et al., 1979)….Cover, combined with its location and juxtaposition 
to water, forage and salt, influences how an ungulate moves through its range (Ganskopp, 2001).” They go on to 
recommend, “In both transitory and permanent ranges, the general management concept to decrease ungulate 
and other forest conflicts is to disperse animals throughout the extent of their range so no one locale is over used 
by animals for foraging, bedding or resting.” Other studies (Thomas and others 1979, Germaine and others 2004) 
indicate that mule deer need cover for use during the day (i.e., day-beds). For instance, Germaine and colleagues 
recommend “that stands of sapling and pole-sized trees having greater than 40% midstory canopy closure be 
retained in treated forest….” Such stands, according to these researchers, should be greater than 0.01 acre in size 
and retain deciduous and coniferous trees for mule deer forage and concealment needs. Thomas and others (1979) 
recommend a 40% cover/60% forage ratio as the optimal mix for elk. Meanwhile, Vavra and his colleagues (2005) 
suggest that the number of these cover patches can be reduced in landscapes with irregular topography because 
topography itself makes hiding easier for wild ungulates. They do, however, recommend that cover patches be 
strategically placed to allow animals to move safely between them.
Forest restoration treatments will likely make elk and deer easier targets for hunters due to increased visibility 
and access within treated areas. Researchers at the Starkey Project—a multi-agency research undertaking in 
northeastern Oregon (http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/starkey/)--recommend maintaining some level of hiding cover 

5
for elk and deer. For example, Wisdom and others (2004, p. 751) suggest that forest planners should: “Manage 
for, and retain security areas for, elk in watersheds when planning the layout of harvest units in time and space. 
Security areas serve primarily to mitigate any increase in elk vulnerability to hunting when timber activities result 
in increased visibility and human access in a watershed. A security area for elk was defined by Hillis et al. (1991: 
38) as a nonlinear block of hiding cover at least 250 acres and at least one-half mile from roads open to motorized 
traffic….In particular, Hillis et al. suggested that security areas are most effective…when [they] compose at least 
30 percent of a watershed.” 
All these research findings about cover suggest that restoration planners concerned with ungulate habitat should 
strive to create a diverse landscape mosaic with openings, sufficient forest/meadow edge, and various successional 
stages of vegetation, including dense cover for hiding, birthing, and resting. This will produce habitat for a variety 
of ungulates as well as many other animal species. 
Resting Treatment Areas before Allowing Domestic Grazing to Resume
How soon domestic grazing animals can return to allotments after initial restoration treatments are completed 
remains one of the most important questions for forest restoration planners and land managers. Many statements 
from ecologists call for resting grazing allotment areas after restoration treatments (Belsky and Blumenthal 1997, 
Moore and others 1999, Allen and others 2002, New Mexico Restoration Principles 2006). Likewise, there is 
an unwritten U.S. Forest Service guideline that suggests resting areas burned by wildfires for two years before 
allowing grazing animals to return (Mork 2010). Unfortunately, there is little scientific research to support any of 
these conclusions. 
There is some useful information from researchers at the Starkey Project, however. For example, Wisdom and his 
colleagues (2004) found that “Timber harvest is likely to cause an immediate but short-term (1- to 3-year) decline 
in forage availability in the harvest units, followed by a large increase in forage that may last 10 years or longer.” 
(p. 752). Likewise, Long and colleagues (2008) noted that, “Nutritional quality of herbaceous forage species in 
treatment stands did not change significantly during the first few years after treatment (fuels reduction) but by the 
fifth year after treatment had increased above maximum mean values observed in control stands in both spring 
and summer.” These two studies from northeastern Oregon suggest that three to five years following restoration 
treatment would be a reasonable rest period. 
Writing from the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (A-S) in east-central Arizona, White (2005) takes a 
different approach. Instead of specifying a timeframe before cattle or sheep can return to a grazing allotment after 
fire (natural or prescribed), he focuses on the minimum conditions of four variables that he believes must be met: 
1) soil stability (ground cover), 2) plant composition, 3) forage production, and 4) structural range developments 
that meet Forest Service standards and are adequate to maintain or support grazing management. All of these 
minimum standards must be met before allowing cattle to graze, according to White:
• Either a minimum of 75% of the natural basal and/or aerial organic cover as identified by the Terrestrial 
Ecosystem Survey (TES) for the A-S for the map unit being inventoried or a minimum Fair soil condition to 
meet soil stability standards. 
• Either a minimum of 75% community similarity in terms of plant composition as defined by the TES for the 
map unit being inventoried or Fair range conditions. 
• A minimum of 100 pounds dry weight equivalent per acre of forage production as defined by Forest Service 
Region 3. 

6
These research findings, although limited, suggest that federal agencies should be prepared to wait more than 
two years before allowing domestic grazing on restored allotments lest they jeopardize two important goals of 
restoration treatments—restoring the understory and returning low-intensity prescribed fire as an ecosystem 
process. Having forage reserves or swing allotments (Forest Service) or reserve common allotments (BLM) 
in place to provide permittees with adequate areas to graze their cattle or sheep will be necessary. In addition, 
research designed to further explore the best way to address this question is needed.
Integrating Grazing with a Prescribed Burning Schedule
Existing concepts and plans for landscape-scale forest restoration call for treating the land with prescribed 
burning either alone or following mechanical thinning with multiple entries over the course of decades (Allen 
and others 2002, Friederici 2003, Youtz and others 2008). However, few, if any, researchers have studied just 
how such a prescribed burning program will be integrated with continued grazing allotments. There are two 
basic concerns that arise: 1) there will not be enough grass (fuel) to carry a fire due to too much grazing (Center 
for Biological Diversity 2003) and 2) there will not be enough forage for all grazers if areas are burned too 
frequently (Tiedemann and others 2000, Vavra and others 2005). Some balance must be struck between these two 
possibilities.  
There may be a way to integrate prescribed burning with the current grazing allotment system. Once the land 
management agency decides to implement a prescribed burning program on a given cycle, then the grazing 
rotation on an allotment could be adjusted to meet that cycle. For example, a grazing allotment program could be 
designed that rests (i.e., the complete withdrawal of a pasture or pastures from the rotation during a given grazing 
cycle) or defers (i.e., using pastures in such a way that cool- or warm-season grasses are not grazed by domestic 
livestock more than two years in a row) sites for some period (e.g., two or three years) prior to the scheduled 
prescribed burn. This would allow sufficient time to pass, assuming the site received enough moisture, to grow 
enough grass to carry fire. While this is a possible solution, integrating grazing and burning in a restoration 
context is another topic that would benefit from more in-depth research.
Ungulates: Vectors and Regulators of Unwanted Plant Species
Animals disperse seeds after passing them through their digestive system, carrying them in their fur or hooves, 
or by spitting them out. Writing about the seed dispersal potential of cattle, elk and deer, Bartuszevige and 
Endress (2008) note: “Large domestic and native ungulates have the potential to disperse large quantities of seeds 
throughout the landscape….All three species (cattle, elk, deer) act as seed dispersers for native and exotic plants.” 
As one might expect given the forage tendencies of cattle and elk, Bartuszevige and Endress found that cattle 
fecal pats had a greater species richness and density of exotic grasses compared to other ungulates, while elk fecal 
pats had greater species richness and density of native and exotic forbs compared to other ungulates. The work 
of these and numerous other researchers indicates that ungulates are, indeed, vectors for unwanted plant species 
(although see Stohlgren and others [1999] who found no consistent difference between native or exotic species 
richness due to livestock grazing). This suggests that grazing animals, especially cattle because they tend to eat 
exotic grasses and dispense large quantities of seeds, can be a source for unwanted invasive plant species in restored 
areas. However, a study by Tate and others (2003) suggests that most cattle-dispersed seed will be found at “cattle 
attractants” (e.g., watering areas; shady, resting areas; gentle slopes) while seeds deposited by elk and deer will 
likely be dispersed across different areas and habitats. 

7
One invasive plant species of concern, cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum), is known to increase following ecological 
disturbances, including overgrazing and fire (James 2007). It is especially prolific in the sagebrush ecosystem of 
the Great Basin where it has altered fire regimes and reduced forage (Reid and others 2008, Rowland and others 
2010). The extent to which cheatgrass will increase in ponderosa pine or other fire-adapted forest ecosystems 
after restoration treatments remains an open question (although see prescribed fire-related studies by Crawford 
and others 2001, Keeley and McGinnis 2007). Work in northern Arizona suggests that grazing either following 
thinning and burning (Sorensen and McGlone 2010) or after a wildfire (Mork 2010) helps spread cheatgrass, 
especially whenever drought conditions occur after these events. These research studies suggest that cheatgrass has 
the potential to become a serious management problem following restoration treatments on grazing allotments. 
If land managers find that they need to control cheatgrass and encourage native grass and forbs species, there may 
be ways to use grazing animals to help in their efforts. Known by such names as “targeted grazing,” “prescribed 
grazing” and “prescription grazing,” these strategies use either single or multiple grazing species in very controlled 
situations to control or eliminate plant pests. The basic idea is to set pest plants back by 1) grazing them when they 
are most vulnerable (i.e., typically early in the growth process) and 2) doing so frequently enough (possibly for 
several growing seasons) to eliminate the population and let desirable plant species thrive (Frost and Launchbaugh 
2003). Such grazing tactics manipulate three basic variables—herbivore selection, seasonal timing, and grazing 
intensity. The authors of The Targeted Grazing Handbook (Peischel and Henry, Jr. 2006), for example, provide 
information about a wide variety of western pest plants and the animals that will control them. They indicate that 
sheep, goats, and/or cattle can be used to control cheatgrass by an intensive method known as “flash grazing.” A 
recent dissertation (Diamond 2009) also records the successful use of targeted grazing and late-season prescribed 
burning to control cheatgrass. The U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service and the Bureau of Land Management have active 
programs in this area, and the USFWS National Wildlife Refuge System website has a good explanation of the 
process (see http://www.fws.gov/invasives/staffTrainingModule/methods/grazing/introduction.html). 
Monitoring, both pre- and post-treatment, is critical in order to make this management practice work properly. 
Knowing exactly when a plant is in its most vulnerable growth stage is vital in order to get the animals in the field. 
Likewise, observing the responses of both the targeted species and other desirable species is key to understanding 
whether the treatment is working or needs to be modified. Monitoring is needed for several growing seasons to 
determine the effects on plant density, cover, biomass, species composition, and seed bank dynamics.  
Grassbanks: A New Form of Partnership between Ranchers and 
Restorationists
As restoration treatments progress and are completed, it may be necessary to remove domestic grazing animals 
from an existing allotment to either prevent them from interrupting the thinning or prescribed burning process or 
to delay grazing on newly treated areas until the understory growth is sufficient and stable. In such cases, already 
existing set-aside areas, known as forage reserves, swing allotments or reserve common allotments, will be available 
from land management agencies for ranchers and their displaced cattle. Permittees can transfer their cattle to this 
new acreage with no additional fees or responsibilities until such time as their original allotment is again available. 
Grassbanking may be another option for temporarily holding domestic grazers.
Grassbanking is a “partnership that leverages conservation practices across multiple ownerships based on the 
exchange of forage for tangible conservation benefits” (National Grassbank Network 2003). The first and, perhaps, 
the most well-known grassbank was created by the Malpai Borderlands Group, who coined and registered the 
term, and used their grassbank to obtain a conservation easement from a neighboring rancher to stop a housing 

8
project. More recent grassbanking efforts in the western United States, mainly by The Nature Conservancy, have 
provided ranchers with grazing rights in exchange for conservation benefits such as resting a high-value habitat, 
the use of prescribed fire, and wildlife habitat improvements (Gripne 2005a).
There are several examples of grassbanks in the western United States, including Malpai (AZ), Vina Plains 
Grassbank (CA), Valle Grande/Rowe Mesa Grassbank (NM), Rocky Mountain Front Grassbank (MT), Matador 
Ranch (MT), Heart Mountain Grassbank (WY), and the Triple Peak Forage Reserve (WY). All these enterprises 
consist of partnerships between non-profits, government agencies, and ranchers. Several provide grazing areas for 
ranchers whose federal grazing allotments are being treated and/or require rest from grazing. See http://www.
compatibleventures.com/grassbank_fact_sheets.html for more details about these projects.
While these existing grassbanks demonstrate the potential of trading forage areas for conservation/restoration 
benefits, there are several challenges in creating and maintaining a grassbank. 
• Raising the necessary funds to purchase the sizable acreage needed for a grassbank can be daunting (Gripne 
2005a). This explains why many existing grassbanks are on lands that individuals or organizations already own 
or on public lands. 
• Even when the land is available, raising money to pay the rancher can be difficult and time consuming, and 
often is done with little assurance that rancher will not walk away from the proposed deal. As Courtney 
White, director of the Quivira Coalition, told a New York Times reporter, grassbanks have “all the costs of a 
ranch but none of the income” (Robbins 2006).
• The participants need to have a clear idea of the benefits they will gain from the partnership. This has proven 
difficult in terms of measuring the conservation/restoration benefits (i.e., ecosystem services) that may accrue 
to the conservation organization, public agency, or general public. 
• There can be problems when dealing with federal agencies in terms of completing the necessary documents, 
such as environmental assessments, in a timely and legally defensible manner.
• There can also be problems in terms of completing restoration treatments on time so that the grassbanking 
agreement does not have to be redone (Gripne 2005b).
• These obstacles have made grassbanking a less attractive conservation tool in recent years. Nevertheless, the 
use of a grassbank as part of a landscape-scale forest restoration effort may prove to be a collaborative solution 
for both ranchers and restorationists if some of these obstacles can be overcome.
Establishing a Grazing Monitoring Protocol that Addresses 
Landscape-scale Forest Restoration 
Whether at the stand scale or the landscape level, monitoring the effects of domestic and wild ungulate grazing 
is an important part of a successful forest restoration project. Without monitoring, sites may become overgrazed 
leading to several kinds of environmental problems, including lack of vegetation to carry prescriptive fires, soil 
compaction, erosion, loss of important plant and animal species, and water pollution. Public agencies have 
monitoring protocols in place for their grazing allotments (e.g., U.S. Forest Service Region 3 1997), but they are 
somewhat limited in terms of their application to a multi-resource, landscape-scale forest restoration process. 
Moreover, agency staffing levels for range conservationists and technicians are a limiting factor in terms of how 
much monitoring takes place. What can be done to solve these two situations?
First, existing federal agencies may need to expand their data collection procedures to address questions such 
as: Are grazers reducing the numbers of browse species? Is early season grazing having an effect on cheatgrass 
populations? Did the grazing rotation provide enough grass for a scheduled prescribed burn? What understory 

9
plants, especially forbs, are increasing and/or decreasing under the current grazing rotation? How well are 
domestic and wild ungulates co-existing on the landscape? What is the condition of riparian areas on the 
allotment? The answers to these and other questions may be determined using existing monitoring procedures, 
while in other cases they may require new procedures. 
Resolving the second situation is going to require either a quicker way to assess allotment conditions (i.e., a rapid 
assessment methodology or RAM) or more people who are capable and willing to monitor the conditions of the 
allotments. Allison and others (2007) discuss a RAM they used to assess 25 allotments (586,000 acres) on the 
Santa Fe National Forest in northern New Mexico over the course of a few weeks. They did so by establishing at 
least one “key area” of five acres or more within each allotment. Each key area represented a vegetation type on the 
allotment, and was located 0.25 mile to 1 mile from a water source, on slopes less than 15 percent, and on soils 
in satisfactory condition. Photo points were established and used at each key area. Plant cover and composition 
as well as residual forage biomass was determined using the step-point method (Evans and Love 1957). Stubble 
height of forage grasses was measured to determine grazing intensity in order to determine thresholds below 
which grazing is detrimental to plants and site stability. They also quantified the soil moisture depth at each key 
area by taking a soil core and noting the depth where moist and dry soil met. Lastly, domestic and wild ungulate 
use was assessed by doing pellet-group counts along a belt transect. This provided an approximation of animal 
use over time and identified the relative use by different ungulate species. The data set was then compiled and 
analyzed, and the allotments placed into three categories: 1) suitable for continued grazing, 2) unsuitable for 
continued grazing, and 3) grazing status requires further investigation. Although it varies depending on the site 
and the experience of the personnel, a RAM of this type on one key area typically takes two to four hours with a 
crew of four to six people (Dr. Jerry Holechek, pers. comm.). The authors note that this RAM “has been requested 
on numerous occasions throughout the New Mexico region since 2002 and adopted as collaborative approach to 
joint agency-permittee monitoring efforts.” 
 
 
To address the multiple resource issues that will occur following restoration treatments on grazing allotments, 
federal agencies might work more collaboratively with permittees to expand the monitoring process. This is slowly 
starting to take place in different parts of the West, especially after the U.S. Forest Service and the BLM signed 
Memorandums of Understanding with the Public Lands Council to promote voluntary cooperative monitoring 
(Thompson 2004, Fernandez-Gimenez and others 2005a). In Wyoming, for example, voluntary permittee 
monitoring of rangelands now occurs on the Bridger-Teton National Forest, and the University of Wyoming 
Cooperative Extension Service has published a booklet about the subject (Peterson 2006; see Peterson 2008 for 
an update of these activities). Nevada and Idaho have a similar guide to monitoring for ranchers (Perryman and 
others 2006, Sanders 2006). 
Fernandez-Gimenez and her colleagues (2005a, 2005b) found supporting evidence for this trend in their survey 
of permittees and land managers in Arizona. Their results indicate that while permittees and land managers 
disagreed about issues such as government regulation/loss of personal freedom, whether or not federal rangeland 
management should strongly emphasize livestock grazing and the level of effort expended to protect rare and 
endangered species,  they agreed strongly that permittees should help monitor their allotments; many agreed this 
should be mandatory. Both groups generally agreed that such a collaborative approach would produce benefits 
for all, including improved range condition, improved ability to determine whether management objectives were 
met, providing protection from lawsuits, protecting private property rights, and, ultimately, establishing a better 
management practices and social understanding (i.e., communication, cooperation, and trust) between permittees 
and land management agencies.

10
Conclusion
Across the western United States, nearly 16 million of the 19 million acres of federally managed ponderosa pine 
forests are located on active federal grazing allotments (Stade 2008, Stade and Salvo 2009). Since it is fairly certain 
that the federal grazing allotment system will continue in its present form (although it is possible that grazing 
fees could increase; E&E News 2011, Taylor 2011), anyone interested in restoring ponderosa pine forests at the 
landscape scale may want to consider the following points about how to integrate grazing and forest restoration:
• A landscape-scale forest restoration treatment plan will require including the goal of providing habitat for both 
domestic and wild ungulates. Developing a dynamic mosaic of interconnected foraging, resting, birthing, and 
hiding areas needed by cattle, elk, antelope, and deer is essential. The planning for this should be integrated with 
other planning concerns related to the timing and sequencing of restoration treatments across the landscape. 
• In most circumstances, a functional mix of restoration forestry and ranching practices can be used to control 
resource conflicts between domestic and wild ungulates.
• The responses of domestic and wild ungulates to restoration treatments will differ, but eventually cattle, elk, 
antelope, and deer will all use the improved forage in restored areas, although cattle, elk, and antelope will most 
likely feed on the grass and forb component while deer will continue to forage on woody species and oak mast.
• More applied research is needed to determine how long a treated area should “rest” before domestic grazers 
are allowed to return to an allotment. Existing guidelines are not presently supported by scientific data.
• Land managers, restoration planners, and scientists need to discuss and research ways to integrate grazing with 
a prescribed burning schedule. Resting or deferring grazing across an allotment prior to a scheduled prescribed 
may be a viable solution, especially if there adequate moisture during this period to assure adequate grass growth. 
• Land managers and restorationists should be aware that ungulates, especially cattle and, to a lesser extent, elk, help 
spread unwanted plant species, including cheatgrass. Withholding grazing in areas where populations of unwanted 
plant species exist, especially when they are in the seed-bearing stage should be encouraged. Reduced grazing during 
droughts should also be considered as a way to help avoid the spread of unwanted plants, such as cheatgrass.
• The targeted use of domestic grazers to control or eliminate unwanted plant species has potential if the correct 
grazers are employed and the timing and intensity of grazing is coordinated to reduce the unwanted plant’s 
resources. Ill-timed efforts will not work. Monitoring of results is essential.
• Grassbanks may provide another means of accomplishing needed restoration activities by exchanging forage 
rights for either conservation work or passive restoration. The costs and benefits of such arrangements have to 
be carefully considered, however.
• Monitoring grazing allotments within landscape-scale restoration treatments needs to be able to answer 
restoration-related concerns, not only grazing concerns. Moreover, a greater level of monitoring is needed 
and could be done using existing federal agency personnel in combination with allotment permittees and 
interested citizens. Rapid assessment methodologies might also be appropriate. 

11
References
Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F. Suckling, T.W. Swetnam, T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman, and J.T. Stacey. 2002. Ecological 
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: A broad perspective. Ecological Applications, 12(5):1418–1433. 
Allison, C.D., J.L. Holechek, T.T. Baker, J.C. Boren, N.K. Ashcroft, and J.M. Fowler. 2007. Rapid assessment methodology for proactive rangeland 
management. Rangelands 29(2):45-50.
Anon. 2006. Elk, deer, and cattle: The Starkey Project. Pacific Northwest Research Station. Science Update.
Bartuszevige, A.M. and B.A. Endress. 2008. Do ungulates facilitate native and exotic species spread? Seed dispersal by cattle, elk and deer in northeastern 
Oregon. Journal of Arid Environments 72:904-913.
Bartuszevige, A.M. and P.L. Kennedy. 2009. Synthesis of knowledge on the effects of fire and thinning treatments on understory vegetation in U.S. dry 
forests. Special Report 1095. Joint Fire Science Program. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University.
Belsky, A.J. and D.M. Blumenthal. 1997. Effects of livestock grazing on stand dynamics and soils in upland forests of the Interior West. Conservation 
Biology 11:315–327. 
Center for Biological Diversity. 2003. Appendix C: Livestock grazing, fire regimes, and tree densities. Tucson, AZ: Center for Biological Diversity. www.
biologicaldiversity.org/publications/papers/FIRE.PDF.
Cooney, R.F. 1952. Elk problems in Montana. Journal of Range Management 5:3-7.
Cook, J. 2002. Pronghorn antelope. Habitat Extension Bulletin No. 28. Laramie, WY: Wyoming Game and Fish Department.
Crawford, J.A., C.-H.A. Wahren, S. Kyl, and W.H. Moir. 2001. Responses of exotic plant species to fires in Pinus ponderosa forests in northern Arizona. 
Journal of Vegetation Science 12(2):261-268. 
Diamond, J.M. 2009. Effects of targeted grazing and prescribed burning on fire behavior and community dynamics of a cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) 
dominated landscape. Doctoral dissertation, Utah State University, Logan, UT.
E&E News. 2011. Public Lands: Obama admin, enviros reach settlement in lawsuit over grazing fees. E&E News. January 5.
Evans, R.T. and R.M. Love. 1957. The step-point method of sampling—a practical tool in range research. Journal of Range Management 10:208-212.
Fernandez-Gimenez, M.E., S. Jorstad McClaran, and G. Ruyle. 2005a. Arizona permittee and land management agency employee attitudes toward 
rangeland monitoring by permittees. Rangeland Ecology and Management 58(4):344-351.
Fernandez-Gimenez, M.E., G. Ruyle, and S. Jorstad McClaran. 2005b. An evaluation of Arizona Cooperative Extension’s Rangeland Monitoring 
Program. Rangeland Ecology and Management 58(1):89-98.
Friederici, P. 2003. Fuel treatments and forest restoration: An analysis of the benefits. Ecological Restoration Institute Working Paper No. 4. Flagstaff, AZ: 
Ecological Restoration Institute. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/HASH0187.dir/doc.pdf
Frost R.A. and K.L. Launchbaugh. 2003. Prescription grazing for wildland weed management: A new look at an old tool to control weeds on rangelands. 
Rangelands 25:43-47.
Ganskopp, D. 2001. Manipulating cattle distribution with salt and water in large aridland pastures: A GPS/GIS assessment. Applied Animal Behavior 
Science 73:251-262.
Germaine, S.S., H.L. Germaine, and S.R. Boe. 2004. Characteristics of mule deer day-bed and forage sites in current-condition and restoration-treated 
ponderosa pine forest. Wildlife Society Bulletin 32(2):554-564.
Gibbs, M.C., J.A. Jenks, C.S. Deperno, B.F. Sowell, and K.J. Jenkins. 2004. Cervid forage utilization in noncommercially thinned ponderosa pine forests. 
Journal of Range Management 57:435-441.
Graham, R.T., T.B. Jain, and J.L. Kingery. 2010. Ameliorating conflicts among deer, elk, cattle and/or other ungulates and other forest uses: A synthesis. 
Forestry 83(3):245-255.
Gripne, S.L. 2005a. Grassbanks: An evaluation of a conservation tool. Doctoral dissertation, University of Montana.
___. 2005b. Grassbanks: Bartering for conservation. Rangelands 27(1):24-28.
Hillis, J.M., M.J. Thompson, J.E. Canfield, L.J. Lyon, C.L. Marcum, P.M. Dolan, and D.W. Cleery. 1991. Defining elk security: The Hillis Paradigm. Pages 38-43 
in Proceedings of a symposium on elk vulnerability.  Montana Chapter of the Wildlife Society, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT.  April 10-12, 1991. 
James, M.A. 2007. Controlling cheatgrass in ponderosa pine and pinyon-juniper restoration areas. Ecological Restoration Institute Working Paper 20. Flagstaff, 
AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/index/assoc/HASHe8ba.dir/doc.pdf
Keeley, J.E. and T.W. McGinnis. 2007. Impacts of prescribed fire and other factors on cheatgrass persistence in a Sierra Nevada ponderosa pine forest. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 16:96-106.
Laughlin, D.C., J.D. Bakker, M.L. Daniels, M.M. Moore, C.A. Casey, and J.D. Springer. 2008. Restoring plant species diversity and community 
composition in a ponderosa pine–bunchgrass ecosystem. Plant Ecology 197:139–151.
Long, R.A., J.L. Rachlow, J.G. Kie, and M. Vavra. 2008. Fuels reduction in a western coniferous forest: Effects on quantity and quality of forage for elk. 
Rangeland Ecology and Management 61:301-313.
McConnell, B.R. and J.G. Smith. 1970. Response of understory vegetation to ponderosa pine thinning in eastern Washington. Journal of Range 
Management 23(3):208-212.
Milchunas, D.G. 2006. Responses of plant communities to grazing in the southwestern United States. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-169. Fort 
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
Moore, M.M., W.W. Covington, and P.Z. Fulé. 1999. Reference conditions and ecological restoration: A southwestern ponderosa pine perspective. 
Ecological Applications 9(4):1266-1277.
Mork, L.A. 2010. Livestock grazing after wildfire: Understory response, current management, and implications for conservation of southwestern forests. 
Masters thesis, Environmental Sciences and Policy, Northern Arizona University.
National Grassbank Network. 2003. FAQs: Definition of a grassbank. http://www.compatibleventures.com/grassbank_faq.html.

12
New Mexico Forest Restoration Principles. 2006. http://nmfwri.org/images/stories/pdfs/about/001028-NMForestRest-722200843246.pdf.
Peischel, A. and D.D. Henry, Jr. 2006. Targeted grazing handbook. Englewood, CO: American Sheep Industry Association. http://www.cnr.uidaho.edu/
rx-grazing/Handbook.htm.
Perryman, B.L., L.B. Bruce, P.T. Tueller, and S.R. Swanson. 2006. Ranchers’ monitoring guide. Educational Bulletin 06-04. Reno, NV: University of 
Nevada Cooperative Extension. http://www.unce.unr.edu/publications/files/ag/2006/eb0604.pdf#search=”monitoring”.
Peterson, E. 2006. Implementing a cooperative permittee monitoring program. Laramie, WY: University of Wyoming Cooperative Extension Service. 
http://www.wyorange.net/Monitoring/small%20UW%20permittee%20monitoring.pdf.
___. 2008. Cooperative permittee monitoring: The Sublette County, Wyoming experience. Rangelands 30(6):8-12.
Porath, M. L., P. A. Momont, T. DelCurto, N. R. Rimbey, J. A. Tanaka, and M. McInnis. 2002. Offstream water and trace mineral salt as management 
strategies for improved cattle distribution. Journal of Animal Science 80:346–356.
Reid, C.R., S. Goodrich, and J.E. Bowns. 2008. Cheatgrass and red brome: The history and biology of two invaders. Pages 27-32 in S.G. Kitchen, R.L. 
Pendleton, T.A. Monaco, and J. Vernon, compilers. Proceedings of shrublands under fire: Disturbance and recovery in a changing world. Held June 
6-8, 2006; Cedar City, UT. Proceedings RMRS-P-52. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. 
Riegel, G.M., R.F. Miller, and W.C. Krueger. 1991. Understory vegetation response to increasing water and nitrogen levels in a Pinus ponderosa forest in 
northeastern Oregon. Northwest Science 65(1):10-15.
Robbins, J. 2006. Where the cattle herds roam, ideally in harmony with their neighbors. New York Times, Science Section. July 11.
Rosenstock, S.S., W.B. Ballard, and J.C. Devos, Jr. 1999.  Viewpoint: Benefits and impacts of wildlife water developments. Journal of Range Management 
52(4):302-311.
Rowland, M.M., L.H. Suring, and M.J. Wisdom. 2010. Assessment of habitat threats to shrublands in the Great Basin: A case study. Pages 673-685 
in J.M. Pye, H.M. Rauscher, Y. Sands, D.C. Lee, and J.S. Beatty, technical editors. Advances in threat assessment and their application to forest 
and rangeland management. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-802. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest and Southern research stations. 
Sanders, K.D. 2006. A rancher’s guide to monitoring rangelands. Contribution Number 1010 of the Idaho Forest, Wildlife and Range Experiment 
Station, College of Natural Resources. Moscow, ID: University of Idaho. http://www.cnr.uidaho.edu/range/pubs/Sanders-RanchersGuide.pdf.
Senft, R.L., M.B. Coughenour, D.W. Bailey, L.R. Rittenhouse, O.E. Sala, and D.M. Swift. 1987. Large herbivore foraging and ecological hierarchies. 
Bioscience 37:789–799.
Sorensen, C.D. and C.M. McGlone. 2010. Ponderosa pine understory response to short-term grazing exclusion (Arizona). Ecological Restoration 
28(2):124-126.
Stade, K. 2008. Fire, grazing, and the decline of ponderosa pine forests: Federal agencies failure to recognize and address the connection. Paper presented 
at the annual meeting of the International Congress for Conservation Biology, Chattanooga, TN, July 10, 2008. http://convention3.allacademic.
com/meta/p_mla_apa_research_citation/2/4/3/7/8/p243789_index.html.
Stade, K. and M. Salvo. 2009. Ponderosa pine in peril: Assessing public lands grazing in ponderosa pine forests. Chandler, AZ: WildEarth Guardians. http://
www.wildearthguardians.org/Portals/0/support_docs/report-ponderosa-pine-08-09.pdf. 
Stohlgren, T.J., L.D. Schell, and B. Vanden Heuvel. 1999. Effects of grazing and soil quality on native and exotic plant species in Rocky Mountain 
grasslands. Ecological Applications 9:45-64.
Tate, K.W., E.R. Atwill, N.K. McDougald, and M.R. George. 2003. Spatial and temporal patterns of cattle feces deposition on rangeland. Journal of Range 
Management 56:432–438.
Taylor, P. 2011. Obama Admin denies petition to raise grazing fees on public lands. New York Times, Energy and Environment Section. January 19.
Thomas, J. W., H. Black, R.J. Scherzinger, and R.J. Pedersen. 1979. Deer and elk. Pages 104-127 in J.W. Thomas, editor, Wildlife habitats in managed 
forests—the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. Washington, D.C.: USDA Forest Service, Agricultural Handbook Number 553.
Thompson, T. 2004. Statement of Tom Thompson, deputy chief, National Forest System, USDA Forest Service, at the hearing on the Forest Service 
Grazing Program. Washington, D.C.: Subcommittee on Public Lands and Forests, Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
Tiedemann, A.R., J.O. Klemmedson, and E.L. Bull. 2000. Solution of forest health problems with prescribed fire: Are forest productivity and wildlife at 
risk? Forest Ecology and Management 127:1-18.
U.S. Forest Service, Region 3. 1997. Chapter 4: Rangeland monitoring and evaluation in Region 3 in Rangeland Analysis and Management Training 
Guide. Albuquerque, NM: USDA Forest Service, Southwest Region.
Vavra, M., K. Walburger, and T. DelCurto. 2005. Ungulate ecology of ponderosa pine ecosystems in the Northwest. Pages 145-158 in M.W. Ritchie, D.A. 
Magutre, and A. Youngblood, technical coordinators, Proceedings of the Symposium on Ponderosa Pine: Issues, Trends, and Management, 2004 
October 18-21, Klamath Falls, OR  Gen. Tech. Rep PSW-GTR-198. Albany, CA: USDA, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station.
White, M. R. 2005. Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests resource safeguards: Soil stability and recovery and vegetation regeneration and recovery; 
recommended minimum thresholds for restocking of domestic livestock on burned areas (natural, fire-use, and prescribed fires). Springerville, AZ: 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests.
Wisdom, M.J., B.K. Johnson, M. Vavra, J.M. Boyd, P.K. Coe, J.G. Kie, and A.A. Ager. 2004. Cattle and elk responses to intensive timber harvest. 2004. 
Pages 727-758 in J. Rahm, ed., Transactions of the 69th North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference, held March 16-24 in 
Spokane, WA. Washington, D.C.: Wildlife Management Institute.
Youtz, J.A., R.T. Graham, R.T. Reynolds, and J. Simon. 2008. Implementing northern goshawk habitat management in southwestern forests: A template 
for restoring fire-adapted forest ecosystems. Pages 173-191 in Integrated restoration of forested ecosystems to achieve multiresource benefits: 
Proceedings of the 2007 national silviculture workshop. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-733. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. http://www.treesearch.fs.fed.us/pubs/29472.

13
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native species, structural 
characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration International defines ecological 
restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its 
health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for 
Ecological Restoration International 2004).
Throughout the dry forests of the western United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during 
the last 150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and lack their 
once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly susceptible to damaging, 
stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics. Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing 
frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory 
plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching, implementing, and 
monitoring ecological restoration of dry, frequent-fire forests in the Intermountain West. By allowing natural processes, 
such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, 
wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Issues in Forest Restoration series provides overviews and policy recommendations derived from research and 
observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes that every forest restoration is 
site specific, we feel that the information provided in the series may help decisionmakers elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the 
opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not 
constitute their endorsement by the United States Government or the ERI.
ERI--Issues in Forest Restoration
1. Forestlands Health and Carbon Sequestration: Strengthening the Case for
Western Forest Restoration
2. Smoke from Prescribed Burning: Issues on Public Forestlands of the Western
United States
3. Public Perceptions of Forest Restoration in the Southwest: A Synthesis of Selected
Literature and Surveys
4. Integrating Ecological Restoration and Conservation Biology: A Case Study from
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
5. Communications between Forest Managers and Property Owners in Pine Flat, Arizona: A Case Study of 
Community Interactions in a High Fire Hazard Area
6. Wilderness Management and the Restoration of Fire: An Analysis of Laws and Regulations in Northern Arizona
7. Navigating the Motives and Mandates of Multiparty Monitoring
8. Forest Service Contracting: A Basic Guide for Restoration Practitioners
9. Case Study of Community Stewardship Success: The White Mountain Stewardship Contract
10. What to Expect from Collaboration in Natural Resource Management: A Research Synthesis for Practitioners
11. Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI) Biophysical Monitoring Workshop Report
12. Carbon Credits for Restored Western Forests?
13. Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis
14. Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo Tribal Forest Lands

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
ERI34KA
Return Service Requested
