Governors to meet for forest health summit 
By ALISA BLACKWOOD 
Associated Press Writer 
12/21/2000 
 
PHOENIX -- With millions of acres of Western forest land having burned last summer 
and millions more at risk, the governors of New Mexico and Arizona plan to meet next 
month to devise an action plan to work together for prevention.  
"We need to look at the entire region of Arizona and New Mexico because the landscape 
doesn't change even though there's a border," Francie Noyes, spokeswoman for Arizona 
Gov. Jane Hull, said Wednesday. "Given that the conditions are so similar, this is 
something we need to do together."  
Also in attendance at the summit will be New Mexico Gov. Gary Johnson and local, state 
and federal forest, land and environmental officials. The purpose of the summit, 
scheduled for Jan. 12 in Tempe, Ariz., is to develop a 10-year forest restoration proposal 
for the two states.  
The government spent more than $1.6 billion to fight fires that burned more than 6.5 
million acres across the country this year.  
A catastrophic fire in Los Alamos, N.M., left 400 families homeless in May. The state 
tended to a total of 933 fires from July 1999 to June 2000, said Toby Martinez, director 
of the New Mexico Forestry Division.  
Dozens of smaller fires also ravaged thousands of acres throughout Arizona, including 
portions of the Grand Canyon.  
"Our forests and our communities are threatened by wildfires," said Diane Vosick, 
spokeswoman for the Ecological Restoration Institute.  
"Until there's a coordinated strategy to address the problem, we're going to see an 
ongoing problem with wildfires. They're going to grow more wild and more intense."  
Congress allocated $240 million to reduce fire risk nationwide after this year's 
devastating fire season. The appropriation will allow the U.S. Forest Service, the Bureau 
of Land Management and the National Park Service to hire more firefighters, buy more 
equipment and help remove brush and small trees.  

The U.S. Forest Service is in the process of hiring 3,500 new workers nationwide, said 
Mary Zabinski, spokeswoman for the Forest Service's Southwest Regional Office in 
Albuquerque. BLM has said it intends to hire about 1,700 people nationwide.  
Officials say they don't want a repeat of firefighter shortages that occurred this year when 
elite firefighting crews, air tankers and helicopters were in big demand.  
Army soldiers were forced to attend crash courses in firefighting techniques and crews 
also were brought in from eastern states and from as far away as Canada, New Zealand 
and Australia.  
Decades ago, forests had relatively few mature trees widely spaced in grasslands, which 
allowed low-intensity fires to pass through with little damage. Today, however, much of 
the nation's forests are filled with small trees so close together that fires burn through the 
tops of the trees, destroying the forest.  
Summit coordinators say the 10-year Arizona-New Mexico wildfire prevention and forest 
restoration program will reduce fire risk through thinning and prescribed burns and will 
increase partnership between the two states.  
"The national forests don't know state boundaries ... and the issues will be similar in both 
states," Vosick said. "By joining forces, there may be a greater efficiency applied."  
 
