Kyl talks up benefits of forest-restoration plan 
By Daily Sun Staff 
11/30/2000 
 
Northern Arizona University's Ecological Restoration Institute is influencing the national 
debate on the future of unhealthy and wildfire-prone forests across the nation, said U.S. 
Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., at a news conference today at the Gus Pearson Natural Area 
outside of Flagstaff.  
Kyl was on hand to discuss the Institute's recent $8.8 million allocation from Congress 
for research, forest thinning projects and controlled burns.  
The funding will enable the Institute and agencies such as the U.S. Forest Service to 
move forward with proposed forest treatment projects on 100,000 acres surrounding 
Flagstaff.  
"National attitudes and policies are being influenced by the timely and critical work being 
done at the Institute, including restoration-based fuels treatment, community education 
and outreach, and forest by-product market research," said Kyl.  
Institute Director Wallace Covington was unable to attend today's event because he was 
giving a speech before the Western Governors Association.  
The group is working on a 10-year plan for forest treatment, wildfire threat reduction, and 
multi-agency and state cooperation across the West.  
NAU President Clara Lovett also praised the Institute's leadership role in developing 
strategies to restore the nation's forests.  
"Dr. Wally Covington has worked diligently for 25 years to promote understanding of 
ponderosa pine ecosystems and the urgent need for restoration. Under his direction, (the 
Institute) will remain a national leader in developing science-based solutions that meet 
social objectives," Lovett said in a prepared statement.  
Flagstaff Mayor Joseph Donaldson applauded the program to address forest health issues.  
"Through the collaborative efforts facilitated by the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership. 
Our city has recognized that just stopping fires will not solve a deeper problem. We are 
taking action to restore the ecological health of the forest to create long-term protection 
for our community," Donaldson said.  

Opponents of forest restoration projects in Fort Valley are challenging a recent decision 
by the Forest Service to treat 9,100 acres of congested forest in the area. Critics of the 
Institute's strategy to restore forests to a less congested condition prevalent before settlers 
arrived say the approach is harmful to the environment.  
 
