Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Vosick, D., D. M. Ostergren, and L. Murfitt. 2007. Old-growth policy. Ecology and Society 12(2): 19.
[online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
Synthesis, part of a Special Feature on The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth in Frequent-fire
Forests of the American West
Old-growth Policy
Diane Vosick 1, David M. Ostergren 2, and Lucy Murfitt
ABSTRACT. Most federal legislation and policies (e.g., the Wilderness Act, Endangered Species Act,
National Forest Management Act) fail to speak directly to the need for old-growth protection, recruitment,
and restoration on federal lands. Various policy and attitudinal barriers must be changed to move beyond
the current situation. For example, in order to achieve the goal of healthy old growth in frequent-fire forests,
the public must be educated regarding the evolutionary nature of these ecosystems and persuaded that
collaborative action rather than preservation and litigation is the best course for the future of these forests.
Land managers and policy makers must be encouraged to look beyond the single-species management
paradigm toward managing natural processes, such as fire, so that ecosystems fall within the natural range
of variability. They must also see that, given their recent evidence of catastrophic fires, management must
take place outside the wildland–urban interface in order to protect old-growth forest attributes and human
infrastructure. This means that, in some wilderness areas, management may be required. Land managers,
researchers, and policy makers will also have to agree on a definition of old growth in frequent-fire
landscapes; simply adopting a definition from the mesic Pacific Northwest will not work. Moreover, the
culture within the federal agencies needs revamping to allow for more innovation, especially in terms of
tree thinning and wildland fire use. Funding for comprehensive restoration treatments needs to be increased,
and monitoring of the Healthy Forest Initiative and Healthy Forest Restoration Act must be undertaken.
Key Words: diameter caps; federal employee liability; institutional barriers; Mexican spotted owl; northern
goshawk; preservationist philosophy; public education; wildland fire use
INTRODUCTION
Understanding the history of forest management
and attitudes toward forest resources are a
prerequisite to understanding the changes needed in
current policies to promote old growth. Motivating
policy change to support recruitment and protection
of old growth requires that the public, federal
agencies, business interests, and elected officials
understand and agree that managing for old growth
is important and that old growth is an essential
component of a healthy forest ecosystem.
A complex relationship exists between the public,
policy makers, stakeholders, and the land
management agencies when it comes to developing
and implementing public policy. A common
assumption is that policy will be based on rigorous
science, data, and other factual information. As a
result, a great deal of attention is devoted to the
development and distribution of that information as
a primary strategy to catalyze change. However,
Congressional legislation and agency regulations
are created in response to a variety of influences that
include individual constituents, lobbyists, interest
groups, economic conditions, public opinion, and
social values, to name a few (Oleszek 2001).
Frequently, the promulgation of policy is a response
to an immediate, cataclysmic event that captures the
attention of the public, who in turn demand action
(Downs 1972).
A recent example of this was the exponential
increase in funding for the National Fire Plan (NFP)
in federal fiscal year 2001, which was a direct and
immediate response by Congress to one of the worst
fire years in the United States’ history. Looking
further back in history, one finds that the
catastrophic fires in the Lake States during the latter
decades of the 19th century and the great fires of
1Ecological Restoration Institute, 
2Northern Arizona University School of Forestry

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
1910 in the West gave rise to the fire-suppression
policies that have contributed greatly to today’s
forest health problems. Thus, although science is
important, in reality, the scientific basis for a policy
is just one of many factors that influence the final
decision. In the end, policies reflect social values
that are informed by many factors, including
science.
In this chapter, we analyze current federal policies
in the context of the scientific recommendations for
old-growth protection and recruitment, and the
policy and attitudinal barriers that must be changed
to achieve old-growth management goals. The
proposed changes will build from the logic and
scientific evidence presented in previous chapters,
yet recognize that, in the final analysis, human
values will carry the day.
THE POLICY AND SOCIAL CONTEXT OF
OLD-GROWTH PROTECTION SINCE THE
1960S
Most federal policies do not explicitly include old
growth, yet protection of old growth has
dramatically influenced forest management for the
past 35 years. Understanding how advocates for
protection of old growth have used a variety of laws
to influence and change federal land management
is necessary to identify what policy changes may be
needed to restore old growth. In fact, rigorous
protection strategies may not be appropriate to
restore old-growth conditions in the frequent-fire
forests of the western United States.
As detailed in the article by Alexandra Murphy and
colleagues (2007) in this special issue, timber
resources were aggressively harvested to support
economic expansion and home construction
following World War II. During the 1970s and
1980s, clearcutting increased to all-time highs
throughout the national forest system (Yaffee
1994). A modern environmental consciousness
came of age during the same period, inspired by the
work of biologist Rachel Carson in the 1960s, and
reflected in the popular culture by the celebration
of the first Earth Day in April 1970. The growing
awareness of conservation, and increasing demand
for the protection of air and water quality, wildlife,
and wild places began to collide with commodity-
driven forest management during this period.
Congress Codifies Environmental Protection
Before the 1960s, the general public and the federal
courts had little involvement in management
decisions of the Forest Service. However, during
the 1960s and 1970s, popular demand for the
conservation and protection of public lands and
wildlife led Congress to pass laws that codified
environmental protection and broadened public
involvement in land-management decisions. Some
of the most significant statutes expanded the rights
of citizens and advocacy groups to legal recourse in
federal land-management issues (Keele et al. 2006).
These decisions enabled citizens and advocacy
groups to successfully use administrative appeals
and other legal actions to influence land-
management 
decisions. 
The 
Administrative
Appeals Reform Act of 1993 affirmed this right of
appeal.
During the 1960s and 1970s, Congress passed the
Wilderness Act, the National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA), the Endangered Species Act (ESA),
the Federal Land Policy and Management Act
(FLPMA), and the National Forest Management
Act (NFMA). Each statute addressed the public’s
demand for environmental protection and the need
for new approaches to manage natural resources.
Despite no specific mention of old growth, these
five acts are the foundation for decisions that
influence old-growth management today.
Congress passed the NFMA to create a new
framework of greater accountability and transparency
for forest-management decisions. During Senate
hearings on the NFMA, Senator Hubert Humphrey
observed that the Forest Service’s record had
brought into question the extent to which the agency
could be relied upon to protect and manage public
resources. Humphrey declared:
The days have ended when the forest may
be viewed only as trees and trees viewed
only as timber. The soil and the water, the
grasses and the shrubs, the fish and the
wildlife, and the beauty that is the forest
must become integral parts of resource
managers’ thinking and actions. (Gifford
Pinchot Task Force 2006).

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
The NFMA and its implementing regulations are
the primary legal framework for managing national
forests. Congress intended that National Forest
plans would guide forest management and provide
the public with transparent standards and guidelines
for management. Congress also provided the Forest
Service with clear guidance in terms of
implementing the NFMA. Specifically, section 3(B)
became the basis for advocates to argue that old-
growth protection was inherent in maintaining the
diversity of plant communities and, therefore, was
afforded protection under the NFMA.
The regulations shall include, but not be
limited to....
(3) 
specifying 
guidelines 
for 
land
management plans developed to achieve the
goals of the Program which—
(A) insure consideration of the economic
and environmental aspects of various
systems of renewable resource management,
including the related systems of silviculture
and protection of forest resources, to
provide for outdoor recreation (including
wilderness), range, timber, watershed,
wildlife, and fish;
(B) provide for diversity of plant and animal
communities based on the suitability and
capability of the specific land area in order
to meet overall multiple-use objectives, and
within the multiple-use objectives of a land
management plan adopted pursuant to this
section, provide, where appropriate, to the
degree practicable, for steps to be taken to
preserve the diversity of tree species similar
to that existing in the region controlled by
the plan.... (16 U.S.C. § 1604(g).)
Congress passed the NEPA to ensure that
environmental considerations, along with economic
and technical considerations, are factored into
decisions made by federal agencies. The Forest
Service used the NEPA to evaluate the first forest
plans and their subsequent amendments. The 2005
Forest Planning Rule eliminated the internal
requirement to do an Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS) as a part of forest planning,
However, on 29 May 2007, the United States
District Court for the Northern District of California
issued a decision in combined cases involving the
Forest Service. The Court held that the adoption of
the 2005 Planning Rule violated the Administrative
Procedure Act (APA), the NEPA, and the ESA. It
enjoined the agency from implementing or
otherwise using the rule (USDA Forest Service
2007). Exactly how forest planning will proceed is
unclear at this time.
The interface between the NFMA, National Forest
Plans, and the NEPA created transparency for the
public to monitor proposed management actions. It
was the intersection of these three policies that
created the pathway for concerned organizations
and individuals to challenge forest management
decisions (Keele et al. 2006). It was the concern
about endangered species listed under the ESA and
the relationship of those species to forest practices
(in particular, the removal of old growth) that
mobilized the environmental community to take
legal action whenever the Forest Service appeared
to have ignored administrative procedure or non-
commodity values.
Using these laws as the primary tool for challenging
land-management decisions has generated controversy.
Some policy makers believe that the NEPA process
has been abused to obstruct land management
(General Accounting Office (GAO) 2003), whereas
others maintain that the NEPA is inadequately
applied to guide decisions (Lindstrom and Smith
2001). In some cases, environmental organizations
have resorted to challenging administrative minutia
in order to further their goals. Whether this is
because federal agencies failed to address important
management issues (e.g., biodiversity) or because
some environmental organizations are overzealous
in their efforts is a matter of opinion. The fact is that
both sides have won and lost cases, and legal actions
have had a significant effect in terms of changing
the process of decision making used by the Forest
Service (Manring 2003).
A CASE STUDY: HAWKS, OWLS, AND
FOREST PLANS CONVERGE TO
INFLUENCE MANAGEMENT OF FORESTS
IN THE SOUTHWEST
Forest plans in the Southwest Region were
completed from 1985 to 1988, before the Mexican
spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) was listed
under the ESA and before there was active public
concern about the apparent decline in northern
goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) populations. Although
the plans addressed habitat needs for threatened,
endangered, and sensitive species by articulating
some guidelines, they included little specific

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
guidance for the two species that would become the
basis for significant litigation. Forest plans that were
completed in the 1980s continued to promote
silviculture and sustained-yield forestry as the
primary objective of forest management. Early
forest plans emphasized a sustained-yield, even-
aged management system based on the removal of
large and old trees, and replanting or re-
establishment of trees to unnaturally high levels of
uniform ages and sizes (USDA Forest Service
1995). In the 1990s, even-aged forest management
and wood production started to give way to
ecosystem management and the need to change
management to provide for more diverse ecological
and social values (Cortner and Moote 1999).
The issues of forest management, forest planning,
and protection of critical habitat for endangered,
threatened, and sensitive species under the ESA
erupted in the Southwest in 1995 when federal Judge
Carl Muecke ordered logging to stop in all
Southwest federal forests in response to a lawsuit
by the Center for Biological Diversity (Anderson
1995).
Conservation of the northern goshawk had already
caught the attention of the Forest Service, who chose
to list it in the Southwest as a “sensitive species” in
1982 (Reynolds et al. 1992). During initial forest
plan development in the mid-1980s, five of the plans
provided for a 20- to 30-acre protection area around
occupied northern goshawk nests. The type and
extent of habitat needed for these two species, and
forest management practices that threatened that
habitat, became the issue that focused attention on
land management by the federal agencies. These
two wildlife species provided a foundation to argue
for the protection of old growth.
In order to save the goshawk and the forests
it depends upon, the Center for Biological
Diversity has launched an ambitious
campaign to protect all three subspecies
and all mature forests from Alaska to
Mexico. At the federal level, the Center is
seeking to list the Queen Charlotte goshawk
as an endangered species in Alaska, British
Columbia, Washington and Oregon, and the
Apache and Northern Goshawks as
endangered species in all U.S. States west
of the continental divide. At the regional
level, the Center is leading efforts to protect
goshawks in the Southwest, the Sierra
Nevada, Utah, and Southeast Alaska. At the
local level, we are challenging timber sales,
grazing allotments, and road construction
which destroys goshawk habitat. The
Center is also conducting scientific
research on goshawks and publishes an
online review of goshawk research and
conservation issues. (Center for Biological
Diversity 2006.)
On 24 June 1992, the Forest Service filed a Notice
of Intent to prepare an EIS amending all 11 Forest
Management Plans in the Southwest Region to
incorporate guidelines for habitat management of
the northern goshawk and the Mexican spotted owl.
The EIS created an avenue for the Center for
Biological Diversity and others to challenge the
goshawk guidelines, maintaining that the guidelines
were based on the incorrect assumption that the
northern goshawk is a “habitat generalist” that uses
a variety of different habitats. The Center, along
with the Arizona Department of Game and Fish and
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife, instead argued that the
northern goshawk is an old-growth “forest
specialist” that depends on old-growth forests
(United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth
Circuit 2003).
The final EIS (FEIS) evaluating alternatives for
Forest Plans in Region 3 adopted an alternative that
responded to comments taken from the Mexican
Spotted Owl Recovery Plan (MSORP), which was
released in March 1995. The FEIS included
standards and guidelines based on the MSORP and
the standards and guidelines developed by the
Interagency Scientific Committee for northern
goshawks. This alternative recommended retention
of 50% of trees in mature and old forests. Since
adoption of the forest plan amendments in 1996,
managers have largely avoided locating projects in
habitat for Mexican Spotted Owl (protected activity
centers or PACs) and have either avoided treatments
in northern goshawk post-fledgling family areas
(PFAs) or faced controversy.
FUEL AND FIRES INCREASE IN
FREQUENT-FIRE FORESTS
Between 1986 and 2003, timber-processing
capacity in the Southwest plummeted by 63%
(Keegan et al. 2004). Timber harvest levels likewise
declined dramatically from an average high in the
1980s of 402 million board feet (MMBF) to 46

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
MMBF by 1996. By 1996, the harvest had shifted
almost exclusively to fuelwood (Raisch et al. 1997).
Although there were early signs that the economics
and feasibility of commercial logging in the
Southwest were waning, the 1995 injunction by
Judge Muencke accelerated the decline of logging
in the region. The timber industry in Arizona, New
Mexico, Colorado, and Utah depended on timber
from federal land for 70% of their supply, leaving
them particularly vulnerable to changes in forest
policy.
Fire suppression and other historic management
actions have led to an unnatural increase in the
amount of fuel in frequent-fire forests. The net
annual growth (NAG) of sawtimber (NAG = annual
growth – [harvest + mortality + defect]) on
timberland in the Southwest Region results in a net
annual increase of 461 MMBF. Structural changes
include significant increases in the number of trees
that are <43.2 (<17-in) cm in diameter at breast
height (dbh; Johnson 1994). This unnatural stocking
of small trees, combined with other compositional
and structural changes in the forest, set the stage for
unprecedented crown fire outside the natural range
of variability for frequent-fire forests.
Catastrophic Fire Triggers New Policies: the
Healthy Forest Initiative and Restoration Act
Seek to Expedite Treatments while Protecting
and Restoring Old Growth
As a result of the increasing severity, size, and
frequency of catastrophic fire, the federal agencies
and Congress initiated significant policy changes
starting in 1995. The 2000 Cerro Grande Fire in Los
Alamos, New Mexico and other unprecedented
conflagrations in Montana that year provided the
impetus for Congress to significantly increase
funding to the federal land-management agencies
through the 2000 National Fire Plan. In response to
complaints that planning and the processes
associated with the NEPA, NFMA, and ESA were
the biggest impediments to a swift response to the
wildfire crisis, President G.W. Bush advanced
administrative policy changes through the Healthy
Forest Initiative (HFI) in 2002. Through the HFI,
the administration sought to streamline the
administrative rules and regulations guiding
environmental review of projects, consultation
requirements under the ESA, and other procedures
considered impediments to forest thinning and
restoration. Congress echoed this action one year
later with the Healthy Forest Restoration Act
(HFRA) of 2003, which authorized up to $760
million 
for 
restoration 
and 
fuel-reduction
treatments, and made additional policy changes
designed to accelerate hazardous fuel reduction
(GAO 
2003). 
In 
an 
attempt 
to 
address
environmental concerns that the HFRA would
accelerate potentially harmful commercial logging
that might include old growth, Congress included
provisions designed to protect and enhance old
growth. Other significant provisions directed the
Secretary of Agriculture to give priority to projects
that protect at-risk communities, watersheds, or
communities that implement Community Wildfire
Protection Plans (CWPPs). The Act also states that
no less than 50% of the funding under the Act should
go to projects in the Wildland–Urban Interface or
WUI (Healthy Forest Restoration Act 2003).
Defining old growth in statute is a vexing problem
for congressional staff (J. Watts, Counsel to Senator
Diane Feinstein, personal communication, 2006).
The fact that the definition must vary by forest type,
geographical location, and other ecological
variables makes a statute-friendly, one-size-fits-all
definition impossible. Congress elected to tie the
definition of old growth in the HFRA to the
provisions of the NFMA that describe goals for
protecting plant and animal diversity. Tied to the
provisions of the NFMA to protect diversity, the
HFRA also seeks to maintain old growth and allow
actions that will restore it.
In carrying out a covered project, the
Secretary shall fully maintain, or contribute
toward the restoration of, the structure and
composition of old-growth stands according
to the pre-fire suppression old-growth
conditions characteristic of the forest type,
taking into account the contribution of the
stand to landscape fire adaptation and
watershed health, and retaining the large
trees contributing to old-growth structure. 
(Healthy Forest Restoration Act, 2003.)
Federal agencies are just beginning to use the new
HFRA authorities. The House and Senate held
hearings during the summer of 2006 to review
agency work under the HFRA and HFI to determine
the extent they are used (House Resources
Committee/Forests and Forest Health Subcommittee,
29 June 29 2006; Senate Energy and Natural
Resources Committee/Public Lands and Forests, 19

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
July 2006). Testimony from Deputy Secretary of
the Interior Lynn Scarlett indicated that use of new
authorities is just beginning because of the timelines
associated with existing project planning (Scarlett
2006). One witness, Matthew Koehler of the
WildWest Institute, reviewed provisions related to
restoring and protecting old growth in his testimony.
He asserted that the Forest Service ignored the old-
growth protection provisions in a project proposed
under HFRA guidelines on the Middle East Fork in
the Bitterroot National Forest (Koehler 2006). It is
still too early to determine how much the provisions
under the HFRA and HFI will be used, and whether
or not they will be used to protect old growth.
In response to the HFRA and the support expressed
by communities for protection, the agencies have
focused hazardous fuels treatments in the WUI.
Other factors, including the easy access to most of
these WUI sites, the solid funding for hazardous
fuels reduction (as opposed to that for restoration
treatments) and the low likelihood of conflict,
support 
this 
emphasis. 
Unfortunately, 
this
preoccupation with the WUI may be coming at the
cost of protecting valuable attributes in the
landscape, such as old growth.
Further confounding forest restoration is the
emphasis by the Office of Management and Budget
and Congress on treating the maximum number of
acres using the least amount of money. This has a
fiscal logic, but fails to consider the associated
ecological implications. This performance measure
pushes the agencies toward acres that are easier to
treat (acres that have not accumulated excessive
fuels and, therefore, can be treated with prescribed
burning as opposed to more costly thinning and
burning) and militates against treating acres that
may require more complex, costly approaches or
are difficult to access. In the case of old growth, the
need to reduce understory fuels before prescribed
burning adds significant cost to the treatment. Land
managers are hard pressed to meet acreage targets
as well as address highest priority areas with the
available dollars associated with this performance
measure.
WHAT THREATENS OLD GROWTH?
In the 1990s, the biggest perceived threat to old
growth was logging. The basis for this concern was
legitimate—it was a response to one hundred years
of high-grading the forest for the biggest and best
trees as well as other management decisions that left
frequent-fire forests depauperate of old growth. By
the 1990s, old growth in the Rocky Mountains and
Southwest had been reduced to a fraction of the
amount that occurred before Euro-American
settlement (Kaufmann et al. 1992b).
With a focus on protecting old growth from logging,
the environmental community effectively used the
policy tools of the 1970s to challenge projects that
cut old growth or large trees, or appeared to
negatively affect critical habitat. These actions (or
threats of actions), along with the loss of sawmills
capable of handling (and dependent on) large-
diameter trees and the loss of harvest infrastructure,
have significantly reduced the number of forest
treatment projects that include old-growth forests
or large trees. To provide assurance that old growth
will not be cut, collaborative forestry groups often
argue for and obtain a diameter-size limit (or cap)
on the size of trees that can be removed (Friederici
2003). For example, Arizona maintains a de facto
40.6 cm (16-in) dbh cap on trees harvested from
State Trust forested lands. Similarly, the first
projects developed by the Greater Flagstaff Forests
Partnership were designed with diameter caps.
Although these caps have questionable ecological
benefit, their existence has allowed some projects
to move forward that might otherwise have been
appealed (Abella et al. 2006).
However, if logging was the only threat to the
survival of old growth in frequent-fire forests, then
a qualified victory could be declared in most parts
of the West. The good news is that logging is no
longer the primary threat to old growth in frequent-
fire forests. The bad news is that a myriad of other
factors threaten its survival. Solving these problems
will require changes in public understanding,
federal land-use policy, and agency culture.
WHAT NEEDS TO CHANGE? PUBLIC
UNDERSTANDING, FEDERAL POLICY,
AND AGENCY CULTURE
A successful strategy to retain and promote old
growth in frequent-fire forests requires broader
acceptance that active management is necessary. To
develop this acceptance will take time and the
political will to act.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
Public Understanding: Retaining and
Recruiting Old Growth Requires Action—
Hands-off Preservation Will Not Work
All frequent-fire, old-growth forests have been
influenced by humans (Pyne 1982, Kaufmann et al.
1992b). Fire by indigenous people, a century of fire
suppression, 
and 
grazing 
are 
but 
a 
few
anthropogenic influences that have shaped the
condition of old growth for millennia.
People have an emotional attachment to old growth.
These feelings arise from the sense that old-growth
forests are static, venerable, and unchanged for long
periods (Sharpe et al. 1986). Given this perception,
many people believe that, by leaving old-growth
forests alone, they will be preserved.
A common perception is that actively
managing old growth is inappropriate or
incompatible with other values, resulting in
proposals to set aside mature and old-
growth forests and prohibiting any form of
management. However, even where non-
timber 
values 
are 
primary, 
active
management of mature and old-growth
forest may be necessary to promote and/or
sustain ecological values over time. 
(Society of American Foresters 2005.) 
Old growth in frequent-fire forests evolved with
low- and mixed-severity fire. Although the
landscape was believed to be dominated by old
growth before Anglo-European settlement, multi-
aged and sized trees were an important, dynamic
element associated with old-growth structure
(Covington and Moore 1994). Frequent fire meant
the herbaceous layer in an old-growth stand was
constantly changing, that tree recruitment was
sporadic—the site was dynamic, not static.
Preservationist, hands-off, anti-logging strategies
were a rational protection strategy when logging
was the biggest threat to old growth. It is not the
strategy that will protect old growth today (Thomas
2006). It is only through active restoration and
management that old growth will be protected and
recruited. However, restoring old growth requires
an evaluation of whether restoration is a one-time
affair or includes re-entry over predetermined
timeframes, and whether wildfire will be allowed
to burn or whether prescribed burning will be used.
A necessary approach to build confidence in
management decisions will be to bring stakeholders
into management discussions through collaboration
(Friedman 2006). Most federal, state, and regional
policies of the last 6 years promote collaboration as
a way to build trust between citizens and the
agencies (Western Governors’ Association 2001,
2002; HFRA 2003). This activity, although no
guarantee for smooth and quick conflict resolution,
is proving to decrease acrimony and build
understanding for forest restoration (Lowe and
Moote 2005).
Action:
G 
Federal land-management agencies should
continue to integrate collaboration in land-
management decision making. To do this
successfully requires training, clarity of
purpose and roles, and transparency. It should
also be supported through collaboration-
based performance measures. Veterans of
collaboration do not feel agency personnel
are adequately trained or supported to achieve
success (Moote and Becker 2003). The
agencies should continue to emphasize the
importance of collaboration, and provide the
training to do it effectively.
 
Federal Policy: Intelligently Managing for Old
Growth Requires an Understanding of the
Underlying Evolutionary Framework of
Frequent-fire Forests
Restoring forest health requires understanding the
evolutionary forces that shaped frequent-fire
forests. Although it is difficult to understand all the
drivers and nuances of complex ecosystems,
ecological restoration approaches assume that by
understanding and restoring the major functions,
structure, and composition of an ecosystem, the
ecosystem will be launched on a trajectory that will
return it to its natural range of variability. This
approach to management is a radical departure from
the views embraced and promoted by forest
managers in most of the 20th century, and is
theoretically supported by an improved understanding
of dynamic ecology and ecosystems (Christensen et
al. 1996, Pickett et al. 1997, Cortner and Moote
1999).

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
Action:
G 
Continuing education—with an emphasis on
emerging knowledge of forest ecosystems—
should be encouraged for land managers.
 
Federal Policy: Retention and Recruitment of
Old Growth Is an Essential Part of Any
Strategy to Improve the Ecological Health and
Resiliency of the Whole Forest
Managers should move beyond single-species
objective management and manage for the natural
processes—such as fire—that support multiple
ecosystem attributes.
Managing for only one or few ecosystem elements
often leads to unintended consequences. A more
holistic approach is more likely to lead to overall
ecosystem sustainability in the long term.
Furthermore, conservation biologists and restorationists
agree that most native biological diversity,
including threatened species and endangered
resources, will be supported when an ecosystem is
restored to its natural range of variability (Noss et
al. 2006).
Action:
G 
Forest plans should establish a central goal of
restoring ecological processes and the natural
range of variability to frequent-fire forests.
Forest plan revisions should acknowledge the
importance of restoring ecological processes
to achieve multiple biodiversity objectives.
They should also acknowledge that, in many
cases, it will be necessary to mechanically
alter stand structure as well as encourage
understory development that will support
surface fire. Restored forests will support
retention and recruitment of old growth.
 
G 
Clarify the goshawk guidelines for the
management and environmental communities.
The goshawk guidelines (Reynolds et al.
1992) influence management activity in the
Southwest more than any other region in the
country. The guidelines emphasize the
importance of retaining old growth while
restoring historic forest structure. Emerging
work demonstrates that treatments using the
goshawk guidelines and those using forest
health restoration treatments developed by
the Ecological Restoration Institute are
largely consistent (Richard T. Reynolds and
W. Wallace Covington, personal communication,
2006). However, there is widespread
misinterpretation of the guidelines by
practitioners with respect to establishment of
openings and tree-selection criteria. In many
cases, practitioners fail to create adequate size
openings, and misinterpret desired forest
structure. Efforts to clarify the goshawk
guidelines and move treatments in the
direction of comprehensive restoration
should become the cornerstone of future
training activities for forest managers in the
Forest Service.
 
G 
Wildland fire use plans should be completed.
Restoring natural fire to the landscape is
essential to recruit old growth. Wildland fire
use plans should be completed so that, where
and when appropriate, natural ignitions can
be used to reduce hazardous fuels. However,
overstocked old-growth stands should be
identified during the planning process and
thinned of hazardous fuels before reintroducing
fire. Fire-management officers and others
will need the support of regional and national
offices to help protect them from the potential
liabilities and negative publicity inherent in
the use of wildland fire.
 
G 
Pass state “right-to-burn” statutes. Florida
passed 
legislation 
that 
grants 
land-
management agencies the right to use fire for
management purposes. Concern exists that
the federal Clean Air Act and the Americans
with Disabilities Act may lead to a prohibition
or serious restrictions on burning. The right
of land-management agencies to use this tool
may need preemptive protection by statute.
The most difficult aspect of right-to-burn
statutes will be defining airshed pollution
allotments that include regular forest fires. In
the San Joaquin Valley of California, air
pollution is such that Yosemite and Kings
Canyon national parks have been forced to
cancel fires because smoke and particulate
matter would exceed local standards.
 

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
Federal Policy: Healthy Forest Restoration Act
—Hazardous Fuel Reduction Must Go Outside
the Wildland–Urban Interface to Protect
Irreplaceable Forest Attributes
Agencies are compelled to focus hazardous-fuel
reduction treatments in the WUI to protect
communities. This choice minimizes conflicts with
the environmental community and addresses
immediate public concerns about fire. However, it
diverts management action from the broader
landscape. Many environmental groups hope that,
once the WUI is treated, the public will more readily
accept using fire as the primary tool to restore forest
health at the landscape level. They hope that either
no thinning or only light thinning will be necessary
before wildland fire use (WFU) can be employed to
restore extensive forest landscapes (Nowicki 2002).
The priority for forest managers in the
Southwest should be to provide the greatest
possible degree of protection to interface
communities through joint-fuels reduction
programs....Once communities in the forest
interface are reasonably protected, FOREST
GUARDIANS believes that fire must
become a viable forest management tool. In
order for people to feel safe, their
immediate surroundings must be treated,
local fire departments must be adequately
funded and adequate evacuation routes
must exist and be identified. (Byrd and
Brittenburg 2005.) 
When fuel reduction and restoration treatments
focus solely on communities, many attributes in the
broader landscape are compromised and remain
vulnerable to damage and mortality caused by
unnatural, severe fire. Support exists for treatments
to protect important elements of the landscape
(Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Advisory
Council 2004).
Action:
G 
Treatments should occur outside the WUI to
protect and restore important landscape
attributes. The HFRA permits up to 50% of
the authorized funding to be spent outside the
WUI. The federal land-management agencies
should work with communities to identify
acres for treatments that protect landscape
attributes including old growth, watersheds,
and critical habitat.
 
G 
The federal agencies should use the
authorities provided under the HFRA to
protect and restore old growth from
catastrophic fire. Using this authority will
require full engagement through collaboration,
a difficult but not impossible task. By
implementing the policy designed to protect
old growth, the agencies can build the trust
required to reduce hazardous fuels and
improve health of old growth in frequent-fire
forests.
 
Federal Policy: Performance Measures for
Treatments Should Be Modified to Encourage
Quality, Not Just Quantity
Not all acres cost the same to treat, nor are all acres
equally important. The current emphasis of
maximizing the number of acres treated drives the
federal agencies to treat “cheap” acres, not
necessarily the most important acres. Revising
performance standards so that strategic and priority
acres (such as those that protect old growth and
bolster community protection) are emphasized and
treatments that provide for the return of surface fire
are rewarded. Such a policy will encourage actions
that are more ecologically significant and
economically prudent.
Action:
G 
Congress and the Office of Management and
Budget should recognize that maximizing the
number of acres treated per unit cost is an
insufficient measure of agency performance
to determine treatment effectiveness. The
land management agencies should develop
performance measures that support efforts to
treat important acres.
 
Federal Policy: Management to Protect and
Recruit Old Growth May Be Needed in Some
Wilderness Areas
Some federally designated Wilderness Areas and
National Park Service (NPS) backcountry areas are
irreplaceable reservoirs of biological diversity.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
However, fire suppression and the ecological
degradation associated with fire interruption may
leave these areas vulnerable to catastrophic fire.
Managed treatments within the framework of the
law may be needed in these areas to preserve or
restore their wilderness character (Ostergren 2006).
Action:
 
G 
Initiate careful restoration treatments to
protect old growth in Wilderness Areas and
NPS backcountry areas where irreplaceable
biodiversity attributes are threatened.
 
Federal Policy: the Definition for Old Growth
in Frequent-fire Forests Is Not the Same as the
Definition for Old Growth Developed in the
Pacific Northwest
The definition of old growth in frequent-fire forests
has been confounded by attempts to align it with
definitions of old growth in the mesic forests of the
Pacific Northwest. In fact, definitions of old growth
developed in the Southwest that were derived from
the Northwest characterizations and observations of
post-settlement 
structure 
in 
the 
Southwest
(Kaufmann et al. 1992a) bear little resemblance to
old-growth trees and stands before Anglo-
European-induced changes as described by current
research (Covington and Moore 1994). This
confusion has undermined management strategies
for frequent-fire forests and confounded policy
makers.
Action:
G 
Definitions of old growth for frequent-fire
forests should be developed, peer reviewed,
and adopted by the federal agencies.
 
Federal Policy: Increase Funding for
Comprehensive Restoration Treatments
Presently two-thirds of funding provided through
the National Fire Plan is dedicated to fire
suppression. Only one-third is dedicated to
preventative action. Studies demonstrate that it
makes economic and ecological sense to invest in
preventing rather than suppressing unnatural
wildfires (USDA Office of the Inspector General,
Western Region 2006, Snider et al. 2006).
Restoration treatments reduce hazardous fuels and
simultaneously restore forest health. Nonetheless,
many land managers don’t acknowledge this fact,
and focus primarily on hazardous-fuel reduction.
Many managers justify their decision based on the
belief that funding exists primarily for hazardous-
fuel reduction.
Action:
G 
The federal land-management agencies
should clarify that comprehensive restoration
treatments 
qualify 
for 
hazardous-fuel
reduction dollars.
 
G 
Congress and the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) should increase federal land-
management agency capacity to review and
conduct restoration treatments across the
landscape.
 
Federal Policy: the Environmental Review
Process
Congress and the Administration have changed the
environmental 
review 
processes 
that 
were
perceived as slow and obstructionist. Congressional
hearings in 2006 indicate that those processes are
just beginning to be applied and it is unclear how
well the changes have achieved their objectives of
reducing appeals and accelerating action.
Action:
G 
Congress should monitor application of the
environmental review process to see if the
goals promulgated in the HFI and HFRA are
achieved.
 
G 
Congress should fund the public outreach and
project planning activities sufficiently to
rebuild trust in federal agencies among all
interest groups.
 

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
Agency Culture
There is little incentive to reward federal land
managers who innovate. Moreover, in the face of
diminished financial and human resources for land
management, agency personnel often default to
familiar actions that avoid controversy or do not
require additional time.
These institutional realities influence management
in many ways. For example, many managers do not
reduce fuels adequately to allow the safe
reintroduction of low-intensity fire. This occurs for
several reasons. First, hazardous-fuel reduction
treatments in frequent-fire forests may still reflect
past practices that sought to enhance commercial
wood production rather than restore ecological
health. Therefore, too many trees are left in patterns
reminiscent of tree farms rather than natural
ecosystems. Second, managers are responding to
public pressure to limit the size and number of trees
harvested. 
Third, 
in 
attempts 
to 
address
interdisciplinary concerns, treatment objectives
may be confounded by trying to address such
concerns as wildlife habitat and visual effects, thus
diluting the effectiveness of treatments. These
factors conspire to reduce the efficacy of treatments
and their long-term effectiveness for wildfire risk
reduction and forest restoration.
Risk aversion also diminishes the use of wildland
fire. Fire is inherently risky, both ecologically and
from a public relations perspective. For example,
the escape of the 2006 Warm Fire on the North
Kaibab National Forest attracted negative media
coverage and public concern. Nevertheless, use of
natural ignitions has proved effective in the Gila
National Forest and elsewhere in the Southwest.
Wildland fire use requires the judgment of skilled,
experienced professionals combined with scientifically
sound predictive models.
Action:
G 
The agency should provide the training,
liability protection, and encouragement
required to build confidence when employing
its wildland fire use authority.
 
CONCLUSION
Most federal policies do not directly address the
protection of frequent-fire, old-growth forests.
Nevertheless, during the last 30 years, protection of
old growth erupted as an important conservation
issue. Advocates used a number of policy tools to
advance preservation, including the ESA, NEPA,
the Goshawk Guidelines in Region 3 of the Forest
Service, and the NFMA.
Environmental litigation and the attrition of
commercial harvest infrastructure have minimized
commercial logging as a threat to old growth. Of
greater concern among ecologists is the potential
loss of existing old growth to unnatural catastrophic
fire, and the inability to effectively manage for the
recruitment of old growth because of the difficulty
and cost of restoring natural processes and forest
structure through the application of restoration
treatments.
There is widespread agreement among stakeholders
that we need to restore the natural structure,
functions, and composition of frequent-fire forests.
However, the public will be concerned about
proposals that call for treatments in and around old
growth. Actively educating the public and building
trust through collaboration is a necessary
prerequisite before taking action. The federal land-
management agencies will need a change in
performance measures to support action in old
growth. For example, agency performance with
respect to treated acres should not be based on
getting the most acres per unit cost. Rather, a new
performance standard is needed that emphasizes
quality and treatments to protect valuable attributes,
which may in fact cost more per unit. Land managers
should be rewarded for treatments that may initially
require more time, attention, and collaboration,
rather than defaulting to the easiest acres to
accomplish (i.e., acres in the wildland-urban
interface vs. in the greater landscape), and they
should be empowered to use the tools, such as
wildland fire, that will facilitate restoration and
recruitment of old growth. Finally, Congress must
provide the financial resources that support the level
of human and financial commitment required to
restore forests.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/responses/
Acknowledgments:
The authors want to thank Jesse Abrams, Wally
Covington, and Tom Klabunde for their thoughtful
comments and insights.
LITERATURE CITED
Abella, S. R., P. Z. Fulé, and W. W. Covington. 
2006. Diameter caps for thinning southwestern
ponderosa pine forests: viewpoints, effects, and
tradeoffs. Journal of Forestry 104(8):407–414.
Anderson, S. 1995. Owl shuts down the Southwest.
High Country News 27(16). (online) URL: http://w
ww.hcn.org/servlets/hcn.Article?article_id=1276.
Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Advisory
Council. 2004. Guiding principles for forest
ecosystem restoration and community protection. 
Phoenix, Arizona, USA. [online] URL: http://www.
governor.state.az.us/FHC/documents/Final%20Guiding%
20Principles%20with%20groupings%20and%20authors%
20-%2010-03.pdf.
Byrd, B., and C. Brittenburg. 2005. Born of fire:
the National Fire Plan in the southwest. Forest
Guardians, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
Center for Biological Diversity. 2006. Northern
goshawk. Tucson, Arizona, USA. [online] URL: 
http://www.biologicaldiversity.org/swcbd/species/
goshawk/goshawk.html.
Christensen, N. L., A. Bartuska, J. H. Brown, S.
Carpenter, C. D’Antonio, R. Francis, J. F.
Franklin, J. A. MacMahon, R. F. Noss, D. J.
Parsons, C. H. Peterson, M. G. Turner, and R. G.
Woodmansee. 1996. The scientific basis for
ecosystem management. Ecological Applications 
6:665–691.
Cortner, H. J., and M. A. Moote. 1999. The politics
of ecosystem management. Island Press, Washington,
D.C., USA.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994.
Postsettlement changes in natural fire regimes and
forest structure: ecological restoration of old-
growth ponderosa pine forests. Pages 153–182 in 
R. N. Sampson and D. L. Adams, editors. Assessing
forest ecosystem health in the Inland West. Haworth
Press, New York, New York, USA.
Downs, A. 1972. Up and down with ecology: the
“issue-attention” cycle. The Public Interest 28:38–
50.
Friederici, P. 2003. The Flagstaff model. Pages 7–
25 in P. Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island Press.
Washington, D.C., USA.
Friedman, M. 2006. The Forest Service is dead;
long live the Forest Service! It’s time for
conservationists to collaborate with an agency
they’ve long demonized. Grist: Environmental News
and Commentary (Soapbox): 28 February 2006.
[online] URL: http://www.grist.org/comments/soap
box/2006/02/28/friedman/.
General Accounting Office (GAO). 2003. Forest
Service: information on appeals and litigation
involving fuels reduction activities. General
Accounting Office GAO-04-52.
Gifford Pinchot Task Force. 2006. Bush
Administration attempts to undermine forest
protection rules. Portland, Oregon, USA. [online]
URL: http://www.gptaskforce.org/article.php?id=120
.
Healthy Forest Restoration Act of 2003. Public
Law 108-148, 117 Stat. 1887, 16 USC §§ 6501 et
seq.
Johnson, M. A. 1994. Changes in southwestern
forests: stewardship implications. Journal of
Forestry 92(12):16–19.
Kaufmann, M. R., W. H. Moir, and R. L. Bassett,
editors. 1992a. Old-growth forests in the Southwest
and Rocky Mountain regions, proceedings from a
workshop. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-213.
Kaufmann, M. R., W. H. Moir, and W. W.
Covington. 1992b. Old-growth forests: what do we
know about their ecology and management in the
Southwest and Rocky Mountain regions? Pages 1–
11 in M. R. Kaufmann, W. H. Moir, and R. L.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
Bassett, editors. Old-growth forests in the Southwest
and Rocky Mountain regions, proceedings from a
workshop. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-213.
Keegan, C. E., T. A. Morgan, K. M. Gebert, J. P.
Brandt, K. A. Blatner, and T. P. Spoelma. 2004.
Timber-processing capacities and capabilities in the
western 
U.S. 
Western 
Forestry 
Leadership
Coalition, Lakewood, Colorado, USA. [online]
URL: http://www.wflccenter.org/ts_dynamic/
edu_outreach/18_file.pdf.
Keele, D. M., R. W. Malmsheimer, D. W. Floyd,
and J. E. Perez. 2006. Forest Service land
management litigation 1989–2002. Journal of
Forestry 104(4):196–202.
Koehler, M. 2006. Testimony before the
Subcommittee on Public Lands and Forests
United States Senate on Implementation of the
Healthy Forest Restoration Act (Public Law
108-148). 19 July 2006. [online] URL: http://
energy.senate.gov/public/_files/Koehler.pdf.
Lindstrom M. J., and Z. A. Smith. 2001. The
National Environmental Policy Act: judicial
misconstruction, 
legislative 
indifference 
and
executive neglect. Texas A & M University Press,
College Station, Texas, USA.
Lowe, K., and M. A. Moote. 2005. Collaboration
as a tool in forest restoration. Working Papers in
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
#11. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern
Arizona University. Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
[online] URL: https://library.eri.nau.edu:8443/hand
le/2019/191.
Manring N. J. 2003. Locking the back door: the
implications of eliminating postdecisional appeals
in national forest planning. Society and Natural
Resources 17:235–245.
Moote A., and D. Becker. 2003. Exploring barriers
to collaborative forestry. Report from a workshop
held 17–19 September 2003, Hart Prairie, Flagstaff,
Arizona, USA. [online] URL: https://library.eri.nau.
edu:8443/handle/2019/211.
Murphy, A., J. Abrams, T. Daniel, and V. Yazzie. 
2007. Living among frequent-fire forests: human
history and cultural perspectives. Ecology and
Society 12(2): 17. [online] URL: http://www.ecolog
yandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art17/.
Noss R. F., P. Beier, W. W. Covington, R. E.
Grumbine, D. B. Lindenmayer, J. W. Prather, F.
Schmielgelow, T. D. Sisk, and D. J. Vosick. 2006.
Recommendations for integrating biology in
ponderosa 
pine 
forests 
of 
the 
Southwest.
Restoration Ecology 14(1):4–10.
Nowicki, B. 2002. The community protection zone:
defending houses and communities from the threat
of forest fire. Center for Biological Diversity,
Tucson, Arizona, USA. [online] URL: http://www.
sw-center.org/swcbd/programs/fire/wui1.pdf.
Oleszek, W. J. 2001. Congressional procedures and
the policy process. Fifth Edition. Congressional
Quarterly Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Ostergren, D. M. 2006. Wilderness management
and the restoration of fire: an analysis of laws and
regulations in northern Arizona. Ecological
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. [online] URL: https://libr
ary.eri.nau.edu:8443/handle/2019/365.
Pickett, S. T. A., R. S. Ostfeld, M. Shachak, and
G. E. Likens. 1997. Ecological basis of
conservation: heterogeneity, ecosystems, and
biodiversity. Springer, New York, New York, USA.
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: a cultural history
of wildland and rural fire. University of Washington
Press, Seattle, Washington, USA.
Raish, C., W. Yong, and J. M. Marzluff. 1997.
Contemporary 
human 
use 
of 
southwestern
ponderosa pine forests. Pages 28–42 in W. M. Block
and D. M. Finch, technical editors. Songbird
ecology in southwestern ponderosa pine forests: a
literature review. U.S. Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-GTR-292. [online] URL: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_rm/rm_gtr292/
rm_gtr292_028_042.pdf.
Reynolds, R. T., R. T. Graham, M. Reiser, and
M. Hildegard. 1992. Management recommendations
for the northern goshawk in the southwestern United
States. U.S. Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-217. [online] URL: http://www.treesea
rch.fs.fed.us/pubs/6420.
Scarlett, 
L. 
2006. 
Testimony 
before 
the

Ecology and Society 12(2): 19
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art19/
Subcommittee on Forests and Forest Health
Committee 
on 
Resources, 
U.S. 
House 
of
Representatives. Oversight Hearing on Healthy
Forests: Targets and Accomplishments. 29 June
2006. [online] URL: http://resourcescommittee.house.
gov/109/testimony/2006/lynnscarlett.htm.
Sharpe, W., C. W. Hendee, and W. E. Sharpe. 
1986. Introduction to forestry. McGraw-Hill, New
York, New York, USA.
Snider G., P. J. Daugherty, and D. Wood. 2006.
The irrationality of continued fire suppression: an
avoided cost analysis of fire hazard reduction
treatments versus no treatment. Journal of Forestry 
104(8):431–437.
Society of American Foresters. 2005. Managing
mature and old-growth forests: a position of the
Oregon Society of American Foresters. Adopted by
the OSAF membership on December 2005.
Thomas, J. W. 2006. Sustaining forests. The
Sacramento Bee 11 July 2006.
United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth
Circuit. 2003. Center for Biological Diversity vs.
USFS/R3 and Chief of the Forest Service. No.
02-16481/D.C. No. CV-00-01711-RCB/Opinion.
18 November 2003.
USDA Forest Service. 1995. Final environmental
impact statement for amendment of forest plans. 
USDA Forest Service-Region 3, Albuquerque, New
Mexico, USA.
USDA Forest Service. 2007. Southwestern Region:
status of court ruling on 2005 Planning Rule. 
[online] URL:
http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/coconino/projects/plan-
revision-2006/2007-05-29-2005-planning-rule-q-a.
pdf.
USDA Office of Inspector General, Western
Region. 2006. Forest Service: large fire suppression
costs. Audit Report No. 08601-44-SF. U.S. Forest
Service, Washington, D.C., USA. [online] URL: 
http://www.usda.gov/oig/webdocs/08601-44-SF.pdf
.
Western Governors’ Association. 2001. A
collaborative approach for reducing wildland fire
risks to communities and the environment: 10-year
comprehensive strategy. Denver, Colorado, USA.
[online] URL: http://www.westgov.org/wga/initiatives/
fire/final_fire_rpt.pdf.
———. 2002. A collaborative approach for
reducing wildland fire risks to communities and the
environment: 10-year comprehensive strategy
implementation plan. Denver, Colorado, USA.
[online] URL: http://www.westgov.org/wga/initiatives/
fire/implem_plan.pdf.
Yaffee, S. 1994. The wisdom of the spotted owl. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
