 
 United States Department of Agriculture 
Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes (SWERI) 
 
Five-Year Evaluation Report 
2010-2014 
 
 
Prepared by  
The U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern Region 
April 26, 2016 
 
 Forest Service 
Southwestern Region 
APRIL 2016 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
1 
 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 
In	  accordance	  with	  Federal	  civil	  rights	  law	  and	  U.S.	  Department	  of	  Agriculture	  (USDA)	  civil	  rights	  regulations	  and	  
policies,	  the	  USDA,	  its	  Agencies,	  offices,	  and	  employees,	  and	  institutions	  participating	  in	  or	  administering	  USDA	  
programs	  are	  prohibited	  from	  discriminating	  based	  on	  race,	  color,	  national	  origin,	  religion,	  sex,	  gender	  identity	  
(including	  gender	  expression),	  sexual	  orientation,	  disability,	  age,	  marital	  status,	  family/parental	  status,	  income	  derived	  
from	  a	  public	  assistance	  program,	  political	  beliefs,	  or	  reprisal	  or	  retaliation	  for	  prior	  civil	  rights	  activity,	  in	  any	  program	  
or	  activity	  conducted	  or	  funded	  by	  USDA	  (not	  all	  bases	  apply	  to	  all	  programs).	  Remedies	  and	  complaint	  filing	  deadlines	  
vary	  by	  program	  or	  incident.	  	  
Persons	  with	  disabilities	  who	  require	  alternative	  means	  of	  communication	  for	  program	  information	  (e.g.,	  Braille,	  large	  
print,	  audiotape,	  American	  Sign	  Language,	  etc.)	  should	  contact	  the	  responsible	  Agency	  or	  USDA’s	  TARGET	  Center	  at	  
(202)	  720-­‐2600	  (voice	  and	  TTY)	  or	  contact	  USDA	  through	  the	  Federal	  Relay	  Service	  at	  (800)	  877-­‐8339.	  Additionally,	  
program	  information	  may	  be	  made	  available	  in	  languages	  other	  than	  English.	  	  
To	  file	  a	  program	  discrimination	  complaint,	  complete	  the	  USDA	  Program	  Discrimination	  Complaint	  Form,	  AD-­‐3027,	  
found	  online	  at	  http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html	  and	  at	  any	  USDA	  office	  or	  write	  a	  letter	  
addressed	  to	  USDA	  and	  provide	  in	  the	  letter	  all	  of	  the	  information	  requested	  in	  the	  form.	  To	  request	  a	  copy	  of	  the	  
complaint	  form,	  call	  (866)	  632-­‐9992.	  Submit	  your	  completed	  form	  or	  letter	  to	  USDA	  by:	  (1)	  mail:	  U.S.	  Department	  of	  
Agriculture,	  Office	  of	  the	  Assistant	  Secretary	  for	  Civil	  Rights,	  1400	  Independence	  Avenue,	  SW,	  Washington,	  D.C.	  20250-­‐
9410;	  (2)	  fax:	  (202)	  690-­‐7442;	  or	  (3)	  email:	  program.intake@usda.gov.	  	  
USDA	  is	  an	  equal	  opportunity	  provider,	  employer	  and	  lender.	  
 
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
2 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................... 4	  
Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 6	  
SWERI Assessment and Recommendations .......................................................................... 10	  
 
New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute Assessment (2015) ..................... 13	  
 
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute Assessment (2015) .................................................... 17	  
 
Ecological Restoration Institute in Arizona Assessment (2015) ............................................ 22	  
Appendix A — Institute Reports ................................................................................................. 25	  
New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute Report ........................................ 26	  
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute Report ....................................................................... 36	  
The Ecological Restoration Institute in Arizona Report ........................................................ 44	  
Appendix B — Responses of Institutes to Recommendations  from the 2005-2009 Report ... 600	  
Responses of NMFWRI to Recommendations — 2005-2009 Report ................................ 600	  
Responses of CFRI to Recommendations — 2005-2009 Report ...................................... 622	  
Responses of ERI to Recommendations — 2005-2009 Report ........................................ 655	  
Appendix C — Interviewees (2015) ........................................................................................... 66	  
Appendix D — Summary of Affected Entity Interviews (2015) ................................................... 69	  
Summary of Interviews with Respect to  New Mexico Forest  
and Watershed Restoration Institute .................................................................................... 70	  
Summary of Interviews with Respect to  Colorado Forest Restoration Institute .................. 76	  
Summary of Interviews with Respect to  The Ecological Restoration Institute in Arizona ... 82	  
Appendix E — Acronyms ........................................................................................................... 88	  
Appendix F — State Government Charter ................................................................................. 89	  
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
3 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Range of Perspectives ........................................................................................... 7 
Table 2: Institute Funding 2010-2014 .................................................................................. 8 
Table 3: Annual Institute Funding by Source…………………………………………………...8  
Table 4: University Indirect Cost Contributions by Year………………………………….……8 
Table 5: NMFWRI Funding ................................................................................................ 25 
Table 6: CFRI Funding ...................................................................................................... 35 
Table 7: ERI Funding ......................................................................................................... 47 
 
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
4 
Executive Summary 
The Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act (P.L. 108-317, 16 U.S.C. 6701(2004)) 
(the Act) established the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes (SWERI), a unique program of 
applied research and service via three university-based restoration institutes. These are the 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University, The Colorado Forest 
Restoration Institute (CFRI) at Colorado State University, and the New Mexico Forest and 
Watershed Restoration Institute (NMFWRI) at New Mexico Highlands University.  The primary 
purpose of the institutes is to develop, translate, and provide the best available science to affected 
entities on designing and implementing forest restoration and hazardous fuel reduction treatments.  
Affected entities are defined in the Act as land managers; stakeholders; concerned citizens; and the 
States of the interior West, including political subdivisions of the States. This SWERI Five-Year 
Evaluation Report was prepared pursuant to the Act (SEC. 7, P.L. 108-317, 16 U.S.C. 6701(2004).  
It is the second SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report. Each institute responded satisfactorily to the 
recommendations found in the first five year evaluation report (Appendix B).   This second report 
follows the same format used in the first report.  It is based on self-evaluation reports from each 
institute, interviews with the affected entities identified in the Act, and a review of the final report by 
the Forest Service in consultation with the Department of Interior.  
 
The duties of the institutes are to: 1) develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor 
restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and 
improve the health on dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West; 2) synthesize and 
adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement restoration-based hazardous fuel 
reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive ecosystem management framework; 3) 
translate for and transfer to affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary knowledge about 
restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 4) assist affected entities with the design of 
adaptive management approaches (including monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-
based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; and 5) provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
 
Over the last five years the SWERIs have made a considerable contribution to the scientific 
knowledge available to affected entities and the credibility of landscape scale forest restoration in the 
Southwest. The three institutes are seen as “go to” resources for scientific information on landscape 
scale restoration and analysis, risk assessment, and restoration and treatment monitoring.  Pursuant 
to this 5 Year Evaluation the institutes have: 1) Ensured to the maximum extent possible that their 
research, communication tools, and information transfer activities have made significant progress 
toward achieving the purposes of the Act; and 2) implemented the duties described under Section 
5(c) to the best of their ability within provided resources.  More specifically, the SWERIs have: 
improved communication and cooperation among local, state and federal agencies, environmental 
organizations, and private industry in the planning process; provided resources and expertise that 
complement state forest restoration efforts; supported legislation on forest and watershed restoration; 
assisted the development of forest restoration industries in under-served communities through 
training and technical assistance; increased trust and credibility with stakeholder groups in landscape 
scale restoration discussions by providing and interpreting the best available science; provided 
expert scientific advice to affected entities; facilitated stakeholder group and discussions; and 
provided independent verification of the best available science for stakeholders in support of Forest 
Service restoration work. 
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
5 
ERI is well known for its ecological research, publications and outreach. CFRI has taken on the dual 
role of providing science to stakeholders including government agencies, while also serving as 
facilitator for stakeholder groups, especially the Colorado Front Range Collaborative Landscape 
Restoration Program. NMFWRI is involved in projects that contribute to the health of the forest and 
woodland ecosystems through forest land mapping using a Geographical Information System (GIS), 
tours of ponderosa pine and mixed conifer restoration demonstration sites, and education and 
outreach. 
 
All three institutes are meeting the duties and achieving the purposes for which they were 
established.  The Act authorizes an appropriation of $15 million annually.  In the last five years 
annual allocations to the SWERIs were $150,000 to $2 million. During that time record breaking 
high intensity wildfires in the Southwest and widespread tree mortality due to the mountain pine 
beetle have galvanized state and local governments on the need for forest restoration.  This has 
increased the demand for technical assistance from the SWERIs.  The institutes responded by 
leveraging an additional $14.2 million from the states ($9.8 million) and federal land management 
agencies ($4.4 million).  Of the $22.5 million the SWERIs received in the last five years 63% came 
from state governments and federal agencies for specific projects that were not covered by the 
annual SWERI allocation.   The Act does not require any form of matching funds, so this additional 
funding demonstrates that the SWERIs are successful in obtaining additional support from affected 
entities.  
 
The stakeholders that were interviewed indicated that the institutes should broaden their scope to 
include other ecosystems and larger landscapes to further the science and resources available to 
states.  The interviewees also said that funding for the SWERIs should be increased to expand their 
outreach and education activities and the continual building of partnerships with other agencies and 
research entities. 
 
In conclusion, each of the institutes warrants continued provision of federal assistance because they 
have been successful at working with various stakeholders in the states to establish the credibility of 
forest restoration and treatment to prevent wildfires; As a result of the work that has been completed 
with scarce resources, the institutes have generated a high degree of demand and relevance in their 
states. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
6 
Introduction  
Background 
The Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act (P.L. 108-317, 16 U.S.C. 6701(2004)) 
(the Act) establishes a unique program of applied research and service via three university-based 
restoration institutes located in Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico.1 The primary purpose of the 
institutes is to develop, translate, and provide the best available science to land managers, 
practitioners and stakeholders designing and implementing forest restoration and hazardous fuel 
reduction treatments.  
 
The responsibility for implementation of the Act was assigned to the Secretary of Agriculture, acting 
through the Chief of the U.S. Forest Service. The Chief of the U.S. Forest Service delegated the 
implementation of the Act to the Southwestern Region of the U.S. Forest Service. In 2005, the Forest 
Service established a Development Team to work with the institutes to identify projects for annual 
work plans and an Executive Team to approve those work plans. The Development and Executive 
teams are chaired by the U.S. Forest Service and include representatives from the Bureau of Land 
Management (BLM), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), 
State Foresters from each state, and the three institutes. The annual work plans are reviewed, revised 
and reconciled with federal appropriations by the Development Team and approved by the Executive 
Team.  
 
On June 13, 2005 the governors of Arizona, Colorado and New Mexico signed a charter to clarify 
the duties and operating procedures for the SWERI, and their respective states, as envisioned in PL 
108-317 (Appendix E).  
 
The annual work plans are the basis for requesting federal and state annual appropriations. Each 
institute’s performance of their duties is tied to the development and successful completion of annual 
work plans that achieve the purposes of the Act. For this reason, they are a major source of 
information for the Five-Year Evaluation.  
 
The activities proposed in the work plans (referred to as “projects”) address information and service 
needs identified by land managers and the diverse stakeholders (referred to as “affected entities” in 
the Act). Needs are identified in reports from workshops, conferences, surveys, collaborative 
meetings, governmental task forces and councils, field trips, one-on-one communications, by phone, 
or through correspondence. The institutes then work collaboratively throughout the year with 
stakeholders to plan projects that may be included in the annual work plan. 
 
Five-Year Evaluation Requirement  
Section 7 of the Act requires the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the U.S. Forest 
Service, and in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, to complete a detailed evaluation of 
the programs and activities of each institute five years after the date of enactment of the Act, and 
                                                
1 The Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act passed by Congress on October 4, 2004. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
7 
every five years thereafter. The evaluation is submitted to the Committee on Resources (now the 
Committee on Natural Resources), to the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives, 
and to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate. The purpose of this report is 
to satisfy this requirement for 2010 through 2014, the second Five-Year Evaluation. The intentions 
of the evaluation, as defined in the Act, are:  
 
1) To ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that the research, communication tools, and 
information transfer activities of each institute are sufficient to achieve the purposes of the 
Act, including:  
a.  Implementing active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape 
level; 
b. Reducing unnecessary planning costs; 
c.  Avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts; 
d. Increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices; 
and 
e.  Achieving general satisfaction on the part of the affected entities. 
2) To determine the extent to which each institute has implemented its duties under Section 
5(c) of the Act, which are to:  
a.  Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and 
improve the health on dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West; 
b. Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments on landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework; 
c.  Translate for and transfer to affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 
d. Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches 
(including monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuel 
reduction treatments; and 
e.  Provide peer-reviewed annual reports.  
3) To determine whether continued provision of federal assistance to each institute is 
warranted. 
 
Evaluation Methodology 
As a first step in the evaluation process, the Southwestern Region requested an evaluation report 
from each institute describing how it had performed the duties specified in the Act. Key 
accomplishments for each duty are summarized at the beginning of each institute chapter that 
follows. The institute evaluation reports are included in full in Appendix A.  
The Southwestern Region contracted Lauren Poole to conduct interviews with affected entities 
(defined in the Act as land managers; stakeholders; concerned citizens; and the states of the interior 
West, including political subdivisions of the states) for the purpose of assessing their satisfaction 
with the institutes and their views about how well the institutes had achieved the purposes of the Act. 
Ms. Poole was also tasked with compiling the SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report. For consistency 
with the previous five year review and to show progress the institutes have made over the five year 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
8 
review period, the contractor used the same interview questions when contacting the affected 
entities. In addition, a new section was added to the report that addresses the institutes’ responses to 
recommendations from the last SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report (See Appendix B.) In 
preparation for the interviews, each institute provided Ms. Poole a list of about 20 people to 
interview that represented the various affected entities defined above. Out of approximately 60 
potential interviewees, a total of 34 responded. A “Range of Perspectives” is provided in Table 1 
below. Most of the interviewees were very familiar with the work of each institute in their state. 
However, a few interviewees were new to the position and could only speak about their experience 
over the last year or two. 
The interviews were conducted with the understanding that interviewee comments and 
recommendations would not be attributed to individuals, but rather captured in an overall summary 
of interview results. A list of interviewees is provided in Appendix C. The interview results are 
reflected in the chapters that follow and summarized in Appendix D. 
The determination whether the institutes accomplished the purposes and duties of the Act is based on 
the sum of information available through the institutes’ evaluation reports and the interview results. 
 
Table 1: Range of Perspectives 
 
Survey	  Participants	    
ERI	  
CFRI	  
NMFWRI	  
TOTAL	  
Conservation | NGO 
1	  
1	  
1	  
3	  
Academic	      
2	  
2	  
Local Government 
1	    
1	  
2	  
State	  Government	  
3	  
2	  
2	  
7	  
Federal Government 
6	  
4	  
3	  
13	  
Tribal	      
2	  
2	  
Private Industry 
2	  
1	  
1	  
4	  
Private	  Land	  Owner	      
1	  
1	  
TOTAL	  
13	  
8	  
13	  
34	  
Note:	  The	  range	  of	  perspectives	  is	  not	  all	  inclusive	  of	  survey	  respondents.	  	  
A	  total	  of	  some	  60	  people	  were	  contacted	  to	  complete	  a	  written	  survey	  and/or	  
phone	  interview.	  Out	  of	  60	  people,	  34	  people	  responded	  as	  shown	  in	  Table	  1.	  
 
Funding History 
The Act authorized an annual appropriation of $15, but.  The total annual federal appropriation 
allocation for SWERIs has declined from $2 million in 2010 to $ 1.5 million in 2014 (Table 2).   
 
The Forest Service annual budget direction includes a SWERI allocation.  The SWERIs develop 
annual work plans that reflect that allocation.  The Forest Service, in consultation with the 
Department of Interior and the State Foresters from Arizona, Colorado and New Mexico each review 
the work plans to assure that the work proposed serves the informational needs of the affected 
entities named in the Act. In addition, the Forest Service, BLM, and states have funded individual 
projects under separate agreements to address specific needs.  The states have provided matching 
appropriations and funded specific projects. The three universities have contributed the difference 
between their negotiated indirect cost rate of over 40% and the 10% they agreed to charge the Forest 
Service under the SWERI agreements.   

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 
Table 2: Total SWERI Funding (2010-2014) 
 
Source	  
Funding	  
Annual	  Forest	  Service	  Allocations	  
$8,328	  
Additional	  Federal	  Project	  Funding	  
$4,359	  
State	  Funding	  
$9,821	  
TOTAL	  (2010-­‐2014)	  
$22,508	  
Dollars	  in	  thousands 
 
Table 3: Annual Institute Funding by Source 
 
	  
	  
2010	  
	  
	  
2011	  
	  
	  
2012	  
	  
	  
2013	  
	  
	  
2014	  
	  
Institute	  
Fed.	  
Work	  
Plan	  
Add’l	  
Federal	  
Projects	  
State	  
Fed.	  
Work	  
Plan	  
Add’l	  
Federal	  
Projects	  
State	  
Fed.	  
Work	  
Plan	  
Add’l	  
Federal	  
Projects	  
State	  
Fed.	  
Work	  
Plan	  
Add’l	  
Federal	  
Projects	  
State	  
Fed.	  
Work	  
Plan	  
Add’l	  
Federal	  
Projects	  
State	  
CFRI	  
250	  
23	  
231	  
500	  
223	  
490	  
150	  
573	  
273	  
150	  
281	  
704	  
150	  
665	  
425	  
ERI	  
1,500	  
0	  
1,318	  
1,200	  
1,101	  
1,183	  
1,200	  
192	  
1,325	  
1,200	  
179	  
1,225	  
1,125	  
764	  
965	  
NMFWRI	  
250	  
0	  
342	  
203	  
300	  
427	  
150	  
0	  
263	  
150	  
0	  
263	  
150	  
57	  
387	  
TOTAL	  
$2,000	  
	  	  $23	  
$1,891	  
$1,903	  
$1,624	  
$2,100	  
$1,500	  
	  $765	  
$1,861	  
$1,500	  
	  $460	  
$2,192	  
$1,425	  
$1,486	  
$1,777	  
   Dollars	  in	  thousands 
 
Table 4: University Indirect Cost Contributions by Year 
 
Institute	  
2010	  
2011	  
2012	  
2013	  
2014	  
Total	  
CFRI	  
$188	  
$447	  
$229	  
$223	  
$374	  
$1,461	  
ERI	  
$786	  
$758	  
$900	  
$800	  
$562	  
$3,805	  
NMFWRI	  
$90	  
$181	  
$54	  
$54	  
$75	  
$454	  
Total	  
$1,064	  
$1,386	  
$1,183	  
$1,077	  
$1,011	  
$5,720	  
Dollars	  in	  thousands 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 10 
SWERI Assessment and Recommendations 
Assessment of Overall Institute Performance 
It is apparent from the institute reports and the interviews with affected entities that, over the last five years, 
all three institutes are meeting the duties and achieving the purposes for which they were established under 
the Act. The productivity of each institute was limited by their funding levels, which were significantly less 
than the annual funding authorized under the Act, with ERI having received more funding than the other two. 
Their work over the last five years has made a considerable contribution to the amount of scientific 
knowledge available to affected entities and the credibility of landscape scale forest restoration in the 
Southwest. The three institutes are often seen as “go to” resources for scientific information on landscape 
scale restoration and analysis, risk assessment, and restoration and treatment monitoring. 
The contributions by the institutes vary, not only because of the difference in funding levels, but also 
because some specialization has occurred. All of the institutes provide a suite of services.  ERI has 
become well known for its ecological research, publications and outreach. CFRI has taken on the 
dual role of providing science to stakeholders including government agencies, while also serving as 
facilitator for stakeholder groups, especially the Colorado Front Range Collaborative Landscape 
Restoration Program. NMFWRI is involved in projects that contribute to the health of the forest and 
woodland ecosystems through forest land mapping using a Geographical Information System (GIS), 
tours of ponderosa pine and mixed conifer restoration demonstration sites, and education and 
outreach. NMFWRI developed and delivered training courses in the design and safe implementation 
of forest restoration treatments. NMFWRI is also working with the New Mexico National Forests 
and watershed health organization (WHO) of the New Mexico State Forestry Division to create a 
web-based forest and watershed restoration health information clearinghouse for the state of New 
Mexico.! 
The unique value-added niche of the institutes, as reflected in 
the comments made during the interviews with affected 
entities, is that they provide the latest science to stakeholder 
groups on landscape-scale restoration.  They are extremely 
credible with both the public and government agencies, which 
makes it easier to implement wildfire mitigation treatments on 
national forest lands.  
Given limited resources, especially for the CFRI and NMFWRI, the institutes have strategically 
invested in specialization while continuing to meet the diverse ecological restoration needs in each 
state. The Colorado institute has taken on the dual role of research institute and stakeholder 
facilitator. In the future the CFRI will need to decide if it has the capacity to do both or focus on one 
area. 
Since the last evaluation report, small organizations and local governments have benefited a great 
deal from the assistance provided by the institutes in designing, implementing, and monitoring on-
the-ground treatments. During the last five years, their contribution to landscape-scale restoration 
has expanded from local to the state and federal level, with many federal and state government 
“I strongly believe that without 
the institutes’ leadership and 
organizational skills, we would 
not be where we are today 
relative to commencing 
landscape scale restoration.”  
Survey respondent, Appendix-D  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 11 
agencies indicating that they relied on the institutes for scientific data, monitoring, and 
communicating information to conservation groups and other nongovernmental organizations. 
The effect of climate change on national forests and its potential to increase wildfires that impact 
water supplies makes landscape level planning crucial if forest restoration projects are to be 
successful and cost-effective. The institutes can continue to address scientific questions and assist 
collaborative efforts of government agencies and nongovernmental organizations as they work 
together to prevent and reduce the impact of wildfires in the Southwest. Their capacity to provide 
those services will be function of future funding levels for each institute.  
 
Affected Entity Recommendations  
The affected entities that were interviewed for the evaluation offered a number of recommendations 
that apply to all the institutes. Increased funding to the institutes was their primary recommendation 
on how to improve future service, especially for the New Mexico and Colorado institutes. 
Interviewees stated that staffing issues due to funding shortfalls have caused delays in workshops 
and other educational outreach activities, including the implementation of new college programs in 
restoration. 
The New Mexico institute would benefit from revisiting  
a proposed college program that did not come to fruition 
because one staff member left. Another suggestion was to have 
the institute in New Mexico explore how forest landscape 
restoration would affect urban and rural communities, private 
industry, local governments, and economic development. See 
also Appendix B, NMFWRI Question 1. 
 
Interviewees also stated that with additional funding, CFRI’s 
work could expanded beyond the Colorado Front Range 
Program to benefit wildfire-prone areas throughout the state. 
An increase in funding would also eliminate the potential for 
“mission creep,” in which the institute expends valuable 
resources trying to secure general operating funds, according 
to interviewees. One suggestion to increase support for CFRI 
was to hold annual or biennial meetings of stakeholders to 
report on accomplishments, solicit feedback, and plan for the 
future. The event would help build a community of 
stakeholders around CFRI that had a stake in its success. 
Increased funding would also allow the institute to deliver 
more workshops for different stakeholder groups, according to interviewees. That would allow CFRI 
to increase communication among stakeholder groups and identify new research ideas that apply 
statewide. 
In Arizona, one interviewee wrote that ERI could improve services by increasing coordination and 
integration with the Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS). The institute should also ensure it 
 “There is a tremendous amount 
of discipline and institutional 
based pushback on ecology, 
restoration, and a science based 
framework. If the CFRI was not 
here, I would not be able to have 
the support to push the science 
and implementation of both the 
scale and magnitude of ecology 
based treatments.”  
“The institute's involvement with the 
New Mexico Legislature earlier this 
year was highly significant and 
important in the forging ahead of 
New Mexico's policy on forest and 
watershed restoration.”  
Survey respondent, Appendix-D   

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 12 
aligns its work with Forest Service databases for consistency. Respondents indicated the workshops 
organized by ERI were valuable and felt that they should 
do more of them. 
The survey results provided the following overall 
assessment of the three institutes: 
 
Value-Added Contributions  
The three institutes have: 
 Improved communication and cooperation among local agencies, 
state agencies, environmental organizations, private industry and 
federal agencies in the planning process; 
 Provided resources and expertise that complement state forest 
restoration efforts; 
 Supported legislation on forest and watershed restoration; 
 Assisted the development of forest restoration industries in under-
served communities though training and technical assistance; 
 Increased trust and credibility with stakeholder groups in landscape 
scale restoration discussions by providing and interpreting the best 
available science; 
 Provided expert scientific advice to affected entities; 
 Facilitated stakeholder group and discussions; and 
 Provided independent verification of the best available science for 
stakeholders in support of Forest Service restoration work. 
!
Recommendations From the Effected Entities to Improve Future SWERI Work 
 Increase staffing and programs 
 Increase scientific expertise and college programs  
in landscape scale restoration 
 Remain flexible to new research areas 
 Share information with other groups 
 
General Recommendations 
 Increase staffing to provide stability and expand services 
 Improve communication on services offered 
 Expand educational workshops and programs 
“ERI’s contributions have made a 
difference because they are accessible, 
responsive, proactive, and respected in 
Arizona. The pace and scale of restoration 
in Arizona would not be where it is today 
without the contributions of ERI 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 13 
New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute 
Assessment (2015) 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act 
The information provided in NMFWRI’s Five-Year Evaluation Report (Appendix A), cites 
numerous examples of significant contributions for each duty. Highlights are summarized and 
presented below.  
Duty 1: Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based hazardous-
fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health of dry forest 
and woodland ecosystems in the interior West. 
NMFWRI was involved in projects that contributed to the health of the forest and woodland 
ecosystems through forest land mapping, introductory tours of ponderosa pine and mixed 
conifers, and education and outreach. Prominent examples include: 
• Desired Conditions Workshops—Guidelines were created and applied to the ponderosa 
pine and mixed conifer ecosystems on New Mexico national forest lands. In May of 2012 an 
introductory tour was held in the Bluewater area west of Grants and the Jemez Mountains. 
 
• New Partnerships— In the fall of 2014 the NMFWRI assisted the Otero County Working 
Group and the Grant County Eco-Watershed Planning Group to be more strategic in 
addressing forest and grassland issues by looking at a watershed scale and developing 
communication tools to improve education and outreach. Initial steps have been taken to 
create a partnership with Western New Mexico University (WNMU) to establish a 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) storehouse for maps under the AllAboutWatersheds 
portal.  
 
• Socioeconomic Monitoring—NMFWRI established standardized protocols for collecting 
and evaluating socioeconomic monitoring data as it relates to the effectiveness of restoration 
projects. 
 
• Coleman Ranch Water Budget Study—NMFRI worked with the Lower Pecos Watershed 
Alliance and New Mexico Institute of Technology to examine how thinning in a mixed 
conifer stand would impact the surface and subsurface water budget.  
 
• BLM Contract Work—NMFWRI used digital ortho-imagery and Trimble eCognition 
software to develop a vegetation and land cover classification map of the Rosa and Carrizo 
Largo Landscape Areas in Rio Arriba and San Juan Counties of New Mexico.  
 
• Teacher’s Camp—NMFWRI hosted the Forestry and Fire Ecology Academy in partnership 
with the New Mexico Highlands University’s (NMHU) Natural Resources Department and 
the Environmental Education Association of New Mexico.  The three-day teacher’s camp 
presented a condensed overview of issues and research on forest restoration and fire 
management in New Mexico.  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 14 
Duty 2: Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive 
ecosystem management framework. 
• AllAboutWatersheds.org—NMFRI worked with the Forest and WHO of New Mexico 
State Forestry Division to create a web-based forest and watershed restoration health 
information clearinghouse from across the state.  
 
• Ojo Peak—NMFWRI monitored the response of the ponderosa pines within the perimeter of 
the Ojo Peak Wildfire (November 2007) to determine if the trees would live or die after 
being burned late in the season.  
 
• Estancia—NMFWRI served on the Estancia Basin Monitoring Steering Committee, which 
comprises the three Soil and Water Conservation Districts in the basin. The institute worked 
with SWCA environmental consulting to monitor thinning projects throughout the basin.  
 
• Gallinas—The Gallinas watershed, the source of municipal drinking-water for the city of 
Las Vegas, is a high priority for restoration.  To NMFRI helped develop and implement a 
watershed plan and hazardous fuel reduction strategy to mitigate the potential for 
catastrophic wildfire, and to secure a sustainable water supply for the City and the region.  
 
• Zuni Mountain Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration program (CFLRP)—
NMFWRI attended collaborative meetings with other stakeholders.  
 
• Long-Term Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP) Monitoring—NMFWRI 
identified 20 CFRP projects that represent multiple jurisdictions and forest types that will be 
measured at five, ten, and fifteen years post-treatment. NMFWRI has completed the first 
round of post-treatment monitoring of these projects. 
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, the affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments.  
• Demonstration Areas—Pritzalff Ranch, a private ranch about 20 miles from Las Vegas, 
NM, is used by NMFRI for training and outreach. The forest on the Ranch was thinned in 
the fall of 2008 followed by a prescribed fire burn in November of 2010.  
 
• Habitat Characterization of the Jemez Mountain Salamander— During the summers of 
2011 and 2012 NMFWRI trained students and Jemez Pueblo crews to conduct a vegetation 
survey using modified monitoring protocols to measure vegetation and down logs.  
 
• Little Bear Fire—NMFWRI evaluated the effectiveness of various hazardous fuel reduction 
treatments that had been implemented prior to the fire. 
 
• Mastication—NMFWR selected three sites in which to evaluate fire behavior in masticated 
material: one in pinyon-juniper stands on the Lincoln National Forest; one in ponderosa pine 
on the Tonto National Forest, and one in chaparral on the Prescott National Forest.  
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 15 
• Guide to Bosque Monitoring— NMFWRI developed guidelines and protocols for 
monitoring fuel and fire dynamics in response to riparian restoration projects.  
 
• Santa Fe Community College—NMFRI presented a three-week course at the Santa Fe 
Community College on forest restoration principles, timber marking, basic GIS and 
monitoring.  
Duty 4: Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
• HB 38, the Forest and Watershed Restoration Act—NMFWRI provided technical 
assistance to state legislators, the State Forester and stakeholders to establish the Forest and 
Watershed Restoration Fund. 
 
• Statewide Vegetation Treatment Database—NMFWRI collected data on planned and 
completed restoration projects on private, state, tribal, and federal forest land to develop a 
statewide geospatial database of watershed treatments in New Mexico.  
Duty 5: Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
NMFWRI prepared annual reports that were sent to stakeholders for comment prior to being 
submitted to the Forest Service. They are available at the following website: 
http://www.nmNMFWRI.org/annual-reports. 
 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act 
The NMFWRI self-assessment demonstrates progress toward achieving the purposes of the Act 
through many activities and outcomes, including: 
Purpose 1: Implement active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level. 
In working on the images for the Estancia Basin project, the GIS group noticed the 
relationships among that project and other projects in the Manzano Mountains. The projects 
funded by the CFRP, the Water Trust Board, the Natural Resource Conservation Service 
(NRCS) under Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP), and the Cibola National 
Forest, and included at least six different ownership groups.  
These projects constituted landscape-level restoration of forest structure but require the 
reintroduction of fire for full restoration. The NMFWRI gave presentations across the region 
on the significant accomplishment and cumulative effect these projects represent. 
Purpose 2: Reduce unnecessary planning costs. 
NMFWRI has been involved in collaborative planning efforts across the state. The legal 
structure of the federal planning process left little room for cost cutting. With the possible 
exception of maps and other GIS support, NMFWRI’s involvement did not reduce planning 
costs.  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 16 
Purpose 3: Avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts. 
NMFWRI avoided duplication by working with other organizations doing similar work. The 
Institute brought different groups together to implement restoration which prevented 
duplication and increased awareness in the community of restoration work going on in the 
area. 
NMFWRI’s tasks potentially overlap with the New Mexico State Division of Forestry’s 
WHO. NMFWRI participates in quarterly meetings with state and federal land management 
agencies in New Mexico to share and coordinate efforts in order to avoid duplication.  
Purpose 4: Increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices. 
NMFWRI has lacked a monitoring specialist to provide feedback on adaptive management 
efforts, which has hindered its ability to increase public acceptance in this area. NMFWRI 
recently hired a monitoring specialist to develop strategies to close this adaptive management 
feedback loop.  
Purpose 5: Achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities. 
The majority of the stakeholders interviewed were satisfied with the institute’s work. 
NMFWRI’s former director worked with NMHU to create a Certificate in Forest and 
Watershed Restoration that would be available to high school students and high school 
graduates, but the project fell through after the director left the position.  
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 17 
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute Assessment (2015) 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act 
Based on the information provided in CFRI’s Five -Year Evaluation Report (Appendix A), the 
institute performed a significant amount of work toward achieving each of the duties specified in the 
Act. Examples of the contributions for each duty are presented below.  
Duty 1: Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health of dry forest 
and woodland ecosystems in the interior West. 
CFRI was involved in multiple collaborative wildfire mitigation, forest restoration and fuel 
reduction projects in Colorado. Prominent examples include:  
• Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative (CBBC)—CFRI developed a state of the science report 
on the effects of mountain beetles on forest ecology, fuels and fire, wildlife, watershed, and 
recreation; convened symposia to translate and transfer current available science from 
research (especially the RMRS); developed a hazard assessment framework for CBBC 
partners to identify treatment goals and priorities; and assisted the RMRS in a 5-year 
monitoring project to assess the impact of the Church Park Fire on tree and plant 
regeneration. 
 
• Uncompahgre Plateau and Front Range Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
(CFLR) Projects—CFRI developed and implemented multi-party monitoring plans for these 
projects and provided scientific expertise to improve collaborative learning and consensus-
building during project design and adaptive management.  
 
• Colorado Wildfire Risk Reduction Grant Program—CFRI served on an advisory 
committee to create the grant program and review and select grant applications for treatment.  
The Institute developed and implemented treatment effectiveness monitoring for the grant 
program and promoted the program by giving presentations to the Colorado General 
Assembly. 
 
• Denver Water-US Forest Service Forest-to-Faucets Program—CFRI developed and 
implemented a treatment effectiveness monitoring strategy for the program 2015 renewal and 
developed a framework for linking treatment effectiveness to return-on-investment metrics 
for the project for Denver Water. 
 
• San Juan Headwaters Forest Health Partnership—CFRO developed a status of 
knowledge report pertaining to dry mixed-conifer ecology and management to inform 
managers and stakeholders about restoration needs and opportunities. The Institute also 
organized and led stakeholder workshops to deliver current knowledge about dry mixed-
conifer ecology and management and to identify priority areas for forest restoration.  
CFRI gave multiple public presentations, media interviews, and media editorials about forest 
restoration and fuel reduction activities. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 18 
Duty 2: Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive 
ecosystem management framework. 
CFRI collaborates with researchers at area universities, the RMRS, and other federal research 
institutions to compile, synthesize, and apply current scientific information for managers, 
collaborative groups, and stakeholders. Over the last five years, CFRI published reports on 
desired conditions for Colorado Front Range Collaborative Forest Restoration, a status of 
knowledge report on dry mixed-conifer forest ecology and management in southwestern 
Colorado, and a general technical report on principles and guidelines for restoring Ponderosa 
pine and dry mixed conifer forests in Colorado’s Front Range. 
 
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, the affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
CFRI continuously assesses affected entities to identify needs and opportunities for 
knowledge transfer.  The institute organizes events involving a wide range of participants, 
and collaborates with other entities, including the RMRS, to apply and integrate the best 
available science into forest restoration and wildfire risk reduction. 
Examples of their work during the last five-years include: 
• Hosting a symposium on post-mountain pine beetle effects and management priorities 
involving 100+ managers, stakeholders, community leaders, and elected officials; 
• Arranging scientific presentations on post-mountain pine beetle research pertaining to 
forest recovery and watershed effects for the Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative; 
• Co-sponsoring a webinar with the RMRS on mountain pine beetle outbreak impacts 
and management effects; and 
• Co-sponsoring multiple field trips involving scientists, managers, and stakeholders 
for the Front Range and Uncompahgre Plateau CFLR projects. 
CFRI published multiple research briefs, including a report on the sudden decline of 
Aspen trees in Southwestern Colorado and the use of physics-based fire behavior 
modeling to assess treatment effectiveness to inform researchers and managers on the use 
and application of new fire behavior models. Another brief examined signs of recovery 
for Colorado forests in the wake of the mountain pine beetle. The paper was based on 
research conducted by the RMRS and co-sponsored by CFRI. 
Duty 4: Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
CFRI is an active participant in collaborative forest landscape restoration and fuel reduction 
projects. It has developed and implemented monitoring and adaptive management strategies 
linked to several large-scale forest restoration and fuel reduction projects. Examples include: 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 19 
• Developing and implementing a multi-party monitoring plan for the Front Range and 
Uncompahgre CFLR projects. This included working closely with managers on collecting 
data on treatments and providing information back to managers to inform future treatment 
prescriptions. Took a leadership role in developing a collaborative adaptive management 
strategy document to guide the Front Range CFLR project. 
 
• Organizing and leading a multi-party monitoring and adaptive management reviews for the 
Uncompahgre Plateau CFLR project and engaging stakeholders in “citizen science” field 
experiences. 
 
• Assisting in the development and implementation of a monitoring and adaptive management 
strategy for the Denver Water–U.S. Forest Service Forest-to-Faucets program (2015 
renewal). 
 
• Participating on the Spruce Beetle Epidemic-Aspen Decline Management Response 
(SBEADMR) project Science Team of the Grand Mesa-Uncompahgre-Gunnison (GMUG) 
National Forest to develop and implement a collaborative adaptive implementation strategy. 
Duty 5: Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
The CFRI prepared annual reports as required under the Act. They were circulated among 
stakeholder groups for comment before being submitted.  
 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act 
CFRI has demonstrated progress toward achieving the purposes of the Act through many of its 
activities and outcomes, including, for example: 
Purpose 1: Implement active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level.  
CFRI is actively involved in the Front Range and Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration projects. The institute is integrated into the project planning, goal 
setting, design, monitoring and adaptive management of these large-landscape projects. CFRI 
has convened numerous meetings among scientists, managers, and stakeholders to identify 
current scientific knowledge about reference conditions, silvicultural treatments, and 
monitoring metrics and methods. CFRI produced written reports and oral presentations of 
results.  
 
CFRI has also increased its portfolio to non-federal lands and is utilizing spatial analysis 
techniques to assist in treatment planning and design to complement work on federal lands. 
CFRI is also leading the development and implementation of effectiveness monitoring to 
inform non-federal managers on treatment effects and the design of future treatments. 
 
Purpose 2: Reduce unnecessary planning costs. 
CFRI regularly receives requests from federal land managers to assist, lead, and participate in 
various phases of project planning to address social conflict over treatments, address uncertainties in 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 20 
scientific knowledge, assist in project design, and provide guidance on monitoring metrics and 
adaptive management strategies.  
 
Examples include the following: 
• CFRI collaborated with the US Forest Service and The Nature Conservancy (TNC) to 
develop design criteria for various forest types on the Upper Monument Creek project. 
 
• In 2012, CFRI co-sponsored field-based rapid assessments of historic forest structure to 
inform the planning and design of the Escalante Forest Restoration and Stewardship 
Project on the Grand Mesa-Uncompahgre-Gunnison (GMUG) National Forest. 
 
• In 2015, CFRI, along with the RMRS, provided a status of knowledge report on spruce 
ecology and management to inform its Spruce Beetle Epidemic & Aspen Decline 
Management Response (SBEADMR) project. The report addressed stakeholder concerns 
by developing and implementing a robust monitoring strategy that ties in with the 
proposed adaptive implementation action. 
 
• Collaborative, multi-stakeholder planning helped build agreement prior to and during the 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process, and reduced the costs to federal 
agencies in addressing objections and appeals. 
Purpose 3: Avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts. 
CFRI seeks efficiencies in its efforts by:  
 
• Engaging in pilot/demonstration projects, such as the Uncompahgre Mesas Forest 
Restoration Projects that serve as a launching point for larger-scale work; 
 
• Conducting assessments of historic versus current forest conditions across large areas to 
inform management in setting priorities and developing prescriptions;  
 
• Collecting, analyzing, and disseminating monitoring data for treatment prescriptions that 
have been commonly implemented across a large area to inform the development of future 
prescriptions;  
 
• Participating in a variety of collaborative forest health partnerships to identify needs and 
common issues across partnerships;  
 
• Developing, compiling, and applying science-based information that is locally relevant to 
managers; and 
 
• Producing reports and sponsoring knowledge transfer activities and that target managers 
facing similar issues in similar forest conditions. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 21 
Purpose 4: Increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices.  
CFRI regularly receives requests to participate in the planning, design, and monitoring and 
adaptive management of forest restoration and fuel reduction projects on federal and non-
federal lands, primarily in the state of Colorado. These requests are due in large part to the 
credibility CFRI has with a variety of stakeholders, managers, and elected officials in 
providing unbiased, objective science-based information. For example, the GMUG national 
forest reached out to CFRI in spring 2015 to participate in a Science Team (along with the 
RMRS) to develop and implement monitoring strategies for the SPEADMR project. CFRI’s 
involvement has helped assuage concerns among many stakeholders about the U.S. Forest 
Service’s proposed “adaptive implementation” strategy. 
 
In the last five years CFRI has received an increasing number of requests to give 
presentations to state and federal elected officials on the scientific basis for forest landscape 
restoration, fuel reduction, monitoring results and lessons learned. Core concepts and ideas 
presented by CFRI have been incorporated into the Colorado Wildfire Risk Reduction Grant 
program and proposals for federal legislation. This is evidence of CFRI’s impact on 
increasing the acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices. 
Purpose 5: Achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities. 
CFRI strives to maintain regular, active communication with affected entities, including 
federal and state forest land management agencies, water providers, non-governmental 
stakeholder groups, and other research institutions, such as the RMRS, other federal research 
institutions (e.g., U.S. Geological Survey), and other universities.  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 22 
Ecological Restoration Institute in Arizona Assessment (2015) 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act 
Based on the information provided in ERI’s Five -Year Evaluation Report (Appendix A), the 
institute has performed a significant amount of work toward achieving each of the duties specified in 
the Act. Examples of significant contributions for each duty are presented below.  
Duty 1: Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health of dry forest 
and woodland ecosystems in the interior West. 
ERI assessed unnatural and potentially catastrophic changes in frequent-fire areas and tested 
treatments designed to restore more benign fire conditions in these areas. ERI studied sites 
throughout Arizona, New Mexico, and southern Colorado. Each site was set up to be a stand-
alone experimental study test site and is part of ERI’s Long-term Ecological Assessment and 
Restoration Network (LEARN). 
During this time period ERI compiled current scientific information on forest restoration for 
land managers and forged new partnerships with federal agencies to increase adaptive 
management through treatment monitoring. 
Duty 2: Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive 
ecosystem management framework. 
To scale up small-scale landscape restoration efforts to large-scale restoration, ERI has been 
collaborating with stakeholders in the largest forest landscape restoration project to date that 
spans four national forests and covers 2.4 million acres of ponderosa pine forests in Arizona. 
ERI has a leadership role in supporting the various working groups associated with this 
project, including the landscape restoration strategy group and the scientific and monitoring 
group. 
ERI has also collaborated with the National Forest Foundation (NFF) to develop a set of 
national indicators for Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration (CFLR) projects. 
Other work in this area includes hosting workshops on how to use best available science for 
monitoring and producing two publications to assist groups with restoration implementation. 
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, the affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
Since 2010, ERI has translated and communicated scientific information to affected entities 
through working papers designed to assist managers in making restoration decisions; white 
papers designed to assist stakeholders and policy makers in making restoration decisions; fact 
sheets that translate peer reviewed scientific papers for land managers, stakeholders and 
nontechnical audiences; technical reports; a website and an online library of publications; and 
newsletters. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 23 
Duty 4: Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
In addition to providing monitoring support for the CFLR pilots described in Duty 3 above, 
ERI assisted the White Mountain Stewardship Multi-Party Monitoring Board with measuring 
the outcomes of its 10-year forest restoration project of 70,000 acres in eastern Arizona. The 
forest treatments provided under this project were credited with preventing the 2011 Wallow 
Fire from burning into surrounding towns such as Alpine. 
Duty 5: Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
ERI provides online copies of its annual reports and presents a summary of its annual 
deliverables to Congress and the U.S. Forest Service in Washington, D.C. Reports are 
available online at: http://nau.edu/ERI/Resources/Annual-Reports-Work-Plans/ 
 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act 
Below is a summary of ERI’s achievement of the purposes of the Act. More details on report titles, 
stakeholders, and events are found in the institute’s evaluation in Appendix A. 
Purpose 1: Implementing adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level. 
ERI manages LEARN, which monitors the outcomes of different landscape restoration 
treatments across the Southwest. The monitoring data from these sites provides defensible 
scientific results to inform restoration treatments.  
 
In addition, ERI provides leadership, scientific data, and administrative support to the Four 
Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI). The 4FRI is the largest restoration pilot authorized under 
the CFLRP. The 4FRI Stakeholder Group and the four national forests that make up the 
initiative are collaborating to restore 2.4 million acres of ponderosa pine forest across 
northern Arizona.  
 
ERI led the successful development of a Monitoring and Adaptive Management Plan for the 
first Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) analysis for 900,000 acres. ERI assisted in the 
identification of almost 600,000 acres for active ecological restoration and continues to play 
a major role in the ongoing Multi-Party Monitoring Board that has already begun pre-
treatment monitoring for the first EIS.  
 
ERI also provides monitoring and adaptive management technical support for 23 CFLR 
projects via webinars, workshops, and one-on-one consultations. ERI provided leadership to 
a CFLR stakeholder and Forest Service team to help develop the biophysical monitoring 
metrics for a five year CFLR progress report to Congress.  
 
Purpose 2: Reducing unnecessary planning costs. 
The ERI provides a variety of services that improve the efficiency and effectiveness of 
planning, thereby reducing planning costs through: 1) Rapid Assessments to develop science-
based documents and treatment prescriptions; 2) One-on-one science support in response to 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 24 
information requests from agency personnel and stakeholders; 3) Publication of evidence-
based reviews, working papers, white papers and fact sheets that synthesize the best available 
science for planners, specialists, and stakeholders; 4) Assistance to stakeholders throughout 
the CFLR network to help them advance restoration projects that will make it through the 
NEPA process (without litigation) and into implementation; and 5) Workshops designed to 
assist land managers apply best available science.  
Purpose 3: Avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts. 
 
 
ERI first assesses whether or not the answer is known in the research community before 
pursuing the expensive task of research. In addition, ERI participates in numerous networks 
and communicates with other research entities, such as the Southwest Fire Science 
Consortium (SWFSC) and the RMRS in order to avoid duplication. Finally, collaboration 
occurs annually between the institutes to avoid unnecessary duplication and to coordinate 
projects where resources can be leveraged.  
 
Purpose 4: Increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices. 
During the last five years, ERI’s outreach activities for the public include presentations, 
publications, their website, and active and passive engagement with print, television, and 
radio media. The ERI also uses social media including Twitter, LinkedIn, and Facebook to 
connect, inform, and engage with a broad audience. In 2013, ERI helped coordinate a public 
forum at the Museum of Northern Arizona about the Four Forest Restoration Initiative 
(4FRI). The public response was overwhelming and led to the conclusion that future 4FRI 
public meetings should be jointly sponsored by the Stakeholder Group (of which ERI is an 
integral member) and the Forest Service.  
 
Purpose 5: Achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities. 
“Affected Entities” is defined in PL108-317 as land managers, stakeholders, concerned 
citizens, and states of the Interior West, including political subdivisions of the states. Some 
examples of general satisfaction with ERI from the affected entities include the following: 
several land managers found their research papers and fact sheets to be very helpful and cited 
the work in their reports; a city official stated that an ERI white paper had been widely 
shared and valued by decision makers in the City of Flagstaff, and the ERI is routinely asked 
to testify in Congress by both Republicans and Democrats due to the objectivity, quality and 
accessibility of ERI science. (See ERI evaluation for report titles and details). 
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 25 
Appendix A — Institute Reports 
Each of the institutes prepared an evaluation report to comply with the Five-Year Evaluation Report 
requirement of the Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act. Each institute’s evaluation 
focused on the institute’s performance for each of the following program duties specified in the Act: 
1. Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health on dry 
forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West; 
2. Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement restoration-
based hazardous fuel reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive ecosystem 
management framework;  
3. Translate for and transfer to affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary knowledge 
about restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 
4. Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 
and  
5. Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
 
 
An institute’s successful implementation of its duties demonstrates that its programs and activities 
have sufficiently met the purposes of the Act. Continued federal assistance to an institute is 
warranted if it has programs and activities that have resulted in the achievement of the purposes of 
the Act.  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 26 
New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute Report 
Work Plans by year, listing projects and federal funds available. 
 
FY 2010 
• Technical assistance for communities and restoration collaborative 
• Ecological restoration monitoring, restoration-based prescriptions, and water budget after 
forest restoration 
• Outreach, continuing education, and forest worker safety trainings 
• $250,000 in federal budget 
FY 2011  
• Technical assistance for communities and restoration collaborative 
• Ecological restoration monitoring 
• Outreach, continuing education, and training 
• $203,500 in federal budget 
FY 2012  
• Technical assistance and monitoring 
• Restoration-based economic development 
• Facilitating watershed restoration partnerships 
• $150,000 in federal budget 
FY 2013  
• Technical assistance and monitoring 
• Restoration-based economic development  
• Facilitating watershed restoration partnerships  
• $150,000 in federal budget 
FY 2014  
• Technical assistance  
• Monitoring 
• Facilitating watershed restoration partnerships  
• $150,000 in federal budget 
 
Table 5: NMFWRI Funding 
 
Funding	  Source	  
2010	  
2011	  
2012	  
2013	  
2014	  
Total	  
Federal	  Work	  Plan	  
250.0	  
203.5	  
150.0	  
150.0	  
150.0	  
903.5	  
Additional	  Federal	  Projects	  
0	  
299.6	  
0	  
0	  
57.2	  
356.8	  
State	  
342.0	  
427.3	  
263.3	  
263.3	  
387.0	  
1,682.9	  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 27 
Total	  	  
$592.0	  
$930.4	  
$413.3	  
$413.3	  
$594.2	  
$2,943.2	  
Dollars	  in	  thousands	  
 
The NMFWRI work plans have reflected the views and needs of our statewide stakeholders from 
the beginning.  Each year the institute develops a work plan based on the duties and purposes of the 
Act, recommendations from the New Mexico Forest and Watershed Health Plan, and conversations 
with natural resource professionals and other stakeholders.  NMFWRI draws heavily on the needs 
identified at the 2010 joint meeting of the SWERIs and the RMRS. The Institute also relies on core 
funding by the NM Legislature, which has been twice the Forest Service funding for the last five 
years. NMFWRI works closely with New Mexico State Forestry Division Office of Forest and 
Watershed Health to efficiently utilize resources and avoid redundancy. 
 
The NMFWRI has endeavored to work with our two sister Institutes during the period covered by 
this report.  One example is the SWERI-wide collaboration on Desired Condition tours that were 
sponsored by the Forest Service Southwestern Region. ERI took the lead, CFRI participated in the 
tours, and NMFWRI helped with site selection and logistics in New Mexico. NMFWRI has also 
overlapped with CFRI in southern Colorado on work with the Chama Peaks Land Alliance, the Rio 
Grande Water Fund, and the upcoming project database for the Rio Grande basin.  These projects 
are described below in greater detail. 
 
About The New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute 
NMFWRI exists to promote practices that reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfire and enhance 
ecosystem function. The Institute has pursued this through four program areas: ecological of 
restoration treatments, or which tree to cut and which to leave, with an emphasis on the need to burn 
treated areas; the mechanics of treatments, or how to operate safely and efficiently, a program area 
that was most active 2008-2010 but currently is dormant; support from GIS to field work by 
NMFWRI and our partners, which usually involves maps; monitoring, or how to determine if 
treatments are effective; and collaboration, which is an umbrella covering all four of the other 
program areas.  
NMFWRI is a stand-alone office attached to NMHU in Las Vegas. At full staffing, NMFWRI 
employs 6.8 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE). In addition to the full-time staff, we employ NMHU’ 
undergraduates as work-students, a small group of undergraduates to assist with summer fieldwork, 
and contractors as needed. Since the first SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report, NMFWRI has had 
two Directors, and other staff turnover that has affected capacity and performance. Two recent hires, 
the program directors for monitoring and for collaboration, put the Institute in a good position for the 
future.  
 
To What Extent Did The Institute Meet The Duties Under The Act? 
Duty 1: Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and  
improve the health of dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West. 
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 28 
Desired Conditions Workshops 
For several years, the Southwestern Region of the Forest Service worked on the science 
underlying forest restoration. The resulting combination of research, observations, and 
prescriptions came to be called Desired Conditions for ponderosa pine and mixed conifer 
on national forests in New Mexico and Arizona.  In 2011 and 2012 the SWERIs assisted 
the Forest Service Southwestern Region in organizing and conducting field tours with 
stakeholders to discuss desired conditions for pine in Arizona and New Mexico and for 
mixed conifer in in Arizona.  
NMFWRI played a key role in the 2012 ponderosa pine tour. That tour began at the 
Bluewater demonstration area west of Grants, and then moved to the Jemez Mountains. 
NMFWRI worked with the Santa Fe National Forest to select tour sites in the Jemez 
Mountains.  The desired condition guidelines were used to mark a demonstration area. The 
Institute identified key partners to invite who coordinated ground transportation and helped 
with logistics.  
 
New Partnerships 
In the fall of 2014 the Washington Office of the Forest Service provided funding for 
NMFWRI to assist the Otero County Working Group and the Grant County Eco-Watershed 
Planning Group. These groups include representatives from New Mexico State Forestry 
Division, USDA Forest Service, tribes (in Otero County), the State Land Office, conservation 
and environmental organizations, forest industry, contractors, citizens, and city and county 
representatives. 
NMFWRI assisted these groups to be more strategic in addressing forest and grassland issues 
at a watershed scale. They identified and prioritized future implementation areas and funding, 
identified stakeholders and partners including economic development organizations and 
wood products industries, and developed tools to improve education and outreach.  
Past, planned and current watershed projects were identified by land ownership and maps 
were drawn to identify future project areas. A current Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
was used to identify areas of greatest fire risk. This was compared to focal areas identified by 
New Mexico State Forestry Division and TNC based on fire risk, water quality and supply, 
economic opportunity, forest health, and fish and wildlife. Individuals also shared criteria 
they used to identify areas of importance. From these multiple areas, one priority project area 
was established for each group.  
Potential partners and stakeholders for each of these areas were identified.  The Otero group 
selected one focal area based on greatest fire risk and partnership potential to initiate the next 
phase. They are working with potential partners and stakeholders to identify projects and 
discuss options for communicating with the public on planning, implementing and funding 
these activities. This approach will then be duplicated in other focal areas. 
As part of the work with the Grant County group, a partnership developed between Western 
New Mexico University (WNMU) and NMFWRI in the area of GIS. A storehouse for maps 
was created under the AllAboutWatersheds portal so group members could have access to 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 29 
maps created by the working group. Maps of past, present, and future projects, by landowner, 
are now in these two private folders, as well as maps that outline the priority project areas.  
Socioeconomic Monitoring 
While some core ecological indicators have been developed and widely used to evaluate 
the effectiveness of restoration projects, efforts to systematically develop and apply 
indicators related to the social and economic outcomes of projects historically have been 
limited. Beginning soon after he arrived in 2010, NMFWRI’s former director recognized 
this shortcoming and worked to standardize protocols for collecting and evaluating 
socioeconomic monitoring data. While the work was targeted at CFRP projects, it could be 
applicable to all restoration projects. 
This work incorporated a Delphi process, an iterative method of questioning a group of 
opinion leaders, controlled feedback, response modification based on the feedback, and 
eventual consensus, without the opinion leaders knowing one another before consensus is 
reached. Using this process, a set of indicators was developed. The indicators were grouped 
into three levels of detail and five thematic areas: collaborative participation; community 
sustainability; economic impacts and outcomes; public support for restoration; and 
outreach and training. As would be suspected, job creation ranked highest of all the 
indicators. The full report and a user’s guide are available on our website at 
http://www.nmfwri.org/for-land-managers.  
Coleman Ranch Water Budget Study  
NMFWRI teamed with the Lower Pecos Watershed Alliance and New Mexico Tech in the 
development of a project designed to examine how thinning in a mixed conifer stand would 
impact the surface and subsurface water budget. NMFWRI conducted the pre-treatment 
monitoring in 2008, and the post-treatment monitoring in 2013. NM Tech continues to collect 
and analyze water data. This project was partially supported with funding from New Mexico 
Institute of Mining and Technology (NM Tech). 
NMFWRI also developed an object-based image classification for the Colman Ranch area 
using eCogntion software to develop canopy cover maps for pre and post-treatment areas, 
Canopy classifications were developed at 1- meter scale for each year using ortho-imagery 
from 2003 and 2014. Percent canopy coverage was calculated at 10-meter grid cells based on 
the 1-meter canopy classification. Knowing the percent canopy before treatment and after 
indicates the amount of canopy reduction and the spatial distribution of the change. These 
canopy cover datasets were used as inputs in computer modeling performed at NM Tech. 
NM Tech continues to collect and analyze water data. This project was also partially 
supported with funding from NM Tech. 
BLM Contract Work  
NMFWRI works with project managers across the state to provide them with maps to assist 
them in project planning. Between 2011 and 2015, the BLM funded NMFWRI to develop a 
vegetation and land cover classification map of their Rosa and Carrizo Largo Landscape 
Areas in Rio Arriba and San Juan Counties of New Mexico. For both areas a detailed 30cm 
(1 foot) vegetation classification was created using digital ortho-imagery and Trimble 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 30 
eCognition software. Percent cover for each land cover type was derived using 30x30 meter 
grid cells.  
The Rosa landscape area comprises over 111,000 acres and borders Navajo Lake on the San 
Juan River. The Carrizo Largo study area covers over 259,000 acres and is located 40 miles 
northeast of Cuba, NM. Extensive road and well-pad networks to support oil and natural gas 
production dominate the landscape in both study areas. Because of the fragmented landscape, 
habitat for wildlife is a concern. Working with the BLM Farmington Field Office and our 
own field crew, field plots and vegetation transects were used to validate the accuracy of the 
classification. The Rosa Landscape land cover classification included 21 land cover classes 
and had an overall accuracy of 80.14%. The Carrizo Largo Landscape land cover 
classification included 20 land cover classes and had an overall accuracy of 85.63%. 
Creating a vegetation and land cover classification is important for habitat assessment and 
land management activities. Having a baseline assessment of vegetation cover and diversity 
is critical to support long-term land management activities. More information about these 
projects can be found on our website: http://www.nmfwri.org/projects. 
Teacher’s Camp 
In the summer of 2014, NMFWRI partnered with NMHU’s Natural Resources Department 
and the Environmental Education Association of New Mexico to host a three-day teacher’s 
camp on NMHU’s campus. Called the Forestry and Fire Ecology Academy, it presented a 
condensed overview of issues and research surrounding forest restoration and fire 
management in New Mexico. Classes included fire laboratory activities, a Simtable 
demonstration, an orientation to dendrochronology and Project Learning Tree, a sawmill tour 
and a tour of the Pritzlaff Ranch demonstration area. Twenty educators participated, 
including an equal mix of high school teachers and nature center operators. Participants were 
funded by a grant from New Mexico State Forestry Division. 
 
Duty 2: Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive 
ecosystem management framework. 
 AllAboutWatersheds.org  
The AllAboutWatersheds portal is a forest and watershed restoration health information 
clearinghouse.  It is a joint effort with the Forest and WHO of New Mexico State Forestry 
Division. The web-based portal contains links, postings, and videos related to prescriptions, 
groups, funding sources, and monitoring protocols from across the state and is used by 
groups (e.g., the Zuni Mountain Landscape CFLR) and agencies (e.g., the NM Environment 
Department). Planning was supported by Federal funds, and start-up funding for the portal 
was from New Mexico State Forestry Division. NMFWRI currently is supporting the portal 
with core state funding, and additional funding is actively being sought. 
AllAboutWatersheds has become a valuable tool for exchanging information about 
restoration. 
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 31 
Ojo Peak 
This project was funded under a Participating Agreement between the Cibola National Forest 
and NMFWRI. The objective was to monitor the response of ponderosa pine that were within 
the perimeter of the Ojo Peak Wildfire (November 2007) to determine if the trees would 
survive after being burned late in the season. A November wildfire is uncharacteristic in the 
Southwest, and little was known about the effects on tree mortality or survival rates. 
NMFWRI and the Forest Service established plots in 2008, and NMFWRI re-measured those 
same plots during the summers of 2009 and 2011. Thirty-one plots were established. 
Fourteen plots had good survival. Most of these plots were in areas mapped as having low 
severity fire.  
On the 17 moderate-to-high mortality ponderosa pine plots survival improved as diameter 
increased and as the percentage of post-fire green crown increased. Having green in the 
crown after fire is an indicator of survival.  Diameter was a weaker indicator than expected. 
Minimum bark char height also shows some potential as an indicator of survival. (Two 
measures are made on each tree: the maximum bark char height will typically be found on 
what was the leeward side during the fire, and the minimum height on the windward side.) 
The ponderosa pines with the highest minimum bark char heights died, and those with the 
lowest minimums tended to live. Some relationships, like crown position, scorch, and 
consumption, were weak. Survival was better for trees higher in the canopy, but many trees 
lower in the canopy survived. Complete post-fire crown scorch is not an indicator of death, 
and less post-fire crown consumption is better, but there was little relationship with 
mortality. Bark thickness is generally accepted as positively related to survival, but these data 
show no relationship.  
Southwest Jemez Mountains (SWJM) Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
(CFLR)  
This project, funded by the Washington Office of the Forest Service, originally included 
210,000 acres on the Santa Fe National Forest and the Valles Caldera National Preserve 
(VCNP). NMFWRI participates with the collaborative and partners in regular planning 
and informational meetings. 
Estancia  
Since 2007, NMFWRI has been a member of the Estancia Basin Monitoring Steering 
Committee, which comprises the three Soil and Water Conservation Districts in the basin 
and representatives from cooperating agencies. NMFWRI works with the SWCA consulting 
group to monitor thinning projects in the basin.  
Gallinas  
The 52,000 acre Gallinas watershed provides municipal drinking-water for the city of Las 
Vegas, NM and has been prioritized for restoration. Two-thirds of the area is on National 
Forest land, with the remainder divided between municipal and private ownership. 
NMFWRI organized the Gallinas Partnership in 2010 to bring the land management 
organizations together to improve the health and safety of the Gallinas and neighboring 
watersheds by mitigating the potential for catastrophic wildfire, and to secure a 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 32 
sustainable water supply for the City of Las Vegas and the region.  The Partnership 
developed and implemented a comprehensive watershed plan and hazardous fuel 
reduction strategy.  
Zuni Mountain CFLRP 
NMFWRI attends collaborative meetings along with other stakeholders for the Zuni 
Mountain CFLRP.  
Long-Term CFRP Monitoring  
The first SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report described NMFWRI’s involvement in long-
term monitoring of projects funded by the CFRP. In late 2008, a five-person team identified 
twenty projects across multiple jurisdictions and forest types to be measured at five, ten, and 
fifteen years post-treatment. This long-term monitoring closes the feedback loop essential for 
adaptive management. NMFWRI has completed the first round of post-treatment monitoring 
of those projects, and is on schedule for the ten-year post-treatment monitoring. Using the 
same criteria as the first selection, we have selected additional projects for five year 
monitoring.  
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, the affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
 Pritzalff Ranch Demonstration Area  
NMFWRI established a 10-acre demonstration area in a ponderosa pine stand on the 
Pritzlaff Ranch outside of Las Vegas in 2007. Areas of equal size were marked according to 
evidence-based guidelines developed by ERI, Northern Goshawk guidelines developed by 
the U.S. Forest Service, and genetic (phenotypic) guidelines developed by NMFWRI. Areas 
are large enough for visitors to see what a residual stand would look like. The ERI and 
Northern Goshawk plots exhibit the group-and-opening structure characteristic of historic 
ponderosa pine stands.. Thinning of this stand was completed in the fall of 2008, and the 
area was burned in a prescribed fire in November 2010. The area has been used several 
times a year for training and outreach. The area is being continually monitored to determine 
lessons learned. 
Habitat Characterization of the Jemez Mountain Salamander 
In 2010, TNC asked NMFWRI to characterize the habitat of the Jemez Mountain salamander 
(JMS). A team of biologists assembled by TNC identified areas where the JMS had been 
found, and prioritized those areas for vegetation measurement. NMFWRI’s role was to 
conduct a vegetation survey using the Institute’s modified monitoring protocols. NMFWRI 
used a combination of student and Jemez Pueblo crews to measure the vegetation and down 
logs in these areas in summers of 2011 and 2012.  
Very little is known about the JMS. It is associated with closed-canopy mixed conifer forest. 
Salamander biologists used to find JMS in places they no longer occur. Ladder fuels have 
increased and the canopy has filled in and become more continuous. Places where 
salamanders had been known to occur and that were selected for us to measure varied from 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 33 
sparse ponderosa pine with a New Mexico locust understory, to very dense wet mixed 
conifer. Vegetation cover seemed to have little to do with past JMS occurrence. 
Due to the declining numbers of salamanders found during the NMFWRI surveys the US 
FWS listed the Jemez Mountain Salamander as Endangered in the spring of 2013. 
Little Bear Fire  
The Little Bear Fire ignited from a lightning strike in June 2012 in the Lincoln National Forest 
outside of Ruidoso, NM and grew to become the most financially destructive fire in New 
Mexico history. Prior to the fire, various hazardous fuel reduction treatments were 
implemented on private, municipal, and federal land. In 2012 the Forest Service Washington 
Office provided funding for NMFWRI to evaluate the effectiveness of these treatments based 
on various ecological metrics.  
 
Four fuel reduction treatments were evaluated: thinning the trees; thinning and piling the 
biomass; thinning and masticating the biomass; and thinning, chipping the biomass, and 
hauling it away from the site. The primary post-fire metrics used to evaluate the impacts were 
fire severity, tree mortality, and bare ground. Other post-fire metrics were collected to examine 
their relationships to tree mortality and bare ground, and provide information for future 
management. These include fuels, trees per acre, woody basal area per acre, habitat type, slope, 
aspect, non-woody canopy cover, non-woody basal area, and insect occurrence.  
 
Analysis showed five statistically significant relationships. These were between fire severity 
and tree basal area, tree mortality, bare ground, and fuel treatments, and between the fuel 
treatments and bare ground. As basal area increased, fire severity increased. Increased fire 
severity also was correlated with increased tree mortality and increased bare ground. Bare 
ground increased with fire severity and the thin-and-pile treatment. Two of the four 
treatments – thin-and-pile, and thin, -chip, -and-haul – appeared to be the driver of the 
relationship with fire severity. The thin-and-pile plots showed high fire severity, and thin, -
chip, -and-haul showed low fire severity.  
 
Mastication 
In 2012 the Forest Service, New Mexico State Forestry Division, and BLM requested a study 
on fire behavior in masticated materials. Three sites were chosen in 2013: for pinyon-juniper, 
the Lincoln National Forest near Ruidoso, NM; for ponderosa pine, the Tonto National 
Forest near Payson, AZ; and for chaparral, the Prescott National Forest near Prescott, AZ.  
Three general methodological approaches were used: fuel bed and soil temperatures and heat 
residence time on masticated and burned plots; observations of flame length, heat output, rate 
of spread, and the post-fire masticated fueled conditions; and short-term monitoring of 
vegetation changes in and proximate to treated plots – both masticated only and masticated 
and burned. 
Site selection, fieldwork, and planned burns were coordinated with the local District Offices. 
At each treatment site, data was collected on mastication depth, species, and cover of 
understory plants. NMHU faculty leveraged other funding to examine soil factors. More than 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 34 
ten students have been involved in this project, and a strong link has been established 
between the NMHU and NM State University fire programs.  
Guide to Bosque Monitoring 
Well-designed monitoring of riparian projects is critical to improving current treatments and 
modifying future techniques. Riparian sites frequently are identified in community wildfire 
protection plans as priority areas for fuels reductions. Because riparian areas have been 
poorly studied with regard to fuel and fire dynamics, little science is available to guide the 
fuel management process. 
NMFWRI developed guidelines for monitoring in riparian areas including: cover plot layout; 
measurement of ecological indicators; Hink and Ohmart structural determinations; and 
groundwater monitoring. The protocols and a handbook for field use are available on the 
NMFWRI website at http://www.nmfwri.org/collaborative-forest-restoration-program. 
Santa Fe Community College 
In 2012 the Santa Fe Community College (SFCC) asked NMFWRI to develop and deliver a 
course for woods workers. SFCC’s Workforce Development Program offered a course in 
February 2013 for environmental science technicians, and NMFWRI presented the three-
week program on restoration monitoring and principles, timber marking, and basic GIS. A 
member of the Alamo Navajo field crew assisted in the instruction, and two of the twenty 
students were members of pueblos. Funding was provided by Santa Fe Community College. 
Duty 4: Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
 HB 38, the Forest and Watershed Restoration Act 
During its 2014 Session, the New Mexico Legislature passed two Memorials that recognized 
the urgent need for watershed restoration, and requested “the appropriate interim committee 
of the Legislature to develop a long-term funding plan for federal, state, local and tribal 
agencies and diverse stakeholders to cooperate on forest and watershed restoration work in 
New Mexico”. The Interim Water and Natural Resources Committee assigned this task to the 
NMFWRI.  
Developing a long-term funding plan requires the agencies involved in watershed restoration 
to work together. In early August NMFWRI called a meeting in Santa Fe attended by 19 
organizations including state and federal agencies, universities, tribes, soil and water 
conservation districts, and other stakeholders. This group discussed what was being done in 
watershed restoration, what needed to be done, and what was needed to cover that gap. 
The full group appointed a smaller group who determined that the two key issues were 
promoting forest and watershed function, and protecting water sources by reducing the risk 
of catastrophic fire. The smaller group determined the funding needed and what the funds 
should be used for. The group agreed that $15 million would cover about one-fourth of the 
total annual treatment needed in New Mexico. They then developed a list of criteria to use in 
prioritizing projects that emphasizes on-the-ground work but allows for planning, especially 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 35 
when there is an opportunity for collaboration and leveraging other sources of funding.  This 
process led the Interim Water and Natural Resources Committee to establish a Forest and 
Watershed Restoration Fund.  
A bill was drafted and presented to the Interim Committee at a meeting in December. The 
draft was voted on and endorsed as a committee-sponsored bill for the 2015 Session. House 
Bill (HB) 38, the Forest and Watershed Restoration Act, would have established a Fund and 
a Board to manage the money, given guidance on projects and proposals, and raised $15 
million annually by diverting tax revenues from the homeowner's insurance premium tax that 
currently goes to the General Fund. It was co-sponsored in the House by a Republican 
rancher from Aztec, and in the Senate by a Democratic lawyer from Santa Fe.  
HB 38 passed through the House and Senate, but was vetoed by the Governor. The final 
version and other documentation can be found on the Legislature’s website 
http://www.nmlegis.gov/lcs/legislation.aspx?Chamber=H&LegType=B&LegNo=38&year=15. 
 
Statewide Vegetation Treatment Database  
NMFWRI is developing a statewide geospatial database of planned watershed treatments on 
private, state, tribal, and federal forest land for all of New Mexico.  
 
Development of this database involves working collaboratively with and receiving data from NM 
State Forestry, USDA-Forest Service, BLM, the State Land Office, NRCS, and a host of other 
agencies. The collected data populates an integrated database. Pulling together this information 
from different State and Federal agencies is aided by NMFWRI’s GIS capabilities and by its 
unique position as an active but neutral participant in statewide projects.  
The geospatial database will allow users to overlay project-level information with other data 
such as fire history, imagery, and vegetation. Project-specific pages can be assembled into 
customized map books with a project map, a location map, and information related to the 
project listed in a summary table.  
In the past two years, TNC has established the Rio Grande Water Fund to identify funding for 
vegetation treatments in the Rio Grande basin in New Mexico and southern Colorado.  The 
statewide geospatial database will be a valuable tool in identifying priority treatment areas for 
the Water Fund 
 
Duty 5: Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
Annual reports have been prepared every year. They have been circulated among our 
stakeholder group for comment before being submitted. They are available on our 
website: http://www.nmNMFWRI.org/annual-reports. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 36 
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute Report 
CFRI’s work plans are based on semi-annual statewide needs assessments. The assessments are 
performed by the director and include focus group discussions with affected entities such as the U.S. 
Forest Service, the U.S. BLM, and the Colorado State Forest Service (CSFS). Formal needs 
assessments were conducted in 2005, 2007, and 2009. CFRI assumed the directorship in May of 
2008 and conducted the 2009 assessment. Since this time, assessment of needs occurs through 
ongoing conversations and collaborations with resource specialists and line officers at the ranger 
district, forest supervisor, and regional office levels in Colorado, as well as with individuals from 
non-federal and non-governmental organizations (NGO) working on forest landscape restoration and 
wildfire mitigation. 
 
Table 6: CFRI Funding 
 
Funding	  Source	  
2010	  
2011	  
2012	  
2013	  
2014	  
Total	  
Federal	  Work	  Plan	  
250	  
500	  
150	  
150	  
150	  
1,200	  
Additional	  Federal	  Projects	  
23	  
223	  
573	  
281	  
665	  
1,765	  
State	  
231	  
490	  
273	  
704	  
425	  
2,123	  
Total	  	  
$	   504	  
$	  1,213	  
$	  996	  
$	  1,135	  
$	  1,240	  
$	  5,088	  
Dollars	  in	  thousands	  
*	  Includes	  salary	  support	  for	  Cheng,	  unrecovered	  indirect	  cost/overhead	  at	  CSU’s	  research	  rate,	  and	  financial	  
agreements	  with	  State	  of	  Colorado	  government	  for	  projects.	  
About The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
The CFRI is housed in the Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, Warner College of 
Natural Resources at Colorado State University. As such, it is well positioned to leverage the science 
and outreach capacity within the College by drawing on the expertise of faculty, staff, and students, and 
the CSFS. Located in Fort Collins, Colorado, CFRI is fortunate to be located in close proximity to the 
U.S. Forest Service RMRS, affording opportunities for collaboration with RMRS scientists to 
synthesize current research pertaining to restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction and insect 
infestation impacts on Colorado’s forests, as well as drawing on RMRS research expertise in 
conducting forest condition assessments and monitoring.  
The mission of the CFRI is to build the capacity of land managers, communities, and policy makers 
to address forest health and restoration issues through collaborative science-based approaches to 
assessing, designing, and adaptively managing restoration projects. CFRI staff brings ecological and 
social science expertise to bear on forest restoration issues, and are constantly called upon to work 
with agencies, collaborative partnerships, and policy makers. Currently CFRI is staffed by a director, 
eight full-time research associates, three graduate students, and between nine and fifteen temporary 
Colorado State University student employees working on field projects. CFRI also draws on multiple 
faculty and research scientists in the Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship, in other 
departments within the Warner College of Natural Resources, and across the university to 
collaborate on developing, synthesizing, and applying science-based knowledge to place-specific 
forest restoration and wildfire mitigation management situations. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 37 
To What Extent Did The Institute Meet The Duties Under The Act? 
Duty 1: Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health of dry forest 
and woodland ecosystems in the interior West. 
CFRI meets this duty through its involvement in multiple collaborative wildfire mitigation-
based forest restoration and fuel reduction projects in Colorado. Prominent examples include: 
the Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative, the Colorado Front Range CFLRP, the Colorado 
Wildfire Risk Reduction Grant Program, Denver Water-U.S. Forest Service Forest-To-
Faucets Program, the San Juan Headwaters Forest Health Partnership, and the Uncompahgre 
Plateau CFLRP. Highlights include: 
Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative 
• Developed a status of knowledge report on effects of the mountain beetle outbreak on forest 
ecology, fuels and fire, wildlife, watershed, and recreation. 
• Convened two symposia to identify treatment goals and priorities for post-mountain pine 
beetle hazard reduction. 
• Developed a hazard assessment framework to assist local managers to identify goals, 
objectives, and priorities for reducing fire and other hazards to communities and critical 
infrastructure. 
• Collaborated with the RMRS on a five-year monitoring project to assess the impact of the 
Church Park Fire (burned in October 2010 in beetle-killed forests) on tree and plant 
regeneration, comparing impact in previously cut and uncut stands. 
Front Range CFLRP 
• Provided assistance in developing the monitoring component for the Front Range CFLRP. 
• Assisted in the formation and ongoing functioning of the Landscape Restoration Team of 
the Front Range Roundtable to oversee implementation, monitoring, and adaptive 
management of the project.  
• Worked continuously through the Landscape Restoration Team since 2011 to develop, 
synthesize, and apply currently available scientific knowledge to inform and monitor projects 
on the Arapaho-Roosevelt and Pike-San Isabel national forests. 
• Took the lead in producing three core documents underlying the Front Range CFLRP: 
desired conditions at stand and landscape scales; the multi-party monitoring plan; and a 
framework for collaborative adaptive management.  
• Helped initiate collaboration between two national forests, the USDA Forest Service’s 
RMRS, and Rocky Mountain Tree Ring Research to implement a large-scale assessment of 
historic forest structure and fire regimes. Results from the assessment are already being used 
by federal and non-federal managers as reference conditions for developing restoration 
prescriptions for Colorado Front Range Ponderosa pine and dry mixed-conifer forests. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 38 
• Led efforts to develop and implement methods for monitoring treatment effects on 
estimated fire potential and behavior, forest structure, and understory plant communities. 
• Developed and implemented a socio-economic monitoring strategy to gauge the effect of 
treatments on local employment, wood utilization, and the regional economy. 
• Helped organize and lead annual multi-party monitoring reviews to provide adaptive 
management guidance to managers. 
Colorado Wildfire Risk Reduction Grant Program  
• Serve on the advisory committee to formulate the grant program and review and select 
grant applications. 
• Developed and implemented a treatment effectiveness monitoring strategy, and provided 
information back to the advisory committee and to grantees. 
• Provided technical guidance and citizen science opportunities to landowners and managers 
on monitoring treatment effectiveness. 
• Promoted the program through invited presentations to the Colorado General Assembly. 
Denver Water-US Forest Service Forest-to-Faucets Program 
• Developed and implemented a treatment effectiveness monitoring strategy.  
• Developed a framework for linking treatment effectiveness to return-on-investment metrics 
for Denver Water for the project’s 2015 renewal. 
San Juan Headwaters Forest Health Partnership 
• Developed a status of knowledge report pertaining to dry mixed-conifer ecology and 
management to inform managers and stakeholders about restoration needs and opportunities. 
• Organized and led a multi-stakeholder workshop to deliver current knowledge about dry 
mixed-conifer ecology and management, and identify priority areas for forest restoration. 
• Provided technical guidance on multi-party monitoring of treatment effectiveness for the 
ten-year stewardship contract. 
• Helped organize and lead a community workshop reviewing the effects of the Little Sand 
Fire (burned June 2012). 
 
Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Project 
• Assisted in developing the monitoring component for the Front Range CFLRP. 
• Participated in a core group focused on monitoring and adaptive management, including 
leading the development and implementation of the multi-party monitoring strategy. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 39 
• Provided technical assistance to the high school Forestry Internship Program to collect 
treatment effectiveness data pertaining to forest structure and fuels. 
• Developed and implemented a socio-economic monitoring strategy to gauge the effect of 
treatments on local employment, wood utilization, and regional economic impacts. 
• Developed an assessment of forest structure in roadless old growth stands to provide 
managers with an understanding the influence of soils on variability of long-term vegetation 
dynamics and fire history. 
• Conducted analysis of stakeholder perspectives on forest restoration projects that harvest 
and utilize wood. 
• Organized and lead annual multi-party monitoring reviews to provide guidance to 
managers. 
Additional activities: 
• Gave presentations on forest restoration and fuel reduction projects to congressional 
members and staff, and the Colorado state legislature. 
• Organized and led annual meetings of forest health collaborative groups to identify lessons 
learned, areas of common need, and best practices for forest restoration and fuel reduction 
treatments. 
• Gave multiple public presentations, media interviews, and media editorials about forest 
restoration and fuel reduction activities. 
Duty 2: Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive 
ecosystem management framework. 
CFRI collaborates with researchers at area universities, the RMRS, and other federal research 
institutions to compile, synthesize, and apply current research for managers, collaborative 
groups, and stakeholders. Examples include: 
• A report defining desired conditions for Colorado Front Range Collaborative Forest 
Restoration.  
 
• A status of knowledge of dry mixed-conifer forest ecology and management in 
Southwestern Colorado.  
 
• In collaboration with the RMRS, a general technical report on principles and guidelines 
for restoring ponderosa pine and dry mixed conifer forests in Colorado’s Front Range. 
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, the affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 40 
CFRI continuously assesses needs and opportunities for knowledge transfer, organizing and 
convening a range of events involving a wide range of participants, and collaborating with other 
entities with a mission to apply and integrate best available science into forest restoration and 
wildfire risk reduction. Examples include: 
• Participated in an April 2010 symposium on post-mountain pine beetle effects and 
management priorities involving 100+ managers, stakeholders, community leaders, and 
elected officials. 
 
• Arranged scientific presentations in 2010-2014 on post-mountain pine beetle research 
pertaining to forest recovery and watershed effects for the Colorado Bark Beetle 
Cooperative. 
• Published the research brief, Signs of recovery for Colorado forests in the wake of the 
mountain pine beetle, based on research conducted by the RMRS and co-sponsored by 
CFRI. 
 
• Co-sponsored a webinar with the RMRS on mountain pine beetle outbreak impacts and 
management effects.  
 
• Co-sponsored multiple field trips 2011-2015 involving scientists, managers, and 
stakeholders for the Front Range and Uncompahgre Plateau CFLRPs. 
 
• Published two research briefs synthesizing current research on aspen forest conditions 
and Sudden Aspen Decline in Southwestern Colorado. 
 
• Published the research brief, Use of physics-based fire behavior modeling to assess 
treatment effectiveness, to inform researchers and managers on the use and application of 
new fire behavior models. 
Duty 4: Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments.  
CFRI actively participates in collaborative forest landscape restoration and fuel reduction 
projects. CFRI developed and implemented monitoring and adaptive management strategies 
linked to several large-scale forest restoration and fuel reduction projects. Examples include: 
• Developed and implemented a multi-party monitoring plan for the Front Range and 
Uncompahgre CFLRP projects and collected data on treatments to inform managers on 
future treatment prescriptions. 
 
•  Led the development of a collaborative adaptive management strategy document to 
guide the Front Range CFLR project. 
 
• Organized and led multi-party monitoring and adaptive management reviews for the 
Uncompahgre Plateau CFLR project, which included engaging stakeholders in “citizen 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 41 
science” field experiences. 
 
• Assisted in the development and implementation of a monitoring and adaptive 
management strategy for the Denver Water-US Forest Service Forest-to-Faucets program 
(2015 renewal). 
 
• Ongoing participation on the Science Team associated with the Spruce Beetle Epidemic-
Aspen Decline Management Response (SBEADMR) project of the Grand Mesa-
Uncompahgre-Gunnison (GMUG) National Forest to develop and implement an adaptive 
implementation strategy. 
Duty 5: Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
The CFRI has prepared annual reports as required under the Act. They have been circulated 
among stakeholder groups for comment before being submitted.  
CFRI website: http://warnercnr.colostate.edu/cfri-home/  
 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act 
Purpose 1: Implementing active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level. 
CFRI is actively involved in the Front Range and Uncompahgre Plateau CFLRPs. The 
institute is integrated into project planning, goal setting, design, monitoring, and adaptive 
management of these large-landscape projects. CFRI has convened numerous meetings 
among scientists, managers, and stakeholders to identify current scientific knowledge about 
reference conditions, silvicultural treatments, and monitoring metrics and methods. CFRI 
supervises the gathering of pre- and post-treatment data pertaining to forest structure, fuels, 
understory plants, and socio-economic impacts, and produced written reports and oral 
presentations on results to feed back into the adaptive management process. CFRI helps 
organize and convene annual field reviews of treatments, and leads collaborative discussions 
about effects and future treatment design. 
CFRI has also increased its portfolio to non-federal lands and is utilizing spatial analysis 
techniques to assist in treatment planning and design to complement work on federal lands. 
CFRI is the lead entity in developing and implementing effectiveness monitoring to inform 
non-federal managers on treatment effects and on design of future treatments. 
Purpose 2: Reducing unnecessary planning costs. 
CFRI regularly receives requests from federal land managers to assist, lead, and participate in 
various phases of project planning to address social conflict over treatments, address 
uncertainties in scientific knowledge, assist in project design features, and provide guidance 
on monitoring metrics and adaptive management strategies. For example, CFRI worked 
closely with US Forest Service managers and TNC on the Upper Monument Creek project (a 
project under the Front Range CFLR initiated in 2012) to develop design criteria for various 
forest types in the project area. By doing so, CFRI helped reduce the time that would have 
been allocated by the US Forest Service during its internal planning and analysis pursuant to 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 42 
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Similarly, in 2012 CFRI co-sponsored a 
field-based rapid assessment of historic forest structure to inform the planning and design of 
the Escalante Forest Restoration and Stewardship Project on the GMUG National Forest. 
Without this information, US Forest Service planners would have either had to collect it 
themselves or been open to stakeholder objections over the lack of information for the 
decision. Relatedly, CFRI’s collaborative work with the RMRS to establish reference 
conditions for forest restoration across the Colorado Front Range (and into southern 
Wyoming and the Black Hills, South Dakota), will greatly reduce the exposure of the US 
Forest Service and other agencies to objections about the lack of a scientific basis for 
restoration treatments in ponderosa pine/dry mixed-conifer. This is crucial given recent 
publications by researchers at the University of Colorado and University of Wyoming who 
call into question the need for forest restoration.  
In 2015, the GMUG asked CFRI and the RMRS to provide a status of knowledge report on 
spruce ecology and management to inform its SBEADMR project.  The report addressed 
stakeholder concerns by developing and implementing a robust monitoring strategy that ties 
in with the adaptive implementation proposed action. 
This type of multi-stakeholder collaboration surrounding forest restoration and fuel reduction 
project planning and design can help build agreement prior to and during the NEPA process, 
and reduce the costs to federal agencies in fighting objections and appeals. 
Purpose 3: Avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts. 
CFRI seeks efficiencies in its efforts by: 1) engaging in pilot/demonstration projects, such as 
the Uncompahgre Mesas Forest Restoration Project, that can serve as a launching point for 
larger-scale work; 2) Conducting well-sampled assessments of historic vs. current forest 
conditions across large areas to inform management priorities and prescriptions; 3) 
collecting, analyzing, and disseminating monitoring data for treatment prescriptions 
commonly implemented across a larger area to inform future prescriptions; and 4) 
participating in a variety of collaborative forest health partnerships in order to identify needs 
and issues common across partnerships. CFRI develops, compiles, and applies science-based 
knowledge that is locally relevant to managers, and develops reports and sponsors knowledge 
transfer activities to target managers who face similar issues in similar forest conditions. 
Purpose 4: Increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices. 
CFRI regularly receives requests to participate in the planning, design, and monitoring and 
adaptive management of forest restoration and fuel reduction projects on federal and non-
federal lands, primarily in the state of Colorado. These requests are due in large part to the 
credibility CFRI has with a variety of stakeholders, managers, and elected officials in 
providing unbiased, objective science-based information. For example, the GMUG national 
forest reached out to CFRI in spring 2015 to participate in a Science Team (along with the 
RMRS) that would develop and implement monitoring strategies for the SPEADMR project. 
CFRI’s involvement has helped assuage concerns among many stakeholders about the US 
Forest Service’s proposed ‘adaptive implementation’ strategy. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 43 
Since the 2009 SWERI Five-Year Review, CFRI has increasingly been invited to make 
presentations to state and federal elected officials, especially concerning the scientific basis 
for forest landscape restoration and fuel reduction, and to share monitoring results and 
lessons learned. Core concepts and ideas presented by CFRI have been incorporated into the 
Colorado Wildfire Risk Reduction Grant program and federal legislative proposals. This is 
evidence of CFRI’s impact on increasing the acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem 
management practices. 
Purpose 5: Achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities. 
CFRI strives to maintain regular, active communication with affected entities, including 
federal and state forest land management agencies, water providers, non-governmental 
stakeholder groups, and other research institutions, such as the RMRS, other federal research 
institutions (e.g., US Geological Survey), and other universities. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 44 
The Ecological Restoration Institute in Arizona Report 
Annual Work Plans Guide Institute Activities 
Each year the ERI develops an annual work plan that describes a program of activities for our annual 
federal funding. In some cases, such as our biophysical and monitoring work, state or other funding 
is used to leverage federal funding. The commitment of funding from Arizona enables the ERI to 
provide a suite of services that increases the impact of the ERI beyond what is possible with only our 
federal funding.  
The ERI designed the work plans to ensure that the best science available is used by land managers 
and stakeholders to develop and implement comprehensive, restoration-based forest treatments. 
Annual work plans of the ERI follow the guidance of the authorizing legislation and are approved by 
both the Forest Service SWERI Development and Executive Teams. The activities and deliverables 
in each work plan: (1) support forest restoration policy directives from the U.S. Forest Service, the 
Western Governors’ Association, the Department of the Interior, and other organizations; (2) serve 
the needs of land managers and other affected parties to implement action; and (3) anticipate 
emerging biophysical and social science questions. The ERI intentionally works at the interface of 
developing and transferring rigorous science to solve a significant natural resource challenge—
restoring forests at the landscape scale.  
Table 7: ERI Funding 
Funding	  Source	  
2010	  
2011	  
2012	  
2013	  
2014	  
Total	  
Federal	  Work	  Plan	  
1,500	  
1,200	  
1,200	  
1,200	  
1,125	  
6,225	  
Additional	  Federal	  
Projects	  
0	  
1,101	  
192	  
179	  
764	  
2,237	  
State	  
1,318	  
1,183	  
1,325	  
1,225	  
965	  
6,016	  
Total	  	  
$2,818	  
$3,484	  
$2,717	  
$2,604	  
$2,854	  
$14,478	  
	  	  Dollars	  in	  thousands	  
 
About the Ecological Restoration Institute 
ERI-NAU is nationally recognized for mobilizing the unique assets of a university to help solve the 
serious problems of degraded forest health and unnaturally severe wildfire in the frequent-fire forests 
of the Southwest and Intermountain West. The mission of ERI is to serve as an objective leader in 
research, scholarship, education, and, in collaborative efforts, to help interested parties plan and 
implement restoration treatments for these forests and woodland landscapes. In this light, the ERI 
provides land management agencies and communities with applied scientific knowledge (i.e., 
comprehensive focused studies, monitoring and evaluation research, and technical support) about 
issues related to both the ecological and social aspects involved in restoration treatments.  
ERI was formally established in 1997 by the Arizona Board of Regents and in 2004 by the federal 
legislation (Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act of 2004, P.L. 108-317). In 2005, 
ERI was formally chartered by the Western Governors’ Association.  This action committed the 
three states and Universities named in the federal legislation to provide resources to advance 
landscape scale restoration. The ERI employs a staff of about 23 people including ecologists, 
administrators, professors, and outreach personnel. In addition, the ERI subcontracts with experts in 
other disciplines (e.g., ecological economics, conservation biology, sociology) to provide research 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 45 
and expertise in areas outside the core competencies of the ERI. The institute also provides 
educational and field experiences to NAU undergraduate and graduate students. The ERI is funded 
by a combination of: NAU base budget; Technology, Innovation and Research funding (TRIF) from 
the Arizona Board of Regents; federal appropriations; federal projects; and, through competitive 
grants programs. More information about the ERI is available at http://www.eri.nau.edu. 
  
To What Extent Did The Institute Meet The Duties Under The Act? 
Duty 1: Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health of dry forest 
and woodland ecosystems in the interior West. 
During 2010-2014, ERI continued to assess unnatural and potentially catastrophic changes in 
frequent-fire landscape conditions, and test treatments designed to restore characteristic 
forest structure, ecological function, and more benign fire behavior. This work was 
accomplished through original studies of fire history, forest dynamics, plant community 
responses, wildlife responses, and social and economic aspects of forest restoration. In 
addition, the ERI developed a strong program in secondary research (i.e. evidence-based 
conservation) to compile, review, and analyze existing knowledge using rigorous, systematic 
methods. Lastly, the ERI forged new partnerships with the US Forest Service and US FWS to 
increase adaptive management through treatment monitoring.  
Studies were carried out at sites throughout the Southwest and in more distant areas of the 
Intermountain West using leveraged state funds as well. A central component of the ERI´s 
studies of restoration treatments are the LEARN. The network covers the ponderosa pine 
forests of Arizona from the Arizona Strip in the northwest through the eastern Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forests on the Arizona-New Mexico border. Additional sites are located 
in Colorado and New Mexico. The network includes ponderosa pine and mixed conifer 
forests, as well as pinyon-juniper woodlands. Each site is set up as a stand-alone controlled, 
replicated experimental study testing a full restoration treatment (i.e., thinning young trees to 
restore historical density, spatial pattern, and species composition; treatment of fuels; re-
introduction of low-severity surface fire), and an untreated control. The LEARN sites are 
located on public lands including U.S. Forest Service, BLM, National Park Service, 
Department of Defense (DoD), and state lands. The strong scientific design of the LEARN 
network resulted in many stand-alone contributions to the state of knowledge concerning 
restoration of frequent fire forests (see Appendix A). In addition, the network has recently 
enabled powerful new insights and provided broad inference through meta-analyses done 
across LEARN sites having similar treatments. 
Early after passage of the Act, the ERI focused studies on restoration of southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. More recently, the ERI has completed analysis of historical 
conditions and restoration priorities in mixed conifer forests and pinyon-juniper woodlands. 
Over the 2010-2014 period, the ERI increased efforts to better understand mixed conifer 
forests of the West through both primary (using leveraged state funding) and secondary 
studies. For example, restoration treatment comparisons were done at the LEARN site on the 
San Juan National Forest in Colorado, effects of wildfire on treated and untreated mixed 
conifer sites were studied within the Wallow Fire, and fire history and stand conditions of 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 46 
mixed conifer landscape on the Mogollon Rim were reconstructed. In addition, published 
literature on understory responses to forest thinning and prescribed fire was systematically 
reviewed and analyzed.  
Another important area of knowledge the ERI addressed in the 2010-2014 period concerned 
long-term effects and restoration of wildfire sites. Dynamics of hazardous fuels and 
development of stand structure were studied in both ponderosa pine forests and pinion-
juniper woodlands, survival and success of post-fire tree planting was investigated on sites 
throughout Arizona and New Mexico, literature pertaining to effectiveness of post-wildfire 
seeding across the West was systematically reviewed, and information on long-term 
restoration strategies for severely burned sites was synthesized.  
In the current work plan, the ERI is continuing long-term studies on restoration treatment 
alternatives in mixed conifer forests and is working with the US Forest Service on a new 
LEARN site located on the Mogollon Rim Ranger District in Arizona. The ERI is also 
strengthening a partnership with the US FWS and establishing monitoring plots to study 
effects of fuels treatments on Mexican spotted owl habitat and population responses near 
Flagstaff. Work to compare wildfire effects among areas receiving alternative restoration 
treatments is being done on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. The effectiveness of 
wildfire managed for resource benefit is being studied on US Forest Service lands as well as 
within Grand Canyon National Park. Lastly, reference conditions are being reconstructed 
using remote sensing data (LiDAR), and metrics for monitoring landscape-scale restoration 
treatments are being developed.  
For a comprehensive list of publications, please see the ERI Publications section at the end of 
the ERI self-assessment report. 
Duty 2: Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive 
ecosystem management framework. 
In order for restoration to make a significant impact on the multiple threats to forest 
ecosystem sustainability in the Interior West, treatment activities must move beyond small-
scale experiments to large landscapes. As scale increases, there is increased need and 
opportunity to apply the best available science and use adaptive management to answer 
critical questions about effects on wide-ranging species.  
Since 2010, the ERI has been collaborating with numerous stakeholders in the largest 
landscape-scale forest restoration effort proposed to date--a project covering 2.4 million acres 
of ponderosa pine forests in Arizona. The 4FRI spans four national forests in Arizona 
(Apache-Sitgreaves, Coconino, Kaibab, Tonto) with a broad goal of restoring natural 
processes to frequent-fire ecosystems to benefit the wildlife, native flora, watersheds and the 
human communities that depend on these attributes.  
The ERI has provided leadership to the 4FRI stakeholder group, serving as co-chair and 
helping to facilitate the 30 plus member organization group to develop foundation 
documents, and timely input to a million acre Forest Service Environmental Impact 
Statement (EIS) analyses. In addition, ERI science and policy staff have contributed 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 47 
leadership to small-group work, including a landscape strategy working group, the science 
and monitoring working group, the economics and utilization working group, the Draft EIS 
review working group, and the multi-party monitoring board. Products developed under this 
leadership include the landscape strategy, several drafts of the multi-party monitoring plan, 
comments on the Draft EIS and a revised charter. In addition to stakeholder support and 
science delivery, the ERI staff continues to work directly with the 4FRI Interdisciplinary 
Team (I.D. team) to understand and address science gaps and provide constructive comments 
on early drafts of the EIS. This work, again, is built on the foundation of knowledge and 
experience the ERI has acquired over the past fifteen years.  
In 2011, ERI staff attended the NFF sponsored workshop to develop a set of national 
indicators for CFLRP projects. At this conference, ERI staff and partners initiated a CFLR 
monitoring network. Partnering with NFF to host webinars, this group has hosted eight 
webinars between Fall 2011 and Spring 2015 to share relevant science, lessons learned and 
success across the CFLR project landscape on a variety of monitoring topics, including 
collaboratively setting desired conditions and using best available science to select 
measurable indicators and metrics. Additionally, following the CFLR National Indicators 
workshop, ERI staff worked on a small team to refine the CFLR Ecological Indicator. 
Measures of landscape restoration success are novel in the literature. The effort to develop 
indicators relied on recent science, as well as identified gaps in the body of science. ERI has 
remained a consistent member of this group over the last five years, most recently serving on 
the Ecological Indicator expert panel to assist the 23 funded projects with the development of 
the CFLR 5-yr report.  
In 2013, the ERI partnered with CFRI, the NFF, and the Uncompahgre Partnership to host a 
Forest Service Region 2 and Region 3 CFLRP workshop in Montrose Colorado. This 
workshop was attended by ~80 Forest Service staff and multi-stakeholder partners from the 
five CFLR projects found in the area. Outcomes included priorities for continued partnership 
and learning, including how to use best available science to inform monitoring indicators and 
associated metrics. 
Also in 2013, ERI produced two publications aimed to assist collaborative forest landscape 
restoration collaborative groups. Breaking Barriers, Building Bridges: Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Handbook explored the various barriers to landscape-scale, 
collaborative forest restoration and the innovative ways to bridge those barriers. “Closing the 
Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management” was co-
published with several partners, including Sustainable Northwest, NFF, the Watershed 
Center, Forest Guild, and U.S. Forest Service. This sourcebook provides a selection of 
evaluation tools and change mechanisms for collaborative groups to consider and use and 
stimulates discussion of evaluation and adaptation in collaborative resource management. 
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, the affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
Since 2010, the ERI has translated scientific information to affected entities through: 
working papers, white papers, fact sheets, web site/e-Library, workshops, field trips, and 
presentations. The following is a summary of work in those outreaches areas.  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 48 
Working Papers  
The ERI Working Papers series presents and translates scientific findings from the research 
and observations of ERI researchers as well as researchers from other organizations and 
universities. ERI working papers are intended to deliver applicable science to land managers 
and practitioners in a concise, clear, non-technical format. These papers provide information 
critical for management decisions surrounding ecological restoration topics. Topics are 
chosen based on what land managers need to know, and they fill critical knowledge gaps in 
restoration science aimed to assist land managers. The ERI Working Paper series has 
published 13 papers during the past five years. Some of the topics include: fuel treatment 
longevity, protecting old trees from prescribed burns, evaluating reference conditions for 
mixed-conifer forests, evaluation of fire regime reconstruction methods, climate change and 
fire in the Southwest, and carbon cycling in southwestern forests. Working papers are 
distributed in person, during field trips, via mail, and electronically to almost 700 recipients 
throughout the Southwest and beyond. They are also posted on the ERI web site, in the ERI 
e-Library, and featured in bi-annual newsletters.  
 
White Papers  
The ERI White Paper series is designed to reach policymakers, social scientists, and 
appropriate land managers with information about socio-economic issues related to forest 
restoration and hazardous fuels reduction. During the past five years, the ERI has published 
nine white papers on a variety of topics. These include: a full cost accounting of the 2010 
Schultz Fire, ecological restoration as economic stimulus, the history of the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative, administrative and legal review opportunities for collaborative groups, 
and a case study on the Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project. White papers are sent by mail 
and/or electronically to almost 700 affected entities throughout the Southwest and beyond. 
They are also posted on the ERI web site and in the ERI e-Library.  
Impact: ERI’s white paper, “Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire,” was published 
in partnership with the W.A. Franke College of Business at NAU and Coconino County. The 
study is a sobering analysis of the full cost of fire and post-fire flooding, and how the cost 
impacts the public and private sectors. It has been cited numerous times in media reports and 
other economic studies examining the full cost of fire. The results were also presented at a 
Congressional Hearing in 2013.  
Fact Sheets  
The ERI has produced 63 fact sheets during the last five years. These brief, informative 
documents have covered topics such as: stand structure and breeding birds, restoration in a 
warm/dry mixed conifer forest, effects of restoration on wildlife density, carbon costs of 
mitigating high-severity wildfire, systematic reviews and the quality of evidence, canopy 
cover and forest conditions, sediment yield after severe fire, and effects of tree cutting and 
fire on understory vegetation in mixed conifer forests. Fact sheets are often tiered off larger 
publications, such as peer reviewed journal articles, white papers or working papers, and they 
provide a non-technical snapshot of the outcomes and implications of scientific research on 
ecological restoration. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 49 
Rapid Assessments, General, and Technical Reports 
ERI produces two or more Rapid Assessment reports a year. These reports are conducted by 
ERI’s Agency Outreach team and capture site-specific field data for public land managers. 
Other technical reports include special reports to forest districts, like “Identifying priority 
treatment areas across the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests” and “The Wallow Fire and its 
effects on mixed-conifer forests: A comparison with reference conditions”, and monitoring 
reports, such as the White Mountain Stewardship Program monitoring reports.  
In 2014 and 2015, ERI partnered with the SWFSC and Forest Guild to publish overviews of 
the 2013 and 2014 fire season. These overviews have been well received by land managers 
looking for fire summary data based on the largest fires each year in Arizona and New 
Mexico. 
Systematic Review 
In response to persistent questions from the Office of management and Budget (OMB) and 
the Government Accountability Office (GAO), the ERI was asked by the U.S. Department of 
Interior’s Office of Wildland Fire to conduct a systematic review of the economic and 
ecologic consequence of alternative hazardous fuel reduction treatment. “The Efficacy of 
Hazardous Fuel Treatments” demonstrated that overall hazardous fuel reduction and 
restoration treatments in frequent fire forests of the West are both economically and 
ecologically effective. The ERI presented the results of the study to Congress and the OMB 
in 2013. One agency official indicated that the study was helpful in their negotiations to 
restore full funding to the hazardous fuel treatment budget with OMB in FY 2014.  
 
Web site/e-Library  
The ERI web site at http://www.nau.edu/eri has gone through a content management system 
conversion in order to meet the evolving needs of ERI audiences, such as land managers, 
researchers, students and media. It features an extensive e-Library that holds more than 700 
ERI publications and other outreach materials. A recent addition to the website is a Press Kit 
that features news items related to ecological restoration that is relevant to the current fire 
season. Additionally, the site’s research information and LEARN page will be updated in the 
near future with more interactive visual features and elements.  
In 2013 ERI sought to evaluate the overall reach and effectiveness of our e-newsletter, 
particularly as it relates to our recent publications. The ERI newsletter is distributed 
electronically twice a year. It is one of several approaches to deliver the most recent ERI 
publications — including fact sheets, working papers, white papers, journal articles, and 
reports — to interested parties, researchers, and practitioners. We tested whether or not 
having publication descriptions in addition to the citations increased a publication’s click-
through rate, which is a measure of how many people on an email list click on a particular 
link within an email. The newsletter featuring publication descriptions received a 
significantly larger amount of clicks, resulting in higher readership of publications.  
Duty 4: Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 50 
The ERI actively supports monitoring to inform adaptive management throughout the 
Intermountain West via our support of the CFLRP pilots (see #2 above).  
In Arizona, the ERI assisted the White Mountain Stewardship Multi-Party Monitoring Board 
to measure outcomes from the nationally recognized White Mountain Stewardship Project 
(WMSP). The ten-year project was initiated in 2004 and ended in 2014. The contractor 
treated almost 70,000 acres in order to improve forest health, mitigate unwanted wildfire risk, 
treat high-risk burnable fuels and implement a diverse suite of ecosystem improvements 
through stewardship treatments. The ERI is coordinating the completion of a ten-year final 
report for the WMSP (Fall 2015) documenting the outcomes of the effort. This analysis and 
report will explore all aspects of the development, implementation and ecological, social and 
economic outcomes of the project. The majority of the acreage treated under the White 
Mountain Stewardship Project is located within the Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) of the 
White Mountain areas of eastern Arizona. These treatments were credited with preventing 
the Wallow Fire in 2011 from burning into towns such as Alpine and reducing impacts in 
other eastern Arizona communities.  
The ERI also led the collaborative effort to develop the monitoring and adaptive management 
plan for the 4FRI EIS. The plan was adopted with minimal change as a part of the final 
document and Record of Decision.  
Duty 5: Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
The ERI prepares annual reports that are available at the following the link: 
http://nau.edu/ERI/Resources/Annual-Reports-Work-Plans/  
 
The ERI also makes an annual visit to Congress and the Washington Office of the Forest 
Service to report summaries of our deliverables. 
 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act 
The ERI has delivered five years of high quality service to achieve the Purposes of the Act.  
Purpose 1: Implementing adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level. 
In the 2010 SWERI Assessment, the ERI highlighted groundbreaking work at the Mt. 
Trumbull Ecosystem Restoration project as an example of leadership toward implementing 
adaptive management practices at the landscape level. In 2009, the Trumbull project was the 
largest ecological restoration project in the Southwest at 3,700 acres.  
 
In 2015, the ERI plays an integral role in the success of the 4FRI, the largest restoration pilot 
authorized under the CFLRP. The 4FRI Stakeholder Group and the four national forests that 
make up the initiative are collaborating to restore 2.4 million acres of ponderosa pine forest 
across northern Arizona. For its part, the ERI provides leadership (co-chair and work group 
leads), administrative support, technical support, and best available science to the 
Stakeholder Group and 4FRI Interdisciplinary Team. The ERI led the successful 
development of a Monitoring and Adaptive Management Plan for the first Environmental 
Impact Statement (EIS) analysis. This analysis looked at more than 900,000 acres and 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 51 
identified almost 600,000 acres for active ecological restoration. The Monitoring and 
Adaptive Management Plan was included in the Final EIS and Record of Decision. In 
addition, the ERI plays a major role in the ongoing Multi-Party Monitoring Board that has 
already begun pre-treatment monitoring for the first EIS. The ERI will continue to provide 
leadership and science support during the second EIS analysis that is presently in data 
development.  
 
The ERI is also involved in providing monitoring and adaptive management technical 
support across the 23 projects of the CFLRP through webinars, workshops, and one-on-one 
consultations. The ERI provided leadership to a CFLR stakeholder and Forest Service team 
to help develop the biophysical monitoring metrics for a Five-Year CFLRP progress report to 
Congress.  
 
As noted earlier in this report, the ERI manages LEARN, which monitors outcomes of 
different restoration treatments across the Southwest. The monitoring data from these sites 
provides defensible scientific results and therefore “best available science” to inform 
restoration treatments.  
 
Purpose 2: Reducing unnecessary planning costs. 
The ERI provides a variety of services that improve the efficiency and effectiveness of 
planning thereby reducing planning costs. These services include: (1) The preparation of 
Rapid Assessments (RAPs) that are used by ID teams and other Forest Service professionals 
to develop science-based documents and treatment prescriptions; (2) One-on-one science 
support in response to information requests from agency personnel and stakeholders; (3) 
Publication of evidence-based reviews, working papers, white papers and fact sheets that 
synthesize the best available science for planners, specialists, and stakeholders. Recently, one 
of the members of the 4FRI ID Team said the following, “ERI Working Paper #32: 
Outstanding … not to mention very helpful in reviewing Objections to the Final 4FRI EIS”; 
(4) Assistance to stakeholders throughout the CFLR network to help them advance 
restoration projects that will make it through the NEPA process (without litigation) and into 
implementation; and, (5) Workshops designed to assist land managers apply best available 
science.  
Purpose 3: Avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts. 
 
 
Congress created the institutes to fill the gap that exists between research science and 
application on-the-ground. This gap exists because there are cultural differences between 
research scientists who talk in terms of metrics, and rigorous statistical design in order to 
improve certainty of results and land managers who think in English units of measure, are 
multi-tasking responsibilities, and have to make a decision whether outcomes are 100 percent 
known or not. To bridge this gap, the ERI offers a vertically integrated program of work. ERI 
begin with land managers who identify information voids or what they need to know to do 
their job. Once the question is clear we determine if the answer is available in the existing 
literature or if new scientific research is needed. If there is sufficient existing information to 
answer the question we will produce an evidence-based review, literature review, or other 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 52 
knowledge synthesis depending upon the resources available and the complexity of the 
question.  
 
In other words, the ERI first assesses whether or not the answer is known before pursuing the 
expensive task of research. In addition, we participate in numerous networks and 
communicate with other research entities, such as the SWFSC or RMRS in order to avoid 
duplication. These relationships are valuable because they not only help avoid duplication 
but they stimulate partnerships that leverage funds and create synergy.  
 
Finally, collaboration occurs annually between the institutes to avoid unnecessary duplication 
and to coordinate projects where resources can be leveraged. Currently, the three institutes 
are collaborating on the “Broader-scale Monitoring” project that will assist the Forest Service 
to identify monitoring variables that are larger than single national forests. This will help 
inform the broader-scale monitoring required in the 2012 Forest Planning Rule. 
 
Purpose 4: Increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices. 
The ERI annual work plan includes deliverables focused on increasing public understanding 
and acceptance of active forest restoration and adaptive management. Outreach activities 
designed for the public include presentations, publications, the website, and active and 
passive engagement with print, television, and radio media. Dr. Wally Covington’s highly 
regarded research and advocacy for action makes him a favorite resource for reporters. The 
ERI also uses social media including Twitter, LinkedIn, and Facebook to connect, inform, 
and engage with a broad audience.  
 
In 2013, the ERI helped coordinate a public forum at the Museum of Northern Arizona about 
the 4FRI. The public response was overwhelming and led to the conclusion that future 4FRI 
public meetings should be jointly sponsored by the Stakeholder Group (of which ERI is an 
integral member) and the Forest Service. This approach has helped reach significantly more 
members of the public than other public meetings sponsored exclusively by the Forest 
Service.  
 
Purpose 5: Achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities. 
If we are doing our job well, the interviews that inform this assessment will demonstrate 
satisfaction, if not enthusiasm and respect for the work done at the ERI. “Affected Entities” 
is defined in PL108-317 as land managers, stakeholders, concerned citizens, and states of the 
Interior West, including political subdivisions of the states. Below are examples of our 
impact and testimonials from the affected entities.  
 
Land manager. A silviculturalist on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest stated that she 
found the paper “A Full Cost Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire” very helpful and included 
it in her specialist report for the A-S forest plan revision. She stated that in general she 
appreciates our research.  
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 53 
Land manager. “Thank you! The fact sheets with the link to the full article are so helpful to 
us ‘manager-types’ that need to quickly get to the punch-line. I appreciate you forwarding 
this along.” 
 
Stakeholder. Following the successful resolution with objectors of the Flagstaff Watershed 
Protection Project (FWPP) Final EIS and Draft Record of Decision, a city official stated that 
the ERI white paper “Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative 
Groups” (prepared in partnership with the Western Environmental Law Center) had been 
widely shared and valued by decision-makers within the City of Flagstaff to prepare them for 
potential legal action.  
 
Concerned Citizens. It is a tribute to the quality of the science produced by the ERI that we 
are regularly asked to testify in Congress. Most important, we are asked to testify by both 
Republicans and Democrats. In 2013 and 2014, we testified in the House and the Senate on 
our report “The Efficacy of Hazardous Fuels Treatments: A Rapid Assessment of the 
Economic and Ecologic Consequences of Alternative Hazardous Fuel Treatments.”  
 
ERI Publications  
Abella, S.R., E.C. Engel, J.D. Springer, and W.W. Covington. 2012. Relationships of exotic plant communities with native vegetation, 
environmental factors, disturbance, and landscape ecosystems of pinus ponderosa forests, USA. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 271:65-74. 
Abella, S.R., J.C. Hurja, D.J. Merkler, C.W. Denton, and D. Brewer. 2012. Overstory-understory relationships along forest type and 
environmental gradients in the Spring Mountains of southern Nevada, USA. Folio Geobot, 47:119-134.  
Abella, S.R., and J.D. Springer. 2012. Soil seed banks in a mature coniferous forest landscape: dominance of native perennials and 
low spatial variability. Seed Science Research, 22:207-217.  
Abella, S.R., C.W. Denton, R.W. Steinke, and D.G. Brewer. 2013. Soil development in vegetation patches of Pinus ponderosa forests: 
interface with restoration thinning and carbon storage. Forest Ecology and Management, 310:632-642. 
Abella, S.R., and J.D. Springer. 2014. Effects of tree cutting and fire on understory vegetation of mixed conifer forests. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 335:281–299. 
Barrett, K.J., E.L. Kalies, and C.L. Chambers. 2012. Predator occupancy rates in a thinned ponderosa pine forest, Arizona: A Pilot 
Study. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 36(2):232-239.  
Bickford, I.N, P.Z. Fulé, and T.E. Kolb. 2011. Growth sensitivity to drought of co-occurring Pinus spp. along an elevation gradient in 
northern Mexico. Western North American Naturalist, 71(3):338-348. 
Diggins, C., P.Z. Fulé, J.P. Kaye, and W.W. Covington. 2010. Future climate affects management strategies for maintaining forest 
restoration treatments, International Journal of Wildland Fire, 19(7) 903-913. 
Egan, D., M. Stoddard, and A. Formanack. 2015. Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative 
forest restoration project near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. Forest Policy and Economics, 52:39-45. 
Fulé, P.Z., J.E. Crouse, J.P. Roccaforte, and E.L. Kalies. 2012. Do thinning and/or burning treatments in western USA ponderosa or 
Jeffrey pine-dominated forests help restore natural fire behavior? Forest Ecology and Management, 269:68-81. 
Ha, W., T.E. Kolb, A.E. Springer, S. Dore, F.C. O’Donnell, R.M. Morales, S. Masek Lopez,  
G.W. Koch. 2014. Evapotranspiration comparisons between eddy covariance measurements and meteorological and remote-sensing-
based models in disturbed ponderosa pine forests. Ecohydrology, DOI: 10.1002/eco.1586. 
Honig, K.A. 2012. Simulating the effects of climate change and ecological restoration on wildfire behavior in southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 21(6):731 
Horncastle, V.J., R.F. Yarborough, B.G. Dickson, and S.S. Rosenstock. 2013. Summer habitat use by adult female mule deer in a 
restoration-treated ponderosa pine forest. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 37(4):707–713. 
Huffman, D.W., J.D. Springer, and W.W. Chancellor. 2015. Long-term herbivore exclusion for recovery of buckbrush (Ceanothus 
fendleri) populations during restoration of ponderosa pine forests in northern Arizona. Ecological Restoration, 33:274-281. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 54 
Huffman, D.W., J.E. Crouse, W.W. Chancellor, and P.Z. Fulé. 2012. Influence of time since fire on pinyon-juniper woodland 
structure. Forest Ecology and Management, 274:29-37. 
Huffman, D.W., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, J.E. Crouse, and W.W. Chancellor. 2013. Understory plant community responses to 
hazardous fuels reduction treatments in pinyon-juniper woodlands of Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 289:478-
488.  
Huffman, D.W., T.J. Zegler, and P.Z. Fulé. 2015. Fire history of a mixed conifer forest on the Mogollon Rim, northern Arizona, USA. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire, 24:680-689. 
Hurteau, M.D., M.T. Stoddard, and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. The carbon costs of mitigating high-severity wildfire in southwestern ponderosa 
pine. Global Change Biology, 17:1516-1521.  
Ireland, K.B., M.M. Moore, P.Z. Fulé, T.J. Zegler, R.E. Keane. 2014. Slow lifelong growth predisposes Populus tremuloides trees to 
mortality. Oecologia, 175:847–859.  
Kalies, E.L. and S.S. Rosenstock. 2013. Stand structure and breeding birds: Implications for restoring ponderosa pine forests. Journal 
of Wildlife Management, 77(6):1157-1165.  
Kalies, E.L., and W.W. Covington. 2012. Small mammal community maintains stability through compensatory dynamics after 
restoration of a ponderosa pine forest. Ecosphere, 3(9): Article 78.  
Kalies, E.L., B.G. Dickson, C.L. Chambers, and W.W. Covington. 2012. Community occupancy responses of small mammals to 
restoration treatments in ponderosa pine forests, northern Arizona, USA. Ecological Applications, 22(1):204–217.  
Korb, J.E., P.Z. Fulé, and M.L. Stoddard. 2012. Forest restoration in a surface fire-dependent ecosystem: an example from a mixed 
conifer forest, Southwestern Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 269:10-18.  
Korb, J.E., P.Z. Fulé, and R. Wu. 2013. Variability of warm/dry mixed conifer forests in Southwestern Colorado, USA: Implications 
for ecological restoration. Forest Ecology and Management, 304:182-191.  
Kurth, V.J, S.C. Hart, C.S. Ross, J.P. Kaye, and P.Z. Fulé. 2014. Stand-replacing wildfires increase nitrification for decades in 
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Oecologia, 175(1): 395-407. 
Kurth, V.J., N. Fransioli, P.Z. Fule, S.C. Hart, and C.A. Gehring. 2013. Stand-replacing wildfires alter the community structure of 
wood-inhabiting fungi in southwestern ponderosa pine forests of the USA. Fungal Ecology, 6:192-204.  
Kurth, V.J., N. Fransioli, P.Z. Fulé, S.C. Hart, and C.A. Gehring. 2013. Stand-replacing wildfires alter the community structure of 
wood-decay fungi in southwestern ponderosa pine forests of the USA. Fungal Ecology, 6:192-204.  
Laughlin, D.C., J.P. Roccaforte and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. Effects of a second-entry prescribed fire in a mixed conifer forest. Western North 
American Naturalist, 71(4):557-562.  
Laughlin, D.C., M.M. Moore, and P.Z. Fulé. 2011. A century of increasing pine density and associated shifts in understory plant 
strategies. Ecology, 92(3):556-61. 
Laughlin, D.C., P.Z. Fule, D.W. Huffman, J. Crouse, and E. Laliberte. 2011. Climatic constraints on trait-based forest assembly. 
Journal of Ecology, 99(6):1489-1499.  
Loberger, C.D., T.C. Theimer, S.S. Rosenstock, and C.S. Wightman. 2011. Use of a restoration-treated ponderosa pine forest by 
tassel-eared squirrels. Journal of Mammalogy, 92(5)1021-1027.  
McGlone, C.M., C.H. Sieg, and T.E. Kolb. 2011. Invasion resistance and persistence: established plants win, even with disturbance 
and high propagule pressure. Biological Invasions, 13:291-304.  
McGlone, C.M., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, M.L Daniels, P.Z. Fulé and W.W. Covington. 2012. Nonnative species influence 
vegetative response to ecological restoration: two forests with divergent restoration outcomes. Forest Ecology and Management, 
285:195-203.  
Mueller, J.M. 2014. Estimating willingness to pay for watershed restoration in Flagstaff, Arizona using dichotomous-choice 
contingent valuation. Forestry, 87(2): 327-333. 
Ouzts, J., T. Kolb, D.W. Huffman, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2015. Post-fire ponderosa pine regeneration with and without planting in 
Arizona and New Mexico. Forest Ecology and Management, 354:281-290. 
Peppin, D.L., A.L. Mottek-Lucas, and P.Z. Fulé. 2014. Post-fire seeding in western United States forests: perspectives of resource 
managers. Fire Ecology, 10:31–42. 
Ramstead, K.M., J.A. Allen, and A.E. Springer. 2012. Have wet meadow restoration projects in the Southwestern U.S. been effective 
in restoring geomorphology, hydrology, soils, and plant species composition? Environmental Evidence, 1:11. 16 p. 
Roccaforte, J.P., D.W. Huffman, P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Covington, W.W. Chancellor, M.T. Stoddard, and J.E. Crouse. 2015. Forest 
Structure and fuels dynamics following ponderosa pine restoration treatments, White Mountains, Arizona, USA. Forest Ecology 
and Management, 337:174-185. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 55 
Roccaforte, J.P., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Chancellor, and D.C. Laughlin. 2012. Woody debris and tree regeneration dynamics following 
severe wildfires in Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 42:593-604.  
Sánchez Meador, A.J., K.M. Waring, and E.L. Kalies. 2015. Implications of diameter caps on multiple forest resource responses in the 
context of the Four Forests Restoration Initiative: Results from the Forest Vegetation Simulator. Journal of Forestry, 113(2):219-
230. 
Shive, K.L., C.H. Sieg, and P.Z. Fulé. 2013. Pre-wildfire management treatments interact with fire severity to have lasting effects on 
post-wildfire vegetation response. Forest Ecology and Management, 297:75–83.  
Springer, J.D., M.T. Stoddard, D.C. Laughlin, D.L. Crisp, and B.G. Phillips. 2012. Ecology of Rusby’s Milkvetch (Astragalus rusbyi), 
a rare endemic of northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Calochortiana, 1:157-163.  
Springer, J.D., P.Z. Fulé, and D.W. Huffman. 2012. Long-term responses of Penstemon clutei (Sunset Crater Beardtongue) to root 
trenching and prescribed fire: clues for population persistence. Calochortiana, 1:164-171.  
Stella, K.A., C.H. Sieg, and P.Z. Fulé. 2010. Minimal effectiveness of native and non-native seeding following three high-severity 
wildfires. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 19:746–758. 
Stevens-Rumann, C., K.L. Shive, P.Z. Fulé and C.H. Seig. 2013. Pre-wildfire fuel reduction treatments result in more resilient forest 
structure a decade after wildfire. International Journal of Wildand Fire, 22(8) 1108-1117. 
Stoddard, M.T., A.J. Sánchez Meador, P.Z. Fulé, and J.E. Korb. 2015. Five year post-restoration conditions and simulated climate 
change trajectories in a warm/dry mixed-conifer forest, southwestern Colorado, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2015.07.007. 
Stoddard, M.T., C.M. McGlone, P.Z. Fulé, D.C. Laughlin, and M.L. Daniels. 2011. Native plants dominate understory vegetation 
following ponderosa pine forest restoration treatments. Western North American Naturalist, 71(2):206-214.  
Strahan, R.T., M.T. Stoddard, J.D. Springer, and D.W. Huffman. 2015. Increasing weight of evidence that thinning and burning 
treatments help restore understory plant communities in ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management, 353:208-220. 
Tarancόn, A.A., P.Z. Fulé, K.L. Shive, C.H. Sieg, A.J. Sánchez Meador, and B.A. Strom. 2014. Simulating post-wildfire forest 
trajectories under alternative climate and management scenarios. Ecological Applications, 24(7):1626–1637. 
Taylor, M.H., A.J. Sánchez Meador, Y.S. Kim, K. Rollins, and H. Will. 2015. The economics of ecological restoration and hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments in the ponderosa pine forest ecosystem. Forest Science, http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/forsci.14-030. 
Tuten, M.C., Sánchez Meador, A.J. and P.Z. Fulé. 2015. Ecological restoration and fine-scale structural regulation in Southwestern 
ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and Management, 348:57-67.  
Waltz, A.E.M., M.T. Stoddard, E.L. Kalies, J.D. Springer, D.W. Huffman, and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2014. Effectiveness of fuel 
reduction treatments: assessing metrics of forest resiliency and wildfire severity after the Wallow Fire, AZ. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 334:43–52. 
Wu, T. and Y.-S. Kim. 2013. Pricing ecosystem resilience in frequent-fire ponderosa pine forests. Forest Policy and Economics, 27:8-
12. 
Wu, T., Y.-S. Kim, and M.D. Hurteau. 2011. Investing in natural capital: using economic incentives to overcome barriers to forest 
restoration. Restoration Ecology, 19:441-445.  
Wyatt, C.J.W., F.C. O’Donnell, and A.E. Springer. 2014. Semi-arid aquifer responses to forest restoration treatments and climate 
change. Groundwater, 53(2):207-16. 
Zegler, T.J., M.M. Moore, M.L. Fairweather, K.B. Ireland, and P.Z. Fule. 2012. Populus tremuloides mortality near the southwestern 
edge of its range. Forest Ecology and Management, 282:196-207. 
Master’s and Doctoral Theses 
Azpeleta Tarancón, A. 2012. Simulando trayectorias de sucesión post-incendio bajo alternativas de clima y gestión: caso de estudio 
Bosque Nacional de Apache-Sitgreaves, Arizona. Máster en Gestión y Restauración del Medio Natural, Universidad de Alicante, 
Spain. 
Cortés Moñtano, C. 2011. The treasure of the Sierra Madre: ecology of old-growth forests in Chihuahua, México. PhD dissertation, 
Northern Arizona University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2011. (Publication No. 3490516.) 
Diggins, C. 2010. Modeling forest change, bird communities, and management alternatives on a restored ponderosa pine ecosystem. 
MS thesis, Northern Arizona University. 
Dowling, H.E. 2015. Mapped permanent quadrats: A window through time into herbaceous plant demography. MS thesis, Northern 
Arizona University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2015. (Publication No. 1594001.) 
Ireland, K.B. 2013. Response of fire regimes and ponderosa pine and aspen forest communities to climate, Arizona. PhD dissertation, 
Northern Arizona University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2013. (Publication No. 3562137.) 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 56 
Kurth, V. 2011. Long-term effects of stand-replacing wildfires on nutrient cycling and decomposition in southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. PhD dissertation, Northern Arizona University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2011. (Publication No. 3467056.)  
Normandin, D. 2014. Assessing effects of large wildland fires in Mexican spotted owl protected activity centers. MS thesis, Northern 
Arizona University.  
Ouzts, J. 2014. Post-fire ponderosa pine plantings in the southwestern USA. MS thesis, Northern Arizona University. Ann Arbor: 
ProQuest/UMI, 2014. (Publication No. 1556779.) 
Rodman, K.C. 2015. Reference conditions and spatial dynamics in a southwestern dry mixed-conifer forest. MS thesis, Northern 
Arizona University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2015. (Publication No. 1594148.) 
Sheridan, R.A.S. 2014. Using a socio-ecological systems framework to develop a community fire plan in rural Mexico. MS thesis, 
Northern Arizona University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2014. (Publication No. 1556593.) 
Shive, K. 2012. Pre-fire treatments have persistent effects on post-fire plant communities. MS thesis, Northern Arizona University. 
Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2012. (Publication No. 1511296.) 
Strahan, R.T. 2013. A functional trait perspective on demography, community assembly, and response to long-term grazing. PhD 
dissertation, Northern Arizona University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2013. (Publication No. 3606840.) 
Wyatt, C.J.W. 2013. Estimating aquifer response following forest restoration and climate change along the Mogollon Rim, northern 
Arizona. MS thesis, Northern Arizona University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2013. (Publication No. 1537821.) 
Yocom, L. 2011. Influence of climate and local factors on fire in high-elevation forests of Mexico. PhD dissertation, Northern Arizona 
University. Ann Arbor: ProQuest/UMI, 2011. (Publication No. 3467055.) 
Fact Sheets 
Abella, S.R., and J.D. Springer. 2014. Effects of Tree Cutting and Fire on Understory Vegetation of Mixed Conifer Forests. ERI Fact 
Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 3 p. 
Allen, J.A., and K. Ramstead. 2012. Evidence-Based Conservation Systematic Review: Effectiveness of Wet Meadow Restoration 
Projects. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Bryant, T. 2015. Implications of Diameter Caps on Multiple Forest Resource Responses in the Context of the Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Crouse, J.E., E.L. Kalies, J.P. Roccaforte, and P.Z. Fulé. 2012. Meta-Analysis of Treatment Effects on Fire Behavior. ERI Fact Sheets. 
ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Egan, D. 2011. Systematic Reviews and the Quality of Evidence. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University. 4p.  
Esch, B.E. 2015. Administrative Support in Collaborative Forest Restoration. ERI Fact Sheets. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Fulé, P.Z. 2014. Unsupported Inferences of High severity Fire in Historical Dry Forests of the Western United States: Response to 
Williams and Baker. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 3 p. 
Greer, W.J. 2012. Managing Sources of Conflict in Collaborative Settings. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University, 2 p.  
Ha, W., S. Masek Lopez, and A. Springer. 2014. Field Considerations for Measuring Evapotranspiration with the Eddy Covariance 
Method. Ecological Restoration Institute. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 4 p. 
Huffman, D.W. 2013. Influence of Time Since Fire on Pinyon-Juniper Woodland Structure. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2p.  
Huffman, D.W. 2013. Understory Plant Community Responses to Hazardous Fuels Reduction Treatments in Pinyon-Juniper 
Woodlands of Arizona, USA. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2p.  
Huffman, D.W. 2015. Fire History of a Mixed Conifer Forest on the Mogollon Rim, Northern Arizona, USA. ERI Fact Sheets. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Huffman, D.W., Sanchez-Meador, A.J., and Greco, B. 2012. Canopy Cover and How it Relates to Other Forest Attributes as an 
Indicator of Forest Conditions. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 4 p.  
Hunter, M.E. 2011. Methods for Estimating Surface Live Fuel Loading. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University. 3 p. 
Hurteau, M.D., M.T. Stoddard, and P.Z. Fulé. 2010. Carbon Cost of Mitigating High-Severity Wildfires. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 57 
Kalies, E.L. 2011. Systematic Reviews and the Quality of Evidence. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University. 4 p. 
Kalies, E., and W.W. Covington. 2011. Effects of Restoration on Wildlife Density and Populations. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Kalies, E.L. 2012. Restoration Effects on Small Mammals and their Predators. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Kalies, E.L. 2014. Stand Structure and Breeding Birds: Implications for Restoring Ponderosa Pine Forests. ERI Fact Sheets. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Lucas, A.M., Y.S. Kim, E.J. Davis, C. Moseley, M. Nielsen-Pincus, and T. Bilek. 2014. The Impacts of the Woody Biomass 
Utilization Program in Eastern Arizona. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Masek Lopez, S. 2013. Forest Change and Water Balance: Investigating Forest Restoration Treatment Effects on Soil Water Storage, 
Evapotranspiration, Groundwater Recharge and Surface Water Discharge. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Nielsen, E., and F. Solop. 2013. Forest Health and Water Supply Protection Project Ballot Measure: Exit Poll Results. ERI Fact 
Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Ouzts, J.R., and T.E. Kolb. 2014. Genetic Considerations for Restoring Forests of the Southwest after Severe Disturbance. ERI Fact 
Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 4 p. 
Peppin, D.L. 2011. Effectiveness of Post-Wildfire Seeding in Western US Forests. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Roccaforte, J.P., P.Z. Fulé, W.W. Chancellor, and D.C. Laughlin. 2011. Post-Wildfire Regeneration Dynamics. ERI Fact Sheets. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Roccaforte, J.P. 2012. Assessing Restoration Objectives Following a Second-entry Prescribed Fire in an Unharvested Mixed Conifer 
Forest. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2p.  
Roccaforte, J.P. 2014. Planting to Restore Ponderosa Pine Sites Burned by High-Severity Fire. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 4 p. 
Rodman, K., and A.J. Sánchez Meador. 2014. Characterizing Spatial Reference Conditions in Southwestern Warm/Dry Mixed-
Conifer Forests. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 3 p. 
Sensibaugh, M., and D.W. Huffman. 2014. Managing Naturally Ignited Wildland Fire to Meet Fuel Reduction and Restoration Goals 
in Frequent-Fire Forests. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 3 p. 
Springer, J.D. 2012. Conserving Rare Plants in National Parks and Protected Areas. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Springer, J.D. 2012. Exotic Species Management at Landscape Scales. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University, 2 p.  
Springer, J.D. 2014. Ecology of Rusby’s Milkvetch (Astragulus rusbyi), a Rare Endemic of Northern Arizona Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Springer, J.D. 2014. Long-Term Responses of Penstemon Clutei (Sunset Crater beardtongue) to Root Trenching and Prescribed Fire: 
Clues for Population Resistance. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Springer, J.D. 2014. Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and Warm-
Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 3 p. 
Springer, J.D. 2014. Soil Seed Banks in a Mature Coniferous Forest Landscape: Dominance of Native Perennials and Low Spatial 
Variability. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Stoddard, M. 2012. Herbaceous Vegetation Responses Six Years after Restoration Treatments. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Stoddard, M.T. 2011. Historical Forest Structural Characteristics Review. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University. 7 p.  
Stoddard, M.T. 2013. An Example of Forest Restoration in a Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forest. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Stoddard, M.T. 2015. Ecological and Social Implications of Employing Diameter Caps at a Collaborative Forest Restoration Project 
near Flagstaff, Arizona. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Swetnam, T. and D. Falk. 2015. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and 
Management. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 58 
Vosick, D. (Ed.). 2012. Estimating Flagstaff Residents’ Willingness to Pay for Forest Restoration in the Lake Mary and Upper Rio de 
Flag Watersheds: A Pilot Study. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Vosick, D. 2011. Lessons from the Wallow Fire. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 1 p. 
Vosick, D. 2013. Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments: A Rapid Assessment of the Economic and Ecologic Consequences of 
Alternative Hazardous Fuel Treatments. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Waltz, A.E.M. 2014. Effectiveness of Fuel Reduction Treatments: Assessing Metrics of Forest Resiliency and Wildfire Severity after 
the Wallow Fire, AZ. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Waltz, A.E.M. 2012. Impacts of Fire Hazard Assessment and Fuel Reduction Priorities on Mega-fire Outcomes: A Hypothetical Test 
Using the Wallow Fire in Arizona. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 3 p. 
Wyatt, C.J.W. 2013. How Restoration Thinning Treatments on Conifer-Dominated Watersheds Affect the Water Budget. ERI Fact 
Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Wyatt, C.J.W. 2013. Interpretive Model of Regional Semi-Arid Aquifer Responses to Large-scale Forest Restoration Treatments and 
Climate Change. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p.  
Yarborough, R.F. 2014. Summer Habitat Use by Adult Female Mule Deer in a Restoration-Treated Ponderosa Pine Forest. ERI Fact 
Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University: Flagstaff, AZ. 2 p. 
Yarborough, R.F., and Loberger, C. 2013. Tassel-Eared Squirrel Habitat Use and Abundance in Managed Forests within the Wildland 
Urban Interface. ERI Fact Sheets. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 2 p. 
Working Papers 
Egan, D. 2011. Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Burning. ERI Working Paper No. 24. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University. 3 p. 
Egan, D. 2015. The 2012 Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Plan Guidelines for Forest Restoration in the American Southwest. ERI 
Working Paper No. 33. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 11 p. 
Gaylord, M.L. 2014. Impact of Forest Restoration Treatments on Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Tree Resistance to Bark Beetles. ERI 
Working Paper 30. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 9 p. 
Gaylord. M.L. 2014. Climate Change Impacts on Bark Beetle Outbreaks and the Impact of Outbreaks on Subsequent Fires. ERI 
Working Paper No. 31. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 7 
p. 
Kalies, E.L., and C.L. Chambers. 2010. Guidelines for Managing Small Mammals in Restored Ponderosa Pine Forests of Northern 
Arizona. ERI Working Paper No. 23. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona 
University. 7 p. 
Kent, L.Y. 2014. An Evaluation of Fire Regime Reconstruction Methods. ERI Working Paper No. 32. Ecological Restoration Institute 
and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 15 p. 
Kent, L.Y. 2015. Climate Change and Fire in the Southwest. ERI Working Paper No. 34. Ecological Restoration Institute and 
Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 6 p. 
Margolis, E.Q., D.W. Huffman, and J.M. Iñiguez. 2013. Working Paper 28: Southwestern Mixed-Conifer Forests: Evaluating 
Reference Conditions to Guide Ecological Restoration Treatments. ERI Working Paper No. 28. Ecological Restoration Institute 
and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 8 p.  
Reif, S., R.F. Yarborough, S.S. Rosenstock, E.L. Kalies, and S. Hedwall. 2013. Wildlife Habitat Values and Forest Structure in 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine: Implications for Restoration. ERI Working Paper No. 26. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 8 p. 
Springer, J.D. 2013. Post-Wildfire Restoration of Structure, Composition, and Function in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine and 
Warm/Dry Mixed-Conifer Forests. ERI Working Paper No. 29. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 9 
p. 
Springer, J.D., and D. Egan. 2012. Strategies for Enhancing and Restoring Rare Plants and Their Habitats in the Face of Climate 
Change and Habitat Destruction in the Intermountain West. ERI Working Paper No. 25. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 8 p. 
Swetnam, T. and D. Falk. 2015. Carbon Cycling in Southwestern Forests: Reservoirs, Fluxes, and the Effects of Fire and 
Management. ERI Working Paper No. 35. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern 
Arizona University. 15 p. 
Yocom, L. 2013. Fuel Treatment Longevity. ERI Working Paper No. 27. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire Science 
Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 8 p. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 59 
White Papers 
Brown, S.J. 2015. Administrative and Legal Review Opportunities for Collaborative Groups. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest 
Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University and the Western Environmental Law Center. 12 p. 
Combrink, T., C. Cothran, W. Fox, J. Peterson, and G. Snider. 2013. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Full Cost 
Accounting of the 2010 Schultz Fire. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 44 p.  
Combrink, T., W. Fox, and J. Petersen. 2012. Workforce Needs of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative Project: An Analysis. ERI 
White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 19 p. 
Egan, D. 2011. Integrating Domestic and Wild Ungulate Grazing into Forest Restoration Plans at the Landscape Level. ERI White 
Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 12 p. 
Egan, D., and E. Nielsen. 2014. The History of the Four Forest Restoration Initiative: 1980s–2010. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest 
Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 27 p. 
Fitch, A., Y.S. Kim, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2013. Forest Restoration Treatments: Their Effect on Wildland Fire Suppression Costs. ERI 
White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 12 p. 
Huang, C.H., and C.D. Sorensen. 2010. Exploring the Potential of Obtaining Carbon Credits for Restoration Activities on Navajo 
Tribal Forest Lands. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona 
University. 12 p. 
Kim, Y.S. 2010. Ecological Restoration as Economic Stimulus: A Regional Analysis. ERI White Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 12 p. 
Mottek Lucas, A. 2015. Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project: Creating Solutions through Community Partnerships. ERI White 
Paper—Issues in Forest Restoration. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 28 p. 
General and Technical Reports 
Crouse, J.E. and A.E.M. Waltz. 2013. Identifying Priority Forest Treatment Areas across the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. 
Special report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA Forest Service, Region 3. Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University. 50 p.  
Ecological Restoration Institute. 2013. The Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments: A Rapid Assessment of the Economic and 
Ecologic Consequences of Alternative Hazardous Fuel Treatments: A Document for Policy Makers. Northern Arizona 
University. 28 p.  
Egan, D. and Dubay, T. (eds.). 2013. Breaking Barriers, Building Bridges: Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Handbook. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 212 p.  
Evans, A. 2015. 2014 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern U.S. Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute and 
Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University. 20 p. 
Evans, A.M. 2014. 2013 Wildfire Season: An Overview, Southwestern U.S. Ecological Restoration Institute and Southwest Fire 
Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University: Flagstaff, AZ. 12 p. 
Greco, B. and M. Sensibaugh. 2014. Rapid Assessment Report: Upper Rocky Arroyo Restoration Project, Lakeside Ranger District, 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 34 p. 
Huffman, D.W., B. Greco, W.W. Chancellor, J.E. Crouse, J.D. Springer, A.E.M. Waltz. 2013. White Mountain Stewardship Program 
Monitoring Report. Special report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA Forest Service, Region 3. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 33 p.  
Moote, A. 2013. Closing the Feedback Loop: Evaluation and Adaptation in Collaborative Resource Management. Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 44 p. 
Roccaforte, J.P. 2013. The Wallow Fire and Its Effects on Mixed-Conifer Forest: A Comparison with Reference Conditions. Special 
report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA Forest Service, Region 3. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern 
Arizona University. 17 p. 
Roccaforte, J.P., M.T. Stoddard, P.Z. Fulé. 2013. Preliminary Results from the Mineral Ecosystem Management Area (EMA) 
Experimental Block Study: One-Year post-treatment. Special report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA Forest 
Service, Region 3. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 18 p.  
Sensibaugh, M., B. Greco, W.W. Chancellor, M.T. Stoddard. 2013. Larson Forest Restoration Project Historic Range of Variation 
(HRV Reference Conditions) Assessment Report. Special report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA Forest 
Service, Region 3. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, 20 p. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 60 
Sensibaugh, M., W.W. Chancellor, J.E. Crouse, D.W. Huffman, J.D. Springer, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2015. White Mountain Stewardship 
Program Monitoring Report. Special report to the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests, USDA Forest Service, Region 3. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University. 28 p. 
Springer, J.D. 2013. Prolonged Vegetative Dormancy in Rare Plant Species of the Southwest. The Plant Press, Arizona Native Plant 
Society. Fall 2013. 
 
Appendix B — Responses of Institutes to Recommendations  
from the 2005-2009 Report 
Responses of NMFWRI to Recommendations — 2005-2009 Report 
At the time of the first SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report, the affected entities that were 
interviewed for the evaluation offered a number of recommendations that apply to SWERI. This 
section addresses those recommendations. 
1. Broaden the Scope of the Institutes to Other Ecosystems and Larger Landscapes.  
NMFWRI fully supports the idea of landscape-level work. The “watershed” in the Institutes 
name indicates the initial organizers desire to include pinyon-juniper woodland in restoration. 
The latest Forest Inventory and Assessment (FIA) report showed that pinyon-juniper woodlands 
comprise 41% of the total forest land or over 10 million acres of forest land in New Mexico. 
NMFWRI serves as a catalyst by bringing groups together, helping with initial planning, 
identifying partners and potential funding sources, and closing the feedback loop on results.  
2. Consider Some Specialization by the Institutes.  
NMFWRI has or has had four areas of specialization: pinyon-juniper woodland restoration, 
technical assistance to non-Forest Service groups, GIS, and the mechanics of tree removal.  
NMFWRI has developed strong partnerships with state agencies, tribes, soil and water conservation 
districts, and the BLM, which has broadened their support base and diversified their funding base. 
NMFWRI has a strong GIS group. The first director recognized the strength of GIS, and two of 
the original six employees were GIS specialists. One of them left the institute in 2013 to head a 
dedicated GIS lab at NMHU, where he continues to cooperate closely with NMFWRI. As a 
result NMHU has as strong a GIS program as any organization in New Mexico.  
NMFWRI has worked closely with the forest industry because they are critical to restoring the 
forest landscape. NMFWRI had an employee who worked on the mechanics of restoration, 
especially safety training for thinning crews. NMFWRI was the only institute that did this type of 
workforce training. The employee quit two years ago, and since other work was more critical and 
was not being carried out, the position remains unfilled.  
Finally, our current staffing duplicates some capacity at the other institutes. For example, the 
skills of our new collaboration specialist overlap with that of the CFRI Director. Given the large 
areas and the long distances between projects in the southwest each institute has core staff to 
cover their state. Some duplication of capacity is necessary.  
3. Assess Funding Levels and Discrepancies in Funding among the Institutes.  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 61 
As one of the two institutes getting by on one-tenth of the annual allocation, NMFWRI would 
like a more equitable distribution of funding. Given the work and the leveraging of state funding 
by CFRI and NMFWRI, the current budget division seems to be as much an artifact of traditional 
congressional and agency practice as it is a reflection of accomplishment or the demand of services. 
Reducing ERI’s budget to give more to NMFWRI and CFRI would be an unsatisfactory solution. 
ERI’s work in the ecology of restoration, and the resulting continuous stream of publications, 
allows NMFWRI to demonstrate to stakeholders that the underlying science is sound. Their 
staffing capacity for fieldwork and data analysis means that requesting agencies can get help 
immediately.  
Restoration to reduce the risk of catastrophic fire and to improve ecosystem function is a Forest 
Service priority and increasing the funding to and capacity of all three SWERIs should be 
integral to that objective. 
4. Improve Coordination and Build more Partnerships with Other Agencies and Research 
Entities.  
NMFWRI history of collaboration with federal agencies, especially at the USDA, could be 
improved. NMFWRI has lacked technical capacity to assist them. The Institute has hired new 
staff to address that shortfall. 
The BLM/NMFWRI partnership project in the Rosa and Carrizo areas was an innovative use of 
high-resolution imagery and ground truthing that produced detailed vegetation maps on a 
watershed scale. 
NMFWRI has emphasized outreach and partnership with the research community but there is 
room for improvement. NMHU is a teaching institution, and most of the faculty is fully occupied 
with classes. NMFWRI has established productive relations with the natural resources faculty at 
NMHU, and our presence gives them some leverage to be able to pursue research. The Society of 
American Foresters accreditation process also provides similar opportunities. In February 2013, 
the director of the RMRS visited NMFWRI and Highlands to discuss partnerships. More 
recently, developing links between NMHU and Department of Interior agencies may lead to an 
increase funding for applied research. 
Through a partnership with BLM the NMFWRI is providing educational opportunities for 
students in forest inventory on landscape scale in northern New Mexico. 
NMFWRI’s two new hires create opportunities that were not foreseen during the search process. 
The collaboration specialist has a forestry background and strong orientation to community 
development. The monitoring specialist came to us from ERI, and closer links with researchers 
there and at NAU are inevitable. He has a background in range management which NMFWRI 
has lacked. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 62 
Responses of CFRI to Recommendations — 2005-2009 Report 
At the time of the first SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report, the affected entities that were 
interviewed for the evaluation offered a number of recommendations that apply to SWERI. This 
section addresses those recommendations. 
 
1. Broaden the Scope of the Institutes to Other Ecosystems and Larger Landscapes.  
Many interviewees talked about the need for a broader perspective beyond ponderosa pine and 
pinyon-juniper ecosystems. For example, the bark beetle epidemic and aspen decline are pressing 
forest ecosystem management issues that extend beyond restoration imperatives in dry, frequent-
fire forest types. The mandate for a broader perspective is not reflected in the legislation that 
established the institutes, but there is a perceived imperative to scale up restoration efforts in the 
face of intersecting forces such as climate change and rapid population growth in fire-prone 
landscapes. The institutes can play a critical role in supporting a broader array of long-term 
forest health issues beyond large-scale ecological restoration, but their effectiveness may be 
limited by too narrow an ecological scope. For example, treatments on upland ecosystems can 
change the dynamics of runoff and impact adjacent or related ecosystems, such as mid-elevation 
grasslands, woodlands, and wetlands that are threaded throughout ponderosa pine forests; all of 
these landscapes should be considered when assessing treatment effectiveness.  
A natural expansion would be to extend the geographic scale of restoration efforts to encompass 
watersheds. The broadening of scope should include outreach and active management as well as 
research, i.e., the kinds of things others are unable to do, but for which there is a critical need. It 
would also require partnering with many more land management entities than is currently the 
case and, in some situations, working across state boundaries. Thus far, state boundaries are seen 
as impeding on-the-ground jurisdictional cooperation. There is a great opportunity, and urgency, 
for the institutes to make a real difference in western ecosystems by expanding the reach of the 
institutes through watershed approaches, partnering with scientists in other institutions across the 
West, and other creative mechanisms. One concrete suggestion to enhance cooperation across 
state lines was to call upon the Western Governors’ Association to jointly sponsor and organize 
an initiative to examine the role of the institutes and others who need to cooperate in landscape 
scale ecological restoration. 
CFRI’S small operating budget has prevented us from expanding beyond Colorado. Two minor 
exceptions are worth mentioning: 1) ongoing communication and interaction with RMRS 
scientists on hazard reduction in southern Wyoming (Dr. Charles Rhoades); and 2) collaboration 
with RMRS/Dr. Michael Battaglia on a project assessing historic forest structure and fire regime 
that extends into southern Wyoming and the Black Hills of South Dakota. Forest restoration and 
wildfire risk mitigation issues are similar in these geographic areas to those in Colorado. 
Beyond ponderosa pine/dry mixed-conifer forests, CFRI continues to be involved in helping 
federal and non-federal land managers address the impact of large-scale insect outbreaks. As 
CFRI’s engagement with the Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative has tailed off due to the decline 
in the mountain pine beetle outbreak in the central Rocky Mountains, our engagement with 
management response proposals to address the rising spruce beetle outbreak in southern 
Colorado are increasing. Forest landscape change and fire risk in higher elevation forest types 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 63 
remain one of the more vexing challenges for managers, and CFRI remains committed to 
engaging in these issues. 
2. Consider Some Specialization by the Institutes. 
Questions were raised in a few of the interviews about possible duplication of effort among the 
three institutes (as well as with various academic institutions and other research entities). To 
avoid these problems and to create more effective synergy among the institutes, several 
interviewees suggested some strategic specialization, which to some extent is already occurring. 
For example, CFRI has demonstrated particular strengths in facilitation, collaboration and 
conflict resolution – high value services because large landscape restoration efforts are 
necessarily cross-jurisdictional, involving many diverse stakeholders who do not always agree or 
coordinate; NMFWRI has developed strong capacity in GIS and workforce development, 
including training in mechanical treatments; and ERI has a well-developed track record in 
ecological research and outreach. It would behoove the institutes to work together on a forward 
looking strategic plan that would address choices and future priorities. Specialization should not 
come at the cost of any individual institute’s ability to meet needs within its state. All of the 
institutes should build and retain broad enough capacity to provide site-specific ecological 
restoration assistance.  
Regarding requests from affected entities that require CFRI to develop and grow expertise in the 
natural and social sciences, CFRI has personnel trained in forest and fire ecology, plant 
community ecology, social and economic impact analysis, and collaborative planning and 
management. All of these skillsets and areas of expertise are required to meet affected entities’ 
requests, especially regard to expectations for CFRI to be the go-to entity for ecological and 
socio-economic monitoring of projects.  
CFRI has been developing specialized capacity to assist the U.S. Forest Service in the national 
forest planning process. CFRI has brought in faculty and students with expertise in the legal-
regulatory requirements surrounding national forest planning, with specific expertise on 
monitoring and adaptive management, NEPA, and conservation of threatened and endangered 
species.  
CFRI has specialized interest and expertise in NEPA, specifically regarding public engagement, 
case law, adaptive management, and cumulative impact analysis. 
3. Assess Funding Levels and Discrepancies in Funding among the Institutes.  
The interviewees agreed that additional funding would enable the institutes to perform more of 
the valuable work they are already doing, expand the scope of their contribution to large-scale 
landscape restoration, and allow them to help respond to looming imperatives such as climate 
change. Several interviewees suggested increasing funding especially for CFRI and NMFWRI, 
on the assumption that not only are additional services in high demand, but that current funding 
levels are barely sufficient to maintain their institutional integrity. There were mixed views as to 
the ability of the two smaller institutes to absorb a rapid increase in funding – some interviewees 
suggested that a large infusion of additional resources would not be effectively utilized in the 
near term, while others maintained that those institutes do indeed have the institutional 
foundation to be able to grow quite rapidly. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 64 
CFRI has seen its base operating budget decline from $250,000 in FY10 to $150,000 for FY11-
15. Fortunately, CFRI has been able to develop financial agreements with individual national 
forest units and the Rocky Mountain Region regional office, the RMRS, and state and non-
governmental entities on a project-by-project basis. Since FY10, we have leveraged our $1.35 
million in annual base operating funding from the US Forest Service to garner an additional 
$2.73 million. An increase in base operating funding would greatly help CFRI to sustain its 
obligations and partnerships with affected entities. It would also allow CFRI to be more pro-
active rather than being reactive, and provide greater leadership on addressing forest restoration 
and wildfire risk reduction challenges in Colorado and across the interior West. 
4. Improve Coordination and Build more Partnerships with Other Agencies and Research 
Entities.  
It was apparent from the interviews that relationships with other agencies and research entities 
have not always been easy. There is still a real reluctance in some places to take advantage of the 
services and expertise of the institutes. In some cases the institutes are seen as outright 
competitors, in others as diluting the authority/control by local jurisdictions over projects. 
However, interviewees report concerted recent efforts at improved communication and dialogue. 
There is interest in developing CFRI projects with other federal agencies in addition to the U.S. 
Forest Service. Relationships could be further improved by additional outreach, as well as 
continued examination and articulation of the institutes’ highest value niche in the ecological 
restoration arena relative to other players. 
Due to our limited personnel and funding we have opted to prioritize our U.S. Forest Service 
projects. The two CFLR projects in Colorado comprise a large portion of CFRI workload. 
Additional requests from individual national forest units and the RMRS, as well as the state of 
Colorado and municipal water providers make up the remainder of our workload. We interact 
with managers from the U.S. Department of the Interior’s BIA, BLM, and National Park Service, 
and will continue to seek opportunities for collaborative projects with them. 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 65 
Responses of ERI to Recommendations — 2005-2009 Report 
The first SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report (Meridian Institute and US Institute for 
Environmental Conflict Resolution) published in October 2009 included four recommendations. In 
response to the four recommendations the ERI took the following actions.  
1. Broaden the Scope of the Institutes to Other Ecosystems and Larger Landscapes. 
(Examples given include encompassing watersheds, taking an all lands approach, and 
broadening outreach)  
Despite a downward trend in both federal and state funding the ERI is designing and 
implementing treatments in dry mixed conifer vegetation types. This work is essential in order to 
protect habitat and recover the threatened Mexican Spotted Owl—the source of significant 
litigation since 1995. In addition, ERI is examining treatment approaches in low elevation 
ponderosa pine in response to requests from multiple national forests. Treatments in lower 
elevation conditions stimulate a shrubby understory response that contributes to volatile fuels 
build up. Proper management to reduce the shrubby understory is not well understood in the 
Southwest. This information will inform action in the Southwest and other parts of the 
Intermountain West.  
In 2012 the residents of Flagstaff, Arizona, voted overwhelmingly to pass a bond to provide $10 
million over 10 years to restore the forests in and around Flagstaff (almost 74% of the electorate 
voted yes). The goal is to restore forest health in order to improve watershed conditions and 
avoid catastrophic fire that can lead to downstream flooding and infrastructure damage. The ERI 
provided scientific information to support the need for the bond and will monitor vegetation in 
order to evaluate outcomes. Leveraged funding to support this work comes from the City of 
Flagstaff, state of Arizona and US Forest Service funding under PL 108-317. Another example 
of ERI’s response to the need for a watershed approach is a collaborative project developed with 
the Salt River Project (SRP), one of the nation’s largest energy and water suppliers. The SRP is 
working with the ERI to understand surface and ground water yield responses to different forest 
restoration treatments. In order to conduct this work the SRP has contributed almost $900,000 to 
the ERI over the last four years, further leveraging federal funds.  
With respect to the need for an “all lands approach” the ERI provides technical support to all 
affected entities. This includes the state of Arizona, Tribes including the Hopi and San Carlos 
and White Mountain Apache and other entities as needed. In addition, the ERI provides 
monitoring support to many of the CFLRP pilots across the West.  
2. Consider some specialization by the Institutes. (Avoid duplication with other academic 
institutions and research entities).  
Financial resources and technical expertise have led to some specialization between the three 
institutes. The ERI, due to its larger and more diverse staff is known for its biophysical science 
but also has the capacity to support collaboration, monitoring, and investigations in policy and 
economics. 
The ERI bases its program of work on needs expressed by affected entities or in anticipation of 
future information needs—such as restoration approaches in dry mixed conifer. In addition, the 
ERI networks with many organizations throughout the West to understand what others are doing 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 66 
in order to avoid redundancy. In most cases organizations are creating partnerships to stretch 
their resources. For example, the ERI collaborates with NFF on webinars, white papers and 
workshops. The same is true for the SWFSC, under the USFS, Joint Fire Science Program). ERI 
works with investigators at other institutes, organizations or the research stations to ensure that 
the best expertise contributes to work products. Presently, the ERI is discussing a new 
cooperative project with RMRS, state of Arizona and Region 3 of the Forest Service to test 
strategies for creating effective “all lands” approaches to lowering fire risk and restoring forest 
health.  
3. Assess funding levels and discrepancies in funding among Institutes.  
The sponsors of The Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act expected funding to 
gradually increase so that at all three institutes could achieve the purposes of the Act. This goal 
has not been fulfilled.  
Efforts to elevate funding include working together to find federal year-end funds when year-end 
funds are available. All three institutes are utilizing 2014 year-end dollars to fund a project to 
design a “Broad-scale Monitoring” framework to meet the requirements of the 2012 Planning 
Rule.  
The lack of certainty in year-to-year federal support, as well as flat and the declining funding has 
impacted the ability of all three institutes to meet the needs of the affected entities.  
4. Improve Coordination and Build more Partnerships with Other Agencies and Research 
Entities.  
Five years ago affected entities were still discovering the services provided by the ERI. Today 
our partners recognize that the ERI occupies a unique service niche for science development, 
translation and transfer. Research partners, such as the RMRS, acknowledge that the ERI has a 
unique strength in capacity to get the best available science in the hands of land managers— and 
more importantly seeing that the best available science influences management action on the 
ground.  
The ERI actively coordinates and collaborates with organizations like NFF, SWFSC, RMRS, 
TNC and the collaborative groups associated with the CFLRP to advance landscape scale 
restoration.  

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 67 
Appendix C — Interviewees (2015)
Greg Aplet, Senior Science Director 
The Wilderness Society  
 
Michael Bain 
General Manager 
Twin Willows Ranch  
 
Jamie Barbour 
National Implementation Lead for Inventory, 
Monitoring and Assessment 
USDA-Forest Service  
 
Jon Boller 
Senior Staff Attorney  
NM Legislative Council Service  
 
Anne Bradley 
Forest Conservation Program Manager  
The Nature Conservancy 
 
Lindsay Buchanan 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration 
Program Coordinator  
United States Forest Service  
 
Edward W. Collins 
District Ranger, Forest Service 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests 
 
Doug Cram 
Extension Wildfire Specialist  
NMSU Cooperative Extension  
 
Rob Davis 
Forest Energy Corporation 
Show Low, Arizona 
 
Jim deVos 
Assistant Director  
Arizona Game and Fish Department  
 
Jonas Feinstein 
State Conservation Forester  
Natural Resource Conservation Service, USDA-
NRCS Colorado  
William Ferranti 
Natural Resources Specialist  
Alamo Navajo School Board, Inc. 
 
Nancy Fishering 
Policy and Outreach 
Colorado Timber Industry Association  
 
Dick Fleishman 
Assistant Team Leader 
4FRI Coconino National Forest  
 
Chris Furr 
District Ranger 
Tres Piedras RD, Carson National Forest  
 
John Galvan 
Tribal Forester 
Pueblo of Jemez, Department of Natural Resources, 
Jemez Pueblo  
 
Todd Haines 
District Forester 
NMSF-Bernalillo District  
 
Stephen Horner 
Area Manager  
Campbell Global LLC 
 
Jeremy Kruger 
Forestry Program Lead 
Bureau of Land Management 
 
Linda LaGrange 
PhD Associate VP Academic Affairs  
Office of Research and Sponsored Programs 
New Mexico Highlands University  
 
Linda L. Lind 
Arizona State Liaison  
Southwestern Region  
 
Michael Lujan 
State Forester — Timber Management Office 
USFS-Las Vegas Ranger Station 
 

SWERI Five-Year Evaluation Report 
 68 
Tom Mackin 
Immediate Past President  
Arizona Wildlife Federation  
 
Mark L. Martin 
Ecosystem Management Group 
Arapaho & Roosevelt National Forests  
and Pawnee National Grassland  
 
Sara Maybe 
Renewable Resource Staff Officer  
USFS-Pike-San Isabel National Forest  
 
Mark Meyers 
Forester  
New Mexico State Land Office  
 
Pam Motley, Outreach Coordinator 
Uncompahgre Partnership  
 
Tom Osen 
Forest Supervisor 
USFS-Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests 
 
Brent Racher 
Owner 
Restoration Solutions, LLC  
 
Chuck Rhoades, PhD  
Research Biogeochemist  
Rocky Mountain Research Station 
 
Clay Speas 
Forest Monitoring Lead  
USFS-Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, and Gunnison 
National Forest 
 
Paul Summerfelt 
Wildland Fire Management Officer  
Project Manager 
Flagstaff Watershed Protection Project  
City of Flagstaff Fire Department 
 
Madeleine West 
Assistant Director, Parks, Wildlife and Lands  
Colorado Department of Natural Resources 
 
Jeff Whitney 
Arizona State Forester 
Arizona State Forest
 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
69 
Appendix D — Summary of Affected Entity Interviews (2015) 
A summary of responses from the interviewee list found in Appendix C follows this list of 
questions asked in the survey and phone interviews. 
1. Name, Title, Organization, and Phone Number (For follow-up phone interviews only.) 
2. What has been the role of affected entities in the institute’s planning and program 
development process? 
3. What has been the experience of affected entities in terms of the institute’s responsiveness to 
their needs (timeliness, quality of response, effectiveness)? 
4. What issues or concerns have emerged in your interactions with the institutes?  
How were these issues addressed? 
5. What recommendations do you have for improving the institute’s service in the future?  
6. What has been the institute’s role in promoting, implementing, and gaining wider acceptance 
for landscape scale restoration? 
7. In what ways has the institute contributed to reducing planning costs, duplication, and/or 
avoiding conflicts? 
8. In what ways has the institute promoted improved cooperation with local entities? 
Regionally? With Federal agencies? 
9. Are there any other insights or suggestions regarding past or future work of the institutes? 
10. What has been the value-added contribution of the institute? What difference have the 
institute’s contributions made? 
 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
70 
Summary of Interviews with Respect to  
New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute 
1. What has been the role of affected entities in the institute’s planning and program 
development process? 
The institute has successfully collaborated on numerous projects and encouraged cooperation 
among federal, state, local, and tribal government agencies and other participants involved in 
the forest and watershed restoration, maintenance, and monitoring efforts and natural resource 
management. The institute has actively partnered to transfer knowledge and expertise through 
education, outreach opportunity, and tech transfer. 
• The institute provides technical assistance to BLM land managers with forestry program 
students who have conducted forest inventory and vegetation mapping on public lands in 
the Taos and Rio Puerco Field Offices. 
• The institute has applied their expertise in the planning and designing of landscape 
planning projects. 
2. What has been the experience of affected entities in terms of the institute’s 
responsiveness to their needs (timeliness, quality of response, effectiveness)? 
• The institute has been very responsive to returning phone calls, request for data and 
information, organizing meeting, and facilitating communications. They have consistently 
been called reliable and dependable. Requests have been received in a timely manner and 
data has been of quality and relevance. For example, the institute has set up a portal that 
houses information and preparation plans that the Alamo team members can access to 
store and exchange data.  
• The institute has provided timely responses.  An example is coordination of access to state 
land to conduct pre- and post-treatment monitoring of forest restoration and fuels 
treatment activities.  
3. What issues or concerns have emerged in your interactions with the institutes?  
How were these issues addressed? 
• The institute’s good communications and planning have addressed the challenges of 
obtaining permission from landowners to access target sites. (Explanation added by 
NMFWRI: This refers to work done with the NM Sate Land Office (SLO), where we 
needed to cross private land to reach the SLO land, and we needed to coordinate with the 
SLO grazing lessee before working on the SLO land.) 
 
• Efforts have been made by the institute to address funding gaps for forest restoration on a 
landscape scale but this still remains an issue. 
4. What recommendations do you have for improving the institute’s service in the future?  

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
71 
• The majority of recommendations for improving the institutes’ service are to increase 
budget/funding for programs and increase staff. Vacancies in staff and shortages of 
personal have been an issue in the past. The institute has been noticeably short staffed in 
the past and slow to fill vacant positions.  
 
• Increasing scientific expertise and education for landscape scale restoration.  
 
• One staff member’s leaving caused a college program to die. It is important to reestablish 
the implementation of college course programs. “It would be beneficial to have the course 
revisited in an effort to get it off the ground. It would serve our crew members quite well 
and would give them even more skills when trying to find jobs in the forestry industry or 
as continuing education credits for pay raises.” 
• That the institute continues to be the intermediary in establishing communications for 
projects that need permission from landowners to access target sites. 
5. What has been the institute’s role in promoting, implementing, and gaining wider 
acceptance for landscape scale restoration? 
• The institute has played a key role in coordinating the efforts of local governments (such 
as counties, soil and water conservation districts, and land grants), the forest products 
industry, state agencies and environmental organizations to develop legislation to 
formalize the planning process for forest and watershed restoration efforts. 
• The institute has an integral role in procuring long-term funding for forest restoration in 
the state of New Mexico.  
• The institute promotes and assists the NM Prescribed Fire Council in meeting its mission 
of promoting prescribed fire.  
• The institute continues to develop and promote the latest science as it relates to 
restoration. They have formed multiple partnerships and relationships with other players 
in NM as it relates to restoration. Most recently, they worked closely with the NM 
legislature on important restoration policy. 
• The institute has served as a strong collaborator in ongoing landscape plans and strategies. 
Partnerships such as the Rio Grande Water Fund and the CFRP improve understanding of 
the fire dynamics in the habitat of the endangered Jemez Mountains Salamander. 
• The institute has shown leadership in giving presentation on restoration topics and specific 
lessons learned to agencies and citizens in Northern New Mexico. 
6. The institute was instrumental in helping the New Mexico Forest Industries Association 
(NMFIA) pass a bill through the state legislature for annual funding. The bill was passed 
unanimously through both houses but was vetoed by Governor Martinez.  

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
72 
7. In what ways has the institute contributed to reducing planning costs, duplication, 
and/or avoiding conflicts? 
• The institute encourages and provides resources for various entities (agencies) to work 
together on projects, share resources and better communicate with each other to address 
forest restoration and management on a landscape scale. Those efforts are reducing 
duplication across agency boundaries. 
• The institute provides GIS mapping and technical reviews. 
• Utilizing students to assist with forest inventory work reduces the per-unit cost of forest 
inventory. 
• The institute brought agencies and citizens together to discuss water quality, quantity and 
forest/watershed health issues, which reduced duplication in plans and provided a conduit 
for open communications and understanding. 
• The institute has coordinated the compilation of information for an unbiased report by a 
third party that was based on the data gathered by the Alamo crew, which the BIA 
accepted with fewer questions.  
• The institute has coordinated planning, monitoring, and data collection at local/regional 
levels by leveraging them to larger statewide efforts and providing methodologies that will 
allow integration at a larger scale.  
• The institute brought conflicting parties together to improve collaboration and conflict 
resolution.  
8. In what ways has the institute promoted improved cooperation with local entities? 
Regionally? With federal agencies? 
• The institute has been a key participant in educating the legislature on forest and 
watershed restoration issues. It promotes cooperation among local, state and federal 
agencies, and public and private agencies. 
• The director is a reliable adviser in the relationships of cross-jurisdictional programs and 
projects in the forest restoration community in New Mexico. 
• The institute has a reputation for providing sound advice and credible technical assistance 
through their consistent attendance at project work-up meetings.  
• With the Institute’s partners, such as the Prescribed Fire Council, CFRP and the BLM, 
cooperation among local entities has improved. 
• The institute has improved cooperation by serving as a go-between, being at the table. 
They are a levelheaded, unbiased voice of reason. 
• The institute acts as an information gathering entity on issues such as insurance, forest 
workers safety, promoting landscape scale projects, helping in the state legislature, and 
identifying long-range goals. 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
73 
• The institute has been a very effective conduit between federal agencies and stakeholders 
at the local, regional, and state level.  
9. Are there any other insights or suggestions regarding past or future work of the 
institutes? 
• Without the institute, the New Mexico State Land Office (NMSLO) would have an 
increased challenge in meeting forest restoration and management objectives. 
• Turnover of good employees (every 2-3 years) leaving for “better opportunities” requires 
rebuilding, reinventing the wheel, and loss of momentum. 
• NMHU lacks the research infrastructure and programs that could otherwise support a 
significant research program for the Institute. 
• A lack of clarity on what each institute offers and who can ask for help.  
• More information on what funding is available for what services, especially what is 
available for watershed projects. 
• Avoiding funding gaps would be huge.  
• Promoting a non-biased approach to grazing management on federal lands considering 
that the health of rangeland comes before the exploitation of the asset. 
• The NMFWRI will continue to be the leader in collaboration between agencies that are 
working to resolve watershed and forest health issues across New Mexico. With a full 
staff they will continue to share lessons from other projects (state and national) that will 
assist us in improving our management on the ground.  
• “The institutes are a great partner to have and hopefully will be here for the long run.” 
• Expand the safety training programs that are critical for forest related industries to keep 
the associated insurance costs down, which can make the difference between an employer 
staying in business and/or hiring more employees. 
• Look into the “systems approach” to integrate the needs of landscape scale restoration as it 
fits with the urban/rural public, businesses, government, and national/global development. 
10. What has been the value-added contribution of the institute? What difference have the 
institute’s contributions made? 
• Improvements have been noted in the level of cooperation and communication among 
local agencies (municipalities, counties, soil and water conservation districts, land grants), 
state agencies, environmental organizations, private industry and federal agencies in the 
planning process that has led to a decrease in finger-pointing and an increased focus on 
problem-solving.  

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
74 
• The Institute has brought resources and expertise to complement the forest restoration 
efforts of the NMSLO. This partnership has expanded the opportunity for adaptive 
management and implementation of effective treatments on the landscape.  
• The institute’s involvement with the NM legislature was highly significant and important 
in forging ahead on NM’s policy on forest and watershed restoration.  
• A number of under-resourced communities have benefitted by training and advice on 
forest businesses provided by NMFWRI.  
• The institute is perceived to be more neutral by some groups that are distrustful of 
conservation organizations. When we have a joint message to communicate, the institute 
may be the better messenger.  
• The institute director took on a central role in working on legislative funding strategies for 
the Rio Grande Water Fund. While the governor vetoed the last legislatures’ proposed 
funding bill, we have built good relationships and are optimistic about future efforts. 
• The institute assists in coordinating and implementing projects and assist in roles where 
they may be needed.  
• The institute being located on campus has allowed for academic collaborations that have 
benefited the students, faculty, and institute employees. Most importantly, it exposes our 
students to the understanding that forests and watersheds have to be managed well in order 
to maintain their ecological health. 
• Dr. Reid has been at every meeting for the collaborative and provides input to the group. 
• The conservation and land health situation in New Mexico is definitely better off with the 
institute.  
• Partnerships with the NMFWRI increased the BLM’s capacity for conducting forest 
inventory and provided valuable data for project and land management planning efforts. 
• The NMFWRI has been instrumental in keeping agencies communicating and working 
together. The Institute’s professionalism improved working relationships during 
emergency situations (flood and fires) resulting in better management.  
• An important value of the institute is that they act as a bridge between the public and 
private sectors. The institute can provide an unbiased and scientific opinion that 
sometimes carries more weight than it would when coming from an agency. 
• The institute has contributed to hands-on-training in safety, marking, cruzing, and 
monitoring.  
• Alamo Natural Resources has put $600,000 into the local economy over the past three 
years. Without the institute’s help, the Integrated Resources Management Plan (IRMP) 
would not have passed. The IRMP will help Alamo obtain funding for projects in many 
diverse areas. The institute has also assisted Alamo with its Woodland Management Plan. 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
75 
The institute helped Alamo by compiling reports, providing access to other successful 
programs and serving as an information warehouse. 
• The institute has been a consistent presence in various aspects of forest/watershed 
restoration and landscape scale restoration. This is important in a world where many 
scientific/academic institutions focus on piece-meal research, technology transfer, and 
outreach. 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
76 
Summary of Interviews with Respect to  
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
1. What has been the value-added contribution of the institute? What difference have the 
Institute’s contributions made? 
The primary value-added contribution of CFRI to affected entities between 2009 and 2014 
was providing scientific expertise and advice to affected entities. Respondents reported that 
CFRI advances the science of forest restoration and plays a leading role in the Colorado Front 
Range CFLRP. Interviewees responded that CFRI’s leadership includes connecting 
researchers with broader stakeholder groups and people involved in community restoration 
projects and citizen scientist monitoring groups. 
“I don’t know where we would be in the Front Range Roundtable without CFRI. If the 
Roundtable had had to organize leadership of the project, we might still be without a 
monitoring plan, without an adaptive management process, without monitoring data, or any 
sense of program accomplishments or improvement.”  
“The Colorado Front Range CFLR project is one of the few CFLR programs that can report 
real advances in restoration practices, evaluation, and a scientific approach to adaptive 
management.” 
“They provide us access to the best science because they keep up with the latest science and 
provide a nongovernment point of view. Having them participate in our landscape monitoring 
group has been really helpful—I hope they keep doing it.”  
 
Other value-added services CFRI contributed to affected entities is assisting with the 
Department of Natural Resources’ Forest Mitigation Monitoring Program. CFRI prepared 
monitoring protocols for all the grant recipients and conducted an analysis of landscape scale 
benefits to the grant program. These services were useful to the grant manager as well as the 
grant recipients. CFRI gives grant recipients working on fire mitigation projects a broader 
awareness of risk reduction from these treatments that is beyond cutting down trees. 
 
“The community-based groups doing smaller scale fire mitigation projects give CFRI staff 
rave reviews.”  
 
2. What has been the role of affected entities in the institute’s planning and program 
development process? 
As part of the Roundtable process, affected entities were able to identify priority areas of 
work and research that advance ecological restoration in Colorado, and CFRI has begun work 
and research in those areas. Other interviewees said their role was primarily to provide 
funding to CFRI to support their monitoring of the CFLR project. 
“Tony gives us an annual briefing of his plan for the year and where we can work together—
we provide feedback and suggestions and help them plan for their time. We help them help us 
in a sense. They bounce their ideas off us and we provide feedback. They also participate in 
the Front Range roundtable discussions.” 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
77 
3. What has been the experience of affected entities in terms of the institute’s 
responsiveness to their needs (timeliness, quality of response, effectiveness)? 
Interviewees said CRFI is very responsive and that they are “continuously impressed” with 
CFRI’s responsiveness to their needs. “When the CFRI has the charge to develop a product or 
provide assistance, they are professional, engaged, and timely.” Survey participants indicated 
that CFRI is very timely in their responses and that the responses are good quality and very 
effective. Interviewees said that CFRI has taken on an important leadership role in Colorado 
at a time when it was needed for landscape restoration. 
“They are a great partner to work with because they understand when and where to talk about 
science during field trips. Their work dovetails with our research projects and broader 
programs.”  
One interviewee responded that CFRI is a key part of their research work. “When we plan 
projects, we usually start with ‘We do this piece, CFRI does that piece’—that is very 
important.” 
CFRI helped one interviewee create a database to track projects on public and private land. 
CFRI provided ideas and staffing to build the database program. “Their responsiveness is 
always timely and supportive. We keep going back to work with them because they provide 
information we can trust. We count on them. Our experience has been really positive.” 
One respondent stated that while CFRI has been responsive to their needs, the nature of their 
work makes benefits longer term. It took two years to get results from the first round of 
grants. CFRI needed results to make recommendations. The respondent stated that now that 
the institute has the results, they expect CFRI to produce more this spring.  
4. What issues or concerns have emerged in your interactions with the institute? How were 
these issues addressed? 
Most interviewees said they didn’t know of any concerns and had to think about it awhile 
before responding. Interview results suggest more funding and more clearly defined roles 
could improve the effectiveness of the institutes 
Interviewees stated that CFRI plays a dual role—landscape restoration facilitation and 
research to improve the process. “Should they be spending resources on the work that is 
needed to increase the pace of landscape scale restoration in Colorado, or should they be 
analyzing it in order to improve its effectiveness? We need both, and they have the talent to 
do both, but resource limitations put them in the position of trying to do them coincidentally, 
when they really need to be separate functions.” 
Interviewees stated that CFRI is underfunded and could do more with additional funding. 
“CFRI is sorely and consistently underfunded to meet the full needs for the development and 
support of the fundamental research, a robust monitoring program, and an effective and 
impacting outreach and education program.” 
One respondent stated that they wonder how lower funding amounts might limit their ability 
to do the work in the future, So far, they haven’t noticed any lack of responsiveness or break 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
78 
down in work, even when CFRI had some staffing issues due to lower funding than the other 
institutes. 
5. What recommendations do you have for improving the institute’s service in the future?  
Increasing the funding to the institute seems to be the primary recommendation on how to 
improve future service. 
“Get more money so they don’t have to chase dollars to stay afloat.”  
“CFRI has a critical role to play in advancing restoration in Colorado, but they are resource-
limited. As a result, they have to expend valuable resources trying to secure operating funds. 
This also has the potential to force them into ‘mission creep’ in which they pursue funding 
because it is available, not because the work is what is most needed to advance restoration. 
Thankfully, I have not observed this yet, but I am concerned about the potential. One way to 
increase support for CFRI might be for it to host an annual or biennial meeting of stakeholders 
to report on accomplishments, solicit feedback, and plan for the future. This would help build 
community around CFRI and a stake in its success. CFRI works largely ‘behind the scenes’ 
now, but a higher profile may lead to greater political support and, conceivably, greater 
financial support.” 
“I hope they work with me in future as my program morphs.” 
 
Another recommendation is that CFRI remain flexible to embrace new research ideas and 
areas. Right now, CFRI is seen as “the Front Range people,” but they should not get too 
entrenched in one area so they can expand and grow. 
 
One interviewee suggested CFRI share what it is doing with other groups as a way to improve 
communication.  
 
“They were planning on conducting a workshop this fall because a citizen’s group was 
questioning a project we were doing in a national forest. They were going to do a workshop to 
bring the public in and get their feedback. However, Tony lost some staff so the workshop had 
to be postponed until 2016. Sometimes staffing is an issue. On field trips, they give the 
academic perspective, which is great. It says our work is supported by current science.” 
 
6. What has been the institute’s role in promoting, implementing, and gaining wider 
acceptance for landscape scale restoration? 
Interviewees stated that CFRI has been a leader in promoting, implementing, and gaining 
wider acceptance for landscape restoration. Because CFRI is university-based, it lends 
credibility to landscape restoration, especially where politics are involved in the process. 
“There is a tremendous amount of discipline and institutional based pushback on ecology, 
restoration, and a science based framework. If the CFRI was not here, I would not be able to 
have the support to push the science and implementation of both the scale and magnitude of 
ecology based treatments.” 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
79 
“Having CFRI based out of the university gives them a voice that is both respected and 
largely free of suspicion about their motives. This has allowed CFRI to take the reins of 
planning, monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of restoration projects in a way that I don’t 
think stakeholders would have allowed if those tasks had been taken on by others. As such, 
CFRI has brought stability and confidence to stakeholder collaborative relationships, which 
has allowed stakeholders to focus on the work, rather than on who will benefit from it. This 
has helped promote restoration, facilitated implementation, and gained it wider acceptance. 
One respondent stated that CFRI has a good reputation for providing landscape scale risk 
assessment. CFRI can take a bunch of smaller projects and roll up the data into an assessment 
of how these projects reduce risk at the statewide scale.  
CFRI publishes the results of its monitoring data in articles and scientific papers, which helps 
to build credibility with stakeholders. CFRI participates on various teams and in roundtables 
to transfer this knowledge to others. In addition, CFRI helps facilitate meetings with 
collaborative groups (private citizens, cities, local government agencies, county governments 
and federal agencies). Several interviewees said that having CFRI facilitate the discussion 
helped to build an inter-disciplinary approach to the work of affected entities.  
“For the last decade, CFRI is the ‘go-to scientific group in CO’ for landscape scale 
restoration. That’s really important. Landscape scale restoration is very much a long-term 
commitment—it’s new to people and they don’t always understand how it effects standard 
forestry work. The idea that it might take 5 to 10 years isn’t apparent to all people. I hope this 
institute has a long life span to address the long-term issues. CFRI is a respected partner and 
leader in lots of projects.  
“I’ve seen Tony brought in as a key witnesses and contributor to projects conducted at the 
state level. It’s important for credibility purposes that the information comes from a respected 
institute rather than just some professor at a university. CFRI is engaged in lots of work with 
people at the research station here. Their life means new ideas and options come along.” 
7. In what ways has the institute contributed to reducing planning costs, duplication, 
and/or avoiding conflicts? 
Interviewees reported that the key contribution CFRI has made to reducing planning costs, 
duplication of effort, and reducing conflict has been the leadership role they have taken in the 
Roundtable.  
“CFRI has been the ‘go-to’ organization for monitoring, planning, hosting workshops, etc., for 
the Front Range Roundtable. I suspect that having a trusted, professional, competent 
organization to take on these tasks has reduced planning costs and helped avoid conflicts. I 
suppose it is possible that we would have been able to find other institutions to take on these 
tasks, but being able to go to CFRI as the obvious choice has greatly increased efficiency.” 
For reducing conflict, CFRI acts as moderator at public meetings, some of which can be 
contentious. “The public doesn’t trust the government. They help to confirm what we are 
saying so the public trusts us.” 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
80 
On respondent stated that having the current science to work from has reduced some planning 
costs. 
8. In what ways has the institute promoted improved cooperation with local entities? 
Regionally? With federal agencies? 
The interviewees indicated that CFRI serves as a data repository for research findings and 
analysis, which is an important element of cooperation among local and federal agencies. 
CFRI helps other organizations and state and federal agencies clarify research findings as they 
relate to the implementation of ecological principles. “Having a third-party, university-based 
institute collect and analyze data provides transparency to the process and improves 
communication among stakeholders.” 
Interviewees reported that CFRI works collaboratively with all entities and serves as a bridge 
to bring these organizations together.  
Other ways CFRI has promoted improved cooperation with local, regional, and federal 
agencies is by participating in roundtable groups and landscape restoration monitoring teams. 
Some of the monitoring teams are small groups focused on community protection on private 
land, but there is public land adjacent to that private land. CFRI works with all the agencies 
(local, state, fed) on these projects to coordinate work. 
CFRI is involved in cross agency work between Colorado State University and the U.S. Forest 
Service. “They work really well in that space. CFRI talks to lots of federal and state land 
managers. As a federal researcher, I don’t always have the best connections with federal land 
managers. CFRI helps to fill that gap. They provide outreach to stimulate communication 
back and forth between stakeholders, especially at the local community level.” 
9. Are there any other insights or suggestions regarding past or future work of the 
institute? 
CFRI is a respected organization for providing scientific data to affected entities as well as 
assisting with monitoring and outreach. However, a few interviewees said they would like to 
see CFRI take a more active role in promoting and facilitating restoration, including 
expanding the institutes’ role as a dedicated advocate for restoration projects. 
“The Front Range Roundtable has benefited greatly from the ‘one-two punch’ of TNC and 
CFRI, wherein TNC runs the trap lines to set up restoration projects, and CFRI comes in with 
the administrative support for monitoring, etc. This has worked well so far, but it cannot be 
relied on as a long-term solution. NGO priorities change. I fear a day when we will be left 
without an effective protagonist for restoration projects. I would like to see CFRI play a more 
active role in promoting and facilitating restoration work. I realize that resources are tight, and 
CFRI is doing what it can, but I think Colorado would benefit from a dedicated advocate for 
restoration in the form of CFRI in the future as long as it was kept separate from the 
research/evaluation role, which is also needed.” 
The contract structure between CSU and CFRI could be improved to allow CFRI to get more 
work. CSU takes a high overhead percentage of their work, making it difficult to give them 
more work, according to one interviewee.  

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
81 
“Having CFRI available is helpful for our forest and the CFLR project because they work 
across all those boundaries with us—they help us see different options to what we are doing 
out there. Hopefully that will keep going forward.” 
The ideas behind restoration are still evolving. CFRI is consulted for problem solving when 
issues come up.  
“CFRI is doing a great job. I hope they keep on keeping on. They are an important partner and 
hopefully will remain there. If there program collapses, there will be a big gap to fill.” 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
82 
Summary of Interviews with Respect to  
the Ecological Restoration Institute in Arizona 
1. What has been the value-added contribution of the institute? What difference have the 
institute’s contributions made?  
Many survey respondents stated that ERI’s value-added contribution has been significant for 
providing the best available science and simplifying/translating the science in order for it to be 
easily understood by all parties. The institute is also well respected in the community, 
according to interviewees, and provides the third-party verification needed to support U.S. 
Forest Service work in the area with stakeholder groups. 
“ERI’s contributions have made a difference because they are accessible, responsive, 
proactive, and respected in Arizona. The pace and scale of restoration in AZ would not be 
where it is today without the contributions of ERI.” 
“The institute has been and continues to be hugely beneficial to the Uncompahgre Plateau 
CFLR project. The amount of forest restoration work that we are achieving would never have 
been possible without their guidance and involvement.” 
“I strongly believe that without the institute’s leadership and organizational skills, we would 
not be where we are today relative to commencing landscape scale restoration. The 
stakeholder groups, the Forest Service, and even the contractor are not as well organized and 
capable of providing the leadership and coordination necessary to meet the challenges of this 
effort.” 
“Value added contribution in my opinion has been enormous.”  
One interviewee stated that ERI is consulted every time a landscape level environmental 
analysis is conducted because the institute can provide a rapid assessment of the ponderosa 
pine and pinyon-juniper woodlands on restoration projects. “ERI did a rapid assessment of 
two large areas in the last five years. One was the Timber mesa (140,000 acres) where the 
institute did a rapid assessment of the transition between ponderosa pine and pinyon-juniper 
areas. ERI provided scientific historical data on the area to help guide efforts.” 
“ERI is very credible with the public. When we were proposing treatments in these areas, we 
didn’t have much in the way of advice on how to do that. ERI was very important for us in the 
Environmental Analysis to help us restore the area the way Mother Nature did it.” 
ERI helped to accelerate work on the Upper Rocky Arroyo Restoration Project—33,000 acres 
near Lakeside Arizona in the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. The project was not 
intended to start until 2015. In 2014, ERI offered treatment assistance that helped move the 
project up one year. “We were in a mad dash for data collection and they really helped with 
that. They collected data and gave us a rapid assessment that was really helpful on the district 
level.” 
ERI communicates its scientific knowledge through research reports and other forms of 
communication. “They routinely send out new science and research that has been completed 
and published with interpretation and how that science is important to the ecosystems that we 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
83 
work with. They are willing to come out anytime for service trips to help with additional 
interpretation if we need it.” 
2. What has been the role of affected entities in the institute’s planning and program 
development process? 
A wide variety of stakeholders in Arizona work with ERI including non-profits, 
environmental advocacy groups, the timber industry, science organizations, and federal and 
state agencies. “Because ERI engages as one of the many stakeholders in Arizona, they are 
extremely responsive and proactive to what they hear and observe. This is clearly reflected in 
the planning and development of ERI programs.” 
ERI also gets input from affected entities by participating in the Natural Resources Working 
Group, which some interviewees also attend. The interviewees said they provide input to ERI 
at those meetings. 
ERI assisted the Uncompahgre Plateau collaborative group in discussing and developing 
forest restoration efforts that turned into the Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Forest 
Landscape Restoration Project. “Their input was very valuable in our efforts.” 
ERI provides a centralized location for scientific information on landscape scale restoration. 
“With the excellent communication tools provided by ERI, my organization has been able to 
find information and answers to many of our questions and concerns at one centralized 
location. This has been very helpful when gathering data and developing internal as well as 
external communications for my organization. The ERI openly solicits feedback and input 
when they’re developing new or existing programs and it allows us to provide our position in 
such a manner that it will be included and distributed broadly.” 
ERI has worked closely with the U.S. Forest Service on monitoring efforts for the White 
Mountain Stewardship Project. They also assisted with data gathering and biological 
assessments on other restoration projects during the NFMA (National Forest Management 
Act) stage. 
3. What has been the experience of affected entities in terms of the institute’s 
responsiveness to their needs (timeliness, quality of response, effectiveness)? 
Overall, the interviewees said the institute was very responsive to their needs. ERI staff 
consistently provides timely responses to inquiries and other needs, according to several 
interviewees. They also follow up to ensure affected entities are getting the information they 
need and provide links to online sources of additional information. 
“In my experience ERI has been very responsive to the multitude of agencies and 
organizations in Arizona. They also have an important role in creating connectivity to regional 
and national level issues and/or needs.” 
“They are one of the few academic/science organizations that I have interacted with during 
my career that seems to truly understand how to translate the science to on-the-ground 
realities in the field. ERI has also been proactive in contributing to the diverse ecological 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
84 
needs within Arizona. They have not forgotten the southern portion of the state, which is often 
in the shadows of the largest CFLR project in the country.” 
4. What issues or concerns have emerged in your interactions with the institutes? How 
were these issues addressed? 
All the interviewees stated that their interactions with ERI have been both personal and 
positive and their inquiries and needs were met in a timely and adequate manner.  
5. What recommendations do you have for improving the institute’s service in the future?  
Interviewees stated they recommend continued funding support to ERI, but they did have a 
few recommendations for improving the institute’s service: 
One interviewee stated he/she would like to see more coordination and integration with the 
RMRS. 
“It would be great if the institute had the funding that would allow them to be more deeply 
engaged.” 
“Alignment to Forest Service databases is important.” 
One interviewee said they would like ERI to hold another training session similar to the one 
they held in Flagstaff with Charlie Denton. The interviewee said that workshop was incredibly 
effective at transferring the science to the field work. The person interviewed stated “I would 
find a way to get all my people to those kind of sessions.” ERI shares information 
electronically via their website, newsletters, etc., but workshops are great for people who 
prefer face to face communication. 
 
6. What has been the institute’s role in promoting, implementing, and gaining wider 
acceptance for landscape scale restoration? 
 
ERI serves as the central organization for collecting and disseminating scientific information 
regarding restoration.  They provide leadership, direction and resources and serve as a catalyst 
for other groups and organizations that may not be as well equipped to do so. The information 
they provide affected entities is “not tainted by financial, political or personal goals or 
viewpoints.” 
“I believe the institute has played a critical role in all things restoration!” 
“ERI has been instrumental in providing academic credibility to the restoration work being 
done throughout Arizona by the U.S. Forest Service and other partners. Although they often 
focus on the science and on-the-ground application, they also provide context for the 
socioeconomic importance of landscape level restoration. They continue to be a leader in all 
things restoration, and are quite effective in engaging the broad base of publics and partners in 
AZ, the region, and in Washington, DC. A great advocate and partner for the Forest Service!” 
ERI acts as third-party scientific institute that provides guidance and input into the 
development and implementation of forest restoration efforts and monitoring programs. Their 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
85 
participation in monthly group meetings of various organizations, including the Natural 
Resource Working Group, has helped communities gain wider acceptance to forest restoration 
by bringing the scientific viewpoint to different aspects of landscape scale restoration projects. 
An example of how ERI has contributed to wider acceptance of landscape scale restoration is 
their work on the Mineral Project, an area of forest where ERI designed the restoration 
treatments to test different intensities of thinning. Data were collected before and after 
treatments. In 2014, the San Juan Fire ignited near the project area and burned 7,000 acres. 
The fire started on a reservation and crossed into the Springerville Ranger District. “The fire 
was strong and wind-driven. It nuked when it hit the untreated forest stands (mixed conifer 
and ponderosa pine). When it hit the Mineral Project treated area, that brought the fire back to 
the forest floor and the level of damage was far less severe. ERI went out and evaluated what 
they did and will let us know how they treated that area, which will be incredibly helpful to 
ranger districts.” 
 
7. In what ways has the institute contributed to reducing planning costs, duplication, 
and/or avoiding conflicts? 
The institute actively engages stakeholders/partners on an ongoing basis in order to remain 
current on all things restoration and/or natural resources in Arizona. They often are the ones 
that identify areas of duplication and/or ways in which costs could be reduced through more 
coordinated efforts, and are never afraid to offer their services as a third party neutral partner 
organization.  
“I believe that ERI leadership and staff have been instrumental in the success of the 4FRI 
stakeholder process, and continue to be a leader in helping to resolve conflicts that arise 
within this very diverse group. ERI has shown they are an effective (almost neutral) 
organization having the diplomatic skills to work in an ever changing environment here in 
AZ—environmental, economic and political.” 
The ERI’s involvement and assistance has allowed the forest to successfully complete large 
scale, broad-brush NEPA documents (17,000-acre and 138,000-acre). This has been a huge 
help in getting work done on the ground. In addition, having a third party scientific institute 
involved has helped reduce conflict. 
The institute has served as the main organizational entity, providing effective and timely 
communications, developing and maintaining a clearinghouse for information and 
consistently providing capable and professional leadership and support staff to keep the 
ultimate goal of landscape restoration at the forefront of our efforts. 
I feel they bring a balanced approach to the discussions and planning for NFMA efforts, etc. 
When land managers take a project on, ERI is there to fill a void. For two projects—the 
Arroyo and Upper Rocky—ERI completed some data and analysis the ranger district couldn’t 
get anywhere else, according to one interviewee.  
“They provide us with information we can’t get or don’t have the skill to pull out of 
databases. Every time they talk to us, they talk about efficiency and over collection of data. 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
86 
They meet with us before we begin to find out what we need and how to provide it in the most 
efficient way possible.” 
8. In what ways has the institute promoted improved cooperation with local entities? 
Regionally? With federal agencies? 
ERI is often looked to by many partners as a convener because they have a “neutral” 
connection to so many local organizations and agencies, according to one interviewee. “I get 
the impression that there could be more regional coordination with the Forest Service and the 
RMRS. They have a remarkable rapport with the six national forests in Arizona, as well as 
local and state level entities.” 
“In my opinion, the open, timely and professional actions of the institute makes it very easy 
for all entities, across all levels, to receive consistent information based on best practices and 
science. The institute welcomes and respects all entities, large and small, government and 
NGO alike, and encourages participation by all. The institute has also been a leader in 
coordinating and in many cases staffing visits to Washington, Region 3 headquarters and 
elsewhere as needed.” 
ERI is useful in collaborative conservation efforts. “When we worked with the Natural 
Resources Working Group (NRWG), many groups were opposed to what we were trying to 
do.” Stakeholders that participate in collaborative conservation efforts include the Arizona 
Game and Fish Department, the governor’s office, county governments, environmental 
groups, industry representatives (timber and livestock), federal agencies, and other broad and 
far reaching groups. ERI brought in NAU for an academic perspective. “NAU helped at first, 
but ERI continues to provide that scientific expertise at these meetings. They also attend the 
regional meetings.” 
9. Are there any other insights or suggestions you would like to share regarding past or 
future work of the institute? 
The area of economic analysis and viability of restoration in Arizona needs more attention, as 
the forests in Arizona are not considered typical “high value” timber producers, according one 
interviewee. “There needs to be a better understanding and balance of the economic viability 
of restoration as part of the Forest Service planning and contracting processes. ERI has the 
capacity, credibility, history, and relationships to play a key role in coordinating this effort 
with a number of key partners in Arizona currently looking at this issue/gap in 
information/knowledge.” 
“I believe ERI could be an ongoing source for facilitation and conflict resolution services in 
collaborative stakeholder work across the state.” 
“Because landscape scale restoration will be taking place over several decades, it’s my hope 
that the institute will continue with the efforts that they’ve made in the past and that they’ll 
always be able to attract the high caliber staff that we’ve enjoyed working with to this point.” 
“It would be a loss if they go away. We have really benefited from the information and help 
they provide. And on the groups that have the ability to say no (to restoration projects)—but 
because of the collaboration underway, these groups elected not to say no.” 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
87 
One interviewee stated that ERI’s assistance with the treatment areas is an example of how 
catastrophic fire prevention is important in Arizona, because most cutting and thinning of 
forest trees has stopped in the Southwest. As a result, several very large fires, such as the 
Rodeo-Chediski and the Wallow fires, two of the worst fires in Arizona history, could have 
been less severe if the surrounding national forest areas had been treated with landscape scale 
forest restoration. “We volunteered to do that with the White Mountain Stewardship Project—
we were an example in Arizona and the region—for people to see treated areas—we would 
schedule fieldtrips for people to see it. We were the only game in town. Visually the public 
doesn’t get it until you show them a treatment area versus a burned area. Then they see it.” 
ERI’s involvement in public tours has helped groups understand why more than just the forest 
understory needs to be thinned. In fact, too many trees in the forests of Arizona are not natural 
to the region, according to an interviewee who worked with ERI on the Blue Ridge 
Demonstration Project, which involved three levels of forest treatment. “On the tour, Dr. 
Covington discussed ERI’s prescription to mimic what the forest looked like before the 
settlers arrived in the early 1870s. We talked about what happens when you don’t do a 
treatment—the forest nukes out—unless you start thinning and removing some of that fuel. 
Dr. Covington showed us that we didn’t have an opening in the canopy so we needed to 
improve our next phase. We still needed to remove 60 percent of the trees to get close to what 
the forest looked like 140 years earlier—we needed to break up openings in the forest canopy, 
not just thin the bottom. The way he presented it was a teachable moment for me and a whole 
lot of people on the tour. He explained 140 years ago, the forest in this area was a savannah-
like forest with 25 trees to the acre. Now there are 100s to 1,000s per acre. One hundred years 
ago, the grass took most of the moisture so the trees couldn’t reproduce—frequent fires helped 
thin forest—every three to seven years a fire would come through and consume the grass. 
Mother Nature sustained more open forest. After the settlers arrived, they brought in large 
numbers of cows and sheep to eat the grass and unintentionally overgrazed the area so grass 
couldn’t provide the fire preventive measures it did when there was much more. People had 
an anti-fire mindset back then. But every seven years or so, we have above average moisture 
years, which leads to pine seeds which breeds pine trees.”  

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
88 
Appendix E — Acronyms 
BIA – Bureau of Indian Affairs 
BLM – Bureau of Land Management 
CFLRP – Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program 
CFRI – Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
CFRP – Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 
CSFS – Colorado State Forest Service 
DoD – Department of Defense 
EQIP – Environmental Quality Incentives Program 
ERI – Ecological Restoration Institute 
ERI-NAU - Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University  
FTE – Full-Time Equivalent 
FWS – U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
GIS – Geographic Information System 
LEARN – Long-term Ecological Assessment and Restoration Network 
NFF – National Forest Foundation 
NAU – Northern Arizona University 
NFMA – National Forest Management Act 
NGO – Non-Governmental Organization 
NMFWRI – New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute 
NMHU – New Mexico Highlands University 
NMSLO – New Mexico State Land Office 
NRCS – Natural Resource Conservation Service 
RMRS – Rocky Mountain Research Station 
SWERI – Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes 
SWFSC – Southwest Fire Science Consortium 
TNC – The Nature Conservancy 
WHO – New Mexico Forest and Watershed Health Office 
WUI – Wildland-Urban Interface 
 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
89 
Appendix F — State Government Charter 
Charter for the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes 
This Charter clarifies the goals, duties and operating procedures for the SOUTHWEST 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES, and their respective states, as envisioned in PL 
108-317. This Charter is entered into by and among the Governors of the States of Arizona, 
Colorado and New Mexico, and the Presidents of Northern Arizona University, Colorado State 
University and New Mexico Highlands University, on behalf of their respective governing 
boards, hereafter referred to collectively as “the Parties”. 
1. PURPOSE 
A. The purpose of the SOUTHWEST ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES 
(“SWERI”) is to bring the unique strengths of the member universities, individually, collectively 
and in cooperation with other institutions to help support land managers and their collaborators 
working to achieve comprehensive ecological restoration treatments on the ground.  
B. To assure that ecological restoration treatments are effective and efficient, the institutes 
identified by PL 108-317 will develop, translate and transfer practical, operation-oriented 
scientific knowledge to land managers, collaborative community groups and others who 
cooperate in the design and implementation of ecosystem restoration treatments. A key mission is 
to assure, through systematic collaboration and coordination of resources, that all levels of 
government and stakeholders from the local to the state, regional, and national levels have the 
best information available to ensure that collaborative ecosystem restoration treatments are 
implemented in the most effective and efficient manner for restoring the ecological, economic, 
and social integrity of the greater ecosystems of the Interior West.  
C. The SOUTHWEST ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES are established by 
Northern Arizona University, Colorado State University and New Mexico Highlands University. 
The respective states will be involved and represented, at a minimum, by their State Foresters. 
The institutes will have many diverse stakeholders who are involved in the design and 
implementation of ecological restoration treatments in frequent fire forests and associated 
woodlands. These stakeholders may include when appropriate, but are not limited to: the federal 
land management agencies; state governments; tribes; elected officials; local governments; and 
nongovernmental entities that include collaborative community groups and environmentalists, the 
Western Governors’ Association, and business.  
 D. The SOUTHWEST ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES has no regulatory 
authority and recognizes that all legal authority is reserved by its members in accordance with 
existing law. It also recognizes that the institutes, by virtue of their affiliation with universities, 
may have duties beyond those specified in this agreement. 
2. BACKGROUND 
A. The need for restoring ecosystem health in the Southwest has been evident for decades, 
especially for its ponderosa pine and drier mixed conifer forests. As a result of disruption of the 
natural frequent fire regime and past harvesting and grazing practices, forests became dense and 
vulnerable to unnaturally severe, stand-replacing fires. In many watersheds, over 90% of these 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
90 
forests are considered at moderate or high risk for crown fires due to dense stand structure and 
accumulated fuels. Fire acreage and size have been steadily increasing, culminating in the largest 
fire in southwestern history, the 468,000-acre Rodeo-Chediski fire in 2002, a fire that devastated 
watersheds and economies over an entire region. Entire states and regions are now at risk of 
losing the ecological and environmental benefits of greater ecosystems at the scale of millions of 
acres. 
B. Many managers, from resource specialists to land managers, feel that science shows that 
thinning, burning, and other forest restoration techniques can be effective in restoring forest 
health and reducing the threat of unnatural fire in the frequent fire forest types of the Interior 
West. A central question is how to use the best science to get restoration done in the most 
effective and efficient way possible, while learning how to improve our treatments as we move 
forward. Although there are clear needs for the discovery of additional scientific information, the 
flood of existing scientific literature, the disconnected sources of information, and the complexity 
of environmental analysis can overwhelm the resources of practitioners, stakeholders and 
decision-makers. Wildland ecosystems and their dependent human communities are the ultimate 
victims if managers cannot mobilize the critical information for rapid, thorough, and scientifically 
defensible environmental analysis. 
3. STRUCTURE 
A. Goals and Legislative Intent 
3.1. Goal. The goal of the SOUTHWEST ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES is to 
obtain, summarize, and transfer relevant and accurate scientific information to managers 
and other key stakeholders. 
3.2. Legislative Purpose of PL 108-317 as published is:  
a. To enhance the capacity to develop, transfer, apply, and monitor, and regularly update 
practical science-based forest restoration treatments that will improve the health of dry 
forest and woodland ecosystems and reduce the risk of severe wildfires, in the Interior 
West; 
b. To synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research programs to the 
implementation of forest and woodland restoration on a landscape scale; 
c. To facilitate the transfer of interdisciplinary knowledge required to understand the 
socioeconomic and environmental impacts of wildfire on ecosystems and landscapes; 
d. To require the institutes established under this Act to collaborate with Federal 
agencies-- 
i. 
to use ecological restoration treatments to reverse declining forest health and 
reduce the risk of severe wildfires across the forest landscape; 
ii. to design, implement, monitor and regularly revise wildfire treatments based 
on the use of adaptive ecosystem management; 
e. To assist land managers in-- 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
91 
i. 
Treating acres with restoration-based applications; and 
ii. 
Using new management technologies (including the transfer of 
understandable information, assistance with environmental review, and field 
and classroom training and collaboration) to accomplish the goals identified 
in-- 
1. The report entitled `10-Year Comprehensive Strategy: A 
Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire Risks to 
Communities and the Environment' of the Western Governors' 
Association; 
2. The report entitled `Protecting People and Sustaining Resources in 
Fire-Adapted Ecosystems-A Cohesive Strategy' (65 Fed. Reg. 
67480); and 
3. The National Fire Plan. 
f. To provide technical assistance to collaborative efforts by affected entities to develop, 
implement, and monitor adaptive ecosystem management restoration treatments that 
are ecologically sound, economically viable, and socially responsible; and 
g. To assist Federal and non-Federal land managers in providing information to the 
public on the role of fire and fire management in dry forest and woodland ecosystems 
in the Interior West. 
B. Duties 
3.3. Institutes. Each institute shall engage in the following activities to the extent funding for such 
activities has been appropriated pursuant to PL 108-318 or is otherwise made available: 
a. Provide an annual work plan as a condition to receive federal funds for each fiscal year 
on a date to be determined by the US Department of Agriculture-US Forest 
Service in consultation with the Department of the Interior. The work plan will 
follow the template provided by the Secretaries. 
i. The annual work plans will be developed in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture/US 
Forest Service, the Secretary of Interior, the State Foresters and the stakeholders as described in 
paragraph 1.C above.  
ii. The work plans will contain assurances and performance measures that are satisfactory to the 
Secretaries and reflect that the activities will serve the legislative purpose of PL 108-317 
b. Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor ecosystem restoration 
treatments including restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction prescriptions to reduce 
the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health of dry forest and woodland 
ecosystems in the Interior West; 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
92 
c. Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework; 
d. Translate for and transfer to affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 
e. Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction 
treatments;  
f. Provide for continuing education, formal coursework, and public education as 
necessary and useful; 
g. Convene one or more meetings among the institutes annually to share lessons learned 
and to coordinate activities so as to avoid undesirable duplication;  
h. Subject to the availability of federal funding, convene, state-by-state, one or more 
meetings annually of the stakeholders identified in paragraph 1.C above to: define and 
prioritize science needs; identify and prioritize information needs that can be 
synthesized from existing information; and, identify audiences that will benefit from 
the services provided by the institutes. If a representative body able to perform these 
functions already exists in the state, an institute may use its services to fulfill this 
requirement;  
i. Provide peer-reviewed annual reports to the university presidents, the Governors, the 
Secretary of Agriculture and Chief of the Forest Service and Secretary of Interior; 
i. For purposes of this Charter, peer review means a meeting of the stakeholders 
identified in paragraph 1.C to review the annual report and work conducted by 
each institute.  
ii. The annual peer-review will be conducted by October 31 following the end of the 
federal fiscal year. A final report will be prepared by December 31st of the same 
year.  
j. Notwithstanding any provision of this Charter to the contrary, no institute shall be 
prohibited from performing its duties described herein and other functions by 
contracting for their performance. 
3.4. States. The state funding for the institutes required under this Section 3.4 may be provided by 
the annual University budget or funding for the institutes may be provided by other sources as 
may be available and appropriate. Each state: 
a. Shall provide facilities for the institutes; and 
b. Shall provide state funding to support a portion of the operations of the institutes. 
  

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
93 
C. Charter Implementation 
3.5. Coordinating Committee. There is hereby created a Coordinating Committee whose 
membership and purposes shall be: 
a. The Coordinating Committee shall consist of the Executive Director(s) of each 
institute, the State Forester from each state, a designated representative of each 
state Governor and a representative of the Western Governors Association.  
b. The primary purpose of the Coordinating Committee is to implement the purposes 
and intent of this Charter by providing management and administrative guidance 
on matters affecting all the Parties. 
c. The Coordinating Committee shall adopt its own procedures and determine the 
frequency of its meetings. 
d. Examples of matters affecting all the Parties include, but are not limited to: 
(i) 
Establishing protocols for communications among all 
three institutes; 
(ii) 
Identifying opportunities for leveraging resources; 
(iii) 
Addressing common interests and opportunities for 
mobilizing critical information for rapid, thorough and 
scientifically defensible environmental analysis; 
(iv) 
Determining how the institutes should collectively 
model collaboration as a primary value. 
e. Subject to the availability of funds, each institute will fund its own participation in 
the annual meeting, travel, communications and incidental expenses of the 
Coordinating Committee. 
4. Amendment 
This Charter may be amended only by an instrument in writing executed by an authorized 
representative of each Party.  
5. Termination 
If, as a result of the monitoring and evaluation five years following enactment of PL 108-318, the 
Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, determines that an institute does not 
qualify for further Federal assistance under this Act, the non-qualifying institute shall receive no 
further Federal assistance under this Act, and shall cease to be a Party to this Charter, until such 
time as the qualifications of the institute are reestablished to the satisfaction of the Secretaries. 
 
 

SWERI Five-Year Assessment Report 
94 
6. Participant signatures 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises set forth above, the undersigned 
Parties do hereby execute this Charter, which shall become effective on the date on which it has 
been signed by all Parties. 
 
On behalf of the States: 
 
Governor Janet Napolitano, Arizona 
Date 
 
 
Governor Bill Owens, Colorado 
Date 
 
 
Governor Bill Richardson, New Mexico 
Date 
 
On behalf of the Institutes: 
 
 
President John Haeger, Northern Arizona University 
 Date 
 
 
President Larry Edward Penley, Colorado State University 
Date 
 
President Manny Aragon, New Mexico Highlands University 
 Date 
 
