A Twenty Year Record of Changes in an Arizona Pine Forest
G. A. Pearson
Ecology, Vol. 14, No. 3. (Jul., 1933), pp. 272-285.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9658%28193307%2914%3A3%3C272%3AATYROC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5
Ecology is currently published by Ecological Society of America.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/esa.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri Mar 7 17:44:36 2008

A TWENTY YEAR RECORD O F  CHANGES I N  AN ARIZONA  
P I N E  FOREST  
Southwestern Forest atad Range Experiment Stntion 
In the early days of national forest administration one of the first thoughts 
of research men was to establish records that would make it possible to meas- 
ure progress from time to time. Silviculture as applied to western conditions 
was largely theory; it was yet to be determined what methods would give 
the best results and whether, indeed, any method applicable under prevailing 
economic conditions would achieve the main object, namely, sustained pro- 
duction of timber under commercial utilization. 
So-called sample plots were 
established on logged over areas in order to ascertain how fast residual stands 
would grow, whether they could produce merchantable timber, and whether 
natural restocking would take place. 
In the Southwest .the first sample plots were established in 1909 by the 
Fort Valley Forest Experiment Station, now a branch of the Southwestern 
Forest and Range Experiment Station. The idea was conceived by Col. 
T. S. Woolsey, then chief of the Office of Silviculture in the Southwestern 
District of the U. S. Forest Service. The methods employed have been de- 
scribed elsewhere (Woolsey, '12). In brief, the areas vary in size from 2 
acres on " intensive " plots to as high as 480 acres on " extensive " plots; all 
the trees were measured in diameter and about 10 per cent were measured in 
height. At first individual tree records were kept only on the relatively small 
intensive plots, but later all trees were numbered and recorded separately. In-
tensive plots were also mapped in detail, locating all tree groups, all seedlings 
and saplings, stumps, logs, brush piles, logging roads, and other features 
which might affect growth and reproduction (figs. I and 2 ) .  Between 1909 
and 1915, there were established in the ponderosa pine 
forests of Arizona 
and New Mexico 7 extensive plots, having a combined area of 1315 acres, 
and 50 intensive plots having a combined area of 222 acres. All plots have 
been examined and renieasured at 5-year intervals, the longest records now 
covering a span of 20 years. 
The present paper deals with a plot of 480 acres established in 1909, 
on the Tusayan National Forest in northern Arizona. 
Two subdivisions 
of 12 acres each within the larger plot are designated as intensive plots. 
1The publication of extra illustrations with this article was made possible by funds 
other than those of the Ecological Society of America. 
2 The name "ponderosa pine" has recently been adopted by the U. S. Forest Service 
it1 place of "western yellow pine " as the official common name of Pilzt~sponderosn. 

July, I933 
TWENTY YEAR RECORD OF FOREST CHANGES 

274 
G. A. PEARSON 
Ecology, Vol. XIV, No. 3 
NO rth 
FIG.2. Sample plot S 3-B, Tusayan National Forest, established it1 fall 1909, 
logged summer IW. Contour interval 5 ft., scale : I in. =I chain. Mapped by E. W. 
Nelson, October, 1914. 

July, I933 
TIVENTY YEAR RECORD OF FOREST CHANGES 
275 
The forest before cutting was typical of the pine forests of the Colorado 
Plateau. A marked characteristic of these stands is that the trees occur 
in more or less even-aged groups separated by open spaces, often larger 
than the groups themselves. An exact record of the original voluille is not 
available but it is estimated to have been about goo0 feet B. M. per acre. 
Cutting took place in 1909, under what is known as the group selection 
method, deriving its name from the practice of treating the group as a unit, 
cutting or leaving according to the age or condition of the group. hIature 
groups (yellow pine) were cut clear except that selected individuals were 
occasionally left where needed for seed; groups of immature trees (black-
jack) and middle aged trees (intermediate) were left subject to thinning and 
removal of diseased and defective individuals. Seedlings and saplings below 
20 years of age were almost entirely absent and the nun~ber below 60 years 
was relatively small. A dense growth of bunch grass, Festuca arizonica, 
occupied the open spaces which under normal conditions should have been 
stocked with young pine. 
The general character of the forest after cutting 
is shown in figures 3A and 4A. 
The climate, topography and soil of this plot are typical of a large section 
of the pine forest in northern Arizona. The altitude is about 7300 feet; 
annual precipitation is between 22 and 23 inches, about 45 per cent of which 
comes in winter, mainly in the form of snow, and most of the remainder in 
summer rains during July, August and September. The mean annual tem- 
perature at a station of the same altitude 5 miles to the east is 45.6" F. 
and during the growing season, June I to September 30, it is 61" F. 
The mean maximum and mean minimum temperatures for the growing 
season are 77" and 45", respectively. 
The topography is gently rolling. 
The soil is derived from basalt and varies from a clay loam to a loamy 
clay. It is mixed with varying proportions of gravel and stone. Soil mois- 
ture is abundant during the spring months up to June first when it begins 
to decline, approaching wilting coefficient in the upper foot by the end of June. 
In July it rises again as a result of the summer rains and usually maintains 
an available margin of from 5 to 10 per cent until the middle of October 
when it is likely to decline again nearly to the wilting point. 
Pine seedlings 
usually germinate during July rather than in the spring because during the 
spring period when moisture is adequate the temperature is too low for 
germination, and after the temperature becomes favorable the soil is too dry 
in the upper layers. 
WHATTHE RECORDSSHOW 
The periodic examinations have shown consistent growth of trees in diam- 
eter, height and volume, considerable mortality throughout the period, and 
irregular though ultimately effective reproduction. 
Nuwzber and Sizes of Trees. The cutting left an average of 18.1 trees 
per acre, counting only those 4 inches and over in diameter, measured at a 

276 
G .  A. PEARSON 
Ecology, Vol. XIV, No. 3 
point 4.5 feet above the ground. Comparison with areas on which natural 
restocking has proceeded normally over a long period reveals a marked de- 
ficiency of trees in and below the 4-1 I inch class. The number over 20 inches 
in diameter compares favorably with the best cutover areas in this region. 
Trees of this size are the most effective seed bearers and they also form a 
substantial nucleus for the next crop of timber to be cut after about 60 years. 
Periodic re-grouping by diameter classes will show a gradual moving up 
from the lower to the higher classes as a result of diameter growth. Thus, 
many of the 4-11 inch trees will pass over into the 12-20 inch class and many 
of those in this class will in turn pass into the 21-30 inch class. In a stand 
where reproduction has proceeded normally there will usually be large num- 
bers of young trees attaining the 4-inch diameter each year, and thus each 
5-year measurement should record a substantial number of new trees in the 
4-11 inch class. Because of the deficiency in seedlings when the plot was 
first measured, the 4-11 inch class has received few additions from below 
and it contains fewer trees now than in 1909. Moreover, the entrance of new 
trees above 4 inches in diameter has been more than offset by mortality and 
therefore the total number on the plot has declined since the first measurement. 
TABLEI. Inc~etnext and nzortality i n  a portderosa pbte forest durittg tu~ettfy years a f t e ~  
cuttitzg. Satrlplc Plot S-3, area 456 acres, Tusajran. Natio+tal Forest, Arizona 
Net annual 
Ant~ual 
increment 
mortality 
Unit of 
measure 
Volume per acre 
after cutting. 
per acre 
Actual Per cent 
--- 
per acre 
-
Actual Per cent 
Cubic feet ............. 737 
15.1 
2.05 
4.1 
0.56 
Board feet ............. 3,520 
91.0 
2.59 
20.0 
0.57 
' Cubic volume includes all trees 4 inches arid over in diameter; board foot volume 
(Scribner Decimal C scale) includes only trees 12 inches and over. 
Diameter Growtlz. Diameter growth of blackjacks or immature trees has 
proceeded at an average rate of 1.46 inches in 10 years. The older trees or 
yellow pines have grown at a somewhat slower rate but they are not included 
in table I1 because the total number on these plots is too small to give a repre- 
sentative average. 
Periodic measurements show some fluctuations and a 
slight decline in the last $-year period. Whether this is the beginning of 
a downward trend remains to be determined. I t  is of interest to note that 
the 21-30 inch trees have grown slightly faster than the 4-11 inch trees and 
almost as fast as the 12-20 inch trees. The difference in rate of growth be- 
tween diameter classes is so small that for practical purposes blackjacks of 
all sizes may be assumed to be adding to their diameters at the same average 
rate. All plots in this region show this relation. 
Since it requires much more 
wood to deposit a ring on the outside of a large trunk than a small one it 
would be logical to expect a decline in diameter accretion of the larger trees. 

- - - 
July, I933 
TWENTY YEAR RECORD O F  FOREST CHANGES 
277 
This probably will take place as the stands tend to become fully stocked. 
During the 20 years represented by these records, however, there evidently 
has been room enough for both crowns and roots to expand sufficiently to 
keep pace with the increasing size of the trunks. 
TABLE11. Diameter growth itz rclation to size of trees' 
Mean 
Trees in 
annual diam- 
Dianleter class 
each class 
eter growth 
Inches 
Number 
Inches 
'This tabulation is based on intensive plots only because individual trees on extensive 
plots were not tagged in the beginning of the study. Only blackjacks or trees below 
about 180 years of age are included because older trees on the intensive plots are too 
few in number to furnish a reliable average. 
Volzt?4ze Increwent. Increase in volume per acre expresses the summation 
of the factors of growth and mortality. 
Cubic volume gives the most accurate 
measure of incren~ent; board foot volume is the commercial unit of measure. 
The cubic volun~es in table I include all trees down to 4 inches in diameter. 
but the board foot volumes include only those above 11 inches. 
Net incre- 
ment, after deducting the volume lost by death of trees, has averaged 91 
feet B. M. per acre annually. The volume left in cutting was 3520 board 
feet per acre, hence the average annual increment amounts to 2.59 per cent. 
If the past rate of growth continues for 60 years from the time of cutting 
the volume will have increased to 8980 board feet per acre and it will then 
be possible to make a second cut equal to the first, without reducing the 
original wood capital or growing stock. Whether this rate of increment will 
continue 60 years depends upon several factors. It is not likely that the 
gross volume production will fall off but an increasing rate of mortality may 
decrease net increment. On the other hand, it should be recognized that less 
than one-half of the land area is now occupied by trees beyond the sapling 
stage. The openings are about two-thirds stocked with seedlings nearly all 
germinated since the cutting, large numbers of which will pass the 11 inch 
mark at an age of 60 to 80 years. The increment as expressed in board foot 
measure may decline in the next 40 years, but the cubic increment is bound 
to increase, and this will eventually be reflected in board foot volume. 
Present indications are that after this area has been under management long 
enough to obtain full stocking and a balanced distribution of age classes, a 
sustained annual yield of 150 board feet can be realized. 
Mortality. 
As has been indicated, growth is in a measure offset by mor- 
tality and as a stand approaches maturity, mortality may become a deciding 
factor in determining whether the volume of the stand increases, decreases, 
20 

278 
G. A. PEARSON 
Ecology, V O ~ .  
XIV, NO. 3 
or remains stationary. Obviously, death results in the greatest loss when 
it takes large trees; smaIl trees are for the most part quickly replaced by ex- 
panding neighbors, but when a veteran of 30 inches or more succumbs it 
not only removes a large volume of wood but it also leaves a gap which is not 
quickly filled. An analysis of mortality in relation to size of trees and factors 
responsible for their death on this and other plots has been presented by 
Krauch ('30). 
Krauch's study shows that the greatest number of large 
trees and hence the greatest volume is destroyed by windfall and lightning. 
Mistletoe has killed a larger number of trees on this plot than any other 
agency, but it is most active on young or middIe-aged trees; its effects are 
felt even more in reducing the rate of growth than in the outright killing 
of trees. 
Natural Reproductiort. Natural reproduction is the most complex and 
ecologically the most interesting and important phase of forest management. 
In the preceding discussion it has been brought out that sustained volun~e 
production is dependent upon consistent restocking; attention has also been 
called to the absence of seedlings on this area at the time of cutting. Thc 
reproduction recorded in this study may, therefore, fairly be credited to silvi- 
cultural practice. This consists briefly of the following measures: ( I )  Leav-
ing adequate seed trees (in this instance 4.4 selected trees per acre, having a 
diameter of over 20 inches, plus a large number of smaller trees) ; (2) Com- 
plete elimination of fire; (3) Regulation of grazing. 
Detailed discussion of the factors affecting natural reproduction has been 
presented elsewhere (Pearson '23). In brief, successful restocking is de- 
pendent upon proper coincidence of seed crops and rains accompanied and 
followed by adequate protection against fire, grazing, and rodents ; secondary 
factors are character of soil and herbaceous vegetation. 
During the first 10 years of the study progress in reproduction was so 
slow that success was almost despaired of at the time (figs. 3B and 4B) ; 
subsequent experience has shown that the rate of progress was about normal 
for this region. This, however, applied only to the two intensive plots which 
were fenced against grazing animals; on the extensive plot exposed to severe 
grazing by cattle and sheep the only seedlings that became established were 
in partially protected situations, as among rocks and along logs with protrud- 
ing branches. A survey of the intensive plots in 1918, nine years after 
cutting, showed that seedlings over 2 years old were present in numbers vary- 
ing from o to 500 per acre on different sites. The contrast between over-
grazed and protected plots here and on the other areas on the Colorado Pla- 
teau demonstrated that of the factors within the control of man grazing was 
the one which most needed attention. 
In 1919, an extraordinary combination of seed and rainfall resulted in 
pine germination and survival unequalled in the history of national forests 
of the Southwest. Records of this seedling crop have confirmed and supple- 
mented previous findings especially with reference to the influence of browsing 

279 
July, 1933 
TWENTY YEAR RECORD OF FOREST CHANGES 

280 
G .  A. PEARSON 
Ecology, Vol. XIV, No. 3 
+ 4 
m 
.+ 9- c 
m 
r e ,
2 
I- ~ 
2 5 
E B 
H
% 
.z 6 
?
s
.
2 
G:b0 
I- ~ 
2 r,u .s
0 
vl m .%g 
5: g
;z  
a  
+ 3 "  
i : 3  
k g G  
E z 
a n 

July, 1933 
TWENTY YEAR RECORD OF FOREST CHANGES 
281 
by livestock. 
Seedlings were killed on a large scale in 1919 and 1920, but 
they were so abundant on this area that survival remained adequate in most 
places. 
Substantial reduction in the number of grazing animals was made 
in 1921. considerable damage continued but it was not severe enough to 
cause the death of many seedlings. In 1926, cattle were excluded and addi- 
tional reductions were made in both numbers and length of grazing season 
for sheep. Since 1926, browsing has largely disappeared except on rela-
tively small congested areas such as bed grounds. Recovery of seedlings 
damaged prior to 1926has been phenomenal. A large per cent of those which 
had been browsed down to bush form have developed vigorous leaders. 
More 
severely injured specinlens are still bushy but are clearly on the road to re- 
covery (fig. 5B). Substantially the same remedial measures were applied with 
similar results on extensive areas adjoining the sample plots. 
Whether a 
range is grazed by sheep or cattle appears to be of secondary importance so 
long as the numbers are not excessive and they are kept properly distributed 
over the range. 
Figures 2 and 6 present charts of the intensive plot S 3 B prepared in 
1914 and 1931. The 1914 map is essentially a completed edition of the orig- 
inal one made in 1909 
Except for natural reproduction the changes recorded 
in 1931 are not striking; occasionally a large isolated tree has dropped out or 
a break in the crown outline has resulted from the death of a tree in the edge 
of a group. No new crowns have entered the canopy. Careful measurement 
would show a small expansion in crown dimensions but the changes are too 
small to be recorded on this map. Stumps and logs have disintegrated con-
siderably but they are still plainly evident. Logging roads have been obscured 
by vegetation in some places, in others they are as clearly outlined as 20 years 
ago. 
The most evident change is in the natural reproduction. 
For the most 
part the spaces between tree groups are adequately stocked with young trees a 
great majority of which are of 1919 origin. A large per cent of the 
older seedlings present in 1918 were killed by porcupines, a pest which 
was controlled in time to avoid serious damage to the 1919 seedling crop. 
Notwithstanding the very prolific and well distributed germination in 1919, 
there are now patches of considerable size that are poorly stocked. Seed-
lings started in these places but they died, mainly in 1920. A soil map 
prepared in 1919 by J. 0. Veatch, at that time a member of the Bureau of 
Soils, U. S. Department of Agriculture, shows that the poorly stocked areas 
usually have a relatively fine and compact soil described as clay loam or loamy 
clay. These sites also bear a very luxuriant growth of bunch grass, Festuca 
nrizowica. 
The well stocked areas have a more gravelly or stony soil and a 
light or moderate stand of mountain n~uhlenbergia, Muhlef~bergia wzontana, 
also a bunch of grass, usually less aggressive than the Fcstuca. Counts in 1920 
on several 1/10 acre plots gave for the heaviest soils only 36 of the older seed- 
lings per acre as against 493 for the stony soils. Whether the adverse influ- 

282 
G. A. PEARSON 
Ecology, Vol. XIV, No. 3 
FIG.5. A. Excellent reproduction well distributed; all has originated after cutting. 
B. Progressive stages in the recovery of ~ i n e  
seedlings injured by grazing shown from 
left to right. During the first year or two after damage ceases a dense growth of leaves 
develops; a leader is then formed and growth becomes rapid. Note the dense foliage and 
sharp bend at the base of the large specimen, indicating point of injury. 

July, 1933 
TWENTY YEAR RECORD OF FOREST CHANGES 
NORTH 
FIG.6. Same plot as shown in figure 2, seventeen years later. Mapped by E. M.  
Hornibrook, June, 1931.  

6. A. PEARSON 
Ecology, V O ~ .XIV, NO. 3 
ence on the poorly stocked sites was due mainly to the finer soil or to the 
greater grass competition is still somewhat of an open question. Where the 
heavy soils are cleared of grass without destroying the surface leaf mold, usu- 
ally present in undisturbed stands of bunch grass, pine seedlings readily become 
established and make a vigorous growth; on the other hand, where the grass 
is killed out by trampling or deep cultivation, exposing the clay soil, the seed- 
lings almost invariably die. It is undoubtedly true that the clay soils are un- 
favorable to pine seedlings in early life unless organic matter is incorporated 
in the upper layers, or unless the soil is covered by soine sort of mulch such as 
dead grass, needle litter, or limb wood. It is also true that a luxuriant stand 
of grass or other vegetation which has prior possession of the soil subjects a 
young seedling to competition for moisture and light that is likely to prove 
fatal. Since the heavy soils support the heaviest growth of grass they impose 
a double handicap on the pine seedlings, whereas the light soils, usually bear- 
ing a relatively light stand of grass, are doubly favorable. 
It is a curious anomaly that the stony soils which restock most readily 
often produce the poorest timber and conversely the finer soils which re-
stock with difficulty produce the best timber if an adequately dense stand of 
trees once becomes established. It is, therefore, important for the forester to 
see to it that reproduction does not fail on these most productive sites. Arti-
ficial removal of the grass, leaving the surface mold, would undoubtedly bring 
results, but at high cost. 
Grazing, regulated in such a manner as to hold the grass in check, at the 
same time avoiding prolonged over-grazing and the attendant soil deteriora- 
tion, promises to be a favorable middle course. This idea is supported by the 
fact that although the ungrazed plots in this experiment had a great advantage 
in early protection, the grazed plot today is more uniformly stocked, there be- 
ing fewer and smaller areas on which the grass was able completely to sup- 
press the tree seedlings in their infancy. 
An area of 480 acres of ponderosa pine logged in 1 9 9  was divided into 
three plots, one extensive plot of 456 acres, and two intensive plots of 12 acres 
each. Cutting followed the general practice it1 the national forests in which 
about one-third of the merchantable volume is left, mainly in the form of 
immature trees. 
All trees over 4 inches in diameter have been measured at 
intervals of five years. The intensive plots were mapped in 1909, I914 and 
1931, showing the location of all trees and groups of seedlings, in addition to 
other features. 
According to the 1909 record there were on the extensive plot after cut- 
ting 8248 trees over 4 inches in diameter, or 18.1 per acre. During the 20 
years up to 1929, 847 of these trees died, representing an annual loss of 20 
board feet per acre. The agents listed as responsible for this mortality are 

July, 1933 
TWENTY YEAR RECORD OF FOREST CHANGES 
z85 
mistletoe, wind, lightning, bark-beetle and suppression. 
The net annual in- 
crement per acre, after deducting the above loss, is 91 board feet or 2.59 per 
cent of the 1909 volume. This rate of growth would permit in 60 years a 
second cut equal to the first, without reducing the growing stock. 
On the extensive plot natural reproduction was a total failure up to 1919, 
because of over-grazing. 
During this time fairly good progress had been 
made on the intensive plots protected against all grazing. In 1921 and again 
in 1926, the number of livestock was reduced, with the result that grazing 
damage has greatly decreased, and natural reproduction is now proceeding 
satisfactorily. 
LITERATURE
CITED 
Krauch, Hermann. 1930. Mortality in cut over stands of western yellow pine in 
the Southwest. Joztr. Forsf., 28: 1085-1097. 
Pearson, G. A. 1923. Natural reproduction of western yellow pine in the South- 
west. U.S. Dept. Agri. B d .  1105. 
Woolsey, Theodore S., Jr. 
1912. Permanent sample plots. Forst. Quart., 10: 
38-44. 
