Estimating willingness to pay for watershed restoration in Flagstaff,
Arizona using dichotomous-choice contingent valuation
Julie M. Mueller*
The W.A. Franke College of Business, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ, USA
*Corresponding author. E-mail: julie.mueller@nau.edu
Received 5 February 2013
Forest restoration reduces the probability of catastrophic wildﬁre and post-ﬁre ﬂooding; it therefore protects the
quantity and quality of water in a restored watershed. The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) is a landscape
scale restoration initiative in Northern Arizona. 4FRI plans to restore the majority of the forested watersheds that
provide the municipal water supply for the City of Flagstaff, Arizona (population 65 000). While start-up funding is
available for 4FRI, funding sources for future monitoring and maintenance remain uncertain. One way to promote
ﬁnancial sustainability for the restoration initiative is to establish a payments system wherein Flagstaff residents
pay for a portion of the costs. I present results from a contingent valuation survey estimating Flagstaff residents’
willingnesstopayforrestorationoftheLakeMaryandUpperRiodeFlagwatersheds.Iﬁndtheaveragehouseholdis
willingtopay≏$4.89permonthtocontributetoforestrestoration,resultinginpotentialannualmonetarynetben-
eﬁts of up to $1.3M. Thus, the results provide statisticallysigniﬁcant evidence in favour forestablishing a payments
system. This survey focused solely on residents of Flagstaff, Arizona; however, the results are applicable in areas
with similar ecosystems where forest restoration provides improved watershed services.
Introduction
Ecological restoration can play a pivotal role in restoring forest
health and mitigating catastrophic wildﬁre potential (Allen et al.,
2002). The Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) seeks to
restore .970 000 hectares of Ponderosa pine forests across four
National Forestsin Arizona. Restored forests maintain a more resili-
ent structure that encourages natural surface ﬁre regimes, dis-
courages tree seedling recruitment, overstocking and thus
reduces the consequent threat of stand-replacing wildﬁre (Mast,
2003). After treatment areas are initially thinned, maintaining
this forest condition requires follow-up management such as fre-
quentburningorrestorationmonitoring.Without large-scaleinter-
vention, ﬁre suppression and rehabilitation costs will continue to
grow, impeding the ability to maintain forest conditions into the
future (Covington, 2000; Snider et al., 2003). Costs, however,
remain a signiﬁcant barrier to restoration. Despite high restoration
costs and the scale of the challenge, numerous economic analyses
conﬁrm that it is more cost-effective to restore forests than to pay
the costs associated with severe wildﬁre (Snider et al., 2003; Berry,
2010; Wu et al., 2011). Funding exists for the initial treatment for
4FRI; however, future funding for monitoring and maintenance is
uncertain.
One potential way to mitigate the funding issues from 4FRI is to
chargethebeneﬁciariesoftherestorationandusethepaymentsto
fund monitoring and maintenance. An essential step in devising
potential payments is to estimate the potential non-market bene-
ﬁts of the 4FRI restoration. A large body of research exists
investigating the non-market values of catastrophic wildﬁre and
the values of reduction in wildﬁre risk in high-risk areas. In addition,
many researchers have estimated the non-market values of wild-
ﬁres, wildﬁre risk and reduction. For example, Mueller et al. (2009)
ﬁnd that proximity to wildﬁres has a statistically signiﬁcant de-
crease in sale price of homes using a hedonic property model.
Donovan et al. (2007) also apply a hedonic property model to esti-
mate the value of wildﬁre risk on home values. They compare
house prices before and after information on wildﬁre risk is pro-
vided online for 35 000 homes in Colorado Springs, CO. Wildﬁre
risk has a positive correlation with home value before the informa-
tion is provided, however, afterwards there is no positive correl-
ation. Contingent valuation (CV) methods have also been applied
to estimate values of wildﬁre reduction (Loomis et al., 2009),
values for different treatment options including thinning and pre-
scribed burning (Walker et al., 2007) and prescribed ﬁre (Kaval
et al., 2007). This study differs from previous because it focuses
on estimating the beneﬁts of forest restoration in a municipal
watershed.
I estimate Willingness to Pay (WTP) for forest restoration in the
Lake Mary and Upper Rio de Flag watersheds. The 4FRI
landscape-scale restoration initiative plans to restore all of the
ponderosa pine forests in the Lake Mary watershed and 11 500
acres in the Rio de Flag watershed. Both the Lake Mary and Upper
Rio de Flag watersheds provide municipal water for residents of
Flagstaff, Arizona. Thus, Flagstaff residents are key beneﬁciaries
of the restoration through potential increases in the quantity and
quality of their municipal water supply; Flagstaff residents will
# Institute of Chartered Foresters, 2013. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Forestry An International Journal of Forest Research
Forestry 2014; 87, 327–333, doi:10.1093/forestry/cpt035
Advance Access publication 11 November 2013
327
 at Northern Arizona University on April 14, 2014
http://forestry.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

also beneﬁt from reduced catastrophic wildﬁre and consequent
post-ﬁre ﬂood risk. This study contributes to the current body of re-
searchaboutthebeneﬁtsofforestrestorationinseveralways.First,
while previous studies have estimated the WTP for various types of
forest restoration and wildﬁre risk reduction, few studies have esti-
mated the WTP for additional water-related ecosystem services
following a change in forest restoration. In addition, this study
investigates residential water users’ WTP in the arid Southwest, an
area with a rich body of research into the science of forest restor-
ation, yet lacking in studies estimating the non-market values of
restoration. Finally, I use uncommonly applied Bayesian estimation
techniques to obtain WTP.
Methods
Non-market valuation involves estimating the value of an environmental
good or service not commonly bought and sold in a market. Several non-
market valuation techniques exist, and most have been applied in some
manner to estimate values of forests (Riera et al., 2012). The CV method
is a stated preference method of non-market valuation where respondents
are asked to state their preferences for an environmental good or service
that is not bought and sold in traditional markets. Many CV studies, includ-
ing the one presented here, apply the dichotomous-choice elicitation
format as recommended by Carson et al. (2003). The dichotomous-choice
CV method involves sampling respondents and asking whether they would
vote in favour of a referenda and pay a particular randomly assigned dollar
amount.
Similarstudieshaveestimatedvaluesofnon-marketwater-relatedeco-
systemservicesusingCV.Loomis(1996)usedCVtoﬁndaWTPof$73annually
among Washington residents fordam removal and restoration of ecosystem
services and the associated ﬁshery on the Elwha River. Pattanayak and
Kramer (2001) used CV to estimate drought mitigation services provided
by tropical forested watersheds in Ruteng Park, Indonesia. Loomis et al.
(2000) used CV to estimate the value of ﬁve water-related ecosystem
services on the Platte River in Colorado and found a WTP of $252 annually
per household. In addition, Mueller et al. (2013) ﬁnd irrigators in the Verde
Valley in Arizona are WTP ≏$183 per year for upstream forest restoration
of the Verde watershed. While similar studies have estimated the value of
water-relatedecosystemservices,fewestimatethevalueofimprovements
in water resources following forest restoration for municipal water users.
While Maximum Likelihood estimation remains by far the most common
method for estimating WTP from dichotomous-choice CV surveys, some
studies have employed Bayesian estimation, including Yoo (2004), Li et al.
(2009) and Mueller (2013). With classical Maximum Likelihood estimations
of WTP, additional simulation using methods such as the Krinsky and Robb
(1986) technique is required post-estimation to obtain a distribution of
WTP. In contrast, the draws of WTP post-Bayesian estimation provide a
distribution of WTP without any father simulation. I choose the Bayesian
estimation because of its relative convenience in obtaining a distribution of
WTP post-estimation.
Data
Sample selection, focus group and survey design
Addresses of survey respondents were obtained from the City
of Flagstaff utility records. Addresses were chosen at random
from the city records ensuring a spatially representative sample.
A focus group was held with the Flagstaff Water Commission to
test and validate the survey instrument. A draft of the survey was
distributed at a monthly Water Commission meeting. Attendee’s
recommendations were used to guide the survey design.
Data were obtained from a dichotomous-choice CV survey
of Flagstaff city residents. The survey was designed using the
Dillman’s Tailored Design Method (Dillman, 2007). A random
sample of single-family residences was sent a signed cover
letter, collared survey booklet and a return envelope. A reminder
postcard was sent, and non-respondents received a second
mailing of the survey booklet.
Because obtaining accurate estimates requires detailed descrip-
tionsoftheresourcesbeingvaluedandthecontingenciesinquestion
(Loomis et al., 2000),the ﬁrst section of the survey included a water-
shed map and diagrams of three different watershed condition
scenarios(seeFigures1and2).Diagramsdisplayedthreewatershed
conditions: ‘Current watershed condition’, ‘Restored Watershed
Condition’ and ‘Watershed Condition Following Wildﬁre’ and the
hydrologic responses associated with each watershed condition.
Following these diagrams were attitudinal questions about forest
restoration, water supply and the WTP question. The last section
included demographic questions and solicited respondent’s com-
ments. Please see the supplementary material for the full survey
booklet.
The WTP question read as follows:
Suppose the City of Flagstaff is to propose a referendum
requiring residential water users to pay a monthly fee on
their water bill. By law, all funds would go directly to monitor-
ing and maintaining the forest health of the Lake Mary and
Upper Rio de Flag watersheds.
If the water user contribution program were to cost you an
additional X $ per month, would you vote in favor of the refer-
enda?
where ‘X’ equals a random bid amount inserted into surveys. Bid
amounts ranged from $1 to $20, weighted with higher frequencies
from $1–$8 and lesser frequencies from $9 to $20. Bid amounts
were selected based on suggestions from the focus group session.
Methods
Bayesian estimation
The WTP function is estimated with a standard probit model using Bayesian
techniques. Following Cameron and James (1987), the standard probit
model is based on the assumption of an underlying WTP function:
WTPi = x′
i b + mi
(1)
where x′i is a vector of explanatory variables, b is a vector of estimated
coefﬁcients and mi is a random error term. The WTP function is not observ-
able to the researcher, yet latent WTP is represented by the respondents’
‘vote’ on the WTP question. Let yi represent the respondent’s vote, i.e. 1 if
‘yes’ and 0 if ‘no’. Assume mi are independent and normally distributed
with a mean 0 and standard deviation s, and Bidi is the randomly assigned
bid amount for each respondent i. The probability of a ‘yes’ vote given the
explanatory variables and random error is equal to the probability that
the individual’s unobserved WTP is greater than the bid amount. Therefore,
Pr(yi = 1|xi) = Pr(WTPi . Bidi)
= Pr(x′
ib + mi . Bidi)
= Pr(mi . Bidi −x′
ib)
= Pr(zi . (Bidi −x′
ib)/s)
(2)
Forestry
328
 at Northern Arizona University on April 14, 2014
http://forestry.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

where zi is the standard normal random variable and s is avariance param-
eter. Iestimate the probit model using Bayesian estimation and Gibbs sam-
pling (Gelﬂand et al., 1990). I drop the initial 19 000 draws for burn-in. I use
the remaining 1000 draws in the analysis. Unlike traditional Maximum Like-
lihood estimation techniques, because I use Markov Chain Monte Carlo
methods to estimate WTP, I do not have to use additional simulation pro-
cedures to estimate WTP from the regression coefﬁcients. WTP draws are
a product of the estimation.
Respondent certainty
After the WTP question, respondents were asked to rank their certainty of
their response on a scale of 1–10, where 1 is ‘Not at all certain’ and 10 is
‘Completely certain’. A large body of research exists on reducing hypothet-
ical bias byusing certainty responses (Champ and Bishop, 2001).Hypothet-
ical bias occurs when responses to hypothetical CV questions do not elicit
true values. That is, hypothetical bias occurs when respondents answer a
hypothetical question in a way that is inconsistent with their actual behav-
iour. While respondent uncertainty results in hypothetical bias, little theor-
etical guidance exists in explaining why respondents are uncertain (Akter
etal.,2009).Toinvestigatehypotheticalbias,ChampandBishop(2001)per-
formed a split sample experiment where some respondents were asked
their WTP to invest in wind energy foroneyear through an actual payments
programme, whereas others were offered a hypothetical opportunity to
invest. Champ and Bishop (2001) found evidence of hypothetical bias –
the WTP of the respondents with the hypothetical opportunity was higher
than those who were required to send a payment. However, when respon-
dents who were less certain of their answer to the hypothetical WTP ques-
tion were coded as voting ‘no’, the hypothetical bias was eliminated.
Therefore, I choose to follow the approach suggested in Champ and
Bishop (2001) and applied by Li et al. (2009).
Results
Response rate
A total of 490 surveys were mailed with 120 responses and 48
undeliverables, resulting in a response rate of 24 per cent.
A 24 per cent response rate is similar to other CV studies using
mail surveys. For example, Walker et al. (2007) have an average
Figure 1 Map of watershed.
Estimating willingness to pay for watershed restoration
329
 at Northern Arizona University on April 14, 2014
http://forestry.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

overall response rate of ≏30 per cent, and Mueller et al. (2013)
report a response rate of 32 per cent.
Respondent attitudes toward forest restoration
Respondents were asked, ‘Prior to this survey, were you aware of
the Four Forests Restoration Initiative?’ A total of 33 per cent of
respondents were aware of the 4FRI initiative. I also asked respon-
dents about their awareness of the link between forest restoration
and watershed health. On a scale of 1–5, where 1 is ‘Not at All
Aware’ and 5 is ‘Very Aware’, the mean value was 2.9. The results
show that most respondents consider themselves at least ‘Some-
what Aware’ of the link between forest restoration and watershed
health. The relatively low percentage of respondents aware of 4FRI
provides potentially valuable information for policymakers consid-
ering public information campaigns.
Respondents were asked, ‘Considering the full range of issues
you face, how important is watershed health to you? On a scale
of 1 to 5, where 1 indicates “Not Important” and 5 indicates
“Extremely Important,” circle one’. The mean response was 3.97,
indicating that watershed health is a high priority for respondents.
Respondents were also asked, ‘Considering the full range of issues
you face, how important is wildﬁre prevention to you? On a scale
of 1 to 5, where 1 indicates “Not Important” and 5 indicates
“Extremely Important,” circle one’. The mean response was 4.52,
indicating that wildﬁre prevention has a relatively high priority
within the sample.
Respondents were also asked to indicate how concerned they
are about threats to the Lake Mary and Upper Rio de Flag Water-
sheds including:
† Catastrophic Wildﬁre
† Drought
† Flooding
† Global Climate Change
On a scale of 1–5, where 1 indicates ‘Not at All Concerned’ and
5 indicates ‘Extremely Concerned’, respondents are the most con-
cerned about wildﬁre and drought. Table 1 shows the summary
statistics for respondent concern about threats to the watersheds.
Respondent demographics
Fifty per cent of respondents consider themselves afﬁliated with
the Democratic party. According to the AZ Secretary of State’s
web statistics, as of April 2013, there were 71 248 registered
voters in Coconino county, with 27 350 associated with the Demo-
cratic party (http://www.azsos.gov/election/voterreg/2013-04-01.
pdf). Flagstaff, AZ, is known to have a higher percentage of demo-
cratic voters than any other municipality in Arizona. Therefore, the
sample seems to be reasonable in terms of its representativeness
Figure 2 Watershed conditions diagram. (A) Current watershed condition; (B) restored watershed condition; (C) watershed condition following wildﬁre.
Table 1 Summary statistics for attitudinal variables
Variable
Mean
SD
Min
Max
Wildﬁre
4.45
0.80
1
5
Drought
4.46
0.74
1
5
Flooding
3.23
1.16
1
5
Global Climate Change
3.55
1.34
1
5
Forestry
330
 at Northern Arizona University on April 14, 2014
http://forestry.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

ofpolitical leanings. The average incomewithin the sampleis inthe
category $60 000–$79 999. According to the US Census Bureau,
the median household income in 2011 dollars in Flagstaff, AZ, is
48 758, and the mean household income is 63,666 (http://
factﬁnder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.
xhtml?Src=bkmk). Thus, the population mean income falls within
the same category as the sample mean income.
Respondent certainty
Respondents were asked, ‘On a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 being not at
all certain and 10 being completely certain, how certain are you of
youranswer’ to the WTPquestion. Seventy percent of respondents
chose a Certainty level of 8 or above on their answer to the WTP
question. I follow the approach outlined in Champ and Bishop
(2001) discussed earlier and re-code responses with a certainty
level of 7 or less as ‘No’ votes on the WTP question to reduce hypo-
thetical bias.
WTP estimates
WTP is obtained using the parameter estimates from the probit.
Following Hanneman (1984), WTP from a standard probit is as
follows:
−a
ˆbBid
,
where
a = ˆb0 + ( ˆb1 × X1) + ( ˆb2 × X2) + · · · + ( ˆbK−1 × XK−1)
for all the explanatory variables except for ˆbBid. WTP is predicted as
a function of the following explanatory variables:
† Awareness of 4FRI: whetheror not the respondent was previously
aware of the 4FRI initiative (0 ¼ ‘No’, 1 ¼ ‘Yes’)
† Importance of Fire Prevention: the relative importance of wildﬁre
prevention (5 point Likert Scale)
† Concern for Watershed Health: relative concern for watershed
health (5 point Likert Scale)
† Threat of Wildﬁre: concern for threat of catastrophic wildﬁre
(5 point Likert Scale)
† Threat of Drought: concern for threat of drought (5 point Likert
Scale)
† Democrat:whethertherespondentisaDemocrat (0 ¼ ‘Republic-
an or Other’, 1 ¼ ‘Democrat’)
† Income:acategorical measureofrespondent’sreported income
(range 1–9).
Several of the attitudinal variables are highly correlated. To avoid
multicollinearity, I drop Watershed Health, Wildﬁre and Democrat
from the ﬁnal model (See Table A1 in the supplementary material
for an alternative speciﬁcation.).
Regression results are reported in Table 2. The estimated coefﬁ-
cientonBidAmountisnegativeandstatisticallysigniﬁcant,indicat-
ing that the higher the Bid Amount, the less likely the respondent is
to vote ‘Yes’ on the WTP question. The estimated coefﬁcient on
Awareness of 4FRI is positive and statistically signiﬁcant, indicating
that if a respondent was previously aware of 4FRI, they are more
likely to vote ‘Yes’ on the WTP question. The positive statistical
signiﬁcance of the Awareness of 4FRI variable could have signiﬁ-
cant policy implications. The results show that respondents who
are more aware are also more willing to provide ﬁnancial support
for the programme. As noted earlier, only 33 per cent of respon-
dents said they were aware of the 4FRI initiative before the
survey. Given the positive relationship between WTP and aware-
ness, an information campaign could prove more effective at gar-
nering ﬁnancial and other types of public support.
The estimated coefﬁcient on Wildﬁre Prevention is positive and
statistically signiﬁcant. This indicates that respondents with a
high level of concern for wildﬁre prevention are more likely to
vote ‘Yes’ on the WTP question. The estimated coefﬁcient on
Threat of Drought is also positive and statistically signiﬁcant,
showing that respondents who are relatively more concerned
with drought are more likely to vote ‘Yes’ on the WTP question.
The positive and statistically signiﬁcant coefﬁcients on Wildﬁre
Prevention and Threat of Drought provide statistical evidence that
respondents make the connection between forest restoration
and the associated improvements in ecosystem services. Income
also has a positive and statistically signiﬁcant impact on WTP,
showing the estimates are consistent with economic theory. All
else constant, respondents with higher income are more likely to
vote ‘Yes’ on the WTP question.
Based on the best statistical model, mean WTP is $4.89 per
month with a 95 per cent conﬁdence interval of $4.79–$4.96.
The draws from theWTP functionpost-Bayesian analysis arerepre-
sented in Figure 3. In other words, the average respondent would
bewillingtopayanadditional$4.89permonthtosupportmonitor-
ingandmaintenanceoftheLakeMaryandUpperRiodeFlagwater-
sheds. Flagstaff has ≏22 360 households (http://factﬁnder2.
census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.
xhtml?Src=bkmk). If the sample accurately represents the average
single-family household in Flagstaff, AZ, the average monthly
beneﬁt of watershed restoration for single-family household resi-
dents in Flagstaff is $109 000 per month for an annual beneﬁt of
$1.3M. More conservatively, suppose that I assume that the esti-
mated WTP represents only 24 per cent of Flagstaff residents’
WTP for forest restoration, as obtained by the 24 per cent response
rate. Even this conservative estimate represents monthly beneﬁts
of $26 000 and annual beneﬁts of $315 000.
Discussion and conclusions
Wunder (2005),as cited by Kemkes et al. (2010), deﬁned Payments
for Ecosystem Services as ‘voluntary transactions where an
Table 2 Bayesian probit regression results: independent variable: ‘vote’
Variable
Estimated
coefﬁcient
SD
P-level
Constant
24.448542
1.416719
,0.0001
Bid Amount
20.082327
0.047270
0.0370
Awareness of 4FRI
0.499746
0.333866
0.0590
Importance of Fire
Prevention
0.356384
0.217535
0.0430
Threat of Drought
0.532668
0.265246
0.0270
Income
0.105354
0.070809
0.0650
Mean WTP
$4.89
Estimating willingness to pay for watershed restoration
331
 at Northern Arizona University on April 14, 2014
http://forestry.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

ecosystem service is bought by one or more buyers from one or
more providers’. Forest restoration provides a bundle of potential
ecosystem services as mentioned earlier, including the more
direct beneﬁts of potential increases in the quantity and quality
of their municipal water supply and the other beneﬁts of reduced
catastrophicwildﬁreand post-ﬁreﬂood risk. Thisresearchsuggests
that eliciting payments from the beneﬁciaries of maintaining and
restoring an existing watershed in Flagstaff, AZ, may be a viable
option for mitigating costs and promoting ﬁnancial sustainability
of the 4FRI.
Although the survey results provide evidence of a positive and
statistically signiﬁcant WTP for forest restoration, several areas
of further research exist in this area. With additional funding,
I would like to expand my sample to include multi-family resi-
dences and people living outside the municipality of Flagstaff, AZ.
Downstream water users in other areas of northern Arizona will
also beneﬁt from the 4FRI restoration. Thus, the above-mentioned
results provide what I believe is a conservative lower bound esti-
mate of the beneﬁts of forest restoration to the nearest population
centre. The estimates provide policy-relevant evidence that the
non-market beneﬁts of forest restoration should be included in
cost-beneﬁt analyses, and including the non-market beneﬁts
may have signiﬁcant impacts on the ﬁnancially sustainability of
proposed restoration programs.
Ecological restoration of forested watersheds is necessary to
prevent catastrophic wildﬁre and maintain watershed health, es-
pecially in the ponderosa pine forests of Northern Arizona. The
City of Flagstaff obtains its drinking water from the Lake Mary
and Upper Rio de Flag watersheds. The 4FRI plans to restore the
Lake Mary and Upper Rio de Flag watersheds; however, the
funding source is uncertain. Forest maintenance provides beneﬁts
in terms of improved watershed health and residents of Flagstaff
one of the largest groups of potential beneﬁciaries. I ﬁnd an
average sample WTP from of $4.89 per month to fund monitoring
and maintenance of the 4FRI restoration. The analysis shows a po-
tential annual beneﬁt of ≏$1.3M to Flagstaff residents for the 4FRI
restoration. Thus, my results provide evidence that a potentially
sustainable source for funding is through charging Flagstaff resi-
dents for forest restoration. Although this survey focused solely
on residents of Flagstaff, AZ, the results are applicable to many
areas in the Western and southwestern United States where
forested watersheds provide a bundle of ecosystem survives, and
restoration would reduce wildﬁre risk and improve watershed ser-
vices.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks the Ecological Restoration Institute, the Northern
Arizona University Faculty Grants Program, the W.A. Franke College of
Business and the City of Flagstaff Utilities for support of this project. She
also thanks the Flagstaff Water Commission for valuable input during
focus groups. Abe Springer provided research insight and facilitated focus
groups. Sharon Masek Lopez, Erik Nielsen and Wes Swaffar provided
valuable input. Reviewers for the W.A. Franke College of Business working
paper series provided insightful comments. In addition, Ron Klawitter,
Clint
Basham
and
Chanda
Durnford
provided
excellent
research
assistance. All remaining errors are the sole responsibility of the author.
References
Akter, S., Brouwer, R.B., Brander, L. and van Beukering, P. 2009 Respondent
uncertainty in a contingent market for carbon offsets. Ecol. Econ. 68,
1858–1863.
Allen, C.D., Savage, M.D., Falk, K.F., Swetnam, T.W., Schulke, T., Stacey, P.B.,
Morgan, P., Hoffman, M. and Klingel, T.T. 2002 Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems: a broad perspective. Ecol.
Appl. 12, 1418–1433.
Berry, A. 2010 Literature review: the economic value of water and
watersheds on national forest lands in the United States. The Sonoran
Institute. http://www.exloco.org/Headwaters_SLC/docs/Berry_Sonoran_FS_
Water_Lit_Review.pdf.
Cameron, T.A. and James, M.D. 1987 Efﬁcient estimation for “closed-
ended” contingent valuation surveys. Rev. Econ. Stat. 69, 269–276.
Carson, R., Mitchell, R., Hanemann, M., Kopp,R., Presser, S. and Rudd, P. 2003
Contingent valuation and lost passive use: damages from the Exxon Valdez
oil spill. Environ. Resour. Econ. 25, 57–286.
Champ, P.A. and Bishop, R.C. 2001 Donation payment mechanisms and
contingent valuation: an empirical study of Hypothetical Bias. Environ.
Resour. Econ. 19, 383–402.
Covington, W.W. 2000 Helping western forests heal. Nature 408, 135–136.
Dillman, D. 2007 Mail and Internet Surveys: The Tailored Design Method.
Second Edition. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Donovan, G., Champ, P. and Butry, D. 2007 The impact of wildﬁre risk
on housing price: a case study from Colorado Springs. Land Econ. 83,
217–233.
Gelﬂand, A.E., Hills, S., Racine-Poon, A. and Smith, A.F.M. 1990 Illustration of
Bayesian inference in normal data using Gibbs sampling. J. Am. Stat. Assoc.
85, 972–985.
Hanneman, W.M. 1984 Welfare Evaluations in Contingent Valuation
Experiments with Discrete Responses. Am. J. Agr. Econ. 66, 332–341.
Kaval, P., Loomis, J.B. and Seidl, A. 2007 Willingness-to-pay for prescribed
ﬁre in the Colorado (USA) wildland urban interface. Forest Policy Econ. 9,
928–937.
Kemkes, R.J., Farley, J. and Koliba, C.J. 2010 Determining when payments
are an effective policy approach to ecosystem service provision. Ecol.
Econ. 69, 2069–2074.
Krinsky, I.andRobb,A.L. 1986On approximatingthestatisticalpropertiesof
elasticities. Rev. Econ. Stat. 68, 715–719.
Li, H., Jenkins-Smith, H.C., Silva, C.L., Berrens, R.P. and Herron, K.G. 2009
Public support for reducing US reliance on fossil fuels: investigating
Figure 3 Willingness to pay draws post-Bayesian estimation.
Forestry
332
 at Northern Arizona University on April 14, 2014
http://forestry.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

household willingness-to-pay for energy research and development. Ecol.
Econ. 68, 731–742.
Loomis, J.B. 1996 Measuring the economic beneﬁts of removing dams and
restoring the Elwha River: results of a contingent valuation survey. Water
Resour. Res. 32, 441–447.
Loomis, J., Kent, P., Strange, L., Fausch, K. and Covich,A. 2000 Measuring the
total economic value of restoring ecosystem services in an impaired river
basin: results from a contingent valuation survey. Ecol. Econ. 33, 103–117.
Loomis, J.B., Hung, L.T. and Gonza´lez-Caba´n, A. 2009 Willingness to pay
function for two fuel treatments to reduce wildﬁre acreage burned: a
scope test and comparison of White and Hispanic households. Forest
Policy Econ. 11, 155–160.
Mast, J.N. 2003 Tree Health and Forest Structure. Ecological Restoration of
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Friederici, Peter (ed) Island Press.
Mueller, J.M. 2013 Estimating Arizona residents’ willingness to pay to
invest in research and development in solar energy. Energ. Policy. 53,
462–476.
Mueller, J.M., Loomis, J.B. and Gonza´lez-Caba´n, A. 2009 Do repeated
wildﬁres change homebuyers’ demand for homes in high-risk areas? A
hedonic analysis of the short and long-term effects of repeated wildﬁres
on house prices in Southern California. J. Real Estate Financ. 38, 155–117.
Mueller, J.M., Swaffar, W., Nielsen, E.A., Springer, A.E. and Masek Lopez, S.
2013 Estimating the value of watershed services following forest
restoratoion. Water Resour. Res. 49, 1773–1781.
Pattanayak, S.K. and Kramer, R.A. 2001. Pricing ecological services:
willingness to pay for drought mitigation from watershed protection in
eastern Indonesia. Water Resour. Res. 37, 771–778.
Riera, P., Signorello, G., Thiene, M., Mahieu, P., Navrud, S., Kaval, P.,
Rulleau, B., Mavsar, R., Madureira, L., Meyerhoff, J., Elasser, P., Notaro,
S., De Salvo, M., Giergiczny, M. and Dragoi, S. 2012 Non-market
valuation of forest goods and services: good practice guidelines.
J. Forest Econ. 18, 259–270.
Snider, G.B., Wood, D.B. and Daugherty, P.J. 2003 Analysis of costs and
beneﬁts of restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction, treatments vs. no
treatment. NAU School of Forestry Research Progress Reports, Progress
Report #1. June 13, 2003. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/
import/SniderEtal.2003.AnalysisOfCostsAndBeneﬁts.pdf.
Walker, S.H., Rideout, D.B., Loomis, J.B. and Reich, R. 2007 Comparing the
value of fuel treatment options in northern Colorado’s urban and
wildland–urban interface areas. Forest Policy Econ. 9, 694–703.
Wu, T., Kim, Y.S. and Hurteau, M.D. 2011 Investing in natural capital: using
economic incentives to overcome barriers to forest restoration. Restor.
Ecol. 18, 441–445.
Wunder, S. 2005 Payments for environmental services: some nuts and
bolts. CIFOR Occasional Paper, No. 42, http://www.cifor.org/publications/
pdf_ﬁles/OccPapers/OP-42.pdf.
Yoo, S.H. 2004 A note on a Bayesian approach to a dichotomous-choice
contingent valuation model. J. Appl. Stat. 31, 1203–1209.
Estimating willingness to pay for watershed restoration
333
 at Northern Arizona University on April 14, 2014
http://forestry.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
