 
 
Governor, NAU prof to testify about forest policy 
By HOWARD FISCHER 
Capitol Media Services 
07/22/2003 
PHOENIX -- Gov. Janet Napolitano is in Washington this morning to tell senators how 
she thinks federal forest policy should be shaped.  
And she'd like some money, too.  
The U.S. Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources has scheduled hearings 
this morning to examine the impacts of insects, disease, weather related damage and fires 
on public and private forest lands.  
Also testifying will be Northern Arizona University professor Wallace Covington, 
director of NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute.  
Of particular importance, the panel is weighing ways of fighting the spread of insects and 
of how best to deal with the dead trees left behind as fire hazards.  
According to a press release, Covington will tell the panel that large-scale, deep-forest 
thinning and prescribed burns should move forward.  
"I want to say exactly what I have said to Congress before," Covington stated in the press 
release.  
"Knowing what we now know, it would be grossly negligent for our generation not to 
move forward with large-scale restoration-based fuel treatments in the dry forests of the 
West. Inaction is clearly the greatest threat to the long-term sustainability of these 
western ecosystems."  
Napolitano said she is going to take her message of a middle-of-the-road approach to 
Congress.  
"I'm going to be urging them to take a very pragmatic approach to what is happening to 
the forest, particularly the forest in the West,'' the governor said Monday.  
On one hand, Napolitano has rejected claims by some environmental groups who are 
opposed to any easing of laws governing timber harvest. But she also has said that any 
expedited process must have a method of ensuring there is public input before massive 
logging operations begin.  
She also has said that tree cutting should begin in the "urban-wildland interface'' -- the 
area around communities -- where there is some agreement that thinning projects make 
sense. There is not, however, a clear consensus of the size of trees that should be cut.  
Key to the issue, the governor said, is Congress providing the money for the projects. 
