Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
Restoration and Canopy Type Influence Soil Microflora in a Ponderosa Pine Forest
Sarah I. Boyle, Stephen C. Hart,* Jason P. Kaye, and Mark P. Waldrop
ABSTRACT
species. The risk of stand-replacing fire has also greatly
increased due to heavy fuel loading and high tree den-
In ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws.) forests of
sity, threatening local plant and animal life (Covington
the western USA, fire exclusion by Euro-American settlers facilitated
et al., 1997; Kaye and Hart, 1998a; Neary et al., 1999).
pine invasion of grass openings, increased forest floor detritus, and
shifted the disturbance regime toward stand-replacing fires. We evalu-
Ecological restoration, which involves the removal of
ated the impacts of two replicated ecological restoration treatments
trees that established in grass areas after Euro-Ameri-
involving tree thinning alone (thinning restoration) and a combination
can settlement and the reintroduction of low intensity
of tree thinning, forest floor reduction, and prescribed burning (com-
fires, is being undertaken throughout the western USA
posite restoration) on soil microbial activity, biomass, and function
to restore the structure and function of these forests to
approximately 8 yr after initial treatments. Microbial-N levels in the
within their naturalrange of variability (Kaye etal., 2005).
two restoration treatments were not significantly different from the
Although much research has been conducted on the
control during either the dry or wet periods of the growing season. Soil
macroscale impacts of ecological restoration in this re-
respiration measured in situ was significantly higher in the restoration
gion (e.g., Stone et al., 1999; Bailey and Covington, 2002),
treatments than in the control only during the dry period, while soil
enzyme activities were generally higher in the composite restoration
little emphasis has been given to possible impacts on the
treatment than in the thinning restoration or control treatments during
soil microflora. Soil microorganisms play fundamental
the wet period. Community-level physiological profiles suggested dif-
roles in many ecosystem processes, including decompo-
ferences in the physiological capacities of bacteria and fungi in the
sition and nutrient cycling, and affect many important
composite restoration treatment compared with the other treatments.
soil hydrological and chemical properties (Gallardo and
We also compared microbial characteristics under different canopy
Schlesinger, 1994; Hart et al., 2005). Hence, changes in
types to evaluate the impacts of pine invasion and establishment in grass
the soil microbial community may lead to changes in
openings on soil microorganisms. Soil respiration rates (dry period only)
the structure and function of the overall ecosystem, and
and enzyme activities (wet period only) were higher in grass openings
ultimately determine ecosystem sustainability (Bossio
than under presettlement trees, with intermediate values found under
postsettlement pines that have invaded grass areas. Taken together,
and Scow, 1995).
our results suggest that restoration treatments have long-term impacts
Soils disturbed by tree removal often have reduced
on the soil microflora in these forests.
microbial diversity compared with undisturbed areas
(Atlas et al., 1991; Arunachalam et al., 1999; Byrd et al.,
2000). Furthermore, prescribed fire has been shown to
B
efore Euro-American settlement of the south-
alter the structure (Pietikia¨nen and Fritze, 1995), activity
western USA in the late 1800s, ponderosa pine for-
(Fritze et al., 1993), and function (Staddon et al., 1998)
ests were characterized by widely spaced trees, large
of the soil microflora. However, the conclusions of these
grass openings, and low-intensity surface fires that burned
studies may not be applicable to ponderosa pine forests
every 2 to 5 yr (Covington et al., 1997). Euro-American
of the southwestern USA for a variety of reasons. For in-
settlement disrupted fuel continuity through the estab-
stance, the effect of tree removal on soil microorganisms
lishment of roads and trails, as well as the reduction of
covaries with the extent of the disturbance (Morris and
herbaceous fuels by domestic livestock grazing (Coving-
Boerner, 1998), with clearcutting causing substantially
ton et al., 1997; Neary et al., 1999). Subsequent favorable
greater changes in microbial activities than low intensity
weather conditions and active fire suppression activity
thinning (Dahlberg et al., 2001). Ecological restoration
allowed for exceptionally high pine seedling establish-
removes numerous trees, but these trees are typically
ment. The resulting high tree densities have heightened
small in diameter, and the total site disturbance is gener-
competition for moisture, nutrients, and light among trees,
ally much lower than that found in commercial tree har-
decreasing individual tree growth. Other consequences
vests (Covington et al., 1997). Prescribed fires used in
include the loss of herbaceous and shrub species in the
restoration are typically lower in intensity than most
understory and reductions in habitat for some wildlife
other prescribed burns and wildfires because of fuel
reductions or manipulations before burning (Covington
et al., 1997). Further, repeated burning used to maintain
S.I. Boyle and S.C. Hart, School of Forestry & Merriam-Powell Center
restoration treatments may have different impacts than
for Environmental Research, Northern Arizona Univ., Flagstaff, AZ
a single fire event (Neary et al., 1999), and the interactive
86011-5018; J.P Kaye, Crop & Soil Sciences Dep., The Pennsylvania
State Univ., University Park, PA 16802; M.P. Waldrop, School of
effects of both tree removal and fire on the soil microflora
Natural Resources & Environment, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
have rarely been considered in any forest (Acea and Car-
MI 48109. Received 21 Jan. 2005. *Corresponding author (steve.hart@
ballas, 1996; Boerner et al., 2000). Finally, all of these
nau.edu).
previous studies have been conducted in more mesic
Published in Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 69:1627–1638 (2005).
forests; microbial responses to thinning and burning
Forest, Range & Wildland Soils
treatments may differ in semiarid ponderosa pine forests
doi:10.2136/sssaj2005.0029
where water availability is a strong ecological factor
© Soil Science Society of America
677 S. Segoe Rd., Madison, WI 53711 USA
(Kaye et al., 2005).
1627
 
Published online August 25, 2005

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
1628
SOIL SCI. SOC. AM. J., VOL. 69, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2005
such a way as to restore the clumpy spatial pattern of the trees.
In this study, we evaluated the impacts of 8-yr-old
The thinning restoration treatment resulted in the removal of
ecological restoration treatments on soil microbial activ-
the entire aboveground biomass of 2226 trees ha1 from the
ity, biomass, and function within a mature ponderosa
site, more than half of which were between 2.5 and 12.5 cm
pine stand in northern Arizona (Covington et al., 1997).
DBH (Covington et al., 1997). Thinning reduced the stand
Replicated restoration prescriptions included tree thin-
basal area from 35 to 13 m2 ha1 (Covington et al., 1997;
ning alone or a combination of tree thinning, forest floor
Bailey and Covington, 2002). The composite restoration plots
reduction, and prescribed burning. Within restoration
were thinned as described for the thinning restoration plots.
treatments, we stratified our sampling under major can-
Additionally, the forest floor (O horizon) was manipulated
opy cover types to assess potential changes in the soil
to create a fuel load similar to presettlement conditions before
the reintroduction of fire via prescribed burning. Previous
microflora due to pine invasion into grass openings (Kaye
research has suggested that that old growth tree mortality is
and Hart, 1998a, 1998b). We focused our sampling be-
high when prescribed burns are not preceded by the reduction
fore and after the summer monsoon rains because bio-
of forest floor fuels that accumulated over 120 yr of fire sup-
logical activity in this semiarid region is strongly influ-
pression (Covington et al., 1997). The Oa and Oe layers were
enced by precipitation patterns. This experimental design
removed from the site, and the remaining litter layer (Oi)
allowed us to test effects of restoration treatments, dom-
amended with 672 kg ha1 of native grass and forb clippings
inant vegetation, and seasonal rainfall patterns on soil
(1 yr of herbaceous production) from a nearby prairie. Thin-
microbial communities.
ning and composite restoration plots underwent thinning in
1993, and composite restoration plots were burned in 1994
and 1998 (4-yr return frequency) to mimic the historic fire
MATERIALS AND METHODS
return interval at the site. The control plots were left untreated.
Study Site
More information on thinning treatments and prescribed burn-
ing can be found in Covington et al. (1997) and Kaye and
Our study site (351611″ N long., 1114430″ W lat.) was
Hart (1998b).
a 3-ha portion of the Gus Pearson Natural Area (GPNA),
Within each plot, we further stratified sampling beneath three
approximately 10 km northwest of Flagstaff, AZ, in the Coco-
or four canopy types based on previous research in ponderosa
nino National Forest (Bailey and Covington, 2002). The area
pine forests showing that ecosystem response to thinning and
is characterized by pole-sized (10- to 36-cm diam. at breast
fire treatments is dependent on canopy type (Covington and
[1.4-m] height; DBH) ponderosa pine trees in the overstory
Sackett, 1986). Additionally, comparison of treatment re-
and bunchgrasses in the understory (see Kaye and Hart, 1998b
sponses among canopy types provides insight into how pine
for a list of major species). About half of the 567 mm of mean
invasion into grass areas since Euro-American settlement has
annual precipitation falls in the form of winter snow and the
altered these ecosystems (Kaye and Hart, 1998a, 1998b). Con-
other half as summer monsoon rains, with an average of 94
trol plots included presettlement pine, postsettlement pine
frost-free days and a mean annual air temperature of 7.5C
retained, and grass opening canopy types. The thinning and
(Schubert, 1974; Savage et al., 1996). The summer growing sea-
composite restoration plots included these three canopy types
son is characterized by a dry period of little precipitation from
along with the additional canopy type of postsettlement pine
May to early July, followed by heavy rainfall in the latter half
removed. Canopy type sampling areas (subplots) were se-
of the summer (Bailey and Covington, 2002). The site ranges
lected randomly from the population of potential areas for a
in elevation from 2195 to 2255 m, with slopes of 5% (Schu-
given canopy type within each treatment plot. This sampling
bert, 1974). The soil is classified as a Brolliar stony clay loam,
design resulted in a total of 15 subplots in the control treatment
and is a member of the fine, smectitic, Typic Argiboroll USDA
(3 canopy types  5 plots  15 subplots), while thinning
Soil Taxonomic Family. The site has never been harvested,
and composite restoration treatments had 20 subplots each (4
but was grazed between 1876 and 1910. The last reported
canopy types  5 plots  20), for a total of 55 subplots across
natural fire at the site was in 1876, before which fires occurred
the entire study area. Canopy type classifications did not change
every 2 yr on average (Dieterich, 1980).
during the study period.
Treatments
Soil Sampling
Fifteen 0.25-ha plots were established in 1992, and five of
Within each subplot, four, 2-cm diam. soil cores (Oakfield
the plots were assigned to each of three treatments (control,
Apparatus Company, Oakfield, WI) were taken randomly (0-to
thinning restoration, and composite restoration). A fuel break
5-cm mineral soil depth) within a 0.30-m2 area adjacent to
was needed to protect buildings of the historical Fort Valley
soil respiration measurements (see below). These soil samples
Experiment Station, so the 10 restoration treatment plots were
were then composited, resulting in one soil sample for each
assigned randomly (five as thinning and five as composite) to
subplot. The sampling depth was chosen based on studies
plots closest to the buildings. The remaining five plots were
showing that microbial biomass and activity are greatest in
assigned to the control treatment. All areas had statistically
the uppermost portion of forest soils (Nohrstedt et al., 1989;
similar aboveground wood growth (stem, bark, and branches)
Mergel et al., 2000), and we expected treatment differences
and tree biomass (Kaye et al., 2005), mineral soil organic
to be greatest in this mineral soil layer. Sampling occurred on
matter and N concentrations (Stone et al., 1999), and anaerobi-
30 June and 13 Aug. 2001, before and after the onset of the
cally mineralizable N in the mineral soil (S.C. Hart, unpublished
summer rains (hereafter referred to as dry and wet periods,
data, 1993) before treatment.
respectively) to assess the impact of seasonal fluctuations in
Thinning restoration plots were thinned to test whether
soil water content on soil microbial communities and their
re-establishment of aboveground stand structure alone could
responsiveness to restoration treatments (Fig. 1a). Hence, we
restore ecosystem function. The thinning restoration treat-
sampled soils approximately 8 yr after tree thinning in the
ment was designed not only to reduce overall tree density by
thinning and composite restoration plots. Further, our sam-
removing most of the trees that became established post-Euro-
American settlement (ca. 1876), but was also implemented in
pling in the composite restoration plots occurred roughly 7 yr

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
BOYLE ET AL.: RESTORATION AND CANOPY TYPE INFLUENCE SOIL MICROFLORA
1629
after the first prescribed burn, and about 3 yr since the second
prescribed burn; therefore, the direct impacts of the burn via
soil heating on the soil microflora would have been minimal
at this point in the fire cycle (i.e., 4-yr return frequency; Hart
et al., 2005).
Soil Characteristics
Soil samples were stored as intact cores at 4C for 12 d
before processing. All soils were sieved (2 mm) field-moist
immediately before use in analyses. Soil water content was
determined gravimetrically at 105C for each sample, and all
concentration data are expressed on an oven-dry mass basis
except where noted. Soil pH was determined in a 1:2 (w/v)
suspension of air-dried soil to 0.01 M CaCl2 on an Orion 720A
pH meter (Allometrics, Inc., Baton Rouge, LA). Soil total
(organic) C and soil total N were determined on finely ground,
air-dried samples on a Flash EA 1112 N/protein analyzer (CE
Elantech, Lakewood, NJ).
Soil temperature and volumetric soil water content were
measured continuously using thermisters and time domain re-
flectometry probes (CS615) linked to dataloggers (CR10; Camp-
bell Scientific Inc., Logan, UT). Soil temperature (7.5-cm min-
eral soil depth) and volumetric soil water content (0- to 15-cm
mineral soil depth) were measured in all canopy types within
two plots of each treatments (n  8 in each restoration treat-
ment and n  6 in the control). Daily mean soil temperatures
were generated from measurements taken every minute, while
daily mean volumetric soil water contents were determined
from hourly measurements.
Microbial Biomass-Nitrogen and Inorganic Nitrogen
Microbial biomass-N was measured using a modification of
Fig. 1. Mean volumetric soil water content for the 2001-growing sea-
the chloroform fumigation-extraction method described by
son (0- to 15-cm mineral soil depth) for (A) treatments and (B)
Haubensak et al. (2002). A 10-g field-moist soil subsample
canopy types. Vertical arrows indicate sampling dates. Repeated
from each subplot was immediately extracted with 50 mL of
measures ANOVA on ranks showed that treatment had a signifi-
cant effect (P  0.001) on soil water content across the growing
0.5 M K2SO4. A corresponding 10-g subsample was fumigated
season, with median values from control  thinning restoration 
with hydrocarbon-stabilized CHCl3 in a vacuum desiccator for
composite restoration plots (Dunn’s method, n  2). Repeated
5 d. The fumigated subsample was then extracted with 50 mL
measures ANOVA on ranks also indicated that canopy type had
of 0.5 M K2SO4. Soil suspensions were shaken for 1 h on a
a significant effect (P  0.001) on soil water content across the
mechanical shaker and then filtered through Whatman no. 1
growing season, with median values from grass  postsettlement
filter paper that had been rinsed with deionized water. Filtered
pine retained  presettlement pine areas (Dunn’s method, n  6).
extracts were frozen immediately until processed further. Un-
fumigated, filtered extracts were analyzed colorimetrically for
Gas Analyzer, although soda-lime values, on average, under-
ammonium (NH	
4 ) and nitrate (NO
3 ; Lachat Instruments,
estimated CO2 fluxes.
Inc., 2001 and 2000, respectively) using a Lachat AE Flow
Soil respiration was measured 3 d before each soil sampling
Injection Auto-analyzer (Lachat Instruments, Milwaukee, WI)
date at every subplot. We established our soil respiration cham-
to determine inorganic-N pool sizes at the time of sampling.
bers in the same locations used by Kaye and Hart (1998b). A
Total-N (organic-N 	 NH	
4 ) in fumigated and unfumigated
place-holding ring extending 1 cm into the ground marked the
extracts was determined (salicylate method; Lachat Instru-
subplot location for future measurement dates and minimized
ments, Inc., 1994) on a Lachat AE Flow Injection Auto-ana-
lateral gas flow near the ground. The soda-lime method uses a
lyzer after digestion of 20-mL aliquots using a modified micro-
mixture of NaOH and CaO or Ca(OH)2 (granular 1.68–3.36 mm,
Kjeldahl procedure (Haubensak et al., 2002). The N-flush
6–12 mesh soda-lime; Fisher Chemical, Pittsburgh, PA), which
caused by fumigation was calculated by subtracting the total
absorbs the CO2 that is evolved from the soil and trapped in
N in the unfumigated samples from the corresponding total
the chamber. We dried the soda lime (60 g oven-dry weight)
N in fumigated extracts. A kEN of 0.20 was used to convert
at 105C for 24 h in polypropylene containers (8-cm diam.).
chloroform labile-N data to biomass-N data (Davidson et al.,
After cooling in a desiccator, the containers were weighed to
1989; Hart et al., 1994).
within one ten-thousandth of a gram, transported to the field,
opened, and placed under an opaque chamber (27.5 cm diam.,
Soil Respiration
20 cm tall, 0.59 m2). After 24 h, the containers were removed
and sealed, and returned to the laboratory for drying, cooling,
Soil respiration was measured using the soda-lime closed
chamber technique (Edwards, 1982; Grogan, 1998; Kaye and
and weighing. Six blanks were included to account for CO2
gain during handling. Blanks were handled the same way as
Hart, 1998b). Kaye and Hart (1998b) also used the soda-lime
technique at this site to measure soil respiration in 1995 and
the samples, except that they were placed under chambers for
only 30 s. The CO2 flux integrated over the time period was
1996, and found that soda-lime-derived soil respiration rates
were well correlated with those determined with an Infrared
calculated by subtracting the mean net blank weight gain from

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
1630
SOIL SCI. SOC. AM. J., VOL. 69, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2005
the net sample weight gain and multiplying by a 1.69 correction
using turbidity measurements (Garland and Mills, 1991; Buyer
et al., 2001; Classen et al., 2003).
factor that accounted for the theoretical mass of water released
Plates were prepared as described in Classen et al. (2003).
as soda-lime reacts with CO2 (Grogan, 1998). Further details
Briefly, 4 g of sieved (2 mm) soil were extracted in 36 mL
describing the efficacy of the soda lime method, as applied
of 50 mM K2HPO4 buffer, and allowed to settle for 0.5 h before
here, for measuring soil respiration can be found in Kaye and
a 0.4-mL aliquot of this extraction was removed. Aliquots were
Hart (1998b).
then diluted in 39.6 mL of inoculating solution to give a final
dilution of 1:1000 (A.C. Kennedy, USDA-ARS, personal com-
Enzyme Assays
munication, 1999). To inhibit bacterial growth, fungal inocula-
tions also contained 1 
g of streptomycin sulfate and 0.5 
g
The activities of eight ecologically important enzymes were
of chlortetracycline per microtiter plate well (Dobranic and
assayed as indices of microbial activity and function. Utiliza-
Zak, 1999). Both plate types were inoculated with 100 
L of
tion of -1, 4-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.21), -1, 4-glucosidase
the 1:1000 dilution per well.
(EC 3.2.1.20), -galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22), -xylosidase
Plates were placed in polyethylene bags to reduce evapora-
(EC 3.2.1.37), cellobiohydrolase (EC 3.2.1.91), N-acetyl-glu-
tion and incubated in the dark at 22C. Incubation lengths were
cosaminidase (EC 3.2.1.30), alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1),
selected based on previous data collected using soils from this
and sulfatase (EC 3.1.6.1) were measured using the MUB-linked
site showing that fungal growth begins on bacterial plates after
substrates 4-methylumbelliferyl -D-glucosidase, 4-methylum-
72 h, and that fungal plate utilization patterns require 168 h
belliferyl--D-glucoside, 4-methylumbelliferyl -D-galatoside,
to develop fully (Classen et al., 2003). Thus, ECO plates were
4-methylumbelliferyl 7--D-xyloside, 4-methylumbelliferyl -D-
read at 590 nm after 72 h, and SF-N2 plates were read at 750 nm
cellobioside, 4-methylumbelliferyl N-acetyl--D-glucosaminide,
after 168 h on a MicroMax Plate Reader (Molecular Devices,
4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate disodium salt, and 4-methyl-
Sunnydale, CA). One ECO plate and three SF-N2 plates were
umbelliferyl sulfate potassium salt, respectively (Sigma Chem-
used for each soil sample.
ical, St. Louis, MO). The first six enzymes are involved in the
Biolog well absorbance values that were 0.06, the detec-
degradation of carbohydrate polymers (Eivazi and Tabatabai,
tion limit of the spectrophotometer (Biolog, Inc., personal
1988; Sinsabaugh, 1994; Eivazi and Bayan, 1996; Boerner et al.,
communication, 2000), were set to zero. For ECO plates, data
2000). Alkaline phosphatase hydrolyzes phosphate esters and
for within-plate replicates for each sample were averaged, and
anhydrides of phosphoric acid to release phosphate groups
data from the three replicate SF-N2 plates for each sample
(Eivazi and Tabatabai, 1977; Bergmeyer et al., 1983), while
were also averaged. We normalized the data by dividing the
sulfatase hydrolyzes organic sulfate esters to release inorganic
color or turbidity development of each well by the total color
forms of S (Tabatabai and Bremmer, 1970; Ganeshamurthy
or turbidity development of the entire plate, such that the
and Nielsen, 1990; Eivazi and Bayan, 1996). All enzyme analy-
sum of all the individual well values from a plate equaled one
ses were conducted on microtiter plates using a modification
(Classen et al., 2003). This normalization procedure reduces
of a microtiter method proposed by Sinsabaugh et al. (2000)
the influence of differences in initial inoculum densities on
for the testing of urease activity (Waldrop et al., 2004).
CLPPs (Garland and Mills, 1991; Garland, 1996; Classen et al.,
A soil suspension of 1 g of soil per 100 mL of 5 mM bicarbon-
2003). We also analyzed normalized Biolog data by substrate
ate solution (pH 8.2) was prepared for each sample. Each test
guilds rather than individual substrates, using separate analy-
well was inoculated with 100 
L of soil suspension and 100
ses of variance for each guild (Dobranic and Zak, 1999; Sel-

L of one of the enzyme substrate solutions. The enzymes
mants et al., 2005). These groupings allowed us to assess which
were incubated for 1 h and assayed at 20C, which is within
types of substrates contributed the most to community separa-
the range of diel temperature fluctuations in the surface min-
tion determined by non-metric multi-dimensional scaling ordi-
eral soil at our site during the growing season (Dick, 1997).
nations and multi-response permutation procedures (see below).
The level of enzyme activity was indicated by the intensity of
fluorescence (Miller et al., 1998), measured by a Fluoromax
Statistical Analysis
fluorimeter (Jobin Yvon-Spex, Edison, NJ) with an attached
MicroMax Microwell plate reader (Jobin Yvon-Spex, Edison,
All canopy-type (subplot) data were scaled to the plot level
NJ) at an excitation of 360 nm and an emission of 450 nm.
using a geographic information system (GIS) to analyze plot-
Standards for quenching were included on each plate, and
level treatment effects (Kaye and Hart, 1998a, 1998b). The
each enzyme was replicated six times per plate to reduce the
GIS file contained the area of each canopy type within each
variability of readings for each sample (Sinsabaugh et al.,
plot, which allowed us to calculate the proportion of the plot
2000). Enzyme activities are reported as 
mol product kg1
represented by each canopy type. These proportions were used
oven-dry soil h1.
to scale the data to the plot level. The data were then analyzed
using a standard one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). In
cases where data did not meet the assumptions of parametric
Community-Level Physiological Profiles
ANOVA (e.g., the enzyme data), Kruskal–Wallis ANOVAs
Commercially available microtiter plates from Biolog, Inc.
on ranks were used. If the main effects were significant, means
(Hayward, CA) were used to assess the physiological capacit-
were compared using the Holm-Sidak method (parametric
ies of the cultural soil microflora through sole C source (sub-
ANOVA) or medians were compared using Dunn’s test
strate) utilization patterns (Garland and Mills, 1991; Balser
(ANOVA on ranks). Non-metric multi-dimensional scaling
et al., 2002). The ECO plate type, which contains 31 environ-
(NMDS) ordinations with the multi-response permutation
mentally relevant C substrates replicated three times per plate,
procedures (with Sorensen distance measure) were also used
was used to provide community-level physiological profiles
to evaluate plot-level treatment effects on the activities of all
(CLPPs) of bacteria (Classen et al., 2003). Biolog SF-N2 plates,
enzymes combined, as well as on CLPPs. Non-metric multi-
which have 95 unique C substrates per plate, were used to
dimensional scaling condenses multivariate data into single
assess CLPPs of fungi (Classen et al., 2003). The ECO plates
points represented within a two-dimensional space (Mather,
quantify the utilization of the C substrates based on a colori-
1976). Multi-response permutation procedures (MRPP) com-
pare the distances in ordination space between points in two
metric reaction, while C utilization on fungal plates is assessed

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
BOYLE ET AL.: RESTORATION AND CANOPY TYPE INFLUENCE SOIL MICROFLORA
1631
Table 1. Mean (and one standard error) for selected soil (0- to 5-cm mineral soil depth) characteristics at the Gus Pearson Natural Area.
Treatment†
Canopy type†
Thinning
Composite
Postsettlement
Soil characteristic
Control
restoration
restoration
Presettlement
retained
Grass
pH‡
5.5 (0.1)
5.5 (0.1)
5.4 (0.1)
5.3 (0.1)
5.5 (0.1)
5.5 (0.1)
Total C, g kg1
31.0 (2.9)
40.8 (1.8)
32.6 (3.0)
50.7 (5.9)
28.6 (1.4)
35.2 (2.3)
Total N, g kg1
1.3 (0.1)a
1.7 (0.1)b
1.5 (0.1)ab
2.0 (0.2)
1.3 (0.1)
1.7 (0.1)
C/N mass ratio
23.0 (0.7)
23.3 (1.0)
21.3 (0.8)
24.8 (0.8)b
21.7 (0.5)a
20.9 (0.7)a
† Values from the same row with different lowercase letters are statistically different (P  0.033, Bonferroni corrected); when no lowercase letters are
given, values are statistically similar. Due to a significant (P  0.10) treatment by canopy type interaction, no statistical results are shown for total C
or total N by canopy type. n  5 for treatment comparisons and n  15 for canopy-type comparisons.
‡ Measured in a 1:2 (w/v) suspension of air-dried soil to 0.01 M CaCl2.
different groups with those distances within each of the groups
The experiment-wide  was set at 0.10 before the start of
to determine whether or not the two groups are statistically
the experiment to balance between the risks of committing
different (Mielke and Berry, 2001). Data were also tested for
Type I and II errors. Bonferroni corrections were used for
differences between dry and wet periods at the plot level using
the post-hoc Holm-Sidak method, Dunn’s method, and MRPP
paired t tests.
comparisons (three pairwise comparisons for both plot and
The canopy type of postsettlement pine removed was not
canopy-type comparisons, P  0.033). All statistical analyses
present in the control areas; therefore, canopy type differences
were performed using SigmaStat (version 2.03, Systat Soft-
were assessed by analyzing only data from the presettlement
ware, Inc., Pt. Richmond, CA) except for the multivariate
pine, postsettlement pine retained, and grass canopy types
analyses, which were performed using PC-ORD software
(Kaye and Hart, 1998a, 1998b). Differences in soil variables
(Version 4, MjM Software Design, Gleneden Beach, OR).
were determined using a two-way ANOVA, with canopy type,
treatment, and their interaction as factors. Non-metric multi-
dimensional scaling ordination with MRPP was used to evalu-
RESULTS
ate canopy-type effects on the activities of all enzymes com-
Effects of Restoration Treatments
bined and on CLPPs, as was done for plot-level data. For both
on Soil Microflora
plot and canopy-type analyses, enzyme data were analyzed per
unit dry mass of soil as well as per unit mass of microbial-N.
Restoration treatments did not significantly alter soil
The latter approach was used to evaluate whether any differ-
pH, total C, or C/N mass ratio (Table 1). Total N concen-
ences in enzyme activities among treatments or canopy types
tration was higher in the thinning restoration treatment
were due to compositional differences in the soil microbial com-
than in the control, but the composite restoration treat-
munity or differences in microbial community size (Boerner
ment was statistically similar to the other two treat-
and Brinkman, 2003). Within sampling dates, Pearson correla-
tion analyses were used to test for covariance among selected
ments. Soil temperature was significantly higher in the
soil measurements at the plot level (n  15, except for soil
composite restoration treatment than in the control dur-
temperature where n  6) and at the canopy level (n  55,
ing both the dry and wet sampling periods, while soil
except for soil temperature where n  22).
temperature in the thinning restoration plots was inter-
One-way repeated measures ANOVAs on ranks were used
mediate (Table 2). This pattern was also found over
to assess differences in soil temperature and volumetric soil
the 2001 growing season (June 4 to September 30; RM
water content (0–15 cm) among treatments and canopy types
ANOVA on ranks, P  0.001; Fig. 2a). Gravimetric soil
over the summer of 2001 (June 4 to September 30), because the
water content (0–5 cm) was similar among treatments
assumptions of parametric ANOVAs were not met. Medians
were then compared using Dunn’s method.
during both sampling periods (Table 2); however, soil
Table 2. Mean (and one standard error) for selected soil characteristics (0- to 5-cm mineral soil depth) during dry and wet periods at
the Gus Pearson Natural Area.
Treatment†
Canopy type†
Sampling period/
Thinning
Composite
Postsettlement
soil characteristic
Control
restoration
restoration
Presettlement
retained
Grass
Dry period‡
Soil temperature, C§
14.1 (0.9)a
16.8 (0.9)ab
19.4 (1.0)b
16.6 (1.2)
15.8 (1.4)
18.7 (1.0)
Soil water content, %¶
9.7 (1.0)
10.0 (1.0)
9.8 (0.2)
11.8 (0.8)b
10.5 (1.4)ab
9.1 (1.0)a
Nitrate-N, mg m2
21 (6)
12 (5)
38 (11)
12 (4)
11 (3)
17 (4)
Ammonium N, mg m2
294 (97)
206 (75)
348 (70)
114 (23)
198 (35)
145 (12)
Microbial-N, g m2
3.36 (0.36)
2.96 (0.32)
3.25 (0.55)
4.04 (0.54)
3.37 (0.52)
4.30 (0.70)
Wet period‡
Soil temperature,C§
15.9 (0.1)a
17.1 (0.4)b
17.6 (0.1)b
16.7 (0.4)
16.7 (0.5)
17.3 (0.3)
Soil water content, %¶
29.5 (0.9)
31.0 (0.7)
30.8 (1.3)
27.2 (2.1)a
31.0 (0.7)ab
32.1 (1.0)b
Nitrate-N, mg m2
12 (9)
14 (5)
24 (6)
12 (5)
13 (4)
24 (6)
Ammonium N, mg m2
198 (33)a
296 (20)b
217 (20)ab
218 (25)
296 (32)
220 (16)
Microbial-N, g m2
6.43 (0.89)
4.60 (0.84)
6.43 (0.65)
6.49 (0.76)ab
5.52 (0.67)a
8.22 (0.80)b
† Values from the same row with different lowercase letters are statistically different (P  0.033, Bonferroni corrected); when no lowercase letters are
given, values are statistically similar. Due to a significant (P  0.10) treatment by canopy type interaction, no statistical results are shown for nitrate
by canopy type. n  5 for treatment comparisons and n  15 for canopy-type comparisons except for soil temperature, where n  2 for treatment
comparisons and n  6 for canopy-type comparisons.
‡ Dry period refers to June samples taken before the onset of summer rains; wet period refers to August samples taken after the onset of summer rains.
§ Soil temperature was measured using dataloggers and thermistors placed at a 7.5-cm mineral soil depth.
¶ Soil water content was determined gravimetrically.

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
1632
SOIL SCI. SOC. AM. J., VOL. 69, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2005
Fig. 3. Mean soil respiration rates for (A) treatments and (B) canopy
types. Different lowercase letters indicate significant differences
within each sampling period, as determined by ANOVA and the
Holm-Sidak mean separation test (P  0.033, Bonferroni cor-
rected). Vertical lines represent one standard error of the mean.
Respiration increased significantly from dry to wet periods for each
treatment (A) and each canopy type (B), as determined by paired
t tests (P  0.007). There were no significant differences among
treatments or among canopy types for the wet period.
were analyzed together by MRPP (P  0.714). This
pattern was also found when enzyme data were normal-
ized to microbial-N values (data not shown). During the
wet period, the activities of all of the enzymes assessed
increased, and each of the enzymes tested except -glu-
Fig. 2. Mean soil temperature for the 2001-growing season (7.5-cm
cosidase and phosphatase showed significantly higher
mineral soil depth) for (A) treatments and (B) canopy types. Verti-
values in the composite restoration treatment than in the
cal arrows indicate sampling dates. Repeated measures ANOVA
on ranks indicated that treatment had a significant effect (P 
thinning restoration and control treatments (Fig. 4b).
0.001) on soil temperature across the growing season, with median
Similarly, when all of the enzyme activities during the wet
values from composite restoration  thinning restoration  control
period were analyzed together using MRPP, the com-
(Dunn’s method, n  2). Repeated measures ANOVA on ranks
posite restoration treatment was significantly different
also indicated that canopy type had a significant effect (P  0.001)
on soil temperature across the growing season, with median values
from both the control and thinning restoration treat-
from grass  postsettlement pine retained  presettlement pine
ments (P  0.007 and 0.006, respectively), but the con-
areas (Dunn’s method, n  6).
trol and thinning restoration treatments were not differ-
ent from each other (P  0.936). Again, these patterns
volumetric water content (0–15 cm) over the 2001 grow-
among treatments were similar when the enzyme data
ing season was significantly different among treatments
was normalized to microbial-N values (data not shown).
(control  thinning restoration  composite restora-
In the dry period, CLPPs were significantly different
tion; RM ANOVA on ranks, P  0.001; Fig. 1a). Ammo-
between control and composite restoration treatments
nium N pool sizes were statistically similar among the
for both bacteria and fungi (P  0.031 for both; Fig.
treatments during the dry period, but NH	
4 –N pools
5a, b). Bacterial and fungal CLPPs were also different
were greater in the thinning restoration treatment than
between thinning and composite restoration treatments
the control during the wet period; NH	
4 –N pool sizes in
during the dry period (P  0.009 and 0.007, respec-
the composite restoration treatment were intermediate.
tively). Bacterial CLPPs were significantly different be-
Nitrate pool sizes were small across all treatments dur-
tween the thinning and composite restoration treat-
ing both the dry and wet periods, and were statistically
ments during the wet period (P  0.023), with bacterial
similar among treatments. Similarly, microbial-N was
CLPPs of the control plots being intermediate between
similar among treatments during both sampling periods.
the two (Fig. 5c). However, fungal CLPPs were similar
The in situ soil respiration rate was higher in the two
across all treatments during the wet period (Fig. 5d).
restoration treatments than in the control during the
When ANOVAs were used to evaluate differences
dry period, but no difference in soil respiration rates
in substrate utilization by guilds, bacterial utilization of
was observed during the wet period (Fig. 3a). Enzyme
amino acids was significantly lower in the composite
activities were generally low during the dry period
restoration treatment than the thinning restoration treat-
(Fig. 4a). During this period, they did not differ signifi-
ment during the dry period. Fungal utilization of amino
cantly among any of the treatments when individual
acids was higher in the composite restoration treatment
than in the thinning restoration or control treatments
enzymes were compared (Fig. 4a), or when all enzymes

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
BOYLE ET AL.: RESTORATION AND CANOPY TYPE INFLUENCE SOIL MICROFLORA
1633
ylic acid use was lower in the thinning restoration treat-
ment than both the composite restoration and control
treatments (data not shown).
Effects of Canopy Type on Soil Microflora
Significant interactions between treatment and can-
opy type in two-way ANOVAs were only found for
total C, total N, and NO
3 pool size during the dry period.
Hence, we pooled the results for a given canopy type
across treatments to assess canopy-type effects on soil
properties and microbial parameters. Soil pH values,
temperature, and NH	
4 –N pools were statistically similar
among the canopy types (Tables 1 and 2). However,
the presettlement pine canopy type had a significantly
higher C/N ratio than postsettlement pine and grass
areas (Table 1). Furthermore, gravimetric water content
Fig. 4. Mean enzyme activities in treatment plots for (A) dry and (B)
wet periods. Vertical lines represent one standard error of the
was higher in presettlement pine canopy types than in
mean. During the dry period, all enzyme activities were statistically
grass openings during the dry period, but the reverse
similar among treatments (based on ANOVA on ranks, P  0.10).
was true during the wet period (Table 2); postsettlement
During the wet period, treatment had a significant effect on all
pine canopy types had intermediate gravimetric water
enzyme activities. For a given enzyme, values with different lower-
contents during both periods. Over the 2001 growing
case letters are statistically different (P  0.033, Bonferroni cor-
rected). All enzymes in each treatment increased significantly from
season, volumetric soil water content (0- to 15-cm min-
dry to wet periods based on paired t tests at P  0.05. Enzymes
eral soil depth; Fig. 1b) and soil temperature (7.5-cm
are abbreviated as follows: -glucosidase (-gluc), -glucosidase
mineral soil depth; Fig. 2b) were significantly higher in
(-gluc), galactosidase (galac), xylosidase (xylo), N-acetyl-gluco-
the grass canopy types than the two pine canopy types.
saminidase (nag), phosphatase (phos), and sulfatase (sulf).
Microbial-N was similar among canopy types during the
dry period, but microbial biomass-N was higher in the
during the dry period. Amine and amide usage by fungi
were higher in the thinning restoration treatment than
grass openings than the postsettlement pine canopy type
during the wet period; the presettlement canopy type
the composite restoration treatment. During the wet
period, we found no significant differences in substrate
had intermediate microbial-N pool sizes (Table 2).
In situ soil respiration was significantly higher in the
guild use for bacteria. However, for fungi, carbohydrate
usage was greater in the thinning restoration treatment
grass areas during the dry period, with the two pine
canopy types having similar rates (Fig. 3b). During the
than the composite restoration treatment, and carbox-
Fig. 5. Non-metric multi-dimensional scaling (NMDS) ordinations of bacterial and fungal community-level physiological profiles in restoration
and control treatments during the dry and wet sampling periods. Each symbol represents a replicate plot (n  5). Statistical differences among
treatments were determined using multi-response permutation procedures (MRPP, P  0.10), and are denoted by different lowercase letters
(P  0.033, Bonferroni corrected). Ordination stress level, a measure of the quality of representation of the data in the ordination, ranged
from 8.6 to 13.3; these values suggest fair to good ordinations with no real risk of drawing false inferences (Clarke, 1993).

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
1634
SOIL SCI. SOC. AM. J., VOL. 69, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2005
P  0.219). When substrate utilization patterns were
analyzed by guilds, no significant differences were found
for bacteria or fungi among canopy types during either
sampling period (data not shown).
Seasonal and Environmental Influences
on Microbial Responses
At the plot-level, gravimetric soil water content, soil
respiration rate, all enzyme activities, and NH	
4 –N and
microbial-N pool sizes increased significantly between
the dry and wet periods (paired t tests, P  0.05, n 
15). However, soil temperature and NO
3 –N pool sizes
were similar between dates (P  0.10). At the canopy-
type level during the dry period, gravimetric soil water
content was correlated with microbial-N (r  0.30, P 
0.02), soil temperature (r  0.44, P  0.07), -glucosi-
dase (r  0.24, P  0.08), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminide
(r  0.27, P  0.05), and phosphatase (r  0.32, P 
0.02). During the wet period, soil temperature was un-
Fig. 6. Mean enzyme activities in canopy type during the (A) dry and
(B) wet periods. Vertical lines represent one standard error of the
correlated with soil respiration rate and any enzyme
mean. During the dry period, all enzyme activities were statistically
activity (P  0.10). However, gravimetric soil water
similar among treatments (based on ANOVA on ranks, P  0.10).
content correlated with the activities of each enzyme
During the wet period, canopy type had a significant effect on all
(r  0.44 to 0.50, P  0.001) during the wet period for
enzyme activities except nag. For a given enzyme, values with
canopy types. At the plot level, soil temperature and
different lowercase letters are statistically different (P  0.033,
Bonferroni corrected). All enzymes in each canopy type increased
soil respiration were correlated (r  0.79, P  0.06) in
significantly from dry to wet periods, based on paired t tests at P 
the dry period only. In the wet period, gravimetric soil
0.05. Enzymes are abbreviated as follows: -glucosidase (-gluc),
water content was found to be significantly correlated
-glucosidase (-gluc), galactosidase (galac), xylosidase (xylo),
with several enzymes at the plot level: -glucosidase
N-acetyl-glucosaminidase (nag), phosphatase (phos), and sulfatase
(sulf).
(r  0.48, P  0.07), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminide (r 
0.51, P  0.05), and phosphatase (r  0.46, P  0.08).
wet period, there were no significant differences in soil
No other significant correlations were found during the
respiration among canopy types. When enzyme activi-
dry or wet periods at the plot level.
ties were compared among canopy types, no significant
differences were found during the dry period for any
DISCUSSION
individual enzyme (Fig. 6a), or for overall enzyme activ-
ity as assessed by MRPP multivariate analysis (P 
Restoration via tree thinning and prescribed burning
may impact the soil microflora through a variety of
0.891). This pattern was also found when enzyme data
were normalized to microbial-N values (data not shown).
mechanisms (Hart et al., 2005). Tree removal increases
insolation to the ground and burning reduces the surface
In the wet period, however, all of the enzymes except
N-acetyl-glucosaminidase showed significantly higher
albedo and the thickness of the forest floor, all of which
increase surface temperatures and heat transfer to the
enzyme activities in the grass canopy type than in the
presettlement pine areas, with the postsettlement can-
mineral soil (DeBano et al., 1998). Tree removal and
burning can also change soil water regimes by altering
opy types being intermediate (Fig. 6b). Similarly, when
enzyme activities measured during the wet period were
rates of evaporation and transpiration, and eliminating
interception of precipitation by the canopy and forest
assessed simultaneously using MRPP, grass and pre-
settlement pine canopy types were significantly different
floor (Bissett and Parkinson, 1980; Arianoutsou-Farag-
gitaki and Margaris, 1982). These relatively immediate
(P  0.003), while postsettlement pine canopy types
were similar to both grass and postsettlement areas (P 
changes in soil microclimate may directly alter the com-
position and the activity of the soil microflora (Va´zquez
0.211 and 0.252, respectively). Normalizing the enzyme
data collected during the wet period to microbial-N
et al., 1993; Hart et al., 2005). Over the longer-term,
thinning and burning can affect organic matter inputs
generally resulted in similar patterns, except that pre-
and post-settlement canopy types became significantly
and quality by changing plant productivity and vegeta-
tion composition (Kaye and Hart, 1998a, 1998b). Such
different from each other (data not shown). Pearson
correlation coefficients between pairs of enzyme activi-
changes in organic matter quantity or quality can, in
turn, also alter microbial community structure and func-
ties across all canopy types (n  55) ranged from 0.33
to 0.97 in the dry period, and 0.88 to 0.99 in the wet
tion (Lui et al., 2000; Hart et al., 2005).
Our results suggest that tree removal alone has only
period (P  0.02). Non-metric multi-dimensional scaling
and MRPP analyses of CLPPs found no significant dif-
a modest impact on the soil microbial community 8 yr
after treatment. Although soil respiration was higher in
ferences among the canopy types for either sampling
period for bacteria (dry period, P  0.485; wet period,
the thinning restoration treatment than in the control
during the dry period, respiration rates were similar
P  0.248) or fungi (dry period, P  0.242; wet period,

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
BOYLE ET AL.: RESTORATION AND CANOPY TYPE INFLUENCE SOIL MICROFLORA
1635
between these two treatments during the wet period.
ment had strong impacts on the soil microbial commu-
nity. Soil respiration from the mineral soil is likely
Kaye and Hart (1998b) also found that thinning in-
creased soil respiration during the third growing season
higher in the composite restoration treatment than in
the thinning restoration treatment even though the mea-
(1996) following treatment at this site. Because they
found no significant differences in fine root biomass and
sured soil respiration rates were similar. This is because
both the forest floor and the mineral soil contribute to
only small differences in soil water content between
thinning restoration and control treatments, they sug-
the net CO2 efflux from the soil surface, but the compos-
ite restoration treatment plots had substantially lower
gested that higher soil respiration in the thinning resto-
ration treatment plots could be due to differences in
forest floor areal densities than the thinning restoration
plots (Kaye and Hart, 1998b). Furthermore, bacterial
microbial biomass, microbial community structure (e.g.,
bacteria to fungal ratio), or soil temperature. Eight years
and fungal CLPPs and soil enzyme activities differed
significantly between thinning and composite restora-
following the implementation of the treatments at this
site, we found similar soil microbial-N concentrations,
tion treatments, while these microbial assays were gen-
erally similar between control and thinning restoration
enzyme activities, and CLPPs of the microflora for thin-
ning restoration and control treatments. We conclude
treatments where only thinning was conducted. Differ-
ences in enzyme activities between the two restoration
that the higher soil respiration rates that we and Kaye
and Hart (1998b) observed in the thinning restoration
treatments were maintained even when enzyme activi-
ties were expressed on a per unit microbial-N basis,
treatment are most likely the result of higher soil tem-
peratures in this treatment compared with the control.
and microbial-N was similar between these treatments.
These results suggest that these differences in enzyme
Soil temperature was statistically similar between these
two treatments on the day soil respiration was measured
activities are driven by changes in the function of the
soil microflora resulting from fire and are not simply
(Table 2) and soil temperature was uncorrelated with
soil respiration at the canopy level. However, soil tem-
due to changes in the size of the microbial community.
Previous studies evaluating the impact of fire on soil
peratures were significantly higher (difference in me-
dian values of 2.9C) in the thinning restoration treat-
enzyme activities have often been contradictory. For
example, -glucosidase and acid phosphatase activities
ment than in the control treatment during the month
preceding the dry period sampling (RM ANOVA on
have been shown to increase (Ajwa et al., 1999), de-
crease (Eivazi and Bayan, 1996; Boerner et al., 2000;
ranks, P  0.001; Fig. 2a). Furthermore, Kaye and Hart
(1998b) found moderately strong correlations (r  0.63
Boerner and Brinkman, 2003), or remain unchanged
(Boerner et al., 2000) in response to fire. In our study,
to 0.65) between soil temperature and soil respiration
within these treatments with a greater number of sam-
the additional disturbance of prescribed fire in the com-
posite restoration treatment may have led to differences
pling dates (and thus more statistical power) than those
used in our study.
in enzyme activities by creating new substrates that alter
the functional composition of the soil microflora relative
Other studies have found that tree harvesting alone
can both increase (Chang et al., 1995) and decrease
to the thinning restoration treatment (Fritze et al., 1993),
as suggested by our CLPP analyses. Based on analyses
(Entry et al., 1986; Morris and Boerner, 1998) soil micro-
bial biomass. Additionally, a few previous studies have
of substrate guilds, differences in substrate use among
N-containing compounds (e.g., amino acids, amines, and
provided evidence consistent with a change in the com-
position of the soil microflora following tree harvesting.
amides) in these two restoration treatments appeared
to account for most of the differences in CLPPs.
For instance, Staddon et al. (1998) found reductions in
bacterial Shannon’s Diversity Index values (based on
As was found by Kaye and Hart (1998b) 5 yr earlier,
we observed higher soil respiration in grass areas than
Biolog plates) up to 5 yr after clear-cutting in a Canadian
pine forest. Korb et al. (2003) found higher arbuscular
in the two pine canopy types. Based on these data, Kaye
and Hart (1998b) suggested that soil respiration rates
mycorrhizae propagule densities but similar ectomycor-
rhizal inoculum potentials following restoration thin-
were likely to be much higher in presettlement forests
than theyare today becausethese forests hadmuch greater
ning in a ponderosa pine forest near our site, 1 and 2 yr
following treatment. In our study, the longer intervening
grass cover than contemporary forests (Cooper, 1960;
Covington et al., 1997). Our results are consistent with
period between thinning and soil sampling, as well as
the less severe thinning regime, may account for the
this conclusion, at least for periods of low soil water
availability.
lack of a substantial change in the soil microflora follow-
ing tree removal compared with these previous studies.
Kaye and Hart (1998b) also hypothesized that differ-
ences in the quality and quantity of litter input to the soil
Overall, our results suggest that tree removal alone dur-
ing restoration activities in southwestern ponderosa
by vegetation, or differences in the size or composition
of the soil microbial biomass in the contrasting canopy
pine forests may alter soil microbial activity through
increases in soil temperature, but likely does not have
types, were likely responsible for observed soil respira-
tion patterns because they failed to find any significant
large effects on the function of the soil microbial com-
munity over the long term.
difference in soil microclimate or fine root biomass among
them. We also did not find any soil microclimate differ-
Although tree removal had only moderate effects on
the soil microflora in this ecosystem, the restoration of
ences among the various canopy types during the days
that soil respiration were sampled. However, across the
the forest floor mass to presettlement levels and the
reintroduction of fire in the composite restoration treat-
2001 growing season, grass canopy types had signifi-

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
1636
SOIL SCI. SOC. AM. J., VOL. 69, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2005
cantly higher soil temperatures and volumetric water
lated with soil gravimetric water content during this
sampling date. Our results are consistent with other
content (0–15 cm) than presettlement pine and postset-
tlement pine retained canopy types. Hence, at least for
studies in water-limited ecosystems where water avail-
ability has been shown to strongly control the function
the grass areas, higher soil temperatures and water con-
tents may explain in part the higher soil respiration
and size of the soil microflora (Kieft et al., 1987; David-
son et al., 1990; Liu et al., 2000). Hence, it is not surpris-
rates observed in these areas during the dry period. Our
results suggest that differences in the size or function
ing that the relative response of the soil microflora, as
of the soil microbial community are not responsible for
well as the vegetation, to these restoration treatments
any differences in soil respiration rates among canopy
is tightly coupled to interannual variability in precipita-
types. We did find significantly lower mineral soil C/N
tion, which is extremely high in the southwestern USA
ratios in grass and postsettlement pine areas than in
(Kaye and Hart, 1998a, 1998b; Kaye et al., 2005). Changes
presettlement pine canopy types. This result may reflect
in the microbial community following summer rains may
differences in the quality of organic matter inputs to the
have a large effect on plant processes at this time. For
soil among these contrasting canopy types, with grass
example, microbial biomass in the wet period contained
and postsettlement pine areas receiving higher amounts
1 to 4 g m2 more N than microbial biomass in the dry
of low C/N ratio herbaceous inputs to the soil than pre-
period. This large net flux of N into microbes is compa-
settlement canopy types where almost all of the litter
rable with total annual net N mineralization and plant
inputs are high C/N ratio pine litter (Kaye and Hart,
N uptake at this site (Kaye et al., 2005).
1998a, 1998b; Hart et al., 2005). Hence, the higher qual-
Our results suggest that ecological restoration treat-
ity of organic matter inputs to grass and postsettlement
ments have significant, long-term effects on the soil mi-
pine canopy types might also account for the higher
croflora and support the need for long-term studies. The
respiration rates observed in these areas.
major impact of tree thinning alone on the soil microflora
Soil chemical and biological assays from postsettle-
was an increase in their activity, likely driven by an in-
ment pine canopy types tended to either be similar to
crease in soil temperature. In contrast, forest floor ma-
grass canopy types or intermediate in magnitude between
nipulations and the reintroduction of fire to these forests
presettlement and grass canopy types. Hart et al. (2005)
affected the physiological capacities of the soil microflora,
also found that chemolithotrophic nitrifier population
probably through changes in the availability of sub-
sizes were significantly higher in grass and postsettle-
strates. Differences in soil microbial activity and func-
ment pine canopy types than in areas occupied by pre-
tion among canopy types were also observed that were
settlement pine, three years after restoration activities
consistent regardless of treatment; this result suggests
were completed. In an area adjacent to our study site,
that, over the long term, the indirect effects of restora-
Kerns et al. (2003) found that soil profile characteristics
tion treatments on vegetation composition may have a
in grass and postsettlement pine patches were similar
greater impact on the soil microflora than the direct ef-
to each other, and that both differed from presettlement
fects of the treatments themselves (Hart et al, 2005).
pine areas. Taken together, these results suggest that
soils under postsettlement trees have retained the bio-
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
logical, chemical, and physical imprints of the grass veg-
This manuscript is based on portions of a thesis submitted
etation that occupied these areas before their invasion
by the senior author in partial fulfillment of the M.S degree
by pines in the early 1920s (Covington et al., 1997). The
in the School of Forestry, Northern Arizona Univ. We thank
persistence of this pattern suggests a strong linkage be-
R. Posner, B. Hungate, T. Kolb, and S. Overby for the use
tween plants and soils in southwestern ponderosa pine-
of equipment and for help in methods development. C. Gehr-
bunchgrass ecosystems. The fact that pine invasion has
ing, M. Moore, and two anonymous reviewers provided valu-
not yet fundamentally altered the functional capabilities
able comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. We
of the soil microbial community increases the chances
also thank K. Haskins for help with data analysis and B. Housley
that microbial communities that establish in restored
for field and laboratory assistance. Funding for this research
grass openings (following postsettlement tree removal)
was provided from the USDI BLM Southwest Fire Initiative
will be similar to the communities present before Euro-
through the Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Ari-
American disturbances.
zona Univ., McIntire-Stennis appropriations to the School of
Forestry, Northern Arizona Univ., the state of Arizona, and
Our study indicates that water availability exerts a
USDA Forest Service Joint Venture Agreement RMRS-99161-
profound influence on soil microbial processes in semi-
RJVA. S. Hart acknowledges the logistic support of the USGS
arid ponderosa pine ecosystems. Microbial activity (as
PIERC (BRD/Kilauea Field Station) and the NPS Sabbatical
assessed by soil respiration measurements in situ), mi-
in the Parks Program during the writing of this manuscript.
crobial-N, and the activities of a suite of soil enzymes
all increased following the onset of summer rains. Inter-
REFERENCES
estingly, increases in soil water content that occurred
following the beginning of the monsoon reduced or
Acea, M.J., and T. Carballas. 1996. Changes in physiological groups
of microorganisms in soil following wildfire. FEMS Microbiol.
eliminated any observed differences in microbial activ-
Ecol. 20:33–39.
ity or CLPPs among treatments and canopy types. How-
Ajwa, H.A., C.J. Dell, and C.W. Rice. 1999. Changes in enzyme
ever, significant differences in enzyme activity among
activities and microbial biomass of tallgrass prairie soil as related to
treatments and canopy types were only observed during
burning and nitrogen fertilization. Soil Biol. Biochem. 31:769–777.
Arianoutsou-Faraggitaki, M., and N. Margaris. 1982. Decomposers
the wet period, and enzyme activities were only corre-

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
BOYLE ET AL.: RESTORATION AND CANOPY TYPE INFLUENCE SOIL MICROFLORA
1637
and the fire cycle in the Phryganic (East Mediterranean) ecosystem.
Dieterich, J.H. 1980. Chimney Spring forest fire history. Res. Pap.
RM-222. Rocky Mt. Res. Stn., Ft. Collins, CO.
Microb. Ecol. 8:91–98.
Dobranic, J.K., and J.C. Zak. 1999. A microtiter plate method for
Arunachalam, L., A. Arunachalam, and N.P. Melkania. 1999. Influ-
evaluating fungal functional diversity. Mycologia 91:756–766.
ence of soil properties on microbial populations, activity and bio-
Edwards, N.T. 1982. The use of soda-lime for measuring respiration
mass in humid subtropical mountainous ecosystems of India. Biol.
rates in terrestrial systems. Pedobiologia 23:321–330.
Fertil. Soils 30:217–223.
Eivazi, F., and M. Bayan. 1996. Effects of long-term prescribed burning
Atlas, R.M., A. Horowitz, M. Krichevsky, and A.K. Bej. 1991. Re-
on the activity of select soil enzymes in an oak-hickory forest. Can.
sponse of microbial populations to environmental disturbance. Mi-
J. For. Res. 26:1799–1804.
crob. Ecol. 22:249–256.
Eivazi, F., and M.A. Tabatabai. 1977. Phosphatases in soils. Soil Biol.
Bailey, J.D., and W.W. Covington. 2002. Evaluating ponderosa pine
Biochem. 9:162–172.
regeneration rates following ecological restoration treatments in
Eivazi, F., and M.A. Tabatabai. 1988. Glucosidases and galactosidases
northern Arizona, USA. For. Ecol. Manage. 155:271–278.
in soils. Soil Biol. Biochem. 20:601–606.
Balser, T.C., J.W. Kirchner, and M.K. Firestone. 2002. Methodological
Entry, J., N. Stark, and H. Loewenstein. 1986. Effect of timber harvest-
variability in microbial community level physiological profiles. Soil
ing on microbial biomass fluxes in a northern Rocky Mountain
Sci. Soc. Am. J. 66:519–523.
forest soil. Can. J. For. Res. 16:1076–1081.
Bergmeyer, H.U., M. Graßl, and H.E. Walter. 1983. Enzymes. p.
Fritze, H., T. Pennanen, and J. Pietikia¨nen. 1993. Recovery of soil
126–327. In H.U. Bergmeyer et al. (ed.) Methods of enzymatic
microbial biomass and activity from prescribed burning. Can. J.
analysis. Vol. 2. Samples, reagents, assessment of results. Verlag-
For. Res. 23:1286–1290.
Chemie, Weinheim, Deerfield Beach, Basel.
Gallardo, A., and W.H. Schlesinger. 1994. Factors limiting microbial
Bissett, J., and D. Parkinson. 1980. Long-term effects of fire on the
biomass in the mineral soil and forest floor of a warm-temperate
composition and activity of the soil microflora of a subalpine,
forest. Soil Biol. Biochem. 26:1409–1415.
coniferous forest. Can. J. Bot. 58:1704–1721.
Ganeshamurthy, A.N., and N.E. Nielsen. 1990. Arylsulfatase and the
Boerner, R., K. Decker, and E. Sutherland. 2000. Prescribed burning
biochemical mineralization of soil organic sulfur. Soil Biol. Bio-
effects on soil enzyme activity in a southern Ohio hardwood forest:
chem. 22:1163–1165.
A landscape-scale analysis. Soil Biol. Biochem. 32:899–908.
Garland, J.L. 1996. Analytical approaches to the characterization of
Boerner, R.E.J., and J.A. Brinkman. 2003. Fire frequency and soil
samples of microbial communities using patterns of potential C
enzyme activity in southern Ohio oak-hickory forest. Appl. Soil
source utilization. Soil Biol. Biochem. 28:213–221.
Ecol. 23:137–146.
Garland, J.L., and A. Mills. 1991. Classification and characterization
Bossio, D., and K. Scow. 1995. Impact of carbon and flooding on
of heterotrophic microbial communities on the basis of patterns
the metabolic diversity of microbial communities in soils. Appl.
of community-level sole-carbon-source-utilization. Appl. Environ.
Environ. Microbiol. 61:4043–4050.
Microbiol. 57:2351–2359.
Buyer, J.S., D.P. Roberts, P. Millner, and E. Russek-Cohen. 2001.
Grogan, P. 1998. CO2 flux measurement using soda lime: Correction
Analysis of fungal communities by sole carbon source utilization
for water formed during CO2 adsorption. Ecology 79:1467–1468.
profiles. J. Microbiol. Methods 45:53–60.
Hart, S.C., G.E. Nason, D.D. Myrold, and D. Perry. 1994. Dynamics
Byrd, K.B., V.T. Parker, D.R. Vogler, and K.W. Cullings. 2000. The
of gross nitrogen transformations in an old-growth forest: The carbon
influence of clear-cutting on ectomycorrhizal fungus diversity in a
connection. Ecology 75:880–891.
lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) stand, Yellowstone National Park,
Hart, S.C., T.H. DeLuca, G.S. Newman, D.M. MacKenzie, and S.I.
Wyoming, and Gallatin National Forest, Montana. Can. J. Bot. 78:
Boyle. 2005. Post-fire vegetative dynamics as drivers of microbial
149–156.
community structure and function in forest soils. For. Ecol. Manage.
Chang, S.X., C.M. Preston, and G.F. Weetman. 1995. Soil microbial
(in press).
biomass and microbial and mineralizable N in a clear-cut chrono-
Haubensak, K.A., S.C. Hart, and J.M. Stark. 2002. Influences of chlo-
sequence on northern Vancouver Island, British Columbia. Can.
roform exposure time and soil water content on C and N release in
J. For. Res. 25:1595–1607.
forest soils. Soil Biol. Biochem. 34:1549–1562.
Clarke, K.R. 1993. Non-parametric multivariate analyses of changes
Kaye, J.P., and S.C. Hart. 1998a. Ecological restoration alters N trans-
in community structure. Austral. J. Ecol. 18:117–143.
formations in a ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Ecol. Appl.
Classen, A.T., S.I. Boyle, K.E. Haskins, S.T. Overby, and S.C. Hart.
8:1052–1060.
2003. Community-level physiological profiles of bacteria and fungi:
Kaye, J.P., and S.C. Hart. 1998b. Restoration and canopy-type effects
Plate type and incubation temperature influences on contrasting
on respiration in a ponderosa pine-bunchgrass ecosystem. Soil Sci.
soils. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 44:319–328.
Soc. Am. J. 62:1062–1072.
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of
Kaye, J.P., S.C. Hart, and P.Z. Fule´. W.W Covington, M.M. Moore,
southwestern pine forests since white settlement. Ecol. Monogr. 30:
and M.W. Kaye. 2005 Initial carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus
129–164.
fluxes following ponderosa pine restoration treatments. Ecol. Appl.
Covington, W.W., and S.S. Sackett. 1986. Effect of periodic burning
(in press).
on soil nitrogen concentrations in ponderosa pine. Soil Sci. Soc.
Kerns, B.K., M.M. Moore, M.E. Timpson, and S.C. Hart. 2003. Soil
Am. J. 50:452–457.
properties associated with vegetation patches in a Pinus ponderosa-
Covington, W.W., P. Fule´, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T. Kolb, J. Mast,
bunchgrass mosaic. Western N. Am. Nat. 63:452–462.
S.S. Sackett, and M. Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in
Kieft, T.L., E. Soroker, and M.K. Firestone. 1987. Microbial biomass
ponderosa pine forests of the southwest. J. For. 95:23–29.
response to a rapid increase in water potential when dry soil is
Dahlberg, A., J. Schimmel, A. Taylor, and H. Johannesson. 2001. Post-
wetted. Soil Biol. Biochem. 19:119–126.
fire legacy of ectomycorrhizal fungal communities in the Swedish
Korb, J.E., N.C. Johnson, and W.W. Covington. 2003. Arbuscular
boreal forest in relation to fire severity and logging intensity. Biol.
mycorrhizal propagule densities respond rapidly to ponderosa pine
Conserv. 100:151–161.
restoration treatments. J. App. Ecol. 40:101–110.
Davidson, E.A., J.M. Stark, and M.K. Firestone. 1990. Microbial pro-
Lachat Instruments, Inc. 1994. QuickChem Method No. 13–107–06–2-D.
duction and consumption of nitrate in an annual grassland. Ecol-
Lachat Instruments, Milwaukee, WI.
ogy 71:1968–1975.
Lachat Instruments, Inc. 2000. QuickChem Method No. 10–107–04–1-C.
Davidson, E.A., R.W. Eckert, S.C. Hart, and M.K. Firestone. 1989.
Lachat Instruments, Milwaukee, WI.
Direct extraction of microbial biomass nitrogen from forest and
Lachat Instruments, Inc. 2001. QuickChem Method No. 12–107–06–1-B.
grassland soils of California. Soil Biol. Biochem. 21:773–778.
Lachat Instruments, Milwaukee, WI.
DeBano, L.F., D.G. Neary, and P.F. Ffolliott. 1998. Fire’s effects on
Lui, X., W.C. Lindemann, W.G. Whitford, and R.L. Steiner. 2000.
ecosystems. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Microbial diversity and activity of disturbed soil in the northern
Dick, R.P. 1997. Soil enzyme activities as integrative indicators of soil
Chihuahuan Desert. Biol. Fertil. Soils 32:243–249.
health. p. 121–155. In C.E. Pankhurst et al. (ed.) Biological indictors
Mather, P.M. 1976. Computation methods of multivariate analysis in
physical geography. John Wiley & Sons, London, UK.
of soil health. CAB International, New York.

Reproduced from Soil Science Society of America Journal. Published by Soil Science Society of America. All copyrights reserved.
1638
SOIL SCI. SOC. AM. J., VOL. 69, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2005
Mergel, A., O. Schmitz, T. Mallmann, and H. Bothe. 2000. Relative
The status of our knowledge. USDA For. Serv. Rocky Mt. For.
Range Exp. Stn. Res. Pap. RM-123. Rocky Mt. Res. Stn., Ft. Col-
abundance of denitrifying and dinitrogen-fixing bacteria in layers
lins, CO.
of a forest soil. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 36:33–42.
Selmants, P.C., S.C. Hart, S.I. Boyle, and J.M. Stark. 2005. Red alder
Mielke, P.W., Jr., and K.J. Berry. 2001. Permutation methods: A
(Alnus rubra) alters community-level soil microbial function in
distance function approach. Springer Series in Statistics.
conifer forests of the Pacific Northwest, USA. Soil Biol. Biochem.
Miller, M., A. Paloja¨rvi, A. Rangger, M. Reeslev, and A. Kjøller.
37:1860–1868.
1998. The use of fluorogenic substrates to measure fungal presence
Sinsabaugh, R.L. 1994. Enzymatic analysis of microbial pattern and
and activity in soil. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64:613–617.
process. Biol. Fertil. Soils 17:69–74.
Morris, S.J., and R.E.J. Boerner. 1998. Interactive influence of silvicul-
Sinsabaugh, R.L., H. Reynolds, and T.M. Long. 2000. Rapid assay
tural management and soil chemistry upon soil microbial abundance
for amidohydrolase (urease) activity in environmental samples.
and nitrogen mineralization. For. Ecol. Manage. 103:129–139.
Soil Biol. Biochem. 32:2095–2097.
Neary, D., C. Klopatek, L. DeBano, and P. Ffolliott. 1999. Fire effects
Staddon, W.J., L.C. Duchesne, and J.T. Trevors. 1998. Impact of
on belowground sustainability: A review and synthesis. For. Ecol.
clear-cutting and prescribed burning on microbial diversity and
Manage. 122:51–71.
community structure in a Jack pine (Pinus banksiana Lamb) clear-
Nohrstedt, H.-O¨ ., K. Arnebrandt, E. Ba˚a˚th, and B. So¨derstro¨m. 1989.
cut using Biolog Gram-negative microplates. World J. Microbiol.
Changes in carbon content, respiration, ATP content, and microbial
Biotechnol. 14:119–123.
biomass in nitrogen-fertilized pine forest soils in Sweden. Can. J.
Stone, J.E., T.E. Kolb, and W.W. Covington. 1999. Effects of restora-
For. Res. 19:323–328.
tion thinning on presettlement Pinus ponderosa in Northern Ari-
Pietikia¨nen, J., and H. Fritze. 1995. Clear-cutting and prescribed burn-
zona. Restor. Ecol. 7:172–182.
ing in coniferous forest: Comparison of effects on soil fungal and
Tabatabai, M.A., and J.M. Bremmer. 1970. Arylsulfatase activity of
total microbial biomass, respiration activity, and nitrification. Soil
soils. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 34:225–229.
Biol. Biochem. 27:101–109.
Va´zquez, F.J., M.J. Acea, and T. Carballas. 1993. Soil microbial popu-
Savage, M., P.M. Brown, and J. Feddema. 1996. The role of climate
lations after wildfire. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 13:93–104.
in a pine forest regeneration pulse in the southwestern United
Waldrop, M.R., D.L. Zak, and R.L. Sinsabaugh. 2004. Microbial com-
States. Ecoscience 3:310–318.
munity response to nitrogen deposition in northern forest ecosys-
tems. Soil Biol. Biochem. 36:1443–1451.
Schubert, G.H. 1974. Silviculture of southwestern ponderosa pine:
