Journal of Land, Resources, and Environmental Law
2006
Article
*267 COMPARING WILDERNESS RESTORATION AND FIRE POLICY IN THREE FEDERAL AGENCIES: VARI-
ATIONS ON A THEME IN NORTHERN ARIZONA
David M. Ostergren [FNa1]
Copyright (c) 2006 Journal of Land, Resources and Environmental Law; David M. Ostergren
Once management undertakes to improve the wilderness for man by changing conditions of his wilderness use
or by manipulating natural processes in the wilderness itself the fragile wilderness quality of the area being man-
aged is in jeopardy. Howard Zahniser, 1961. [FN1]
A thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the biotic community. It is
wrong when it tends otherwise. Aldo Leopold, 1949. [FN2]
I. Introduction
Ecological restoration is the process of assisting the recovery of an ecosystem that has been degraded, damaged, or
destroyed. Ideally, in North America a restored ecosystem contains a self-sustaining complement of species composition,
structure and function which, as nearly as possible, reflect conditions as if Euro-Americans had not manipulated the sys-
tem. [FN3] Fire is one of the most significant processes to influence southwestern ecosystems so, to address restoration,
government agencies must address fire.
Fire restoration is a challenge for agencies across all public lands but the political issues surrounding decisions in
Wilderness grow exponentially. The laws and policies regarding fire control and suppression are clear for Congression-
ally designated Wilderness Areas and National Park Service (NPS) backcountry. However, the laws and policies are
much less clear that regulate fire restoration. Wilderness management is complicated because wilderness harbors relat-
ively undisturbed ecosystems as refugia for biodiversity as well as outstanding opportunities for solitude and primitive
recreation. In other words, agencies must work within both human expectations and ecological constraints.
The issue is no longer “should we have fire in wilderness,” but “how should we restore fire as an essential ecosystem
process?” Implementation of fire *268 management has been inconsistent across and within land management agencies
for a host of reasons, but primarily because of a need for a comprehensive national policy. [FN4] This analysis first
places restoration of fire into the context of the 1964 Wilderness Act, [FN5] then illustrates the challenges by comparing
policy in northern Arizona across five wilderness areas and three agencies; the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and
the National Park Service (NPS) in the U.S. Department of Interior, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Ser-
vice (USFS). Wilderness is defined as those lands, which either Congress designated as wilderness areas or, backcountry
areas within the NPS, designated to retain their wilderness character. NPS Director's Order #41 in 1999 [FN6] and the
2001 NPS Management Policies both affirm policy established in 1988 that “for the purposes of applying [NPS wilder-
ness] policies, the term ‘wilderness' will include the categories of suitable, study, proposed, recommended and desig-
nated wilderness.” [FN7]
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 1
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

II. Background
A. Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems and Fire
Southwestern Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) ecosystems are dependent on frequent return interval fires. [FN8]
But since the late 1800s fire suppression, logging and grazing, virtually eliminated fire's effect on forest conditions.
[FN9] Evidence indicates that the fire return rate on the north rim of the Grand Canyon National Park (GCNP) was 3-4
years, with intense fires about every 9 years. [FN10] Currently, these Ponderosa pine forests (hereafter PIPO) contain
many small trees per hectare, while historic conditions were more open and park-like, with scattered groups of *269
large Ponderosa pine. [FN11] As a consequence, managers, researchers and NGOs are investigating the restoration of
these forests for their species composition, structure and function. [FN12] Decision-making stalls in the face of complex
interactions between soils, herbaceous vegetation, grasses, trees, ungulates, predators and larger forces, such as climate
variability. Nonetheless, individuals and agencies are starting to address ecosystem imbalances and viewing restoration
as an option. Restoration techniques vary but in any case, restoration options must be designed to a specific place.
[FN13]
The long-term goal is to restore fire as one of the more significant ecosystem processes missing from federal lands.
By definition, within federal land management agencies, fire can return as prescribed fire (management ignited fire), or
wildland fire use (WFU). WFU is naturally-ignited fire, which is allowed to burn to fulfill natural resource management
goals. Current conditions, however, make simply allowing lightning to start fires in the hot, dry months, extremely dan-
gerous. Thus, strategies may include: prescribed fire in highly controlled situations, or thinning of snags or small trees
close to old growth and then prescribed fire, or major thinning with anything from handsaws to chainsaws to large log-
ging equipment and then prescribed burns. Several strategies for restoration have been tried in the Grand Canyon Nation-
al Park (GCNP), [FN14] but specific laws and politics influence what strategy to employ. The results of each treatment
create different forest structure also influencing management options. [FN15]
Subject to regulations, most public lands in the PIPO ecosystem may be thinned through mechanical means, and then
burned with prescribed fire to reduce high fuel loads (i.e. mitigate fire risk) and ultimately return fire back to the system.
But what actions may be conducted in the valuable wilderness areas and NPS backcountry? The literature documenting
the scientific and philosophical issues surrounding the restoration of fire to wilderness areas, has been reviewed periodic-
ally; first as a purely scientific consideration in 1985, [FN16] then as a broader *270 inter-agency issue in 1999, [FN17]
and finally placed firmly into the restoration lexicon in 2001. [FN18]
Reintroducing fire into wilderness ought to be a priority. [FN19] The 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Policy and 2001 re-
view recognized the ecological benefit of fire and encouraged more WFU. [FN20] Despite the recognition that fire is a
part of healthy ecosystems, BLM, USFS and NPS managers remain cautious about restoring fire on a wide scale on any
lands [FN21] much less in wilderness areas. [FN22] Obstacles include; (1) the perception that risk to human life and
property is too great to let fires ‘wander’ for weeks at a time across the 6,490,000 acres of southwestern PIPO forests, (2)
limited funding to defray expenses (costs are dependent on the intensity of restoration action), (3) questions about the
ecological effects on soils, water or air, and (4) questions as to public acceptance of altered forests [FN23] and smoky
conditions. [FN24]
Fire suppression to protect resources inside and outside wilderness areas was built into the 1964 Wilderness Act,
“[I]n addition, such measures may be taken as may be necessary in the control of fire, insects, and diseases.” [FN25]
Nearly every wilderness designation since 1964 has included a clause allowing for fire suppression. Ironically, fire sup-
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 2
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

pression is now cited as one of the biggest threats to wilderness. [FN26] Agency policy would like to move from sup-
pression to WFU. The challenge is to determine the activities that can be conducted to return fire to wilderness ecosys-
tems, which will not compromise the wilderness character of those same ecosystems.
*271 This analysis documents and compares the specific legislation, subsequent agency regulations and the unique
circumstances for five wilderness areas in northern Arizona for fire restoration. Four cases continue to suppress all fires
triggered by lightning: Mt. Trumbull Wilderness and Mt. Logan Wilderness in the BLM as well as Kendrick Mountain
Wilderness and Kachina Peaks Wilderness in the USFS. The north rim of GCNP has prescribed fires and wild fire use
with various levels of intensity since 1980 (escaped fires were suppressed). Comparing policy implementation across
agencies sheds light on how each agency is responding to similar fire restoration goals within disparate missions, as well
as each unique set of external and internal politics. I conclude that agencies need to work together to collectively develop
a consistent, unified strategy for wilderness fire management that recognizes the political and ecological circumstances.
Wilderness fire restoration policy should proceed slowly, involve the public in planning and seek the maximum level of
both natural and untrammeled conditions.
B. The 1964 Wilderness Act
The 1964 Wilderness Act was a result of decades of debate. [FN27] Specific arguments included: (1) wilderness for
recreation is the highest use of the land, [FN28] (2) America needs wild nature, [FN29] (3) natural wild areas were disap-
pearing, [FN30] and (4) that there was a dissatisfaction of early administrative efforts to protect wilderness also known
as primitive areas. [FN31] In 1964 Congress reserved the prerogative to set aside areas of federal land “to assure that an
increasing population, accompanied by expanding settlement and growing mechanization, does not occupy and modify
all areas within the United States.” [FN32] The Wilderness Act created the National Wilderness Preservation System,
which has grown to include 680 areas (106,619,199 acres). The areas are distributed between the four primary federal
land management agencies: USFS, BLM, NPS, and the Fish and Wildlife Service. [FN33] Wilderness management has
evolved over forty years [FN34] and among the *272 most recent management tools is a wilderness-monitoring frame-
work that tackles the very difficult issue of monitoring wilderness character. [FN35]
Those who drafted the Wilderness Act believed that once set aside, natural forces would be the norm, and they gave
little consideration for fire. Our perspective of wildland fire has subsequently changed. As early as 1963, the Leopold
Report was highly critical of the lack of biological research in national parks and particularly the lack of fire as a natural
process. [FN36] Though skeptical that fire may return, the Leopold Report stated that fire would need to be re-introduced
cautiously with new expertise and perhaps with prior vegetation removal. Soon after the Leopold report, fire became in-
creasingly recognized as part of many ecosystems in wilderness. [FN37] In 1968 the NPS released a fire policy that al-
lowed for prescribed fire. [FN38] In Sequoia Kings-Canyon National Park fire was re-introduced through a prescribed
fire program and Yosemite National Park followed in 1970. [FN39] The prescribed fire program demonstrated that, with-
in reason, fire could be managed and controlled [FN40] and by the early 1970s the NPS was a leader in prescribed fire
application. [FN41] Prescribed fires and subsequent research have provided a wealth of information on fire behavior and
the role of fire in wilderness ecosystems.
1. Natural and Untrammeled
A key debate for managers, NGOs, and policy makers to restore fire to wilderness resides in the very definition of
wilderness, as many management issues revolve around the terms untrammeled and natural: [FN42]
*273 A wilderness in contrast with those areas where man and his own works dominate the landscape, is
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 3
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

hereby recognized as an area where the earth and its community of life are untrammeled by man, where man him-
self is a visitor who does not remain. An area of wilderness is further defined to mean in this Act an area of un-
developed Federal land retaining its primeval character and influence, without permanent improvements or human
habitation, which is protected and managed so as to preserve its natural conditions and which (1) generally appears
to have been affected primarily by the forces of nature, with the imprint of man's work substantially unnoticeable;
(2) has outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation; (3) has at least five
thousand acres of land or is of sufficient size as to make practicable its preservation and use in an unimpaired con-
dition; and (4) may also contain ecological., geological., or other features of scientific, educational., scenic, or his-
torical value. [FN43]
The differences between ‘natural’ and ‘untrammeled’ have been the subject of several analyses. [FN44] At issue is
the fact that the Wilderness Act does not provide a clear definition of natural. One generally accepted definition, which
has emerged over the years, is that natural refers to an ecosystem with the species composition, structure, and original
function, as if Euro-Americans had not manipulated the system. [FN45] After eighty to one hundred years of fire sup-
pression, logging and grazing, many fire-dependent wilderness systems are not ‘natural.’ Fuel levels are high, [FN46]
and the species composition and vegetation structure are highly altered. [FN47] Thus, any fire in such a wilderness area
can not be defined as natural. A ‘natural fire’ in a natural ecosystem would burn within the frequency, intensity and size
of historic fires and produce the effects that dominated prior to Euro-American influence. [FN48] Still, more research is
required to know what constitutes natural fire.
Another impetus to act and re-introduce fire is that wilderness may act as last reserves for disappearing biodiversity.
From a biological perspective, no action *274 may be as devastating as too much action. [FN49] In addition to biological
values, wilderness provides social values as well. These areas should be a primitive vignette in the words of the Leopold
report [FN50] where modern people can see and experience what once was the vast North American wilderness. [FN51]
Thus, the imperative exists but the legal foundation to restore naturalness in wilderness via thinning and burning, or ex-
tensive prescribed fires, rests on tenuous ground.
The meaning of untrammeled is much more clear. [FN52] An untrammeled system is un-manipulated, free, wild--it is
self-willed. [FN53] Untrammeled wilderness is a place where “man himself is a visitor” and the area “generally appears
to have been affected primarily by the forces of nature, with the imprint of man's work substantially unnoticeable.”
[FN54] Stumps, roads, planes, motors, radio towers, chainsaws, and fences are all evidence of human trammeling. We
can include trails, GPS locators and cell phones in the trammeling lexicon. Senator Frank Church (D. Idaho, 1957-81)
stated in 1972 that much of the pre-existing ‘evidence of man’ does not preclude wilderness designation, the framers of
the Wilderness Act did not expect some sort of pure wild areas. [FN55] It is the post-designation actions (i.e. trammel-
ing) that degrade wilderness character and must be highly regulated. Both the current practice of full fire suppression as
well as prescribed fire reduce the untrammeled characteristic of wilderness. [FN56] But these activities are not excluded,
nor even unexpected in wilderness.
The dilemma is can we trammel a wilderness to improve its natural character? But first, can we know what is natur-
al? If we are engaged in engineering an ecological process into what we ‘imagine’ is natural [FN57] then fire is a tool, a
device that creates only our best approximation of what is natural. Such manipulation *275 violates the spirit of the Wil-
derness Act in that these areas are not untrammeled and self-willed. [FN58] The area is trammeled if managers must re-
enter every few years to ‘tend the garden.’ [FN59]
In the words of Howard Zahniser, a principal author of the Wilderness Act, improving wilderness for use, or manipu-
lating natural processes to recreate nature means that “the fragile wilderness quality of the area being managed is in jeop-
ardy.” [FN60] The charge for managers is to prioritize between natural and untrammeled and then either; (1) restore
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 4
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

threatened wilderness, [FN61] (2) restore some areas and leave others, [FN62] or (3) leave everything alone because we
can not anticipate the end result. [FN63] The Pinchot Institute for Conservation conducted a multi-agency wilderness re-
view and concluded that agencies will need to become stewards of wilderness whose greatest struggle is to balance natur-
al and untrammeled. [FN64] In terms of fire, the worst case scenario for an untrammeled fire is that it ignite in the hot
dry months and burn a wilderness area to the mineral soil leaving little left for life. The burden of proof for agencies is
that such a fire would not leave a mosaic with just a few patches of mineral soil.
Congress requires a very difficult task; “preservation of wilderness character.” [FN65] Part of maintaining that char-
acter is by using the minimum tool to complete a project. The minimum tool practice by all agencies requires that a mul-
tidisciplinary team evaluate whether (1) the job is necessary and/or legally mandated, and (2) what is the least intrusive
tool to accomplish the job? With fire, agencies are worried that the fire will rage out of control and escape into neighbor-
ing lands destroying life or property (e.g. homes or timber). Thus, the agency may determine that fire is mandatory to re-
tain the wilderness character of an area, and a fire line the minimum requirement for safety. The minimum tool may be
mules and two-man cross-cut saws, or helicopters for ignition and a bulldozer to cut a safety line. One set of tools may be
acceptable in one area and not in another. [FN66] Actions that will certainly fail to meet any minimum tool requirement
include; road construction, commercial sales and mechanical thinning *276 with feller-bunchers. Any decision relies on
judgment, experience and the best intentions by management. In some cases prescribed fire may be the minimum tool as
at Sequoia-Kings Canyon National Park). [FN67] But above all, the key to any action that may compromise wilderness
character is to proceed with caution, restraint, respect and humility. [FN68] Wilderness is not for us, it is for wilderness.
[FN69] Whenever society, acting through an agency, proposes to modify a wilderness area, it necessarily delves into the
philosophical as well as legal implications and stretches the democratic process:
Manipulating wilderness conditions is philosophically and practically problematic. . . .When do the means of
manipulation justify the ends of naturalness and how do we know? What is forsaken when fire is intentionally sup-
pressed or when it is reintroduced into wilderness? . . . How much and how, if deemed appropriate, we intervene in
wilderness to restore or enhance its character will take a lot of thought, creativity, and leadership. [FN70]
The idea of wilderness is evolving. From the early 1900s to 1964, wilderness was a place uninhabited and unaffected
by people. That ideology no longer holds sway, wilderness has become more complex and nuanced. [FN71] For instance,
what was the ecological role of Native Americans on the landscape? Does solitude mean distance from other visitors, or
freedom from the influence of land managers? What will be the long-term effects of global climate change? Whether an-
thropogenic or natural in origin, climate changes over time and ecosystems change with climate. Thus wilderness is not a
single preserved moment, but an evolving, open system. How do managers manage a moving target?
The argument to take action and to sacrifice untrammeled conditions for natural conditions may be necessary, but it
is not sufficient. Wilderness is more than tangible forests, deserts, swamps, islands and mountains. Wilderness has im-
measurable symbolic value. [FN72] Wilderness is a symbol of humility and restraint where society has said: ‘enough, we
manage no further.’ Untrammeled wilderness *277 would contain untrammeled fire, fire that is unplanned, unmanaged
and unrestrained. If treatments could bring back untrammeled fire, would a single entry be worth the symbolic sacrifice
of human restraint? What precedent is society willing to set that tampers with the Congressional intent to preserve wil-
derness character?
2. Releasing Wilderness Areas
Agencies could refrain from management until a court defines ‘natural’ and ‘untrammeled’ and then implicitly orders
agencies to prioritize one or the other. However many managers, researchers and NGOs are searching for some middle
ground that allows wilderness to be both more natural and less trammeled. Though not universally accepted, one option
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 5
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

is the concept of ‘releasing’ wilderness areas. [FN73] In a sense, the goal of restoration can be viewed as nudging the
ecological trajectory of a system. [FN74] Building on this idea, wilderness areas can be viewed on two axes. One is
‘Human Influence’ that moves from controlled to untrammeled. The other axis is ‘Primeval Character’ moving from arti-
ficial to natural. Any environment may be placed on a spectrum from built (i.e. highly controlled and artificial) to wilder-
ness (untrammeled and natural). [FN75] The goal of the Wilderness Act is to preserve wild areas with maximum natural
and untrammeled conditions. Congress intended preservation to be an affirmative action and that managers may be oblig-
ated to preserve and restore wilderness. [FN76] Thus, restoration can ‘release’ a wilderness area onto a trajectory that is
more natural and less trammeled [FN77] and the system will recover in a reasonable amount of time. [FN78] Imagine a
single entry into a small wilderness area where strategic small diameter trees are cut by hand (cross-cut saws or chain-
saws). The subsequent prescribed fires are set for two to seven year returns until lightning can take over as the ignition
process. The area will eventually be, at least theoretically, both more natural and more untrammeled. There is a strong ar-
gument to support accepting an action (a minimum action), if it eventually creates conditions wherein fires are free.
Actions in wilderness require public review and often generate intense public debate. Despite the democracy of wild
lands, historically many decisions in wilderness areas and NPS lands have been limited to relatively small number of
*278 interest group elites, [FN79] or politicians. [FN80] Current decisions ought to involve the public; but who is ‘the
public’ and how can their opinions be measured? Is it enough to use such methods as the survey of public opinion of res-
toration activities in Mt. Logan Wilderness Area that revealed general public support for all options including removal of
trees? [FN81] Perhaps not, the risk is that simple solutions can compromise wilderness character. [FN82] Thus any at-
tempt to include the public may benefit from focus groups and extensive discussion/deliberation so decisions are made
by an informed public. [FN83]
C. Fire Control and Presuppression
Regulations and policies that pertain to fire restoration are closely tied to policies for fire suppression, prescribed fire
and presuppression action. Changes in national policy can be traced from the 1964 Wilderness Act; “In addition, such
measure may be taken as may be necessary in the control of fire, insects, and diseases, subject to such conditions as the
Secretary deems desirable.” [FN84] This has been interpreted as full suppression of fire; (1) to protect against the loss of
human life or property, (2) if the fire may escape and damage resources, or (3) if there is no fire plan to accommodate a
natural (lightning ignited) fire. Most enabling legislation for wilderness areas repeats this clause to allow fire control (i.e.
suppression).
Prescribed burning is another tool entering into the wilderness management toolbox. The 2001 Interior Appropri-
ations Act amends the Black Rock Desert-High Rock Canyon Emigrant Trails National Conservation Area Act of 2000:
“Nothing in this Act or the Wilderness Act . . . precludes a Federal., State, or local agency from conducting wildland fire
management operations (including prescribed burns) within the areas designated as wilderness under subsection (a), sub-
ject to any conditions that the Secretary considers appropriate.” [FN85] This Amendment influences about 755,000 acres
of Nevada wilderness, which were designated by the Black Rock Act.
*279 Significantly, the Endangered American Wilderness Act of 1978, established the Santa Lucia Wilderness Area
and added to the Ventana Wilderness Area with specific phrasing authorizing the USFS “to take whatever appropriate ac-
tions are necessary for fire prevention and watershed protection including, but not limited to, acceptable fire presuppres-
sion and fire suppression measures and techniques.” [FN86]
The Big Sur Wilderness and Conservation Act of 2002 also includes specific language for presuppression actions.
[FN87] Fire presuppression treatments usually includes removing fuel (i.e. trees) with mechanical means (i.e. feller
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 6
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

bunchers). The implication is that the USFS may conduct any activity within these wilderness areas in anticipation of fire
damage. This act makes the line between presuppression and restoration, or even timber management, very thin and very
grey. As the USFS makes prescribed burning or presuppression plans, managers, researchers and NGOs will struggle
mightily to determine the minimum appropriate tool. Presuppression and prescribed fire clauses will certainly become
more common in future wilderness legislation.
III. Comparative Policies Between Agencies and Wilderness Areas
Broadly speaking, all wilderness agencies must adhere to national standards set forth in the 1973 Endangered Species
Act [FN88] and 1969 National Environmental Policy Act. [FN89] Either law may promote or hinder restoration actions,
depending on the specifics of a site (e.g. fire may kill one species and create habitat for another). However the national
policy that is more germane to this discussion, is the reigning National Fire Plan, and the 1995 Federal Wildland Fire
Management Policy (reviewed 2001). These plans and policies make explicit the official U.S. government position on the
role of fire in ecosystem health. In general one criticism is that they focus on fuels reduction rather than wild fire man-
agement. [FN90]
The National Fire Plan provides an interagency set of guidelines, procedures, definitions and a framework for indi-
vidual agency policies. [FN91] The Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy sets the goals and overall direction for
fire plans within an individual unit. [FN92] Reviewed in 2001, the policy recommends, “federal fire management activit-
ies and programs are to provide for firefighter and public *280 safety, protect and enhance land management objectives
and human welfare, integrate programs and disciplines, require interagency collaboration, emphasize the natural ecolo-
gical role of fire, and contribute to ecosystem sustainability.” [FN93] Thus, in 1995 the agencies made explicit, that fire
should be in forests as an ecosystem process. Some analysts were very optimistic that the 1995 policy would promote and
support fire reintroduction in wilderness. [FN94] The policy provides funding opportunities and the administrative and
procedural mechanisms to allow natural fire ignitions to burn. wilderness areas are required to have a Wilderness Plan
and Fire Management Plan to allow ‘wildland fire use’ (natural ignition) or prescribed fire (management ignition).
However, no specific sections or guidelines in the policy emphasize or prioritize wilderness, and extensive fire programs
are still relatively rare. [FN95] This lack of information on WFU across all agency land much less wilderness is a prob-
lem. [FN96]
More evidence for fire returning to forests came in August 2001, when the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior
joined the Western Governors' Association, National Association of State Foresters, National Association of Counties,
and the Intertribal Timber Council to endorse A Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire Risks to Communit-
ies and the Environment: A 10-Year Comprehensive Strategy (TYCS). The four goals of the TYCS include: (1) Improve
Fire Prevention and Suppression, (2) Reduce Hazardous Fuels, (3) Restore Fire-Adapted Ecosystems, and (4) Promote
Community Assistance. The implementation outcome is that fire-adapted ecosystems are restored, rehabilitated and
maintained, using appropriate tools, in a manner that will provide sustainable environmental., social and economic bene-
fits. [FN97]
The three federal agencies that manage wilderness in northern Arizona, have the same mandate, to manage wilder-
ness under the 1964 Wilderness Act and bring fire back into the forest under the National Fire Plan. However they oper-
ate with three different missions and in three different institutional contexts. Enabling wilderness legislation, which is
overlaid with agency history and associated regulations and policies, creates a complex quilt of criteria to get fire back in
the forest. The size, ecological history and geographic location of wilderness areas also play an important role in agency
decisions.
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 7
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

The five areas in this analysis are all: subject to the 1964 Wilderness Act, significant portions are ponderosa pine,
they are relatively remote, all excluded fire since the 1880s, and all continue to suppress fires to one degree or another
(see Table (1)). The notable exception is the GCNP that started a cautious fire *281 reintroduction program in the late
1970s and has since burned or let burn 70-80% of the north rim PIPO forest. However, GCNP suppresses fires ‘out of
prescription’ so that many fires that would have burned before Euro-American settlement are extinguished. These are
typically fires ignited during the dry, hot fire season of June and July.
Wilderness Area
Federal Agency
Regional Authority
Acreage
Year Est.
Mt Logan
Bureau of Land
Management
BLM/NPS Grand
Canyon-Parashant Na-
tional Monument
14,650a
1984
Mt. Trumbull
Bureau of Land
Management
BLM/NPS Grand
Canyon-Parashant Na-
tional Monument
7,880a
1984
Kendrick Moun-
tain
USDA Forest Ser-
vice
Kaibab National
Forest Coconino Na-
tional Forest
5,000a 1,510a
1984
Kachina Peaks
USDA Forest Ser-
vice
Coconino National
Forest
18,616a
1984
Grand Canyon Na-
tional Park north rim
National Park Ser-
vice
Grand Canyon Na-
tional Park
65,000 PIPO
50,000 mixed conifer
and spruce/firb
1919
Table 1. Wilderness Areas and NPS lands with ponderosa pine ecosystems in Northern Arizona.
a Acreages taken from www.wilderness.net and reflects agency reports.
b Acreages from the GCNP Fire and Aviation department.
The management objectives for any particular wilderness area are determined through overlapping legislation; en-
abling legislation takes precedence over all other legislation, and conforms to the 1964 and 1975 federal wilderness legis-
lation exclusive of specified exceptions. Then, the next tier of guidelines for management objectives originates in the en-
abling legislation of for the monument, national forest or park unit. Finally, management objectives must be consistent
with the broader, agency-wide management policies. A comparison of regulations and legislation between the three agen-
cies reveals that each agency has practically the same mandate for wilderness fire restoration. Current practices are,
however, constrained by natural conditions, public expectations, and agency history.
A. Bureau of Land Management
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 8
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

The 1976 Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA) made wilderness management one of the multiple
uses for the BLM. [FN98] FLPMA instructs that “the Secretary shall continue to manage such lands . . . in a manner so
as not to impair the suitability of such areas for preservation as wilderness” until Congress *282 acts. [FN99] Subsequent
case law supports the idea that the BLM has a right and obligation to protect wilderness character. [FN100]
The 1983 Manual Section 8560 “Management of Designated Wilderness” outlines the specific management goals,
uses and allowable nonconforming uses for BLM wilderness. [FN101] Manual 8560 specifies that a Wilderness Manage-
ment Plan be developed for each wilderness area, all fires must be controlled to prevent loss of human life or property,
and that fires must be prevented from spreading outside of the wilderness areas. [FN102] The Manual also recognizes,
“[n]atural fire (i.e. lightning caused) is normally a part of the ecology of wilderness, and human effort to ban this agent
may have resulted in significant ecological changes in flora and fauna in some areas.” [FN103] Natural fire (i.e. WFU)
may burn IF there is a Fire Management Plan. The policy also allows for prescribed burns to reintroduce or maintain nat-
ural conditions, restore fire, perpetuate a primary wilderness value or perpetuate an endangered species. [FN104]
Additional guidelines for wilderness management in the BLM are contained in H.R. Report 101-405 commenting on
P.L. 101-628, the Arizona Desert Wilderness Act of 1990. [FN105] Management of Fire objectives permit “lightning
caused fires [to] play, as nearly as possible, their natural ecological role within wilderness” and “prescribed fires ignited
by man may be permitted to reduce unnatural buildup of fuels,” although they can not use ‘vegetative manipulation’ to
justify wildland fire use. [FN106] Despite the recognition of fire's role in ecosystems, by 1997 the BLM had not conduc-
ted any prescribed burns. [FN107]
Mt. Trumbull and Mt. Logan wilderness areas were designated in the Arizona Wilderness Act of 1984. [FN108]
There are no specific statements in the enabling legislation with regard to fire or restoration. Mt. Trumbull and Mt. Lo-
gan wilderness areas are relatively unique wilderness areas, in that they have (1) a completed Wilderness Management
Plan, [FN109] and (2) a Fire Management Plan (FMP). [FN110] The FMP reports 54 fires burned 213 acres from
1980-2003 in the two *283 wilderness areas including one in 1989 that burned 84 acres on Mt. Trumbull. [FN111] All
were suppressed. The significance of the plans is that the BLM is empowered to allow wild fire use or prescribed fire.
On January 11, 2000 President William J. Clinton established the Grand Canyon-Parashant National Monument, to
be managed jointly by the BLM and NPS. [FN112] Mt. Trumbull and Mt. Logan wilderness areas are within this juris-
diction and managed by the BLM with all existing grazing leases intact. It is important to note for restoration purposes
that the Mt. Trumbull grazing lease is now owned by the Grand Canyon Trust (a conservation NGO) and no cattle will be
grazed in the wilderness area for the foreseeable future. Although not specific to the wilderness areas, the proclamation
includes the language that “[s]ale of vegetative material is permitted only if part of an authorized science-based ecologic-
al restoration project.” [FN113] National monuments typically carry very high restrictions on the sale and/or exploitation
of natural resources. This language reflects the priority that then Secretary of Interior Bruce Babbitt, placed on ecosystem
restoration. The clause allows the BLM to defer some expenses of restoration science by timber sales. The implication is
NOT that the sales clause may be translated to wilderness, but rather that restoration of southwestern forests had emerged
on the national political agenda and commands new measures and resources.
The most recent regulations to implement FLPMA with regard to BLM wilderness may be found at 43 C.F.R. 6300
and 43 C.F.R. 8560. [FN114] The only specific reference to fire is for control and no reference is made to restoration. As
the BLM issued its Final Rule on December 14, 2000, one comment urged that the regulations include provisions author-
izing BLM to use prescribed burns in appropriate situations. The BLM believes that wording in the final rule is broad
enough to allow prescribed fire as a management tool in BLM wilderness. [FN115] However the wording is rather vague:
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 9
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

(b) Prescribe conditions under which other Federal., State, or local agencies or their agents may use, build, or
install such items to meet the minimum requirements for protection and administration of the wilderness area, its
resources and users; (c) Authorize officers, employees, agencies, or agents of the Federal., State, and local govern-
ments to occupy and use wilderness areas to carry out the purposes of the Wilderness Act or other Federal stat-
utes.” [FN116]
Later language is more clear, if “prescribe measures to control fire” is interpreted as permission to conduct restora-
tion activities that incidentally restore *284 fire. BLM may prescribe measures to control fire, noxious weeds, non-native
invasive plants, insects, and diseases. The BLM may require restoration concurrent with or as soon as practicable upon
completion of such measures. [FN117] Still, the BLM has not initiated any fire program much less a full-blown restora-
tion program.
The conditions are ripe for a big fire in the Mt. Trumbull Wilderness Area, and managers are concerned about what
may happen if a wildfire gets out of control. [FN118] Most wildland fires are caused by a natural source of ignition,
lightning from June through September. The second greatest cause of wildland fires is campfires. Table 2 reports the
wildland fires and burned acres from 1980 to 2003. [FN119]
Cause by Fire Management Unit
Number of Fires
Acres Burned
Mt. Trumbull & Mt. Logan Wilder-
nesses
Lightning
54
213
Total
56
4121
Table 2: Debris burning lead to 197 burned acres.
In 1999 the BLM initiated a dialogue with interested stakeholders to discuss restoration in Mt. Trumbull Wilderness
Area. The issue was whether the Mt. Trumbull ecosystem was far enough on a trajectory of degradation to warrant inter-
vention. Any intervention to reduce fuel loads or reintroduce fire by human hands is, by definition, trammeling. Argu-
ments in favor of management action pointed out that fire suppression is also trammeling and that the area was in great
risk of a large, unnatural fire. Actions invariably included some removal of small diameter trees. However, there is
enough work to do that chainsaws rather than handsaws may be necessary. Skeptics worry that introducing chainsaws in-
to wilderness sets a precedent and could open the whole area to timber management. Although no concrete proposals
were developed, after several meetings and discussions there was enough uncertainty that the process stopped. The per-
ception is that just about any BLM decision will be challenged, so without the full support and participation of all stake-
holders in 1999, the BLM was unlikely to move forward.
B. USDA Forest Service
Policies governing the Kachina Peaks Wilderness Area and the Kendrick Mt. Wilderness Area date to the 1897 Or-
ganic Act establishing that national forest reserves were to supply the nation with a continuous stream of timber and
*285 favorable conditions for water flow. [FN120] The 1905 Transfer Act moved the national forests from the Depart-
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 10
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

ment of Interior into the USDA Forest Service where they managed for water and timber until the Multiple Use Sus-
tained Yield Act of 1960 (MUSY) specified, “the national forests are established and shall be administered for outdoor
recreation, range, timber, watershed and wildlife and fish purposes.” [FN121] In 1964 the Wilderness Act added wilder-
ness management to the USFS mission. In all cases the USFS is directed to protect the land first, and then produce goods
and services.
The 1976 National Forest Management Act (NFMA) indicated a significant shift in how the USFS makes manage-
ment decisions. [FN122] The law reaffirmed many directives in MUSY, but subsequent regulations added a specific
planning process to develop Forest Management Plans. [FN123]
In 2005, new NFMA planning regulations generated a great deal of controversy. [FN124] The administration of
George W. Bush designed rules to streamline the planning process and allow for a more flexible Forest Management
Plans that can adapt to new information over time. Objections to the new rule include that it allows for greater discretion
by the “Responsible Official” for public participation and the use of science. Where the 1982 Planning Regulations ob-
ligated officials to use the best possible science; in 2005 the Responsible Official must take into account the best avail-
able science. [FN125] Consistent with the 1982 rules, the new rules state “[u]nless otherwise provided by law, all Na-
tional Forest System lands possessing wilderness characteristics must be considered for recommendation as potential wil-
derness areas during plan development or revision.” [FN126] Although comments addressed ecological restoration, bio-
logical conservation and prescribed fire, these topics are not addressed in the new NFMA regulations. The presumption is
that these issues will be considered at the National Forest level. Inevitably, the new rules will generate a round of law
suits challenging the agency's compliance with NEPA and perhaps with the 1976 NFMA. [FN127]
Significantly, the USFS has always interpreted the Wilderness Act and the NFMA to include restoration: [FN128]
National Forest Wilderness shall be so administered as to meet the public purposes of recreational., scenic,
scientific, educational., conservation, *286 and historical uses; and . . . in such a manner as to preserve and protect
its wilderness character. In carrying out such purposes, National Forest Wilderness resources shall be managed to
promote, perpetuate, and, where necessary, restore the wilderness character of the land and its specific values of
solitude, physical and mental challenge, scientific study, inspiration, and primitive recreation. To that end: (a) Nat-
ural ecological succession will be allowed to operate freely to the extent feasible. (c) In resolving conflicts in re-
source use, wilderness values will be dominant to the extent not limited by the Wilderness Act. [FN129]
Over decades ‘restoration’ has changed in meaning and scope. In the mid-twentieth century restoration meant re-
planting tree seedlings after a fire or even age (i.e. clear cut) timber operation. Since the early 1990s, forest restoration
policy includes reintroducing natural ignition wildfires to maintain ecosystem function for endangered species or wilder-
ness character. However, several obstacles impede the application of WFU in wilderness areas including; the slow ac-
ceptance of WFU principles across the agency, public perception of fire and smoke, and the fear that fire will cross polit-
ical boundaries into other jurisdictions. [FN130] Nonetheless, the USFS has utilized prescribed fire in more wilderness
areas than the other agencies. Unfortunately relative to the total acres of wilderness, the percentage of land treated re-
mains small. [FN131]
The Arizona Wilderness Act of 1984 is the enabling legislation for Kendrick Mt. Wilderness Area, which is split
between the Kaibab and Coconino National Forrests and Kachina Peaks Wilderness Area wholly in the Coconino Nation-
al Forrest. [FN132] No special restoration provisions for fire were included.
In 1994 a USFS funded assessment of the Kendrick Mt. Wilderness Area warned of a dangerous accumulation of
fuels and that when (not if) a fire started in the wilderness area, the results could be devastating. In June, 2000 the Pump-
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 11
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

kin Fire started outside of Kendrick Wilderness Area and burned 14,760 acres including much of the Wilderness Area.
Full suppression efforts were employed and a lookout tower and cabin were preserved. The fire burned in a mosaic patter
across the landscape however some areas burned very hot consuming all organic material leaving behind burnt stumps
and mineral soils that have experienced high rates of erosion. Although natural., the recovery period for some areas will
measured in centuries. Other areas are excellent opportunity for allowing WFU. Although the area is so small (6,500)
that fire will probably need to be ignited by management (prescribed) to maintain a two to four year return interval.
*287 The Kaibab National Forrest manages the bulk of Kendrick Mt. Wilderness Area and their 2005 Fire Manage-
ment Plan contains key management direction for WFU in the wilderness. A guiding principle for the Kaibab National
Forrest states, “the role of wildland fire as an essential ecological process and natural change agent will be incorporated
into the planning process.” [FN133] Wilderness may have WFU, although suppression will occur if the fire threatens to
escape, or burn the historic fire tower on top of the mountain. [FN134] The Kaibab has taken steps to be able to let fire
burn in Kendrick Mt wilderness area by burning nearby Forest Service land, 928 acres burned in 2005. [FN135] In FY06,
2,184 acres have been treated with prescribed fire in the Kendrick project area. [FN136] However, there still are prob-
lems at the wilderness boundary. The agency did not let the prescribed fire into the Wilderness Area because there was
not enough time to properly complete the NEPA Environmental Assessment process. Wilderness is not politically accept-
able as a categorical exclusion to the NEPA process and that once proposed, the agency would have to negotiate whether
prescribed fire is ‘natural.’ Prescribed fire is ignited in April, May, October or November under predictable and relat-
ively mild wind conditions in Arizona. Natural fire would likely start in July in pre-monsoon conditions (dry lightning
ignitions without rain), with unpredictable and often high wind conditions. Resolving this difference is essential to wil-
derness management. Wilderness advocates within agencies, academia, NGOs or the general public will not support a
wilderness fire plan that relies on human ignition and human management of what can only be imagined as natural.
Kachina Peaks Wilderness Area is in the Coconino National Forrest San Francisco Peaks, just outside of Flagstaff
Arizona and has high visitor usage and public visibility. “Fire under prescribed conditions is allowed to play a natural
role in the wilderness.” [FN137] However, the conditions under which a fire can burn are so restrictive that no natural ig-
nition fire (or prescribed fire) has burned through the area. One reason for tight restrictions is compliance with the 1973
Endangered Species Act and concerns for habitat for the endangered Mexican spotted owl. [FN138]
Because Kachina Peaks Wilderness Area varies in altitude from about 2000 m a.s.l. to 3855 m a.s.l., it includes sev-
eral forest types with PIPO dominating about 2839 acres. But with aspen and mixed conifer as also frequent fire ecosys-
tems upwards of 10,000 acres in the 18,616 acres wilderness area is under consideration. Recent research has demon-
strated that the species composition has changed since *288 1880 when fires were excluded from the ecosystem. [FN139]
Restoration treatments are recommended especially for the lower elevation PIPO although some fire should be allowed to
run upslope to create a mosaic of conditions that returns the more natural ecosystem processes. [FN140]
C. National Park Service (NPS)
In 1916 Congress passed the National Park Service Organic Act, “to conserve the scenery and the natural and historic
objects and the wildlife therein and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will
leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.” [FN141] The contradictory nature of that clause has
been quoted extensively, although a preponderance of historical evidence suggests the intent of Congress in 1916 was
that preservation trumps recreational access. [FN142] Nonetheless Congressional intent does not always translate into
practice, and recreation has dominated NPS planning for decades. [FN143] The “Redwood Act” Amendment in 1978 ex-
panded the Organic Act to ensure that park visitation would not ‘impair’ the natural resources. [FN144] In the 1990s the
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 12
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

NPS recognized the need for more natural resources research [FN145] and the NPS initiated the Natural Resources Chal-
lenge that has stepped up research as well as the restoration and preservation of ecosystems. [FN146] Both policies re-
cognize the primacy of managing for natural conditions.
To manage natural resources within wilderness the NPS guidelines are that:
[W]ithout spectacular natural resources, especially indigenous and endemic species, a wilderness experience
might not be possible. . . . Natural resource management plans will be integrated with and cross-reference wilder-
ness management plans. . . . Management intervention should only be undertaken to the extent necessary to correct
past mistakes, the impacts of human use, and the influences originating outside of wilderness boundaries. Manage-
ment actions, including restoration of extirpated and endangered native species, altered natural *289 fire regimes,
controlling invasive alien species, and the protection of air and water quality, should be attempted only when the
knowledge and tools exist to accomplish clearly articulated goals. [FN147] Furthermore:
[F]ire management activities conducted in wilderness areas will conform to the basic purposes of wilderness.
The park's fire management and wilderness management plans must identify and reconcile the natural and historic
roles of fire in the wilderness, and will provide a prescription for response, if any, to natural and human-caused
wildfires. If a prescribed fire program is implemented, these plans will also include the prescriptions and proced-
ures under which the program will be conducted within wilderness. [FN148] Restoration activities are mandated
by NPS policy, especially for fire:
The National Park Service will maintain as parts of the natural ecosystems of parks all native plants and anim-
als. . . . The Service will achieve this maintenance by: Preserving and restoring the natural abundances, diversities,
dynamics, distributions, habitats, and behaviors of native plant and animal populations and the communities and
ecosystems in which they occur. [FN149]
However, restoring fire in dense PIPO stands is a delicate business. For fire to burn in a hot, dry year in the hottest
months of June and July, there may be a call for judicious thinning. In fact, another Organic Act clause, rarely if ever
used, allows for the Secretary of the Interior to sell timber “where in his judgment the cutting of such timber is required
in order to control the attacks of insects or diseases or otherwise conserve the scenery or the natural or historic objects in
any such park, monument, or reservation.” [FN150] Politically and practically it would require an extraordinary set of
circumstances to sell timber from an NPS unit; doubly impossible when management decisions in NPS backcountry are
guided by the 1964 Wilderness Act.
The enabling legislation for Grand Canyon National Park provides fundamental goals and direction for management.
In 1908, President Theodore Roosevelt issued Proclamation No. 794 establishing the Grand Canyon National Monument.
[FN151] GCNP was established in 1919 for the benefit and enjoyment of the *290 people, to be managed in accordance
with the 1916 NPS Organic Act. [FN152] In the GCNP Enlargement Act of 1975 Congress recognized “that the entire
Grand Canyon . . . is a natural feature of national and international significance” wherein grazing allotments were to be
terminated by 1985 and the Secretary of Interior is required to make recommendations of any suitable area for preserva-
tion as wilderness. [FN153] These documents do not explicitly refer to restoration activities. Although over 90% of the
GCNP was recommended for wilderness in the late 1970s, designation has not been forthcoming. [FN154] Nonetheless,
guiding principles exist in the 1998 GCNP Wilderness Management Plan that require the area to be managed to preserve
its wilderness character. [FN155]
While fire is not the only aspect to restoration, its importance was recognized by NPS Director Fran Mainella's reau-
thorization of Wildland Fire Management in 2003. [FN156] Specifically the NPS will use science to manage WFU as an
essential ecological process to restore, preserve, or maintain ecosystems and effectively integrate the preservation of wil-
derness including the application of “minimum requirement” management techniques into all activities impacting this re-
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 13
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

source. [FN157]
The NPS has the longest history of reintroducing fire into ecosystems. Kings Canyon-Sequioa National Park in 1968
and Yosemite National Park in 1970, both initiated a prescribed fire regime after a new issue of NPS policies recognized
that “Fires in vegetation resulting from natural causes are recognized as natural phenomena and may be allowed to run
their course.” [FN158] Furthermore, prescribed fire to achieve objectives may be employed as a substitute for natural
fire. [FN159] The Kings Canyon-Sequioa National Park ecosystems have a frequent, low to moderate fire intensity re-
gime and managers believed the system had been compromised by years of fire suppression. [FN160] The prescribed fire
program demonstrated that fire could be managed and controlled and by the early 1970s the NPS was a leader in pre-
scribed fire application for the purposes of restoration. [FN161] As early as the 1980s there was debate on whether fire
alone is enough to correct the influence of past *291 management decisions or whether other manipulation was required.
[FN162] Nonetheless prescribed fire and WFU was here to stay in the NPS.
Prescribed fire and WFU has been utilized as a management tool in GCNP since the late 1970s. [FN163] The advant-
ages to implementing fire restoration in the GCNP include that: (1) the fire history and pre-Euro-American conditions are
relatively well known, [FN164] (2) current conditions indicate that the system is out of natural range of variability, (3)
there are recommendations from within the park unit to restore fire and reduce fuel loads, [FN165] (4) there appears to
be wide spread support for restoring fire to the ecosystem, [FN166] (5) the staff and personnel are in place, and (6) a Fire
Management Plan that has gone through the NEPA process and a full Environmental Impact Statement ought to be in ef-
fect by 2007. More recently, research is addressing the ecological effects of different restoration treatments in the GCNP;
(1) burning only, (2) thinning around old growth with burning, and (3) heavy thinning throughout the experimental site
with burning (treatments were in the Kaibab National Forest in conditions similar to the GCNP). [FN167] The recom-
mendation is that GCNP employ some thinning especially around old growth trees to restore forest conditions and that
the thinning could be carried out without large equipment but may require chainsaws. [FN168] As to whether fire alone
can achieve restoration goals, research on an escaped prescribed fire in 1993 had sufficient mortality to fulfill restoration
objectives. [FN169] But that fire was much hotter than planned and management is unlikely to use such hot fires fearing
damage to resources or humans. In other words, when a fire gets hot enough to burn off the detritus and kill younger es-
tablished PIPO, the risk of the fire getting out of control may be just too high for administrators to withstand.
Overlay the Wilderness Act with the National Fire Plan and it appears that to conduct prescribed fire, an army of
rangers with two-man cross-cut saws and buckets of water will patrol the perimeter to contain a prescribed fire. But there
are no legal barriers in the GCNP to prohibit chainsaws if they are determined to be the minimum tool for safety and effi-
ciency. A Finding of No Significant Impact in 2002 for a research experiment, demonstrated that nothing in the law pre-
vented mechanical thinning. However, the preferred alternative was not implemented *292 when the level of public res-
istance to mechanical thinning was made clear to the NPS. On the north rim of GCNP chainsaws are sparingly employed
to clear ‘black lines' and/or roads that act as barriers for prescribed and WFU programs. Helicopter ignitions are em-
ployed for large prescribed burns over 1000 acres but as of 2005 the majority of burned areas on the north rim are from
WFU. Although the area is not designated wilderness, each action is reviewed for minimum tool requirements to retain
wilderness characteristics.
To the NPS's credit, their National Wilderness Steering Committee has struggled with the natural/untrammeled de-
bate in restoration and proposed classifying actions into three categories. [FN170] A Class I action is a short term dis-
turbance with long term wilderness character enhancement, Class II is a long term recurring entry with both benefits and
costs, and Class III actions support laws and policies but “do not directly enhance wilderness character.” [FN171] The
Committee recognized that activity is not precluded by statute but that does not always translate into action. [FN172] The
question is that with such direction, why is there so little fire in the system? Or in the GCNP case, can they remove some
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 14
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

trees to open up the forest to more historic conditions? In the end, the Superintendent is still the one to make the call
between a Class I, II, or III action and the issue still hinges on whether the trade off for the temporary trammeling suffi-
ciently ‘enhances' wilderness.
The 2007 Fire Management Plan will, presumably, forecast the long term goals of WFU, prescribed fire and whether
or not the north rim will move toward BOTH more natural and more untrammeled conditions and how that goal will be
accomplished. Ideally the density of PIPO will be reduced, fire suppression will stop, and naturally ignited fires would be
allowed to burn in all seasons. Fire is gaining acceptance with the general public. One survey revealed six times as many
visitors to GCNP supported some sort of fire in the park than those opposed to all fires. [FN173]
IV. Three Agencies, Three Variations
What lies in store for restoration, fire and wilderness for each agency? All three agencies share the National Fire Plan
policy directive to restore fire to ecosystems including wilderness. All three agencies are subject to the 1964 Wilderness
Act and have interpreted that act to include restoring natural conditions. But at least in northern Arizona the NPS in the
grand Canyon National Park forges ahead with an aggressive prescribed burn and let burn policy utilizing chainsaws and
old roads for fire lines and helicopters for ignition. The USFS is *293 monitoring ecological recovery from a devastating
wilderness fire and burning in the cool season on lands surrounding the wilderness area, but not in the wilderness area
yet. The BLM continues to suppress fire in its wilderness areas but is floating an ambitious balloon of restoration in Mt.
Trumbull. Each agency is balancing through action or inaction the legal implications of natural and untrammeled stipula-
tions in the Wilderness Act. All three agencies as well as the ecosystems themselves, would benefit from across the board
guidance and support that unifies the National Wilderness Preservation System.
The NPS is at a difficult point in history. It has struggled with the natural and untrammeled debate and, at least policy
wise, decided to proceed. As restoration techniques and knowledge become more prevalent and the science of restoration
more exact, the temptation will be to act more aggressively. Ecosystem restoration will expand to address the growing
list of external and internal threats on NPS lands. In the extreme, managers will be faced with choosing between man-
aging wild, self-willed parks where ecosystem structure is compromised and exotic species slowly overrun endemic spe-
cies, or creating parks that are aggressively managed botanical gardens where structure is maintained and exotic species
are held at bay. [FN174] How do managers avoid the extreme choices?
Ostensibly, in ponderosa pine ecosystems the goal is to create conditions where lightning can strike any time of the
year and managers can just watch it burn. The open forest conditions will allow sunlight to nourish a historic host of un-
derstory grasses and vegetation with the associated fauna. To that end the GCNP has the legal grounding and policy pro-
cess to continue with an aggressive prescribed burn program. The public generally supports NPS actions and the Fire
Management Plan for 2007 should emerge from the NEPA process with good alternatives. Any proposal to remove trees
will have a higher likelihood of success if it is a one time operation, and if hand tools like cross-cut saws are at least thor-
oughly tested. Cross-cut saws are not generally preferred (they are also referred to as ‘misery whips'), but creative man-
agement alternatives may indicate that enough volunteers can thin enough small diameter trees to fulfill management ob-
jectives. In contrast, the impact from all these people with hand tools may be unacceptable and the public may condone
chainsaws for a one time treatment. Understandably anyone who values wilderness shudders at the concept of stumps and
burn piles no matter how noble the goal. Even the goal to make an area more natural and less trammeled.
For many areas the BLM seems to be taking a wait and see position. They, as an agency, must pick their legal battles
and any action in a wilderness area is very likely to attract a lawsuit. However, it appears as if the BLM in Grand Canyon
Parashant National Monument is prepared to take a dramatic step. Mt. Trumbull and Mt. Logan wilderness areas have the
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 15
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

legal authority and policy process in place to take some sort of restoration action. Both areas have a Wilderness Manage-
ment Plan and Fire Management Plan. The big step is that the November *294 2005 released Draft Resource Manage-
ment Plan--Draft Environmental Impact Statement, proposes to restore Mt. Trumbull Wilderness Area. [FN175] The pro-
posed action includes using prescribed fire or WFU on 6000 acres over twenty years. The BLM “could use appropriate
tools to construct control lines” and would protect old growth trees by raking around the base or “using minimum tools to
fell and buck small diameter trees” that pose a threat for crown fires. [FN176] It is too early to see what the public reac-
tion will be although the trust level for the BLM is generally not as high as for the NPS. The comparatively small Mt.
Trumbull area may be appropriate for hand tools (or may not). The BLM's argument to act will be enhanced if action
only requires a single entrance plan and the impact on flora and fauna is heavily monitored (both stipulations will require
funding and some sort of guarantee). Because the wilderness area is perched on a mesa it receives enough annual light-
ning strike to insure that once restored, fire will play a role in the area's future.
The USFS in northern Arizona has a slightly different outlook. All three agencies can use Kendrick Mt. Wilderness
Area as an example of what can happen to a wilderness in a dry, hot year. The area has been ‘reset’ to ecological condi-
tions that vary from mineral soil to heavily thinned to surface clearing. But resetting an area is not restoration. If the
USFS would like to conduct restoration and reintroduce fire, this would be an opportune moment. The USFS has a long
history of rigorously adhering to minimum tools including cross-cut saws for trail maintenance. They may be able to
build on that tradition and act in Kendrick Mtn. and Kachina Peaks Wilderness Area to restore historic ecological condi-
tions. Just as in the NPS or BLM, no roads or sales should be proposed, and their argument to act would be strengthened
by a single entry plan and well funded post-treatment monitoring.
Coconino National Forest has an aggressive prescribed fire program although WFU awaits a revised Fire Manage-
ment Plan. The let burn policy in Kachina Peaks Wilderness Area is so constrained by weather and moisture conditions
that wild fire is very unlikely. Perhaps the USFS can learn a lesson from Kendrick Mt. that eventually the forest will
burn, and starting a program on their own with or without thinning is in their best interest.
Any action in any of these agencies will be reviewed and scrutinized by the public. Agencies can develop plans that
will be effective and avoid legal obstruction. It will require creative leadership with a ‘go slow’ sense of humility. Recent
research indicates that complex ecological data can be digested by the public with the help of GIS mapping and repeated
meetings. [FN177] Thus the science *295 information can jump the manager--public gap that too frequently plagues nat-
ural resources conflict.
Yet the future is uncertain. Science may reveal more information about restoration and managers may improve WFU
and prescribed fire as components of restoration. But to act in wilderness, to thin trees so that fires are not so intense, to
burn off accumulated debris on the ground with human ignited fire in the cool months, agencies must be able to demon-
strate that these ecosystems are on a trajectory of degradation, and must also be able to insure that management will max-
imize the untrammeled character of wilderness. Agency plans that make us gardeners of wilderness will undoubtedly
face court challenges and public resistance. These are, after all, the wild places of America and agencies are charged to
maximize that wildness--forever.
[FNa1]. Ph.D. and Associate Professor, School of Forestry, Center for Environmental Sciences and Education, Northern
Arizona University.
[FN1]. Howard Zahniser, Editorial., Managed to Be Left Unmanaged, The Living Wilderness, Spring to Summer 1961,
at 2.
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 16
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

[FN2]. Aldo Leopold, The Land Ethic, in A Sand County Almanac 217, 240 (Oxford Press 1968) (1949).
[FN3]. See Society for Ecological Restoration International Science & Policy Working Group (Ser), The Ser Internation-
al Primer on Ecological Restoration 3 (2004).
[FN4]. See generally Jerry F. Franklin & James K. Agee, Forging a Science-Based National Forest Fire Policy, Issues in
Sci. & Techn., Fall 2003, at 59. See also Scott L. Stephens & Lawrence W. Ruth, Federal Forest-Fire Policy in the
United States, 15 Ecol. Appl. 532, 542 (2005).
[FN5]. The Wilderness Act of 1964, 16 U.S.C. §§ 1131-36 (2000).
[FN6]. Nat'l Park Serv., Director's Order #41, Wilderness Preservation and Management 2 (Aug. 2, 1999) available at ht-
tp:// www.nps.gov/policy/dorders/dorder41.doc.
[FN7]. Nat'l Park Serv., Management Policies, § 6.3.1 (2001), available at http://www.nps.gov/policy/mp/policies.pdf.
[FN8]. See generally Thomas W. Swetnam & Chris H. Baisan, Historical Fire Regime Patterns in the Southwestern
United States since AD 1700, in Fire Effects in Southwestern Forests: Proceedings of the La Mesa Fire Symposium
11-32 (Craig D. Allen ed., 1996); W. Wallace Covington, The Evolutionary and Historical Context, in Ecological Restor-
ation of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests 26-47 (Peter Friederici ed., 2003).
[FN9]. See generally Margaret M. Moore et al., Reference Conditions and Ecological Restoration: a Southwestern Pon-
derosa Pine Perspective, 9 Ecol. Appl 1266 (1999).
[FN10]. Peter Z. Fulé et al., Continuing Fire Regimes in Remote Forests of Grand Canyon National Park, in Wilderness
Science in a Time of Change, Vol. 5: Wilderness Ecosystems, Threats, and Management 245 (David N. Cole et al. eds.,
2000).
[FN11]. See generally Joy N. Mast et al., Restoration of Presettlement Age Structure of an Arizona Ponderosa Pine
Forest, 9 Ecol. Appl. 228 (1999).
[FN12]. See generally Kim Crumbo & Roxane George, Protecting and Restoring the Greater Grand Canyon Ecoregion, at
http:// arizona.sierraclub.org/conservation/grandcanyon/GcpaperForweb.pdf (June 2005).
[FN13]. See generally Craig D. Allen et al., Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems: a Broad
Perspective, 12 Ecol. Appl. 1418 (2002).
[FN14]. See generally Peter Z. Fulé et al., Comparing Ecological Restoration Alternatives: Grand Canyon, Arizona, 170
For. Ecol.& Mgm't, 19-41 (2002).
[FN15]. Amy E. M. Waltz et al., Diversity in Ponderosa Pine Forest Structure Following Ecological Restoration Treat-
ments, 49 Forest Sci. 885-900 (2003).
[FN16]. See generally Bruce M. Kilgore, The Role of Fire In Wilderness: A State-of-Knowledge Review, in Proceed-
ings--Nat'l Wilderness Res. Conf: Issues, State-of-Knowledge, Future Directions, U.S. Forest Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep.
INT-220, at 70 (Robert C. Lucas ed., 1986).
[FN17]. James K. Agee, Wilderness Fire Science: A State-of-Knowledge Review, in Wilderness Science in a Time of
Change, supra note 10, at 5, 6.
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 17
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

[FN18]. See generally Marion Hourdequin, Linking Wilderness Research and Management--Volume 1. Wilderness Fire
Restoration and Management: an Annotated Reading List, U.S. Forest Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-70-VOL 1
(2001).
[FN19]. See generally A. Starker Leopold et al., Wildlife management in the national parks, 69 Am. Forestry 35 (1963);
Norman L. Christensen, Fire and Wilderness, Int'l J. Wilderness, Sept. 1995, at 30-34.
[FN20]. Nat'l Interagency Fire Ctr., National Fire Plan, Review and Update of the 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Manage-
ment Policy, http://www.nifc.gov/fire_ policy/history/index.htm (2001).
[FN21]. See generally Agee, supra note 17.
[FN22]. David J. Parsons, The Challenge of Restoring Natural Fire to Wilderness, in Wilderness Science in a Time of
Change, supra note 10, at 276.
[FN23]. W. Wallace Covington et al., Restoring Ecosystem Health in Ponderosa Pine Forests of the Southwest, 95 J.
Forestry 23-29 (1997).
[FN24]. Laura Sweedo, Where There is Fire, There is Smoke: Prescribed Burning, in Idaho's Forests, 8 Dick. J. Env. L.
Pol. 121 (1999).
[FN25]. 16 U.S.C. § 1133(d)(1); see also David L. Bunnell, Prescribed Fire Considerations and the Wilderness Act, in
Proceedings of the Environmental Regulation and Prescribed Fire Conference, Tampa, Florida 64-73 (Dana Bryan, ed.,
1995).
[FN26]. David N. Cole & Peter B. Landres, Threats to Wilderness Ecosystems: Impacts and Research Need, 6 Ecological
Applications 168, 172 (1996).
[FN27]. See generally Roderick Nash, Wilderness and the American Mind. (4th ed. 2001). See also Doug Scott, The En-
during Wilderness 45-56 (Fulcrum Pub. 2004).
[FN28]. Aldo Leopold, The Wilderness and its Place in Forest Recreation Policy, 19 J. Forestry 718 (1921); Arthur H.
Carhart, Recreation in Forestry, 21 J. Forestry 12 (1923).
[FN29]. Howard Zahniser, supra note 1.
[FN30]. See generally Craig W. Allin, The Politics of Wilderness Preservation (1982).
[FN31]. James P. Gilligan, The Development of Policy and Administration of Forest Service Primitive and Wilderness
Areas in the United States (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan) (on file with author) 333-59 (1953).
[FN32]. 16 U.S.C. § 1131(a).
[FN33].
Wilderness.net,
Wilderness
Fast
Facts:
The
National
Wilderness
Preservation
System,
ht-
tp://www.wilderness.net/index.cfm? fuse=NWPS&sec=fastfacts (Apr. 7, 2006).
[FN34]. See generally John C. Hendee & Chad P. Dawson, Wilderness Management: Stewardship and Protection of Re-
sources and Values (3d ed. 2002).
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 18
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

[FN35]. See generally Peter Landres et al., Monitoring selected conditions related to wilderness character: a national
framework,
U.S.
Forest
Serv.
Gen.
Tech.
Report
RMRS-GTR-151
(2005)
available
at
http://
www.treesearch.fs.fed.us/pubs/9459.
[FN36]. See generally Leopold et al., supra note 19.
[FN37]. See Miron L. Heinselman, Fire in Wilderness Ecosystems, in Wilderness Management, U.S. Forest Serv. misc.
pub. 1365 at 249 (John C. Hendee et al. eds., 1978); David J. Parsons, et al., Natural Fire Management in National Parks,
10 Envtl. Mgmt. 21 (1986).
[FN38]. Nat'l Park Serv., Compilation of the Administrative Policies for the National Parks and National Monuments of
Scientific Significance 17 (rev. 1968).
[FN39]. Bruce M. Kilgore & George S. Briggs, Restoring Fire to High Elevation Forests in California, 70 J. Forestry
266, 266-70 (1972).
[FN40]. See generally Larry Bancroft, et al., Evolution of the Natural Fire Management Program at Sequoia and Kings
Canyon National Parks, in Proceedings-- Symposium and Workshop on Wilderness Fire, U.S. Forest Serv. Gen. Tech.
Rep. INT-182, at 174-80 (James E. Lotan et al eds., 1985).
[FN41]. Jan W. van Wagtendonk, The Evolution of National Park Service Fire Policy, in Fire in the Environment: Ecolo-
gical and Cultural Perspectives, Gen. Tech. Report SE-69, at 330 (Steven C. Nodvin & Thomas A. Waldrop eds., 1991).
[FN42]. Daniel Rohlf & Douglas L. Honnold, Managing the Balances of Nature: The Legal Framework of Wilderness
Management, 15 Ecol. L. Q. 249, 255 (1988).
[FN43]. 16 U.S.C. § 1131(c) (emphasis added).
[FN44]. See generally David N. Cole, Ecological Manipulation in Wilderness-- An Emerging Management Dilemma,
Int'l J. Wilderness, May 1996, at 15-19; David N. Cole, Paradox of the Primeval: Ecological Restoration in Wilderness,
18 Ecol. Restoration 77-86 (2000); Peter Landres et al., Naturalness and Wildness: The Dilemma and Irony of Ecological
Restoration in Wilderness, 10 WildEarth 77-82 (2001).
[FN45]. Society for Ecological Restoration, supra note 3.
[FN46]. Carol Miller, Wildland Fire Use: A Wilderness Perspective on Fuel Management, in Fire, Fuel Treatments and
Ecological Restoration--Conference 379 (Philip N. Omi & Linda A. Joyce eds., 2003).
[FN47]. Moore et al., supra note 9.
[FN48]. Bruce M. Kilgore, What is “Natural” in Wilderness Fire Management?, in Proceedings, supra note 40, at 57.
[FN49]. See generally, Reed F. Noss, A Checklist for Wildlands Network Designs, 17 Conser. Biol. 1270 (2003).
[FN50]. Leopold et al., supra note 19, at 33.
[FN51]. The claim was made notwithstanding the more recent recognition of Native American presence in wilderness.
See Mark David Spence, Dispossessing the Wilderness (1999); Philip Burnham, Indian Country, God's Country (2000);
Robert A. Poirier & David M. Ostergren, Evicting People from Nature: Indigenous Land Rights and National Parks in
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 19
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

Australia, Russia and the United States, 42 Nat. Res. J. 331 (2002).
[FN52]. Cole, Paradox of the Primeval., supra note 44; Scott, supra note 27, at 1; Greg H. Aplet, On the Nature of Wild-
ness: Exploring What Wilderness Really Protects, 76 Den. U. L. Rev. 347, 351-52 (1999).
[FN53]. Howard Zahniser, supra note 1; Edward Zahniser, The Wilderness Act: Humility and Restraint in American
Land Law, Presentation at the George Wright Society Biennial Conference (March 17, 2005).
[FN54]. 16 U.S.C. § 1131(c).
[FN55]. Preservation of Wilderness Areas: Hearing on S. 2453 and Related Wilderness Bills before the S. Subcomm. on
Pub. Lands, 92nd Cong. 58-62 (May 5, 1972) (Statement of Frank Church, Chair, S. Subcomm. on Pub. Lands).
[FN56]. George Nickas, Preserving an Enduring Wilderness: Challenges and Threats to the National Wilderness Preser-
vation System, 76 Den. U. L. Rev. 449, 456-57 (1999).
[FN57]. William A. Worf, Wilderness Management: A Historical Perspective on the Implications of Human-Ignited Fire,
in Proceedings, supra note 42, at 276-82.
[FN58]. Michael McCloskey, Changing Views of What the Wilderness System Is All About, 76 Den. U. L. Rev. 369,
376-78 (1999); Cole, Paradox of the Primeval., supra note 44; Aplet, supra note 52, at 352; Landres et al., supra note 35,
at 12.
[FN59]. Howard Zahniser, Editorial., Guardians not Gardeners, The Living Wilderness, 1963, at 2.
[FN60]. Howard Zahniser, Managed to Be Left Unmanaged, supra note 1.
[FN61]. William Wallace Covington, Helping Western Forests Heal., 408 Nature 135-36 (2000).
[FN62]. Cole, Paradox of the Primeval, supra note 44, at 19.
[FN63]. William A. Worf, Response to “Ecological Manipulation in Wilderness” by Dr. David Cole, Int'l J. Wilderness,
June 1997, at 30.
[FN64]. Pinchot Institute for Conservation, Ensuring the Stewardship of the National Wilderness Preservation System 13
(Sept. 2001) available at http:// www.pinchot.org/publications/policy_reports/wilderness_report.pdf.
[FN65]. 16 U.S.C. §1133(b).
[FN66]. Rohlf & Honnold, supra note 42, at 261.
[FN67]. MaryBeth Keifer et al., Prescribed Fire as the Minimum Tool for Wilderness Forest and Fire Regime Restora-
tion: A Case Study from the Sierra Nevada, California, in Wilderness Science in a Time of Change, supra note 10, at
266.
[FN68]. Landres et al., supra note 35, at 5; see also Charisse A. Sydoriak et al., Would Ecological Restoration Make Ban-
delier Wilderness More or Less of a Wilderness?, 10 WildEarth 89 (2001).
[FN69]. Nash, supra note 27, at 388.
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 20
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

[FN70]. Pinchot Institute, supra note 64, at 10.
[FN71]. See The Great New Wilderness Debate (J. Baird Callicott & Michael P. Nelson eds., 1998) (discussing the
evolving wilderness ideal).
[FN72]. See generally Mark W. T. Harvey, A Symbol of Wilderness: Echo Park and the American Conservation Move-
ment (1994); see also David N. Cole, Symbolic Values: The Overlooked Values that Make Wilderness Unique, Int'l J.
Wilderness, Aug. 2005, at 23.
[FN73]. Jerry F. Franklin & Greg H. Aplet, Wilderness Ecosystems, in Wilderness Management: Stewardship and Pro-
tection of Resources and Values 271-79 (John C. Hendee & Chad P. Dawson eds., 2002).
[FN74]. See Peter Friederici, Introduction, in Ecological Restoration of South-western Ponderosa Pine Forests xix (Peter
Friederici ed. 2003).
[FN75]. Franklin & Aplet, supra note 73, at 271.
[FN76]. Rohlf & Honnold, supra note 42, at 259.
[FN77]. Franklin & Aplet, supra note 73, at 279.
[FN78]. David M. Graber, Ecological Restoration in Wilderness: Natural Versus Wild in National Park Service Wilder-
ness, The George Wright Forum, No. 3, 2003, at 34, 40.
[FN79]. See, e.g., Doug Goodman & Daniel McCool, Contested Landscape: the Politics of Wilderness and Utah and the
West (1999).
[FN80]. William R. Lowry, The Capacity for Wonder: Preserving National Parks (1994).
[FN81]. Marcy A. DeMillion, Mount Logan Wilderness Reference Condition and Social Preferences for Ecological Res-
toration (1999) (unpublished M.S. thesis on file at Northern Arizona University).
[FN82]. James P. Gilligan, The Contradiction of Wilderness Preservation in a Democracy, Proc. Soc'y Am. Foresters,
119, 122 (1954).
[FN83]. See generally Daniel Yankelovich, Coming to Public Judgment: Making Democracy Work in A Complex World
(1991).
[FN84]. 16 U.S.C. § 1133(d)1.
[FN85]. Dept. of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-63, §135(f), 115 Stat. 414,
443 (2002) (amending Pub. L. No. 106-544 (2001)).
[FN86]. Endangered American Wilderness Act of 1978, Pub. L. No. 95-237, §2(c)-(d), 92 Stat. 40 (1978).
[FN87]. Big Sur Wilderness and Conservation Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-370, § 4(a), 116 Stat. 3071, 3074 (2002).
[FN88]. 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531-1544 as amended.
[FN89]. 42 U.S.C. §§ 4321-4347.
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 21
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

[FN90]. Stephens & Ruth, supra note 4, at 534.
[FN91]. See National Fire Plan, What Is the NFP, http:// www.fireplan.gov/overview/whatis.html (2004).
[FN92]. See U.S. Dept. of the Interior et al., 2001 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy: Guiding Principles,
Policies, and Implementation Actions, in Review and Update of the 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy
(Jan. 2001) available at http://www.nifc.gov/fire_policy/history/index.htm [hereinafter Nat'l Fire Plan].
[FN93]. Nat'l Fire Plan, supra note 92, at i.
[FN94]. G. Thomas Zimmerman & David L. Bunnell, The Federal Wildland Fire Policy: Opportunities for Wilderness
Fire Management, in Wilderness Science in a Time of Change, supra note 10, at 294.
[FN95]. Parsons, supra note 22, at 278.
[FN96]. Stephens & Ruth, supra note 4, at 535.
[FN97]. See U.S. Dept. of the Interior et al., A Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire Risks to Communit-
ies and the Environment: A 10-Year Comprehensive Strategy, at http://www.fireplan.gov/reports/7-19-en.pdf (Aug.
2001).
[FN98]. 43 U.S.C. § 1782 (2000).
[FN99]. § 1782(c).
[FN100]. Amy Rashkin et al., The State of the Law: The Wilderness Act of 1964: A Practitioner's Guide, 21 J. Land Re-
sources & Envtl. L. 219, 267-69 (2001).
[FN101]. Management of Designated Wilderness, 45 Fed. Reg. 47,180 (Sept. 24, 1981).
[FN102]. Id. at 47,192.
[FN103]. Id.
[FN104]. Id
[FN105]. H.R. Rep. No. 101-405 (1990).
[FN106]. Id. at Appendix B, P 14.
[FN107]. Parsons, supra note 22, at 278.
[FN108]. Arizona Wilderness Act of 1984, §301(a)(4), Pub. L. No. 98-406, 98 Stat. 1485, 1493 (1984) (Mount Logan
Wilderness); §301(a)(5) (Mount Trumball Wilderness).
[FN109]. Bureau of Land Management, Mt. Trumbull Wilderness & Mt. Logan Wilderness, Wilderness Management
Plan, BLM-AZ-PT-90-009-8500 (1990).
[FN110]. Bureau of Land Management, Arizona Strip Fire Management Zone, Fire Management Plan (2004) available at
http://www.blm.gov/az/env_ docs/fmp/ASFMP04.pdf.
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 22
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

[FN111]. Id. at 41.
[FN112]. Proclamation No. 7265, Establishment of the Grand Canyon-Parashant National Monument, 65 Fed. Reg. 2825
(Jan. 11, 2000).
[FN113]. Id. at 2827.
[FN114]. See 43 C.F.R. §§ 6300-6305, 8560 (2003).
[FN115]. Wilderness Management, 65 Fed. Reg. 78,357, 78,369 (Dec. 14, 2000).
[FN116]. 43 C.F.R. § 6303.1(b)-(c).
[FN117]. Id. at § 6304.22.
[FN118]. William Wallace Covington et al., Changes in Ponderosa Pine Forests of the Mt. Trumbull Wilderness: Report
to BLM, AZ Strip District, Ecological Restoration Institute (1999), at http://hdl.handle.net/2019/62.
[FN119]. Bureau of Land Management, supra note 110, at 42.
[FN120]. 16 U.S.C. § 475.
[FN121]. 16 U.S.C. §§ 528-531.
[FN122]. The National Forest Management Act of 1976, Pub. L. No. 94-588, 90 Stat. 2949 (1976) (codified at 16 U.S.C.
§§ 1600-1614 and amending the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974).
[FN123]. 36 C.F.R. §219 (1982).
[FN124]. 36 C.F.R § 219 (2005).
[FN125]. § 219.11 (a).
[FN126]. § 219.7(a)(5) (ii).
[FN127].
See
generally
WildLaw,
Review
of
the
New
NFMA
Planning
Regulations,
ht-
tp://www.wildlaw.org/news.html#012005 (Jan. 20, 2005).
[FN128]. Rohlf & Hannond, supra note 42, at 262-63.
[FN129]. 36 C.F.R. § 293.2 (emphasis added).
[FN130]. Dustin Doane, Barriers to Wildland Fire Use in USDA Forest Service Wilderness Areas as Perceived by Wil-
derness Fire Managers, 26-27 (2005) (unpublished M.S. thesis in Forest Resources, University of Idaho).
[FN131]. Parsons, supra note 22, at 278.
[FN132]. The Arizona Wilderness Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-406, § 101(a)(22), 98 Stat. 1485, 1487 (1984)
(designating Kachina Peaks Wilderness); § 101(a)(12) (designating Kendrick Mountain Wilderness).
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 23
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

[FN133]. U.S. Dept. of Agric., Forest Serv., Kaibab National Forest, Forest Management Plan (on file with the Kaibab
National Forrest, 2 (2005)).
[FN134]. Id. at 13.
[FN135]. E-mail from Jacquiline C. Denk, Fire Information Officer, Williams/Tusayan Ranger Districts, Kaibab National
Forest (Oct. 28, 2005 (on file with author).
[FN136]. Id.
[FN137]. U.S. Dept. of Agric., Forest Serv., Coconino National Forest plan 111(1987, revised through 2005), available at
http:// www.fs.fed.us/r3/coconino/publications/plan-revision-2006/index.shtml.
[FN138]. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Serv., Biological Opinion Summary, Kachina Peaks Wilderness Prescribed Natural Fire
Plan 2-21-94-F-220, (September 10, 1997).
[FN139]. Allison E. Cocke et al., Forest Change on Steep Mountain Gradient After Extended Fire Exclusion: San Fran-
cisco Peaks, Arizona, USA, 42 J. Applied Ecology, 814, 819 (2005).
[FN140]. Id. at 821.
[FN141]. National Park Service Organic Act, 16 U.S.C. § 1 (2006).
[FN142]. Robin W. Winks, The National Park Service Act of 1916: “A Contradictory Mandate” ? 74 Denv. U. L. Rev.
575, 622-23 (1997).
[FN143]. See generally Richard West Sellars, Preserving Nature in the National Parks: A History (Yale Univ. Press
1997) (1935).
[FN144]. Redwood National Park Expansion Act of 1978, Pub. L. No. 95-250, §101(b), 92 Stat. 163 (1978) (amending
16 U.S.C. §1a-1).
[FN145]. See generally Sellars, supra note 143.
[FN146]. Nat'l Park Serv., Natural Resource Challenge, http:// www.nature.nps.gov/challenge/index.cfm (Dec. 18, 2003).
[FN147]. Nat'l Park Serv., Director's Order #41, supra note 6, at § 6.3.7.
[FN148]. Id. at § 6.3.9.
[FN149]. Nat'l Park Serv., Management Policies, § 4.4.1 (2001), available at http://www.nps.gov/policy/mp/policies.pdf.
[FN150]. 16 U.S.C. § 3.
[FN151]. Proclamation No. 794, 35 Stat. 2175 (Jan. 11, 1908).
[FN152]. § 221; see An Act to Establish Grand Canyon National Park in the State of Arizona, ch. 44, 40 Stat. 1175
(1919).
[FN153]. Grand Canyon National Park Enlargement Act, Pub. L. No. 93-620, §§2,7 88 Stat. 2089 (1975), (codified at 16
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 24
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

U.S.C. §§ 228a, 228f).
[FN154]. Kim Crumbo, Wilderness Management at Grand Canyon: “Waiting for Godot?” Int'l. J. Wilderness, May 1996,
at 19-24.
[FN155].
Nat'l
Park
Serv.,
Draft
Wilderness
Management
Plan
(Apr.
1998)
available
at
ht-
tp://www.nps.gov/grca/wilderness/draftwmp.htm.
[FN156]. Nat'l Park Serv., Director's Order #41, Wildland Fire Management (Dec. 31, 2005) available at ht-
tp://www.nps.gov/fire/download/fir_wil_do18.pdf.
[FN157]. Id. at § 4.4.
[FN158]. Nat'l Park Serv., supra note 38, at 17.
[FN159]. Id. at 17.
[FN160]. Agee, supra note 17, at 6.
[FN161]. Jan W. van Wagtendonk, The Evolution of National Park Service Fire Policy, in Fire in the Environment: Eco-
logical and Cultural Perspectives, Gen. Tech. Report SE-69, 330 (Stephen C. Nodvin & Thomas A. Waldrop eds., 1991).
[FN162]. Bonnickson, T.M., Ecological Information for Park and Wilderness Fire Management Planning, in Proceed-
ings--Symposium on Wilderness Fire, Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-182, 168-73, (James E. Lotan et al eds. 1985)
[FN163]. Fulé et al., Comparing Ecological Restoration Alternatives, supra note 10, at 21.
[FN164]. Peter Z. Fulé et al., Natural Variability in Forests of the Grand Canyon USA, 29 J. Biogeog. 31, 44 (2002). See
Moore et al., supra note 9.
[FN165]. T. Nichols et al., Report of the Task Force Review of the Hazard Fuel Situation on the North Rim of the Grand
Canyon (1994) (on file at Division of Resource Management, Grand Canyon National Park).
[FN166]. See generally Crumbo & George, supra note 12.
[FN167]. Fulé et al., Comparing Ecological Restoration Alternatives, supra note 14, at 22.
[FN168]. Id. at 38.
[FN169]. Peter Z. Fulé et al., Effects of an Intense Prescribed Fire: Is It Ecological Restoration?, 12 Restoration Ecol.
228 (2004).
[FN170]. Nat'l Park Serv., Nat'l Wilderness Steering Comm., Guidance White Paper No.2, What Constitutes Appropriate
Conservation And Restoration Activities In Wilderness? (2004).
[FN171]. Id. at 6.
[FN172]. Id. at 7.
[FN173]. Nancy Eileen Muleady-Mechan et al., A Public Opinion Survey on Wildland Fire in Grand Canyon National
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 25
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.

Park, The George Wright Forum, No. 4, 2004, at 12, 19.
[FN174]. David M. Graber, Facing a New Ecosystem Management Paradigm for National Parks, 21 Ecol. Restoration
264, 268 (2003).
[FN175]. U.S. Dep't of Int., Bur. of Land Mgmt. & Nat'l Park Serv., Draft Resource Management Plan/Draft EIS for the
Arizona Strip 2-45 (2005), available at http://www.blm.gov/az/LUP/strip/DEIS.htm.
[FN176]. Id.
[FN177]. Thomas D. Sisk et al., Participatory Landscape Analysis to Guide Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Ecosystems in
the American Southwest, J. Landscape Urb. Plan. (forthcoming 2005).
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
END OF DOCUMENT
26 JLRENVL 267
Page 26
26 J. Land Resources & Envtl. L. 267
© 2010 Thomson Reuters. No Claim to Orig. US Gov. Works.
