Conserving Biodiversity  
Through Sustainable Forestry
A Guide To Applying NCSSF Research

Joyce Berry, PhD, Commission Chair 
Vice President for Advancement and 
Strategic Initiatives 
Colorado State University
Greg Aplet, PhD 
Senior Forest Scientist 
The Wilderness Society
Ann Bartuska, PhD 
Deputy Chief, Research &  
Development 
USDA Forest Service
Jim Brown 
Jim Brown Consulting Forestry, LLC 
Oregon State Forester, 1986-2003
Norm L. Christensen, PhD  
(chair 2002-2003) 
Professor of Ecology 
Nicholas School of the Environment, 
Duke University
Nils Christoffersen 
Executive Director 
Wallowa Resources
John C. Gordon, PhD  
(chair 2001-2002) 
Pinchot Professor of Forestry  
(Emeritus) 
Yale School of Forestry and  
Environmental Studies
Sharon Haines, PhD 
Manager of Sustainable Forestry 
International Paper
Alan A. Lucier, PhD 
Senior Vice President 
National Council for Air and  
Stream Improvement
David Perry, PhD 
Professor (Emeritus) 
Oregon State University
H. Ronald Pulliam, PhD 
Regents Professor of Ecology 
University of Georgia
Hal Salwasser, PhD  
(chair 2003-2005) 
Dean, College of Forestry 
Oregon State University
V. Alaric Sample, PhD 
President 
Pinchot Institute for Conservation
Scott Wallinger 
Senior Vice President (Retired) 
Mead Westvaco
Chris Bernabo, PhD 
NCSSF Program Director 
National Council for Science  
and the Environment
FORMER MEMBERS  
OF THE COMMISSION
Bruce J. Cabarle, PhD 
Director, Global Forestry Program’s 
World Wildlife Federation 
2001-2004
Charles H. Collins 
Managing Director 
The Forestland Group, LLC 
2001-2002
Wallace Covington, PhD 
Regents Professor of Forest Ecology 
Northern Arizona University 
2001-2003
Phil Janik 
Chief Operating Officer (Retired) 
USDA Forest Service 
2001-2002
Mark Schaefer, PhD 
President and CEO 
NatureServe 
2001-2003
Mark Schaffer, PhD 
Program Officer for the Environment 
Doris Duke Charitable Foundation 
(Formerly Defenders of Wildlife) 
2001-2003
COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP
Sponsors of the National Commission  
on Science for Sustainable Forestry
The National Commission on Science For Sustainable Forestry  
(NCSSF) operates under the auspices of the National Council for 
Science and the Environment (NCSE), a non-advocacy, not-for-profit 
organization dedicated to improving the scientific basis for  
environmental decision making. 
NCSE promotes interdisciplinary research that connects the life, 
physical, and social sciences and engineering. 
Communication and outreach are integral components of these  
collaborative research efforts that link scientific results to the needs 
of decision makers.

1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction................................................................................................. 2
Section I: Factors Influencing Biodiversity 
	
Chapter 1: Forest History and Biodiversity.......................................... 7
	
	
Forests of the Northeast................................................................ 8
	
	
Lake States Forests....................................................................... 24
	
	
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast....................................... 30
	
	
Pacific Coastal Forests.................................................................. 38
	
	
Colorado Plateau Forests of the Southwest............................... 49
	
Chapter 2: Non-native Invasives and Biodiversity............................ 56
	
Chapter 3: Fragmentation and Biodiversity .................................... 68
	
Chapter 4: Old-growth Forests and Biodiversity.............................. 84
	
	
Northeast...................................................................................... 86
	
	
Lake States.................................................................................... 91
	
	
Southeast Coastal Plain............................................................... 96
	
	
Pacific Northwest....................................................................... 101
	
	
Southwest................................................................................... 108
Section II: Tools for Landowners and Managers
	
Chapter 5: Selecting Indicators for Biodiversity............................. 115  
	
Chapter 6: Biodiversity in Managed Forests................................... 121
	
Chapter 7: Landscape Scale Planning and Biodiversity.................. 134
	
Chapter 8: Adaptive Management and Biodiversity..................... 148
	
Chapter 9: Policy that Encourages Biodiversity.............................. 159
Section III: Appendix
	
To Learn More About the Chapter Topics....................................... 167
	
Glossary.............................................................................................. 170
	
Index.................................................................................................. 173
ON THE COVER
Clockwise from top:
Old-growth Western Hemlock, Pacific Coastal Forest .
Photo: Jon Martin
Retention harvest, Washington State Photo: Jerry Franklin
Development in the New Hampshire Ossipee Pine Barrens .
Photo: Joseph Klemenitovich
Thinning and underburning restoration, Oregon .
Photo: Bernard Borman, USDA PNW FS
Bottomlands, Altamaha River, Georgia Photo: Beth Young 

2
From the trail at the lower left to the road in the distance, this landscape includes some of the historical and contemporary 
factors influencing forest biodiversity conservation. Enjoy the trip as you explore the guidebook.
INTRODUCTION

3
INTRODUCTION
WHO SHOULD READ THIS GUIDEBOOK?
	
Anyone who is interested in forests and forest manage-
ment practices should benefit from reading this book. It 
offers forest owners, practitioners, managers, and policy-
makers some advanced scientific knowledge and practical 
tools for biodiversity conservation and sustainable forestry.  
The following examples illustrate various situations that 
forest managers face 
and suggest guidebook 
chapters that should 
be particularly useful 
in each situation. Brief 
chapter descriptions are 
included in “Overview 
of the Guidebook” 
below.
I’m a business  
forester. I manage 
plantation forest-
lands that must 
provide a reasonable 
return on investment. I realize that these forests are 
much more than mere fiber farms, but has anyone 
figured out how to enhance biodiversity in intensively 
managed forests and still make a profit?
Recommended chapters: 6, 7, 1, 2 and 3.  
I’m a service or consulting forester. I work primarily 
with family forest owners and see the need for  
management practices that conserve biodiversity. It’s 
not that the owners I work with don’t care; it’s more 
a situation where we 
all want to do the 
right thing and need 
to understand how  
to do it. Is there 
something here that 
I can use in my work 
with forest owners? 
Recommended chap-
ters: 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6.
I’m a family forest 
owner. I’ve owned 
my property for 
quite a while. I know 
what it’s like to make 
annual payments. 
My acreage had no 
merchantable timber 
when I bought it, 
but I’ve planted and 
thinned and the trees 
have grown. Over the 
years, I’ve listened to 
professional foresters 
and done what they recommended. It’s been a lot of 
work and now I want to generate some income, but 
there’s all this talk about managing forests sustainably 
and protecting biodiversity. What’s this all about? 
Recommended chapters: 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6.
I’m a government forester. I live and work in a rural, 
forest-dependent community close to a large  
metropolitan area. 
Local citizens are  
feeling a lot of  
pressure to develop 
the surrounding 
forestland. What 
was once a remote 
little town is rapidly 
becoming a bedroom 
community. Develop-
ment includes  
1-to-5-acre upscale 
suburban home-
steads, a new subdivi-
sion for 85 homes, 
and plans to widen the connecting state highway. 
Town officials are coming to my agency for advice.  
Is there information here that can help?
Recommended chapters: 1, 3, 7, 8 and 9.
Business Forester*
WHY WAS THIS GUIDEBOOK WRITTEN?   
	
This guidebook was written to promote .
communication and understanding about forest .
biodiversity (Glossary) among researchers, practitioners, 
landowners, managers, and policymakers. Its purpose is 
to strengthen the link between scientific understanding 
of biodiversity and its practical application in forest .
management. Although there are gaps in our .
SERVICE OR CONSULTING Forester*
FAMILY FOREST OWNER*
GOVERNMENT Forester
knowledge, forest practices and policies that can be .
beneficial to biodiversity are constantly being developed 
and tested. This guidebook will help improve forest 
management by making biodiversity science easier to 
understand and illustrating on-the-ground applications. 
It emphasizes the reasons why biodiversity conservation 
and sustainable forestry (Glossary) are important. 
*© Photos courtesy of Ben Meadows Company, Janesville, WI
Tom Iraci

4
INTRODUCTION
I’m a policymaker.  
I help establish laws, 
regulations, and rules 
that reflect public 
consensus on how 
forests can be  
managed to conserve 
the values that they 
represent. I know 
the science of biodi-
versity is continuing 
to evolve, but I need 
information that will 
result in decisions 
that best protect the long-term public interest in  
conservation and sustainable natural resource  
management.
Recommended chapters: 1, 3, 5, 7 and 8.
WHAT’S THE BASIS OF THE GUIDEBOOK?
	
The guidebook highlights the latest research on biodi-
versity and sustainable forestry sponsored by the National 
Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry (NCSSF). It 
includes topics that the Commission members have identi-
fied as important elements of forest biodiversity. Some seri-
ous gaps in scientific knowledge about many of these topics 
have been filled by NCSSF-sponsored research projects that 
produced new scientific findings and practical tools for ap-
plying those findings in the field. The Commission selected 
and funded knowledgeable and experienced researchers 
as project leaders, and the guidebook is based largely on 
their research results and scientific opinions, along with 
the expertise of Commission Members (listed on the inside 
front cover). However, the Commission did not attempt to 
evaluate the scientific accuracy of the projects, nor does it 
promote any particular scientific school of thought.
	
The Commission acknowledges that the project reports 
don’t include everything there is to know about particular 
forest biodiversity topics, nor were they intended to. NCSSF 
project researchers are all recognized experts in their fields 
who were chosen through national requests for proposals 
and a rigorous and competitive review process. The Com-
mission recognizes that it might have sponsored many other 
important scientific studies on these same topics if unlimited 
resources had been available.  
	
A complete listing of all the NCSSF project reports is 
included in the appendix under To Learn More (pages 167-
168). There you will find the name of the project or projects 
that formed the basis of each chapter and the lead project 
author or authors. All of these project reports can be viewed 
and downloaded at the NCSSF website (www.ncssf.org) .
unless otherwise noted. 
OVERVIEW OF THE GUIDEBOOK  
	
The guidebook includes three major sections: 
s	 Section I: Factors Influencing Biodiversity
s	 Section II: Tools for Landowners and Managers
s	 Section III: Appendix
	
Each chapter examines a specific topic, answering .
three questions: 
s	 Why is this topic important? 
s	 What’s known about this topic  
(but not everything)? 
s	 How can that knowledge be used in  
forest management? 
	
In Section I, Factors Influencing Biodiversity, the 
guidebook looks at how biodiversity is influenced by forest 
history, non-native invasive species, forest fragmentation, 
and old-growth. Each chapter offers suggestions for using 
this knowledge to improve biodiversity.
	
Chapter 1, “Forest History and Biodiversity,” 
describes the origins of today’s forest policies and how 
that history has led to a growing interest in biodiversity 
and sustainable forestry. The 
guidebook begins with this 
topic because it’s the foundation 
for why things are the way they 
are. Chapter 1 doesn’t stop with 
history, but goes on to describe 
restoration strategies that are 
being created and tested to 
conserve biodiversity in the .
major forest regions of the 
United States. 
	
Chapter 2, “Non-native Invasives and  
Biodiversity,” tells about the growing threat to biodiver-
sity from non-native invasive species, due in part to forest 
history and the fact that the continents and regions of the 
world have become more connected. Forests are more 
vulnerable than ever, and this 
chapter offers preventive .
strategies and recognizes gaps 
in the war against invasives. 
What’s most essential is that we 
move beyond the attitude that 
invasives are someone else’s 
job to the recognition that this 
threat requires the attention of 
every natural-resource manager. 
POLICYMAKER
Bob Szaro

5
INTRODUCTION
	
Chapter 3, “Fragmentation and Biodiversity,” goes 
beyond the historical loss of forestland. It explores the .
theoretical underpinnings of 
fragmentation theory and the 
numerous and complicated 
effects of fragmentation on 
biodiversity. The topic is difficult 
because it’s a landscape-scale 
phenomenon, and we don’t 
always relate well to that scale. 
	
Chapter 4, “Old-growth 
and Biodiversity,” takes the 
reader to five major forest 
regions of the United States for 
an update on the status of old-
growth (OG) forests. It describes 
some OG-adapted species, ma-
jor threats to OG, how society in 
each region views OG, and how 
knowledge of OG can be used 
in developing management 
and conservation strategies for 
public and private forestland.
	
Section II offers tools for improving biodiversity 
while allowing landowners and managers to achieve 
their particular objectives. NCSSF has focused its support 
on research that offers practical applications, and this .
section is loaded with them. There are tips on selecting 
biodiversity indicators, enhancing biodiversity in managed 
forests, scientific advances in landscape-scale planning, how 
to make better use of adaptive management, and policies 
that encourage biodiversity.
	
Chapter 5, “Selecting 
Indicators for Biodiversity,” 
discusses one of the most dif-
ficult topics for forest managers 
to get a handle on – how to tell 
if we’re successfully maintaining 
forest biodiversity. It describes a 
technique for selecting biodiver-
sity indicators at the landscape 
and local level.
	
Chapter 6, “Biodiversity 
in Managed Forests,” will 
interest everyone who practices 
intensive forestry across the 
United States. It looks at .
management practices that .
support biodiversity in those 
forests, regardless of the 
ownership, using loblolly pine 
and Douglas-fir plantations as 
examples.
	
Chapter 7, “Landscape- 
Scale Planning and  
Biodiversity,” is crucial to sus-
taining forests and maintaining 
biodiversity. It describes innova-
tive decision support systems 
that are being used to help 
develop a clearer understand-
ing of the effects of alternative 
forestland management policies 
on biodiversity. 
	
Chapter 8, “Adaptive 
Management (AM) and 
Biodiversity,” explores the 
art/science of a concept that has 
had a mixed history of success 
when applied to forestry issues. 
It focuses on how to ensure the 
successful use of AM in forest 
management and offers several 
on-the-ground examples.
	
Chapter 9, “Policy that 
Encourages Biodiversity,” 
summarizes what the Commis-
sion believes is important for 
protecting biodiversity. It ex-
plores the question of whether 
current incentive programs 
encourage biodiversity-compat-
ible practices and offers policy 
ideas that will enable private 
forest owners, who control 
much of the nation’s forestland, 
to practice biodiversity.
Section III, the Appendix, offers references to help you 
learn more about each chapter topic, highlights important 
organizations (NatureServe and The Natural Heritage .
Network), includes references to reports that support .
biodiversity conservation (State Wildlife Action Plan), and 
identifies informative web-based references about Non-.
timber Forest Products, the Rapid Assessment Scorecard, 
and the Carbon Sequestration Primer. It also includes a .
comprehensive glossary and index.

6
INTRODUCTION
WHAT IS NCSSF?
	
The National Commission on Science for Sustainable 
Forestry (NCSSF) was created in 2001. It consists of sixteen 
leading scientists and forest-management professionals 
from government, industry, academia, and environmental 
organizations. Their mission is to improve the scientific basis 
for sustainable forestry practice, management, and policy 
in the United States. The Commission members and NCSSF 
staff are dedicated to: 
s	 filling gaps in scientific understanding of biodiversity 
and sustainable forestry by supporting research projects
s	 transforming research results into usable, accessible 
information for forestry practitioners, managers, and 
policymakers 
s	 improving communication between producers and .
users of scientific knowledge. 
	
The Commission’s work is guided by three broad prin-
ciples developed through extensive deliberation, discussion, 
and consensus-building:
Continuum of Forest Types
	
The Commissioners believe that forests should be 
viewed as a continuum, with each type of forest providing 
benefits to biodiversity and sustainable forestry commensu-
rate with its natural potential and the owner’s management 
goals. The contribution to biodiversity conservation varies 
with each type of forest along the continuum. 
	
At one end are reserves – large areas protected from 
development, intended to preserve native species, “wild” 
ecosystems, and natural processes. They include wilderness 
areas and other lands set aside within federal forest owner-
ships and parks. Reserves are necessary but not sufficient to 
maintain biodiversity. In some regions of the United States 
that have a small portion of their forests in reserves, .
biodiversity must be sustained on other kinds of forests. 
	
At the other end of the forest continuum are wood-
production forests – plantations that are managed primarily 
for industrial wood production. Even though most of these 
forests are privately owned, their management is influenced 
by landowner rights and responsibilities determined by laws 
and customs. 
	
Between the ends of the continuum are multi-resource 
forests with multiple objectives chosen by the landowners. 
The majority of America’s forests are multi-resource, and 
many are owned and managed by individuals and families. 
Urban forests represent a special type of multi-resource 
forest, and they continue to expand as urbanization spreads 
into less developed rural areas and more of the nation’s 
natural resources become part of urban forest ecosystems. 
	
This continuum of forest types helps our nation meet its 
economic, environmental, and social objectives. 
Public Permission
	
The Commissioners believe that forest practitioners, 
landowners, managers, and policymakers serve as stewards 
of the nation’s forests with the permission of the public. 
The public obviously has more influence over some parts of 
the forest continuum than others, but its overall influence 
continues to grow. 
	
Federal forestlands (both reserves and multi-resource 
forests) are currently being managed with emphasis on 
biological diversity, and over time they will consist of .
a mix of old-growth, late-succession habitats, and early-.
succession habitats (the result of wildfire and other natural .
disturbances). In contrast, the industrial forest landscape 
(wood-production forests), with its emphasis on economic 
profitability, is often missing the later succession elements 
of biodiversity, but instead provides some of the early- and 
mid-succession habitats missing in reserves. 
	
An informed public, encouraged to step back and look 
at a state or region, will see a mix of habitats that represents 
the forest continuum and one that is likely to provide the 
suite of benefits that the public wants. The bottom line is 
that biodiversity depends on a mix of management goals 
across a landscape and that this approach to biodiversity 
conservation will meet the public interest.
Keep Forests as Forests
	
The Commissioners believe that one of the most .
important threats to forest biodiversity comes from .
development, and the best way to conserve biodiversity is 
to keep forestland as forest. The chapters on fragmentation 
(3) and landscape-scale planning (7) each raise the specter 
of forest loss due to development. In most cases, however, 
the “highest and best use” (HBU) of a forest for society is as 
a forest – for all the values it produces. HBU is an economic 
market term that rarely considers the value of water, .
wildlife, biodiversity, recreation, green space, carbon .
exchange, etc. Keeping forests as forests is more than a 
slogan – it must become a national goal.
SUMMARY
	
While this guidebook does offer and advocate man-
agement prescriptions, it is primarily a toolbox from which 
practitioners, landowners, managers, and policymakers can 
pick and choose what has merit for them. It’s the reader’s 
responsibility to use the information and tools in the context 
of his or her own forest management goals. 
	
We do not know all there is to know about conserving 
biodiversity and sustainable forestry. However, one thing 
we know for certain is that new knowledge will continue 
to change the way we manage our forests. The successful 
conservation of biodiversity calls for careful observation of 
how the forest responds to natural and human disturbances 
and requires adjustments to future management according 
to those observations.

Ossipee 
Pine Barrens
Blend of 
Northern 
Hardwoods
and Transition 
Hardwoods
Connecticut 
Valley
Pine Barrens (pages 8-11)
Transition Hardwoods 
(pages 12-16)
Northern Hardwoods 
(pages 17-23) 
ME
RI
MD
CT
PA
VT
NY
NH
DE
NJ
MA
Forest History AND Biodiversity
	
This chapter describes both forest history 
and forest restoration ideas that are being 
studied and attempted in some of the major 
forest regions in the United States. The regions, 
which were selected by NCSSF as the subjects of 
commissioned scientific studies, include:
s  The pine barrens, transition hardwoods, and 
northern hardwoods of the Northeast 
s  White pine forests of the Lake States
s  Coastal plain forests of the Southeast
s  Pacific Coastal forests 
s  Colorado Plateau forests of the Southwest.
	
These forest regions are presented in the order 
of their European settlement, which began in the 
Northeast more than 400 years ago. From the 
Northeast, we’ll follow land-use history as the Lake 
States were settled. By the end of the nineteenth 
century, logging had depleted much of the Lake States 
HOW CAN KNOWLEDGE OF FOREST HISTORY BE 
USED TO RESTORE BIODIVERSITY?
	
Natural and land-use history have modified forests 
over time and continue to influence them today. A major 
challenge to forest scientists, conservationists, and land 
owners and managers is to understand interactions among 
forest history, climate, geology and topography and 
how they control forest structure and composition. We 
understand some of these interactions, but we have a poor 
understanding of many implications of this knowledge for 
sustainable forest management.
	
Forest restoration science links forest history, forest 
structure, and maintenance of biodiversity with silvicultural 
tools. As we will see, forest restoration is related to natural 
disturbance and forest development regimes. Forest history 
tells us how and why we arrived where we are now, why 
restoration is needed and helps us design new .
management strategies to maintain biological diversity. 
	
Note that restoration does not necessarily 
mean returning forest ecosystems to some historic 
benchmark or time period. That would be difficult 
if not impossible to do because we live in an 
environment that is not the same, and people in 
the future will live in environments that are not 
like that of today. Ecological, social and economic 
systems are not only different today they are 
changing more rapidly than ever before. To the 
degree that future environments, future social 
needs and future economies can be predicted, 
forests, and settlers began clearing forestland in the 
Southeast for agriculture, development and wood 
products. The decline of logging in the Lake States also 
brought attention to the Southwest and the Pacific 
Coast. In each case, we’ll see how natural and land-use 
history have changed forests. 
	
These examples illustrate the role of forest history 
in forest management. If the history of your forest 
region isn’t included, we encourage you to examine it, 
using the three outline questions that we used in .
this chapter:
s	 How can knowledge of forest history be  
used to restore biodiversity?
s	 What do we know about the natural and land 
use history of forests and how has it affected 
biodiversity?
s	 How can we use our knowledge of forest 
history to develop management strategies for 
restoring biodiversity?
THE FORESTS OF THE NORTHEAST
This first section of Chapter 1 
includes three of the five major 
forest types in the Northeast: Pine 
Barrens, Transition Hardwoods, 
and Northern Hardwoods.
7
they and not the past must shape our restoration efforts. 
The future cannot be perfectly predicted, but it is more 
relevant to forest restoration than notions of how things 
were in the past.
How can knowledge of forest history be used to restore biodiversity?
C H A P T E R
1

Pine Barrens of the Northeast
Tree Species 
• pitch pine (Pinus rigida)
• scrub oak (Quercus ilicifolia)
Groundcover Species
• black huckleberry (Gaylussacia baccata)
• blueberry (Vaccinium species) 
• wintergreen (Gaultheria procumbens) 
• sweetfern (Comptonia peregrina)
• bracken fern (Dennstaedtia punctiloba)
Location 
• Pine Barrens occur on dry sand plains or sandy glacial 
outwash in major river valleys.
• The flat terrain encourages the spread of wildfires 
that eliminate its shade-tolerant competitors and 
provides a new seedbed.
Pitch Pine Requirements:
• mineral soil for establishment from seed
• a relatively shade-free environment
• a stand-replacing fire or management that mimics 
such a disturbance.
Sediment cores from 
lakes near today’s pine 
barrens indicate that 
these forests have been 
present for thousands 
of years. Prior to 
European settlement, 
pine barrens were 
probably even-
aged stands started 
by large-scale fire 
disturbances (see Pitch 
Pine Requirements in 
Introduction box).
Fires were frequent. In 
fact, pine barrens have 
the highest incidence 
of fire of any northeast 
forest. Without fire 
pine-oak forests 
succeed to oak.
Natural History 
8
What do we know about the natural and 
land-use history of the Pine Barrens and 
their effect on biodiversity?
Native Americans 
deliberately burned 
pine barrens in the 
spring and fall to clear 
fields for planting, 
improve game habitat, 
drive game and assist 
hunting, reduce 
reptiles and insects, 
increase berries and 
seeds, or remove cover 
for protection from 
their enemies.
Massachusetts pine 
barrens (Map, page 7) 
were often cleared for 
farmland. European 
settlers pushed forests 
back to the hillsides, 
swamps, and dry sand 
plains. Settlement 
initially increased 
fire frequency, due 
to land clearing or 
escaped fires, but fire 
suppression became 
more prevalent when 
settlements were 
established.
The New Jersey 
pine barrens (Map, 
page 7) and the 
northern barrens 
of New Hampshire 
were actively logged 
but rarely plowed 
(discussed on next 
page). Pitch pine was 
used for firewood, 
fuel, fence posts, 
railroad ties, barrels 
and boxes, and early 
shipbuilding.
After 1850 the lure 
of more productive 
lands in the Midwest, 
the development of 
railroads, and the 
industrial revolution 
in the cities resulted 
in the abandonment 
of pine barren farms 
and their subsequent 
natural regeneration 
to forest.
Land Use History
Forest History AND Biodiversity
C H A P T E R
1
Introduction to the Pine Barrens  
(Map, page 7)

Pine Barrens of the Northeast
9
What are the Effects of Clearing the Pine Barrens?  
	
Plow layers in soils persist for centuries after sites .
are reforested. The physical effects of plowing had direct 
and lasting effects on understory and groundcover 
vegetation in the Montague pine barrens of the Connecticut 
River Valley (Map, page 7). Wintergreen (Gaultheria 
procumbens) is a plant restricted to areas of the barrens 
that had never been plowed. However, seeding experiments 
indicate that it can be sown and will grow in plowed areas.
	
In the Montague pine barrens, historical plowing and 
land use also affected overstory tree species. Research 
indicates that 97% of stands dominated by pitch pine were 
on formerly plowed areas, whereas 89% of sites dominated 
by scrub oak existed on unplowed areas. In plowed 
areas, scrub oak recolonized only as scattered understory 
individuals, in contrast to the dense thickets found in 
unplowed areas today. Because abandoned fields provided 
an excellent litter-free seedbed, nearly all pitch pine trees 
in plowed areas today belong to the post-abandonment 
cohort. (A forest cohort is a stand of trees that are 
approximately the same age.) Knowing that pitch pine can 
be reestablished by plowing is important for restoring pine 
barrens (described below).
What are the Effects of Changing the Fire Regime? 
	
Since the 1940s, large fires have been excluded from 
many forests that formerly burned. As a result, pine barrens 
have changed so much that ecological threats are now 
appearing. Most northeast barrens are declining as a result 
of fire suppression. 
Research indicates that 
wintergreen is absent 
on sites that were 
plowed and present 
only on sites that were 
never plowed. While it 
can be sown artificially, 
its natural rate of spread 
by seed and its slow 
growth rate kept it from 
colonizing plowed sites. 
At its present rate of 
expansion, it will take thousands of years for wintergreen to 
recolonize its former range.
Forest History AND Biodiversity
The Karner blue 
butterfly (Lycacides 
melissa samuelis) is 
a federally protected 
endangered butterfly 
species. 
	
In the Ossipee Pine Barrens of New Hampshire (Map, 
page 7), shade-tolerant, fire-intolerant hardwoods and 
white pine have increased over the last 50 years. Pitch 
pine declined from more than 60% to less than 40% 
between 1952 and 2002, even though a seed source 
was present. This is evidence that pitch pine seed can’t 
penetrate the litter layer of scrub oak without soil surface 
disturbance. 
	
On the Delmarva Peninsula before 1937, fire had 
returned every 10-40 years, supporting a landscape of 
oak-pine or pine woodland (50%) or open savanna (50%). 
Between 1937 and 1993, 25% of the barrens converted .
to hardwood forest, with 50% converting to closed 
canopy oak-pine or pine, at the expense of 50% of the 
savanna area.
What are the Effects on Pine Barrens Biodiversity?
	
Both regionally and globally rare plants and animals 
are dependent on these habitats. The Long Island pine 
barrens support 54 rare plants and 19 rare animals. 
Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) are especially 
dependent on barrens. Scrub oak is the principal larval 
host for 16 (29%) of the 56 Lepidoptera of conservation 
concern in New England and New York. Frost pockets – .
small depressions where frost is likely to form – found in 
pitch-pine/scrub-oak barrens provide an important habitat 
for these rare or endangered Lepidoptera. This may 
have to do with the time of appearance of oak leaves. 
Young, tender leaves are more nutritious than older leaves 
because they have more nitrogen and water content. 
Spring leaf development is delayed in frost pockets, 
providing highly nutritious food on warm sunny days, 
resulting in rapid growth of butterfly larvae. 
Gary Boyd
Erv Evans, NC State University
C H A P T E R
1

10
How can knowledge of pine barrens history 
be used to restore biodiversity?
Why Restore Pine Barrens?
	
Restoration is important because:
s	A number of rare plants and animals are dependent on 
these habitats.
s	Pine barrens contain important bogs and marshes that 
contribute to biodiversity. 
What’s Their Current Status?
	
Most are old pitch-pine stands, either invaded by or 
being replaced by less fire-tolerant species like white pine, 
oak, red maple, or other hardwoods. Fifty years of fire 
exclusion and fragmentation have prevented the fires .
that regenerated these stands in pre-settlement times. 
Pitch-pine regeneration is minimal due to dense forest-
floor leaf litter. 
Important Points about Pine Barrens
	
Pine barrens:
s	require periodic fire, so .
long-term management .
must include some kind 
of burning or equivalent 
management practice 
(described on next page) 
In the New Hampshire Ossipee 
Pine Barrens, mature pine 
forests originated from 1885, 
1920, and 1957 fires. Fuel 
models that predict surface 
flame lengths and rates of 
speed indicate that catastrophic 
crown fires would result with 
wind speeds of only 15-20 mph. 
Burning could be hazardous 
to suburban property unless 
defensible space is maintained 
between dwellings and the 
forest edge. Fire management 
areas would have to be 
enclosed with firebreaks 
to prevent uncontrolled 
spreading. 
This buffer created by 
mechanical harvesting during 
the late winter of 2005 in 
Madison, New Hampshire, does 
two things. First, it protects 
homes adjacent to the Ossipee 
Pine Barrens Preserve from 
wildfire. Second, it mimics the 
effects of fire and restores 
the pine barrens ecosystem 
by removing white pine 
and hardwoods and adding 
openings in the forest. 
Pine Barrens of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
s	are threatened by development and fragmentation. 
These forests exist on outwash plains that provide flat, 
well-drained land suitable for housing developments, 
roads, shopping malls, and airports. State and private 
organizations are working to protect the remaining 
large, undeveloped sand plains.
	
There is no blanket approach to pine barrens 
management. Geographically isolated pine barrens 
have their own history, and restoration plans should be 
developed on a site-by-site basis. 
Overcoming Difficulties of Pine Barrens Restoration 
	
Historical stand-replacing fires that occured after 
droughts and usually in the summer, regenerated pine 
barrens prior to European settlement. Today, such fires 
are dangerous and difficult to control. Managers also 
face additional complications resulting from multiple 
ownerships and parcelization along boundaries between 
urban areas and large undeveloped pine barrens. The 
Nature Conservancy is attempting a solution in its Ossipee 
Pine Barrens (see photo caption below). 
Joseph Klemenitovich
C H A P T E R
1

11
Results of Low Intensity Spring Burns
	 These burns:
•	 typically are hot enough to char bark on large trees
•	 have little effect on roots of hardwood and shrub species 
that compete with pitch pine
•	 don’t eliminate the litter layer that prevents pitch pine 
establishment. 
	 Stands are likely to succeed to mixed pine-hardwoods 
or red maple because these fires don’t damage the root 
systems or sprouting ability of red maple or oak. 
Results of High Intensity Spring Burns
	 These burns: 
•	 can consume the litter layer
•	 should be planned 
with a heavy pitch-pine 
seedfall, or a harvest 
that opens the canopy, 
followed by burning 
slash piles to reduce 
fuel loads. 
	 They are recommended 
for successfully 
regenerating pitch pine.
Results of Repeated 
Light Summer Burns
	 Burns repeated annually 
as many as three times:
•	 reduce fuel loads 
•	 reduce red maple and grey birch by killing their 
rootstocks
•	 don’t reduce scrub oak density. 
	 Unfortunately, pitch pine does not regenerate .
in light burns. 
Results of High Intensity Summer Burns
	 These burns:
•	 successfully regenerate pitch pine stands
•	 may be controlled if done during wet weather.
	 However, they’re probably impractical due to .
control problems.
Pine Barrens of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Effects of Prescribed Fire in Pine Barrens
	
Prescribed fire can be useful in restoring pine barrens. 
It’s been used in New Jersey since the 1950s to control 
fuel loads and reduce catastrophic wildfires. However, its 
effectiveness varies with the time of year and the intensity 
of the burn. (See box)
	
Prescribed fires may be restricted near residential 
areas. For example, only spring burns are allowed in the 
Connecticut Valley of Massachusetts. Unfortunately, low 
intensity spring burns have little effect (see box), so a 
three-part approach to restoration is recommended: 
1	 cut unwanted hardwoods in the growing season
2	 scarify the soil to promote pitch pine regeneration 
from seed (historically effective when plowed fields 
were abandoned)
3	 use follow-up controlled burns to maintain 
vegetation.
	
Burning doesn’t always restore plant composition 
to historic levels, and it’s not always possible to get 
rid of introduced species, but some kind of burning is 
important to perpetuate pine barrens. Where summer 
burns are impractical, annually repeated small-scale 
burns might slowly eliminate hardwood competition. 
Controlled growing-season burns during wet weather 
and/or mechanical treatments have been recommended in 
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and New York to reduce 
fuel loads adjacent to residential development.
Is It Possible to Practice Sustainable Forestry in  
Pine Barrens?
	
If the goal is to grow white pine for harvest along with 
pitch pine, here’s a possible scenario:
s	 Delay burning until white pine is large enough to 
withstand heat (it’s intolerant of fire when young). 
s	 Once white pine is large enough, burning each year for 
3-5 years may be needed to control hardwoods. 
s	 Continued burning at pre-settlement return intervals 
(10-40 years) is necessary to prevent hardwoods from 
growing back. 
s	 Cutting or girdling large hardwood trees that survive 
prescribed burns may be necessary to remove their 
seed source. 
s	 Pitch pine isn’t as commercially valuable as white 
pine, but conversion to white pine should be avoided 
because pitch pine is the primary species of this 
ecosystem. Attempts to convert to white pine in the 
Ossipee Pine Barrens failed due to white pine weevil.  
s	 Some white pine grown under the protection of pitch 
pine may be more weevil resistant, because it typically 
attacks and deforms white pine monocultures. 
s	 Eventually, a clearcut or seed-tree harvest can be used 
to simulate natural disturbance.
s	 Soil scarification (shallow plowing) will allow pitch pine 
regeneration by seed from adjacent areas.
	
This management scenario would create even-aged 
pitch-pine stands similar to those that result from stand-
replacing fires. It would provide structural diversity, 
ecological sustainability, and fuel management. It would 
end the history of fire suppression, which threatens today’s 
pine barrens with replacement by fire-intolerant species. 
Implementing this scenario will be costly. However, it may 
be possible over the long term to pay management costs 
with profit from harvests and manage these disappearing 
ecosystems for their benefit to biodiversity.
C H A P T E R
1

In the Uplands 
• The central uplands 
in Massachusetts 
included hemlock, 
sugar maple, yellow 
birch, beech and other 
shade tolerant, mature 
forest species.
• Hemlock and chest-
nut were dominant 
in the Berkshire-
Taconic plateau 
of northwestern 
Connecticut 
and western 
Massachusetts.
• Oak and chestnut were 
important in other upland sites in central Massachusetts.
• Around 1450, during the “Little Ice Age” of extreme winters 
and cool summers, beech, sugar maple, and hemlock began 
to decline while oaks increased.
12
Location 
• A band of transition hardwoods extends from the 
coast of Maine and New Hampshire through 
Massachusetts and northern Connecticut into 
southern New York and central Pennsylvania. 
Transition hardwoods grow in some of the most 
populated parts of the Northeast and are some of 
the most heavily disturbed and modified forests in 
the region.
Tree Species
Hardwoods include:
• American beech (Fagus grandifolia)
• sweet birch (Betula lenta) 
• yellow birch (Betula alleghaniensis) 
• sugar maple (Acer saccharum)
• red maple (Acer rubrum)
• northern red oak (Quercus rubra) 
• black oak (Quercus velutina) 
• white oak (Quercus alba)  
• shagbark hickory (Carya ovata) 
• mocknut hickory (Carya tomentosa) 
• pignut hickory (Carya glabra)
• white ash (Fraxinus americana) 
Conifers include:
• white pine (Pinus strobus)
• eastern hemlock (Tsuga canadensis)
Transition Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Natural History
In the Lowlands
•	 Oak, chestnut, and 
hickory, along with 
some pine (white 
and pitch) dominated 
the lowlands and 
major river valleys in 
Massachusetts, along 
with lesser amounts 
of hemlock, beech, 
and sugar maple.
What do we know about the natural 
and land-use history of the TRANSITION 
HARDWOODS and their effect on biodiversity?
	
Lake sediment cores show that pre-settlement species 
composition varied between uplands and lowlands.
Charcoal in sediment 
cores indicates 
that periodic fires 
contributed to long-
term maintenance of 
oak forests. Fire was 
most frequent in the 
valleys, where Native 
American populations 
were highest. 
Along the eastern 
seaboard, hurricanes 
are a major stand-
replacing disturbance 
with a return interval 
of from 85-150 years. 
The great hurricane 
of 1938 felled 3 billion 
board feet of timber 
on 240,000 ha (600,000 
a), including half of all 
the white pine in the 
region. 
In north-central 
Pennsylvania, the 
following differences 
in species composition 
were influenced by 
landform, elevation and 
geography: 
• 	Upper elevations 
were dryer, favoring 
oak, chestnut, and 
fire- and drought-
tolerant pitch pine. 
•	 Lower elevations had 
a higher proportion 
of species that 
require a moderate 
amount of water, 
such as white pine 
and hemlock, mixed 
in with the oaks. 
•	 Red maple crossed all 
landforms and was more abundant than anywhere else in 
the transition hardwoods zone.
C H A P T E R
1
Introduction to tRANSITION HARDWOODs  
(Map, page 7)

13
Transition Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Native Americans in the 
transition hardwoods 
had well-developed 
agricultural societies. 
However, European 
diseases that arrived 
ahead of the colonists 
drastically reduced 
native populations. The 
Mayflower pilgrims, 
landing at Plymouth, 
found abandoned Indian 
settlements, not an 
unbroken wilderness, 
an indication of Native 
American impact on 
forested landscapes.
European colonies were 
established in the early 
1600s in coastal New 
York, Massachusetts, 
and New Hampshire, 
and spread inland. 
Settlement brought 
extensive clearing of 
forests for agriculture. 
In Massachusetts, 
between 1830 and 1885, 
50-60% of the land was 
in agriculture, sheep 
and cattle numbers 
exceeded 650,000, and 
forests were confined 
to poor quality lands, 
mountains, and swamps 
and were harvested for 
timber and fuel.
Both population and 
land use peaked around 
1850 when westward 
railroad expansion 
allowed a mass exodus 
to more fertile Midwest 
farmland, leaving 
abandoned acreages. 
Forests increased and 
agricultural land use 
decreased. Only 7% 
of Massachusetts is in 
agriculture today.
Land Use History
Agricultural 
abandonment led to 
even-aged stands of 
white pine. Hemlock-
hardwood understories 
eventually developed 
beneath the pine and 
included beech, red 
oak, yellow birch, red 
maple, sugar maple and 
other species. These 
stands were common 
from New England to 
western Pennsylvania 
until logged or damaged by the 1938 hurricane. 
Regeneration following the hurricane was in the form of 
advanced hardwood growth beneath the white pine. In 
general, hardwoods benefited from the hurricane. 
Around 1900, growth 
of white pine stands 
on old agricultural 
land resulted in a 
new round of timber 
harvesting. Pine forests 
were either clearcut or 
selectively logged and 
replaced by even-aged 
hardwoods that had 
established under the 
pines and now became 
the dominant species 
and are still dominant 
today.
C H A P T E R
1

14
What are the Effects of Clearing Transition 
Hardwoods? 
	
Today’s stands of transition hardwoods still reflect .
19th-century land-use practices in many ways: 
s	 The age structures are often similar, the result of .
old-field abandonment or clearing. 
s	 Most are stratified mixed-species stands, with complex 
diameter distributions and vertical structure. 
s	 Those not cleared for agriculture were cut repeatedly 
for firewood, producing even-age stands and .
multi-stemmed trees that remain today. 
s	 They lack large trees, large down logs, tip-up .
mounds and pits (resulting from wind damage), .
and large snags.
s	 Less than 1% of northeastern forests are true old-
growth. Old-growth stands, defined on the basis 
of structure (i.e. old large trees, uneven-aged and 
shade-tolerant species) are extremely rare because of 
widespread clearing for agriculture and clearcutting 
from the time of settlement.
s	 Many understory plants haven’t recolonized, and 
understory diversity is below pre-settlement levels. 
Species without adaptations for long distance seed 
dispersal are rare. Bedrock outcrops served as refugia 
(locations that support organisms limited to small parts 
of their previous geographic range) throughout the 
agricultural period for species that are poor dispersers 
and assisted with recovery in nearby areas.
What are the Effects of Changing the  
Fire Regime?
	
Before European settlement, frequent but light 
understory fire appears to have been important in .
transition hardwoods. 
s	 By the late 1700s, fires decreased as the area of forest 
declined and most land was converted to agriculture.
s	 With old-field reforestation after agricultural 
abandonment in the late 1800s, fire returned.
s	 Fire incidence increased with logging, reaching a 
maximum around 1900, before fire control policies 
were established.
s	 Since World War II, forests that historically burned 
have been protected from fire. Major fires in the 20th 
century only occurred when drought conditions .
favored them.
s	 Fire suppression in transition hardwoods, especially in 
Pennsylvania, has led to a decrease in oak and hickory 
and an increase in red maple. The oaks will continue to 
decline if fire is not reintroduced.
What are the Effects on Animal Biodiversity? 
	
Animal populations responded to forest change 
after farmland abandonment. Today, mid-succession 
stands dominate the region, and some animal species 
are becoming more abundant as tree sizes increase. For 
example, pileated woodpeckers have responded to the 
increased availability of larger diameter trees for nesting 
and foraging. However, few species are dependent upon 
the mid-succession stands that now dominate the region.
	
More than 260 
vertebrates use 
forest habitats in the 
Northeast, with the 
majority finding food 
and cover in early- 
and late-succession 
forests. As a result, 
wildlife communities 
are handicapped by 
the lack of young 
forests and old-growth 
stands. Populations 
that depend on young, 
regenerating forests are 
declining conspicuously. 
They include bird species (golden-winged warblers), 
mammals (cottontail rabbits), reptiles (black racers) and 
various butterflies and moths. 
s	 Present-day populations of cottontails (Sylvilagus 
transitionalis) depend on large patches of regenerating 
habitat close to each other for long-term survival.
s	 Golden-winged warblers (Vermivora chrysoptera) 
don’t nest in patches less than 10 ha (24.7 a).
s	 Large-bodied snakes like the black racer (Coluber 
constrictor) seem limited to patches greater than 10 ha 
(24.7 a) of regenerating forests in human-dominated 
landscapes.
	
In contrast, white-tailed deer populations have 
increased in response to landscape modifications and 
elimination of large predators. Removal of wolves and 
cougars has had a lasting impact since the early 1800s. In 
some areas, deer density is greater than in pre-settlement 
times. One 50-year study at an old-growth stand in 
Pennsylvania showed deer populations increasing with 
early-succession habitat following farm abandonment 
and clearcutting between 1890 and 1920. Overbrowsing 
of tree seedlings and saplings by deer created an age/
size gap for several species and also encouraged hay-
scented fern (Dennstaedia pinctilobula) to dominate in the 
understory (see photo caption on next page).
Pileated woodpeckers
Transition Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Great Lakes Ecological Assessment
C H A P T E R
1

15
Transition Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Hay-scented fern
•	Deer feed heavily on 
Allegheny blackberry 
(Rubus allegheniensis), 
a plant that colonizes 
forest openings. 
Blackberry seedlings 
in turn promote 
the establishment 
of tree seedlings. 
When blackberry is 
removed by over-
browsing, hay-scented 
fern (Dennstaedia 
pinctilobula) replaces 
it. Deer avoid this fern, 
which then becomes 
very abundant and 
inhibits the growth 
of tree seedlings and 
small herbs. Once 
established, hay-
scented fern may 
persist for decades.
	
Overbrowsing deer: 
s	 affect herbs, which represent most plant diversity in 
temperate forests, because they never grow tall enough 
to escape browsing 
s	 may eliminate herbs that naturally occur at low densities 
from some locations 
s	 can reduce vertical complexity of forest understories, 
reducing the abundance and diversity of shrub-nesting 
songbirds. 
	
From these examples it’s clear that the history of 
transition hardwoods has affected biodiversity. The loss of 
large predators has altered animal communities, resulting 
in an abundance of habitat generalists that can affect plant 
communities and modify local species abundance. 
Introduced Insects and Diseases in  
Transition Hardwoods
	
Non-native invasive species have reduced populations or 
eliminated some native species (Chapter 2). Two important 
examples are: 
s	 Chestnut blight, a fungus imported from China, 
completely eliminated large chestnut from its .
historical dominance. 
s	 Hemlock wooly adelgid insect is a current serious 
concern. 
	
This subject is discussed in more detail in .
Chapter 2, page 58.
HOW CAN KNOWLEDGE OF TRANSITION 
HARDWOOD HISTORY BE USED TO RESTORE 
BIODIVERSITY?
Why Restore Transition Hardwoods?
	
Land use, changed fire regimes, distorted animal 
populations, and invasive species have altered the 
structure and composition of these forests. 
What’s Their Current Status?
	
Transition hardwood forests are characterized by:
s	 a decrease in oak and hickory and an increase in red 
maple resulting from fire suppression, especially in 
Pennsylvania, trends that will continue if fire is not 
reintroduced
s	 mid-succession stands that dominate the landscape 
with serious consequences for biodiversity
s	 declining populations of animals dependent on .
early-succession.
	
They’re some of the most densely human-populated 
and most heavily disturbed and modified forests in the 
Northeast, both historically and currently.
Important Points About Transition Hardwoods
	
There is concern about the future of sustainable 
forestry in this region for several reasons:
s	 There are a lot of small, non-industrial forest 
ownerships with parcel sizes ranging from ten to a 
few hundred hectares.  
s	 There are only a few large industrial or even large 
non-industrial forest holdings, which complicates the 
reintroduction of fire (discussed below).
s	 In addition to parcelization, there’s widespread 
fragmentation from roads, residential clearing, and 
commercial development along main travel corridors.
Difficulties in Restoring Transition Hardwoods
	
Many scientists contend that silviculture that reflects 
pre-settlement or natural disturbance patterns will 
conserve ecosystem functions and biodiversity. They 
point to evidence that pre-settlement forests experienced 
frequent large-scale stand-replacing disturbances, 
including hurricanes, together with understory and 
occasional catastrophic fire. This raises three major 
questions:
1 	Can fire be reintroduced into this landscape?
2 	What silvicultural management system is most 
suitable in these areas, which are dominated by the 
most recent post-hurricane cohort?
3 	How can a mid-succession forest landscape be 
managed to create large live trees, large snags, and 
large down logs?
Erv Evans, NC State University
C H A P T E R
1

16
The Question of Reintroduced Fire
	
Pre-settlement fire favored the dominance of oak and 
pine over shade-tolerant species, but reintroducing it may 
not be easy for three reasons: 
s	 Compared to pre-settlement fires, low-intensity 
prescribed fires fail to regenerate oak populations 
because the fire probably won't control the shade-
tolerant hardwoods, that are otherwise fire-intolerant, 
due to their relatively large size. 
s	 The infrastructure required for a safe prescribed fire 
effort is probably beyond the capability (and interest) of 
most non-industrial private forest owners, who control 
the majority of forestland. 
s	 The air-quality impacts of prescribed fire would likely be 
a problem and create legal and policy challenges.
The Question of Silviculture in Post-Hurricane Areas
	
Studies of the silviculture of post-hurricane, .
single-cohort stands (Glossary) have produced a reasonably 
good understanding of the regeneration of major species. .
We know that: 
s	 oaks are strongly dependent on either stump sprouts or 
well-established advance regeneration for dominance in 
the next cohort 
s	 the stems of young eastern white pine can be 
protected from white pine weevil damage by leaving a 
canopy of partial shade until the pines have reached a 
predetermined height
s	 both of these factors argue strongly for single-cohort 
silviculture using a shelterwood system to establish new 
stands under the protection of a partial canopy .
of trees.
	
Unfortunately, the silvicultural science behind 
intermediate treatments such as thinning isn’t well 
developed for transition hardwoods. Instead, many foresters 
rely on Midwestern oak density-management guidelines. 
However, considering the financial value and importance of 
tree grade, there is a critical need for research to develop 
individual crop-tree approaches to thinning.
Creating Structural Legacy in Transition Hardwoods
	
Legacies are conditions that link past and future 
systems. Mid-succession forests often lack structural legacies 
such as large live trees, large snags, and large down logs 
(see discussion of their value, page 44). One approach to 
developing structural legacy in single-cohort stands is to 
practice green-tree retention when harvesting (retain some 
large trees into the next rotation, described in more detail 
on page 45). Unfortunately, foresters lack scientific guidance 
for selecting retention trees or predicting their impact in 
the next cohort. This approach would be difficult given the 
importance of tree grade to the value of hardwoods and 
the tendency of oaks, along with sugar maples, to develop 
crooks following partial shade or suppression.
	
Another approach to structural legacy might be group 
selection or group shelterwood, including a variety of 
irregular shelterwood techniques. But there are challenges 
to group selection in the single-cohort structure of today’s 
transition hardwoods. For example, relatively large openings 
(greater than 0.12 ha/.29 a) are required to maintain tree 
species diversity, and trees in lower strata would need 
to be eliminated. And there’s another complication: the 
continued prevalence of the unsustainable practice of high-
grading oaks and pines (taking the best trees and leaving 
the rest) from private forests, especially in Massachusetts. 
Rather than producing an uneven-aged stand, this practice 
simplifies stand structure, speeding the dominance of 
shade-intolerants like beech, red maple and hemlock in 
lower canopy strata. 
	
It may be impossible to reconstruct pre-settlement 
forests in the transition hardwoods region, which has been 
substantially modified by several centuries of human activity. 
Instead, those who recognize this limitation recommend 
providing a range of forest habitats that support viable 
populations of native species. Ultimately, this may be more 
realistic than attempting to simulate natural disturbances.
Transition Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
C H A P T E R
1

17
Northern Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Location 
• Northern hardwoods lie between the transition 
hardwoods of southern New England and central 
Pennsylvania and spruce-fir forests at high elevations 
and latitudes in the Northeast. They cover parts of 
northern Pennsylvania, New York, Vermont, New 
Hampshire, northwestern Massachusetts, western 
Maine, and extreme northeastern Maine.
Tree Species 
Hardwoods include:
• American beech (Fagus grandifolia)
• sugar maple (Acer saccharum)
• yellow birch (Betula alleghaniensis) 
Less shade-tolerant hardwood species include:
• paper birch (Betula papyrifera)
• gray birch (Betula populifolia)
• mountain paper birch (Betula papyrifera var. cordifolia)
• pin cherry (Prunus pensylvanica)
• white ash (Fraximus americana)
• striped maple (Acer pensylvanicum)
• red maple (Acer rubrum)
Conifers dominate lowland and riparian forests  
and include:
• white pine (Pinus strobus)
• eastern hemlock (Tsuga canadensis)
• balsam fir (Abies balsamea)
• red spruce (Picea rubens)
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT NATURAL AND  
LAND-USE HISTORY OF NORTHERN HARDWOODS 
AND THEIR EFFECT ON BIODIVERSITY?
Pre-settlement forest 
composition and 
structure of northern 
hardwoods have 
been analyzed using 
records of “witness 
trees” blazed by land 
surveyors to mark the 
locations of section 
corners. Results 
include: 
•	 In northern New 
England and New 
York, 49 tree species 
were identified. 79% were beech, spruces, maples, 
hemlock, and birches. 
Natural History 
Fire was rare in the 
northern hardwoods, 
with a return interval 
of approximately 1000 
years. The reasons: 
cooler climate, 
ample rains, high 
soil moisture, and 
deciduous vegetation. 
The northern limit of 
fire probably set the 
boundary between 
transition hardwoods 
and northern 
hardwoods.	
Here’s an interesting 
question: Since fire 
was rare, how did 
shade-intolerant 
birches survive for 
1000 years between 
stand-replacing 
disturbances? 	
Answer: Birches 
survived in canopy 
gaps (openings caused 
by the death of one or 
more adjacent trees).  
Old age, insects and fungi, physical damage, and 
windthrow are natural causes of gaps. More explanation 
is in the box on the next page: Tree Regeneration 
Strategies in Gaps.
•	 In Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont, beech 
averaged 24%, maples 11.8%, and birches 9.7% of all 
witness trees. Other species were oaks, pines, hemlock, 
and spruces.
•	 In the Catskill Mountains of southern New York, 
northern hardwoods existed at middle elevations (305-
914 m/1000-3000 ft), bounded by transition hardwoods 
at lower elevations and spruce-fir at higher elevations. 
In the Adirondacks, the upper limit of northern 
hardwoods was 980 m (3200 ft). 
•	 Forest composition in north-central Pennsylvania (1765-
1798) also followed elevation. Forests on the Allegheny 
High Plateau resembled northern hardwoods, but oaks 
of the central hardwoods dominated warmer and drier 
elevations of the Allegheny Front. High Plateau forests 
included beech and hemlock. Other northern hardwood 
associates such as maple and birch were not as common.
C H A P T E R
1
Introduction to NORTHERN HARDWOODs  
(Map, page 7)

18
Northern Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Tree Regeneration Strategies in Gaps
	
Different northern hardwood species respond 
differently to sunlight in gaps. Trees already established 
in the understory at the time the gap is created are called 
advanced regeneration. They are shade-tolerant enough 
to persist in the understory for many years. Examples 
include beech, sugar maple, hemlock, and red spruce. 
Each species in this group has a different strategy for 
securing sunlight and resources.
	
Beech can survive approximately 11 years 
(maximum 30 years) in a suppressed state. It responds 
only modestly to increased light in gaps. However, its 
capacity to root sucker allows it to dominate stands with 
low gap size and frequency.
	
Sugar maple may survive an average of 2 years in 
the understory, but it can alter its leaf to intercept more 
light in gaps. It can out-compete beech following gap 
formation because of its faster growth rate.
	
Striped maple is a gap specialist. It uses the 
temporary increase in light to grow quickly and produce 
seeds, then dies back when the gap closes. 
	
Birch can survive for 1000-year periods between 
stand-replacing disturbances by arriving in a gap as seed, 
then germinating and outgrowing the established shade-
tolerant species. Their success is controlled by gap size, 
because smaller gaps favor more shade-tolerant species 
and larger gaps favor shade-intolerant regeneration. In 
other words, for intolerant trees (such as birches) to be 
“gap fugitives” and survive between infrequent stand-
replacement events, large gaps had to be a frequent 
characteristic of many stands. The small windblown 
seeds of yellow birch survive on the bare mineral soil of 
tip-up mounds or on rotting logs or stumps, all of which 
are present in gaps. Because it requires soil disturbance, 
heavy leaf litter or inadequate soil disturbance interferes 
with its regeneration. 
	
Pin cherry stores seeds in the soil until a light 
gap is created, triggering germination and growth. 
It’s shade-intolerant, but its rapid growth makes it 
successful in larger gaps and after stand-clearing 
disturbances such as fire or clearcutting. But pin cherry 
is a transient, and it’s eventually overtopped by slower 
growing species that began growing at the same time. 
It’s an example of “dynamic stratification,” the reversal 
of stratum layers during stand development, where one 
layer follows the elimination of a less-tolerant stratum.
	
Various size gaps create a patchwork of 
developmental stages, with the main part of the forest 
being shade-tolerant species. In the White Mountains 
of New Hampshire, smaller, older gaps were associated 
with hemlock, while larger, newer gaps were associated 
with paper birch, striped maple, pin cherry, and red 
maple. Yellow birch, red maple, and striped maple 
were less abundant in the old-growth parts of the 
forest than in gaps, while hemlock, beech and sugar 
maple showed the opposite trend. Gap age, gap size, 
and location within the gap all explained variation in 
species abundance and community structure, with 
gap age being the most influential. For pin cherry and 
paper birch, gap size was important because both 
need larger gaps to regenerate. For shade-intolerant 
species, location within a gap was important because 
regeneration success increased toward the center. 
Finally, gap age is a strong predictive indicator of species 
composition and dominance as gaps are reclaimed. 
Knowledge of gaps is important for successful 
restoration.
Ice storms are 
intermediate intensity 
disturbances. They 
create gaps by 
taking down trees 
and accelerating 
deterioration of 
injured trees. Higher 
elevations and/or 
latitudes make 
northern hardwoods 
prone to ice storms. 
Older trees incur more 
damage than younger 
trees because larger 
crowns catch more 
freezing rain.
The effect of wind-
storm disturbances.   
•	 Northern hardwoods 
closer to coastal 
areas were disturbed 
more frequently by 
hurricanes, which 
occur on average more 
than 380 years apart.  
•	 The great hurricane 
of 1938 devastated 
the White Mountains. 
Post-hurricane stands 
were dominated 
by pin cherry, a 
pattern that also 
follows clearcut harvesting. Within 50 years, pin cherry 
was overtopped and eliminated (dynamic stratification). 
The result was that beech, sugar maple, and yellow birch 
became dominant.  
(See box below: Tree Regeneration Strategies in Gaps)
Natural History 
C H A P T E R
1

19
Northern Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
	
The pattern in northern hardwoods was similar to 
transition hardwoods, but with interesting differences.
Northern hardwoods 
were less settled by 
Native Americans than 
transition hardwoods. 
Their inland location 
made them less 
accessible to European 
settlers, but land was 
cleared for agriculture 
when colonization 
occurred by the late 
1700s.
Like the pine barrens 
and transition 
hardwoods, farmed 
acreages were 
abandoned in 
the 1850s. Here, 
abandoned land 
reverted to old-field 
white pine, birch, and 
maple. And 150 years 
later, these forests still 
show effects of those 
historical land uses 
(see Effects of Clearing 
Northern Hardwoods 
below).
From the late 1800s 
to the early 1900s, 
nearly all the northern 
hardwood forest 
was logged with 
a combination of 
clearcutting and/or 
partial cutting that 
high-graded the 
biggest and best 
trees. Custom-built 
logging railroads made 
large-scale harvesting 
possible from the 
White Mountains to the  
Alleghenies of Pennsylvania. The steam-powered 
locomotives started slash fires that raged across recently 
logged landscapes and shaped the character of many 
forests today. This devastation of forests and watersheds 
led to national legislation (Weeks Act of 1911) and 
establishment of national forests in the east.
Virgin red spruce, sugar maple, yellow birch and white 
pine were cut for furniture. Beech was seldom harvested 
but was used for wood-burning locomotives. Hemlock 
was cut for its bark and used in the leather tanning 
industry.
Land Use History 
What are the Effects of Clearing the  
Northern Hardwoods?
	
Historic clearcutting and burning left current 
landscapes dominated by mid-succession stands with the 
following characteristics:
s	 They’re often stratified single-cohort mixtures, 
lacking the horizontal gaps (canopy openings) that 
are common in advanced developmental stages. 
They lack tip-up mounds and pits, the result of large 
tree blowdown in natural forests, which provide 
regeneration habitats for paper and yellow birch .
(see box: Tree Regeneration Strategies in Gaps, .
page 18).
s	 High-grading has left forests that lack large old trees, 
large dead snags, and large down logs, elements 
which provide habitat for diversity, including insects, 
fungi and lichens.
s	 Subsequent natural disturbances – hurricanes, fires, 
and major windstorms – have not been enough to 
undo human impacts on northern hardwood forest 
ecosystems.
What are the Effects of Northern Hardwoods  
History on Biodiversity?
	
Long-lived, late-succession species such as beech, 
sugar maple, hemlock, and yellow birch have declined 
compared to pre-settlement populations. Shorter-lived, 
early- to mid-succession species such as red maple, 
poplars, cherries, white pine, and white ash have 
increased. This landscape-scale age structure favors animal 
species that need/prefer mid-succession habitat. Just as in 
the transition hardwoods region (page 14), animal species 
that need/prefer early- and late-succession habitats are low 
in the northern hardwoods, and many are declining.
What’s Important About Early- and  
Late-succession Habitats? 
	
Early-succession habitats offer herbaceous ground 
cover and fruit-bearing shrubs. The length of time some 
vertebrates use early-succession habitat varies, and it may 
be extremely short for some species. For example, the 
decline in the population of olive-sided flycatchers is of 
great conservation concern (see photo captions on .
next page).
C H A P T E R
1

20
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Northern Hardwoods of the Northeast
Olive-sided flycatcher 
(above) eastern 
bluebird (below) 
Olive-sided flycatchers 
(Contopus cooperi) 
and eastern bluebirds 
(Sialia sialis) may 
colonize a site a 
year or two after 
a disturbance but 
abandon it after only 
two or three breeding 
seasons. In addition 
to this short period 
of suitability, both 
species rely on large 
canopy gaps that may 
be associated with 
beaver dams or other 
disturbances that 
kill many trees. They 
do not make use of 
openings created by 
individual or small 
group-selection 
harvests.
	
Mammals occupy a greater diversity of habitats than 
breeding birds. More than 85% of the 60 species endemic 
to the region use various combinations of forest types and 
developmental stages. However, nearly all mammals in this 
region use early-succession habitats, and about 20 have 
shown a preference for such habitats. Several species are 
tightly associated with young forests, and their abundance 
is directly dependent on the dense understory vegetation 
found in regenerating stands (see Snowshoe hare/.
Lynx caption). 
	
Vertebrate species richness in mature stands, over-
mature stands, and stands with all age classes is greater 
than in early-succession stands. One important feature 
of mature stands is decay in standing and fallen trees. 
Lynx hunting snowshoe hare
Lagomorphs (rabbits, hares, and pikas) are dependent 
upon young forests. They’re major prey for a number 
of carnivores. Changes in lagomorph abundance affect 
predator number. Snowshoe hares (Lepus americanus) 
are the only lagomorph present in northern hardwoods. 
The lynx is a threatened species in the Northeast. Because 
its abundance is closely associated with the abundance 
of hares, attention is being directed toward maintaining 
adequate hare habitat to assure lynx viability.
In northern hardwood forests, 41 species of birds and 
mammals nest, den, roost, or forage for insects in trees 
with stem cavities. Most nest in relatively large trees 
(greater than 45 cm/18 in DBH) with suitable decay.
	
Unfortunately, little is known about northern 
hardwood forest development and other organisms like 
insects and fungi. Organisms requiring large living trees 
or large down logs may be more abundant and diverse in 
older stands, for example: 
s	 Some groups of beetles such as the Pselaphidae and 
Leiodidae appear to be more abundant in old-growth 
forests compared to younger managed forests. At 
least one Leiodid beetle has been cited as a possible 
indicator of old-growth northern hardwoods, and the 
species richness of beetles that feed on fungi under 
bark was higher in an old-growth stand than in a .
40-year-old managed stand. 
s	 The species richness of Calicioid lichens and fungi, 
which often grow on the bark of large, slow-
growing trees, increases over time, with older stands 
supporting more rare species. 
s	 Maintaining species richness in these insect and 
fungal groups may depend on protecting some old-
growth northern hardwoods and managing some 
older stands to allow for a sufficient number of large 
legacy structures. 
Introduced Insects and Diseases in  
Northern Hardwoods
	
As in the transition hardwoods, invasives have 
reduced populations of some native species. This subject is 
discussed in more detail in the invasives chapter, but two 
are of serious concern:
s	 Beech bark disease, a 20th-century invasive (Chapter 
2, page 59), has had the largest impact of any non-
native pathogen, because beech was the most 
abundant forest species in pre-settlement times and is 
also the most shade-tolerant. Eastern hemlock is the 
primary beneficiary, filling the openings left by dead 
and dying beech trees.
s	 Hemlock woolly adelgid is a serious invasive as it is in 
the transition hardwoods (Chapter 2, page 58).
Tom Munson
Tom Munson
Tom and Pat Leeson/Photo Researchers
C H A P T E R
1

21
Northern Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
HOW CAN KNOWLEDGE OF NORTHERN HARDWOOD 
HISTORY BE USED TO RESTORE BIODIVERSITY?
Why Restore Northern Hardwoods?
	
One reason is that current forests don’t mirror the 
distribution of pre-settlement forests. Research based on 
historical records and the few existing old-growth stands 
indicates that those forests were more diverse:
s	 30% were in early-succession stages, best produced by 
even-aged or single-cohort silvicultural systems.
s	 40% were in later-succession stages, best produced 
by uneven-aged multi-cohort systems with gap sizes 
ranging from small groups to small patches.
s	 30% were in transitional stages between the two.
	
Today’s mid-succession forest landscape has left a 
shortage of early- and late-succession stands and a lack of 
legacy structures.  
	
A mix of silvicultural systems would be necessary 
to maintain a forest landscape with the pre-settlement 
proportions described above. Redeveloping legacy 
structures will require modifying both even- and uneven-
aged management approaches. To achieve that goal, some 
scientists advocate converting from even-aged stands to 
uneven-aged stands over time.
What’s Their Current Status?
	
Today’s forests are much younger than pre-settlement 
forests, even though the tree species are largely the same. 
Forests growing on abandoned agricultural fields are 
approximately 150 years old. The oldest second-growth 
forests are about 100 years old. Third-growth forests, 
logged and regenerated in the 20th century, are even 
younger. Characteristics include: 
s	 even-aged stands with complex vertical structure but no 
horizontal structure (natural openings or gaps) 
s	 some snags and down logs, but few large standing 
trees, large snags and large down logs (Table 1.1, page 
23). Some fungi, lichens, and insects are dependent on 
these structures, and they tend to be more abundant 
and diverse in the few existing old-growth stands 
s	 lower percentages of later-succession beech and sugar 
maple, and higher densities of low- to mid-tolerant red 
maple, paper birch, and white ash than pre-settlement 
forests. 
Important Points about Northern Hardwoods
	
Even with a history of conversion and heavy harvest, 
these forests are not as fragmented, parcelized, or close 
to large human population centers as the transition 
hardwoods. So in theory, more management options .
are possible. 
	
While the quality (grade) of trees is not the same, the 
forest has recovered to merchantable size, with 58% of 
stands in the sawtimber size class. A range of management 
techniques, from even-aged to uneven-aged, is available to 
meet management objectives.
Difficulties in Restoring Northern Hardwoods
	
As with transition hardwoods, many forest scientists 
contend that silviculture that reflects pre-settlement natural 
disturbance may be the most effective way to protect 
plants, animals, and natural ecosystem processes while 
maintaining a forest-supported economy. They encourage 
foresters to avoid even-aged management that doesn’t 
mirror natural processes.
	
Local experts counter by saying that a natural-
disturbance silvicultural system has not been adopted 
because there are no specific quantitative guidelines for 
designing and manipulating natural patterns. 
	
A key question is: can modern forest management 
maintain forest functions (productivity, nutrient and water 
cycling, etc.), along with the array of native organisms 
present in pre-settlement forests, and at the same time deal 
with the loss of landscape-scale diversity in age and stand 
structure produced by 300 years of prior land use?
	
Two major issues in the restoration of northern 
hardwoods are: 
1	 Is a pre-settlement model of management that 
calls for a shift from even-aged to uneven-aged 
management valid, would it achieve ecological and 
social objectives, and is it feasible?
2 	 How can the goals of creating large living trees and 
large down logs be achieved?
The Pro and Con of Even-Aged Management
	
Even-aged management, practiced in many regions 
of the United States, is a repeatable cycle of regeneration, 
tending, and harvesting stands dominated by a single 
cohort. Its major benefit is economic because: 
s	 Harvesting is less expensive.
s	 Administration and supervision are less complex.
s	 More wood can be harvested at one time.
s	 Roads and landings require less upkeep.
	
In the northeast, both clearcutting and shelterwood 
techniques are used, each having a different effect on which 
species will dominate after harvest. Clearcutting favors 
shade-intolerant birch and is highlighted in the illustrated 
sequence below. Open shelterwood (leaving 30-50% crown 
cover) favors mid-tolerant yellow birch and red maple. Dense 
shelterwood (leaving 80% crown cover) favors shade-
intolerant sugar maple and beech. 
C H A P T E R
1

22
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Northern Hardwoods of the Northeast
One year after 
clearcutting 
an even-aged 
cohort of shade-
intolerant 
regeneration 
has begun. The 
successful species 
is influenced by 
soil. On fine till, 
early dominants 
include yellow 
birch, pin cherry, 
and paper birch, while red maple, paper birch, pin cherry, 
and yellow birch dominate on sandy till. 
The tree canopy 
closes 10-15 years 
after logging. 
Herbaceous 
forage declines 
due to shading.
At 20 years, 
the height to 
live canopy is 
3-4 meters (10-
13 ft). At this 
stage, changes 
in canopy 
composition 
are based on 
elimination of 
short-lived and 
shade-intolerant 
species. Those 
early dominants 
decrease over 
time as shade-
tolerant species 
from lower strata 
increase and  
eventually  
dominate. 
At age 70, with 
trees 50-60 cm 
(20-24 in) in 
diameter, the 
stand is ready to 
harvest. 
	
Even-aged management is not popular with the public 
because of its appearance. Large clearcuts are supposed to 
simulate large catastrophic disturbances, but the frequency 
of such events in any northern hardwood stand was at 
most once every several centuries (more about this below). 
Today’s even-aged management uses a 50-100 year 
rotation.
The Pro and Con of Uneven-aged Management
	
Supporters of uneven-aged management contend that 
it is most similar to pre-settlement disturbance regimes. 
They refer to science-based calculations indicating that 
a stand-replacing disturbance affecting 20 ha (50 a) of 
contiguous forest would occur in the same spot every 347 
years. They point out that current even-aged systems, 
with a 50-100 year rotation, allow more frequent clearcuts 
on that same area of forest. Supporters also say that a 
regulatory approach that regenerates 0.7-1.3% of the 
landscape per year would better approximate natural 
canopy turnover, resulting in a maximum tree age within 
managed stands of 70-140 years, a longer rotation than 
even-aged silviculture. Obviously, this approach would be 
more expensive. On private land, where trees are seen as 
a capital investment, holding stands beyond a certain age 
would reduce the rate of return. 
	
General opinion is that while the concept of uneven-
aged management is biologically sustainable, it’s unlikely to 
become a viable practice because most landowners would 
see it as having financial disadvantages. Other challenges 
to successful uneven-aged management include: 
s	 Beech bark disease has lowered beech value by 
killing most of the larger trees. Mortality leads to root 
sprouting, resulting in high understory beech densities 
that compete with more valuable species such as .
sugar maple. 
s	 Where sprouting beech densities are high, site 
preparation with herbicides may be necessary to 
control them.
s	 To provide a sustainable yield, an uneven-aged stand 
must produce not only the same volume of wood 
over time, but also a consistent species and grade 
mix. Species composition can be regulated to some 
degree by gap size. For example, a group selection 
harvest, with patches up to 0.81 ha (2 a) would 
favor birch regeneration, while single tree and small 
group selection would favor sugar maple and beech 
regeneration. 
s	 The forest must have enough pole-size trees to grow 
into sawtimber size, but not be so dense that growth 
is slowed. 
C H A P T E R
1

23
Northern Hardwoods of the Northeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Can There be a Shift From Even- to  
Uneven-aged Management?
	
Converting from even- to uneven-aged stands would 
take many decades and involve speeding up canopy break-
up rather than waiting for trees in even-aged stands to die 
naturally. The result would be a structure similar to pre-
settlement forests, but the maximum diameter and basal 
area would be smaller.
	
While moving from even- to uneven-aged forests, it 
would be important to:
s	 control the cut so that some older trees remain
s	 create gaps large enough for new cohorts to become 
established at regular intervals 
s	 maintain species diversity (especially shade-.
intolerant species)
s	 assure the health and vigor of the old trees .
that remain
s	 sustain seed production until younger cohorts mature
s	 regulate the number and mix of trees in each cohort as 
multi-aged stands develop over as much as a century. 
Once they are established, a selection system could be 
sustainable.
	
Two methods for conversion have been suggested:
1	 regularly scheduled uniform partial cuts, similar to 
heavy thinning or light shelterwood to establish new 
seedlings – for eventual single tree selection
2	 periodic patch cutting (1-2 tree heights in diameter) 
with thinning to establish clusters of seedlings, 
eventually supporting group selection.
	
The first would favor shade-tolerant species, and the 
second would allow regeneration of shade-intolerant 
species. A mix of the two would increase heterogeneous 
stands, an important characteristic of natural uneven-aged 
forests.
	
Successful conversion would depend on:
s	 sustaining the regeneration of seedlings and saplings 
over many decades by growing trees free from 
intense animal browsing, free from interference 
from undesirable woody or herbaceous plants, and 
protected from fire and drought 
s	 because overstory trees must produce seeds at 
appropriate thinning intervals, the eventual forest 
should have three to four age classes with consistent 
intervals between them, each occupying a similar 
amount of space.
How to Develop Large Trees, Snags, and  
Large Down Logs
	
Land-use history left very few old-growth stands with 
large live trees, and there’s no quick fix. Table 1.1 compares 
the basal area of snags and the volume of large down logs 
in the few remaining old-growth stands with managed 
stands. 
Table 1.1  
A Comparison of Legacy Structures in Northwest Forests
	
It would take several decades for managed stands 
to reach the volume of large down logs in old-growth 
stands, even if no harvesting occurred. Thinning might 
accelerate the development of large-diameter trees and 
snags, but it would still take decades. There are three 
ways to achieve these goals more quickly:
s	 the passive approach
s	 the long-rotation approach
s	 the active retention approach.
	
The passive approach simply recognizes the value 
of large live trees, snags, large down logs, and other 
legacies with old-growth character. However, protecting 
entire stands would involve some economic cost, and 
there’s no guarantee against a major disturbance. 
This approach is relatively inexpensive but probably 
won’t achieve the targets in Table 1.1. There may be 
improvement as some landowners see its value, but 
structural legacies will be a feature in only a few stands, 
not a common feature in most stands.
	
The long-rotation approach requires rotation ages 
of 120-200 years in even-age systems and even longer 
in uneven-aged systems. Unfortunately, there has been 
no research on this approach, and it requires economic 
sacrifice that might be unacceptable except for public 
ownerships.  
	
The active retention approach uses green-tree 
retention (see page 45) to increase snags and large down 
logs in stands managed on shorter rotations. This idea 
is appealing, but there’s not much field data to support 
recommendations on green-tree retention in northern 
hardwoods. In addition, there’s no information about the 
susceptibility of retention trees to windthrow disturbance. 
	
While it’s true that biodiversity has been impacted by 
land-use history in the northern hardwoods, the successful 
development of legacy structures associated with older 
stands and landscapes will require modifying both even- 
and uneven-aged silviculture in this region. Unfortunately, 
a lack of older stands provides few opportunities for 
research. Redevelopment of the northern hardwood 
landscape will be a long-term proposition, not a quick .
and easy fix. Tools and strategies to sustain public 
and political commitment to this goal over multiple 
generations will be required.
	
Old-growth Stands	
Managed Stands
Snag basal area	
4-8 m2/ha (30-60 ft2/a)	
0.3-4 m2/ha (2.25-30 ft2/a) 
Volume of large 	
60-160 m3/ha 	
15-65 m3/ha 
down logs	
(1240-3300 ft3/a)	
(310-1340 ft3/a)
C H A P T E R
1

24
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Lake States Forests
Lake States forest cover has declined from 32.7 million ha 
(81 million a) at the time of European settlement, to 20 
million ha (49 million a) today. White pine forests have 
seen a drastic loss, from 1.4 million ha (3.4 million a) to 0.2 
million ha (.49 million a) currently. 
Tree Species 
Hardwoods include:
•	 quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides)
•	 bigtooth aspen (Populus grandidentata)
•	 paper birch (Betula papyrifera)
•	 sugar maple (Acer saccharum)
•	 red maple (Acer rubrum)
•	 basswood (Tilia americana)
•	 white ash (Fraxinus americana)
•	 Ameican elm (Ulmus americana)
•	 northern red oak (Quercus rubra)  
•	 shagbark hickory (Carya ovata)
•	 butternut hickory (Carya cordiformis)
Conifers include:
•	 eastern white pine (Pinus strobus)
•	 red pine (Pinus resinosa)
•	 jack pine (Pinus banksiana)
•	 northern white cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
•	 white spruce (Picea glauca)
•	 black spruce (Picea mariana)
•	 tamarack (Larix laricina)
•	 eastern hemlock (Tsuga canadensis)
•	 balsam fir (Abies balsamea)
Pine Forest
Aspen-Birch Forest
All Other Forest
Non-Forest
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT NATURAL AND  
LAND-USE HISTORY OF WHITE PINE FORESTS OF THE 
LAKE STATES AND THEIR EFFECT ON BIODIVERSITY?
Presettlement 
Forest
current 
Forest
L. Wilson, Great Lakes Ecological Assessment
Mature red and white pine, Menominee Reservation, 
Wisconsin.
C H A P T E R
1
Introduction to LAKE STATES FORESTs 
Modified and reproduced from History .
of the Lake States Forests, Forest Stearns

25
Lake States Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Natural History 
Glacial landforms, the 
result of the Wisconsin 
Glacial Epoch which 
ended 10,000 years 
ago, are a dominant 
part of Lake States 
forests and determine 
soils, topography, 
and potential natural 
vegetation.
Pre-settlement forests 
were diverse and 
included: 
•	 pine on sandy soils 
•	 hardwood and mixed 
hardwood conifers 
on more fertile 
soils (till plains and 
moraines) 
•	 cedar, spruce, and 
larch in swamp 
forests
•	 young stands of 
aspen/birch, pine or 
maple 
•	 older stands of pine, 
hemlock, or northern 
hardwoods ranging 
in age from 250-400 
years. 
Natural disturbances 
that influenced 
forest structure and 
composition included 
wind (particularly 
catastrophic wind), 
fire, disease, insect 
infestations, and 
fluctuations in climate.
Forests located on 
dry, sandy soils 
are extremely 
flammable. Fire 
eliminated competing 
hardwoods, created 
a mineral seedbed 
for pine, and allowed 
residual trees to 
restock the land. 
White pine occurred 
most frequently with 
red pine and most 
often followed jack 
pine.
•	White pine was maintained by a repeating sequence 
of catastrophic fires every 150 to 300 years, with light 
surface fires at shorter intervals. 
•	Fire intervals of 100-150 years tended to favor red pine.
•	Intervals greater than 300 years resulted in northern 
hardwoods.  
White pine is a mid-
succession species. 
•	 Its seed regenerates 
successfully in 
mineral soil and full 
sunlight after fires.
•	 It is relatively slow 
growing during 
establishment, 
which allows faster 
growing pioneer 
species to dominate 
post-fire stands. 
•	 It persists because it 
has a long life span (up to 450 years), has the ability to 
survive surface fires, and is moderately shade tolerant.
C H A P T E R
1

26
Land Use History
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Lake States Forests
By the 1920s the 
merchantable pine, 
hemlock, and smaller 
hardwoods were 
gone. Logging had 
permanently changed 
the species composition 
of pine, hemlock and 
hardwood forests.
•  Soils were exposed 	
to excessive drying, 
eliminating seedlings 
and saplings of 
sensitive species like 
hemlock.
•  Logging favored more aggressive, sprouting, and wind-
dispersed sugar maple. The less mobile, animal-dispersed 
beech was at a disadvantage.
•	 Old-growth forests of hemlock, beech, and sugar maple 
were converted to second-growth sugar maple forests.
•	 The extensive fires that followed logging favored 
sprouting oak and maple. Seed producers like white pine 
were at a disadvantage.
•	 Fires helped maintain fire-dependent jack pine and 
pioneer species like aspen, white birch and cherry. 
•	 In other areas, pinelands were converted to large 
expanses of sweet fern and open stands of aspen 
suckers, scrubby oak, and red maple.
The Weeks Act of 1911 and the Clark/McNary Act of 1924 
funded cooperative state/federal forest fire protection and 
reforestation and authorized private land purchases east of 
the Great Plains for national forests. Both acts emphasized 
forest protection rather than exploitation. The incidence of 
fires decreased and reforestation expanded dramatically.
The Great Depression brought the Works Progress 
Administration (WPA) and the Civilian Conservation Corps 
(CCC). These agencies built forest nurseries and began 
reforestation.
Fire-suppression policy 
has left many 40-60 
year old stands. Since 
the 1950s aspen and 
jack pine have become 
valuable as pulpwood 
for paper, fiberboard 
and waferboard. They 
are managed on 30-60 
year clearcut rotation 
cycles. The low fire 
frequency in jack pine 
and aspen forests has 
raised concern about 
the maintenance of 
these short-lived, 
shade-intolerant species. Without the reintroduction of 
fire, major unnatural changes in the ecosystem could occur. 
Continuing fire control may allow spruce and fir to replace 
broadleaf species in the area.
Humans have reshaped 
the forest landscape of 
the Lake States region. 
Native Americans 
intentionally burned 
forests for hunting and 
agriculture.
Following the clearing 
of northeastern 
forests by the 1850s, 
many eastern lumber 
companies relocated 
to the Lake States 
where there was virgin 
white pine and water 
transportation. Logging 
intensified from the 
1870s through the 
1890s.
White pine was 
considered the only 
species worth logging 
because it was light, 
strong, and easy to 
transport. Harvesting 
began in the 1830s. The 
following 50 years saw 
rapid exploitation of 
the forest. It reached 
a peak around 1890 
when all merchantable 
pine had been cut or 
destroyed by fire. 
With the white pine 
supply exhausted, 
blister rust fungus 
infected many of the 
remaining white pines, 
and landowners were 
discouraged from 
replanting the tree. 
Timber companies 
moved on to hemlock 
and hardwood species, 
including maple, birch, 
ash, basswood, elm, 
cedar, and fir. Hemlock 
bark was used for 
tannin in the leather 
industry. After a forest 
was clearcut, fires were 
started in the slash to 
create “stump pastures” 
that were used for 
farming. But agriculture 
was not sustainable on 
the sandy, unproductive 
soils.
C H A P T E R
1

27
Lake States Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
What are some of the Effects of Lake States Forest 
History on Biodiversity? 
	
There’s been a drastic loss of white pine and red pine 
in Minnesota over the last 100 years. Efforts are underway 
to restore white pine, but there are five main impediments:
1	 There’s a landscape-wide reduction of viable seed 
trees due to the region-wide reduction of white 
pine and red pine forests noted above.
2	 In the absence of fire, more shade-tolerant 
deciduous species dominate pine sites, including 
sugar maple, aspen, paper birch, basswood, 
northern red oak, and woody brush species like 
hazel (Corylus cornuta).
3	 With the absence of large predators, whitetail deer 
(Odocoileus virginianus) populations in Minnesota 
are vastly larger than in pre-settlement forests. 
Deer prefer white pine buds to other conifer 
species due to the lower resin content.
4	 Exotic white pine blister rust (Cronartium ribicola), 
a fungus disease, was introduced in 1916. North-
central Minnesota has one of the highest hazard 
ratings for white pine blister rust in the Lake State 
region. (Chapter 2, page 58).
5	 The white pine tip weevil (Pissodes strobi) kills 
terminal leaders of white pine saplings at least 1.5 
meters tall growing in open conditions. The result 
is growth loss, poor form, and reduced value of 
individual trees. 
HOW CAN KNOWLEDGE OF LAKE STATES HISTORY 
BE USED TO RESTORE BIODIVERSITY?
Why Restore Lake States Forests?
	
One reason is that the landscape of northern 
Minnesota and the upper Lake States is generally second-
growth forests shaped by human disturbance. Timber 
harvesting started with white pine, moved on to other 
species, involved large-scale slash-fueled wildfires, and 
concluded with almost complete fire exclusion. The result 
has been a transition in forest composition from northern 
hardwood and conifer types to early-succession species, 
such as aspen, and a shift toward younger stand age. 
What’s Their Current Status?
s	 Forest cover has declined significantly from .
pre-settlement forest (Map, page 24).
s	 Old-growth forests were 68%; they now make up 
5.2% for all forest types. 
s	 Primary forests (areas that remained in forest 
throughout European settlement, which may or may 
not be old-growth) are about 1% of what they were 
in pre-settlement times.
s	 Secondary forests (cleared for farmland and/or 
pasture, and logged or disturbed by humans but 
not cleared for farmland), consisting of oak-hickory, 
aspen-birch, red-white pine, jack pine, swamp conifers 
and northern hardwoods, are the most extensive 
forest types.
Why Restore Eastern White Pine in Minnesota?
	
The challenge of white pine restoration in the northern 
Minnesota landscape seems insurmountable given the 
problems noted in 1-5 above. In spite of the difficulties, 
and at great cost, there has been success. The key has 
been to recognize the role of natural disturbance and the 
need for silvicultural systems that provide conditions similar 
to those generated by natural disturbance, particularly fire.
The Rajala Approach to White Pine Restoration
	
Rajala Company, a fourth-generation, family-owned 
group of sawmills and forest products manufacturing 
plants that manages about 12,000 ha (29,500 a), has 
worked for 25 years to restore eastern white pine and 
associated tree species in north-central Minnesota.
	
The company’s silvicultural fieldwork focuses on white 
pine but includes red pine. Red pine is easier and cheaper 
to grow, but white pine is more desirable. It grows across a 
range of site conditions, is moderately shade tolerant, and 
the physical and mechanical properties of the wood make 
it easier to mill than red pine.
	
Rajala’s approach differs from conventional pine 
management in the region. Rajala practices retention 
harvesting, a system best described as modified irregular 
shelterwood. It includes the following elements:
s	 Live mature trees are left during harvest, either 
scattered across the harvest area (in a dispersed 
pattern) or in clumps (aggregate pattern). 
s	 Snags and downed logs are intentionally kept, and a 
mineral seedbed is developed. 
C H A P T E R
1

28
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Lake States Forests
s	 White pine stands are 
managed on 100 to 
200 year rotations with 
several commercial 
thinnings. 
s	 White pine is 
underplanted following 
retention harvests or 
variable density thinnings 
(described in Pacific 
Coastal forests, page 45). 
s	 Live mature trees, left 
after harvesting, act as 
nurse trees, but are also 
retained as crop trees 
that continue to add 
value as future veneer 
and eventual high-grade 
lumber products. 
s	 White pine is the species of choice for retention, but 
preference is given to other commercially valuable 
species including red oak, paper birch, basswood, 
and balsam fir. If no crop trees are present, then less 
merchantable trees are retained as nurse trees. 
s	 Nurse trees lessen the impact of frost pockets by 
retaining heat and reducing condensation from rising 
pockets of air. Since moisture is a key in the infection 
of white pine needles by blister rust, controlling 
moisture decreases the probability of infection. 
Overstory shade helps reduce tip weevil infestation .
by keeping white pine terminal leaders below a 
threshold size. 
	
Rajala Company loggers are trained to understand the 
ecological requirements of white-pine regeneration. Their 
goal is to minimize damage to residual nurse trees, even 
non-commercial-crop trees, because of their importance 
to underplanted white pine. White pine sites range from 
1-24 ha (2.5-60 a). The management cycle includes the 
following six steps:
1	 Study stands and develop plans for regeneration.
2	 Design harvest plans for white pine underplanting 
and mark trees to leave.
3	 After harvest, prepare the site by mechanical 
scarification (raking) and herbicide application.
4	 Plant the site.
5	 Apply intermediate treatments including 
protection, pruning, and commercial thinning, 
6	 Schedule a retention harvest (described in greater 
detail on pages 45-46).
How the Rajala Program was Developed
	
The Rajala program started as an experiment using 
white pine on a variety of sites under different harvesting 
and site preparation treatments. Restoration sites 
were selected by soil characteristics. Yearly evaluations 
identified the most successful and cost-effective treatment 
combinations. With experience came greater site 
selectivity, with attention to competing vegetation and 
deer populations. 
	
Retention harvest levels are determined using crown 
closure management instead of basal area, guided by the 
architectural characteristics of the tree species and the 
predicted crown response to thinning. For example, sugar 
maple crowns respond aggressively (within 2-5 years) to 
thinning. So in stands with abundant sugar maple the 
post-harvest crown closure range is 20-30%. In contrast, 
the crown closure target is 40-60% in stands dominated 
by species with much narrower and thinner crowns, such 
as trembling and bigtooth aspen, paper birch, balsam fir, 
or red pine. 
Overstory retention of large pine after harvest.
Brian Palik
C H A P T E R
1

29
Lake States Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
	
Retention harvests are followed by intense site 
preparation and intermediate silvicultural treatments 
designed to optimize conditions for establishing white 
pine. Early attempts at underplanting prepared the site 
with either herbicides alone or mechanical scarification 
alone. Both were generally unsuccessful. Success came 
when site preparation combined an exposed mineral 
seedbed from mechanical scarification with herbicides to 
reduce woody brush and herbaceous vegetation for 3-5 
years. Mineral soil exposure and reduction of competition 
in the understory imitate periodic natural surface fires in 
Lake States pine ecosystems. Without natural disturbance, 
these substitutes are important for successful white pine 
regeneration.
	
Conventional forest herbicide combinations were 
found to damage residual canopy trees. Current herbicide 
combinations are designed to reduce herbaceous and 
woody competition while remaining on the site for the 
shortest time possible (half-life of 6 days). They .
include low concentrations of glyphosate (Accord) .
and sulfometuron (Oust). 
	
Protection treatments include manual release of white 
pine from woody competition and protection from deer 
browsing. Chemical release is less expensive than manual 
release, but white pine is less resistant to chemical damage 
than most pine species. After testing tubes and commercial 
deer repellents, the most cost-effective deer protection 
was found to be budcaps on terminal leaders, applied 
every fall before browsing begins. Other intermediate 
protective treatments include pruning to remove blister 
rust and prevent future infections. 
	
Rajala Company used their understanding of local 
natural history to develop silvicultural techniques that meet 
their economic goals and at the same time conserve an 
important native tree species. 
After retention harvesting 
the structural complexity and 
compositional diversity of this 
red pine stand are still in place. 
Underplanted and budcapped 
(bud protection device) white 
pine seedlings are in the 
foreground.
Brian Palik
C H A P T E R
1

30
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT NATURAL AND  
LAND-USE HISTORY OF THE COASTAL PLAIN 
FORESTS OF THE SOUTHEAST AND THEIR EFFECT  
ON BIODIVERSITY?
Originally, longleaf pine extended from southern Virginia 
to central Florida and west to Texas. At the time of 
European settlement its estimated coverage was 60% of 
the upland forest area in the coastal plains. Today, 2% of 
its historical coverage remains. In Virginia, Louisiana, and 
Texas, the decline of longleaf forests is almost complete. 
Tree Species 
Hardwoods include:
•	red maple (Acer rubrum)
•	white oak (Quercus alba) 
•	black oak (Quercus velutina)
•	chestnut oak (Quercus prinus) 
•	scarlet oak (Quercus coccinea)
•	American beech (Fragus grandifolia) 
•	shagbark hickory (Carya ovata)
•	shellbark hickory (Carya laciniosa)
•	mocknut hickory (Carya tomentosa)
•	pignut hickory (Carya glabra)
Conifers include:
•	longleaf pine (Pinus palustris)
•	loblolly pine (Pinus taeda)
•	slash pine (Pinus elliottii)
•	shortleaf pine (Pinus echinata)
•	Virginia pine (Pinus virginiana)
•	sand pine (Pinus clausa)
•	bald cypress (Taxodium distichum)
Beth Young
Presettlement 
LONGLEAF PINE RANGE
current 
LONGLEAF PINE Forest
Bottomland hardwoods along the Altamaha River, Georgia.
C H A P T E R
1
Introduction to COASTAL PLAIN FORESTs  
OF THE SOUTHEAST 

With the retreat of 
continental glaciers 
12,000 years ago, 
the climate of the 
southeast became 
warmer and drier. 
Species that inhabit 
sites that are neither 
very wet nor very 
dry, such as sugar 
maple, beech, and 
red maple, retreated 
to bottomlands and 
protected coves. 
Oak, hickory, and 
herbaceous species 
dominated the 
uplands. 
Approximately 5,000 
years ago, the climate 
became cooler and 
moister and marshes 
and bogs formed 
along the Atlantic 
Coastal Plain. Southern 
pine and oak species 
migrated north, 
invading prairies and 
open forests. Swamps and floodplains covered 15% of the 
total area. Their changing water levels resulted in a diverse 
array of environments.
Disturbance regimes 
included tornadoes 
and hurricanes, 
southern pine beetle 
outbreaks, and fire. 
Landscape-level fires 
shaped longleaf and 
slash pine forests. 
Fires, usually started 
by Native Americans, 
were more local in 
oak forests. Fires 
were infrequent 
in floodplains, but 
catastrophic fires occured during major droughts. 
Coastal Plain Forest 
Structure and 
Composition 
•	 High humidity 
and lack of very 
cold winters are 
characteristic.
•	 Soils are older, 
strongly leached 
with low nutrients.
•	 The seven major 
pine species include 
shortleaf, loblolly, 
Virginia, longleaf, slash and sand pine. Longleaf, loblolly 
and slash pine dominate coastal areas.
•	 Inland areas have deciduous forest species,  
especially oak.
•	 Prescribed fire is needed to control succession of oak 
species because they are more shade tolerant than pine.
Bottomland 
hardwoods within the 
Coastal Plain:
•	 occur primarily on 
flood plains next to 
rivers and streams
•	 are economically 
and ecologically 
important
•	 mitigate the effects 
of uplands by 
filtering nutrients 
and sediment
•	 include a large 
number of species.
Many of these forests  
have been converted  
to farmland.
Natural History 
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast
31
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Jack Kenner
Jason McGee
C H A P T E R
1

Long before European  
settlement, Native 
Americans practiced 
agriculture consisting 
of cut, burn, plant, 
and abandon. Late 
Mississippian culture 
(1400 to the time of 
European contact) 
decentralized into 
smaller agricultural 
villages. These 
settlements were more 
permanent and cleared 
8-80 ha (20-200 a) 
patches of forest for 
agriculture. 
European settlement 
began along the 
Atlantic coastline 
and gradually moved 
inland. Human 
disturbances included 
deforestation for 
agriculture, timber 
harvesting, fire 
suppression, and 
changes in floodplain 
hydrology. Early 
logging was confined to the coastline and larger rivers 
for easier log transport. Forests dominated by longleaf, 
shortleaf, loblolly, and slash pine were harvested first.
After the Civil War, 
forestry was the 
fastest growing 
trade in the South. 
Other industries 
that depended on 
the forest were 
turpentine, tanning, 
shipbuilding, shingles, 
charcoal for the iron 
industry, and whiskey. 
In 1870, the extent of 
Southern States pine 
was estimated to be 
three times that of 
the Lake States. Supplies were predicted to last 300 years 
in Arkansas alone. Exploitation increased as northeastern 
and Great Lakes forests were depleted. Northern timber 
companies purchased so-called Gulf “swampland” for 25 
cents per acre.
From 1880 to 1920, an 
estimated 36 million 
ha (90 million a) of 
longleaf, shortleaf, 
loblolly, and slash 
pine were harvested. 
Only one-third was 
replanted, leaving 
extensive scrub woods 
and barrens. By 1910 
nearly 39,000 miles 
of railroad in the 
13 southern states 
helped move timber 
to markets. By 1914, 
predicted timber 
supplies dropped 
below a 30-year 
supply.
As concern over 
timber supply grew, 
forests became more 
valuable. Fire was 
seen as a negative 
factor, consuming or 
damaging valuable 
timber, especially in 
deciduous forests. In 
1920, fire suppression 
policy was aimed at 
keeping fire out of 
forests.
Agricultural and 
logging practices prior 
to the 1930s Dust 
Bowl drought caused 
extensive erosion 
and sedimentation 
of streams. It’s been 
estimated that the 
Piedmont has lost 25% 
or more of its topsoil in 
the last century. 
From the 1920s to 
1950s, forest clearing 
for logging and 
agriculture moved from 
uplands to floodplains 
and swamplands. 
Flood-control levees 
made it possible to 
harvest virgin timber. 
Bottomland was put 
into soybean and 
cotton production. Swamps were drained to grow trees 
and crops. Timber harvesting benefited because bald 
cypress could be cut out of deep swamps. Early logging 
used pullboat cones, attached to the end of logs, that 
prevented snagging on debris. By the 1950s bald cypress 
swamps were nearly gone.
32
Land Use History 
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast
C H A P T E R
1

33
What are the Effects of Changed Fire Regimes on 
Coastal Plain Forests?
	
In the decades following the establishment of the fire 
suppression policy of the 1920s, two large-scale changes in 
vegetation pattern began to emerge:
1	 Pines, being shade intolerant and unable to 
regenerate under their own canopy, succeed to oak 
without periodic fire disturbance. 
2	 Most oaks, while more shade tolerant than .
pines, also have difficulty regenerating under a 
closed canopy. 
What are the Effects of Coastal Plain Forest History 
on Biodiversity?
	
Slash, loblolly, longleaf pine, and shortleaf pine more 
than 100 years old provide rare habitat that’s becoming 
rarer as older trees and stands disappear (Restoration 
section below).
s	 Historical forests were more open, with widely spaced 
trees and more understory plants. Periodic fires 
and large herbivores, now extinct, maintained this 
landscape. 
s	 Longleaf pine ecosystems have declined steadily 
throughout the 20th century and are considered 
threatened in North America. These forests are centers 
of biodiversity containing upwards of 40 species 
of vascular plants/square meter. Their conversion 
to loblolly and slash pine (short-rotation plantation 
forestry) has dramatically increased their loss.
HOW CAN KNOWLEDGE OF COASTAL PLAIN  
FOREST HISTORY BE USED TO RESTORE  
LONGLEAF PINE BIODIVERSITY
Why Restore Longleaf Pine?
	
Renewed interest in longleaf pine began in the 1990s, 
primarily due to its resistance to disease and insects and 
lack of vulnerability to market volatility. Declines in the pulp 
market have spurred landowners to look for alternative 
models of forest management. 
What’s The Current Status of Longleaf Pine Forests? 
s	 Only 2% of their historical coverage remains. 
s	 They are home to rare and threatened native .
flora and fauna. 
s	 The long-term viability of at least 187 plants associated 
with Coastal Plain grassland ecosystems is of 
concern at state, national, or global scales. The red-
cockaded woodpecker, Bachman’s sparrow, flatwood 
salamander, gopher tortoise, and gopher frogs are very 
rare. Habitat for these species exists in the Red Hills 
(described below).
What’s the Role of Fire in Longleaf Pine Savannas?
	
Historically, fire was the dominant disturbance that 
influenced structure and regulated function in longleaf 
pine grasslands. Pre-settlement forests were vast savannas 
dominated by a mix of open canopy, multi-aged longleaf 
pine with even-aged cohorts of regeneration in the larger 
openings. Most regeneration patches were relatively 
small (0.1 ha/. 25 a), but hurricanes and 
tornadoes created some larger patches. 
Fire frequency was most often 1-3 
years, with return intervals of 3-5 years 
where topography protected areas from 
burning. Longleaf pine was co-dominant 
with other southern pines and/or 
hardwoods. 
     Today, these fire-maintained upland 
forests help conserve regional biodiversity 
by vectoring fire into neighboring 
wetlands, maintaining habitat for plants 
and animals, particularly amphibians and 
reptiles (described below). 
     Natural regeneration of longleaf pine 
depends on fire. Lightning opens canopy 
gaps; fire regulates competing ground 
vegetation and maintains open canopy 
conditions. Wiregrass (Aristida stricta), a 
dominant ground-cover species, is a fine 
fuel for fire. 
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Gary Boyd
C H A P T E R
1
Today, prescribed fire is used to maintain oak forests and 
savanna-like pine forests such as longleaf pine.

34
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast
	
The federally endangered red-cockaded woodpecker 
(RCW) is dependent on tree cavities found in mature 
longleaf pine forests, and their frequent fire regime 
maintains open foraging stands.
Bunchgrass crowns catch the long needles of longleaf pine, 
leaving many needles elevated above the forest floor. The 
result is a loosely packed, fully exposed fuel that dries 
quickly after rain and ignites easily.
	
Fire is a cost-effective way to reduce hardwoods. 
Reintroducing fire and favorable conditions for burning is 
critical to restoring native biodiversity. The key is a ground 
cover of wiregrass that’s been frequently burned in .
the past. Management should maintain native ground 
cover by:
s	
burning frequently 
s	
avoiding soil disturbances that disrupt ground-cover 
root systems 
s	
avoiding a dense, closed-canopy overstory
s	
using herbicides sparingly, if ever
s	
continually producing pine needles for fuel by 
maintaining the overstory. 
	
Where the ground cover or forest has been .
disturbed, compromising fuel production by grasses, 
invading woody shrubs are much more difficult to control 
(more details below). 
Restoration of Longleaf Pine in the Red Hills:  
A Case Study
	
The Red Hills region of southern Georgia and 
northern Florida comprises a remnant longleaf pine forest 
that includes a group of large, privately owned properties 
managed for game birds and timber. The owners of these 
properties recognize the importance of old tree retention, 
frequent fire, and complex biological communities. 
	
The management philosophy of the Red Hills property 
owners contrasts with the plantation management 
approach that dominates industrial and other private 
forests. Those commercial forests are heavily stocked, 
even-aged plantations of slash and loblolly pine, grown on 
25-30 year rotations to reduce costs. Their closed canopy 
structure and intensive site preparation can reduce the 
diversity of native understory plants. They have fewer age 
classes and less dead wood, and they don’t provide some 
unique habitats that are found in native forests (more 
detail below). While some native plants and animals, such 
as young loblolly pine, slash pine, and early succession 
pioneer plants, deer, and turkey, thrive in this type of 
forest, many other important elements of biodiversity .
are reduced.  
	
The Red Hills management philosophy evolved under 
the guidance of forestry consultants Herbert L. Stoddard, 
Sr., and Leon Neel, who started working with hunting 
estate owners in the early 1950s. Stoddard and Neel 
valued aesthetics and wildlife, especially the habitat needs 
of primary game species such as the northern bobwhite 
(Colinus virginiana), as well as the economic value of 
timber. They recognized the importance of retaining old 
canopy trees, applying fire frequently, and maintaining 
complex biological communities. They developed an 
approach based on selective cutting and long rotations.  
	
The Stoddard/Neel approach conserves biodiversity by 
applying sustainable forestry principles that include:
s	 maintaining a perpetual forest with all its components 
while harvesting timber
s	 allowing timber to grow to a threshold before 
removing part of the growth 
s	 accepting time as an important ecological feature .
of land
s	 recognizing that forests aren’t just about wood or 
game but are ecosystems sustained by disturbances 
that provide structural complexity and heterogeneity. 
	
While disturbance takes many forms in these .
forests, the most important is frequently applied and 
controlled fire that regulates the structure and controls 
ecosystem function. 
Julius Ariail
C H A P T E R
1

35
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
response to prescribed fire and time 
since burning. It is rich in species, 
so managing it and neighboring 
wetlands is important to conserving 
biodiversity. The SNA recognizes the 
importance of the pine canopy in 
maintaining fire in this ecologically 
sensitive part of the landscape. 
	
SNA timber harvest guidelines .
are designed to enhance the 
ecosystem by:
s	 increasing the age structure .
	
of pine 
s	 converting from other .
	
pine species to longleaf on 	
	
	
upland sites 
s	 removing hardwoods and.
	
encouraging grass and pine .
	
fuels that sustain frequent 	
	
	
controlled burns. 
	
Harvesting sustains the ecosystem by:
s	 removing low-vigor trees
s	 removing trees with economically valuable defect 
(detail below) 
s	 evaluating each tree individually for removal – there 
are no simple rules or equations, but principles that 
guide tree selection. 
Harvest guidelines in upland sites call for:
s	 giving preference to longleaf pine because it lives 
longest of the southern pines, is preferred habitat for 
RCW, and provides the best fuels for burning 
s	 using retention criteria that are adjusted as site 
moisture increases to include slash pine, a species 
commonly found with longleaf
s	 favoring older live trees over younger trees for 
retention because of their heartwood. They tend to 
be less susceptible to decay and fire and are a source 
of standing and fallen woody debris. Decay from red 
heart disease occurs only in older pines and provides 
habitat for cavity nesters in live trees. 
s	 removing trees with sparse crowns and yellowing 
needles, but not all at once 
s	 harvesting defective trees (forked, crooked, or 
diseased with cankers) but leaving some defect – for 
example, witch’s brooms are kept to supply habitat to 
some animals 
s	 harvesting some old dead trees, even though they 
have ecological value, because they’re not producing 
needles for fuel.
Frequent fire is the most important disturbance in longleaf 
pine-wiregrass ecosystems. It maintains the open canopy 
structure, sustains understory regeneration, encourages 
diversity of plant life, regulates the flow of energy and 
materials through the ecosystem, and maintains fine fuels.
How does the Stoddard/Neel Approach (SNA) 
Maintain Diversity?
	
The goal in upland landscapes is to:
s	
discourage hardwood vegetation that invades in the 
absence of fire
s	
keep hardwoods small by sustaining a pine overstory 
through time.
	
On more extreme longleaf pine growing sites .
such as dry sandhill sites and wet drainages/depressions, 
the overstory becomes even more important in 
maintaining fires. 
	
Dry sandhills tend to be the least productive sites. 
Harvesting reduces pine fuels, which makes burning 
patchier and allows oaks to establish and grow to 
more fire-tolerant sizes. As oaks grow, their litter is less 
flammable than grass or pine needles, allowing them to 
persist in fire-dominated ecosystems. Fire on these sites 
regulates but does not eliminate scrub oak.
	
Wet drainages and depressions protect hardwoods, 
allowing them to assume dominant and co-dominant 
crown positions. Higher soil nutrients allow production of 
large amounts of litter. This reduces the frequency of fire 
and increases survival of hardwoods, which gradually move 
toward the uplands. 
	
There is no demarcation between drainages that 
support hardwoods and upland, fire-dominated savannas. 
If this zone is well managed, it is dynamic, moving in 
Julius Ariail
C H A P T E R
1

36
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast
	
Tree selection is also 
based on spatial distribution 
within the stand, with the 
goal ranging from nearly 
closed canopy to widely 
scattered trees. Trees are cut 
to release seedlings or create 
openings to encourage new 
regeneration, but opening 
size and total area are restricted to maintain canopy cover 
for needle production. Longleaf seedlings develop in gaps 
as small as 0.1 ha (.25 a). To encourage regeneration, 
cutting generally shouldn’t exceed 0.25 ha (.6 a). Cutting 
single trees may start regeneration that continues through 
several cutting cycles, gradually enlarging openings and 
releasing seedlings.
How to Convert Stands to Longleaf Pine
	
One way to convert is to clearcut loblolly, slash, or 
shortleaf pine and plant longleaf in even-aged stands. But 
this approach can encourage hardwoods, which then have 
to be controlled mechanically or with herbicides to permit 
the use of fire. 
	
It’s better to convert incrementally by maintaining 
pine forests over time, even species that are less desirable 
than longleaf. The pine canopy provides fuel for hardwood 
control with fire. This approach reduces costs and 
maintains the herbaceous ground cover. It can be done in 
the following stages:
1	 Use cutting practices that favor any overstory longleaf 
pine that is present. 
2	 Start a fire regime that encourages longleaf pine 
regeneration while suppressing other tree regeneration. 
3	 Plant or seed longleaf pine in gaps created by .
harvesting off-site pine according to the SNA approach 
described above. 
How to Reintroduce Fire in Fire Suppressed  
Longleaf Pine
	
Some trees die in longleaf pine stands that have been 
burned after periods of fire suppression. The cause may be 
root damage from fire, stem girdling, leaf scorch, or insect 
or pathogen injury after fire. Mortality can be reduced by:
s	 Raking litter away from trees to avoid damage to 
valuable trees with red-cockaded woodpecker cavities. 
This is expensive and impractical on a large scale.
s	 Burning in the winter when litter is nearly too moist 
to burn. Only a little surface litter will be removed; 
smoldering embers should be extinguished to avoid 
pine damage. 
s	 Continuing to burn in the cool season to remove 
layer after layer of duff. This encourages grass 
establishment for fuel and slowly expands the area of 
forest that is burned. 
s	 After initial fuel reduction, burning during lower 
humidity and fuel moisture will increase fire intensity 
and hardwood control. 
	
Repeated upland fire will help delineate between 
uplands and drainages that require infrequent but intense 
fire to keep them at bay. Periodically pushing burns into 
drainages helps bottomland forests and areas between the 
hardwood drainages and the uplands to be dynamic and 
defined by fire.
After a forest reaches the 
desired condition, it is 
maintained. It changes at 
smaller spatial scales, with 
trees regenerating and 
growing, but remains stable 
over larger spatial scales. 
Julius Ariail
C H A P T E R
1

37
Coastal Plain Forests of the Southeast
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Biodiversity Spin-offs of SNA 
Other birds and small 
mammals use the 
cavities of red-cockaded 
woodpeckers. They 
include chickadees, 
bluebirds, titmice and 
other woodpeckers 
(downy, hairy, and red-
bellied woodpecker). 
Larger woodpeckers like 
the pileated may enlarge 
the hole and take over the 
cavity, and screech owls 
and wood ducks are often 
next in line. 
	
The red-cockaded woodpecker (RCW) appears to 
prefer longleaf pine but will use other species of upland 
pine (loblolly, shortleaf, slash). Patches of old-growth 
longleaf pine in the Red Hills support a high density of 
RCWs. SNA has benefited them in several ways:
s	
Cavity trees, a critical resource for the RCW, are noted 
during timber inventories and protected from harvest, 
in contrast to the regional trend of harvesting them. 
s	
Potential cavity trees are identified and protected. 
s	
SNA advocates high stocking levels for mature trees, 
and many old trees (more than 100 years) are kept for 
aesthetic reasons, providing quality foraging habitat 
for RCW.
Gopher tortoises 
excavate a burrow 
up to 30 feet 
long with a den 
at the end. They 
browse on low 
growing vegetation 
including wiregrass, 
broadleaf grasses 
and legumes.
	
The gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus), a species 
of concern in the southeastern United States, digs burrows 
in open-canopy forests with abundant ground cover for 
forage.  SNA has benefited habitat for the gopher tortoise 
and the Florida gopher frog (Rana capito), which lives in 
tortoise burrows. Here’s how:
s	
Short-rotation forests with intensive site preparation 
can eliminate herbaceous tortoise food. Their high 
tree densities and closed canopy cause the tortoises 
to abandon their burrows and migrate to forest edges 
and roadsides. This also happens in fire-suppressed 
longleaf pine forests where oak encroachment results 
in a closed canopy.
s	
Gopher tortoise burrows are used by more than 60 
vertebrate and 300 invertebrate species, providing 
shelter from high temperatures and predators. The 
Florida gopher frog spends most of its life in and 
around tortoise burrows, leaving only to breed in 
wetlands during winter months. It requires an open-
canopy pine forest and access to wetlands. Fire 
suppression or changes in the water regime can make 
wetlands unsuitable for successful breeding. 
s	
Invasion of oaks in the absence of fire can alter pond 
regimes and impact frog larvae development. Oak 
thickets support large numbers of predators that feed 
on migrating frogs.  
	
SNA has benefited native plants because:	
s	 Native plants are adapted to re-sprouting after fire. 
Some species are vulnerable to fire suppression and 
decline in the absence of fire. The protection of 
existing ground cover or reintroduction of fine fuels 
along with pine canopy provides the necessary fuel to 
sustain the plant diversity. 
s	 Forest management that maintains a perpetual forest 
structure over time is key to floral diversity in the 
longleaf pine ecosystem.  
Todd Engstrom/CLO
Gary Boyd
C H A P T E R
1

Tree Species 
Conifers include:
•	Douglas-fir (Pseudosuga menzizii)
•	white fir (Abies concolor)
•	grand fir (Abies grandis)
•	sugar pine (Pinus lambertiana)
•	Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis)
•	western white pine (Pinus monticola)
•	western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla)
•	western redcedar (Thuja plicata)
•	Alaska yellow-cedar (Chamaecyparis nootkatensis)
Hardwoods include:
•	black cottonwood (Populus trichocarpa)
•	red alder (Alnus rubra)
•	Oregon white oak (Quercus garryana)
•	big leaf maple (Acer macrophyllum)
•	Pacific madrone (Arbutus menziesii)
•	Oregon ash (Fraxinus latifolia)
Pacific Coastal Forests
38
Natural History
Forest History AND Biodiversity
BIODIVERSITY?
Ocean maritime 
influence keeps 
temperatures mild 
throughout the year. 
Annual precipitation 
is high but seasonal 
(127-381 cm/50-150 
in), with little rainfall 
during the summer 
growing season (June 
through September). 
Dry warm summers 
have important 
wildfire implications. 
Winter storms with 
high winds are common. Occasional extreme wind events 
occur at intervals of several decades in coastal areas. The 
Columbus Day Windstorm of 1962 affected several million 
hectares in western Washington and Oregon.
Windstorms and pathogens helped shape forest 
development, but fire has been the primary natural 
disturbance.  
Fire disturbance 
consisted of intense, 
very large-scale 
stand-replacement 
fires. Large fuel 
accumulations, 
coupled with weather 
patterns of hot, dry 
air from continental 
regions, led to these 
fire events. Fire return 
intervals decrease 
from north to south. 
For example: 
•	up to 750 years in 
the moist coastal forest of the northern Oregon Coast 
Range and the Olympics
•	<50 years along the crest of the Coast Range in southern 
Oregon and coast redwood stands of northern California.
Due to ocean proximity, coastal Sitka spruce-western 
hemlock forests have much lower fire probabilities. 
Volcanic events 
such as the 1980 
eruption of Mount St. 
Helens are another 
kind of disturbance 
phenomenon. This 
stand-replacement 
event affected over 
50,000 ha (123,500 a) 
of forest.
C H A P T E R
1
Introduction to PACIFIC COASTAL FORESTs  
Pacific Coastal 
forests stretch 
from the coast 
redwood region 
of northern 
California to 
southern British 
Columbia and  
east to the 
Cascade 
Mountains.

Pacific Coastal Forests
39
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Pacific Coast Forest Structure and Composition
s	 Massive conifer forests dominated the region prior to 
European settlement. The major tree species have long 
life spans and can grow for centuries to large sizes. 
s	 Douglas-fir dominates much of the low to middle 
elevations. These forests are the result of long fire 
intervals separated by catastrophic fires, although 
periodic, low-intensity surface fires were also common 
in places. 
s	 The Klamath Mountains in the south, with lower 
precipitation and complex geological and ecological 
history, support a mixture of drought-resistant conifers 
and hardwoods. 
s	 Southwestern Oregon and northwestern California 
include evergreen hardwoods, such as tanoak, Pacific 
madrone, canyon live oak, and California laurel.
s	 Coast redwood is an important and distinctive species 
in northwestern California and extreme southwestern 
Oregon.
s	 Oak woodlands, grasslands, wetlands, and riparian 
forests with black cottonwood, red alder and big leaf 
maple replace conifers in lowland river valleys. Oaks 
include Oregon white oak and California black oak. 
European settlement 
began in the early 
1800s. At that time,  
approximately two-
thirds of the coastal 
forest cover was more 
than 200 years old. 
These old-growth 
forests were the result 
of extensive stand-
replacement fires.
Except for a few areas, 
such as Oregon’s 
Willamette Valley 
grasslands, these forests were a challenge to early 
settlers who cleared them for agriculture and settlements. 
Compared to the Northeast, the Lake States, or the 
Southeast, not much forestland was cleared for agriculture 
because most land was unsuitable for cultivation. 
Difficulties with 
transportation 
and access limited 
harvesting to lowland 
areas near harbors 
like Puget Sound. By 
the 1850s the first 
sawmill was operating 
at Fort Vancouver. 
By 1890, with the 
Lake States forests 
depleted, timber 
cutting and exporting 
were becoming a major 
industry. Pacific Coast 
logging expanded 
dramatically in the early  
1900s, and by the 1920s  
it rivaled the Southeast. 
Land Use History
Al Levno, USFS PNW-OSU Forest Science Data Bank
C H A P T E R
1

By the 1920s, tractors 
and trucks replaced 
railroads. 
Major wildfires were 
a recurring problem 
up to the 1930s. The 
1902 Yacholt Burn 
consumed nearly 
100,000 ha (247,000 
a), and the Tillamook 
Burns covered 111,000 
ha (274,000 a).
Private landowners 
were unwilling to 
apply silvicultural principles until effective fire suppression 
programs were in place. By 1940, the tree-farm movement 
signaled the beginning of credible fire suppression 
programs.
Before World War II,  
most harvesting 
was on private lands 
because the industry 
lobbied to keep federal 
timber off the market 
during the Depression. 
After the war, demand 
for wood products 
expanded. The Forest 
Service brought 
national forests under 
intensive management, 
and harvests increased. 
Intensive management 
that included clearcutting and even-aged management was 
the norm on both private and public lands. 
Clearcutting was 
justified because 
shade-intolerant 
Douglas-fir needed 
large, sunny openings 
to successfully 
regenerate and 
grow. Clearcuts 
were considered the 
ecological equivalent 
of stand-replacement 
wildfires. 
Clearcut size depended 
on the ownership. 
Large clearcuts 
hundreds of hectares in size were typical of private lands. 
Dispersed, small clearcuts 2.5-5.5 ha (6-13 a) in size were 
typical of federal lands.
Land ownership 
patterns were well 
established by 1900, 
with forests divided 
among private, state, 
and federal ownership. 
The Homestead and 
Timber and Stone 
Acts transferred large 
tracts of forestland. 
Other land grants 
subsidized construction 
of railroads and wagon 
roads. 
Highly productive forests with merchantable timber at low 
elevation with easy access were in private ownership.
State governments received trust lands that provided 
income for schools, universities, roads, and other public 
services. They also received “in lieu” lands, substitute lands 
in place of sections that were already in private hands. 
Additional lands came to the states from unpaid taxes 
during the Great Depression and from large wildfires like 
the Tillamook and Yacholt Burns.
The Federal government held large blocks of  
national forests. 
Early Logging  
(1880-1940)
Teams of oxen or 
horses moved huge 
logs to streams and 
rivers for transport 
to mills. Over time, 
railroads and steam-
powered cable-yarding 
systems improved 
efficiency.
Old-growth Douglas-
firs were considered 
the most valuable 
trees in the forest, 
and the main job was clearing these trees. Large acreages 
of logging slash were left behind, often resulting in 
devastating wildfires on and adjacent to logged areas. 
40
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
C H A P T E R
1

National forests and 
state trust lands 
followed the corporate 
high-yield forestry 
model. Planting was 
favored over natural 
regeneration, and 
greater log utilization 
left little organic 
material after harvest. 
For a time, the Forest 
Service required 
gathering and piling 
of cull logs and 
unmerchantable wood 
on all clearcuts. 
Slash and large down logs were even removed from 
streams and riparian areas in the 1960s. Stream wood was 
thought to block fish passage. 
“What’s good for wood 
production is good for 
the forest” seemed to 
be the motto of forest 
managers. 
Little thought 
was given to the 
consequences of 
intensive management 
on forest biodiversity 
and ecosystem 
function.
Interest in wildlife 
was confined to game 
species that were 
thought to flourish in 
edge habitat created by clearcutting.
Scientists studied ecosystem functions such as nutrient 
cycling and stream flow regimes, but they received little 
attention from land managers.
By the 1960s, scientists 
were expressing 
concern about the 
effects of intensive 
management and 
forest roads on 
ecosystem functions 
such as soil stability, 
sedimentation, 
and stream water 
temperatures.
Public concern focused 
on the aesthetics of 
intensive management 
and concern for the 
environment  
in general. 
Environmental laws of the 1960s and 70s made it possible 
to legally challenge federal land management. Litigation 
forced changes in management.
41
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Current harvest 
patterns in the Pacific 
Coast region use the 
staggered setting or 
checkerboard model, 
with clearcut units 
15 ha (37 a) or more 
dispersed throughout 
the landscape to 
produce a mosaic 
of even-aged, 
structurally-uniform 
stands. 
Logging slash is 
typically burned to reduce fuel loading and control 
competition from surviving understory plants. Other 
management activities include herbicide and fertilizer 
applications that further alter the natural rates and 
patterns of stand development (see page 43). 
Before the 1950s, 
reforestation was 
often left to reseeding 
from adjacent stands, 
but since the 1960s 
replanting has been 
practiced, often with 
only one (Douglas-fir) 
or a few species.
C H A P T E R
1

42
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
What are the Effects of Pacific Coastal Forest History 
on Biodiversity? 	
	
Most private Pacific Coast forests were converted 
from complex ecosystems to simpler plantations that favor 
wood production. The most significant effects involved 
changes in fire regime and loss of forest habitat: 
s	 Within less than a century, the natural disturbance 
regime of wildfire and windstorms was largely 
replaced by short-rotation, even-aged management 
using clearcuts and prescribed burning, disturbances 
that are more frequent and less variable in size .
and intensity.
s	 The Pacific Coastal region contains some of the largest 
and oldest trees in the United States and harbors 
many endemic species. There is evidence that habitat 
change and loss of structural diversity in forest 
plantations favors some species but results in a lower 
diversity of others. 
s	 The area of old-growth forests on all land ownerships 
in Washington, Oregon, and California has declined 
by greater than 50% since the 1930s and 1940s. 
Scientists estimate that only about 17% of the old-
growth Douglas-fir forests that existed in the early 
1800s remained in 1988 and that 96% of the original 
coastal rain forests of Oregon and 75% in Washington 
had been logged by 1988 (Condition and Extent of 
Pacific Coast Old-growth, page 102).
How Can knowledge of pacific coastal 
forest history be used to restore 
biodiversity?
Why Restore Pacific Coastal Forests?
s	 Landscapes have been limited in their ability to 
provide for native biodiversity related to late-
succession forests. The northern spotted owl, marbled 
murrelet, bull trout and some salmon populations are 
threatened or endangered.
s	 The consequences of forest fragmentation continue 
to be an issue. Today’s national forests are composed 
primarily of patches of older stands, with much larger 
trees intermixed with stands of small trees less than 50 
years old. 
What’s Their Current Status?
s	 Society is concerned about biological diversity and 
ecosystem functions such as stream protection and 
water quality.
s	 Federal land managers attempt to maintain 
biodiversity and ecosystems even at the expense of 
reduced timber harvest and increased fire risk.
s	 Private and state trust lands use Best Management 
Practices to protect aquatic biodiversity and produce 
high wood yields. 
s	 Efforts are aimed at restoration of upland and 
riparian forests to ensure biodiversity and functioning 
ecosystems. Achieving these goals requires forest 
management that will sustain biodiversity.
Important Points about Pacific Coastal Forests
	
Two major challenges to managing these forests for 
biodiversity are how to:
s	 maintain biodiversity and ecosystem function in 
natural stands that continue to be harvested and
s	 restore biodiversity and ecosystem function in young 
developing stands and landscapes where they have 
been lost due to past management. 
	
Silvicultural systems that satisfy these challenges 
require three essential ingredients:
s	 Include biological legacies in harvesting prescriptions. 
(Described below in the section: What is Variable 
Retention Harvesting? Page 45)
s	 Include principles of natural stand development, 
including small-scale disturbance processes, in 
silvicultural treatments of young developing stands. 
(Described below in the section: Restoring Structure 
and Biodiversity to Young Developing Stands using 
Variable Density Thinning, Page 47)
s	 Allow for appropriate recovery periods between 
regeneration harvests. (Described below in the 
section: The Economics of Restoration, Page 48)
Pacific Coastal Forest Restoration
	
Forest restoration is already underway in coastal 
forests. Variable retention harvesting is used to maintain 
biodiversity in natural stands that continue to be harvested. 
Variable-density thinning is used to restore biodiversity and 
ecosystem function in forest stands and landscapes where 
they have been lost due to past management. These two 
restoration techniques (described below) are based on the 
natural disturbance regimes (described above), and stand 
development patterns that have been studied over the last 
30 years (see box: Development of Pacific Coast Douglas-
fir Forests). The following points are important: 
s	 Different ownerships vary in their efforts to maintain 
and restore biodiversity, but all ownerships are 
involved in these practices to some degree.
s	 Restoration efforts include terrestrial and aquatic 
ecosystems, since riparian forests and stream systems 
have been impacted by 100 years of timber harvest 
and other activities. 
s	 Reserve lands (Late-Successional Reserves on federal 
forests within the range of the northern spotted owl), 
have been established and removed from timber 
harvesting as part of the effort to maintain and 
restore biodiversity and ecosystem function.
C H A P T E R
1

43
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
1 Disturbance and  
Legacy Creation. 
Historically, after wildfire 
disturbance in an old-
growth Douglas-fir stand, 
legacy structure was 
carried over in the form of 
large standing trees and 
large down logs.
2 Cohort Establishment. 
After the disturbance, a 
new cohort of trees and 
other organisms develops. 
Initial dominance is often 
by Douglas-fir, a shade-
intolerant species.
3 Canopy Closure. As the 
tree canopy develops, lack 
of sunlight causes shade-
intolerant herbaceous and 
shrub species to disappear 
along with lower tree 
branches.
4 Competitive Exclusion.  
In this stage, mortality 
occurs in the tree layer 
as trees compete for 
light and water. Natural 
pruning of lower branches 
occurs and understory 
plants and tree vegetation 
is sparse. 
5 Maturation.  
At the age of approximately 150 
years, the Douglas-fir stand has 
achieved maximum height and 
crown spread. A shrub and herb 
layer reappears, the result of 
understory redevelopment. 
6 Vertical Diversification. Canopy 
growth continues with the 
development of multiple layers. 
Lower branch systems develop on 
dominant trees. Shade-tolerant 
trees (western hemlock and 
western red cedar) may gradually 
become established and grow 
into the upper canopy, replacing 
Douglas-fir, a process that can 
take several centuries. 
7 Horizontal Diversification. Trees 
develop multiple tops, stem and 
top rots, cavities, and brooms. 
Large-diameter branches form 
and lichens and fungi move in.
8 Pioneer Cohort Loss. Individual 
canopy trees or groups of trees 
begin to die, forming gaps of 
various sizes and shapes. New 
trees establish in the understory, 
and trees already in lower and 
mid-canopy positions grow taller. 
This phase requires hundreds 
of years and is uncommon in 
landscapes where logging and 
natural disturbances occur 
frequently.
Development of Pacific Coast Douglas-fir Forests
We understand how these stands change in composition and structure. Although stand development is complex and 
diverse, and not all stands go through all stages, there is a general pattern across a wide range of forest types and 
locations. It includes eight stages.
There are exceptions to this general development 
pattern. For example:
s	 Shade-tolerant species can be part of the initial 
stand-replacement disturbance.
s	 Douglas-fir occasionally reproduces and grows 
successfully in established stands.
s	 Stand-replacement disturbances typically return before 
pioneer cohort loss because Douglas-fir can survive for 
800 to 1500 years.
	
This stand-development pattern can be generalized .
to forest types other than those dominated by Douglas-fir or 
stand-replacement fires. The descriptions of each stage are 
useful when planning stand treatments to be used in forest 
restoration.
C H A P T E R
1

44
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
What’s so Important about Biological Legacies?
	
Biological legacies help conserve biological diversity in significantly 
disturbed forest ecosystems. Pictured here are biological legacies left 
behind by three different natural disturbances.
s	 Biological legacies are responsible for the survival of plant species, 
either immature or mature individuals or reproductive structures 
such as seeds, spores, or sprouting vegetative parts.
s	 They affect other plant and animal life by creating refugia that 
provide a lifeboating function.
s	 They provide structural habitat needed by re-colonizing 
organisms.
s	 They improve connections across the 
landscape for some organisms by 
providing protective cover.
s	 Their role is most important where a 
stand replacement disturbance has 
taken place. The lifeboating function 
is provided by the large live trees, 
snags, and down logs that persist. 
These structures sustain organisms by 
providing habitat (nesting sites and 
hiding cover) and energy, especially 
immediately after the disturbance. 
s	 Live green plants that survive a stand-
replacement disturbance sustain energy 
flows to belowground organisms and 
food webs, as well as to aboveground 
herbivores.
s	 Legacy structures modify microclimate 
conditions, allowing organisms to 
survive, that might otherwise be 
eliminated from the post-disturbance 
environment. 
Understory plants, large quantities of tree seedling, snags, and  
down logs were legacies at some locations after the Mount St. Helens 
eruption in Washington, May 1980.
Above: Six years after a stand-replacement 
fire in Yosemite National Park, California, 
snags and down log legacies remain to 
serve important functional and habitat 
roles.
Left: After a windstorm in the Bull Run 
River drainage on the Mount Hood National 
Forest, Oregon, understory plants, tree 
seedlings and saplings and down logs  
were left. 
Jerry Franklin
Jerry Franklin
Jerry Franklin
C H A P T E R
1

45
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
What is Variable Retention Harvesting?	
	
It includes harvesting practices that retain biological 
legacies and riparian buffers along streams and rivers and 
around other aquatic areas. 
	
Why was it developed? Variable retention 
harvesting was developed to mitigate the negative impacts 
of clearcutting and even-aged management and mimic the 
biological legacies of natural disturbance regimes.
	
Is it new? Not entirely. Shelterwood and group 
selection harvesting techniques have been applied on 
federal lands since the 1970s. They provided experience in 
retaining overstory trees. When the concept of biological 
legacies became apparent from ecological studies of 
Mount St. Helens in the early 1980s, it merged with the 
practical experience of structural retention in shelterwood 
and group selection harvests. Today, it is being used on 
both public and private ownerships in Pacific Coastal 
forests. 
	
How it differs from shelterwood? There are two major 
differences. First, what’s left after the harvest is intended 
to stay into the next rotation, rather than being harvested 
after trees become established. Second, as shown in the 
photo above, the retained trees are either left in blocks or 
scattered across the cutting unit (lower left quadrant .
of photo).
	
What does it look like on public forests? .
All federal forest land within the range of the northern 
spotted owl now requires regeneration harvests that retain 
a minimum of 15% of the previous stand, effectively 
eliminating the practice of clearcutting (see photo). 
Retained structures include some of the largest and oldest 
trees, large snags, and large down logs. The Washington 
Department of Natural Resources also has adopted this 
practice on its trust lands within the Pacific Coastal region.
	
What’s its effect on biological diversity? Variable 
retention harvesting is thought by some to be more 
effective than clearcutting at sustaining biological diversity. 
It provides both a lifeboating effect for organisms in the 
near term and a means of recolonizing the harvested site 
by displaced species as the next forest develops (see box: 
What’s so Important about Biological Legacies?).
Retention harvesting 
on national forest 
lands. In this case 
different tree species 
and sizes, along with 
large old trees, snags, 
and down logs, have 
been left (about 25% 
of the original stand).
Jerry Franklin
C H A P T E R
1

	
What does it look like on 
private forests? When Plum Creek 
Timber Company started using variable 
retention harvesting in its Pacific 
Coastal forests in 1989, it was the first 
timber corporation in the United States 
to adopt and apply this approach. 
The goal was to reduce impacts on 
potentially threatened and endangered 
species and minimize harvesting costs 
and safety issues while maximizing 
the effectiveness of retention from 
the standpoint of biodiversity and 
aesthetics.
46
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Cougar Ramp retention harvest unit on 
Plum Creek property in Washington, 
five years after harvest (1989). 
This illustration sequence shows the 
Plum Creek retention harvest in the 
first year (A) and what it will look like 
in 25 years (B). At year 1 the retention 
unit includes carry-over biological 
legacy structures from the original 
forest (snags for cavity nesters, old live 
trees, and habitat for lichens, fungi, 
birds, and small mammals). The result 
25 years later is a complex forest, 
enriched with structural features that 
would be absent from a clearcut. 
A
B
Robert Logan
C H A P T E R
1

47
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
How to Restore Structure and Biodiversity to Young 
Developing Stands Using Variable Density Thinning
	
By using intermediate treatments that model 
processes found in natural stand development (box, page 
43), simplified young stands can be managed to accelerate 
structural complexity and biodiversity. 
	
What’s the difference between traditional thinning 
and variable density thinning? Traditional thinning is 
done to accelerate timber production and create spatial 
homogeneity in the stand. It can include:
s	 removal of suppressed smaller trees
s	 development of dominant trees
s	 elimination of non-commercial tree species.
	
Variable density thinning, sometimes described as 
“skips and gaps,” creates spatial heterogeneity in the 
stand. It includes:
s	 accelerating development of large diameter trees
s	 maintaining greater diversity of plants and animals and 
ecosystem processes
s	 forming “gaps” by removing dominant trees to 
maintain and enhance growth of shade-tolerant 
conifers and hardwood species and islands of 
understory vegetation
s	 leaving “skips” that maintain habitat for species and 
processes dependent on heavy shade. 
	
Variable density thinning is new. There are 
disagreements and questions among scientists about its 
effectiveness in restoring late-successional structures and 
organisms.
s	 Some favor very heavy thinning, believing that it 
replicates the wide spacing thought to exist in the 
development of old-growth stands. 
s	 Others think heavy thinning will result in two-tiered 
stands with a low density of overstory trees and a 
dense understory of either shrub species or western 
hemlock, neither of which is structurally diverse. 
	
Despite differences of opinion and unknowns, there is 
consensus about the benefits of variable density thinning 
in accelerating development of late-successional forests. 
However, the practice and its effects are quite limited .
at present. 
Where is This Approach Being Used?
s	 On federal lands where young stands are located 
within late successional reserves (LSRs).
s	 In simplified forests on municipal watersheds, such as 
Seattle’s Cedar River Watershed.
s	 On trust lands administered by the Washington 
Department of Natural Resources where Dispersal and 
Nesting-Roosting-Foraging (NRF) habitat for northern 
spotted owls is required.
On Federal Lands
	
The Northwest Forest Plan, developed in 1995, is 
a strategy to sustain old-growth forest ecosystems and 
related organisms by creating LSRs that contain well-
developed old-growth forests fragmented by harvesting 
that occurred between 1950 and 1990. The result is 
significant areas of young forest, less than 50 years old, 
mixed with old-growth. 
	
The goal for these LSRs is to restore contiguous late-
successional forest cover. This could be achieved by letting 
natural stand development processes take place, but 
that would take considerable time. To speed the process, 
variable density thinning can be used in young stands to 
create snags and large down logs, stimulate development 
of decadence, accelerate development of large diameter 
trees, and re-introduce missing plant and animal species. 
On the Cedar River Watershed in Seattle
	
The City of Seattle watershed has a habitat 
conservation plan (HCP) that calls for restorating late-
successional forest conditions throughout the drainage. 
There is some old-growth in remote and inaccessible parts 
of the watershed, but most is 10-80 year old stands. The 
city is using variable density thinning on very young stands. 
Thinning of older stands will begin soon, and much of the 
wood will be left in the forest to provide large down logs 
on the forest floor. 
C H A P T E R
1

48
On Washington State Trust Lands
	
As part of its HCP with US Fish and Wildlife Service, 
the Washington Department of Natural Resources 
(WADNR) is required to create and maintain Dispersal and 
Nesting-Roosting-Foraging (NRF) habitat for the northern 
spotted owl. This requires forest stands with highly 
complex structure. For now, WADNR can accommodate 
the objective of their HCP by maintaining existing older 
stands, but they can’t harvest those older stands until 
replacement stands are available for owl habitat. The 
department needs to develop suitable Dispersal and NRF 
habitat as rapidly as possible. They are currently using 
variable density thinning to create snags, large down logs, 
and other old and decaying wood. 
The Economics of Restoration 
	
It’s one thing to invest in restoring and maintaining 
biological diversity, but in the long run forest managers 
have to consider economic returns along with ecological 
benefits. Research scientists have developed a silvicultural 
system called “biodiversity pathways” that integrates 
economic and ecological goals. It was developed for 
WADNR as an alternative to traditional forest practices on 
trust lands. Stand simulations have shown that this system 
can integrate ecological goals with positive economic 
returns. As much as 82% of the net present value 
generated by traditional timber management systems can 
result from a biodiversity management strategy that uses:
s	 variable density thinning
s	 alternating rotations of 70 and 130 years 
s	 structural retention at the time of regeneration 
harvest. 
	
Biodiversity pathways focuses on intermediate stand 
treatments of established stands that integrate economic 
and ecological goals. 
Structures retained on a harvest unit on public lands 
include large, decaying live trees, large snags, and large 
down logs. All of these structures are impossible to  
re-create in stands managed under even moderate  
(e.g., 100-year) rotations.
Summary of Pacific Coast Forest Restoration
	
Silvicultural practices being designed and used to 
restore and maintain native biodiversity and ecosystem 
processes include:
s	 regeneration harvests (variable retention rather than 
clearcutting) that mimic natural disturbance regimes, 
especially biological legacies 
s	 managing young stands (variable density thinning) 
to restore and maintain structural complexity 
and compositional diversity by simulating natural 
development processes. 
Pacific Coastal Forests
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Jerry Franklin
C H A P T E R
1

Forests of the Colorado Plateau sprawl across southeastern 
Utah, northern Arizona, western Colorado, and 
northwestern New Mexico. Noted are the four case studies 
referred to in the text.
49
Tree Species 
Conifers include:	
•	corkbark fir (Abies lasiocarpa var. arizonica)
•	alpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa)
•	white fir (Abies concolor)
•	Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii)
•	blue spruce (Picea pungens)
•	Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmanni)
•	limber pine (Pinus flexilis)
•	bristlecone pine (Pinus aristata)
•	ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa)
•	lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta)
•	pinyon-pine juniper (Pinus edulis)
•	Rocky Mountain juniper  
(Juniperus scopulorum)
•	Southwestern white pine (Pinus strobiformis)
•	western juniper (Juniperus occidentalis)
Hardwoods include:	
•	quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides)
•	Gambel oak (Quercus gambellii)
Colorado Plateau Forests of the Southwest
Forest History AND Biodiversity
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT NATURAL AND  
LAND-USE HISTORY OF THE COLORADO PLATEAU 
FORESTS OF THE SOUTHWEST AND THEIR EFFECT  
ON BIODIVERSITY?
Three Major Forest Types
	
The Colorado Plateau of the Southwest, also called the 
“Four Corners” region, includes three major forest types:
s	 Mixed conifer forests, dominated by ponderosa pine 
and Douglas-fir along with white fir and blue spruce, 
occur at high elevations. Ponderosa pine, once co-
dominant in many stands, has been replaced by a 
dense understory of Douglas-fir and white fir, the 
result of fire suppression. 
s	 Ponderosa pine forests grade into mixed conifer 
forests at higher elevations and into pinyon-juniper 
woodlands or grasslands or sage scrub below. 
Widespread surface fires occurring at 4-36 year 
intervals kept many of these forests open and diverse 
until the 1880s and early 1900s. Since then, thickets 
of ponderosa saplings have increased in density as old 
overstory trees declined or died. Ponderosa forests 
are shrinking as fire-intolerant fir in the mixed conifer 
moves downslope and pinyon in the lower elevation 
woodlands moves upslope.
Ponderosa pine forest, Colorado Plateau
Josef Muench, NAU Cline Library, Special Collections and Archives
C H A P T E R
1
Introduction to COLORADO PLATEAU  
FORESTs OF THE SOUTHWEST 
NV
UT
WY
CO
AZ
NM
SAN FRANCISCO
VOLCANIC FIELD
WUPATKI
CANYON DE CHELLY
SUNSET
CRATER
MESA VERDE
BANDELIER
CA
Colorado River
CHUSKA MTNS.
JEMEZ MTNS.
Modified and reproduced from Woodlands in Crisis by Nabhan, Coder and Smith.

50
Natural History 
s	 Pinyon-juniper woodlands are more heterogeneous 
than the other two. Some of the highest levels of 
species richness in the western United States have 
been found in landscapes dominated by pinyon-
juniper woodlands. The fire history of this forest type 
is not well known, but recent evidence suggests that 
infrequent, high-severity fires were more common in 
the historic record than spreading, low-severity .
surface fires. 
Four Colorado Plateau Case Studies 
	
The Colorado Plateau is ranked in the top four of 109 
ecoregions in North America for species richness in several 
taxonomic groups and first for unique or endemic plants 
and animals. The following information is based on four 
case studies that demonstrate the heterogeneity of today’s 
Colorado Plateau landscape and the variability in historic 
land uses and other ecological changes that have shaped 
the current conditions. The case studies include: 
s	 The Jemez Mountains/Bandelier National Park, .
New Mexico
s	 Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado, is known for its 
stone cliff dwellings that served the prehistoric Anasazi 
people for more than 200 years and are some of the 
best-preserved Indian sites in the nation. 
s	 The Chuska Mountain Complex (Canyon de Chelly 
National Monument), Arizona, one of the longest 
continuously inhabited areas in North America, is 
located on Navajo tribal land, and today’s Navajos play 
a role in preserving its integrity. 
s	 San Francisco Volcanic Field/Wupatki and Sunset 
Crater National Monuments, Arizona. 
How Do We Know the Natural and Land-use History 
of Colorado Plateau Forests?
	
Researchers have developed detailed information 
about the history of this landscape based on:
s	 palynology (the study of pollen and spores) 
s	 dendrochronology (tree growth rings) 
s	 fire scars 
s	 packrat middens (dung piles)
s	 archaeology
s	 written and oral histories and repeat photography.
	
Packrat middens left in caves and crevices by packrats 
contain fossil plants that formerly grew nearby. Rock 
formations can shelter and preserve these middens from 
the elements for thousands of years. They can be used to 
compare historical and modern vegetation.
Colorado Plateau Forests of the Southwest
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Past and current 
climate variability has 
shaped the Colorado 
Plateau woodlands 
and forests. After 
reviewing all 
climatic records 
of the four study 
areas, researchers 
found examples of 
flood, drought, or 
temperature variation 
that were more 
extreme in the past 
than any modern climate event, although the current 
global warming trend appears to be becoming an  
extreme event. 
Fire history varied 
greatly among the 
four study sites, 
with periods of fire 
cessation occurring 
centuries earlier in 
some landscapes than 
in others. Interestingly, 
wildfire regimes at 
the four study sites 
were permanently and 
dramatically reduced 
by 1880. That is well 
before national fire 
exclusion and suppression  
policies were initiated. 
Insect infestations 
may have influenced 
prehistoric wooded 
landscapes across the 
Colorado Plateau.
C H A P T E R
1

Land Use History
51
The Southwest has 
a complex history of 
human occupation and 
abandonment over the 
last 12,000 years. That 
history has affected 
substrates, bedrock, 
geology, precipitation 
and microclimate, and 
the dominant forest 
vegetation types. 
Native inhabitants 
influenced these 
landscapes by many 
activities, including 
farming, grazing, and logging. In some cases, the most 
intensive land use occurred centuries before Anglo-
American settlement. 
Anglo-American 
settlement brought 
added impacts to the 
landscape including 
sheep overgrazing 
and logging. Historical 
evidence of native 
bunch grasses indicates 
that these habitats 
evolved with low 
levels of soil surface 
disturbance by 
ungulates.
Insect infestations 
across the Colorado 
Plateau have had 
dramatic impacts on 
forests and woodlands 
in recent years, with 
750 million acres of 
dead or dying trees 
documented in Arizona 
and New Mexico in 
2002.
What are the Effects of Colorado Plateau History  
on Biodiversity? 
	
The land-use, climate change, and fire history of the 
Colorado Plateau have changed forest composition, struc-
ture, and ecological processes. Here are some examples:
s	 Ponderosa pine forests and pinyon-juniper woodlands 
have had dramatic increases in stand density, decreases 
in the number and variety of species in the understory, 
reduced native biodiversity, and loss of cool-season 
grasses and non-timber forest products (NTFPs). 
s	 Higher elevation mixed-conifer forests show an increase 
in stand density and shade-tolerant trees.
s	 Intensive harvesting and fires in some locations have 
resulted in a loss of old-growth ponderosa pine.
s	 Trees and shrubs have expanded into grasslands.
s	 Overgrazing has affected ecological processes such as 
hydrologic regimes and fire frequency.
s	 The loss of understory vegetation has reduced surface 
water infiltration, which in turn has altered streamflows.
s	 Habitat loss and fragmentation from urban and rural 
population growth are threats in three (Jemez, Chuskas, 
and SF Volcanic Field) of the four areas studied.
s	 Invasive exotic plant species are a threat in three of four 
areas studied. For example, 10-17% of the plants are 
introduced species at Mesa Verde, the Jemez Mountains, 
and in the Canyon de Chelly/Chuska Mountain area.
Colorado Plateau Forests of the Southwest
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Some important 
natural processes 
in pre-settlement 
landscapes are now 
difficult to maintain, 
such as frequent low-
intensity fires, the role 
of missing predators, 
and depletion of 
surface and ground 
water through human 
overuse. The missing 
predators are the 
grizzly bear and 
Mexican gray wolf 
(recently reintroduced 
in the region).
Modern influences on 
this landscape include 
pollution, exotic species 
invasions, habitat  
loss or fragmentation, 
and climate change. 
One notable invasive 
plant is cheatgrass 
(Bromus tectorum). 
(See Invasives, page 59)
C H A P T E R
1

52
Colorado Plateau Forests of the Southwest
Forest History AND Biodiversity
HOW CAN KNOWLEDGE OF THE  
COLORADO PLATEAU FOREST HISTORY BE  
USED TO RESTORE BIODIVERSITY?
Why Restore Colorado Plateau Forests?
	
In the last century, forest and woodland management 
has resulted in increasingly homogeneous habitats that 
are more prone to high-severity stand-replacing fires and 
are less diverse in understory NTFPs. These trends have 
regional ecologic, economic, and cultural consequences. 
Their causes include interactions among land-use history, 
climate, physical characteristics of the landscapes, and 
relationships among predators, prey, protected livestock, 
and forage species. 
What’s Their Current Status?
	
Unprecedented wildfires in recent years prompted 
passage of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act in 2003. 
This national legislation authorizes money for preventative 
forest thinning. Opinions differ about whether thinning 
can really restore forests and about the historical 
conditions to which forests should be restored. Some say 
pre-settlement conditions should be the goal. Others say 
pre-settlement conditions are too general and may not 
apply to specific locations. 
	
Ecological restoration to more natural conditions is 
urgently needed. But scientists differ about whether the 
changes in vegetation are the result of fire exclusion, 
livestock grazing, climatic fluctuations, bark beetle 
infestations, or other factors. Ponderosa pine forests near 
the San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona have been 
the model for forest restoration in the Southwest. But 
the Colorado Plateau case studies demonstrate that the 
San Francisco Peaks model does not describe the historic 
conditions found in other ponderosa pine forests in the 
region, let alone mixed conifer forests or pinyon-juniper 
woodlands. 
	
The Healthy Forests Restoration Act passed in 2003 
has focused the debate. The question is: How can the 
funds provided by this legislation be used not just to 
reduce property-damaging fires, but also to restore the 
health and diversity of forests in the future? There is 
scientific uncertainty about how to achieve this goal in 
ponderosa pine forests. The conclusion, after looking at 
forest history in the Colorado Plateau, is that there is no 
single pre-settlement target for restoration. 	
  
Important Points about Colorado Plateau Forests
	
The four case studies demonstrate that each site 
has unique characteristics that must be recognized when 
developing management or restoration plans, and each 
landscape has unique needs. However, there are some 
general patterns.
s	 Species richness of native plants and birds has declined 
and exotic invasive plants have increased over the past 
150 years at all sites.
s	 There have been reductions in fire frequencies induced 
by historic grazing that predated government fire 
suppression mandates. 
s	 Most important is the reduced heterogeneity of 
cultural management strategies for forests and 
woodlands. Bureau of Indian Affairs managers have 
replaced Native American practices with one-size-
fits-all U.S. Forest Service and National Park Service 
policies. Reducing Native American and Hispanic 
traditional use has helped to homogenize the 
landscape. Practices have been lost that formerly 
maintained a mosaic of habitats through the use of 
fire and small-scale farming and gathering. These 
policies have focused management on timber or 
grazing resources to the detriment of NTFPs, which 
contribute to biodiversity and ecosystem health.
s	 Geology has played a key role in the adaptation 
of many of the endemic plants that are influenced 
by particular soil conditions. This geographic 
heterogeneity and its influence on endemic, rare, 
threatened, and endangered species underscore the 
need for land managers to base their restoration and 
management on site-specific characteristics. 
C H A P T E R
1

53
Differing Ideas About 
Restoration in the  
Colorado Plateau
	
Land managers and scientists 
generally agree that restoration 
of Colorado Plateau forests and 
woodlands is urgently needed. 
Disagreement comes in how 
to carry out that restoration. In 
response to unprecedented stand-
replacing wildfires in the West, the 
government has invested money 
in preventative forest thinning to 
restore forests. This has prompted 
debate about thinning, controlled 
burns, and other restoration 
activities. 
	
Most land managers and 
scientists agree that:
s	 the evidence indicates more frequent, intense, and 
large wildfires, along with increasing costs of fire 
suppression and rehabilitation in the ponderosa pine 
forests over the last decade
s	 these changes in fire dynamics have been related to 
historic changes in the density and age structure of 
ponderosa pine forests.
Colorado Plateau Forests of the Southwest
Forest History AND Biodiversity
Pinyon-juniper forest, Jemez Mountains, near Bandelier 
National Monument: 
•	 Geology: volcanic 
•	 Precipitation: moderately dry 
•	 Forest: co-dominated by ponderosa pine and  
pinyon-juniper
•	 Almost continuously occupied by Pueblo, Hispanic  
and Anglo cultures 
•	 Grazed by sheep since the 1600s, then cattle up  
to the 1930s 
The Cerro Grande Fire, burned into the town of Los 
Alamos, New Mexico in May, 2000. This is the area in 
April, 2006, showing the burned area adjoining the 
west perimeter of the townsite. Stand-replacing crown 
fire like this are evidence of more frequent, intense and 
large wildfires occurring in the Southwest, along with 
increasing fire suppression and rehabilitation costs.
Susan J. Smith
Northern Arizona University, Cline Library
Craig D. Allen
Mesa Verde National Park:
•	 Geology: sedimentary 
•	 Precipitation: more moist
•	 Forest: dominated by pinyon-juniper 
•	 Intense prehistoric agriculture (900 and 1300) then 
abandoned until 1500 when occupied by very light 
presence of Utes and Anglo cultures 
•	 Short grazing history by cattle (1880 to 1935) 
Two locations highlight the range of variability on the Colorado Plateau and the need for site-specific restoration.
C H A P T E R
1

54
Colorado Plateau Forests of the Southwest
Forest History AND Biodiversity
	
They disagree about: 
s	 whether the structural changes in vegetation are 
explained by fire exclusion and suppression policies, 
livestock overgrazing, climatic fluctuations, bark beetle 
infestations, or other factors  
s	 the degree to which thinning or controlled burning 
can restore wooded habitats, and what the reference 
point should be. 
	
One group of scientists advocates using pre-
settlement conditions to understand what forest stand 
structure was like before European settlement. They 
conclude that thinning would restore stand structure, 
which in turn will restore ecosystem processes, such as 
frequent low-intensity fires. 
	
Another group of scientists fears that using 
structure alone, or in combination with fire frequency, 
to predict ecosystem function will miss other pieces of 
the ecosystem. Those pieces include biodiversity and 
understory composition, the effects of the understory 
on hydrology, changes in nutrient cycling, the role of 
predators, birds, and other wildlife, and the importance 
of NTFPs. They point out that using past conditions as a 
model to restore modern forests also underestimates new 
influences such as pollution, fragmentation, invasives, 
and climate change. They claim that a restoration model 
developed around Flagstaff, Arizona, is not transferable 
to other pine-dominated landscapes in the west and that 
what works in the ponderosa pine forest around Flagstaff 
may actually cause damage in other forests and woodlands 
on the Plateau.
Forest Restoration Ideas for the Colorado Plateau
	
How have these landscapes responded to restoration 
treatments in the past?
s	 Within 3 to 50 years, grazing exclosures have shown 
increases in native biodiversity, increases in native 
cool-season grasses, and more well developed 
biological soils crusts (see photos). 
s	 Mesa Verde research showed a 17-foot rise in the 
water table after grazing was excluded for 11 years.
After exclusion of cattle and sheep from Mesa Verde 
National Park, repeat photography demonstrates a change 
from nearly 100% bare ground to nearly 100% cover 
(mostly clover) within 8 years, and native herbs within  
11 years. Recovery of the water table was also dramatic.
Mesa Verde National Park
Prater Canyon 1942
Prater Canyon 1946
Prater Canyon 1935
C H A P T E R
1

55
Summary
Forest History AND Biodiversity
s	
In general, fire recovery studies show changes 
in species composition and increases in native 
biodiversity following fire. 
s	
Invasives are a concern in burned habitats. 
s	
Preliminary results show significant changes in grass 
species composition and cover in response to thinning 
and mulching treatments in the Jemez Mountains.
s	
The health and richness of understory species was 
enhanced by the harvest of NTFPs. These species 
tend to increase landscape heterogeneity because 
they prefer certain substrates or growing conditions, 
and their harvest is an important way to encourage 
stewardship of native biodiversity in these wildlands.
Additional Thoughts on Colorado Plateau 
Restoration
	
Scientists who conducted the four case studies 
advocate a stronger focus on restoring ecological 
processes rather than exclusively focusing on forest 
structure or composition. They believe that historic and 
contemporary uses of NTFPs have been undervalued 
relative to timber and livestock production. They want to 
restore understory species and wildlife, not just conifers 
and grass. With these concerns in mind, they make the 
following recommendations. 
s	 Manage adaptively for the uncertainty of drought or 
climate change rather than for timber, livestock, or fire 
management. Direct research toward restoring forest 
and woodland ecological processes, given current and 
predicted climatic regimes, rather than reconstructing 
past vegetation structure or composition. 
s	 Management plans for ponderosa pine forests 
and pinyon-juniper woodlands should be based 
on site-specific information rather than regional 
generalizations. There is no single pre-settlement 
target for restoration.
s	 Since invasive plants are a significant threat over much 
of the Colorado Plateau, forest thinning methods that 
increase the dispersal, recruitment, and establishment 
of invasive exotic weeds should be avoided. Because 
most landscapes on the Colorado Plateau have 
evolved with low levels of soil surface disturbance, 
and are dependent on the biological crusts that have 
developed, management and restoration efforts 
should minimize disturbance of soil crusts in thinning 
and burning activities, and in recreational use, logging, 
mining, livestock management, and other activities 
that would disturb the soil’s biological crusts. 
s	 Ecological restoration must be presented to the public 
in a broader context than just structural thinning and 
controlled burns. The focus should be on managing 
forests as ecosystems, with cultural and economic ties 
to the local population. It may be difficult to promote 
practices that focus on overall health of forest 
ecosystems when the public fears wildfire. However, 
managers can increase a sense of stewardship through 
education and a stronger focus on other uses of the 
forest, such as the harvest of NTFPs, traditional uses, 
hunting, and wildlife observation and photography. 
SUMMARY
	
The forest history of the five major regions described 
in this chapter is a starting place, an explanation of how 
and why we arrived at where we are today. It’s also a step 
toward restoration and preparation for conserving biodiver-
sity in the forests of the future. In Chapter 2 we will look at 
the role of non-native invasives, a factor that has influenced 
biodiversity in the past and one that will have even more 
profound impact in the future. 
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 167.
C H A P T E R
1

56
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
WHY ARE NON-NATIVE INVASIVES IMPORTANT?
	
A non-native invasive species is a species whose 
introduction threatens or harms natural ecosystems, 
human health, economic values, or all three. Throughout 
this chapter we’ll use the term invasives as shorthand for 
non-native invasive species. 
	
Forest ecosystems are adapted to the slow, natural 
movement of species and to natural disturbances like 
wildfires, floods, and droughts. In the last 200 years, 
however, people have been able to travel between 
continents faster and easier than ever before, and they 
have carried plants, animals, and pathogens (microscopic 
organisms that cause disease) to places they might never 
have reached by natural dispersal. Once there, away 
from parasites and other ecological controls that limited 
their environmental and socioeconomic impacts on their 
home continents, some of these non-native species 
become invasive.
	
Invasive species are a major threat to sustainable 
forestry. Over the past century, invasives in the United 
States have impacted all of the forest ecosystem values 
that sustainable forestry seeks to ensure. They affect 
biological diversity, forest health and productivity, water 
and soil quality, and socioeconomic values. The loss, 
just in terms of forest products, is more than $2 billion 
annually. In spite of these serious impacts, we have 
failed to deal effectively with forest invasives in the 
United States and worldwide. 
	
We have inventoried and calculated invasives, 
but we haven’t answered the question of what we’re 
going to do about them. To help answer that question, 
NCSSF sponsored a research project to describe how 
research can help eradicate, contain, or suggest new 
ways to control forest invasives. This chapter explains the 
findings of the scientists who conducted that project. 
It reviews some major invasive species that affect forest 
ecosystems, briefly describes the organizations involved 
in their control, and lays out a strategy to reduce their 
threat more effectively.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT THE THREAT  
FROM INVASIVES?  
	
Some invasives have a long history of impact on .
our forests (chestnut blight), others have appeared more 
recently (emerald ash borer and sudden oak death), and .
still others such as the nun moth (pages 58-59) represent .
future threats. 
	
United States forests have yet to experience many 
possible invasions or even the full effects of some already 
established non-native species. Despite defensive efforts, 
such as seed purity requirements and sanitation regulations 
for imported wood packing materials, entry pathways 
remain open or only partially regulated, and forest invaders 
continue to spread. Movement of invasives across the 
globe is on the rise because of increasing international and 
interstate commerce. At the same time, increasing human 
access to forests, forest fragmentation (Chapter 3), and 
forest disturbance all create opportunities for invaders to 
penetrate and become established. When climate change 
is added to the list, there’s potential for the threat to grow 
in response to altered disturbance regimes and geographic 
ranges of forest species. We’re facing future invasions that 
are likely to have enormous social, economic, and ecological 
consequences. 
Sidney V. Streator, Forest History Society
Chestnut blight, one of the most devastating invasives 
in recorded history, reduced the most important tree 
in Eastern forests to insignificance. This photo, taken 
in Graham County, NC, first appeared in American 
Lumberman in 1910. (From left to right, B. King, Timber 
Warden and D.W. Swan, Timber Agent)
Why are non-native invasives important?
C H A P T E R
2

57
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
	
Before examining the impacts, let’s briefly review some 
basics. First, invasives fall into one of four categories: 
1. Invasive pathogens are microscopic organisms capable 
of causing disease. Sudden oak death (SOD) is an invasive 
pathogen that can affect many different plants and cause a 
variety of symptoms. Early detection is challenging because 
of the size of pathogens. 
3. Invasive plants, including trees, modify forest 
ecosystems by altering fire and water regimes and food 
webs, preventing the growth of groundcover, wildflowers, 
and dominant tree species. One example is Japanese 
honeysuckle (others are described on pages 58-59). .
Sometimes invasive plants are weeds, helped by forest 
management activities, such as prescribed fire, road 
building, soil disturbance, harvesting, and use of .
non-native plants in forest revegetation projects (i.e., 
following wildfire).
Mark Robinson, USDA Forest Service, www.forestryimages.org
John M. Randall/The Nature Conservancy
Joseph O’Brien, USDA Forest Service, www.forestryimages.org
Death of this oak canopy is caused by the sudden oak death 
pathogen (Phytophthora ramorum).  
Extensive summer defoliation due to the European gypsy 
moth (Lymantria dispar). 
2. Invasive insects, along with pathogens, have damaged 
and killed dominant tree species and caused changes in 
the ecology, function, and value of forest ecosystems. An 
example is the European gypsy moth, which defoliates 
millions of acres each year. 
Japanese honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica) is found in 
37 states. It invades forest edges and disturbed areas, 
suppressing native plants, bringing down trees and altering 
songbird populations by changing forest structure. Cutting 
stems at ground level or burning makes the registered 
herbicide treatment more effective.
4. Invasive aquatic species and wildlife often spread 
from one region to another with unintended help from 
landowners and others who are not fully informed about 
how invasive species can affect the forest or about control 
strategies. Examples include the movement of bullfrogs, 
brook trout, and rainbow trout (from eastern to western 
United States). The fact that these invasives are viewed as 
desirable for recreation contributes to their spread.
Adult bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana Shaw, 1802).  
Control: catch and remove frogs.
Gary Boyd
What do we know about the threat from invasives?
C H A P T E R
2

58
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
	
Here’s a sample of U.S. forest invaders and their 
impacts, arranged according to the date of their 
detection. Starting at the top right are two possible 
future invaders, followed by some of the most recent, 
and finally some established invaders that go back to 
the 1850s. The impacts noted here are not exhaustive, 
but they do indicate that inventory data are limited and 
cost estimates of impacts are rudimentary. These are just 
two shortcomings that hinder the war on invasive forest 
species. There’s more about these and other limitations .
in the discussion of efforts needed to reduce the threat .
of invasives.  
KEY
l	
When First Detected in U.S.
t	
Origin
n	
Invasive Species	
	
s	
Ongoing and Possible Impacts
u	
Control Treatments
l 	 Not yet detected
t	 Unknown
n 	 Nun moth  
(Lymantria monacha)
s 	Could cause cumulative 30-
year tree losses as high as 
$2.5 billion if established in 
three cities. Most damaging 
forest pest in Europe.
u	 Early eradication with 
registered insecticide
Female Nun moth 
on Scotch pine in 
Germany. 
Hannes Lemme,.
www.forestryimages.org
l 	1920s
t	 Asia
n 	 Hemlock woolly adelgid  
(Adelges tsugae)
s 	Currently in more than 16 states. 
Contributing to the decline of 
eastern and Carolina hemlock. 
Alters bird communities and 
riparian ecosystems where it kills 
eastern and Carolina hemlock.
u	 Use registered systemic 
insecticide in spring; release 
predatory beetles
Hemlock woolly adelgid 
disguises itself inside a 
cottony ball. 
John M. Randall/.
The Nature Conservancy.
l 	1908
t	 Europe
n 	 Balsam woolly adelgid 
(Adelges piceae)
s 	Attacks most North 
American true fir 
species. Caused dramatic 
declines in Fraser fir in 
Great Smoky Mountains 
National Park, resulting 
in understory and 
wildlife changes.
u	 Use registered systemic 
insecticide in spring
Balsam woolly adelgid 
killed these Fraser fir.
John M. Randall/.
The Nature Conservancy.
l 	1904
t	 Asia
n 	 Chestnut blight 
(Cryphonectria parasitica)
s 	Eliminated American chestnut 
from eastern deciduous 
forests. Estimated value of 
chestnut timber in three 
states in 1912 was $82.5 
million. Caused decline in 
chestnut-dependent wildlife.
u	 Plant resistant chestnut
Damage to American chestnut from 
Chestnut blight, 1943.
USDA FS archives, .
www.forestryimages.org
l 	Late 1800s-early 1900s
t	 Asia
n 	 White pine blister rust 
(Cronartium ribicola)
s 	Throughout the range of 
eastern white pine and in 
six western states. Killing 
whitebark and limber pines 
in western high elevation 
ecosystems, eliminating 
wildlife forage; affecting 
soil stability, snowmelt 
regulation and succession.
u	 Developing genetic 
resistance
White pine blister rust 
on eastern white pine.
Susan Hagle
l 	1850s
t	 Mediterranean
n 	 Giant reed (Arundo donax)
s 	Riparian invader in nine states, 
including national forests 
in California and Arizona. 
Chokes waterways, generates 
flammable material, displaces 
native vegetation and wildlife 
like the federally endangered 
least Bell’s vireo.
u	 Use integrated approach 
(biological, cultural, 
silvicultural, physical);  
avoid burning
Giant reed matches  
its name.
John M. Randall
What do we know about the threat from invasives?
C H A P T E R
2

59
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
l 	 Not yet detected
t	 Eurasia
n 	 Sirex woodwasp  
(Sirex noctilio)
s 	Could cause cumulative 
30-year tree losses of $760 
million if established in three 
cities.
u	 Remove and destroy 
infested trees
Adult female sirex  
woodwasp on Scotch  
pine in Poland.
Stanislaw Kinelski, .
www.forestryimages.org.
l 	 2002
t	 Asia
n 	 Emerald ash borer  
(Agrilus planipennis)
s 	Currently in Michigan, 
Ohio, and Indiana. Could 
eliminate ash as a street, 
shade, and forest tree 
nationwide. 
u	 Remove and destroy 
infested trees; apply 
registered pesticides
Emerald ash borer
David Cappaert, 
forestryimages.org
l 	1994
t	 Unknown
n 	 Sudden oak death 
(Phytophthora ramorum)
s 	Currently in California and 
Oregon and spreading 
rapidly. Has been detected 
in diseased nursery stock 
shipped from California to 22 
states. Could eliminate oak 
forests nationwide.
u	 Remove and destroy hosts; 
quarantine to restrict 
spread
Symptoms of sudden oak death 
on azalea/rhododendron. 
Joseph O’Brien, USDA.
Forest Service, www.forestryimages.org.
l 	1927
t	 Asia
n 	 Dutch elm disease 
(Ophiostoma ulmi)
s 	Occurs in most states. Has 
killed more than 60% of 
elms in urban settings 
where the elm was a 
valued ornamental and 
shade tree.
u	 Plant resistant elm
Symptoms of Dutch 
elm disease on 
American elm.
Robert L. Anderson, .
USDA FS, www.forestpests.org
l 	1890 (Nova Scotia)
t	 Europe
n 	 Beech scale insect 
(Cryptococcus fagisuga)
s 	Currently from Maine to 
North Carolina and west to 
Michigan. Expected to spread 
throughout the range of 
American beech. Carrier of 
beech bark disease, which 
kills more than 75% of large 
trees, leaving dense beech 
sprouts with reduced wildlife 
and economic value.
u	 Use registered systemic 
insecticides
Cankered stem of 
beech after attack 
of beech scale and 
infection. 
Linda Haugen,.
USDA FS, www.forestryimages.org
l 	Late 1800s
t	 Asia and South America 
	
respectively
n 	 Cheatgrass (Bromus 
tectorum) and Lehman 
lovegrass (Eragrostis 
lehmanniana)
s 	Displaces native bunchgrasses 
and dies early in the summer, 
reducing forage quality 
and increasing the spread 
and severity of fires when 
adjacent to forests. Particular 
hazard to dense western 
forests that are susceptible to 
catastrophic wildfire. 
u	 Use integrated approach 
(biological, cultural, 
silvicultural, physical)
Cheatgrass
Tom Heutte, USDA FS,.
www.forestryimages.org.
l 	1869
t	 Europe
n 	 European gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar)
s 	In 19 states, spot infests 12 more. 
Annually defoliates millions of 
northeastern and Midwestern forested 
acres; suppression costs tens of millions. 
Record losses in 1981: 13 million acres 
defoliated, $3.9 billion (1998 dollars)  
in losses. 
u	 Use registered biological controls
European gypsy moth
Hannes Lemme
What do we know about the threat from invasives?
C H A P T E R
2

60
WHO’S RESPONSIBLE FOR THE WAR ON INVASIVES? 
	
We are all responsible for fighting invasives, but some 
organizations are equipped with authority, regulations, 
and resources to meet that responsibility. Individuals and 
organizations make decisions every day that determine the 
impacts of invasive species on U.S. forests. Table 2.1 lists 
their major activities and influence. Their objectives are 
varied and sometimes conflicting. 
	
Some agencies have responsibility both for 
encouraging global trade and minimizing entrance of 
exotics. Obviously, this can limit their effectiveness in the 
war on invasives. Prevention, detection and management 
of invasives require multiple agency coordination, but 
the roles and responsibilities of agencies are not always 
well defined because the statutes/laws that define 
their responsibilities are not clear. Non-governmental 
organizations, like the Nature Conservancy, are joining 
coordination efforts at all the activity levels identified in 
Table 2.1.
	
The bottom line is that even with organizations, 
laws, protocols, etc., the threat of invasives is increasing. 
The task is complicated, and it’s important to note that 
there always will be some uncertainties about invasives, 
so prevention is never 100% effective. Effective action 
against invasives requires flexible approaches in which 
forest practitioners, managers, and public agencies share 
a common understanding of the threat and have access to 
information so they can respond to the unexpected. The 
next page describes three strategies that can make the war 
on invasives more effective. 
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
	
Major Activity
	
International	
National	
Regional	
State	
Local
	
International Plant Protection Convention	
T	
-	
-	
-	
-
	
North American Plant .
	
Protection Organization	
T	
-	
-	
-	
-
	
Montreal Process	
S	
S	
-	
-	
-
	
Forest Certification Programs	
S	
S	
S	
S	
S
	
Timber and Paper Industries	
S, M, C	
S, M, C	
S, M, C	
S, M, C	
S, M, C
	
Horticultural Industry	
C	
C	
C	
C	
C
	
Industries involved in international trade .
	
using wood packaging materials	
C	
-	
-	
-	
-
	
USDA Forest Service	
S, M	
S, M, P	
S, M, P	
S, M, P	
S, M, P
	
USDA Animal & Plant Health .
	
Inspection Service	
T, P	
P, Q	
P, Q	
P, Q	
-
	
State Agencies .
	
(forestry, natural resources, agriculture)	
-	
-	
-	
M, P, Q	
M, P, Q
	
Private Forest Landowners	
-	
-	
-	
M	
M
	
Local Governments	
-	
-	
-	
-	
M, P
Organization, Group, Law, etc.
C	 responsible for commercial shipments of wood products, 
wood packing materials or plants that might be or become 
contaminated by invasive pests
M	 responsible for forest management
P	 responsible for implementing large-scale control programs 
for invasive species
Q	 responsible for interstate regulation and quarantines of 
forest pests
S	 responsible for developing sustainable forestry principles, 
criteria, indicators, objectives, and performance measures
T	 responsible for international trade agreements, protocols, 
regulations, and quarantines
USDA	 United States Department of Agriculture
Legend:
Table 2.1  Groups, organizations, and government entities responsible for invasive species.
Who's responsible for the war on invasives?
C H A P T E R
2

61
	
There are three strategies to counter invasive .
species (Fig. 2.1).
1	 identify and block pathways for introduction and 
spread of new invasives (Prevention)
2	 detect and eradicate invaders that escape prevention 
(Detection and Early Intervention)
3	 develop Long-term Management strategies for .
well-established invasive species. 
	
Figure 2.1 illustrates how each strategy is linked to the 
source of the invasive species, their means of transportation 
to the United States, the location of initial infestation, and 
how invasives spread and impact sustainable forestry. Each 
strategy works to minimize not only future invasions but also 
the spread and impact of well-established invaders. All three 
strategies may be needed to control a single pest. Efforts 
against the European gypsy moth, for example, involve 
preventing introduction of the moth’s Asian counterpart into 
the United States, detection and early eradication of spot 
outbreaks in new states, and long-term management aimed 
at containing and managing current infested areas.
Figure 2.1  Three strategies for reducing impacts of invasives 
are identified in the left column. All three are designed to 
minimize future invasions and the impacts and extent of 
already-established invaders. 
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
SOURCE
TRANSIT
NEW INFESTATION
Establish international 
agreements that balance 
trade with risk pathways
Minimize risk pathways 
and species transfers
Use preventive management for forests at risk
Develop large-scale, long-term control 
programs that target high-risk species and 
forests at risk of invasion
Manage already infested forests to minimize 
impacts of invaders on ecosystems
Detect, identify, and eradicate populations of high-risk species
STRATEGIES FOR 
REDUCING INVASIVES
1. PREVENTION
3. LONG-TERM 
MANAGEMENT
2. DETECTION 
AND EARLY 
INTERVENTION
Who's responsible for the war on invasives?
C H A P T E R
2
SPREAD, INCREASE, 
AND IMPACTS

62
WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT INVASIVES?
	
The key to success against invasives is prevention, early 
detection and rapid response/eradication at all levels. The 
Weed Bounty Hunter program is a local example (see box). 
Effective early detection depends on better information 
accessible to practitioners, managers and policymakers. 
Knowing that, what can be done to: 
s	 improve the link between invasive species and 
sustainable forestry
s	 provide better information resources for practitioners, 
forest managers, and policymakers
s	 provide new scientific tools
s	 provide better cost estimates to inform policy and 
management decisions
s	 improve prevention and management at different 
landscape scales (from local sites to states, regions and 
continents)? 
How to Link Invasives with Sustainable Forestry
	
The Montreal Process and Forest Certification are tools 
being used to evaluate and document sustainable forest 
practices, yet they are nearly silent on the role that invasives 
play in affecting the outcome of forest management. For 
example, more than a decade ago, 12 nations, including the 
United States, agreed to the Montreal Process. Surprisingly, 
none of its indicators measure the threat to sustainable 
forestry posed by invasive species. In its recent report on 
how the Montreal Process is being implemented in the 
United States (National Report on Sustainable Forests – .
USDA FS 2004), the USDA Forest Service included no data 
about the economic or ecological impacts of invasive species 
on U.S. forests. Nor was there information comparing 
invasive species to other sustainable forestry threats, or any 
evaluation of the effectiveness of policy and management 
actions on invasives. 
	
Forest certification programs, like SFI (Sustainable 
Forestry Initiative) and FSC (Forest Stewardship Council) can 
and do have influential effects on policy and management 
of forestland by government agencies, timber companies, 
and other forest owners, but they haven’t addressed the 
subject of invasives any better than the Montreal Process. 
For example, measurements of invasive species in SFI or FSC 
assess only the extent to which participants minimize the 
risk of exotic tree planting and monitor and manage forests 
to prevent and minimize outbreaks of pests, diseases, and 
invasive plants and animals. Granted, this is a start, but 
these measurements don’t reflect the magnitude of the 
threat of invasives on sustainable forestry. 
	
What can be done to improve the Montreal Process and 
forest certification programs with respect to invasives and 
their threat to sustainable forestry?
	
First we must determine whether the correct metrics for 
assessing the threat of invasive species have been identified 
and whether they adequately measure the participants’ 
implementation of the three strategies (described in Fig 2.1). 
	
This should be done through the internal review process 
of the Montreal Process and certification programs. It should 
include scientists and technical experts. 
	
The ultimate goal should be to track whether 
participants:
s	 eliminate pathways that spread invasive species
s	 manage forests in ways that reduce new invasions 
including minimizing ground disturbance that opens 
new areas to invasion
s	 monitor to detect new invasions and implement rapid 
response measures
s	 suppress established invaders by participating in large 
scale monitoring and management efforts
s	 consider how eradication strategies will affect other 
aspects of forest ecosystems and sustainability. 
	
At a minimum, reporting should track the social, 
economic, and ecological impacts of invasive species.
How to Build Better Information Resources 
	
Table 2.1 identifies the people and organizations 
involved in decisions about invasive species in the United 
States. Unfortunately, there’s no information infrastructure 
to enable policymakers to make consistently informed 
choices. Yes, there are online databases and information 
sources, but the invasives information system is incomplete 
and fragmented, and access to and analyses of the data are 
weak. Global invasive-species databases are no better. Most 
databases are not widely used by the private landowners 
and local governments that own more than half of U.S. 
forestlands. Detailed information on the distribution and 
impacts of some of the most devastating forest invaders is 
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
What can we do about invasives?
C H A P T E R
2

63
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
What can we do about invasives?
Where: Lower Grande Ronde River, .
Wallowa County, Oregon
Who: Wallowa Resources, formed in 1996, is a .
non-profit organization designed to bring people 
together and blend the ecological needs of the land 
with the economic needs of the community. .
(www.wallowaresources.org)
What: The Lower Grande Ronde River Watershed is at 
a high risk of degradation from noxious weeds partly 
due to its mixed ownership pattern (Bureau of Land 
Management, United States Forest Service, Private 
Ranches) and the fact that it is divided between two 
states, four counties, and two national forests. Three 
major target weeds include: Meadow Hawkweed, 
Rush Skeletonweed and Leafy Spurge.
Short-term priorities:  
s	 coordinate and implement integrated weed .
management treatment projects across jurisdictional 
boundaries for high priority weeds along the .
river corridor
s	 inventory and map target weeds across .
the watershed
s	 private landowners along the river corridor are 
invited to participate but must pay for part of the 
costs of control efforts.
Figure 2.2  Bounty hunters  
located this Scotch thistle 
(Onopordum acanthium L.) 
infestation and Oregon Youth 
Conservation Corps members 
disposed of it. Native to  
Europe and eastern Asia, this 
aggressive plant can form 
dense stands, impenetrable  
to livestock.
Mark Porter
Long-term priorities:  
s	 coordinate weed treatment across all properties in .
the watershed and provide “seamless treatment” of 
noxious weeds
s	 all stakeholders participating in design and treatment, 
contributing to costs with either financial contributions 
or in-kind service.
Invasive weed treatments include:  
s	physical, chemical, biological and cultural methods of 
control as well revegetation of treated areas
s	exploring new techniques.
Bounty Hunter Program: 
	
Anyone finding a “new” invasive weed site within .
the watershed can win $200. Maps are provided on .
the website to help hunters find areas that need .
searching. Access to private land requires permission. 
Tips are provided for identification, best time of year to 
search and how to handle noxious weeds safely.
Program Expansion: 
	
The Wallowa Canyon Lands Partnership has been 
formed and addresses noxious weed issues in both the 
Grande Ronde and the Imnaha River Watersheds.
Weed Bounty Hunters – Warring Against Invasives at the Local Level – An Example
C H A P T E R
2

64
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
What can we do about invasives?
s	 The USDA Port Interception Network (PIN) identifies 
port interceptions. At present, PIN includes only pests 
of “quarantine significance” rather than all intercepted 
species, and access to PIN is restricted. It could be used 
to identify high-risk pathways by comparing the initial 
occurrence of a known forest pest with variables that 
affect pathways, such as the volume of trade, type of 
commodity, or shipping and packing materials. 
s	 Both the National Agricultural Pest Information System 
(NAPIS) and the Exotic Forest Pest Information System 
for North America (EXFOR), report on established 
invasive species.
s	 Other databases and links to policy and management 
tools include web sites maintained by the National 
Invasive Species Council, the National Biological 
Information Infrastructure, the Plant Conservation 
Alliance, the Nature Conservancy, the USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, the Environmental Law 
Institute, and the Global Invasive Species Program. 
	
Even with the growth of online information sources, 
this information still needs to be translated into actionable 
knowledge. What’s missing is a coordinated reporting 
system that could speed public and private responses 
to growing invasive threats. A solution is a national 
clearinghouse that allows state agencies, tree-care 
companies, forest managers, landowners, and others to 
voluntarily report verified sightings of invasives.
New Scientific Tools and Concepts
	
Unfortunately, it’s not always easy to identify an invasive 
species. Physical characteristics can be subtle and difficult 
for non-specialists to distinguish. Taxonomy information is 
not always complete for pathogens and insects. Pathogen 
identification is more difficult if the pathogen causes 
different symptoms on various hosts or mimics symptoms 
identical to those caused by other pathogens (i.e., SOD). 
Identification of invasive insects and plants often depends 
on catching larvae or collecting seeds and spores that don’t 
have the distinguishing features of later life stages.
	
Scientific tools from molecular biology, biotechnology, 
and digital imaging that hold promise for new and easier 
ways to detect and identify invasive species include: 
s	 DNA/RNA technologies that can detect plant pathogens 
in nursery stock could be used to assay for known 
pathogens of particular hosts at ports of entry during 
pre-shipment certification. 
s	 A microchip that can screen samples for the .
presence of 250 potato pathogens is being tested in the 
United Kingdom. 
s	 DNA microprobes have potential to identify .
insect larval stages and eggs found within cargo .
and packing materials.
s	 Expert systems that automate risk identification at ports 
of entry could improve import screening. Such a system 
could integrate data on imports (e.g., product records, 
receiving ports, containerized freight destinations) 
with United States habitat distribution (e.g., climate, 
soils, forest types), and pest distributions in originating 
countries. This could automatically target inspections 
toward commodities or other vectors known to harbor 
high-risk species or those that come from countries that 
previously were sources of contaminated cargo.
	
Tracking the advance or retreat of invasives across large 
areas is another difficult problem. The information must 
be comprehensive yet sensitive, and it must be collected 
frequently enough to encounter small populations of 
invaders when they’re easier to eradicate. It’s possible 
that remote sensing, which includes techniques from 
aerial photography to satellite imagery, could be used to 
identify the distribution or impacts of invasive pathogens, 
insects and plants. For example, the pattern of defoliation, 
crown dieback, and tree mortality, as detected by remote 
C H A P T E R
2
not readily available. There are no anticipatory systems for 
preventive action that would routinely identify emerging 
pathways, probable new invaders, or ecosystems vulnerable 
to future invasions. What’s needed is baseline information 
about what exotics are in our forests, where they are, their 
rate of spread, and the size of their population. 
	
What’s available?
s	 The USDA Forest Service Forest Inventory and Analysis 
(FIA) database is a grid of inventory plots across all the 
forests of a state. It reports on habitat and how invasive 
species host trees are distributed across the landscape. 
This database would be more useful for identifying 
areas at risk of invasion if it included more information 
on alternative hosts (e.g., understory plants) and better 
links to sites with climate, soils, and high-risk locations 
(e.g., where host plants are sold in nurseries or bought 
by timber companies).

65
sensing, can help monitor certain invasive species. This 
kind of analysis can pinpoint high-risk locations that can 
be confirmed by ground surveys. Digital “sketch mapping” 
techniques are being tested that provide aerial survey results 
within days after aerial flights rather than waiting for weeks. 
	
Invasive species can alter ecosystem processes, so they 
must be better integrated into the concept of ecosystem 
management. We know that spatial patterns of physical and 
biological processes across forests can impede or promote 
species invasions and could be managed to reduce invasion 
risks. Here are some examples: 
s	 Roads, railways, vehicles, and foot traffic provide 
pathways for the spread of pests.
s	 Contiguous populations of host plants and alternative 
hosts can enhance the spread of invasive pathogens .
and insects. 
s	 Adjacent land uses, the size of habitat fragments, and 
the edge-to-interior ratio of forests all affect invasions 
(described in Chapter 3). 
s	 Disturbances can open up habitat for invaders or disrupt 
their dispersal.
s	 Fire suppression can intensify pathogen outbreaks by 
altering stand dynamics.
s	 Severe wildfires after years of fire suppression can help 
spread invasive plants.
s	 Silvicultural practices affect vulnerability to and recovery 
from pathogens and insects, as well as the relative 
abundance of non-native understory plants.
s	 Some invasive species alter fire frequency, hydrology, 
and other ecosystem processes in ways that may favor 
further invasions by the same species or others. 
	
We need to take what we know about how landscape 
structure and ecosystem condition affect invasions and 
use it in management prescriptions. They can be tested 
and improved through adaptive management (a process 
where research results are continually brought forward and 
management practices are continually reassessed as new 
information becomes available, see Chapter 8). The objective 
should be to eliminate invasion pathways and minimize 
impacts where invasives are established. We should examine 
forest management practices such as patterns of timber 
harvest and thinning, fire suppression and burn frequency, 
revegetation after disturbance, road building, and hunting 
and recreational uses, as well as natural disturbance regimes. 
Possible mitigation approaches should be identified. For 
example, we need to know whether closing logging roads 
after harvest reduces invasion risks or whether interplanting 
different species or establishing buffers can slow the spread of 
host-specific invaders. 
How to Improve Invasive Cost Estimates 
	
Although existing information about past and projected 
costs generated by species invasions in U.S. forests is 
inadequate, we know that such information has affected 
policy when it was available. For example, it was used to 
justify the Animal and Health Inspection Service’s rules for 
treatment of solid wood packing materials.
	
We need better cost-benefit or cost-effectiveness 
analyses of past and projected costs of species invasions. 
That would strengthen decisions by legislators and agencies 
and help weigh alternative policy and management actions. 
But quantitative information should go beyond timber 
losses and pest suppression expenses. It should include 
non-market environmental and social values that may 
be degraded by invasives, such as watershed protection, 
biodiversity, aesthetic, and other amenity values. This won’t 
be easy. Even with good information on environmental 
impacts, economic techniques that assign dollar values to 
non-market goods and services are costly and controversial. 
It’s easier to estimate values for human health and aesthetic 
protection than for carbon sequestration or climate 
regulation. And it’s also tough to justify expenditures today 
for invasive species, when the benefits may not accrue until 
some future time. The fact is that the benefits from avoiding 
harm by preventing or controlling invasives often come 
decades later. 
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
What can we do about invasives?
C H A P T E R
2

66
What can we do about invasives?
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
	
Better cost and benefit estimates would also improve 
pest suppression programs. The speed with which decisions 
are made and management actions are taken during a 
biological invasion greatly influence effectiveness; yet 
invasive species can confuse timely decisions as shown in 
Figure 2.3. 
	
Rapid-response decision rules could help resolve the 
dilemma illustrated in Figure 2.3 by providing standard 
procedures for agencies to follow in times of emergency. 
At present, agencies develop assessment methods for each 
new situation, and that takes time. Decision rules would 
provide a clear rationale for efforts to fund rapid responses. 
Such rules would assess the risks of a new species invasion, 
the potential costs and benefits of responding at different 
points along the invasion process curve (Figure 2.3), and 
the best time to switch from eradication to suppression. 
Scenario analysis is one approach to making decisions even 
when uncertainty is great. It examines the cost-effectiveness 
of early eradication under various risk scenarios and sets a 
threshold risk level that triggers rapid action.
C H A P T E R
2
Figure 2.3  As an infestation 
becomes larger and the 
invasion curve begins to 
peak, more aggressive 
treatment techniques are 
needed. Most invasives 
persist at low densities 
before their rapid 
expansion. Those small, 
dispersed populations 
are difficult to detect. 
Often their economic and 
environmental impact is 
uncertain. Government 
agencies are unable to 
step in and regulate their 
movement, and forest 
managers may be unwilling 
to implement eradication 
programs. But this is the 
most effective time for 
quarantines, eradication, 
and control.
INV
AS
IO
N
 P
R
O
CE
S
S 
CU
RV
E
OPTIMAL TIMING FOR SUCCESS
TIME
DECREASING CHANCE
OF ERADICATION & CONTROL
Hand-pulling invasives
How to Prevent and Manage Invasives at Various 
Landscape Scales
	
Spatial computer models offer another approach for 
understanding how landscape structure affects invasions. 
Time-series scenarios of the spread of gypsy moths under 
various management strategies now guide multistate gypsy 
moth suppression and could be applied to other large-scale 
invasives programs. If we integrate better cost estimates 
with spatial population models, we could optimize control 
strategies by distributing resources where and when a 
species is most invasive and harmful, the treatment costs are 
lowest, or the chances of success are highest.

67
	
Ultimately, effective management of invasive species 
across large forested areas will require participation by 
landowners and managers with different goals, cultures, 
and reasons for their actions. The more we know about 
this variation, the more it could help develop processes, 
incentives, or policies that encourage cooperation 
and accept and adopt necessary control technologies. 
Techniques like GIS predictive mapping could help 
landowners understand the susceptibility of their property 
to invasive species. The map of sudden oak death (SOD) in 
California is an example (Figure 2.4). It predicts the risk of 
establishment and spread of the SOD pathogen and raises 
awareness about risks in currently non-infested areas.
Figure 2.4  SOD risk of establishment and spread in California 
based on climate variables and distribution  
of host plant species. 
(Reproduced from Sonoma State University 
Geographic Information Center)
SUMMARY
	
In the long run, invasives are one of the biggest threats 
to the integrity of forest ecosystems. In a world where 
non-native invasive species are jumping bio-geographic 
barriers, we need new approaches to identifying and 
blocking invasion pathways and to detecting emerging 
invasive populations early and eradicating them rapidly. 
We need greater ability to intervene and manage over 
the long-term. We have identified better tools for tackling 
invasive species at large spatial scales, and we need to use 
them aggressively. We need to translate online information 
sources into actionable knowledge. Action that responds 
to the priorities identified in this chapter should benefit 
sustainable forestry and reduce harmful impacts of .
invasive species.
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 167.
non-native invasives AND BIODIVERSITY
Summary
C H A P T E R
2
SUDDEN OAK DEATH
(SOD) RISK
Very High
High
Moderate
Low
Very Low

68
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
Why IS This Subject Is Important?
	
While most of us see the forest from ground level 
or watch it go by from the seat of a vehicle, it might be 
easier for us to understand forest fragmentation if our 
everyday view was from above, because fragmentation 
is a landscape phenomenon. It changes large contiguous 
areas of relatively homogenous forest into a mosaic .
of undisturbed forest “patches” and a “matrix” of .
disturbed lands. With a bird’s-eye view of the landscape, 
we’d see a pattern of patches and matrix (Figure 3.1), a 
landscape of older forests next to younger forests next .
to no forest at all. Fragmentation science is all about .
the size and spatial arrangement of habitat patches, 
characteristics of the disturbed matrix lands, and the 
effects of that change on biodiversity and ecological 
processes and functions. 
	
Simply stated, forest fragmentation is the .
conversion of a continuously forested landscape into 
isolated patches of forest. Two things are clear from this 
definition. First, fragmentation is about landscapes on 
large spatial scales, and second, the visible results of .
fragmentation are changes in the pattern of forests 
across a landscape. We’ll define and describe these 
elements in more detail below, but it’s important to 
recognize that while fragmentation is the result of both 
historical and contemporary land use, it’s not just a 
phenomenon influenced by humans. Avalanches, fires, 
hurricanes, and other natural disturbances (described in 
Chapter 1) also contribute to forest fragmentation. .
However, there’s a difference between human- and 
naturally-caused fragmentation. Human actions often are 
more frequent, less random, and more permanent than 
natural disturbances. 
	
Today, land-use conversion or “forest loss” .
contributes to increasingly fragmented forest landscapes, 
leaving patches adjacent to or surrounded by houses, 
highways, parking lots, and shopping malls. This points 
to a distinction between fragmentation associated 
with forest loss and fragmentation associated with 
forest harvest and regeneration. Forest loss often leaves 
remaining habitats indefinitely degraded within a matrix 
that has little value to forest species. On the other hand, 
forest harvesting may result in a temporary reduction 
in habitat for species that rely on mature forests while 
creating new habitat for species that rely on young, 
early-succession forests. Differences between harvested 
matrix lands and undisturbed patches gradually become 
less pronounced over time through the processes of 
regeneration, growth, and succession.
	
Forest fragmentation is an important environmental 
issue. It was identified in the Montreal Process as an .
indicator of biodiversity (Chapter 5, page 115). The .
developers of the Montreal Process recognized the .
importance of fragmentation and separated it from other 
biological diversity measurements such as forest extent 
and protected status. They saw a relationship between 
biodiversity, fragmentation, and ecological processes. 
National assessment reports (The 2000 RPA Assessment 
Figure 3.1  From a landscape view, the fragmented  
pattern is a mix of forest patches and matrix.  
The matrix might be recently logged areas, early- 
succession habitats, aquatic and riparian habitats,  
corridors and other land uses such as agriculture,  
highways and development. 
Why is this subject important?
C H A P T E R
3

69
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
of Forest and Range Lands, The State of the Nation’s 
Ecosystems, and The United States Roundtable on 
Sustainable Forests) all cite the relationship between 
biological diversity and landscape structure in .
fragmented forests. All of these assessments support 
the notion that the composition, extent, and layout .
of land cover have the potential to affect forest .
ecosystem goods and services. 
	
Given the international and national recognition 
of fragmentation, it was surprising when an NCSSF 
survey revealed that forest owners don’t share these 
views. Survey respondents never mentioned .
fragmentation when describing their use of biodiversity 
indicators (Chapter 5, Page 116). We can only 
speculate about why it wasn’t mentioned, but one 
reason might be perspective – we’re not accustomed 
to a fly-over view of forest landscapes. However, that 
limitation is quickly becoming a thing of the past with 
remote sensing and geographic information systems 
(GIS), tools that help us see patterns of fragmentation 
and better understand its effects. As we’ll learn in this 
chapter, another reason may be that fragmentation 
science has limitations. It’s based on theory, established 
long-standing theory, but theory nevertheless. It’s 
also based on spatial models (e.g., GIS, paper maps, 
relationships described in mathematical equations, .
and diagrams) that sometimes make it difficult to .
see practical implications. True, there is scientific .
field evidence, but because designing fragmentation 
experiments is complicated, the results of those .
experiments have had limited application to on-the-
ground situations.
	
For these reasons, the Commission sponsored a 
comprehensive review of fragmentation science and 
what is known and not known about its effect on .
biodiversity. The review described current efforts to .
assess the effects of fragmentation, identified .
information gaps, and provided some practical .
implications for its use in forest management. But 
there is a caution. As you will see in this chapter, the 
impact of fragmentation on biodiversity depends on 
what particular plant or animal species we are .
concerned about, how it moves across the landscape, 
and the degree to which the landscape is fragmented. 
Despite our understanding of its process, theoretical 
underpinnings, and effects, we still don’t know the 
thresholds at which landscape-scale movements of 
plants and animals become inhibited by fragmentation. 
However, what we do know should encourage all 
practitioners, landowners, managers, and policymakers 
to be aware of its effects.
What Do We Know About Forest  
Fragmentation and Biodiversity?
	
This is merely an introduction. Even the NCSSF report 
that provides the basis of this chapter is just a start. We 
briefly review the process of fragmentation, the underlying 
theories, and its effects on landscape pattern, biodiversity, 
and ecological processes. Because fragmentation science is 
the study of habitat alteration (either through forest loss or 
harvest/regeneration) and the isolation of forest patches, it 
asks these kinds of questions:
s	 What are the effects of fragmentation on plant and 
animal species?
s	 Can plants and animals survive fragmentation?
s	 What are the effects of fragmentation on other forest 
functions and ecosystem services?
	
Before describing those effects, let’s look briefly at the 
origins of this science and its process, because both provide 
insight into how our understanding of fragmentation has 
developed over time.
	
As early as the 1950s, scientists were raising concerns 
about how human actions were altering landscape .
patterns and leading to species extirpations and extinctions. 
A study in 1956 drew attention to the spatial aspects of 
fragmentation by showing changes in forest cover in Cadiz 
Township in southern Wisconsin from 1831-1950, roughly 
corresponding to the time of European settlement (Figure 
3.2). The study documented the process of fragmentation, 
which begins with dissection and perforation of forest 
cover (1882 map), proceeds to fragmentation of forest 
patches (1902 map), and finally results in attrition, where 
remaining patches shrink in size and become more isolated 
(1950 map). This process of shrinking size and changes in 
the spatial relationship of forest patches to one another 
(distance between patches) is described next.
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
C H A P T E R
3

70
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
	
We’ll use the Cadiz Township study to describe the 
stages in the process.
	
Dissection is a beginning stage. Early forest .
management activities, agricultural development, or human 
settlement can contribute. Dissection can start with building 
a road, trail, or power transmission line into a landscape. 
Fragmentation science is interested in the extent to which 
these activities block the movement of plant and animal 
species. For example, consider a highway with a high 
Figure 3.2  A 1956 study by Curtis of Cadiz Township,  
Wisconsin, is a classic but not unique example of  
deforestation and forest loss to agriculture and  
development. In 1831, essentially the entire township 
(23,040 acres/9324 ha) was forested. By 1882, many  
forest patches were still intact (half the township).  
By 1902 there were fewer, smaller, and more widely  
separated patches. By 1950, only 55 small, scattered 
patches of forest remained.
1882
1902
1950
1831
C H A P T E R
3

71
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
concrete curb or lane dividers. They may stop less mobile 
animals like turtles and amphibians, while other animals 
such as small mammals and ground beetles are able to cross 
the highway, but may be unwilling or are subject to high 
mortality. Dissection usually acts as a filter, meaning that 
some individuals cannot or will not cross, but others do. 
A road might stop a mature turkey from leaving its home 
range, but at the same time be no problem for a young 
turkey intent on dispersing into new territory (more about 
barriers, filters, and dispersal below).
	
Perforation is the next stage. It usually includes .
converting part of the landscape into agricultural lands .
and/or settlements (essentially forest loss as shown in the 
1882 map of Cadiz township). These openings may not 
be large enough to act as barriers to species movement, 
because most species can migrate around them if they .
can’t cross them directly. The most significant effect of .
perforation is the creation of edges (areas where .
ecosystems come together). We’ll pick up on the subject of 
edges below, and we’ll see that they can have an effect on 
things like bird nesting success and increased predation of 
reptiles and small mammals. 
	
Fragmentation follows. As perforations and dissec-
tions grow larger and extend further, they coalesce, leaving 
forest patches isolated from one another. At this stage the 
definition of fragmentation becomes a reality (1902 map). 
A fragmented landscape can restrict animal migration, 
especially non-flying animals. Problems begin to appear in 
the smaller isolated populations of plants and animals left 
in the remaining patches (discussed in more detail in the 
metapopulation section below). 
	
Attrition picks up where fragmentation leaves off. In 
this stage, more patches are disturbed, and the remaining 
patches become smaller and more distant from one another 
(1950 map). At this point in the process, connections 
(corridors) between patches are cut off with increasing 
effects on the viability of plant and animal populations. 
Attrition is most likely to occur with very extensive 
agriculture and urban-suburban development. Plant and 
animal populations occupying the small, isolated patches 
are more likely to become extinct, and it’s difficult for them 
to emigrate and recolonize other patches due to distance. 
	
From this brief look at the stages of fragmentation, two 
major effects of the process are clear. There’s a reduction 
in the total area of forest (referred to as sample and area 
effects and described below) and increased isolation and 
distance between the remaining forest patches (referred to 
as isolation and edge effects and described below). 
	
As ecological concerns about the effects of fragmen-
tation grew during the mid- to late-twentieth century, 
scientists explained its effects by borrowing from the 
theories of island biogeography, metapopulations, and 
source-sink dynamics. These theories became the basis for 
establishing nature reserves designed to maximize species 
diversity and protect critical habitat for endangered species. 
Next we’ll review these theories and their contribution to 
the science of fragmentation.
What is Island Biogeography Theory?
	
This theory says that the number of species living on an 
oceanic island is a function of island size and isolation. Large 
islands near the mainland maintain the greatest number 
of species due to their size and proximity to colonization 
(immigration) sources. There’s less chance of extinction and 
greater chance the habitat is heterogeneous (variable over 
space and time). In contrast, small, isolated islands have 
the fewest species due to their distance from other islands. 
Here there’s greater chance of extinction and less chance of 
arrival of potential immigrant species.
	
Scientists applied island theory to terrestrial landscapes 
and drew parallels between islands and fragmented 
terrestrial forest patches. The idea that species richness 
(the number of species present in an area) varied with the 
amount of area was already a well-established scientific 
principle. However, the importance of patch isolation and 
especially the quantification of connectivity to a potential 
colonizing source population was a new concept. As 
mentioned, island biogeography principles were used in 
designing nature reserves to protect critical habitat for 
endangered species. The goal was to maximize species 
diversity, and the thought was that biodiversity would be 
highest in larger, less isolated reserves. 
	
The application of island biogeography theory to 
terrestrial habitats requires stepping back from the idea of 
discrete habitat islands surrounded by unsuitable matrix 
(like an island surrounded by water) and recognizing that 
matrix lands can take on a variety of forms, contain a range 
of habitat qualities, and change over time through plant 
succession and changing land uses. However, the basic 
tenets of island theory remained relevant while attention 
turned more toward the role of matrix lands (as we’ll see 
below). Fragmentation science began to focus more on 
habitat quality, not only in patches, but also in surrounding 
matrix ecosystems. Spatial structure in matrix lands was 
recognized as having a critical part in the movement of 
genes, individuals, populations, and communities. Theories 
associated with metapopulations and source-sink dynamics 
(described next) and models of population dynamics and the 
role of corridors for connecting fragmented landscapes have 
all grown directly out of the concept of isolation that was 
central to island biogeography theory. Another consequence 
has been interest in landscape metrics – measurements that 
capture not only area effects but also isolation effects in 
fragmented landscapes (described later).  
C H A P T E R
3

72
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
What are Metapopulations and  
Source-sink Dynamics?
	
Metapopulation theory helps us understand the effects 
of fragmentation on plant and animal populations. The 
concept has to do with interactions among populations; for 
example the movement of plants and animals within and 
between forest patches and across the matrix. Figure 3.3 
depicts a metapopulation of freshwater fish. Part 1 shows an 
unfragmented landscape and Part 2 a fragmented landscape. 
	
In the unfragmented landscape (Part 1), four subpopula-
tions of the same fish species are outlined. Taken together, 
these four subpopulations make up a metapopulation (a 
population of populations) that exists at a larger spatial scale. 
So a metapopulation consists of subpopulations of a species, 
linked to one another by migration. 
	
In Part 2, altered by land uses (dams, roads, logging, 
bridges and culverts), the subpopulations have become more 
or less isolated from one another and interbreeding is more 
restricted. Some subpopulations are more restricted than 
others in their ability to disperse and migrate into other areas. 
Under these circumstances there’s a possibility that one or 
more of the isolated subpopulations could become extinct 
over time due to the loss of genetic variation, demographic 
change, or environmental fluctuations, all of which .
become more important as subpopulation size decreases. 
From this theory, it’s apparent that there is a relationship 
between fragmentation, habitat loss, and the potential for 
population extinction.  
	
Now let’s add the concept of source-sink dynamics 
to Figure 3.3. Consider the subpopulation in the upper 
left corner of Part 1. It’s possible that this is poor quality 
habitat and the population cannot be maintained without 
immigration from nearby populations. If a dam prevents 
immigration, this subpopulation may disappear. The 
potential for recolonization is based on the size and 
suitability of neighboring subpopulations, as well as the 
distance (isolation) from potential emigrating subpopula-
tions. In the theory of source-sink dynamics, a source is a 
population in which births exceed deaths and emigration 
exceeds immigration. A source area is a net exporter 
of individuals. Individuals emigrate from a source to 
neighboring areas with no or lower populations and more 
resources. Conversely, sinks are habitats in which deaths 
exceed births and immigration exceeds emigration. Habitat 
quality in a sink area is so poor that its population will 
become extinct if it does not receive new individuals from 
outside the area. Source populations serve as a rescue effect 
to sink populations, and in the absence of immigration, 
sink populations disappear. In Part 2, a land-use barrier (a 
dam) isolates that upper left subpopulation, creating a sink 
area without a source, where subpopulations can become 
extinct. Part 2 also illustrates other fragmentation examples 
with the potential to impact the overall metapopulation. 
Figure 3.3 Part 1  Part 1 is an unfragmented landscape with 
four subpopulations of fish outlined. 
C H A P T E R
3

73
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
	
From this example we see that fragmentation can result 
in small, isolated populations that may be more vulnerable 
to random natural events that can reduce their viability over 
time. There are dispersal mechanisms that encourage the 
movement of individuals into new areas. If connections are 
maintained among subpopulations, and individuals are .
able to disperse between them, the probability that 
metapopulations remain intact over time increases. One .
way to help the dispersal of less mobile species in a 
landscape is to ensure a network of suitable areas and 
corridors (more about this below).
	
There are two important points about metapopulation 
theory and source-sink dynamics. The first is that the 
definition of an area as a source or sink is both temporally 
and spatially scale dependent. Second, just like island 
biogeography, source-sink dynamics and metapopulation 
theory in general fails to fully consider differences in matrix 
habitat. There is a difference between suitable matrix 
habitat that provides some, but not all the needs, unsuitable 
matrix habitat that may simply slow plant and animal 
movement, and matrix habitat that acts as a complete 
barrier – essentially non-habitat. While early ecological 
research focused on species in patches, later evidence 
has shown that more focus is needed on processes in the 
intervening matrix (more about this below).
What are the Primary Effects of Fragmentation  
on Biodiversity?
	
Based on the principles of island biogeography, 
metapopulation models, and source-sink dynamics, 
scientists have identified four major effects of forest 
fragmentation on the loss of biodiversity. We will describe 
them within the context of forest management activities .
in contrast to other land uses that result in forest loss. .
The effects are associated with landscape patterns and are 
referred to as sample effects, area effects, isolation effects 
and edge effects.
Sample effects 
	
When a forest is cut (Figure 3.4), most of the individual 
plants in the cut area are lost and the animal habitat is 
changed. The plant and animal populations in the uncut 
patches are only a “sample” of the original populations. 
They may not represent the pre-cut populations in numbers, 
genetic diversity, density, age, or distribution of structure. 
The sample populations may also lack interactions such as 
predation, competition, and mutualism (when two or more 
species benefit in growth rate and population size by their 
association).
Figure 3.3 Part 2  Part 2 shows the same subpopulations, 
isolated by various land uses.
C H A P T E R
3

74
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
Area effects
	
The area of patches affects population size, variety of 
habitat, natural disturbances, and species interactions in the 
following ways:
s	 A reduction in habitat area leads to smaller populations, 
which may be vulnerable to extinction. According to 
island biogeography theory, species extinction rates are 
higher on small islands (Figure 3.5).
s	 A reduction in the variety of patch habitat results in 
fewer species. According to island biogeography and 
metapopulation theory, the area of a patch affects its 
recolonization because recolonizing species can locate 
larger patches more easily (right patch versus left in 
Figure 3.5). Patch size may also affect the presence of 
large mammals and some birds, which may require larger 
patches for grazing, nesting, and mating. If the patch size 
cannot support their needs, it may not serve as a vector 
to other patches. 
s	 Patch size and shape may also affect wind disturbances; 
smaller patches with certain orientations will have less 
drag on wind that may more easily loft seeds above and 
away, increasing dispersal.
s	 The patch area can affect the type, extent, frequency, and 
even intensity of natural disturbances. For example, small 
areas may be more subject to wind destruction or altered 
disturbance regimes that affect the biodiversity of species. 
Small fragments may be more likely to completely burn if 
fires occur. They may lack predators to control herbivore 
outbreaks, and they tend to be less productive.
s	 Reductions in forest area affect species interactions, 
especially trophic (food chain position) effects. For 
example, species at higher trophic levels, such as top 
carnivores, tend to require more area. A large carnivore 
must cover a larger fragmented territory to capture its 
prey. If the sample effect (described above) leaves top 
carnivores on small patches, they are likely to become 
locally extinct if those patches are too isolated to allow 
for inter-patch movement. Competition is also affected. 
For example, some species may be released from natural 
competition by the local extinctions of other species. 
Isolation effects
	
The isolation of forest patches has several .
important effects:
s	 Animals can be more vulnerable as they move among 
patches. As a habitat becomes fragmented, patches 
can become separated by relatively inhospitable 
terrain. Wildlife attempting to cross between patches 
becomes vulnerable to predators, harsh environmental 
conditions, or starvation. 
s	 The immigration rate (rate at which plants or animals 
move) will be lower to an isolated patch than to an 
equal patch of the same size that is surrounded by 
contiguous similar habitat. 
s	 The degree of isolation of a patch depends on the 
distance to nearby patches and how seriously the 
matrix habitat restricts movement. Some species in a 
patch surrounded by homogenous habitat must be 
maintained by continual immigration. More isolated 
patches will have less immigration and their populations 
may have a greater risk of extinction. 
Figure 3.4  The sample effects of fragmentation. After a 
timber harvest, a “sample” of the original populations 
remains, often in steep inaccessible areas, riparian areas 
and wetlands.
C H A P T E R
3

75
Figure 3.6  Red-backed vole. 
Red-backed voles (Southern 
Clethrionomys gapperi) in 
Pacific Coastal forests are 
habitat specialists that do 
not cross large areas of non-
forest habitat. Research has 
shown that their genetic 
diversity is greatest in an 
intact landscape, least in a 
landscape of isolated  
forest fragments, and  
intermediate in a fragmented landscape with corridors.  
The implication is that corridors can moderate the effects 
of fragmentation (more about corridors on pages 81-83). 
Figure 3.7  Deer mouse.  
In contrast to red-backed 
voles, the genetic  
variation of deer mice, a 
habitat generalist in coastal 
forests, is unaffected by 
fragmentation. The  
difference between the two 
species is attributed to the 
response of generalist and 
specialist species to  
the matrix.
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
s	 Corridors (connections between patches, such as the 
riparian areas in Figure 3.4) are thought to be beneficial 
for reducing isolation and maintaining biodiversity (more 
on corridors below). 
s	 Isolation also affects disturbance regimes. For example, 
isolation from fire or pests can protect a patch 
population and lower the disturbance frequency by 
reducing the number of times a disturbance that begins 
in another area spreads to the isolated remnant. Isolation 
can also affect recovery after a disturbance by limiting 
the recolonization of a patch. 
s	 Isolation effects may alter interaction among species. For 
example, species that could interact because they were 
previously in a contiguous area may no longer be able to 
do so because of isolation. Individuals may be in a patch 
without a primary predator or competitor. The extent to 
which these changes in interaction occur may result in 
some local extinctions. 
	
The photo captions at right describe examples of .
isolation effects. 
Edge effects
	
Fragmentation creates edge habitats along the margins 
of patches. Patches are affected both by edges and the effect 
of edges on patch interiors in the following ways.
s	 Edges create changes in microclimate (the climate 
of small areas). Depending on latitude, age, and 
the direction the edge faces, more light reaches the 
understory in an edge than under a canopy. More light 
creates higher temperatures, providing a source of 
energy for certain plant species that can use full sunlight. 
s	 Wind speed is higher in an edge understory than in the 
patch interior understory, so the potential evapotrans-
piration (the conversion of water into water vapor by 
evaporation or plant transpiration) at an edge is higher 
than in the interior, and conditions for plant growth 
may be drier. Since trees slow wind, the lack of trees in 
edge environments results in higher wind speeds in the 
edge understory than in the patch interior understory. 
Figure 3.5  The area effects of fragmentation. Two patches 
remain, one large the other small.
Robert J. Erwin/Photo Researchers
Phil Meyers, Animal Diversity Web
C H A P T E R
3

76
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
s	 Early-succession plant species are often adapted to 
edge microclimates. For this reason, the overall diversity 
of a patch may actually increase as these species are 
added to its edge. 
s	 Interior patch species respond in various ways to edge 
conditions. Some are unable to survive. 
s	 Non-native invasive species may be helped by edge 
habitats. Many invasive plants are abundant seed 
producers that thrive in higher light conditions and .
have widely dispersed seeds. These traits make them 
more likely to establish and thrive in edges than .
patch interiors. 
s	 Edges are more susceptible to human disturbance, but 
their effect declines from the edge to the patch interior. 
Human pressures include light, noise, pets, hunting, 
and other activities, and depend on the nature of the 
matrix (described below). 
s	 Edge effects change species interactions by increasing 
interaction among edge and interior species. For 
example, as noted in the perforation stage of fragmen-
tation, many forest-nesting birds avoid edges because 
of the increased risk of predation, nest parasitism, 
inhospitable temperature and moisture conditions, or 
insufficient food (see box). Note: Most research has 
focused on forest/agriculture edges. More research is 
needed in the edges of perforated forest landscapes, 
because initial studies have not shown predation/edge 
effects to be very serious.
The Nest Parasite
	
Interior forest birds that are forced to nest near edges 
can become victims of the brown-headed cowbird. This 
bird never builds its own nest. Instead, the female lays 
her eggs in the nests of other 
birds, as many as 40-50 eggs 
in one breeding season. Since 
cowbird eggs often hatch first, 
and young cowbirds grow faster, 
they often push other eggs or 
young out of the nest, and are 
raised by the adoptive parents 
who raise no young of their own 
(Figures 3.8, 3.9, 3.10). 
Figure 3.8  The brown-headed 
cowbird thrives with more edge 
(male pictured). 
	
Edge-adapted birds like the yellow warbler (Figure 
3.11) can deal with the cowbird. Too small to push a 
cowbird egg out of her nest, the warbler buries the .
cowbird egg under a newly constructed nest, sometimes 
at the expense of her own eggs. Then she tries again. 
One warbler was observed building a six-story nest.
Figure 3.11  The yellow warbler is adapted to life in edges. 
	
The cowbird is a classic example of nest parasitism 
in edges, and its negative effects have been documented 
in forest fragments in eastern forests. Cowbirds typically 
feed in grasslands or agricultural areas and venture into 
forests to parasitize the broods of other birds. In eastern 
forests, matrix habitats often differ markedly from .
forested patch habitats, but in western coastal .
forests matrix habitats are less open and less favorable .
to cowbirds making cowbird parasitism less of an issue .
in western forests. 
Johann Schumacher/CLO
Figure 3.9  A 
cowbird egg 
with chipping 
sparrow egg and 
baby sparrow. 
Tom Ulrich
Figure 3.10  A young 
cowbird has emptied the 
nest of all competition. 
Brenda Oviatt
Tom Ulrich
C H A P T E R
3

77
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
s	 Smaller patches have proportionately high amounts of 
edge habitat. Long, narrow patches have little or no 
interior habitat. 
s	 The amount of edge habitat increases at the expense of 
interior habitat. Species dependent on interior habitat 
suffer, while edge-dependent species, including invasive 
species and predators, thrive. Highly fragmented forests 
cannot provide the food, cover, or reproduction needs 
of interior forest species. Predators such as crows .
and raccoons and nest parasites like the brown-headed 
cowbird may find target nests more easily in edge 
habitats.    
s	 Most of the species found in edges are common in the 
landscape, have generalist habitat preferences, and 
tolerate frequent disturbances. Edges often have high 
species diversity. In fact, wildlife managers advocated 
increased development of edges as early as the 1930s, 
because many game herbivores are found at higher 
densities in edges than in patch interiors.
	
Many questions remain about edges. The answers 
are complicated and depend on the individual species 
of interest, because edge effects are notoriously species-
specific. Continued research is needed. These questions 
include:
s	 How far do edge effects reach into the patch?
s	 Do edges block the movement of animals and plants?
s	 Do corridors enhance population movement or make 
edge effects worse for species within the patch?
s	 Do edges encourage non-native invasives?
	
We can’t finish our discussion of fragmentation 
effects without mentioning scale, because much of our 
understanding of forest fragmentation depends on scale 
(whether we’re describing a watershed or a region). Sample, 
area, isolation, and edge effects all have scale-related 
aspects. As a forest becomes fragmented, there is a range 
of habitat destruction. Initially, there may be no noticeable 
effects in the patches except for some local edge effects. 
However, the effects increase as the fragmentation process 
continues, and their rate of increase seems to be linear, 
increasing in direct proportion to the increase in fragmen-
tation. However, at some point nonlinear responses (large 
drops in biodiversity and/or function) occur with small 
increases in fragmentation, and these responses are difficult 
to predict. 
The Importance of the Matrix
	
Up to this point we’ve focused on patches. Now 
we’ll describe the function and diversity of the matrix, 
the area around the patch. The matrix can influence the 
effects of fragmentation in many ways, so it’s important to 
understand matrix concepts. The effect of the matrix .
on patches and the whole landscape depends on its 
similarity to patches and how well it supports connections 
between patches. 
	
One function of the matrix is habitat. The ability of 
forest species to live in and use the matrix as alternative 
habitat will affect their populations and the way in which 
the landscape functions. In terms of the rate of movement 
of animals, plants and energy between the matrix and 
patch, the matrix can act as:
s	 a conduit that allows the movement of species 
s	 a filter that allows some selective movement of species 
s	 a source for individuals that immigrate into patches 
s	 a sink that imports more individuals than it exports 
s	 a barrier that blocks all movement.  
	
The following discussion builds on fragmentation theory 
and the four fragmentation effects – sample, area, isolation, 
and edge. We’ll see that the matrix can modify them 
because the matrix can affect:
s	 resource availability (food, structure, etc.)
s	 population subdivision
s	 disturbance regimes
s	 microclimates
s	 invasives
s	 human pressure on patches. 
	
This brief discussion is offered with the understanding 
that the extent of these effects on patches depends on 
processes in the matrix itself.  
Effect on resources
	
Differences between the matrix and the patch may alter 
the available resources for different species, depending on 
whether they’re habitat specialists (red-backed voles and 
flying squirrels) or generalists (mice or deer). Some species 
experience little difference between patch and matrix .
(deer mice), even if they differ in structure, while others 
(red-backed voles) respond to even minor differences. 
C H A P T E R
3

78
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
Effect on population subdivision
	
Isolation effects on population subdivision depend on 
the area and sample effects. We learned that metapopulation 
division into smaller subpopulations leads to more local 
extinctions of species that often cannot be rescued if isolation 
is high. This isolation effect on population subdivision will be 
reduced if the matrix isn’t a barrier. For example, some plant 
populations may be able to persist in small areas within the 
matrix. Seeds may be carried by wind in multiple steps across 
a matrix into a patch sink. 
Effect on disturbance regimes
	
As noted above, the effects on area and isolation in .
turn affect the size, frequency, and intensity of disturbances 
such as windstorms and wildfire. If isolation is low, patches 
tend to function as a whole. However, the matrix can alter 
disturbance regimes by modifying the degree of isolation. 
Whether or not a matrix operates as a barrier, filter, or 
conduit will vary with the type of disturbance. In addition, the 
matrix can have completely new disturbances that were not a 
part of the pre-fragmentation landscape but can significantly 
affect patches in the fragmented landscape.
Effect on microclimate 
	
The degree to which the matrix differs from the patch in 
structure and evapotranspiration will modify the microclimate 
and the plants that grow in edges. The matrix can reduce the 
effect of small size and edge on microclimate if the matrix’s 
albedo (reflectivity) and structure are similar to those of the 
remnant forest.  
Effect on invasives 
	
The matrix can serve as a habitat, conduit, barrier, or 
filter for invasive species just as it does for native species. In 
fact, the edge itself may be a better habitat and/or conduit 
for invasive species than a contiguous forest. The matrix may 
have the greatest effect on the degree to which edges are 
suitable and accessible for invasives. 
Effect on human pressure
	
Where clearing is done for forestry or agriculture or 
roads, increased human pressures may come from hunting. 
Unless the patches are small, the edges will have more 
human activity than the interior. Where forests are cleared 
for housing, human pressures (light, noise, pets, and local 
recreation) will depend on the distance to patches. If the 
matrix allows humans to live close to the patches, it may 
serve as a conduit through which they can easily approach 
patches. With greater distance, the matrix can act as a filter 
that impedes movement or even as a barrier to the impacts 
of human pressure. 
Measuring Fragmentation (Landscape Metrics)
	
Fragmentation is a spatial process, and it’s important 
that we try to quantify it. Efforts to quantify fragmentation 
use remote sensing and GIS, tools that have become 
very sophisticated over the past twenty years. Spatial and 
landscape-level data on land use and land cover have also 
improved. These tools and data allow scientists to document 
fragmentation patterns at scales ranging from watersheds to 
regions, nations, and the globe. Various ways of measuring 
fragmentation have been developed. Commercially available 
GIS and remote sensing software can calculate basic 
landscape measures such as patch area and perimeter. .
More specialized software provides metrics for landscape 
quantification and fragmentation. 
	
Most metrics fall into three groups, according to 
what aspects of landscape structure and pattern are being 
measured. These aspects include:
s	 the composition of the landscape (the amount of 
different cover types found in the landscape) 
s	 the configuration of the landscape (how patches of 
the same or different cover types are arranged in the 
landscape in relationship to each other) 
s	 the shapes of patches and characteristics of edges .
in the landscape. 
	
There also are more detailed fragmentation metrics, 
including isolation and proximity of cover types, diversity and 
evenness of patterns, connectivity, and contrast. Within each 
of these, there are metrics that can be grouped according 
to the spatial scale of interest, from patch-level metrics 
(calculated for each individual patch in the landscape), to 
class-level metrics (average values calculated for each cover 
type in the landscape), and finally to landscape-level metrics 
(calculated for the landscape as a whole). Also available 
are metrics that focus on specific variables of interest. For 
example, measures of road density and distance of forested 
areas from the nearest road have been used as indicators of 
fragmentation and road effects.
National Databases for Assessing Fragmentation
	
Interest has grown in developing national and interna-
tional measurements and methods that can both map and 
monitor forest habitat loss and fragmentation. In the past 
decade, national and global maps from satellite imagery have 
made it possible to assess land cover at national and interna-
tional scales and conduct preliminary assessments of forest 
loss and fragmentation. Here is a listing of the databases 
available for the United States.  
C H A P T E R
3

79
What do we know about forest fragmentation and biodiversity?
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
s	 The National Land Cover Database (NLCD) is a 21-class 
land cover database available on a state-by-state basis.   
s	 Global Land Cover Characteristics Database (GLCC) 
is a broader spatial scale database released in 1997. 
It provides continent-by-continent land cover data. It 
was developed by the U.S. Geological Survey’s Earth 
Resources Observation System (EROS) data center.
s	 Global Land Cover Facility (GLCF) Databases at the 
University of Maryland is funded by NASA and .
develops and distributes remotely sensed satellite .
data and products.
s	 The National Gap Analysis Program is designed to 
identify the degree to which native animal species and 
natural communities are represented in our current mix 
of conservation lands. Species and communities not 
adequately represented are considered conservation 
“gaps.” The program provides geographic information 
on the status of species.
s	 Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and 
Referencing (TIGER) is a database of road networks 
produced by the US Census Bureau. 
	
One thing to be aware of is that land-cover maps 
indicate only the location and types of forest. Further data 
processing is needed to quantify and map forest fragmen-
tation. In an effort to do that, several studies have used the 
data sources listed above to document patterns of fragmen-
tation across the United States. They include:
s	 The Forest Intactness Database
s	 The Heinz Center’s “State of the Nation’s Ecosystems”
s	 Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources .
Planning Act
s	 Riiters’ Fragmentation Index
s	 How Far to the Nearest Road?
	
More information about these databases and .
fragmentation studies can be found in the appendix .
(page 167).
	
All of these assessments reinforce the national concern 
over forest fragmentation. They confirm that it is possible 
to use high-resolution maps to assess forest fragmentation, 
even if the results are preliminary and contingent on the 
quality of the data. The studies vary in their incorporation 
of roads versus land use, spatial data resolution, scale of 
analysis, and landscape structure. Another weakness is 
that there is little analysis of change over time, due mostly 
to the lack of long-term data. However, these studies 
provide needed impetus for making improvements in the 
next round of national assessments. Support is growing for 
more thorough measures of fragmentation and landscape 
pattern. 
What’s Still Needed in Fragmentation Metrics?
	
Some major issues that still need to be addressed are: 
s	 the fact that landscape-scale metrics of fragmentation 
such as edge density and inter-patch distance have 
value as general indicators of disturbance rates but 
are often poor predictors of species richness and other 
measures of biodiversity in forest patches
s	 the need to clarify the way fragmentation interacts 
with habitat loss to affect biodiversity and ecological 
processes 
s	 the need for a better understanding of nonlinear 
relationships between landscape structure, fragmen-
tation effects, and landscape metrics
s	 the need for ways of dealing with the species-
specific nature of fragmentation effects and using 
fragmentation metrics in the development of forest 
management and monitoring plans 
s	 the need to develop additional metrics that recognize 
that most fragmented landscapes are dynamic mosaics, 
composed of habitats that vary in quality rather than 
discrete patches of habitat and non-habitat
s	 the need to recognize that the interpretation of .
fragmentation metrics with respect to effects on .
biodiversity and ecological pattern and process remains 
open-ended.
What We Know About Fragmentation 
	
We understand the general forces and impacts of .
forest fragmentation. However, there have been relatively 
few experimental tests of fragmentation theory and models. 
This is because experiments at the landscape scale are 
difficult to perform and different species respond .
differently to fragmentation. As a result, the application .
of our knowledge to particular cases is limited. For .
conservation purposes, here’s what we do know:
s	 As forest declines in extent and quality, impacts 
accumulate nonlinearly. Nonlinear responses are often 
seen as thresholds, and our ability to identify those 
thresholds in term of management decisions is still 
unknown. 
C H A P T E R
3

80
Some practical implications of fragmentation science
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
s	 Conservation efforts need to take into account the 
matrix and its characteristics. The degree to which 
the matrix can serve as habitat or partial habitat or 
as a conduit between patches is variable and still 
unpredictable.
s	 There are various degrees of fragmentation, and .
what is suitable for some species may be inhospitable 
for others.
s	 Forests can be temporarily fragmented into smaller 
units by harvesting that changes the age classes and 
species composition of the next forest. 
s	 Larger patches generally support more species than 
smaller patches of the same forest type.
s	 Populations in smaller patches are at greater risk of 
extinction due to variability in environmental conditions 
and population levels.
s	 As patches become smaller and more isolated, adverse 
impacts of fragmentation increase and are likely to be 
greatest for species that are limited in their ability to 
disperse.  However, short-lived patches in a dynamic 
landscape that is continuously forested but with 
different age classes moving spatially over time do 
not function in the same way as forest adjacent to 
agriculture or urban development.
s	 Even isolated forest patches have biodiversity values 
that would disappear if they were converted to .
non-forest uses.
What More We Need to Know About Fragmentation
s	 Local populations in patches are strongly affected 
by the characteristics of the surrounding matrix. It is 
important to understand how fragmentation alters 
flows of energy, matter, and species – including 
dispersal and spread of non-native invasive species and 
diseases – across the matrix and thus affects forest 
succession, sediment movement, nutrient cycling, 
carbon sequestration, and other key community and 
ecosystem processes. 
s	 Determining thresholds is an important area 
for fragmentation research. Models and theory 
demonstrate that habitat destruction has little effect 
on plant and animal movement until a threshold or 
critical point is reached or when a gap wide enough to 
interrupt dispersal is created. If such thresholds can be 
identified, managers can begin to plan their activities 
accordingly.
Some Practical Implications of  
Fragmentation Science
	
Making use of what we know about fragmentation in 
forest management activities is not easy because the effects 
of fragmentation:
s	 are specific to certain groups of plants and animals, 
spatial scales, and ecological processes
s	 vary according to the type of landscape and the 
structure of that landscape
s	 can be difficult to distinguish from effects of historical 
land use and habitat loss per se.
	
Nevertheless, as we manage forests and harvest timber, 
we need to balance those activities with other functions 
that forested habitats provide. We should try to incorporate 
the concepts of fragmentation to sustain forest resources 
and protect susceptible species and ecosystems.
	
It’s also important to remember that a forest 
fragmented by agriculture or urban development may 
be different from a forest with mature and regenerating 
stands that result from timber harvesting. The first situation 
represents a habitat that may be modified indefinitely with 
a matrix that has little or no habitat value for forest species, 
while the latter can be viewed as a shifting mosaic in which 
amounts and spatial patterns of forest habitat types are 
changing constantly in response to management activities 
and natural processes. The techniques described next may 
alter the effects of fragmentation.
Logging Systems That Might Alter the Effects  
of Fragmentation
	
New silvicultural systems need to be designed and 
implemented for managers who want to increase the 
habitat value of matrix lands. Current harvest systems, 
whether based on clearcutting, shelterwood, or selection 
cuts, create different forest patterns across the landscape 
and have different fragmentation effects. Logging systems 
that reduce the impact of one fragmentation effect may 
increase the effect of another. For example, selection cutting 
may result in reduced area effects but may increase isolation 
effects by creating a more extensive transportation network. 
	
Recently, there’s been interest in the use of structural 
retention harvesting (Chapter 1, page 45), a technique 
that maintains structures from the original stand. Structural 
retention may contribute to biodiversity conservation by: 
s	 maintaining plants and animals on a harvested site by 
keeping essential habitat elements such as snags, large 
down logs, and small patches 
s	 adding structural heterogeneity to the harvested stand 
and allowing organisms to return more quickly 
s	 modifying the microclimate after the harvest to make it 
more suitable for certain species 
s	 making it easier for species to move through .
harvested areas 
C H A P T E R
3

81
Some practical implications of fragmentation science
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
s	 complementing protected zones such as riparian areas 
within the matrix.
	
Within the context of forest fragmentation, retention 
harvesting may:
s	 reduce the area effect by increasing the habitat quality 
of the matrix  
s	 reduce the isolation effect by facilitating movement 
through the matrix 
s	 potentially reduce the edge effect by limiting the .
number of abrupt edges in a landscape. 
	
However, the extent to which these elements are 
enhanced depends on the structures that are retained, the 
amount that is retained, and their spatial pattern, and the 
influence of each of these factors is not well understood. 
Research on the economics of retention harvesting is also 
at an early stage. Some public agencies acknowledge that 
they are using retention harvesting because it is considered 
socially acceptable and that they are still in early stages of 
gathering data on the benefits and costs of changing their 
silvicultural regimes. 
	
All of this points to the fact that the effects of .
fragmentation on new and traditional silvicultural strategies 
are not well understood. Better information is needed about 
quantitative relationships between structural features of 
stands and the requirements of forest-dependent plants and 
animals. There is also a need for research on costs and .
benefits of alternative conservation strategies such as .
variable retention, use of mini-reserves in intensively .
managed areas, corridors, adjacency constraints, and .
restrictions on harvest unit sizes. 
	
The Demonstration of Ecosystem Management Options 
(DEMO) Study, a large-scale, long-term experiment on 
structural retention harvests in the Pacific Northwest, is 
investigating some of these questions. It is designed to 
examine the responses of diverse groups of plants, animals, 
and processes to various amounts and/or patterns of live 
trees retained in harvests. There is information about this 
experiment in the appendix. 
Using Corridors and Stepping-stones to Alter the  
Effects of Fragmentation
	
One important way to promote connectivity between 
isolated patches is to create corridors of land that connect 
patches but differ from the surrounding matrix (Figure 3.12). 
One example of maintaining connectivity across highways is 
shown in the box on the next page. Some of the potential 
advantages of corridors are:
s	 They may increase the movement of animals among 
habitat patches, promote genetic exchange, and help to 
recolonize suitable habitat patches. 
s	 They may reduce mortality by assisting species in their 
movement between patches. Species that seem to 
benefit most from corridors are those that avoid open 
matrix habitat and species that require a suitable kind of 
habitat for dispersal. 
s	 They can provide additional habitat area, increase 
the foraging area for species that require large areas, 
and serve as refuges (Chapter 1, page 44) from large 
disturbances. 
Figure 3.12  Corridors can connect a streamside riparian area 
and a ridgeline. 
C H A P T E R
3

82
Some practical implications of fragmentation science
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
Connecting Habitat Across Major Highways
	
The metapopulation model described earlier indicates 
that subpopulations are generally located in areas of 
suitable habitat, and that it’s important that animals 
can move across landscapes between subpopulations 
to sustain their viability and alleviate isolation. We know 
that landscapes are not uniform, but instead consist of 
habitat patches often interspersed with various barriers. 
The term “landscape permeability” indicates the amount 
of resistance that animals perceive when moving across 
barriers from one habitat to the next. For example, 
natural barriers like rivers and steep topography are no 
barrier to river otters and mountain goats respectively. 
Land-use barriers act in a similar way. A deer may cross a 
subdivision, but for a wolverine that subdivision becomes 
a permanent obstacle. Major highways can act as barriers 
too, affecting landscape permeability. Researchers are 
designing ways to increase their permeability, making 
them a conduit or filter and improving animal movement. 
	
Researchers in the Pacific Northwest who are studying 
highway permeability for grizzly bears, wolverines, grey 
wolves, and lynx point out that roads can: 
s	 block movement and dispersal of animal populations
s	 isolate and fragment populations
s	 provide human access and development into .
wildlife habitat
s	 contribute to vehicle-animal collisions.
	
Using GIS and other techniques, researchers can 
identify areas along highways with the best wildlife 
habitat and locate linkages between them. They find 
where animals are most likely to cross highways and 
design wildlife crossing structures that improve highway 
permeability and minimize the problem listed above. The 
primary challenge is finding the correct structure for each 
species (Figure 3.13).
Figure 3.13  The two examples above show how habitats 
can be separated that otherwise would be available  
for wildlife movement. Wildlife crossing structures are 
being planned in locations with high-quality habitat and 
little human access off the roadway. The goal is to de-
sign structures that benefit the widest range of wildlife  
species. Some may be oversize culverts for movement of 
small species like rodents and amphibians, while others 
may be tunnels or vegetation-covered bridges. 
C H A P T E R
3

83
Some practical implications of fragmentation science
FRAGMENTATION AND BIODIVERSITY
	
There is debate about corridors. Although they are 
in use, there are questions about their ability to increase 
connectivity for many species and their effectiveness for 
conserving biodiversity. The benefits of corridors are species-
specific, making it difficult to provide general guidelines 
for their use. Whether corridors are effective depends on a 
range of factors specific to individual cases, including: 
s	 the length and width of corridors 
s	 the suitability of habitat within the corridor and the 
adjacent matrix 
s	 the demography of the patches 
s	 characteristics of the species being helped, including 
their method of dispersal. 
	
Studies are needed to document not only whether 
corridors assist the movement of species across the 
landscape, but how their movement differs from the way 
they move without corridors, recognizing that matrix 
characteristics are important. Studies are also needed that 
address the willingness of species to use corridors, cross-
gaps, and cross-matrix structures. It may be that the best 
strategy to enhance connectivity for some species is to 
manage for or improve structural conditions in the matrix 
rather than investing in corridors. 
	
Another kind of dispersal technique being investigated 
is the use of stepping-stones, patches that allow species 
to “hop” from one patch to another. The movement of 
Fenders’ blue butterfly in the Willamette Valley of Oregon 
is an example of the stepping-stone technique (Figure 
3.14). Historically, lupine patches, which served as suitable 
“source” habitat for this butterfly, were less than 0.5 km 
apart. This distance was easily within the 2 km dispersal 
potential of Fenders’ blue butterfly across non-lupine “sink” 
habitat. However, fragmentation has left lupine patches that 
are isolated by 3 to 30 km, dividing metapopulations into 
non-interacting subpopulations. Scientists have suggested 
developing stepping-stone lupine patches to reconnect the 
populations, rather than corridors, because stepping-stones 
are more like the historical landscape structure. Continued 
research is needed on other species that might benefit from 
this technique.         
Developing Management Plans that Recognize the 
Effects of Fragmentation          
	
Here are three suggested principles to use in .
forest management plans that recognize the effects of 
fragmentation on biodiversity. 
Principle 1: Promote connectivity 
	
Connectivity can be improved by not only creating 
or reserving habitat corridors, but also by using stepping-
stones that help the movement of species across a 
landscape. Other ideas include retention harvesting, mini-
reserves in intensively-managed areas, adjacency constraints, 
and restrictions on harvest unit sizes. It may also be possible 
to manage the matrix to increase its suitability as habitat 
and increase its permeability. Where the matrix consists 
of agriculture or residential development, parks, land-use 
planning that conserves open space and greenways, and 
passageways across major highways may reduce the effects 
of fragmentation. 
Principle 2: Maintain structural complexity
	
Structural complexity includes: 
s	
the variety of stand structures present in natural forests 
along with stand ages and size classes
s	
snags and large down logs
s	
variation in canopy gaps and canopy layers.
Principle 3. Spread the risk of doing the wrong thing
	
Because it is difficult to identify how changes in forest 
extent or connectivity associated with fragmentation affect 
even a single species, the adoption of multiple strategies at 
multiple scales increases the probability of providing suitable 
habitat, connectivity and stand complexity in at least some 
parts of the landscape. For example, if the corridor strategy 
is ineffective, then another strategy, such as stepping-stones 
or structural retention, will be in place to protect elements 
of the landscape. This approach reduces reliance on a single 
strategy and spreads the risk while research continues to 
clarify the science of fragmentation. 
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 167.
Figure 3.14  Kincaid’s lupine patches (Lupinus sulphureus 
ssp. kincaidii), a threatened plant, located at proper  
intervals, can act as stepping-stones, for the Fenders’ blue 
butterfly (lcaricia icarioides fenderi), an endangered insect 
listed under the federal Endangered Species Act. Lupine is 
the primary larval food for the butterfly.
C H A P T E R
3

84
WHY IS THIS SUBJECT IMPORTANT?
	
This chapter revisits the five regions described in 
Chapter 1, focusing on old-growth (OG) forests. Each 
region’s OG story is different, influenced by its natural 
and land use history. We will learn that in some regions 
OG is nearly nonexistent, while in others it’s rare and 
disappearing. In regions where OG is more abundant, .
it’s susceptible to catastrophic disturbances, but manage-
ment can help sustain OG across the landscape. 
	
Regardless of the region, science confirms one .
prominent message – OG is an important stage in the 
dynamic development of any forest (Figure 4.1). That 
doesn’t mean that OG is more important than other 
stages of development, but it does recognize that its 
complexity is vital to biodiversity and that it’s the rarest 
stage of forest development in every region. Research 
confirms the need to conserve existing OG in all regions 
and develop strategies to grow more. 
	
The term OG refers to forests in the late stages of 
stand development. It occurs after a forest has grown for 
long periods of time, often centuries, with low to moder-
ate levels of disturbance. OG includes the mature stage, 
where trees reach their maximum height and crown 
diameter although they still lack some of the structure 
and composition of OG (Figure 4.1). The mature stage 
is included in OG because it may become the OG of the 
future. Recently, researchers have used the term “older 
forest” when referring to the mature and OG stages, and 
that term will be used in this chapter.
	
In the eastern United States OG is rare and its future 
is questionable. In the Northeast for example, less than 
1 percent of the forest is OG, while mature forests are 
slightly more abundant but rapidly disappearing (details 
below). In the Southeast, what’s left of the remaining OG 
amounts to approximately 0.5 percent of the total forest 
area. In the Lake States, the supply is even shorter. Given 
these conditions, NCSSF-sponsored researchers in these 
regions offer conservation strategies aimed at growing 
more OG. In the west, where old growth is more abun-
dant, forest policy has focused on protecting existing OG 
forest reserves in the Pacific Northwest and deciding how 
to manage them. In the Southwest the focus is on how 
to manage OG in frequent-fire landscapes. Long-term 
strategies are being developed in all regions to ensure 
OG has a place in the landscape, whether that landscape 
is subject to wildfire, fire suppression, invasive species, 
pathogens, or other disturbances.
	
OG is known by various names: old forests, heritage 
forests, ancient forests, virgin forests, pristine forests, 
and late-succession forests. Whatever the name, this .
forest stage provides habitat for many organisms, some 
of which show a preference for OG conditions. Some 
OG supports endangered species: the spotted owl .
in the Pacific Northwest, the red-cockaded woodpecker 
in the longleaf pine forest, and the rediscovered ivory-
billed woodpecker in bottomland hardwoods of the 
southeastern coastal plains. Other regions may lack char-
ismatic species but still have species that are dependent 
on OG remnants that often are rapidly disappearing. Old 
forests themselves are an important element of biodiver-
sity. Their size, structure, and spatial characteristics make 
them a fascinating part of the earth’s biota, and one 
worth preserving in its own right for both scientific and 
aesthetic reasons. 
	
This chapter highlights regional differences in OG; 
describes its extent, condition, and major threats; .
addresses the question of how much is enough; and .
offers strategies to enhance OG. It explains environmen-
tal, social, and economic issues in each region, focusing 
on the following general points:
s	 Old forests are more than just old trees.
s	 There’s a connection between biodiversity and the 
need to retain and grow more old forests.
s	 Threats to OG go beyond logging and include .
development, invasive species, and unnatural .
disturbances resulting from fire suppression.
s	 If we want more OG, we must do more than simply 
preserve what we have; it will require managing and 
restoring younger forests.
	
Older forests provide functions and processes that 
are vital to forest biodiversity. Their functions include 
providing large living trees, large standing snags, and 
large down logs (biological legacies, Chapter 1, page 
44), all of which young forests need after stand-replace-
ment disturbances. Their processes include the ecological 
forces leading to their development and maintenance, 
such as gap formation, regeneration, nitrogen fixation, 
low-severity fire, productivity, and decomposition. .
These functions and processes, along with the variety 
of organisms that OG forests protect, all contribute to 
biodiversity. 
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Why is this subject important?
C H A P T E R
4

85
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Why is this subject important?
Stage 8. Pioneer 
cohort loss (final 
stage of OG)
Figure 4.1 Pacific Northwest Douglas-fir is shown as  
an example of forest development. The start of OG 
begins in the mature stage (5) and progresses through 
structural and composition stages (6, 7, & 8), each with 
characteristics that serve a role in conserving  
biodiversity (details in Chapter 1, page 43). 
Stage 1. A stand-replace-
ment disturbance that 
leaves legacy structures
Stage 2. Early cohort 
establishment
Stage 3. Canopy closure
Stage 4. Competitive 
exclusion
Stage 5. Maturity, 
the start of OG 
(80-120 years  
of age) 
Stage 6. Vertical 
diversification 
typically occurs 
at 150-250 years 
of age. OG trees 
are more than 39 
inches in diameter, 
with lower and 
midstory shade-
tolerant trees and 
large dead trees.
Stage 7. Horizon-
tal diversification 
typically occurs at 
150-250 years of 
age. Large down 
logs, a variety of 
foliage heights, 
the patchy distri-
bution of canopy 
gaps and under-
story vegetation 
all characterize OG 
forests.
	
Because OG is a natural part of many forests, .
practitioners, landowners, managers and policymakers 
need to accommodate them in their forest manage-
ment activities. While public lands should bear most of 
the burden of supplying OG, private landowners should 
be encouraged to grow older forests too, especially in 
regions that have little public land. The NCSSF-sponsored 
research featured in this chapter offers management 
strategies that can accommodate the social and .
economic goals of private landowners and the public. It 
offers creative ideas for conserving old forests that are 
tailored for each region.  
C H A P T E R
4

86
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
What do we know about OG in the Northeast?
	
Overall, the Northeast is more forested today than 
it was 150 years ago (Chapter 1, pages 8-23), but 
today’s forest cover has not reached the OG stage .
because most of the northeastern forest was .
converted to agriculture and pasture (except for the 
far northern states). At the same time that forests are 
becoming more mature, the Northeast is generally 
losing forest cover to development in the southern 
tier of states. In the far northern tier of states, which 
were never deforested and converted to farmland, the 
forests have more old forest qualities, but because of 
the emphasis in the last 30 years on managing timber 
more efficiently, most of the remaining mature forest 
is rapidly being removed from the landscape (more 
about this below). 
Figure 4.4 A tip-up mound in OG northern hardwood forest, Maine.
Figure 4.2 OG Red Pine in Maine.
Jerry and Marcy Monkman
John Hagan
Figure 4.3 Big Reed OG Reserve in Northcentral Maine.
Figure 4.5 Researcher John Hagan and OG Ash in  
Big Reed OG Reserve.
John Hagan
John Hagan
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT OG IN  
THE NORTHEAST?
C H A P T E R
4

87
What do we know about OG in the Northeast?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.6 In northern hardwood (birch-
maple) and softwood (spruce) stands, 
OG develops at approximately 200 years. 
However, even in 100-year-old stands, 
OG characteristics can be seen. The 
problem in the Northeast is that existing 
mature stands (100-200 years old) are be-
ing rapidly harvested, because it’s costly 
to hold them beyond the economically 
optimum age of 50-75 years.
Forest Age (Years)
Figure 4.7  
Based on field 
reconnaissance 
in Maine, NCSSF-
sponsored  
researchers have 
found stands that 
contain trees in 
the 100-200 year 
age class, but  
they are rapidly 
disappearing.
Victor Brunelle
C H A P T E R
4

88
What do we know about OG in the Northeast?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.8 This 150-year-old sugar maple is covered with old 
forest mosses and lichens. Due to its harvest history, the 
stand is not OG, but it contains OG trees with OG  
dependent species. 
Figure 4.9a 
This OG moss  
(Neckera pennata), 
tightly associated 
with older sugar  
maple trees, is  
evidence of the need 
to retain mature 
hardwood stands.
	
Forest ownership is critical to any discussion of OG 
in the Northeast, because most forests are private (Figure 
4.10). The vast majority of private forestland is in the hands 
of family forest owners, but there are large private owner-
ships as well. The opportunity to retain existing OG in the 
Northeast lies primarily on public lands, and public owner-
ship of forestland varies between 5 and 15 percent across 
the Northeast states. With such a small portion of the forest 
in public ownership, it’s necessary to encourage private 
owners to grow OG. They will be key to any OG conserva-
tion strategy in the Northeast (more about this below).
What’s the Current Condition and Extent?
	
There’s no clear point at which Northeast forests .
become OG, but as the forest development diagram in 
Figure 4.6 shows, stands 100-200+ years old are considered 
older forest.
	
An inventory of OG in the Northeast is needed but .
has not been done; this is what is known. Less than 0.1 .
percent of any Northeastern state is OG older than 200 
years. What little remains is primarily on public lands and 
has been protected because it is so rare. Individual states 
estimate the following amounts of OG:
s	 Maine – 0.17 percent
s	 New Hampshire – 0.41 percent
s	 Vermont – 0.05 percent
s	 New York – 0.70 percent
s	 Pennsylvania – 0.06 percent
s	 Connecticut – 0.01 percent.
	
In contrast, mature forest 100 to 200 years old is 
more abundant but is being harvested because of the cost 
of holding it (more about this in “threats to OG” section 
below). Mature forest is estimated to occupy less than 5 
percent of the forested landscape. In northern Vermont, 
New Hampshire, and Maine, where forests were not cleared 
for agriculture but were managed for timber for more than 
150 years, remnants of mature forests remain, but they are 
disappearing with concentrated harvesting. In the state of 
Maine for example, there was a net loss of mature forest 
between 1982 and 2003. The amount of mature north-
ern hardwoods declined from 3.93 to 1.1 million acres 
(1,587,720 to 445,154 hectares) (Figure 4.7).  
John Hagan
John Hagan
Figure 4.9b 
The epiphyte (lichen) 
Lobaria quercizans 
is another species 
dependent on older 
forests in Maine.
John Hagan
C H A P T E R
4

89
	
In the southern tier of states, where European settlers 
cleared the landscape for farming and grazing, mature .
forests are returning. In Pennsylvania today, approximately 
20 percent of forest cover on state-owned lands is in the 
mature stage (100+ years). Forests have also recovered in 
Massachusetts, but forestland is now being lost to .
development, and the prospects for retaining mature .
forests are uncertain (strategies are being proposed and .
are described below).
Are There Old-growth Adapted Species? 
	
In contrast to other forest regions, such as the Pacific 
Northwest and Southeast, The Northeast has no charismatic 
wildlife species that depend on OG. However, some mosses, 
lichens, and fungi are dependent on older forests (Figure 4.8 
and 4.9A and 4.9B).
What are the Major Threats to OG in the Northeast?
	
While the small amount of OG that exists in the .
Northeast is protected, threats to mature forests are differ-
ent for various locations in the region. In the north, mature .
forest will steadily decline due to harvesting. In the south, 
development is the threat (Figure 4.10). 
	
Other threats to older forests in the Northeast come 
from acid rain, invasive species, and an overabundance of 
deer. While there has been some reduction in acid rain in 
recent years, the chronic leaching of calcium from the soil 
continues to stress some tree species, especially shade-.
tolerant, long-lived sugar maple. Invasive species include 
chestnut blight that eliminated American chestnut, beech 
bark disease, and hemlock wooly adelgid (Chapter 2, pages 
58-59). Overabundant deer prevent regeneration in older 
forests in New York and Pennsylvania and interfere with the 
maintenance of existing mature forests. 
How Much OG is Needed to Maintain Biodiversity?
	
NCSSF-sponsored researchers say there’s not enough 
time or money to answer this question because most re-
maining mature stands are scheduled for harvest in the next 
1 to 5 years. It’s estimated that 4 to 6 percent of the total 
forest in Maine might qualify ecologically as mature forest, 
but there is no information on how much mature forest 
remains in all of the Northeast. Field observations suggest 
that it would not take large set-aside areas to maintain the 
sensitive species found in mature forests. Rather, it’s possible 
that setting aside many small, very high-quality areas might 
be the best strategy to maintain well-distributed populations 
of mature forest species. Just how that might be done is 
described below.
How Does Society View OG in the Northeast?
	
Surveys indicate that the general public values old forest 
and wilderness areas and wants them maintained in the 
region. What’s unclear is how much is wanted and how 
it should be distributed. Unfortunately, the public is not 
currently involved. There’s been no public discussion about 
older forests in the Northeast – the public is more concerned 
about forest conversion to development than about old 
forests. However, researchers are exploring ways to involve 
the public in dialogue about old forest.
What do we know about OG in the Northeast?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.10 Northeastern states vary between 5 and 15  
percent public ownership. Timber harvesting on large,  
private commercial forestland threatens much of the  
remaining mature forest in northern Vermont, New  
Hampshire and Maine, due to financial considerations.  
It’s just too costly to hold these stands to ecological  
maturity.  At the opposite end of the Northeast region,  
the primary threat is development and the conversion of 
forest to non-forest uses.
Threat to Older Forest: 
Forest Management
Threat to  
Older Forest: 
conversion
Private Forest
Public Forest
Non-forest
C H A P T E R
4

90
	
In Massachusetts, a proposal called “Wildlands and 
Woodlands” would use reserves and easements to protect 
forest cover, including old forests. The goal is to establish 
2.25 million acres (909,000 hectares) (45 percent of the 
state) as “woodlands” and 0.25 million acres (100,000 
hectares) (5 percent of the state) as “wildlands.” Woodlands 
will be managed for timber, and development will not be 
permitted. Wildlands will be off-limits to timber harvesting 
and development. “No-development” easements will be 
used to accomplish the woodland goal. The wildland goal 
will be accomplished by designating existing public lands.
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
How can knowledge of OG be used in  
management strategies on public and  
private forestlands?
	
While there is little Northeast-based scientific informa-
tion to explain what species or processes will be lost with 
the disappearance of older forests, researchers assume that 
many species, especially mosses, lichens, fungi, and insects, 
will be threatened. Current efforts to conserve older forest 
are deadlocked between those who call for immediate 
conservation strategies and those who think more science is 
needed before taking action. Researchers suggest four strat-
egies (the “Four Rs”) to conserve and manage old forests: 
s	 reserves – no-harvest areas used to maintain and .
grow OG 
s	 structural retention – leaving old trees after harvest to 
maintain OG characteristics 
s	 restoration – accelerating development of old forest 
characteristics in younger stands
s	 longer rotation – grow trees longer before harvest.
	
The state of Pennsylvania has developed an OG reserve 
policy. Overall, its forests are mostly in the 80- to 100-year-
old age class, so older forest acreage will come from state-
owned land where 20 to 25 percent will be designated as 
OG. That goal will be met through the use of reserves, long 
rotations, and retention strategies. Efforts to encourage OG 
on private lands will be voluntary.
	
In Maine, researchers are proposing a combination of 
strategies to conserve older forests, depending on landown-
er goals (family forest, public forest, or commercial forest). 
They acknowledge that extending rotation length conflicts 
with economic reality, but they believe a new management 
strategy that balances economics and OG conservation 
could accommodate landowner goals. With a growing 
interest in conservation among family forest owners, they 
suggest buying rotation length. The objective would be to 
purchase rotation length using a new type of easement 
that compensates landowners for the cost of continuing to 
grow stands beyond the financially optimum rotation length 
(50 to 70 years) into the mature and OG stage. The cost of 
added rotation length can be calculated and would be paid 
for through easements, the same way owners are currently 
compensated for development rights.
	
Along with these conservation strategies, researchers 
have developed new tools to help foresters manage for OG. 
One is an index that screens stands for OG content. The 
Late-Successional (LS) Index is a field tool that can be used 
in northern hardwood and upland spruce-fir stands. It rec-
ognizes OG by measuring certain characteristics and scoring 
the results. It’s based on large-tree density and the density 
of trees with one or two lichen species. Tree size is closely 
related to stand age, and the identity of certain lichens helps 
to assess the ecological history/age of the stand. Together, 
these two characteristics can identify OG. The index score 
helps foresters recognize an older forest when they see it. It 
can screen stands prior to harvest, after a harvest to deter-
mine how much OG was retained, or to build an inventory 
of OG stands by using the stand score in a GIS database.  
	
Given the complicated and rapidly changing character 
of northeastern forest ownership, and the economic pres-
sure to harvest stands that are beyond financially optimum 
age, each of these strategies (reserves, retention, restora-
tion, and rotation length) will be needed to conserve older 
forests and their biodiversity. 
C H A P T E R
4

What do we know about OG in the Lake States?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
91
	
Forests in the northern Lake States (Minnesota, .
Wisconsin, and Michigan) are very different from the 
region’s historic forests (Chapter 1, pages 24-29). Today’s 
forests are still recovering from the cutover of the late .
19th and early 20th centuries (Figure 4.11).
	
So little OG remained after the cutover era that the 
challenges facing this region are recovery and restoration 
rather than preservation of OG. It’s estimated that less than 
1 percent of the pre-cutover era OG remains, and far less 
hemlock, yellow birch and white pine remains (details .
below). There’s a serious need to restore ecological .
Wisconsin Historical Society, Image ID #3991 
C H A P T E R
4
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT OG IN  
THE LAKE STATES?
Figure 4.11 By 1890 the supply of white pine in the lake 
states was exhausted. Timber companies moved on to 
hemlock and hardwood species including maple, birch, ash, 
basswood, elm, cedar and fir. After harvesting, widespread 
fires created “stump pastures,” an unsuccessful attempt at 
agriculture on the sandy, unproductive soils. 
complexity to the regional landscape, and older forests are 
one important component. What’s needed is a full spectrum 
of forest stages across the landscape. Older forests deserve 
immediate attention, not because they’re more important 
but because they have a complexity that is most threatened 
by current land management activities. They cannot simply 
be protected in reserves while the majority of forest is .
managed on short rotations for biomass.

92
	
NCSSF-sponsored research-
ers brought together a group of 
experts to develop an OG conser-
vation framework for the region. 
It’s briefly described here with 
more detail in the answers to the 
questions below. Its ideas, prin-
ciples, agreements and rules are 
an outline that can be filled out in 
the future. What’s most important 
is that the framework be able to 
cross regional boundaries, allow-
ing states to work in partnership.  
1	 There must be consistent .
definitions and reliable .
inventories of existing older 
forests.
2	 There must be targets and 
goals for protecting existing 
older forest remnants. Many 
existing OG stands have no 
protection and must be located 
and measured. 
3	 The goal of forest manage-
ment must be a more ecologi-
cally complex forest landscape, 
and OG must be part of restor-
ing ecological complexity. 
4	 Monitoring must be tied to 
adaptive management .
(Chapter 8). Without monitor-
ing it’s impossible to know 
how regional forests are .
responding to pests, .
pathogens and invasive .
species. Adaptive management 
allows for response to .
changing conditions identified 
by monitoring results.
5	 There must be cross-border 
cooperative strategies that: 
•	 encourage active manage-
ment on private lands to 
keep land in forest cover
•	 include working forests to 
maintain the wood .
products industry 
•	 reform state forest laws
•	 encourage forest restora-
tion on private lands.
What do we know about OG in the Lake States?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.13 Old-growth eastern white pine 
and yellow birch, Sylvania Wilderness 
Area, Michigan.
Figure 4.12 Old-growth hemlock-hard-
wood, Porcupine Mountains Wilderness 
State Park, Michigan.
Craig Lorimer
Craig Lorimer
Figure 4.14 Managed uneven-aged northern hardwood forest,  
Wildcat Creek, Nicolet National Forest, Wisconsin.
Craig Lorimer
C H A P T E R
4

93
What’s the Current Condition and Extent?
	
No inventory exists of older forests in the Lake States. 
What’s needed is an inventory and assessment of older .
forests on both public and private lands. In the meantime, 
here are best estimates.
s	 Less than 1 percent of the pre-cutover era OG remains
s	 Less than 0.2 percent of hemlock/hardwood remains
s	 Less than 0.5 percent of white pine/red pine remains
	
Assessments should include mature forests, not just .
forests currently in OG condition, because future OG .
requires identifying, protecting and restoring mature stands. 
Are There Old-growth Adapted Species?  
	
There are no OG-dependent vertebrate species in the 
region. However species groupings and parts of the forest 
landscape that are being lost are needed to maintain forest 
resilience in the face of rapid future change. 
What are the Major Threats to OG in the Lake States?
	
Major threats include the following social and .
ecological changes: 
s	 fragmentation and parcelization from development, 
especially second-home development 
s	 changes in large-scale disturbances, particularly due .
to fire exclusion 
s	 increasing demand on watershed services
s	 invasive species and their probable impact on some 
forest types in the region. Current control efforts are 
aimed at the wrong invasives, such as the gypsy moth 
rather than the hemlock woolly adelgid (Chapter 2). 
s	 climate change and new diseases and epidemics that 
are likely to occur.
How Much OG is Needed to Maintain Biodiversity?
	
The question of how much of the landscape should be 
OG (1 percent, 10 percent or 25 percent) is not simply a 
scientific decision, but something that should be answered 
through public discussion and agreement. Whatever the 
target amount, the region is nowhere near it. It’s important 
to get started. Lack of inventories and targets is being used 
as an excuse for inaction while existing OG is converted to 
development or replaced by aspen.
	
The question of how much OG has been answered in .
Minnesota, and that model could be useful in other states. 
In 1991, Minnesota developed and implemented a .
statewide OG policy to identify and protect the highest 
quality remaining OG forest. There were several steps:
s	 inventory all lands statewide for OG
s	 set statewide targets for OG
s	 develop new forest management structures, projects, 
and databases for OG.
	
Since 1991 Minnesota has gone from 0 to 40,000 .
acres (16,000 hectares) of designated OG and learned the 
following lessons:
s	 establish an interdisciplinary management system with 
clear management authority
s	 set quantity targets for OG, as well as indicators, with 
stakeholder involvement (Chapter 5)
s	 develop a standardized inventory, evaluation and .
database system 
s	 resolve stakeholder conflict through strong leadership.
How Does Society View OG in the Lake States?
	
In spite of Minnesota’s public-involvement experience, 
Wisconsin and Michigan have not had a public conversation 
on OG. There is a need to educate the public about OG and 
foster that conversation across the region.
How can knowledge of oG be used in  
management strategies on public and  
private forestlands?
	
The same NCSSF-sponsored group that developed .
the OG conservation framework described above also .
developed the following strategies.
Protect Existing OG
	
Many existing OG stands on both public and private 
lands have no protection. All existing OG on public lands 
should be protected immediately. Those few stands with 
120-year-old trees should be protected first. Mature stands 
nearing OG should be next. Easements, purchases, tax 
incentives, and exchanges should be used to protect OG on 
private land.
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
C H A P T E R
4

94
Second-growth Management Strategies 
	
Second-growth areas on public lands should be .
managed using extended rotations. They occur in even-aged 
forests and where older cohorts of trees exist in multi-aged 
forests. Variable density thinning (Chapter 1, page 47) and 
prescribed fire may speed the development of older .
forest characteristics in these areas. Where second- or .
third-growth forests on public lands are being managed for 
timber production, researchers recommend management 
that increases biodiversity and ecological complexity at all 
forest development stages. The goal is not to manage these 
areas for OG but to incorporate adequate amounts of .
biological legacies (large decadent trees, snags, and large 
down logs) and other structures (Chapter 1, page 44). 
Future OG can be created by using active management in 
younger even-aged stands or former plantations as well as 
uneven-aged stands with a few large trees (Figure 4.15). 
	
Caution: heavy thinning can delay the onset of OG 
structure in older uneven-aged stands with numerous legacy 
trees. However, there are ways to decide which stands 
might benefit from these techniques.
Other Public Forest Management Strategies
	
For most second- and third-growth public forest, .
management practices should increase biodiversity and .
ecological complexity while providing timber products. 
Stands dedicated to timber production should incorporate 
some structural composition and complexity characteristic 
of OG stands because complexity is needed in all stages of 
stand development. 
Monitoring and Adaptive  
Management
     Monitoring and adaptive management 
are necessary to determine how forests 
will respond to climate change, new pests 
and pathogens, and invasive species. 
Agencies must fund monitoring, along 
with adaptive management (Chapter 8). 
Monitoring and flexibility will make it .
possible to respond to changing .
conditions that are difficult to predict. .
In Minnesota, for example, government agencies built .
adaptive management into their OG reserve policy. If 
monitoring indicates that the actual amount of OG is over 
or under the targets by 10 percent or more, stakeholders 
automatically re-evaluate management practices. This kind 
of adaptive flexibility provides safety measures and also 
develops trust among stakeholders. 
Cross-boundary Coordination
	
A coordinated approach should include state foresters, 
the Council on Forestry Directives, and professional .
societies that can help move the process along. The .
conservation framework described above must cut across 
regional boundaries to allow states to work together in 
partnership.
Deal with Invasive Species, Pests, and Pathogens
	
Exotic species can impact all stages of forest develop-
ment and could have significant impact on older forests in 
the region. If nothing is done, they could devastate older 
forests within the next 20 to 50 years. A multi-state .
approach to regulation, research, monitoring, and control .
is needed.
	
Control efforts for exotic species should focus on the 
most dangerous pests, but that isn’t happening today. Two 
exotic pests – the hemlock woolly adelgid and the Asian 
long-horned beetle – could devastate the remaining OG 
hemlock-hardwood forests. The group of experts felt that 
more attention should be focused on these pests and less 
on the gypsy moth, which is a less serious threat to forests 
but is widely regarded as a public nuisance. The public .
demands that gypsy moths be controlled because they 
cause highly visible damage in urban neighborhoods. This 
demand should be changed with education that focuses on 
older forests that are at much greater risk from the hemlock 
woolly adelgid and the Asian long-horned beetle.
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.15  Many even-aged young stands 
are uniform, with closed canopies and few 
snags, down logs, saplings, large trees, 
or hemlock, yellow birch and white pine. 
Variable-density thinning could be used in 
this even-aged, 70-year old sugar maple 
stand (Chequamegon NF, Wis.) to mimic 
natural small-scale disturbances, forming 
gaps and introducing other species.
Craig Lorimer
C H A P T E R
4

95
	
Deer are another major threat to OG recovery and .
restoration. High deer populations affect hemlock, white 
cedar, yellow birch, maple, and white pine regeneration 
(Chapter 1, pages 14 and 27). Hunting is on the decline in 
the Lake States, and any effort to encourage hunting access 
in the forest could bring more invasive plants and pests from 
the use of ATVs. A publicly funded bounty system might 
work to control deer, wild boar, and other invasive species. 
	
Biotechnology techniques, tree breeding, or inserting 
resistant genes into susceptible species should be consid-
ered. Such approaches are effective with American chestnut 
and may be better than waiting and hoping for the best. 
Reintroduce Fire
	
Fire is needed to maintain pine and oak forests, but 
there are major social and economic constraints. Social .
attitudes about fire need to be changed with outreach and 
education. There’s a lack of ecological understanding about 
the role of fire in the region’s forests. Experiments compar-
ing the effects of fire could help resolve these concerns. 
Agencies need to make a commitment to personnel and 
resources for the job, because fire is an important tool in the 
effort to provide a diverse complex forest landscape across 
the region. 
Restore Complexity
	
To protect OG, land managers should focus on restoring 
complexity to the entire forested landscape using the tools, 
techniques, and principles of ecological forestry such as:
s	 including biological legacies in harvest prescriptions 
(Chapter 1, page 44). For example, retain a hardwood 
component in a conifer-dominated stand, retain both 
commercial and non-commercial species, and retain 
species with special abilities, such as nitrogen-fixing 
plants. Retain some live trees across one or more rota-
tions, allowing long-lived species to live out their natural 
life span. In appropriate locations, reintroduce missing 
or depleted species such as eastern white pine (Chapter 
1, pages 27-29). Use these techniques in both even-
aged harvest practices and in prescriptions for multi-
cohort stands subject to tree- or gap-based disturbance 
regimes, such as OG northern hardwood ecosystems 
(Chapter 1, page 18). Use marking guidelines that .
include goals for maintaining old and large trees and 
their snags and large down logs as part of the stand. 
s	 mimicking natural stand development processes using 
intermediate treatments that create, restore, and main-
tain structural complexity. For example, thinning can 
promote development of large trees, snags, and large 
down logs. Planting, seeding and protecting established 
populations of eastern white pine can introduce and 
conserve stand composition diversity. Prescribed fire 
and other site preparation or control methods can be 
used to establish certain species. Timber stand improve-
ment can be used to encourage yellow birch and white 
pine saplings. Appropriate thinning from below can 
speed development of large-diameter high quality trees. 
Variable density thinning (Chapter 1, page 47) mimics 
small-scale disturbance or gap-formation, contributing 
to greater stand structure.
s	 extending rotations to allow older cohorts to develop. 
Commercial stands often lack legacy structures and tree 
species diversity because short rotations exclude shade .
tolerant species from establishing and growing into .
intermediate or co-dominant positions in the canopy. .
By extending rotations, these natural stand components .
can be integrated into commercial forests.
Provide New Silvicultural Guides
	
Lake States foresters currently use silvicultural guides 
that concentrate on timber growth and yield, but they 
need information focused on ecosystem sustainability. Early 
research results are available to help foresters understand 
forest dynamics, but they must be presented in a form that 
working foresters can use on the ground. Demonstration 
sites are needed to validate these strategies.
Reform State Forest Laws
	
To encourage OG restoration on private lands, Man-
aged Forest Law (MFL) programs in the region should be 
reformed. Originally developed to increase reforestation, 
provide a continuous timber supply, and allow public access 
to forestlands, these programs do not encourage OG resto-
ration and protection. In exchange for developing a forest 
management plan for their property, landowners are given 
a tax break that increases if the landowner allows public 
access for hunting. Currently, MFL allows only 20 percent 
of a forest to be classified as “nonproductive forest lands” 
– a category that includes all values other than traditional 
sustained-yield forestry. The percentage of forest classified 
as nonproductive should be changed to 50 percent to allow 
for restoration and protection of older trees. Extending the 
MFL contract length beyond 20 years would encourage .
ecological values and make it more difficult to back out of 
the programs. Requiring owners to give 10 years advance 
notice would discourage landowners from selling in order 
to cash in on a real estate boom. Other MFL changes are 
needed to encourage cross-boundary cooperation and allow 
multiple landowners to coordinate forest plans that have 
a landscape emphasis. A single forest plan would simplify 
management and encourage local landowners to .
collaborate on harvests and management plans.
	
In the Lake States, a lack of regional policy, social .
agreement, agency capacity, financial resources, and tested 
silvicultural techniques hinders the conservation of older .
forests. However, the strategies developed by the NCSSF-
sponsored group of experts and described here offer a 
framework to overcome these obstacles and achieve .
that goal.
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
C H A P T E R
4

96
	
Shaped by humans for thousands of years, older forests 
in the Southeastern Coastal Plain have influenced the 
culture, economic development, and ecology of the region. 
NCSSF-sponsored researchers chose to focus on two OG 
forests at opposite ends of the fire-frequency continuum – .
longleaf pine and bottomland hardwoods (Figures 4.16 .
and 4.17). 
	
  Historically, longleaf pine dominated uplands in much 
of the Southeastern Coastal Plain and provided a conduit 
for frequent fire into neighboring forests (Chapter 1, page 
35). In contrast, bottomland hardwood and cypress-tupelo 
forests experienced the lowest fire frequency in the .
Southeast. What complicates the story of these two OG 
forests is that both produce valuable wood products and 
are located in a landscape dominated by private land. Any 
management strategy that encourages older longleaf and 
bottomland hardwood forests must recognize these .
economic realities if these forests are to be sustained in 
ways that serve conservation (more about this below). 
What do we know about OG in the Southeastern Coastal Plain?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.16  Fire plays an important role in forests of the 
Southeast Coastal Plain. Longleaf pine forests occupy  
the upper end of the fire-frequency continuum with an 
understory fire frequency of approximately 1-4 years.
Julius Ariail
Gary Boyd
Figure 4.17   
Bottomland  
hardwoods and 
cypress-tupelo  
forests represent 
the low end of the 
fire-frequency  
continuum with 
an understory fire 
frequency of  
approximately  
3-100 years.
C H A P T E R
4
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT OG IN  
THE SOUTHEASTERN COASTAL PLAIN?

97
What do we know about OG in the Southeastern Coastal Plain?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.18  
The red-cockaded 
woodpecker (Picoides 
borealis) depends on 
OG longleaf pine for  
cavities but often  
forages in younger 
nearby forests.
Figure 4.19 (ABOVE AND LEFT)  
The ivory-billed woodpecker 
(Campephilus principalis),  
rediscovered in the Big Woods of 
Arkansas after disappearing for 
70 years. These historical photos, 
two of the few available, were 
taken in 1938 in Singer Tract, 
Louisiana. The photo above is an 
adult male with a female peering 
out the cavity entrance. Left is 
a rare color photo (zoom lenses 
were not available in 1938). 
Researchers are trying to gather 
current photographic evidence.
Todd Engstrom/CLO
James Tanner (courtesy of Nancy Tanner)
What’s the Current Condition and Extent?
	
OG forest inventory data for the entire Southeast is .
rudimentary, but 424 sites in 10 southeastern states .
(Virginia, N. Carolina, S. Carolina, Georgia, Florida, .
Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas and Texas) have 
been identified. They represent an estimated 274,000 .
hectares (677,000 acres), or approximately 0.5 percent .
of the total forest area in the Southeast. Much of this .
total is located in the Appalachian Mountains – not the 
Coastal Plain. 
	
Specifically for the Coastal Plain, OG data identify 67 
cypress/tupelo and bottomland hardwood sites, located 
primarily on public ownerships (61 percent). Their location 
along the major rivers of the Southeast made them .
susceptible to extensive harvesting in the late 19th and early 
20th centuries. In Louisiana alone, 51 percent of the .
acreage of forested wetlands at the time of European .
colonization was eliminated by 1974. Almost all forested 
wetlands and bottomland hardwoods have been harvested 
at least once since the 19th century.
	
Data on OG longleaf pine in the Coastal Plain indicates 
a total of approximately 12,355 acres (5,000 hectares). This 
represents 0.013 percent of the original historical area of 
91.9 million acres (37.2 million hectares) of longleaf and 
longleaf-oak forests. Longleaf pine coverage at the time of 
European settlement was estimated to be 60 percent of the 
upland forest area in the coastal plains. Today, there are only 
29 well-known OG longleaf pine sites (Chapter 1, page 30). 
Like the bottomland hardwoods, most are in public .
ownership (74 percent), and only one of the tracts is more 
than 1,000 acres.
	
Researchers stress that even with this dramatic and 
nearly complete loss of older bottomland and longleaf pine 
forests from the landscape, these small remnant stands still 
support critically important components of biodiversity. 
Are There Old-growth Adapted Species? 
	
Almost two-thirds of all species of concern in the 
Southeast Coastal Plain (those that are in danger of .
extinction, threatened to become endangered, or are rare 
on the landscape) make their preferred home in mature .
longleaf pine forests that have been frequently burned .
for a long time. Two endangered woodpeckers – the .
red-cockaded woodpecker (Figure 4.18) and the recently 
rediscovered ivory-billed woodpecker (Figure 4.19) – have 
drawn attention to OG in the Coastal Plain. Other unusual 
plant and animal species combinations contribute overall 
species richness and unique biological diversity of these .
OG forests. 
James Tanner (courtesy of Nancy Tanner)
C H A P T E R
4

98
	
Even though OG longleaf pine and bottomland .
hardwood forests are scarce and have been fragmented – .
putting some plants and animals at the brink of extinction – .
researchers identify numerous characteristics that are .
valuable to their unique biodiversity.
s	 Older large 
diameter legacy 
trees in the 
canopy. The 
heartwood of 
pines older than 
100 years pro-
vides the struc-
ture necessary for 
the endangered .
red-cockaded 
woodpecker 
(RCW). These 
birds excavate 
heartwood for 
nesting and 
roosting cavities 
(Figure 4.20). 
They prefer to 
forage for insects 
on the largest, .
oldest trees 
available. The 
old trees offer cavities for roosting and den sites for 
many other birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and 
invertebrates. In bottomland hardwood forests, more 
than 50 species of old trees provide for an even greater 
diversity of arthropods (insects, arachnids, centipedes, 
and crustaceans). With age, the trees develop large 
dead branches and tops that provide additional wildlife 
habitat. The ivory-billed woodpecker appears to require 
large old trees for its cavities and dead trees or parts of 
trees for foraging.  
s	 Dead and dying large-diameter trees. Snags 
and large down logs provide cavities for foraging 
and escape cover for animals. Many bird species use 
stumpholes and down logs for protection from .
predators. Bird abundance depends on snags and down 
wood In bottomland hardwoods, dead and dying wood 
supplies beetle larvae for the ivory-billed woodpecker 
and basking habitat for many reptiles. Amphibians, 
reptiles, and mammals also use stumps. 
s	 Intact ground cover. Undisturbed, frequently burned 
ground cover in longleaf pine ecosystems (Figure 
4.21) supports higher species diversity than historically 
plowed or grazed understories. Wiregrass (Aristida 
stricta) dominated ground cover is most important.
s	 A history of appropriate disturbance (either a fire 
regime for uplands or flooding regime in bottomlands). 
Frequent fire in uplands results in more light on the .
forest floor and encourages understory diversity. Fire 
also controls the abundance of arthropods, particularly 
ants, the primary diet of RCW. In bottomland .
hardwood understories, where regular flooding and 
scouring make herbs sparser, there is still a variety of 
rare and endemic plant life.
s	 Minimal forest area and fragmentation.  
Depending on habitat quality, a small RCW population 
(20 clusters) requires approximately 800 to 2000 .
hectares of upland pine forest. Approximately 40 hect-
ares of fire-maintained habitat is necessary to sustain 
50 gopher tortoises (Chapter 1, page 37), a minimal .
viable population size based on home ranges. The 
home range for a single male Sherman’s fox squirrel is .
approximately 40 hectares of mature pines or mixed 
pine and hardwood stands. The area necessary to .
support a viable population of the rediscovered ivory-
billed woodpecker is open to question. Historically, 
individual territories were as large as 17 square miles.
s	 The connection between pine uplands and hard-
wood wetlands. Pine uplands provide a corridor for 
fire into hardwood wetlands. The Apalachicola River 
area in Florida and the Altamaha River and Ochlock-
onee River areas in Georgia are places where upland 
and riparian OG occur together and where large-scale 
conservation could be developed. 
What do we know about OG in the Southeastern Coastal Plain?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Julius Ariail
Figure 4.21 Native grass cover and dead wood.
Figure 4.20 Cavity in longleaf pine.
Julius Ariail
C H A P T E R
4

99
What are the Major Threats to OG in the Southeast?
	
Major threats include:
s	 Improper fire regime is the greatest management 
challenge to protecting upland OG pine forests on .
public lands. A 50-year accumulation of fuel has cre-
ated unnatural conditions that can result in mortality 
of large trees from smoldering fires when prescribed 
burns are reintroduced into OG stands. The loss of fire, 
if mandated by clean air regulations, poses a major 
challenge to the restoration and maintenance of old 
longleaf pine stands.
s	 Changes in hydrology from levees, dams, and other 
river alterations threaten OG bottomland forest. .
Some no longer flood as often or as long as they did 
historically, while others flood more frequently. The 
result is altered forest plant communities.
s	 Non-native invasive species in bottomland .
hardwoods have caused understory problems (Figure 
4.22). Examples include Chinese privet (Ligustrum 
sinense), Chinese tallow (Sapium sebiferum), and .
chinaberry (Melia azedarach). Invasive animal species 
include zebra mussels (Dreissena polymorpha), nutria 
(Myocastor coypus), and wild hogs (Sus scrofa).
s	 Development across the Southeast interferes with the 
need for frequent fire in longleaf pine and demands 
flood control in bottomland hardwoods. Development 
also contributes to invasive exotic infestations.
s	 Lack of a complete inventory leaves managers of 
public parks, forests, and preserves unaware of the 
presence of OG resources.
s	 Lack of knowledge about OG has led to a failure to 
appreciate forests that contain OG characteristics or 
forests that have scattered patches of OG. OG features 
in younger forests should also be protected. 
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.22 The non-native plant kudzu 
(Pueraria Montana (Lour.) Merr.) is a 
climbing vine that grows over, smothers, 
and kills all other vegetation including 
trees. Native to Asia, it was introduced 
in America in 1876 and planted through-
out the east in an attempt to control 
erosion.
James H. Miller, USDA Forest Service, Bugwood.org
s	 There is no mandate to protect OG on military .
or national forest lands unless endangered species .
are present.
How Much OG is Needed to Maintain Biodiversity?
	
Researchers don’t know the answer to this question, 
but they do support a large increase in the area of these 
forests, saying it would greatly enhance biodiversity in the 
region. Setting an acreage target is probably not as .
important as acknowledging that the current area is .
completely inadequate to maintain the range of potential 
biodiversity in the region. Any efforts to increase the .
acreage by organizations like the Longleaf Alliance should 
be supported to the greatest extent possible. 
How Does Society View OG in the Southeast?
	
Social values derived from these forests include their 
role in the heritage and identity of the Southeast and their 
usefulness as scientific benchmarks for biodiversity. Their 
economic values include recreational opportunities such 
as hunting and ecotourism, their unique timber products 
(heartwood), and the clean air and water they generate.
How can knowledge of oG be used in  
management strategies on public and  
private forestlands?
	
Because OG remnants are so rare, small, and .
fragmented, an OG conservation strategy in the Southeast 
must first preserve and manage remaining OG stands. Any 
stands with OG characteristics that might not be considered 
OG, but that provide rare and important habitat, also need 
to be identified. In pine uplands these include:
s	 stands with intact understory plant communities, .
because these communities may be the oldest .
biological parts of the forest
C H A P T E R
4

100
s	 stands with a long history of frequent burning, because 
of their open canopy and herb communities dominated 
by grass, their scattered old individual trees that provide 
structure, and their snags and large down logs.
In bottomland forests these include:
s	 stands with open canopy structure and a few scattered 
old, large trees
s	 stands with differences in tree vigor, including snags 
and trees that can supply large down branches.
	
Managing OG in the southeast is especially difficult .
because there is so little public land. Even on large public-
land parcels, OG remnants are small, isolated, and often .
surrounded by short-rotation forestry, incompatible .
recreational activities, or military testing and training .
facilities. In other locations, agricultural lands and suburban 
development may border OG. Even with these challenges 
and the threats described above, researchers have devel-
oped creative strategies to enhance OG. They include:
s	 develop a complete inventory of OG forests on public 
and conservation lands, while at the same time search-
ing for the ivory-billed woodpecker
s	 protect OG remnants on public lands by practicing 
long-rotation forestry on bordering lands
s	 help managers recognize gradations of OG so .
they can prioritize restoration efforts. Especially .
important is helping managers recognize undisturbed 
OG understories
s	 test and practice burning prescriptions for long-.
unburned OG stands on public lands to avoid excessive 
tree mortality from inappropriate prescribed fire
s	 restore river hydrology wherever possible, returning 
channeled rivers to their original meanders and timing 
dam releases to mimic historical patterns
s	 increase education and training for public managers .
in the burning of OG longleaf pine stands, the .
practice of ecological forestry, and long-rotation timber 
management 
s	 develop guidelines for land managers that promote .
OG conditions
s	 develop partnerships among agencies with OG that 
encourage information sharing about OG restoration 
and management
s	 inform the public and conservation communities about 
activities that may impact OG resources on military 
lands. These lands, such as Eglin Air Force Base in .
the Florida Panhandle, contain more than half of all 
remnant OG longleaf pine stands 
s	 establish cooperation among states, federal agencies, 
and private organizations to acquire future OG .
properties as timber companies sell off land holdings. 
	
Although OG is located mostly on public lands, there 
is some high quality OG on private forestlands. However, 
changes in the forest products industry and development 
pressures are causing dramatic shifts in land use and owner-
ship patterns. These trends could severely impact forest 
conservation if the federal Farm Bill isn’t changed. .
Researchers identified the following problems with the .
current Farm Bill.
s	 There are no incentive programs helping landowners 
retain older forests (Chapter 9, page 163). 
s	 There is no focus on healthy forests including the use of 
prescribed fire and native groundcover.
s	 There is no transparent, consistent way to prioritize 
recipients of Farm Bill incentives. 
s	 There are no priorities for protection of bottomland .
OG forests.
s	 Farm Bill programs are cumbersome and difficult to 
work with.
	
Among the suggested changes to existing Farm Bill 
programs are the following:
s	 encourage long-rotation management of longleaf .
pine acreage in Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) 
plantings by adding ground-cover restoration and .
long-rotation incentive payments, benefiting both 
regional game and non-game species
s	 prioritize Farm Bill dollars to parts of the landscape .
that provide the greatest benefit, such as buffering 
conservation lands and watershed protection
s	 develop education and outreach efforts to help .
identify and educate private landowners whose lands 
fall within priority conservation areas and help them 
enroll their property  
s	 establish an upland reserve program to provide .
payment to private landowners who have significant 
forested habitat, streamside buffers, and high-quality 
native ecosystems. 
	
Efforts to conserve OG in the Southeast are burdened 
with obstacles, some similar to those in other regions and 
others unique. Researchers have identified short-term .
strategies that require immediate attention and more .
long-term policies that will require public dialogue and 
agreement.
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
C H A P T E R
4

101
	
The Pacific Northwest (PNW) has more OG than any 
other temperate forest region in the world, and it offers an 
opportunity to learn how to maintain large areas of forest 
with high natural values in a landscape dominated by .
development. Compared to other regions, the PNW has a 
long history of OG science, policy, management, and poli-
tics. As early as the 1970s, scientists identified the biological 
importance of PNW OG. Policy debate began in the 1980s 
What do we know about OG in the Pacific Northwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.24 OG Oregon white oak
R. Pabst
Figure 4.23 OG western hemlock forest. In some cases,  
these forests can produce more water than young forests 
because their tall canopies capture and condense water 
from fog. 
Jon Martin
Figure 4.25 Open OG ponderosa pine forest (Eastern  
Oregon Cascade Mountains). Before fire suppression policy, 
the history of frequent surface fire made these forests 
relatively resistant to fire damage due to their tall isolated 
canopies and thick bark. 
Tom Spies
Figure 4.26 OG Douglas-fir with hemlock (Western Oregon 
Cascade Mountains). OG forests can store several times 
more carbon than young forests. 
Tom Spies
C H A P T E R
4
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT OG IN  
THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST?

102
with the threatened northern spotted owl. The debate 
expanded to include additional species and the “values” of 
OG ecosystems. Attempts to manage OG began with the 
Northwest Forest Plan in 1993 (Chapter 7, page 140). .
The social debate over OG raged throughout the 1990s, .
focusing on wild versus managed forests and forests as 
reservoirs of nature versus resources for humans. And 
despite the establishment of millions of acres of OG reserves 
on public lands, debate continues, and efforts to preserve, 
manage, and/or restore OG remain controversial (more 
about this below). Figures 4.23, 4.24, 4.25 and 4.26, are 
some of the different types of OG forest in the PNW.   
	
The general stages of Douglas-fir OG development .
illustrated at the start of this chapter (page 85) serve only as 
an example. Research has confirmed that forests can follow .
numerous pathways, and OG forests differ depending on 
their age, geographic location, and disturbance history. .
Even within the OG stage, disturbance continues to be a 
natural and important part of development. For example, 
fire suppression has resulted in a buildup of fuels in some 
PNW provinces (Figure 4.32), while in others fire .
suppression has had little or no impact on fuels because .
fuel loads are naturally high (more about this in Threats to 
PNW OG). Today’s OG has developed from disturbances .
and climate conditions of the last thousand years. One .
unanswerable question when designing management .
strategies for PNW OG forests is whether or not their 
composition and structure can occur again under modern 
climate and disturbance regimes.  
What’s the Current Condition and Extent?
	
Figure 4.27 indicates the general locations of OG in 
the PNW within the range of the northern spotted owl. It’s 
primarily concentrated west of the Cascade Mountains. 
Across the region (including western Oregon, Washing-
ton, and northern California), the area of older forest on all 
ownerships is estimated to be about 12.2 million acres (4.9 
million hectares) out of a total area of 56.8 million acres .
(approximately 21 percent). Of that 12.2 million acres, an 
estimated 3.5 million acres (1.4 million hectares) (about 6 
percent of the total) falls into the category of largest and 
most complex older forest (trees more than 30 inches in 
diameter with complex canopies). Located on the region’s 
federal land (24 million acres or 9.7 million hectares) 
is most of the medium and large older forest (about 64 
percent) and most of the largest and most complex older 
forest (77 percent). Of the 24 million acres of federal land, 
7.87 million acres (3.2 million hectares) are older forest. Of 
the 7.87 million, 2.72 million acres (1.1 million hectares) 
are stands with trees larger than 30 inches dbh (diameter 
at breast height) and with complex canopies. The remain-
ing old forest in the region is located on nonfederal lands, 
mostly state owned. 
	
Compared to historical conditions, the amount of OG 
declined during the 20th century because of logging and 
wildfire. The decades-long practice of fire suppression also 
has contributed to the loss of some fire-dependent OG 
types (Provinces 9, 10, 4, 6, and 12). For example, .
historically the percentage of OG (more than 200 years old) 
in the Oregon Coast Range (province 7) was estimated to 
range between 25 and 75 percent of the area. The Coast 
Range was a mosaic of open area, young closed-canopy for-
est, and older stages; never a landscape completely covered 
by OG. Today, the amount of OG (forests containing 39.4 
inch diameter trees and large down logs) is estimated to be .
approximately 1 percent of the Coast Range; the remainder 
is in the medium size class. 
What do we know about OG in the Pacific Northwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.27 Both medium and large older forest in the  
PNW are included in this map. The region is divided  
among twelve provinces, each with different ecological 
characteristics. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
	
	 Washington  
	
	 Olympic Peninsula
	
	 Washington  
	
	 Western Lowlands
	
	 Washington 
	
	 Western Cascades
	
	 Washington 
	
	 Eastern Cascades
	
	 Oregon  
	
	 Western Cascades
	
	 Oregon  
	
	 Eastern Cascades
	
	 Oregon 
	
	 Coast Range
	
	 Oregon 
	
	 Willamette Valley
	
	 Oregon  
	
	 Klamath
	
	 California  
	
	 Klamath
	
	 California  
	
	 Coast Range
	
	 California  
	
	 Cascades
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Modified and reproduced from USFS references
C H A P T E R
4

103
Figure 4.30 The red 
tree vole (Arborimis 
longicaudus) is found 
in dense, moist conifer 
forests with a suffi-
cient number of Doug-
las-fir trees. It spends 
its entire life in the tree 
canopy, feeding almost 
exclusively on Douglas-
fir needles. The vole is 
bright orange-red to 
cinnamon on top and 
silvery gray under-
neath, with a tail more than 50 percent of its body length. 
It’s the prey of spotted and other owls.
	
While it may be useful to know the percent range .
of historical OG in a province where conservation of .
native biodiversity is a major management goal, researchers 
concede that it may be impossible to reach those ranges in 
the future, given climate and disturbance regime change. 
An example is the difficulty of predicting the loss of OG 
to wildfire. Within just the last 10 years, the “overall loss” 
of older forest on federal land due to stand-replacement 
natural disturbances such as fire was 0.18 percent annually, 
versus a predicted amount of 0.25 percent. However, in the 
dry provinces (9 and 10), rates of loss of older forest to wild-
fire were much higher than the overall average (more about 
this under “Threats” below). This points to the ecological 
differences between the provinces and the need for an OG 
fire-management strategy (more in strategy section).
Are There Old-growth Adapted Species? 
	
The species described in figures 4.28, 4.29, 4.30 and 
4.31 are adapted to older forests in the PNW and show a 
preference for them. While not confined to OG, they do 
use OG components (large standing live and dead trees). 
In addition, some other species are more abundant in OG 
than in younger forests – for example, woodpeckers are 10 
times more abundant. Some salamanders that live only in 
large decaying logs are much more likely to be found in old 
forests than young forests. So the biodiversity value of OG 
can be traced to both its unique structures and the long 
time period that it has existed.
Figure 4.28 The northern 
spotted owl (Strix occi-
dentalis) shows a pref-
erence for older forest 
habitats even though 
it uses younger natural 
forests and some sec-
ond-growth forests at 
low to mid elevations 
in western Washington 
and Oregon. In young-
er forests, the bird is 
often associated with 
remaining older forest 
patches. 
Figure 4.29 The marbled 
murrelet (Brachyram-
phus marmoratus) 
nests in OG conifer 
forests within 30 miles 
of the pacific coast. It’s 
a secretive, robin-sized 
bird, with sooty brown 
to black plumage. In 
winter, the bird has a 
white belly. 
Figure 4.31 The 
Johnson’s hairstreak 
butterfly (Callophrys 
johnsoni) requires 
mid- to low-elevation 
OG forests similar to 
spotted owl habitat. 
This medium-sized 
butterfly has chestnut 
colored wings with a 
prominent white line  
following the curve of 
the wing about halfway out. 
	
More than 100 species of epiphytes (lichens, mosses) 
are found in OG canopies. Because they disperse, colonize, 
and grow slowly, they may occur in OG simply because 
enough time has elapsed since a major disturbance. The .
Lobaria lichen, an important nitrogen fixer (Chapter 7, page 
142), is abundant in the canopy of older Douglas-fir forests. 
In one well studied older forest in Washington, 1 to 1.5 tons 
of lichens per acre were measured (half were nitrogen fixing 
lichens). This lichen/older forest interaction may be impor-
tant to the centuries-long maintenance of OG. 
What are the Major Threats to OG in the Pacific 
Northwest?
	
Threats differ depending on the OG province and 
include logging, wildfire, and insects and disease. Logging is 
a threat on lands outside the reserves. Wildfire and insects 
and disease are a threat in dry, fire-prone provinces.
The Logging Threat
	
Although logging of OG on federal lands has slowed 
in recent years, about 20 percent of the remaining OG on 
federal lands is open to logging. The Northwest Forest Plan 
allowed for logging in matrix lands, but little OG has been 
harvested over the first 10 years of the Plan. In addition, 
older forests on some state-owned lands are still eligible .
for harvest.
What do we know about OG in the Pacific Northwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Al Levno
Martin Raphael
Jeffrey C. Miller
Eric Forsman
C H A P T E R
4

104
The Wildfire, Insect and Disease Threat
	
OG provinces reflect different disturbance 
regimes. For example, OG ponderosa pine 
(Figure 4.34) on dry sites has a relatively open 
understory that was maintained historically 
by frequent low to moderate intensity fire at 
intervals of less than 20 years. OG in wetter 
forests, such as western hemlock (Figure 4.23), 
has large accumulations of live and dead 
wood in the understory and has experienced 
stand-replacing fire disturbances every 100 to 
400 years. Between these extremes are other 
OG forests that experience “mixed severity” 
fire regimes, where fire can range from low to 
high severity (Figure 4.32, left map). 
	
The greatest threat to OG in dry prov-
inces is fire suppression and the high severity 
wildfires that have resulted from that policy. In 
the 0-35 year frequency, low severity fire areas 
(Figure 4.32, right map), fire suppression has 
changed naturally open understories to far 
denser understories of small diameter conifers, 
making them susceptible to high severity wild-
fire. These fires result in the death of OG pine 
and Douglas-fir trees that probably survived 
the lower intensity fires of the past. Not only 
wildfire but insect and disease outbreaks that 
can kill old trees may be more common in 
these dense stands. 
	
Understanding provincial variation is important for .
developing OG management strategies. While the manage-
ment of existing OG reserves has been relatively passive since 
adoption of the Northwest Forest Plan, researchers recognize 
that active management, including fuel reduction and .
restoration, is needed in fire-dependent provinces to reduce 
OG losses to high-severity fires (Figures 4.33 and 4.34). 
	
Where OG has been lost to wildfire in recent years, 
debate centers on post-wildfire management and salvage 
logging. For example, in the areas of the 2002 Biscuit Fire 
(Figures 4.35 and 4.36) in Provinces 9 and 10, the question is: 
what management activities are appropriate when OG burns 
(more about this below).
How Much OG is Needed to Maintain Biodiversity?
	
As with other OG regions, the answer to this question is 
more social than scientific. While science can inform the .
public-policy debate, it cannot resolve it. Science can help 
define OG, identify processes and stand-level practices to 
protect and produce more OG in the future, and clarify .
tradeoffs and offer alternatives for specific OG provinces. 
However, the “how much” question and other related ones 
must be answered in the social arena, for example: 
What do we know about OG in the Pacific Northwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.32  
How natural  
fire frequency  
regimes (left) 
have changed 
(right) due to 
decades of fire 
suppression.
s	 What types of OG management are socially acceptable?
s	 What long-term policies are appropriate?
s	 What are the economic implications of those policies?
s	 How will they be paid for?
	
While the region is relatively rich in OG, recent .
scientific assessments indicate that current amounts are 
much lower than desired. For example, the future target 
amount of older forest within the range of the northern 
spotted owl on federal land in Oregon and Washington is 
about 7.6 million acres. Currently, the amount is about .
5 million acres. Estimates indicate that it will take more than 
100 years to reach that desired level of old forest. However, 
the fact that most of the remaining OG is in large acreages 
on federal and state lands indicates good potential for .
strategies to conserve and restore OG.
How Does Society View OG in the Pacific Northwest?
	
OG in the PNW goes beyond technical scientific .
descriptions and involves other social issues including .
logging, recreation, the role of humans in nature, and the 
spiritual and aesthetic values of forests. To some, OG has 
become an icon that symbolizes wild, pristine, undisturbed 
nature, while to others it represents productive forests and 
timber harvesting. From the standpoint of timber value, one 
Modified and reproduced from USFS references
C H A P T E R
4

105
acre of OG could be worth $25,000, and a 50-acre clear 
cut worth $1.2 million (assuming 50,000 bdft/acre and 
$500/mbft). For those who see OG as an icon, it represents 
places that are unaltered by humans, where nature lives in 
“balance.” However, this concept of balance is not really 
consistent with what research has learned about the role of 
disturbance in OG forests, especially in fire-dependent OG 
(more detail in fire management below).
	
Public opinion surveys in the PNW indicate a high .
recognition of the term old-growth (even if the public 
doesn’t exactly know what it is) and a high value placed on 
its conservation. One study found that the public preferred 
that one-third of the landscape be protected to conserve 
OG forests. That would be a challenging goal for forest 
managers.
	
Years of debate have produced many OG interest 
groups in the PNW, each with different expectations and 
ideas. The result has been OG management paralysis, and 
the Northwest Forest Plan is a perfect example. It allows for 
a balanced approach, including the harvest of OG outside 
of reserves, but after more than 10 years of executing the 
plan, little OG has been cut. Instead, OG has been almost 
completely protected. The result has been more controversy, 
with some claiming the Plan didn’t provide what was .
originally promised.
	
In recent years, “new sources” of knowledge have 
added to the OG debate. No longer are government land-
management agencies and academic/research institutions 
viewed as the sole sources of information and technical 
expertise about OG forests. Today, non-governmental 
scientists with access to satellite imagery and technical 
information resources compete in the marketplace of public 
opinion. The Internet has changed the way the public gets 
its information and whose science they believe. Technology 
and knowledge aren’t confined to established institutions.  
What do we know about OG in the Pacific Northwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.34  After thinning, fire-dependent OG ponderosa pine 
forests will require frequent low-severity prescribed fire. 
Figure 4.33  In fire-dependent forests in the eastern Cascade 
Mountains (Provinces 4 and 6), decades of fire suppression 
have created high-severity wildfire conditions. Without 
K. Norman Johnson
K. Norman Johnson
active management, including thinning (Figure 4.34) and 
prescribed fire, OG Ponderosa pine forests are subject to 
lethal fire. 
C H A P T E R
4

106
How can knowledge of oG be used in  
management strategies on public and  
private forestlands?
	
Despite its millions of OG acres, the region is faced with 
the fact that OG must be managed, because just like other 
stages of forest development, it is part of a dynamic system. 
Regardless of the notion that it’s “in balance,” OG is .
constantly in the process of changing to another stage. .
Today’s OG may become the new young forest of the .
future, while mature forests today become future OG. 
Therefore, the region’s OG management comes .
down to four major issues (described below):
s	 fire management
s	 developing OG characteristics in forest plantations
s	 landscape-scale planning and OG
s	 OG protection policies.
Fire Management
	
Designating OG reserves provides no protection against 
loss from high-severity fire and/or the gradual loss of 
ecological complexity from the suppression of patchy fires, 
which were important in the development of fire-dependent 
OG. In Provinces 9 and 10 for example, fires were more .
frequent and usually low to mixed severity before fire .
suppression policy changed them. Today, reducing the 
buildup of understory density and restoring frequent surface 
fires are crucial or this OG will be lost in the coming decades 
to more insect outbreaks, disease, and high-severity fires. A 
recent example is the 2002 Biscuit fire that burned nearly 
500,000 acres (Figure 4.35 and 4.36). 
	
Farther north in western Oregon and Washington 
(Provinces 3 and 5), the fire regime is a combination of 
surface and crown fires. OG in these areas is also at risk to 
wildfire, although fires were less frequent than in Province 
9. Researchers believe that while the last century of fire 
suppression has had less impact on OG in Provinces 3 and 
5, if suppression continues for another half century or more, 
changes will also occur in these OG forests, so active .
management is needed there too.
	
In the coastal OG of Oregon and Washington where 
the climate is wetter (Provinces 1, 2 and 7), fires were .
infrequent, occurring at 100- to 400-year intervals, but 
often more intense. Because these forests are more .
productive, a century of fire suppression has not changed 
fuel levels as much. However, the urban development now 
located close to these forests makes it impossible to allow 
fire back into these forests. Still, fire management is needed 
in the urban-wildland interface of these provinces.
	
The most urgent need for an OG fire-management 
strategy is in fire-dependent provinces 4 and 6. The most .
logical strategy recommended by researchers is active .
management, including mechanical thinning treatments .
and prescribed fire.
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.36 This patchy pattern of mortality after the 2002 
Biscuit Fire is typical of province 9. Satellite imagery 
showed approximately 45 percent of the fire area was 
unburned or had low vegetation mortality, 25 percent 
moderate and 30 percent severe mortality immediately 
after the fire. 
Tom Spies
Figure 4.35 The Biscuit Fire (2002) was a stand-
replacing wildfire that clearly demonstrated 
the fire risk in OG and focused attention 
on the need for an OG fire-management 
strategy.
2002 Biscuit Fire
OREGON
CALIFORNIA
Modified and reproduced from USFS references
C H A P T E R
4

107
How to Develop OG Characteristics in  
Forest Plantations
	
Plantation forests, originally established on public lands 
for timber production, are now expected to develop into 
future OG. This goal is complicated by the mix of planted 
species and the densities of these stands. However, what’s 
been learned about OG forest development may be useful 
in managing plantations. Research supports the idea that 
plantation forests can be put on a pathway toward complex 
OG ecosystems. That restoration includes techniques like 
variable-density thinning (Chapter 1, pages 47-48) and .
similar practices designed to create structural complexity. 
But this kind of restoration will require trained workers, 
adaptive management (Chapter 8), and financial resources. 
Plantation restoration won’t happen if it’s too costly .
or impractical.
	
With both plantations and OG forests dependent on 
fire and both requiring silvicultural techniques that either 
substitute for fire or include prescribed fire, managers must 
face the fact that this type of management may not .
generate economically viable products. A new way of 
valuing non-commodity goods and services will be needed 
along with new ways of investing in forests. Both short- and 
long-term funding will be needed. Among the new ways 
of generating income may be fees from recreation, carbon 
sequestration markets (evidence shows that OG forests store 
carbon more efficiently than was once thought), and use of 
stewardship contracts. All may be part of getting restoration 
work done in plantations and older forests.
Landscape-scale Planning and OG
	
Sustainable OG forests will require regional planning 
over long periods of time. With the help of landscape-scale 
planning (Chapter 7), managers can see what it will take to 
maintain the diverse forest conditions needed for all habitats 
and ecological functions. Landscape planning models like 
the Oregon CLAMS model (Chapter 7, page 140), predict 
that under today’s federal policies, mature forests (tomor-
row’s future OG), will decline over the long-term. That 
decline, when viewed across a landscape of national forests 
and private timberlands, will leave two predominant age 
classes – old forests and young plantations. The old forests 
will be located primarily on federal lands with young planta-
tions on private and federal lands. Intermediate age classes 
will be very scarce. 
	
This scenario raises such issues as how much landscape 
diversity nature will create through fire and other distur-
bances and how much landscape diversity will be created by 
the use of silvicultural techniques where firefighting reduces 
the number of wildfires. The answer to questions about 
how to maintain future diversity in all forest development 
stages across the region will come from a combination of 
active management and natural disturbance. Just as .
historical fire regimes differed among OG provinces, so .
will decisions about the urgency to apply silvicultural .
management techniques differ among provinces. 
OG Protection Policies 
	
Current federal policies are focused on protecting the 
region’s OG, but even protected OG forests will change. 
Natural disturbances, fire suppression, invasive species, .
insect and disease outbreaks, forest succession, and .
changing climate will all contribute to that change. .
Managers have to decide whether or not these changes 
are compatible with OG goals. Some of them may not be 
desirable, and managers may need to take action. Those 
actions will depend on the variability among provinces and 
the role of fire in creating complex ecosystems at stand and 
landscape levels.
	
All of this raises the question of whether or not timber 
harvesting is appropriate in OG after stand-replacement 
disturbances. Research indicates that when OG is subject to 
high-severity fire, 100 to 200 years may elapse before the 
area returns to old forest conditions. During that time, the 
ecological influence of OG does not end with the death of 
trees. OG legacies, including dead trees, surviving live trees, 
and associated organisms carry over into the new forest and 
can persist for many decades as the young forest develops. 
Researchers find significant amounts of dead wood in .
post-fire stands 100 years after fire. Of course, the amount 
and duration of this legacy wood varies with species, 
climate, and disturbance regimes, but what’s important is 
the recognition that developmental stages are connected 
through the surviving and decomposing components of 
previous stages. 
	
The relative abundance of OG in the PNW and the .
fact that it doesn’t exist anywhere else in the world’s 
temperate forests were pointed out in the opening of this 
section. However, as NCSSF-sponsored researchers have 
described, that abundance carries with it the need to .
maintain those large areas of forest with high natural .
values in a landscape dominated by development. That 
won’t be easy.
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
C H A P T E R
4

108
	
The Southwest has three major forest types: mixed .
conifer forests, ponderosa pine, and pinyon-juniper .
woodlands (Chapter 1, page 49-50). The OG stage of .
each forest is pictured (Figures 4.37, 
4.38, 4.39 and 4.40), but this section 
will focus on the most widespread 
type, ponderosa pine.
	
While it’s true that ponderosa 
forests have old trees, NCSSF-spon-
sored researchers in the Southwest 
point out that it’s not just old trees 
that make an OG ponderosa pine 
forest. OG definitions from other 
regions are really not relevant to the 
Southwest. That’s because under 
natural conditions (without overgraz-
ing, logging, and fire suppression), 
frequent low-intensity fires create an 
OG landscape that is patchy, almost 
park-like, with a variety of openings 
and groups of trees that vary in size 
from tenths of an acre to several 
acres (Figure 4.38). These forests 
have a rich understory, depending 
on whether it is near clumps of big 
trees, in small openings between 
clumps, or in large meadows. In 
many locations, ponderosa grows 
with Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii), 
the second most abundant woody 
shrub in the ecosystem (Figure 4.40).
	
So while natural frequent-fire 
ponderosa pine never takes on the 
appearance common to OG in the 
PNW, after decades of fire suppres-
sion some older ponderosa pine .
forests do have an unnatural .
appearance, similar to the PNW 
(Figure 4.33).     
	
The natural OG ponderosa pine 
forest is a plant community adapted 
to low-intensity frequent fire. .
Ponderosa pines, along with other 
western long-needled pines, not only 
tolerate this disturbance regime, they 
rely on it for long-term survival. .
The following adaptations make 
ponderosa pine perfectly suited:
s	 thick, heat-protected buds
s	 needle bundles that open into a loose arrangement, 
unfavorable to combustion
s	 foliage with high moisture content 
s	 tree stems resistant to scorching 
s	 deep roots.
What do we know about OG in the Southwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.37 This OG mixed-conifer high-elevation forest includes ponderosa pine, 
Douglas-fir, white fir, limber pine and blue spruce. As a result of fire suppression, 
ponderosa, once co-dominant in many of these stands, has been replaced by the 
other species.
Figure 4.38 Historically, ponderosa pine OG forests were a mixed landscape of trees, 
some hundreds of years old, with grassy openings and maintained by frequent 
low-intensity fire. In some locations, depending on the soils, there were clumps of 
old fire-resistant trees with highly diverse understories. In other locations, trees had 
higher densities, but nowhere near the density of today’s ponderosa pine forests 
(Figure 4.41). 
Dave Egan, Northern Arizona University
Dave Egan, Northern Arizona University
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT OG IN  
THE SOUTHWEST?
C H A P T E R
4

109
	
Along with climate and fire, 
other factors shape the structure 
and function of ponderosa pine eco-
systems: variable soils, bark beetles, 
woodpeckers, mycorrhizal root fungi 
(Chapter 6, page 133), humans, 
mistletoe, cankers, and rust. They all 
interact to produce what was his-
torically a heterogeneous landscape 
of grassy openings and old trees 
(Figure 4.38). Today, remaining OG 
trees are important because they 
have survived hundreds of years of .
environmental fluctuation, and their 
presence contributes to genetic 
diversity.
	
Historical fire suppression has 
been detrimental to these forests, 
eventually destroying the OG. But 
the reintroduction of fire into these 
degraded OG forests, along with .
appropriate thinning, can restore 
these ecosystems (more about this 
below). 
	
The cumulative effects of live-
stock grazing, tree harvesting, fire 
suppression, and climate change 
have disrupted and reduced the 
health and resiliency of these .
forests. The changes include:
s	 a shift in tree density to shade-
tolerant species and younger, 
smaller ponderosa trees 
s	 replacement of grassy and 
herbaceous understories with 
woody and/or invasive species
s	 decrease in wildlife habitat 
along with decreased plant and 
animal diversity
s	 increased runoff, erosion, and 
sedimentation.
	
Without landscape-scale res-
toration efforts, researchers agree 
there will be more increasingly 
severe, stand-replacing fires, along 
with increased non-native invasive 
plants, increased tree loss to insects 
and pathogens, and decreased .
wildlife habitat.
What do we know about OG in the Southwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.39 The fire history of pinyon-juniper forests is not well known, but evidence 
suggests that the fire regime consisted of infrequent, high-severity fires.
Figure 4.40 A group of older Gambel oak (right) in a mixed stand with ponderosa pine 
after a prescribed fire.
Dave Egan, Northern Arizona University
Dave Egan, Northern Arizona University
C H A P T E R
4

110
What do we know about OG in the Southwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.42 The pygmy 
nuthatch (Sitta pyg-
maea), a cavity nester, 
relies on OG structures 
such as large trees. 
Figure 4.43 The Abert’s 
squirrel (Sciurus aberti) 
needs an entire patch 
of OG trees to move 
easily and find food. 
Photo: J.G. Hall, Mammal Images 
Library (American Society of 
Mammologists).
Figure 4.44 The northern 
goshawk (Accipiter 
gentiles) requires 
OG conditions in a 
landscape matrix that 
contains a wide variety 
of habitats.
Tom Munson
Rick Kline/CLO
C H A P T E R
4
What’s the Current Condition and Extent?
	
Ponderosa pine forests stretch across parts of southern 
Colorado and Utah, northern Arizona and New Mexico, 
southeastern Nevada, and western Texas. However, the .
best data available on ownership come from New Mexico 
and Arizona. 
	
In New Mexico, the USDA Forest Service oversees 1.8 
million acres or 64 percent of the ponderosa pine forest. 
Other public agencies manage 172,000 acres, and fam-
ily forest owners (including Native American tribes) own 
798,000 acres. The majority of this acreage (2.4 million 
acres) is in non-reserved status (available for management 
for wood production).
	
In Arizona there are approximately 3 million acres of 
ponderosa pine. The USDA Forest Service oversees .
approximately 2 million acres. Other public agencies .
manage 122,000 acres, and family forest owners (including 
Native American tribes) own 851,000 acres. In Arizona, .
6 percent of the total is protected from harvesting for .
commercial wood production.
	
How much is OG? In southern Colorado and New 
Mexico, less than 5 percent of ponderosa pine stands are 
classified as OG. Estimates in the inter-mountain Southwest 
indicate OG ponderosa pine has declined 85 to 90 percent 
during the last century. The amount of OG ponderosa today 
is unknown, partly because there’s no agreement about the 
definition of OG in the southwest. But however it is defined, 
OG is a very small percentage of the existing ponderosa pine 
ecosystem in the Southwest. 
Figure 4.41 After decades of fire 
suppression, these forests have 
undergone major changes in 
structure, composition, fire  
frequency, fire intensity and  
severity, and landscape pattern. 
As a result, unnatural severe 
fire regimes threaten to destroy, 
rather than renew, the pine  
ecosystem (more details below).
George Sheppard, NAU Cline Library, Spepial Collections and Archives

111
Are there Old-growth Adapted Species?  
	
Researchers have identified 135 vertebrates that rely on 
frequent-fire OG ponderosa pine forests. Some species are 
year-round residents, others use these forests for breeding, 
wintering or migration (Figures 4.42, 4.43 and 4.44). 
	
Some species that rely on OG also play a reverse role, 
providing a service to other species. For example, hairy 
woodpecker (Picoides villosus) populations expand after fire, 
right along with their food source – bark beetles. Since half 
of the species that nest in tree cavities in ponderosa pine 
forests cannot excavate their own cavities, hairy wood-.
peckers are important in supporting them. Without surface 
fires severe enough to kill or partially kill some trees, hairy 
woodpecker populations may be low, reducing needed 
habitat for other species and resulting in changes to the 
forest ecosystem. 
	
OG ponderosa pine also helps to cycle soil nutrients. 
Studies have shown that in over-stocked, fire-suppressed 
ponderosa pine forests, nitrogen is mostly in above-ground 
tissue, relatively unavailable to soil microbes and other 
plants. In contrast, most of the nitrogen in more open 
areas was found in the top 6 inches of soil. Open grassy 
areas with clumps of large, old trees have more active soil 
communities, supporting both understory species and the 
large trees. Along with soil nutrients, soil water is important 
in ecosystem production. Open OG stands intercept less 
precipitation compared to dense, fire suppressed stands, 
allowing more moisture to reach the soil and providing for 
more diverse plants and animals. 
	
As with OG in other regions, while some mature trees 
may have diameters and heights similar to OG trees, they do 
not have the structures that many wildlife species require, 
including large gnarly branches, nesting sites created by 
dwarf mistletoe (witches brooms), exposed dead wood 
ready-made for cavity nest building, and loose bark for bat 
roosts. Where OG trees grow in groups, their closed canopy 
can provide escape routes for squirrels and other canopy-
dwelling animals. 
What are the Major Threats to OG in the Southwest?
	
Threats to the preservation and restoration of OG .
ponderosa pine include:
s	 fire suppression that continues to alter the size and 
severity of fires, resulting in undesirable consequences 
for both existing and future OG
s	 fire suppression also allows shade-tolerant species to 
encroach on ponderosa pine ecosystems, causing the 
death of old trees
s	 continuing outbreaks of western pine beetle and .
dwarf mistletoe 
s	 non-native invasive plants
s	 both legal challenges and the required use of diameter 
caps (upper size limits of trees allowed to be cut) by 
environmental groups. While attempting to protect .
OG from logging, these groups have hindered .
restoration efforts to thin trees in and around OG. The 
result is more inaction, more overstocked pine forests 
and eventually more catastrophic fires resulting in the 
loss of OG.  
	
There are also social values that influence the OG issue. 
They include:
s	 urban development in forested ecosystems that .
increases the risk of fire
s	 conflict between scenic and recreational values and 
timber management activities
s	 public knowledge that fire has a role in frequent-fire 
forests but the continuing discomfort about allowing 
wildfires to burn 
s	 opposition to logging OG, but no consistent public .
opposition to removing some larger trees during .
thinning operations 
s	 support for mechanical thinning to reduce forest fuels 
and restore forest structure.
How Much OG is Needed to Maintain Biodiversity?
	
Researchers see OG restoration in the Southwest not as 
a singular goal, but as part of a larger effort to reduce the 
hazard of severe wildfire, protect the urban interface, foster 
biodiversity, and provide recreational and watershed values 
from the entire ponderosa pine forest ecosystem (details 
below). Rather than focusing exclusively on OG, their goal 
is to restore all stages of forest development. However, they 
do think that more OG is needed than currently exists, and 
they use pre-European settlement estimates as a point of 
reference. For example, older forest probably ranged from 
17 to 25 percent at pre-settlement, with the remainder be-
ing grassy openings and younger forests. Research results 
clearly indicate that OG constituted a significant proportion 
of the Southwest’s forests. For that reason, researchers call 
for as much OG as possible. They emphasize that it is rela-
tively easy to enhance OG qualities by protecting old trees 
and thinning and burning forest stands to accelerate the 
development of OG characteristics. These restorative .
actions are consistent with the larger effort aimed at the .
What do we know about OG in the Southwest?
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
C H A P T E R
4

112
How can knowledge of oG be used in  
management strategies on public and  
private forestlands?
	
While developing OG strategies, researchers point to 
Native Americans, who lived in ponderosa ecosystems for 
centuries prior to European arrival and regularly used fire to 
manage the forest. Whether ignited by Native Americans 
or lightning, those frequent low-intensity fires occurred at 
intervals ranging from 2 to 35 years. Stand-replacing fires 
were rare or non-existent, but they did occur in dry forests 
in other parts of the West. The result of frequent, low-.
intensity fires was an open stand structure that limited the 
size and severity of insect outbreaks and kept dwarf .
mistletoe in check. Wildfire research studies indicate a .
dramatic decrease in low-intensity fires by the late 1800s 
due to exploitation of OG and overgrazing.
	
Given this historical setting, OG restoration strategies 
call for thinning to recover ecosystem structure, followed by 
low-intensity fire to return the ecosystem to more natural 
rates of decomposition, nutrient cycling and productivity, 
while reestablishing plant and animal communities. But OG 
restoration depends primarily on two things:
1	 the ability to return fire to the ponderosa pine .
ecosystem after thinning, so its structure and function 
can be restored
2	 the ecosystem’s ability to produce OG from .
existing trees, once it is thinned and exposed to .
low-intensity fires.
	
There are obstacles to this strategy. First, even though 
it’s possible to use small-diameter trees from forest thinning 
for wood products and bioenergy, profit from these uses 
is marginal. Currently, there are no manufacturing facilities 
and no industry plans to rebuild mills, because the industry 
has no long-term confidence in USDA Forest Service policy. 
Second, the manpower and financial resources needed to 
do restoration work at an acceptable pace and scale aren’t 
available. Third, in some locations successful restoration .
may require reseeding or transplanting missing plant .
species, raking around old trees before burning (Figure 
4.45), controlling non-native invasive plants, and regulating 
grazing. Fourth, monitoring is needed to track the progress 
and modify restoration plans as needed. And finally, there 
are key gaps in scientific knowledge. For example:
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
C H A P T E R
4
entire system. The problem however, lies with the current 
limited ability to handle all the acres in need of treatment 
and the time it takes for OG structure and function .
to develop. 
How Does Society View OG in the Southwest?
	
A brief review of southwestern forest history from the 
1960s to present is useful in answering this question. .
During the past 50 years the public has shown increasing 
environmental concern and has had access to forest and 
wilderness areas. As a result, OG forests are regarded as .
representing an ideal of untouched nature, while harvested 
forests are seen as violated or defiled. Early in the period, 
USFS management moved toward multiple-use and .
sustained yield, but it still favored cutting OG and .
replacing it with second-growth forests. National legislation 
(the Wilderness Act, the National Environmental Policy Act, 
and the Endangered Species Act) along with environmental 
organizations such as the Sierra Club and the Wilderness 
Society brought an end to OG conversion. More recent 
policies have emphasized restoring natural forests and fire 
regimes. In the past 20 years timber processing has declined 
by over 60 percent, resulting in a waning forest industry. .
At the same time, catastrophic fires have raised concern 
about public safety, property and ecology. New federal 
initiatives and legislation (the National Fire Plan, the Healthy 
Forest Initiative, and the Healthy Forest Restoration Act) all 
support the restoration of frequent-fire forests along with 
forest research to achieve that goal.  
	
With that historical backdrop, surveys indicate the .
following public views about ponderosa pine forests. 
s	 Society prefers open, park-like forests similar to OG 
ponderosa pine rather than dense pole and/or .
sapling-sized trees. Large, mature trees are seen as .
an important part of scenic beauty. 
s	 Public policy discussions do not focus on OG, but on 
wildlife, aesthetics, and recreation. With respect to .
wildlife, crown fire is seen as the major threat rather 
than logging. 
s	 Attempts to use prescribed fire in restoration activities 
have resulted in public concern about smoke. 
	
Researchers concede that in order to achieve the goal 
of healthy OG in frequent-fire forests, the public must be 
educated about these ecosystems and persuaded that active 
management, rather than preservation, is the best course of 
action for the future.

s	 How well will understory vegetation and animal habitat 
recover after thinning and/or thinning and prescribed 
fire, and will it be close to OG conditions?
s	 Will restoration techniques, tested and used in northern 
Arizona ponderosa pine areas, be successful in other 
areas of the Southwest? 
s	 How different are dry mixed conifer forests from .
ponderosa pine forests, and what techniques can be 
used to restore them?
	
In the meantime, managers have to make site-.
specific decisions about OG restoration objectives, treatment 
prescriptions, and implementation strategies in frequent-fire 
forests. Here are some general principles recommended .
by researchers. 
s	 Retain all trees that pre-date .
European settlement because 
they tend to be fire resistant, 
often provide wildlife habitat, .
and have aesthetic benefits.
s	 Retain some post-settlement 
trees to replace those that existed 
before European settlement but 
have died or been removed. Note 
that ponderosa pine frequently 
grows in small clumps. The size, 
density, number, and location of 
clumps affect wildlife habitat and 
the future risk of crown fire.
s Thin and remove excess trees, .
recognizing that some grassy .
openings were historically in 
place for very long periods of 
time. Re-creating these openings, 
lost to encroaching pines during 
fire suppression, provides habitat 
for many wildlife species and can reduce the risk of .
crown fires.
s	 Rake heavy fuels from the bases of old trees if necessary 
to prepare them for safe prescribed fire.
s	 Burn to mimic the natural disturbance regime. .
Fire is crucial in cycling nutrients and maintaining .
forest structure. Without fire, thinned forests become 
dense again. 
s	 Reestablish healthy understories with native rather than 
exotic species. Besides offering wildlife food and cover 
they provide the fuel needed for frequent low-intensity 
fires that maintain forest structure.
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Figure 4.45  Hand-raking around OG prior to prescribed  
burning prevents heat damage from the long-term  
accumulation of needles.
Dave Egan, Northern Arizona University
113
How can knowledge of OG be used in management strategies on public and private forestlands?
C H A P T E R
4

114
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY
Summary
C H A P T E R
4
SUMMARY
	
From this brief overview its clear that the OG resources 
of each major forest region are poles apart as are the strate-
gies to restore and manage those resources. For example:
s	 In the Northeast, Southeast, and Lake States there are 
relatively small amounts of OG.
s	 The Northeast faces the impending loss of its OG. 
s	 Little attention is given to OG in the Northeast, .
Southeast, and Lake States. 
s	 There’s a continuing loss of OG in the frequent-fire 
forests of the West.
	
Our understanding of OG forests changed during the 
late 20th century. It’s become more than just old trees and 
is now recognized as a complex forest ecosystem. We must 
learn from existing OG and manage for future OG. The .
bottom line is that: 
s	 Any effort to retain biodiversity depends on having 
more old forest.
s	 Threats to OG go beyond logging and include develop-
ment, unnatural fire regimes, and non-native invasives.
s	 If we want more old forest we need more than .
preservation strategies; we need restoration and .
management tools.
s	 Maintaining and growing more OG is not just a science 
issue, it’s a social issue.
	
The major forest regions can learn from one another. 
While the PNW was the first region faced with the OG issue, 
other regions have learned from that experience. The PNW 
has a richness and abundance of OG unique in the world’s 
temperate forests. How it is maintained and managed in the 
PNW may have application to other regions. For example, 
PNW OG Douglas-fir forests have many similarities to OG 
white pine forests in the eastern United States. What’s still 
not clear is whether there are similarities to boreal forests or 
the deciduous forests of the eastern United States. However, 
it is true that the strategy of increasing structural complexity 
as forests mature is applicable to all forests.
	
Preserving what OG remains, restoring OG in mature 
stands, and developing techniques that enable the growth 
of more OG in the future are the major messages of this 
chapter. No matter what the region, OG forests are part of 
the forest developmental process and serve a vital role in 
forest biodiversity.
	
One final word concerning OG: although it has been 
mentioned only briefly, climate change is another threat to 
OG in all regions. Scientific opinion holds that as the climate 
grows warmer over the next century, the climatic .
environment for most existing tree species will shift .
northward. It’s assumed that most forest vertebrates will 
probably be able to keep up as their habitats shift .
northward. However, species that depend on OG, such .
as some lichens, mosses, fungi and invertebrates that 
disperse slowly may be at risk. One strategy for biodiversity 
conservation in the face of climate change may be a system 
of OG stepping stones and corridors (Chapter 3, page 83), 
permitting slow moving species to keep up. This is just .
another reason for each region to locate all existing OG .
and plan for the development of future OG in strategic .
locations.
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 167.

Why is this subject important?
selecting indicators for biodiversity
WHY IS THIS SUBJECT IMPORTANT?
 
Forest practitioners and managers who want to 
maintain certain components of biodiversity in the context 
of sustainable forestry face some challenging questions:
s 
How to decide what components of forest 
biodiversity to maintain?
s 
How will we know if we’re successfully sustaining 
forest conditions and desired values that support 
those components?
s 
How will we recognize success in sustaining the 
desired components of forest biodiversity, given 
thousands of plants and animals, the functions they 
perform, and the ecological processes they support?  
 
A process of selecting indicators and then monitoring 
them is essential for answering such questions. Simply 
stated, indicators are a relatively few measurements 
of the forest system that correlate with as many other 
unmeasured desired elements as possible. Monitoring 
consists of repeatedly measuring change in indicators over 
time. So the indicators used in a monitoring program are 
selected to provide information about the status of the 
larger and more complicated forest. Using indicators is 
the only practical way to know if we are sustaining what 
we are trying to sustain. And that’s important, because 
it’s not physically or biologically possible to sustain every 
component of forest biodiversity on every acre all the 
time. Nor is it appropriate to try to sustain all components 
of every forest irrespective of their management policy or 
purpose. Who owns a forest (public versus private) and 
the purpose of the forest (reserve versus managed) are 
critical backdrops for sustaining biodiversity components 
that will enable us to meet overall management goals.
 
In 1995, the Montreal Working Group, which 
represented 12 countries including the United States, 
developed the Montreal Process. This process encouraged 
assessment at country or regional levels to assist govern-
ments in evaluating their forest policy goals. The working 
group described seven criteria or goals for conservation 
and sustainable management of temperate and boreal 
forests, starting with conservation of biological diversity. 
The members agreed to a framework of 67 inventory 
indicators so countries could share information. Of those 
67, the group identified nine that could be used to 
measure biodiversity. 
 
The Montreal Working Group saw the importance 
of indicators, and while The Process was useful at large 
scales (country or regional levels), it was never meant 
to fit the individual forest or watershed. Meaningful 
indicators at those scales should be developed locally, 
based on relevant state and federal forest and environ-
mental policies and landowner intent.
 
Since then, worldwide efforts by forestry organiza-
tions to use the Montreal Process indicators to evaluate 
their forestry practices have created some confusion 
among forest managers and stakeholders (individuals and 
organizations that have an interest in the forest).  
For example: 
s Who decides what indicators to use? 
s Will stakeholders or individual landowners be 
confident that the best indicators have been chosen? 
s Who’s responsible for the monitoring necessary to 
make indicators meaningful? 
 
Science by itself cannot answer these questions, 
because there are complex and significant trade-offs in 
efforts to sustain forests for various values and uses that 
go beyond science and involve group decisions. The goal 
of the NCSSF-sponsored research projects that form the 
background for this chapter was to provide information 
and tools for those who are seeking answers, including 
a tested framework that engages the public (or in the 
case of family, community, tribal, or industry owned 
forestlands) appropriate stakeholders, in a group process 
to reach agreement on indicators relevant to forest goals, 
that can be applied at a variety of spatial scales, from a 
forest site to a landscape.
115
C H A P T E R
5
INDICATOR SELECTION 
 
Indicators are like your car’s instrument panel, which 
lets you assess the current status of major operating systems 
with a glance. Repeated monitoring detects changes and 
indicates system trends. Warning lights indicate a serious 
change that requires prompt attention (next page). 
 
Forest biodiversity indicators perform similar functions. 
They should: 
s provide a current status report
s describe trends
s indicate the origin of any problems that exist. 
 
Forests are complicated systems, far more complicated 
than an automobile. There will always be a lot we don’t 
know about them. So it’s understandable that we’re always 
in the process of designing or refining an instrument panel 
for our forest cruiser. Because forests in different places 
and under different ownerships are managed for different 
purposes, we will need a different instrument panel for each 
kind of forest. There may be one for measuring biodiversity 
conditions and trends in forest reserves (managed for a 
suite of values and uses most likely to be sustained only 
in reserves), another for plantation forests (managed for 
a suite of values and uses that is led by growing trees for 
wood products), and still another for multi-purpose and 
urban forests that typically are managed for a broader and 
more complex suite of values and uses than either reserves 
or wood production forests. 

selecting indicators for biodiversity
s An implemented biodiversity plan was viewed as the 
most significant indicator of program success.
 
While the survey showed that land managers are using 
biological indicators, NCSSF project scientists sensed some 
confusion because the subject of indicators is relatively new 
territory for many practitioners and forest managers. That 
confusion seems to lie in the selection and application of 
indicators. Many of them just aren’t useful for assessing 
biodiversity for the following reasons:
s An appropriate indicator at a large spatial scale 
(state or region) may not be appropriate at the forest 
management unit or stand level.
s Indicators that work for one forest type, ownership  
or management purpose may not be appropriate  
for another. 
s Indicators are sometimes selected without considering 
the biodiversity component they are intended to 
indicate (more about biodiversity components below).
s Benchmarks or target levels for indicators are almost 
always lacking. Once the indicator is measured, it’s not 
clear what action, if any, should be taken. 
s Indicators can conflict with each other and that’s 
why there’s a need for landscape level indicators. For 
example, if you have an indicator for early-succession 
habitats and one for late-succession forest, they could 
conflict on the stand level, but across a landscape  
they wouldn’t. 
Indicator Selection
Indicator selection is about building a biodiversity  
instrument panel that indicates biodiversity trends and 
pressure points. It requires the involvement of forest  
managers, scientists and stakeholders appropriate to the 
forest ownership or purpose.   
116
C H A P T E R
5
How Forest Managers Are  
Currently Using Indicators
 
Interest in indicators is growing, 
encouraged by:
s principles, criteria, and indicators 
described by the 1995 Montreal 
Process
s forest certification standards, 
including those of the 
Sustainable Forestry Initiative 
(SFI) and the Forest Stewardship 
Council (FSC)
s social concerns about  
conservation, preservation, and 
forest restoration
s interest in maintaining and 
re-establishing components of 
biodiversity placed at risk by 
historic land uses.
 
One NCSSF project surveyed 
more than 1,500 forest landowners 
and managers nationwide about 
their biodiversity practices, asking what indicators they used 
for biodiversity conservation. All levels of forest ownership 
were sampled, from small private woodlands to large 
industrial and public forests. Survey results indicated that:
s nearly 60% of respondents felt their forest biodiversity 
programs were being implemented
s nearly 66% believed their forest management is 
successful in producing desired forest conditions, uses, 
and values.
 
Here’s what survey respondents said about  
biodiversity indicators:
s Most of them don’t use Montreal Process indicators 
directly, but many Montreal indicators are incorporated 
with different names. 
s At the stand level, timber inventory, tree species 
composition, age-class distribution, and stand structure 
were most often considered important indicators for 
successful biological diversity programs.
s At the landscape level, hydrology and stream 
protection were considered the most important 
indicators of forest biodiversity.
s It was considered important to protect important 
habitats, in compliance with federal and state laws or 
regulations. 
s Interestingly, no indicators of fragmentation (Chapter 
3) were being used. Respondents apparently either 
don’t consider fragmentation an important indicator of 
biological diversity or don’t know how fragmentation 
relates to the components of biodiversity they are trying 
to sustain. Fragmentation is one of the nine Montreal 
Process indicators for use at regional or national scale.

Step 1: Identify and Prioritize  
Biodiversity Components
 
The first step is to identify, define, and organize the 
important biodiversity components for a particular site, 
forest, or landscape. Because biodiversity is such a mind-
boggling concept – it’s literally all the species and processes 
that comprise a forest ecosystem, from the biggest and 
showiest to the microscopic and obscure – the first task is to 
break down this complexity into more understandable and 
meaningful components. Then indicators can be selected and 
linked to these components. 
 
But what are biodiversity components?  
The flipchart in the illustration (below) shows some examples 
and their meanings. Biodiversity components vary with forests 
and stakeholders, so there’s no correct or universal set. 
 
According to researchers’ experience, Step 1 may 
require a facilitator. There’s potential for disagreement in the 
group because this step identifies “what values are going 
to be sustained” in a particular site, forest, or landscape. 
Group participants come to the realization that biodiversity 
components that aren’t included at the end of Step 1 may 
not be sustained because they may be incompatible with the 
designated purposes of 
the forest in question.  
selecting indicators for biodiversity
Indicator Selection
In Step 1, the group 
should try to keep 
the number of  
biodiversity compo-
nents to a minimum. 
The task is to rank 
each component for 
importance (e.g. high, 
medium, low) and 
select the top-scoring 
5-10 components.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
Includes tree size, snags, 
large down logs
Old forest characteristics
Young forest characteristics
Includes water quality, 
hydrology, species & flood 
control
Productivity, soils, nutrient  
& hydrologic cycles
Altered forest patterns 
across the landscape
Protected by law and  
those imperiled
BIODIVERSITY COMPONENT
Forest structure
Mature forest habitat
Young forest habitat
Aquatic & riparian 
habitat
Ecosystem function
Fragmentation
T&E species & habitat
117
C H A P T E R
5
s  The indicator selection process needs to be transparent. 
When public land managers select indicators, 
stakeholders can become skeptical if they cannot see 
that their social, economic, and environmental values 
are being addressed. 
Selecting Biodiversity Indicators
 
Given the challenges identified above, NCSSF project 
scientists set out to develop a four-step group process 
for selecting sensible indicators for specific situations and 
locations. The steps include:
s identifying and prioritizing the desired biodiversity 
components to be sustained
s identifying condition, pressure, and policy response 
indicators for those components
s determining how to evaluate high-priority indicators
s selecting the top indicators.
 
Researchers who conducted group process workshops 
shared their observations. The first is this: To insure 
transparency and success, the group should consist of 
stakeholders, land managers/policymakers, and scientists/
technical experts appropriate to the forest ownership and 
willing to commit to a series  
of multi-session meetings.  
If it’s for a national or state  
forest, the size of the group  
and the time required may  
be more than a company  
or family-owned forest.

118
Indicator Selection
SELECTING INDICATORS FOR BIODIVERSITY
Step 2: Identify Condition, Pressure, and  
Policy-Response Indicators
 
This step introduces the group to three different types 
of indicators used to support each of the top-scoring 
biodiversity components. They are:
s Condition indicators that measure the current status 
or condition of a biodiversity component.
s Pressure indicators that point to where a biodiversity 
component is headed in the future. The pressure 
affecting the condition of a biodiversity component can 
be positive or negative (such as a human action that 
may be degrading or improving the condition).
s Policy response indicators are management plans or 
policies designed to maintain or improve the condition 
of a biodiversity component. 
 
These three types of indicators provide different 
information to policymakers. We’ll use large-diameter snags 
to illustrate each one. 
 
A condition indicator for large snags might measure 
their density in a forest or an ownership. It describes the 
condition of large snags using units of measure (e.g., snags 
greater than 20 inches dbh/ha or acre).
 
A pressure indicator for large snags could be harvest 
rotation length. If the rotation length is too short for them 
to develop, there will be fewer large snags in the future, 
regardless of the current density indicated by the condition 
indicator. The fire-management regime for a forest could 
also be a pressure indicator for snags.
 
Here’s an important point: Condition indicators without 
pressure indicators can be misleading. If we rely solely on 
condition indicators, evidence of change in a biodiversity 
component may come too late. Pressure indicators provide 
a warning light on our instrument panel for a future change 
in condition.
 
A policy response indicator might be a written 
management plan for snags. While condition and pressure 
indicators are expressed with units of measure (e.g., snags/
acre, rotation length in years), policy response indicators 
often are not. They’re either “yes” or “no” indicators, (i.e., 
the plan either describes snag protection or it doesn’t).
 
Table 5.1 describes condition, pressure, and policy 
response indicators for another biodiversity component, 
mature forest. The boldface terms under each indicator 
require specific definitions, agreed to by the group, to make 
them useful.
 
It’s apparent that condition, pressure, and policy 
response indicators each provide land managers and policy-
makers with different information. Ideally, each biodiversity 
component identified by the group should have a condition, 
pressure, and policy response indicator. 
How to Accomplish Step 2
 
Assign a small group of people to identify condition, 
pressure, and policy response indicators for each biodiversity 
component from Step 1. Be sure each small group is a mix 
of scientists, managers, and stakeholders appropriate to the 
forest ownership (public, private, large or small). 
We know that large-diameter snags are important for 
those parts of biodiversity that require snags in many  
forest types (Chapter 1, page 44). 
C H A P T E R
5

119
Indicator Selection
SELECTING INDICATORS FOR BIODIVERSITY
Step 3: Evaluate High-Priority Indicators
 
Use the following five criteria to evaluate indicators. 
Although this step is seldom included in indicator selection 
processes, it helps stakeholders understand why one 
indicator was selected over another. Evaluation criteria 
include: 
s Scientific merit. Is there scientific support for the 
indicator and the biodiversity component? For example, 
a commonly used indicator is the amount of area by 
forest type and age class (a Montreal Process indicator). 
Science recognizes that various species depend on 
different forest types and age classes, so this indicator 
has high scientific merit. What science still doesn’t 
know is how much of each forest type and age class 
is needed to successfully maintain each component of 
biodiversity in any geographic area. So setting target 
levels for an indicator is both a social and scientific 
question (i.e., how much do we want?)
s Ecological breadth. Does the proposed indicator 
correlate with other biodiversity components that aren’t 
being measured? An example is the density of large 
living trees. Large living trees correlate with and are 
good indicators of mature forest epiphytes (mosses and 
lichens), raptor nesting habitat, and future large snags 
and down logs. 
s Practicality. An indicator is practical if it’s not too 
expensive to measure, doesn’t require special skills to 
measure, and doesn’t require complicated analysis. If 
the cost of the indicator is too high, its scientific merit 
usually doesn’t matter.
s Utility. Can a forest manager use the indicator to 
make a decision? If there are targets for a biodiversity 
component, the indicator has high usability if it informs 
the manager whether the system is above or below the 
target so action can be taken. Often targets aren’t set in 
sustainable forestry because target setting is so conten-
	
Biodiversity	
Condition	
Pressure	
Policy Response 
	
Component	
Indicator	
Indicator	
Indicator
 
Mature forest
1.  percent of area in 
mature condition, by 
forest type.
2.  large-tree  
(greater than ’X’ dbh) 
density in designated 
mature forest stands, 
by forest type.
3.  percent or area in 
mature forest 
reserves. 
1.  percent of landscape with 
rotation length shorter 
than time required to 
develop mature forest 
characteristics (negative 
pressure).
2.  percent of acres managed 
for timber with mature 
forest retention 
practices applied 
(positive pressure). 
1.  written policy for 
conservation and 
management of  
mature forest.
2.  tax break, carbon 
credit, or conservation 
easement for timberland 
in a mature forest 
management regime.
Table 5.1  
Example indica-
tors for another 
biodiversity 
component 
(mature forest). 
Boldface terms 
need precise 
definitions.
C H A P T E R
5
tious among stakeholders. Science can help set targets 
but is often inadequate for answering the question 
“how much is enough?” especially when “enough for 
what, and whom, and where?” hasn’t been addressed.
s Relevance. How well does the indicator represent 
the stakeholders’ or owner’s biodiversity values? Since 
indicators are used to inform whether forest sustain-
ability is being achieved relative to certain forest values 
and uses, they must be linked to stakeholders’ or forest 
owner’s values. 
How to Accomplish Step 3
 
Use volunteers from the full group to create a science 
workgroup (scientists/technical experts) and a manager 
workgroup (managers/policymakers). The science group 
rates each indicator for scientific merit and ecological 
breadth. The manager group rates each indicator for 
practicality and utility. The workgroups should present the 
ratings to the full group. Then stakeholders appropriate to 
the ownership rate each indicator for how well it reflects 
their values. This ensures transparency and recognizes the 
strengths and weaknesses of each indicator. 
Step 4: Select the Top Indicators
 
Finally, the group selects the top scoring indicators to 
be used. In this step the group sums the evaluation scores 
for scientific merit, ecological breadth, practicality, and utility 
for each indicator in Step 3. Compare the summed scores 
with the stakeholders’ score for the indicator. Indicators  
that score poorly for stakeholders should be eliminated 
if group discussion does not lead to modification of the 
stakeholder score. Researchers admit that practicality usually 
wins out in the final set of indicators, because finances are 
always limited. 

120
Summary
SELECTING INDICATORS FOR BIODIVERSITY
Cautionary Observations About the Four-Step Process 
 
Researchers who tested the four-step process made the 
following cautionary observations:
s Before selecting indicators, be sure the group knows 
how they’re going to use them once they are measured 
and how the data will be collected. Researchers suggest 
answering the following questions: 
• What resources are available to measure the 
indicators and analyze data? 
• Who’s responsible for measuring the indicators? 
• How often will the data be reported, and to whom? 
• How will decisions be made in response to what  
the indicators indicate? Who will be included in 
policy-making? 
• What actions might be taken if indicators suggest  
a problem? 
• How will stakeholders participate in discussion and 
evaluation of results? 
 
Unless these questions are dealt with, stakeholders can 
be frustrated because they don’t see how indicators will be 
used to make forest decisions that protect their values. 
s Stakeholders, forest managers/policymakers, and 
scientists/technical experts have discrete roles in the 
indicator selection process. Stakeholders identify the 
forest values they want sustained; scientists/technical 
experts identify potential indicators that best track 
those values; and managers/policymakers ensure the 
indicators will be practical and useful in policy-making. 
Scientists can participate as stakeholders or as technical 
advisors, but not both. Be sure the indicator selection 
process includes all three groups. Avoid giving a 
technical team responsibility for leading and selecting 
indicators and then presenting them to stakeholders 
after the fact. 
s A trusted group of leaders is needed. Establish a 
stakeholder/scientist/manager leadership team to guide 
the larger group. 
s Indicator selection can be contentious, since it reflects 
values that people want to sustain, and only a finite 
number of indicators can be measured. Participants 
with different values must be able to work together. 
It may be necessary to invest in building social capital 
(the ability of people to work together) before selecting 
indicators. If it’s carefully organized and facilitated, the 
four-step indicator selection process can be effective at 
building social capacity. 
s Establish targets for each biodiversity component, but 
not necessarily numerical targets. An example of a 
non-numerical target might be “to maintain representa-
tion of all natural forest types and age classes in every 
county or forest district.” While qualitative, it’s still 
instructive for policy-making. If a forest type or age isn’t 
present, or is rapidly disappearing, a policymaker can 
act to maintain the target.
s Be clear about the spatial scale at which the indicators 
are to be applied (watershed, community, state, 
or national forest level). If they are to be used at a 
landscape or regional scale, be sure that owners of 
private property within the spatial scale are informed 
and engaged. They are naturally going to be concerned 
about the implications of the indicators for their policy-
making rights. 
s Be aware of other indicator efforts going on at other 
spatial scales. Coordinating indicators among different 
scales can provide insights that are otherwise not 
possible. However, stakeholders within each spatial 
scale legitimately have their own values to track with 
indicators, and not all indicators will be relevant at 
all spatial scales or even similar scales between two 
different landowner types (e.g., national forests vs. 
private commercial forest).
SUMMARY
 
The questions raised at the start of this chapter are 
being answered. NCSSF-sponsored researchers have 
field-tested a four-step framework for selecting biodiversity 
indicators for forests at different spatial scales. The tool 
removes much of the confusion that may have previously 
hampered this process. It provides a way for any landowner 
(public or private) to decide what indicators to use and how 
to use them once they’re selected. It offers a deliberate, 
transparent group process where stakeholders can have 
confidence that the best indicators have been chosen and 
there’s a way to recognize success in sustaining the desired 
components of forest biodiversity. In addition, specific 
cautionary observations are noted that can avoid potential 
problems. For information on biodiversity monitoring 
programs, check Participatory Inventory and Monitoring on 
page 169 of the Appendix. 
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 167.
C H A P T E R
5

WHY IS THIS SUBJECT IMPORTANT?
	
What are some things that I should consider  
if I’m interested in enhancing biodiversity in my 
managed forest? Many industrial and family landown-
ers are asking this question as public recognition of the 
importance of forest biodiversity increases. This chapter 
offers some answers based on NCSSF-sponsored research 
that examined: 
s biodiversity enhancement in forest plantations,  
using loblolly pine and Douglas-fir as examples
s biodiversity enhancement in family forests, based on  
a study of Florida owners 
s pre- and post-wildfire strategies for enhancing  
biodiversity, based on research done on public lands 
in the western United States. 
 
The ideas presented here are intended for managed 
forests, both naturally regenerated and artificially planted. 
The ways they are applied will depend on the manage-
ment objectives of individual owners. As we will see,  
research results clearly show that biodiversity enhance-
ment in managed forests can have significant economic 
costs. If the costs are more than private forest landowners 
are able or willing to pay, and private forests continue to 
be converted to other uses, society will have to decide 
whether government should partner with owners to 
provide economic incentives to enhance biodiversity. If 
the answer is yes, then new ways must be developed 
to establish and support such partnerships (Chapter 9, 
pages 165-166). 
121
Why is this subject important?
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Figure 6.1 Planting, 
vegetation control, and 
mechanical harvesting 
– the typical short- 
rotation management 
cycle for plantations. 
HOW TO ENHANCE BIODIVERSITY IN  
PLANTATION FORESTS
 
In general, planted forests do not have the same level 
of biodiversity as naturally regenerated forests (more details 
below). However, there’s growing interest in developing 
strategies that increase biodiversity and non-timber  
economic values in planted forests while also growing  
wood products. 
 
Planted forests are common in the coastal plains and 
piedmont of the Southeast and in the Pacific Northwest, 
particularly west of the Cascade Mountains. They have 
expanded dramatically in the Southeast. For example, in 
1953 there were about 2 million acres (809,900 hectares) 
of planted pine in the Southeast. By 1999 there were more 
than 32 million acres (13 million hectares), and that  
number could double by 2040. The primary planted  
species are loblolly pine in the Southeast and Douglas-fir in 
the Pacific Northwest. 
 
Despite their differences, loblolly pine and Douglas-fir 
plantations have some overall similarities (Figure 6.1).  
For example: 
s They’re artificially 
planted, often with 
genetically  
superior tree  
seedlings.
s Herbicides may 
be used to  
control  
competing  
vegetation 
during seedling 
establishment.
s Thinning  
and other prac-
tices are used to 
improve wood 
production.
s They usually fol-
low a relatively 
short clear-cut 
rotation pattern. 
s Despite their 
lack of structural 
diversity (details 
below), they pro-
vide forest cover 
for wildlife. 
s They support greater biodiversity than agricultural lands 
or urban development.
s The conversion of plantation forestlands to other uses, 
especially in areas of urban growth, indicates that  
economics plays a large part in their long-term future 
and sustainability.
 
There are differences in the level of biodiversity between 
naturally regenerated forests and loblolly pine and  
Douglas-fir plantations. Chapters 1 and 4 provide greater 
detail, but here’s a brief overview – first loblolly and then 
Douglas-fir. 
C H A P T E R
6

122
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Craig Hedman
Figure 6.2  
This uneven-aged 
longleaf pine-wiregrass 
stand represents the  
structural goal that 
researchers envision  
for loblolly pine 
plantations. Its open, 
park-like structure and 
herbaceous understory 
provides habitat for a 
variety of wildlife  
species.
www.forestryimages.org
Robert Logan
Figure 6.3  Mature Douglas-fir forest.
Figure 6.4  Overstory shade in the stem-exclusion stage of 
this loblolly plantation reduces biodiversity and eliminates 
understory forage and wildlife habitat. 
How to enhance biodiversity in plantation forests
C H A P T E R
6

123
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
 
NCSSF-sponsored researchers used mature, naturally 
regenerated longleaf pine in the Southeast Coastal Plains 
(Figure 6.2) as a structural goal for loblolly pine plantations 
because longleaf is recognized for both high levels of  
biodiversity and economic values that include:
s open, park-like conditions that allow light to reach the 
forest floor, creating a rich, herbaceous understory 
s high levels of plant and animal diversity 
s frequent, low-intensity fires that prevent dense  
shrub layers from developing and stimulate understory 
vegetation.  
s income from saw-timber and hunting leases.
 
In the Pacific Coastal region, Douglas-fir plantations also 
differ from mature, naturally regenerated forests (Figure 6.3), 
which have the following characteristics:
s vertical structural diversity (multiple canopy layers)
s horizontal diversity (large live and dead trees along with 
canopy gaps)
s lower stand densities that allow for larger tree diameters
s a more vigorous understory shrub and herb component.
 
While loblolly pine and Douglas-fir plantations generally 
lack the structural diversity and more mature forest compo-
nents of naturally regenerated forests, there are stand-level 
management practices that can contribute greater biodiver-
sity. They are described next, starting with loblolly pine.
Enhancing Biodiversity in Loblolly Pine Plantations
 
It’s possible to increase biodiversity in loblolly pine  
plantations and move them toward the longleaf pine  
structural model described above and shown in Figure 6.2.  
A primary objective is to minimize the stem-exclusion stage 
in which shade from a closed canopy eliminates understory 
vegetation (Figure 6.4), and instead create a more open  
overstory, allowing development of a diverse understory that 
can provide forage and wildlife habitat. However, there are 
tradeoffs, as noted in the recommendations below, such as 
the effect on wood quality when planting at wider spacing. 
 
While it’s true that maximum production of total wood 
volume is achieved in dense, fully-stocked stands, here are 
some things that can be done to enhance biodiversity in  
loblolly pine plantations:
s Plant at wider spacing (12 feet). This delays canopy 
closure and maintains a more diverse tree establishment 
phase for a longer period. It also allows for disking or 
mowing between tree rows to maintain a more  
productive understory. The disadvantage of wide spacing 
is a reduction in wood quality from larger branch knots. 
An alternative is to plant close and follow up with early 
and frequent thinning. This minimizes the stem-exclusion 
stage, allows light to reach the forest floor and increases 
biodiversity.
s Begin commercial thinning at age 15, with sub-
sequent thinning every five years. The disadvantage 
of thinning is that it allows understory hardwoods to 
develop a midstory, creating heavy shade and reducing 
understory vegetation. Thinning can also result in under-
story vine and shrub growth that shades out herb and 
grass vegetation. In general, a hardwood midstory is  
undesirable for most wildlife, and without hardwood 
control (burning or herbicide treatments described  
below), thinning can result in a less productive and  
diverse understory. On the other hand, mature  
hardwoods such as oaks are desirable because they 
provide mast – acorns, nuts, and seeds – an important 
food source for many wildlife species. When controlling 
midstory hardwoods, individual mature trees should be 
retained, along with occasional clumps of hardwoods, 
especially those growing in bottomlands and drainages, 
which are typical hardwood sites. 
s Use prescribed burning. Historically, frequent low- 
intensity fire in naturally regenerated pine stands  
controlled the hardwoods and maintained an open stand 
structure and a diverse understory. Prescribed burning, in 
combination with thinning, can mimic those conditions. 
It is recommended at 3 to 6 year intervals once pine trees 
are 15 feet tall. Burning should be done in patches rather 
than evenly, to provide nesting cover. Avoid annual burn-
ing because it can eliminate all hardwoods and reduce 
biodiversity. Coordinate burning and thinning. Thin after 
burning because it avoids the problem of too hot a fire 
from thinning slash.
s Use herbicides as an alternative to prescribed burning  
for hardwood vegetation control. They are generally not 
directly toxic to wildlife and their effects last longer than 
burning or mechanical hardwood control.
s Use less intensive site preparation for vegetation 
control at the time of planting. Intensive site prep 
reduces the availability of fruit for wildlife. Mechanical 
site preparation, in contrast to herbicides provides more 
understory production. Burning may also be an option 
for site preparation vegetation control.
s Fertilize, but keep in mind that fertilization has a mixed 
effect on biodiversity in pine plantations. It can improve 
understory food production in thinned stands, but it can 
also speed canopy closure and offset wildlife benefits. 
Fertilization used to benefit both diameter growth and 
wildlife habitat is best done along with thinning. 
s Retain snags, large down trees, and mature live  
trees. Streamside management zones, wetlands,  
and other special habitats in pine plantations can  
contribute to biodiversity by providing wildlife corridors  
(Chapter 3, pages 81-83) while at the same time  
protecting water quality.
How to enhance biodiversity in plantation forests
C H A P T E R
6

s Extend rotations. All of the biodiversity enhancement 
practices noted above will be more effective if rota-
tions are extended. Rotations of 40-100 years ensure 
older forest conditions and long-term wildlife forage, 
hardwood mast, snags, and cavities. However, longer 
rotations have an economic impact, depending on pulp-
wood and saw-timber prices, and can affect the rate of 
return acceptable to landowners. 
Enhancing Biodiversity in Douglas-fir Plantations
 
There are stand-level management practices that can 
increase biodiversity in Douglas-fir plantations. The objec-
tive is to promote both vertical and horizontal structural 
diversity (multiple canopy layers, large live and dead trees, 
and canopy gaps). As with loblolly pine plantations, there 
are tradeoffs, and they are noted in the recommendations 
below. Here are some of those practices: 
s Since Douglas-fir plantations typically are planted  
with 435 trees or more per acre, thinning is a way to 
increase the structural diversity in stands. As in lob-
lolly plantations, thinning opens the stand, allowing 
development of herbaceous plants, understory trees, 
and shrubs, which provide wildlife forage and create 
multiple layers of vertical diversity. Thinning should be 
heavy and frequent because large conifers develop  
mature forest conditions faster with heavy thinning.  
s The type of thinning is important. Instead of uniform 
thinning, variable density thinning is suggested  
(Chapter 1, page 47). This type of thinning leaves 
unthinned areas and gaps that contribute to structural 
diversity. Variable density thinning attempts to mimic 
natural processes. 
s A mix of different species, especially naturally  
occurring shade-tolerant species should be maintained 
while thinning. Hardwoods are important habitat for 
wildlife, especially small mammals, and retention of  
some hardwoods is recommended.
s Biological legacies such as mature hardwood clumps, 
snags and down logs should be retained (Chapter 1, 
page 44).
s It’s important to maintain and manage streamside  
management zones, wetlands and special habitats.  
These are areas of high diversity and can help meet 
legacy retention needs. 
s Underplanting, the practice of planting or sowing 
seed in canopy gaps or under-thinned areas, can create  
multiple layers. 
s Fertilizing individual plants or groups of plants can  
promote vertical diversity.
s Early branch pruning and thinning creates space for  
birds to fly inside the stand.
s Final harvest, using variable retention (Chapter 1,  
page 45) is a way to leave structural diversity for the 
next rotation. However, variable retention increases 
harvesting costs, and the retained trees can impact 
tree growth in the following rotation, decreasing wood 
production.
s Rotations longer than those commonly used in  
industrial forests are needed to improve wildlife habitat 
for a number of species. Even with thinning, it takes  
100 years to develop old-forest characteristics, and  
typical Douglas-fir plantation rotations are 30 to 50 
years. Longer rotations are costly because they delay 
harvest revenues while management costs continue to 
rise. However, Douglas-fir can grow and produce wood 
efficiently over long time periods, up to and sometimes 
exceeding 100 years.
 
Thinning in both loblolly and Douglas-fir plantations can 
accelerate development of mature forest structures that are 
complex, support a variety of species (some dependent on 
them), and are in short supply and difficult to replace on the 
landscape. However, just creating structures doesn’t make 
plantations suitable for old-growth dependent species, such 
as lichens or fungi. That takes time. Thinning can create 
these structures and shorten the time for their use by old 
forest species (Chapter 4).
 
While these practices enhance biodiversity at the  
plantation stand level, they are also important at the  
landscape scale (Chapter 7). The size, shape, and spatial 
arrangement of stand structures and age classes should be 
spread across the landscape to ensure a range of biodiver-
sity. This is easier to do where landowners control larger 
acreages than it is where landscapes are split among mul-
tiple owners. However, multiple landowners who use these 
practices at the stand level are also supporting increased 
biodiversity at the landscape level.
 
Ultimately, all of these biodiversity practices have a cost, 
and if that cost is too high they are unlikely to be used on 
private forest plantations. For landowners and managers 
who are interested in supporting greater biodiversity in their  
plantations, NCSSF researchers developed actual manage-
ment strategies for loblolly pine plantations and analyzed 
their costs using computer simulations. Details concerning 
those costs are available in the Appendix (page 167). 
 
In summary, plantation forest systems have been 
widely adopted by landowners in the Southeast and Pacific 
Northwest. Estimates indicate that high-intensity plantation 
management has increased southern timber yields as much  
as 65% over standard site preparation and planting and 
100% over naturally regenerated forests. But, along with 
their increasing prevalence, there’s growing interest in 
strategies that can increase biodiversity in these forests. 
There are several stand-level management practices de-
scribed above that can support increased biodiversity. The 
key is providing structural diversity. While they are simplified 
124
How to enhance biodiversity in plantation forests
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
C H A P T E R
6

management systems, plantation forests still support more 
biodiversity than other land uses such as development and 
agriculture. With the very real threat of plantation conver-
sion to development in the Southeast and Pacific Northwest, 
landowner incentives are needed to counter forestland con-
version and support biodiversity conservation in plantations. 
Chapter 9 (Policy that Encourages Biodiversity) addresses the 
need for incentives.  
HOW TO ENHANCE BIODIVERSITY ON  
FAMILY FOREST OWNERSHIPS 
 
Family forest owners, who control 58% of the  
timberland in the United States, have adopted intensive 
plantation management practices over past decades,  
especially in the Southeast and Pacific Northwest. But family 
forest owners are different from industrial owners. First, 
they are more diverse and more often have values other 
than timber production as major objectives. Second, it’s 
much more difficult to meet the information needs of family 
forest owners because there are so many of them and they 
are so diverse.  
 
Reduced wood production from public forestlands since 
the early 1990s has made these owners and their forests 
more important than ever. However, family forests are far 
more than just sources of forest products. Society depends 
on them for wildlife habitat, water quality protection, and 
other ecosystem services. In this section we consider the role 
that family forests play in conserving biodiversity and review 
the biodiversity-compatible forest practices recommended in 
Chapters 1 and 4. Then we look at Florida, where NCSSF-
sponsored researchers identified specific practices for family 
forest owners in their state.
Biodiversity-compatible Forest Practices for  
Family-owned Forests
 
Figure 6.5, on the next page, identifies biodiversity-
compatible forest practices that are considered important  
in each of the five major forest regions. More detailed 
scientific justification for the practices in each region can 
be found in Chapters 1, 2 and 4. This illustration makes it 
easy to see recurring recommendations that reach across all 
regions, such as:
s adopting the use of prescribed fire wherever  
appropriate 
s emphasizing harvesting techniques that maintain  
legacy structures
s looking to streamside zones and wetlands as places 
to maintain legacy structures, such as large live trees, 
snags, and large down logs  
s being aware of and controlling non-native invasives
s encouraging longer rotations.
Guidelines for Biodiversity Conservation in  
Pine Ecosystems in the State of Florida
 
NCSSF-sponsored researchers in Florida identified 
specific biodiversity-compatible forest practices for family 
forest owners in that state. Their approach can serve as an 
example of how other states might develop detailed  
guidelines for their landowners, if such guidelines aren’t 
already available. 
 
From the outset, researchers recognized the value of 
voluntary best management practices (BMPs) in Florida, but 
they also acknowledged that BMPs alone may or may not 
promote proactive management of wildlife habitat. So they 
developed a list of biodiversity-compatible forest practices, 
without regard for their cost or potential for adoption by 
family forest owners. Once these practices were identified, 
the researchers analyzed their impact on family forest  
owners’ economic returns. 
 
The most serious concerns that researchers found with 
respect to biodiversity conservation on forest ownerships in 
Florida were: 
s conversion of longleaf pine-wiregrass ecosystems to 
slash or loblolly pine and its detrimental effect on  
wildlife (Chapter 1, page 33)
s the need to restore fire in fire dependent forests to 
control invasive species
s the need for uneven-aged management and longer 
harvest rotations in longleaf and other pine forests in 
the Southeast
s recognition of the role of stream and wetland riparian 
habitat for biodiversity.
 
Given these scientific concerns, the researchers, along 
with a team of forest and wildlife professionals, identified 
some practices that enhance wildlife habitat and promote 
biodiversity in pine ecosystems in Florida. The purpose of 
these practices is to ensure mature trees and dead wood, 
both important elements for improving wildlife habitat.  
 
They include the following: 
s delay the timber harvesting age
s encourage uneven-aged management
s expand the width of streamside management  
zones (SMZs) 
s improve ground cover management with  
controlled burning
s restore native understory vegetation, especially  
wiregrass
s control non-native invasive species
s use thinning techniques that provide an open canopy.
125
How to enhance biodiversity on family forest ownerships
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
C H A P T E R
6

 
From the list, the team ranked the four most important 
practices in this order:
1  uneven-aged forest management
2  prescribed burning and invasive species control
3  increasing the rotation length
4  increasing SMZ widths.
 
Next, the researchers analyzed the financial effect  
these practices would have on landowners, by calculating 
the opportunity cost values foregone when these practices 
are adopted. During this analysis, many forest owners  
indicated that uneven-aged management, the highest 
ranked practice, would be economically unfeasible for them. 
As a result, researchers decided to drop this practice from 
further consideration. The opportunity costs of the other 
practices were determined as follows:
s The average land expectation value (LEV) under the 
typically used management scenario of a 26-year  
rotation is $729 per acre or $28 per acre per year. 
s The cost of adopting prescribed burning and invasive 
species control (second-ranked), along with the prac-
tice of increased SMZ width (fourth-ranked), would be 
$25.32 per acre per year. The LEV under this manage-
ment scenario would drop to $6 per acre per year. 
s The practice of delaying harvesting, taken alone,  
decreases LEV by $11 per acre per year. The cost of 
adopting the two practices described above, plus 
delaying timber harvest up to 50 years (third ranked), 
would be $33.00 per acre per year. The LEV under this 
management scenario would be minus $5 per acre per 
year, resulting in a negative financial return for  
the landowner.
 
From this analysis it’s clear that biodiversity conserva-
tion can involve significant costs to landowners. If the public 
wants private forestland to provide this larger suite of social 
values, public support will be needed to retain these lands 
as forest. Without public support in the form of financial 
incentives, a majority of family forest owners are unlikely to 
adopt these practices at the necessary levels to produce the 
desired wildlife habitat results. 
 
The question then is: since the costs of biodiversity  
conservation accrue to landowners and the benefits are 
spread to the entire society, who should pay? Are there 
incentive programs for family forest owners that encourage 
these practices? If not, what additional steps can be taken 
to support the adoption of biodiversity-compatible forest 
practices by family forest owners? Answers to these  
questions are discussed in Chapter 9, where policies  
and incentives that encourage biodiversity are explained 
(pages 163-166).
126
How to enhance biodiversity on family forest ownerships
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Southwest Colorado Plateau
•	 Reduce the density of forests 
and woodlands
•	 Promote forest legacy  
structures
•	 Restore grasslands from 
encroaching trees and shrubs
•	 Control non-native invasives
Pacific Coastal Forests
•	 Move toward variable 
retention harvesting in 
place of clearcutting
•	 Use young plantation 
treatments that mimic 
small-scale disturbance 
processes
•	 Restore riparian forests 
and stream systems
•	 Control non-native 
invasives
Figure 6.5  Biodiversity-compatible forest practices for each 
of the major forest regions in the United States. 
C H A P T E R
6

127
How to enhance biodiversity on family forest ownerships
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Lake States Forests
•	 Restore white pine where appropriate
•	 Move from a preponderance of early-succession 
aspen/birch forests
•	 Move toward longer-rotation northern  
hardwood/conifer forests
•	 Incorporate retention harvesting techniques
•	 Control non-native invasives
Southeast Coastal Plain Forests
•	 Promote prescribed fire where  
appropriate
•	 Restore longleaf pine forests
•	 Use longer rotations
•	 Control non-native invasives
ME
RI
MD
CT
PA
VT
NY
NH
DE
NJ
MA
Northeast Northern Hardwoods
•	 Shift from even-aged  
to uneven-aged  
management over time
•	 Promote more legacy  
structures
•	 Control non-native  
invasives
Northeast Pine Barrens
•	 Use prescribed fire 
where it’s compatible 
with adjacent  
land uses. 
•	 Otherwise, use  
mechanical  
disturbance to  
perpetuate pine 
barrens
•	 Control non-native 
invasives
Northeast Transition Hardwoods
•	 Reintroduce prescribed fire where it’s 
compatible with adjacent land uses
•	 Promote structural legacy using reten-
tion or irregular shelterwood techniques
•	 Avoid unsustainable high-grading of oak 
and pine
•	 Control non-native invasives
C H A P T E R
6

PRE- AND POST-WILDFIRE STRATEGIES  
FOR MANAGED FORESTS
 
Wildfire is an important disturbance that influences  
the structure, function, and productivity of many  
managed forest ecosystems. Three NCSSF-sponsored  
research projects, focused on separate major wildfires in 
Colorado, Oregon, and California, shed new light on pre- 
and post-wildfire management strategies in the western 
states. While the studies were done on public land, this does 
not imply that management practices on public lands should 
be applied to private land. Rather, the intent here is to 
uncover principles discovered on public land that are worth 
considering by both industrial and family forest owners.
s The 2002 Biscuit Fire, the largest recorded fire in  
Oregon, was started by lightning and resulted in 
375 fires that grew to approximately 494,000 acres 
(200,000 hectares) on the Siskiyou National Forest  
and the Kalmiopsis Wilderness Area, one of the most 
ecologically diverse landscapes in North America.
s The 2002 Hayman Fire in central Colorado, the largest 
in the state’s recorded history, encompassed 138,000 
acres (55,850 hectares) of the Upper South Platte  
Watershed, dominated by ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, 
and understory grasses, forbs, and shrubs.
s The 2002 Williams Fire swept through the San Dimas 
Experimental Forest, northeast of Los Angeles, CA. 
in the San Gabriel Mountains, burning 38,000 acres 
(15,400 hectares) of chaparral forest terrain.
 
The Biscuit Fire burned through several pre-fire  
management treatments including areas that had been 
salvage-logged after the 1987 Silver Fire and through 450 
acres of long-term ecosystem productivity (LTEP) study plots 
that were established in 1992 and had not been burned 
since 1881. The LTEP plots included several different pre-fire 
treatments: thinning, thinning and underburning (controlled 
burning under mature forest canopies as shown in Figure 
6.7), and clear-cutting followed by reforestation with  
Douglas-fir or a mixture of Douglas-fir and knobcone pine, 
and high and low levels of retained large down logs. 
 
These pre-burn treatments gave NCSSF-sponsored  
researchers the opportunity to examine their effect on 
Biscuit fire severity and the recovery of the forest ecosystem. 
They learned that pre-fire management changed how the 
Biscuit fire burned. For example:
s The highest tree mortality was found in thinned stands 
that were not underburned (Figure 6.6A) and in young  
(6-year-old) Douglas-fir plantations.
s Fine fuel (foliage litter and small dead twigs) was the 
only type of fuel that correlated with crown scorch.
s Stands with mid-story hardwoods appeared to have less 
fire damage to overstory conifers.
s Plant biodiversity did not dramatically increase after the 
fires; there was a slight increase in LTEP control plots, 
but biodiversity decreased in severely burned areas.
128
Pre- and post-wildfire strategies for managed forests
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Figure 6.6a  Thinning without underburning.
Bernard Borman, USDA PNW 
Figure 6.6b  Thinning with underburning. 
Bernard Borman, USDA PNW 
C H A P T E R
6

 
The findings imply the following tentative conclusions 
about pre-wildfire management strategies:
s Thinning alone may not adequately reduce fire  
damage to mature trees. Underburning in thinned 
stands is required to adequately reduce fuels in mature 
forests (Figure 6.6B and 6.7).
s Unmanaged stands subjected to fire suppression will 
not necessarily burn severely (Chapter 4, page 106, 
Figure 4.36, shows the patchy pattern of mortality  
after the Biscuit Fire)
s The severe fires in the study area were fueled by  
finer material, and large amounts of downed wood 
are not necessarily a predictor of fire severity. However, 
questions remain about future fire risk as this  
material decays.
s Hardwoods may actually help reduce fire damage to 
conifers (Figure 6.8).
129
Pre- and post-wildfire strategies for managed forests
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Figure 6.7  Underburning after thinning was essential to 
reduce fuels. 
Figure 6.8  Tan oak (left) and madrone hardwoods (right), 
left during thinning, may reduce fire damage to conifers. 
Bernard Borman, USDA PNW FS
Bernard Borman, USDA PNW 
Bernard Borman, USDA PNW 
C H A P T E R
6

 
The Hayman Fire gave NCSSF-sponsored researchers  
a chance to evaluate the effect of one rehabilitation  
treatment on the natural regeneration and growth of under-
story plants. The rehab  
treatment, called seed-
and-scarify, is designed 
to minimize immediate 
post-fire erosion and 
surface runoff. The 
treatment was applied  
shortly after the fire 
to 13,200 of the 
31,600 acres (5,300 of 
the 13,200 hectares) 
rehabilitated by the 
USDA Forest Service. 
Researchers wanted to 
answer three questions.
s 
What effect did 
the rehab treat-
ment have on  
native species, 
many of which 
regenerate and 
re-establish after 
fire?
s 
What effect did 
rehab have on 
non-native  
invasives, which 
can displace native 
species, change 
fire regimes  
and alter the  
ecosystem?
s 
What effect did re-
hab have on other 
species of con-
cern, such as blue 
grama (Figure 6.9) 
and dotted blazing 
star (Figure 6.10), 
plants important 
to the threatened  
Pawnee montane  
skipper butterfly 
(Figure 6.11).
 
High-severity 
wildfires can produce a 
water-repellent layer just below the soil surface that reduces 
water infiltration into the soil and can increase runoff and 
erosion in coniferous forests. To minimize flood and ero-
sion damage, managers often use emergency rehabilitation 
treatments including seeding with native or non-native 
understory species, mulching with straw or other materi-
als, breaking water-repellent soils by scarifying with rakes 
or machinery and trapping runoff and sediment that might 
move downhill by placing logs or straw wattles on hillside 
contours and in drainages (Fig 6.12 A, B, and C). After the 
Hayman fire, managers used all of these techniques. NCSSF-
sponsored researchers focused on the effects of the seed-
and-scarify treatment (Figure 6.13 A and B).
 
Here’s what researchers found when they compared 
the response of understory plants in unburned, burned, and 
burned-and-rehabilitated sites.
s Eighteen months after the fire there was no visible sign 
of the soil scarification treatment, so the treatment  
effect on understory plants could not be determined. 
s Of the two annual grass species seeded (70 percent 
barley and 30 percent triticale), only triticale germinat-
ed, providing less than 1 percent cover. While this mini-
mal coverage was likely due to unfavorable weather 
conditions following the fire, it is consistent with other 
studies of seed-only treatments (without scarification) 
where coverage is often 10 percent or less.
s The researchers saw little effect of the seed-and-scarify 
treatment on native and non-native species richness 
and cover, though there were some effects of the burn 
in general. Total understory cover was comparable 
among the unburned, burned, and burned-and-rehabil-
itated treatments, averaging around 15 to 20 percent. 
s Most of the dominant understory species common to 
the area (9 of 14 species) were tolerant of both the 
fire and the post-fire seed-and-scarify rehab treatment. 
Each of the species was able to survive and recolonize 
after the disturbance by sprouting or re-establishing 
from adjacent seed sources.
s The fire had no long-term effect on the food source of 
the Pawnee montane skipper butterfly. Blue grama’s 
sprouting ability allowed it to reach pre-burn levels 
quickly, and dotted blazing star was unaffected by the 
burn or rehab treatment. 
 
Two important implications of these findings for  
post-wildfire management strategies are:
s 
The Hayman Fire had some short-term effect on the 
understory plant community as a whole and on  
individual species, but the seed-and-scarify treatment 
had little additional effect, probably because of the 
low treatment intensity and also because many plants 
have developed adaptations to survive or successfully 
regenerate after wildfire disturbance. 
s 
It’s unlikely that the seed-and-scarify post-fire  
rehabilitation treatment met the goals of reducing  
soil erosion, but researchers were not willing to  
recommend whether or not land managers should  
continue to use the treatment in the future. They 
thought that further study should be done before  
using the treatment under similar conditions. 
130
Pre- and post-wildfire strategies for managed forests
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Figure 6.11  Pawnee montane  
skipper butterfly (Hesperia  
leonardus Montana)
Beckie Hemmerling
Paula Fornwalt, USDA FS
Figure 6.9  Blue grama  
(Bouteloua gracilis)
Figure 6.10  Dotted blazing star 
(Liatris punctata)
Paul Opler
C H A P T E R
6

131
Pre- and post-wildfire strategies for managed forests
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Figure 6.12a  Contour-felled log erosion  
barriers on the Hayman fire.
Figures 6.13a, 6.13b  High severity-burn areas and slopes less 
than 20 percent were scarified using all-terrain vehicles 
(ATVs) pulling chain-link harrows with 4 inch teeth to break 
up the water repellent soil layer and increase infiltration 
rates. On steeper slopes hand rakes were used.  
Scarification was followed by aerial or hand seeding. The 
seed treatment was a certified weed-free mixture of 70 
percent barley and 30 percent triticale at a rate of 80 kg/ha 
(70 lb/ac) or 280 seeds/m2 (26 seeds/ft2).
Figure 6.12b  Straw 
bale check dams 
on a small channel 
within the Hayman 
fire. 
Figure 6.12c  
Straw wattle 
erosion barriers 
(straw-filled mesh 
tubes staked on 
hillslopes where 
there are no 
burned trees  
available) on  
the 2003 Pira  
fire in Southern 
California.
Joseph Wagenbrenner, USFS
Peter Robichaud, USFS
Peter Robichaud, USFS
Peter Robichaud, USFS
Peter Robichaud, USFS
A
B
C H A P T E R
6

 
The Williams Fire offered a unique opportunity for  
NCSSF-sponsored researchers to learn how the under-
ground world of California chaparral responds to fire. While 
there is considerable knowledge about the above-ground 
chaparral plant response to fire, little was known about the 
underground world before this research. Obviously, post-fire 
management decisions need to benefit both above- and 
below-ground biotic activity. 
 
The fire swept through the San Dimas Experimental 
Forest, including a research study area where soil lysimeters 
have been used to examine forest  
soils since the 1930s (Figures 6.14 A 
and B). (Lysimeters are pits filled  
with native soil that are used to  
measure the downward percolation 
of water and losses of soluble  
materials leached from the soil by  
the percolating water.) 
 
After the burn, researchers 
re-established lysimeter soil-testing 
equipment and studied how various 
segments of the underground world 
responded to the fire. They used soil 
microbes and macrofauna (animals 
large enough to see with the naked 
eye, such as earthworms) as  
indicators of biological diversity 
recovery following the fire. The new 
information, together with existing 
knowledge about soil microorgan-
isms, emphasizes the role they play 
in nutrient cycling, decomposition, 
and plant growth. The activity of 
microbes and macrofauna, such as 
altering soil aeration, moisture  
relations, nutrient status, and  
penetrability, all affect the growth  
of plants after wildfire.
 
The findings have the following 
implications for post-wildfire  
management strategies. 
s It’s important to retain down 
wood and stumps as part of 
post-fire restoration. This mate-
rial controls erosion and releases 
organic nutrients through 
decomposition by bacteria and 
fungi. Re-sprouting stumps are 
reservoirs of mycorrhizae,  
associations of fungi and roots 
that assist plants in the uptake 
of water and nutrients (see 
Mycorrhizae Primer box).
132
Pre- and post-wildfire strategies for managed forests
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
Fig 6.14a, 6.14b  The soil lysimeter study area in the 1930s 
(A) and shortly after the Williams fire (B). After the fire, 
native vegetation was planted across the lysimeter area 
to study the effect of plants on soil water movement and 
nutrient use. The intense fire left vegetation, soil organic 
matter, and soil organisms incinerated or carbonized. 
Since the fire all the pines in photo B have died and blown 
over. Regrowth has been good, including pine from seed, 
resulting in trees that are already eight feet tall. Oak and 
greasewood (chamise) resprouted along with California 
lilac (ceanothus), which was absent from the lysimeter area 
for many years before the fire.
A
B
Paul Sternberg, UC Riverside
Paul Sternberg, UC Riverside
C H A P T E R
6

s Mycorrhizal inoculum survives in post-fire soils under 
re-sprouting shrubs (below the heat of the fire).
s Instead of using mechanical techniques such as ripping 
that have a negative effect on soil structure, post-fire 
restoration efforts for soil erosion that use contour log 
terraces, straw wattles, or silt fences (Figures 6.12 A, B 
and C) may be more effective.
s Considerable research has shown that mechanical tech-
niques that disrupt the soil surface can destabilize VAM 
networks (Mycorrhizae Primer box). Loss of VAM may 
in turn reduce glomalin-associated soil aggregation (a 
glue-like compound exuded by mycorrhizal hyphae that 
promotes soil aggregation). It has only recently been 
discovered that VAM release a lot of glomalin. Ectos 
also aggregate soils, but the high diversity of ectos and 
the tendency for some species to occur in deeper soil 
layers provides a buffer that makes the ectos as a group 
less sensitive to soil disturbance than VAM. Nonethe-
less, ecto formation on seedlings can be reduced in 
areas with heavy soil erosion or other forms of excessive 
soil disturbance such as mine spoils. 
s Activities such as stump removal or excessive control of 
early succession shrubs should be carefully considered. 
They can impede the recovery of mycorrhizal fungi by 
removing sources of inoculum.  
s Seed harvesting ants (Pogonomyrmex) also play a role 
in determining the structure and composition of the 
vegetation after wildfire. Their excavation for nest 
cavities in the soil may help to redistribute organic and 
mineral particles in the soil profile. 
 
While in most cases, mycorrhizal inoculum is probably 
adequate for post-fire plant regeneration, where excessive 
soil disturbance (e.g. erosion) or elimination of plant reser-
voirs has reduced mycorrhizal inoculum, it may be useful to 
inoculate planted seedlings with mycorrhizal fungi.
SUMMARY
 
These pre- and post-wildfire projects point to a growing 
body of knowledge about biodiversity in the recovery of  
forests following wildfire disturbance. They provide insight 
into wildfire strategies for managed forests. For example, 
thinning without underburning is unlikely to reduce wildfire 
severity because fine fuels contribute more to severe fires 
than large woody debris. There is evidence that: 
s leaving midstory hardwoods during thinning may actu-
ally help reduce wildfire damage to overstory conifers 
s using seed-and-scarify wildfire rehabilitation  
treatments are questionable because of their low  
rate of effectiveness
s fire-adapted native plants are capable of reestablishing 
their role as ground cover following fire. 
 
Rehabilitation techniques that disturb the soil surface  
can interfere with what’s happening in the underground  
soil world, where re-sprouting plants and down wood  
contribute to the activity of mycorrhizal fungi. Post-fire  
soil mechanical disturbance may interrupt these fungal  
networks that are necessary for inoculating emerging plants, 
transferring soil energy, and stabilizing soil. After a fire it is 
important to look carefully at soil conditions, the potential 
to introduce invasives, and the impact of salvage logging. 
Whether or not to salvage log is a decision dependent on 
ownership management objectives and the personal time 
horizon and values of the owner. 
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 167.
133
Summary
BIODIVERSITY IN MANAGED FORESTS
 
Ectomycorrhizae are referred to as “ecto-” (a prefix 
that means “outside”) because they form an external 
sheath of mycelium around the plant root tip. Their cells 
don’t penetrate the root cell walls, but may go between 
cells in the cortex (the primary tissue of the root). There 
are a large number of these fungi, but only a few plant 
families have ectomycorrhizae, and these plants are 
always trees, such as birch, alder, beech, oak, eucalyptus, 
pine, and Douglas-fir. The fungus absorbs simple carbo-
hydrates that the tree produces. The tree appears to pro-
duce these carbohydrates specifically for the fungus, as 
the tree doesn’t use them. Ectomycorrhizae usually form 
mushrooms, puffballs, truffles, etc. on the soil surface. 
 
Endomycorrhizae don’t have an external sheath 
around the plant root tip plant (endo- means “inside”), 
but the fungus mycelia do penetrate the root cells of 
the host. One variety called vesicular-arbuscular mycor-
rhizae (VAM) is found throughout the world. The name 
comes from the distinct structures – rounded vesicles 
and branched tree-like arbuscules – inside the cells of 
the infected roots. The vesicles and arbuscules contain 
stored minerals that the plant needs; they lie in the root 
cells, making minerals available to the plant. VAM don’t 
produce large fruiting bodies such as mushrooms.
Mycorrhizae Primer
 
A mycorrhiza is an association of a fungus with the roots of a plant. The fungus enhances the uptake of plant 
water and nutrients through its extensive system of mycelia (root-like filaments) and hyphae (threads that make up 
mycelia). There are two major types: Ectomycorrhizae and Endomycorrhizae.
C H A P T E R
6

134
WHY IS THIS SUBJECT IMPORTANT?
 
Biodiversity includes all the living organisms in the 
forest and the processes that support them: water and 
nutrient cycling, food webs, energy flows, insect out-
breaks, and disturbance regimes. Forestry practitioners, 
landowners, and managers make decisions every day 
that affect biodiversity, while at the same time juggling 
the demands of regulations, forest policy, and changing 
public attitudes. 
 
One NCSSF-sponsored researcher put it this way: 
“From spotted owls to spotted frogs, from fishers to 
mushrooms and bats, we have national, state, and local 
commitments to keep them thriving in our woods.” The 
phrase “keep them thriving in our woods” poses a major 
challenge in terms of both space and time. It means that 
managers are being asked to maintain biodiversity not only 
at the stand level (which itself is complicated), but also at 
the landscape level, and do it over time (for decades in the 
future), and within the land’s historical context. 
 
The larger the scale and the longer the time, the 
easier it becomes to sustain the native biodiversity of a 
forest. It is impossible to accomplish this at the stand 
scale over short periods of time because parts of the total 
biodiversity of a forest occur only in early stages of stand 
development and other parts occur only in old-growth. 
Obviously, one cannot have both at the same time at the 
stand scale. Thus the need for landscape-scale planning 
and management.
 
Landscape is a term that involves scales from small 
watersheds to entire regions. Landscapes are a mix of 
various types of land cover resulting from natural  
conditions, disturbance regimes and human activities 
FigureS 7.1 a & b Landscape planning has taken great 
strides in the past decade with the help of increasingly 
sophisticated computer models called Decision Support 
Systems (DSSs), capable of forecasting change,  
including land use change like the 50-year projection 
shown here. The ability to simulate, not just a single 
town, but multiple communities across a regional 
landscape, decades into the future, with industrial and 
retail expansion, roads and major highways, residential 
growth and forest use change; based on realistic  
projections and input from stakeholder groups, is a 
powerful tool. DSSs can help do that, while also  
calculating forest acreage loss and providing insight 
into the potential impact on certain wildlife species 
populations and overall biodiversity. 
Figure 7.1 a
Why is this subject important?
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
C H A P T E R
7

135
Why is this subject important?
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
(Chapters 1, 2, and 3). Managing forests at the  
landscape scale often requires collaboration and coordi-
nation of activities across jurisdictions, because species 
and ecosystems do not follow legal boundaries. Consider 
for example birds that migrate each year, breeding in 
North America and wintering in South America, or fish 
that spawn in forested watersheds, migrate to oceans for 
part of their life, and return to the original watershed to 
continue their life cycle. While each forest stand  
determines what species can live there, some species 
occur only because of interactions between stand and 
landscape habitat patterns (more about this below).  
Biodiversity conservation requires both stand and  
landscape considerations when managing forest species 
and the processes that support them. All of this de-
mands planning at the landscape level and has fostered 
a relatively new area of forest science that uses computer 
models called decision support systems (DSSs) to assess 
the impacts of management policies on biodiversity. 
 
This chapter begins with a description of DSSs. It 
makes the important point that these analytic tools can 
help managers make decisions but can’t make decisions 
for them. Instead, DDSs help us think about the conse-
quences of alternative actions. Scattered throughout the 
chapter are highlight boxes describing case studies where 
DSSs have been applied. They demonstrate the variety 
of situations where landscape planning is essential. In 
addition, two NCSSF-sponsored projects, one from the 
Oregon Coast Range and the other from the Southeast 
Coastal Plain, are offered as examples of what decision 
support tools can tell us about the effects of forest policy 
and management strategies on biodiversity. Be advised 
that the results of these examples do not apply directly 
to other regions. You are encouraged to find regionally 
relevant models for your area. Some are identified in  
the chapter and others can be found in the appendix 
references for this chapter.
 
Landscape-scale planning is important now, and it 
will become even more important in the future because, 
although species and ecosystems are not confined 
by ownership boundaries, the management policies 
of various owners across a region set the pattern for 
biodiversity. If full biodiversity conservation is the goal, 
stakeholders must be able to examine landscapes across 
ownerships and assess the effects of forest management 
policy over both space and time (Figure 7.1 A and B).
Figure 7.1 B
C H A P T E R
7

136
LANDSCAPE-SCALE PLANNING AND DECISION  
SUPPORT SYSTEMS 
 
The use of DSSs in landscape-scale planning allows 
the planners to examine policy effects on specific aspects 
of biodiversity and provides greater understanding of the 
consequences. It gives a context to forest policy – a way 
to see how it fits across the landscape and over time. We 
will look at two landscape-planning efforts that evaluate 
policy effects in two major timber regions, a mixed-owner-
ship landscape in the Oregon Coast Range and an industrial 
ownership in the Southeast Coastal Plain. But first, here’s 
some background information on DSSs.
What are DSSs? 
 
The term DSS is often used to describe a type of 
computer software, but in more general terms it could be 
any system for supporting decisions, whether or not it uses 
computers. DSSs are tools that provide help with complex 
decisions that involve multiple objectives and uncertainty. 
Notice the word “help” – a DSS is not a tool that makes 
decisions, but it can provide valuable guidance for the 
policymaker. For example, a DSS could give you guidance 
regarding the identification of an invasive species problem 
and the management options for dealing with its control 
and point to other sources of information that might help. 
But it would still be up to you to consider all the information 
and make a final informed decision. 
Landscape-scale planning and decision support systems
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
C H A P T E R
7
DSS Example 1:  
Baltimore Reservoirs Forest Conservation Plan
Timeframe: 2000 – 2003
Spatial size: This landscape analysis covered 17,580 
acres (7,113 hectares) divided into 836 stands.  
Fourteen forest plant communities were identified 
along with many forest habitat structure elements 
(vertical canopy structure, 
interior habitat, large down 
logs). No individual species 
needs were tracked and 
no temporal aspect was 
analyzed (current inventory 
only).
DSS Used:  
NED-1 and ArcView GIS
Description:  Baltimore city 
government wanted to 
analyze the risks to the long-
term sustainability of their 
reservoir lands and develop 
and evaluate alternative 
Christine Duce
Figure 7.9 The City of Baltimore 
owns and manages three  
reservoirs that supply water to 
over 1.8 million people.
management scenarios. Maintaining water quality 
was the primary goal but others included maintain-
ing and enhancing the forest habitat to contribute to 
regional biodiversity.
For more information:  
http://cityservices.baltimorecity.gov/dpw/waterwaste-
water03/watershed_fcp/cfcp2004.pdf

137
can be used as exploratory aids to help people think 
through problems and as games to analyze both problems 
and solutions. A variety of alternative outcomes may be 
examined by repeatedly running a DSS model. 
Different Categories of DSSs and What They Mean
 
While conducting a survey of DSSs, NCSSF-sponsored 
researchers found over 100 systems and screened them 
down to 32 that fit one of the following categories:
s systems that focus on wildlife and biodiversity
s systems that focus on forestry
s general-purpose DSSs with application to forest  
biodiversity issues
s regional assessments that include forest biodiversity as 
a component. 
Landscape-scale planning and decision support systems
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
Focus	
Function	
Acronym & Full Name/ 
	
	
Organization
Biodiversity 
Reserve selection 
CAPS (Conservation Assessment  
 
 
and Prioritization System)
Biodiversity 
Reserve selection 
Sites
Biodiversity 
Reserve selection 
Vista (NatureServe)
Biodiversity 
Population modeling 
RAMAS
Forestry 
Activity scheduling 
Habplan
Forestry 
Activity scheduling 
Woodstock (Woodstock, Spatial  
 
 
Woodstock & Stanley)
Forestry 
Forest growth  
NED 
 
and management
Forestry 
Forest growth  
LANDIS 
 
and management
Forestry 
Forest growth  
LMS 
 
and management
Forestry 
Forest growth  
VDDT / TELSA 
 
and management
Forestry 
Forest growth  
RMLANDS 
 
and management
General 
Evaluation and  
EMDS (Ecosystem Management 
 
prioritization 
Decision Support)
Regional  
Forest growth 
CLAMS (Coastal Landscape 
Assessment 
and management 
Analysis and Modeling System)
Table 7.1 Focus and function of some DSSs examined by 
NCSSF researchers
C H A P T E R
7
 
DSSs can be sophisticated computer models, capable of 
handling millions of pieces of information. They have proven 
helpful in many fields, including business planning, medical 
diagnosis, and air traffic control systems. In forestry, they 
were first used to schedule timber harvests, select silvicultur-
al treatments, and evaluate insect and disease management 
options. Over time, they also have been recognized for their 
potential to assist in sustainable management of natural 
resources, because they can model complex processes and 
integrate knowledge from diverse academic disciplines. 
Why are They Called DSSs?
 
DSSs consist of three parts: data management,  
analytical computer models, and a user-friendly interface. 
They are called DSSs because they:
s evaluate alternative options or scenarios (decision)
s help to deal with complexity (support)
s have a clear, reproducible protocol (system).
How DSSs Can Help
 
Managers are asking questions about sustaining  
biodiversity over thousands and even millions of acres. Many 
of these questions reach decades into the future. It would 
be impossible to analyze the information needed to answer 
these questions without computers. They can keep track of 
and process vast amounts of information, but they must be 
carefully programmed. An advantage of using DSSs is that 
patterns and processes not immediately apparent to users 
begin to emerge from the results. If what emerges makes 
sense and is believable, then the user has learned something 
new that may be useful in the final decision.
 
DSSs can also help to organize and guide stakeholder 
group thinking. Let’s face it, group decision-making can be 
very complicated, especially if deliberations extend over time 
and are difficult. A DSS can help organize the suggestions 
of technical experts. 
A Misunderstanding About DSSs
 
It’s a mistake to think of DSSs as computer models that 
take in your data and crank out answers to your biodiversity 
problems. Instead, they should be seen as one step in the 
decision process, tools that can enhance the deliberations 
about biodiversity problems. They are also referred to as  
deliberation support tools, because they can inform the 
debate and deliberation about a problem. They also  

138
Landscape-scale planning and decision support systems
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
 
Here’s what the categories mean:
1. Biodiversity-focused systems are designed to address 
the problem of reserve selection (finding the most efficient 
land parcels for conserving specific aspects of biodiversity, 
based on a landscape in which each parcel is assigned one 
or more biodiversity values). Often the analysis includes po-
tential costs such as the cost of purchasing the land. Other 
biodiversity DSSs focus on population modeling, estimating 
the size of populations over time, given various assumptions 
about breeding and available habitat (you will see this type 
of analysis in the Oregon and Coastal Plain DSS below).
2. Forest-focused DSSs fall into two types. The first 
involves models for scheduling activities. They are similar to 
reserve-selection models because they try to find efficient 
patterns for harvesting timber over time. That efficiency can 
be analyzed both in economic and ecological ways.  
The second type focuses on simulating tree growth and 
management. These DSSs can simulate either individual tree 
or stand growth over time and apply silvicultural treatments 
or natural disturbances.
3. General purpose DSSs are designed to help with  
evaluation and prioritization. They provide users with a 
framework to rate various aspects of a problem and  
combine the ratings into an assessment, such as the relative 
condition of a number of watersheds or priorities for  
restoration (you will see this in the Oregon example).
4. Regional assessments are customized applications  
designed for use in a specific region. They often involve  
several individual models linked together to provide an  
overall conceptual framework (the Oregon model is an  
example). While designed for a particular region, the 
methods and tools can potentially be transferred to another 
region with proper alterations. 
 
Table 7.1 is a handy reference if the world of DSS is  
unfamiliar territory. It lists some of the DSS examined by 
NCSSF researchers, according to their focus and function.
What DSSs Do and Don’t Do
 
As mentioned above, DSSs don’t give definitive  
“answers” that will resolve problems once and for all, but 
they can provide insights that assist with negotiation. 
 
Many DSSs specialize in predicting the impacts of 
silviculture, fire, and biological threats, but they generally 
do not include mechanisms to address the impacts of these 
disturbances on organisms other than trees. One exception 
is NED, which uses simple habitat-species matrices to give 
landowners an idea of the types of species their forest  
might support. 
 
Another significant gap is that they tend to focus on 
types and aspects of trees that are important for timber 
production. There are, of course, many other forest  
structural components that could be included in assessing 
forest habitat, and some DSSs are now integrating downed 
wood and snags. LANDIS even has the capacity to model 
effects of climate change.
 
Many DSSs can address components of forest  
biodiversity, but no single DSS exists that is easily accessible 
and can provide a manager with an assessment of the  
probable impacts of alternative forest management  
options on biodiversity. Few DSS options exist for  
assessing the effects on biodiversity of climate, biological 
agents (pests, pathogens, invasives), or fire.
 
Regional assessment DSSs can model the effects of 
silviculture and land-use change, but none address the  
influence on biodiversity of wildfire, biological threats  
(pest, pathogens, invasive species), or climate change. It is 
expected that future regional assessment DSSs will include 
climate change and wildfire influences. Incorporating  
invasive species is more challenging because of the difficulty 
of predicting what species might strike and what effects 
they might have.
C H A P T E R
7

139
Typical Situations and Relevant DSSs 
 
Researchers briefly described the following situations 
and suggested useful DSSs.
	
I am a wildlife biologist with an organization  
concerned that current or proposed forest  
management is not conducive to the long-term  
viability of a threatened or endangered species.  
I need to assess the population viability of the  
species. Is there a DSS available?
 
RAMAS is a widely used wildlife-modeling program 
for meta-populations (Chapter 3, page 72). It can be used 
to predict extinction risks and explore management options 
such as designing reserves, translocations, reintroductions 
and assess human impact on fragmented populations. 
 
PATCH, an alternative, models wildlife at the level of 
individuals and is designed to project populations of  
territorial vertebrate species through time. 
	
As a consulting forester, I work with family forest 
owners. They are interested in harvesting timber but 
often want to supply habitat for wildlife or protect 
special areas like wetlands. Is there a DSS available?
 
NED is a public domain DSS developed by USDA  
Forest Service. It helps resource managers develop goals, 
assess current and future conditions and produce  
management plans. 
 
LSM (Landscape Management System) uses standard 
inventory information to predict changes in stands and  
landscapes over time. 
 
Both NED and LSM use FVS (Forest Vegetation  
Simulator) to project stand growth and both systems are 
stand based. FVS simulates growth and yield for most major 
forest tree species, forests types, and stand conditions in the 
United States. 
	
I am part of a conservation organization that is 
concerned about the loss of wildlife habitat in our  
region and wants to find areas that are highest  
priority for preservation. Is there a DSS?
 
This is a “reserve selection” problem (described above). 
SITES has been widely used and has been adopted by The 
Nature Conservancy for ecoregional planning. It enables  
users to specify spatial criteria and display map results.  
Vista (from NatureServe, page 169) is a successor to SITES 
and operates as an extension to the newer ArcMap GIS 
software.
	
I am part of a stakeholder group that wants to 
work on an ecosystem management approach to the 
forests in our region. We are concerned with fire and 
alternative mitigation strategies. Is there a DSS?
 
Several forestry DSSs can model the effects of fire on 
forests. FVS can simulate effects of fire and the potential 
fire risks for all trees in individual stands but it does not  
simulate the spread of fire. VDDT simulates fire by having 
the user suggest the probability of fire for different  
vegetation types. TELSA can locate the fires spatially on a 
landscape. Woodstock and RMLANDS can simulate fire, 
but are very complex computer programs.
Whether or Not to Use a DSS
 
NCSSF-sponsored researchers are quick to encourage 
potential users to carefully consider whether DSSs should be 
used at all. DSSs tend to make information explicit, and that 
can sometimes lead to highly visible errors. For example, if 
a stream segment that is known to be dry gets a high fish 
habitat score, some stakeholders may get the impression 
the DSS is an untrustworthy black box. All models are  
limited, and the limitations need to be explained to the  
users. It is very important that stakeholder participants 
are given a chance to learn about the inner workings of 
the DSS. Successful use of DSSs involves small groups of 
participants who meet repeatedly over an extended period 
of time.  
Are Off-the-shelf DSSs Available?
 
Yes, many have been developed either at universities or 
federal laboratories. Some, like RAMAS and Woodstock, 
can be purchased from commercial businesses that sell the 
software and also offer consulting services. Some  
organizations develop their own in-house DSS. 
Landscape-scale planning and decision support systems
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
C H A P T E R
7

140
Landscape planning and forest management decisions in the Oregon Coast Range
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
 
Landscape-scale planning using DSSs is a way for policy-
makers, managers, scientists, and the public to explore new 
approaches to forest policy that conserve desired aspects 
of biodiversity while providing desired levels of commod-
ity production. It enables us to look at forest sustainability 
across multiple ownerships (public and private forestland, 
agricultural lands, and urban development). It allows us to 
answer such questions as how existing policy strategies and 
new approaches will affect forest biodiversity and timber 
yield in the coming decades.  
 
Until recently, such answers were limited to a single 
ownership (usually public forests) or a specific species  
(often threatened or endangered). Information was not 
available about policy interactions and their effects across 
different forest ownerships and ecosystems. Instead, most 
forest policy assessments focused primarily on economic 
implications for timber supplies (how much timber will be 
available?). What was lacking was a broader landscape per-
spective along with a view of time and geographic space. 
Today, forest policy strategies that require a long and large 
view can be matched with technology capable of handling 
the different perspectives. The CLAMS project (Coastal 
Landscape Analysis and Modeling System) allows us to see 
both the forest and the trees and answer questions such as:
s 
How will reducing the harvest from public lands affect 
private forestlands over the next century?
s 
How will today’s harvest practices affect biodiversity in 
40 or 100 years?
s 
How will various forest management strategies affect 
certain wildlife species?
 
Today’s Oregon Coast Range is a mosaic of major  
forest ownerships, both public and private, each having 
different management priorities (Figure 7.2). For example, 
USDA Forest Service (USFS) and U.S. Bureau of Land 
Management (BLM) lands provide late-succession and 
old-growth forest. State of Oregon lands contain a range 
of forest ages and structures, including young forests with 
large legacies of down wood and higher-elevation true fir 
forests. Family forest ownerships contain both young forests 
and the greatest abundance of hardwoods. Private industrial 
lands include much of the Coast Range early-succession  
forest, most of the mixed hardwood-conifer forest, and 
large amounts of legacy down wood. 
Figure 7.2 Forest ownerships in the Oregon Coast Range.
 
NCSSF sponsored part of the CLAMS project. It’s a 
regional assessment DSS that focuses on forest growth and 
management and simulates current and alternative forest 
policies and how they affect biodiversity and timber produc-
tion in the Oregon Coast Range. CLAMS provides a way for 
researchers, practitioners, policymakers, and the public to 
understand the potential consequences of forest practices at 
broad scales. One of its objectives is to determine the effect 
of current forest policy on biodiversity over the next 100 
years (see box on next page). The forest policies include:
s the Northwest Forest Plan for USFS and BLM lands
s the State of Oregon Management Plans for  
state-owned lands
s the Oregon Forest Practices Act for private lands.
Federal
Industrial
Non-industrial
State
OREGON
Forest Ownership in the  
Oregon Coast Range
C H A P T E R
7
LANDSCAPE PLANNING AND FOREST MANAGEMENT 
DECISIONS IN THE OREGON COAST RANGE

141
 
Given the current forest management policies (see box 
above), researchers set out to answer the following questions:
1 
Where will the timber harvest come from in the next  
100 years? 
2 
What will happen to ecologically important habitats?
3 
How will biodiversity change under current policy?
4 
Will current policies create biodiversity shortages?
5 
What’s the potential effect of future population growth, 
housing density, development, and land-use change 
(Figures 7.1A and B)?
6 
What’s the role of different ownerships (federal vs.  
private) in providing habitat?
7 
How can landscape analysis be used to identify protected 
areas as future sources of large down logs for streams? 
 
The CLAMS DSS provides answers, including social and 
ecological information, that places people in the landscape 
and encourages them to think about their role in creating  
the future. Here are those answers:
1 
With the current forest policies (see box), what role 
will forest ownerships play in supplying timber in 
the next 100 years?
 
Industrial lands managed on 35-to-45 year rotations will 
supply most of the future timber, relying heavily on clearcut 
harvesting and active reforestation that can be sustained in 
the future under existing policies. Since two-thirds of the 
private forests in the Coast Range are industrial, their  
management will dominate the private forest landscape. 
Family-forest management is more difficult to predict, but 
on those ownerships there will probably be few acres with 
forests over 100 years old. 
 
A small volume of timber will come from forest thinning 
on public lands (USFS or BLM). Timber harvest on federal 
lands will decline in the second half of the century as stands 
become older and are no longer eligible for thinning. 
2 
What will happen to ecologically important habitats?
 
There will be a decline in open forests. Today, these 
forests include hardwoods, remnant trees, and a dominant 
shrub cover, but hardwood acreage will decrease by 85% on 
all ownerships as conifers overtop hardwoods. Also contribut-
ing to this decline are the reforestation requirements of the 
Oregon Forest Practices Act which call for conifer trees to be 
“free to grow” within six years after a harvest, and supports 
the suppression of hardwood and other vegetation that  
competes with those conifers. 
 
Open forests with remnant trees will decrease by 20%. 
Most of the “planned” openings will be created on industrial 
lands by clearcuts, and only a minimum number of remnant 
trees will be left, the result of requirements by the Oregon 
Forest Practices Act. However, openings from wildfire or 
windstorms, which are infrequent natural disturbances in the 
Coast Range, could influence this trend. 
 
The most ecologically diverse forests will be on state-
owned lands, where the highest management flexibility  
currently exits.
3 
How will forest biodiversity change  
under current policy?
 
The CLAMS DSS results indicate that:
s Forest acreage dominated by mature and old-growth 
conifers and associated species will increase by nearly 
300%. However, that amount is still at the lower limit of 
historical levels (Chapter 4, page 102). 
s Habitat acreage for red-backed voles, a focal species  
(Chapter 3, page 75), will increase by 25%, mostly on 
public lands. 
Landscape planning and forest management decisions in the Oregon Coast Range
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
Today’s Oregon Coast Range Forest  
Management Policies
 
In the 1990s, the Northwest Forest Plan brought 
sweeping changes to USFS and BLM management in 
the Pacific Northwest, reducing timber sales by almost 
90%, the result of policies to protect threatened and 
endangered species, most notably the northern spotted 
owl. The Plan placed 67-90% of federal forestland in 
reserves of one kind or another, allowing harvests only 
to achieve ecological objectives such as late-succession 
forests. Along with the Plan, certain salmon species 
were also listed under the Endangered Species Act, 
resulting in even more management regulations on all 
forest ownerships. 
 
The State of Oregon Management Plan  
covers state-owned lands in the Coast Range and  
assures sustainable timber and revenue while providing 
for sustainable forest ecosystems and healthy water-
sheds. It calls for achieving a variety of forest structures 
including older conifer forests. 
 
Since 1971, the Oregon Forest Practices Act has 
set increasingly stringent standards for any commercial 
activity involving the establishment, management or 
harvesting of trees on Oregon’s forestlands. It controls 
those activities on all privately owned forestland.
C H A P T E R
7

142
Landscape planning and forest management decisions in the Oregon Coast Range
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
s Habitat acreage for low-dispersal canopy lichens (Figure 
7.3) will double and be concentrated on public lands. 
s Habitat for spotted owls and marbled murrelets (both 
federally listed as threatened species in Oregon, Figures 
4.28 and 4.29) will increase dramatically over the next 
100 years, but whether their populations also will  
increase is highly uncertain, as non-habitat factors  
appear to be driving population dynamics. 
s Habitat for western bluebirds, a focal species, will 
decline slightly; they need open meadows and early 
succession habitats.
s Habitat for moderate-dispersal lichens, a focal species, 
will decline and then stabilize.
s Habitat for olive-sided flycatchers, a focal species, will 
decrease at first then increase later in the century.
4 
Will current policies create biodiversity shortages?
 
The CLAMS DSS results indicate that:
s The increase in older conifer forests will be matched 
by a decline in area of other forest types that provide 
biologically diverse and unique habitat on federal lands, 
DSS Example 2:  
Chesapeake Forest Plan
Timeframe: 1999 - present
Spatial size: The Chesapeake Forest is 58,000 acres 
(23,466 hectares) on the eastern shore of Maryland. 
In 1999 the state of Maryland acquired the lands 
along with a sustainable forestry management plan 
and an ongoing contract with consultants for  
management. 
DSS Used: Tree growth simulator plus HABPLAN
Description:  A DSS was used to analyze trade-offs  
between timber production and endangered Del-
marva fox squirrel habitat, over a 50-year period.  
But when the process was opened to the public,  
access to hunting for other species became the 
dominant issue. The result was a process that fo-
cused on the values involved in the hunting debate.
For more information: http://www.dnr.state.md.us/
forests/chesapeakeforestlands.asp
Figure 7.10  Marshyhope Creek, the Rosedale Powerline  
and other land uses (pictured) contributed to the  
complications in developing the Chesapeake Forest Plan.
Conservation Fund/Chesapeake Forest Lands
Figure 7.3 The lettuce-
shaped, nitrogen- 
fixing lichen (Lobaria 
oregana) converts  
atmospheric nitrogen to 
a form useable by both 
terrestrial and aquatic 
plants. It’s more com-
mon in conifer stands 
that are at least 200 
years old and is limited 
to the Pacific Northwest 
coastal region.
Robert Logan
namely early-succession and mixed-species stands. This 
could be an undesirable change.
s The increasing contrast in habitats and reduced habitat 
diversity across and within ownerships could restrict the 
movement of some species.
s The decline in hardwoods will affect the species  
diversity associated with those forests.
s The decline in early-succession forests with openings, 
remnant trees, snags, and dominant shrubs will affect 
species associated with them. 
s Middle-age forests (50-150 years) will decline  
and not be replaced through any planned action on 
federal lands.
5 
What are the potential effects of future human 
population growth, housing density, development 
and land-use change? 
 
The CLAMS DSS results indicate that: 
s The majority of Coast Range forest will remain intact as 
long as markets exist for wood from private forests. 
s An expected 60% increase in Oregon’s population will 
mostly be felt at forest edges, particularly in the  
Willamette Valley and around the cities of Portland  
and Salem. 
s There will be a projected 10% reduction in industrial 
forests available for timber harvesting and a 33%  
reduction in family forest ownerships over the next  
100 years, with the most vulnerable forests near  
urban-growth boundaries. 
 
These answers indicate that the CLAMS DSS goes well 
beyond the level of analysis previously available to land 
managers. It can also help to develop and evaluate alternative 
policies that could lead to more effective forest management 
C H A P T E R
7

143
 
Forest management restrictions to protect threatened 
and endangered salmon encouraged researchers to look 
at fish-habitat quality in the Coast Range. They found that 
it correlated with forest ownership. For example, stream 
reaches best suited for steelhead trout occur primarily on 
publicly owned forestlands. That’s where smaller, higher 
gradient streams most suitable for steelhead reproduction 
are found. In contrast, stream reaches best suited for coho 
salmon occur on privately owned lands. Coho salmon  
occupy low-gradient, valley-bottom streams flowing mainly 
through private agricultural lands that were forestland, 
wetlands, or meadows at one time. CLAMS found that over 
the next century, it’s likely that these lands will be subject to 
more intensive land management than steelhead streams, 
with implications for coho populations. 
 
While CLAMS takes a broad look at the landscape, 
it can also be practical at very small scales. For example, 
land managers who are trying to determine where stream 
restoration should occur often don’t have much informa-
tion about where it might be most effective. CLAMS can 
tell them how well a landscape can support a threatened 
species such as salmon. In the case of coho, CLAMS can 
describe the potential for valley-bottom streams to  
produce coho habitats. CLAMS researchers also developed 
new riparian-protection strategies base on the potential for 
hillslopes and headwater streams to deliver sediment and 
wood to fish-bearing streams. They learned that it might be 
possible to develop more effective riparian policies based on 
providing disturbance processes that maintain fish habitat 
complexity. And they identified key headwater areas where 
the most wood could be provided to streams for the least 
total area in protected status.  
 
In summary, landscape-scale planning, like that in  
the Coast Range using the CLAMS DSS, demonstrates that 
forest management policies can have a strong affect on  
biodiversity. It shows how policies might effect biodiversity 
across all ownerships and allows for evaluation of  
alternative policies that can lead to more effective forest 
management in the region.
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
Landscape planning and forest management decisions in the Oregon Coast Range
DSS Example 3:  
Sandy River Basin Anchor Habitats Project
Timeframe: 2004-2005
Spatial size: The Sandy River is a tributary of the  
Columbia River, draining 508 square miles.  
The river’s mouth is within 20 miles of Portland, 
Oregon. Approximately 75 percent of the  
watershed is in public ownership and 25 percent 
private. The river supports several species of  
anadromous salmon, including spring and fall  
Chinook, coho and winter steelhead, all of which 
have experienced declines during the last century 
and have been listed as endangered under either 
state or federal Endangered Species Act.
Figure 7.11  Gordon Creek, Sandy River Basin
DSS Used: EMDS
Description:  The goal was to develop a basin-wide 
watershed restoration strategy for the Sandy River 
Basin by identifying anchor habitats – stream 
reaches that are critical for the maintenance of 
high quality habitat for four species of salmon and 
steelhead – than the greater river system. Anchor 
habitat stream segments were identified and can 
now be used to guide habitat restoration planning 
activities.
For more information:  
http://www.oregontrout.org/images/8success/
Sandy%20Habitat%20Report.pdf
Stickeen Photography
in the Coast Range. For example, what if the Oregon Forest 
Practices Act required private landowners to retain five large 
live trees per acre? Realizing that this was a way to retain 
wildlife habitat after a harvest, researchers wanted to  
know what effect it would have on certain species if it were 
used across the entire Coast Range landscape. Here’s what 
they found:
s The policy would result in increased habitat for  
red-backed voles, western bluebirds, and moderate  
mobility lichens.
s It would require landowners to leave valuable trees  
in the forest. 
s If the practice were to become policy, private  
landowners could experience a 5-7% reduction in 
harvest that would cost millions of dollars each year in 
reduced wood available. 
C H A P T E R
7

144
Landscape planning and forest management decisions in the Southeast Coastal Plains
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
 
Like forest practices in the Oregon Coast Range, those 
in the Coastal Southeast are directed by regulations and 
guidelines designed to protect habitat values such as: 
s riparian-zone width 
s regeneration and harvest methods 
s retention areas
s set-asides 
s harvest area size. 
 
NCSSF-sponsored researchers in the Southeast devel-
oped DSS tools that can evaluate the tradeoffs associated 
with some of these forest regulations and guidelines.  
These tools (see Quantitative Habitat Models box) allow 
landowners to simulate various landscape strategies and 
compare tradeoffs between biodiversity protection and 
wood production.
 
This landscape-scale project consisted of two parts. 
In the first part, the researchers developed models that 
described the relationship between elements of biodiversity 
in the southeast, (communities of birds and herpetofauna 
such as salamanders, frogs, toads, turtles, lizards, and 
snakes) and major factors that potentially affect them, such 
as landscape patterns at various scales, forest structure, and 
biomass. The researchers wanted to evaluate these relation-
ships in forested landscapes managed for commercial forest  
products. They gathered data on bird communities and 
landscape and forest structure from managed forest  
landscapes in Arkansas, South Carolina, and West Virginia, 
and collected data on herpetofaunal communities from one 
site in Arkansas (Figure 7.4). 
Quantitative Habitat Models and  
What They Can Do
 
Any successful landscape-scale approach to sustain-
ing biodiversity will depend on our understanding of the 
relationship between landscape patterns such as stand 
ages and forest types and the abundance (richness) of 
various species or species guilds (groups of organisms 
that use the same forest resource in a similar way). It’s 
essential to quantify these relationships. For example, 
while it’s obvious that the cavity-nesting bird guilds need 
trees that provide cavities, this doesn’t tell us how much 
of this habitat is required to sustain viable populations, or 
how to balance the needs of this group with the needs 
of other bird guilds that may require different habitats. 
Today, researchers have quantitative habitat models that 
allow exploration of landscape strategies and their eco-
logical and economic tradeoffs (see A Misunderstanding 
about DSSs, page 137). 
 
Here’s an important point: most studies of bird  
communities and their dependence on forest structure 
have been done at the forest plot or stand level. Unfor-
tunately, stand-level relationships rarely extrapolate well 
to broader landscape scales. That’s because the actual 
distribution of individual bird species (how they select 
habitats, their foraging and mating behavior, and their 
population dynamics) may be taking place on a much 
broader scale than the plots or forest stands where they 
were measured. For this reason, habitat models must be 
responsive to space if they are going to be used to  
simulate effects of various landscape management  
strategies or to test the effects of spatial regulations such 
as harvest area size restrictions or requirements for  
retention areas or set-asides. Before 1995 there were  
no quantitative models capable of relating species  
abundance to landscape patterns at various scales.  
Since then such models have been developed, and this 
NCSSF-sponsored project produced one of them.
Figure 7.4 Landscape planning databases came from a broad 
area in the Southeast, giving researchers confidence in 
making region-wide application of the results.
MeadWestvaco Wildlife and 
Ecosystem Research Forest
Ouachita 
Mountains
Woodbury- 
Giles Bay
Ashley-Edisto 
District
C H A P T E R
7
LANDSCAPE PLANNING AND FOREST MANAGEMENT 
DECISIONS IN THE SOUTHEAST COASTAL PLAINS

145
Landscape planning and forest management decisions in the Southeast Coastal Plains
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
Greg W. Lasley/CLO
Figure 7.5  
Acadian flycatcher  
(Empidonax virescens) is 
a neotropical migrant.
Isidor Jeklin/CLO
Figure 7.6  
Blue-gray gnatcatcher 
(Polioptila caerulea) is a 
neotropical migrant.
Figure 7.7  
Common yellowthroat 
(Geothlypis trichas) is a 
neotropical migrant.
Figure 7.8  
Eastern wood-pewee 
(Contopus virens) is a 
neotropical migrant.
Michael J. Hopiak/CLO
John Dunning/CLO
 
In the second part of the project, the bird-habitat 
models were combined with a harvest schedule model 
(Habplan, Table 7.1) to develop management scenarios for 
a large industrial forest (Ashley-Edisto District, Figure 7.4) in 
South Carolina. It’s located in the Outer Coastal Plain Mixed 
Province, south of the town of Summerville. 
 
The vegetation of the Ashley-Edisto District includes 
loblolly pine on upland sites and interior swamps of  
water tupelo, swamp tupelo, and bald cypress. Many of the 
upland forests contain isolated wetlands with hardwood 
and/or pine overstories. The bird-habitat models measured 
habitat suitability for overall bird richness and richness of 
selected guilds, including: 
s canopy nesters
s cavity nesters
s shrub-associated birds
s neotropical migrants. 
 
They also used models specific to vulnerable birds in the 
region that need conservation actions to ensure sustainable 
populations such as the:
s Acadian flycatcher (Figure 7.5)
s blue-gray gnatcatcher (Figure 7.6)
s common yellowthroat (Figure 7.7)
s eastern wood-pewee (Figure 7.8).
 
These guilds and species were selected to represent a 
range of habitat requirements.
 
The researchers simulated five forest-management 
scenarios that involved constraints on harvesting, including:
s Unmanaged (no harvest, complete protection)  
All stands were allowed to age over the 40-year  
planning period.
s Set-aside A do-nothing regime was assigned to all  
pine and hardwood stands older than 40 years at the 
start of the simulation. This gave about 24% of the 
forest area to set-asides. Most were hardwood stands 
that continued to age over the 40-year planning period. 
The intent of this scenario was to mimic guidelines that 
call for part of the landscape to be managed under 
extended rotations.
s Harvest adjacency restrictions Three scenarios  
were simulated: unrestricted, 180-acre, and 120-acre 
maximum harvest size.
C H A P T E R
7

146
Landscape planning and forest management decisions in the Southeast Coastal Plains
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
s Road closure All roads were planted with pine at the 
start of the simulation allowing them to age over the 
40-year period. This scenario removed the effect of 
roads from the analysis.
s Riparian guidelines These guidelines were tested  
using a 50-meter management zone on each side of 
the major streams. The riparian zones were unmanaged 
hardwoods that were allowed to age over the 40-year 
simulation. 
 
Throughout the simulations, there was an even flow of 
harvested acres and wood volume, preventing a large  
harvest at the end of the 40-year period. All harvested 
wood was considered to be pulpwood. The total harvested 
wood volume was calculated for each scenario.
What was the Response of Birds to the Five Forest 
Management Scenarios?
 
The unmanaged scenario yielded the greatest 
improvement in overall species richness. It resulted in an 
increase in canopy nesters, cavity nesters, neotropical  
migrants, and the eastern wood-pewee. In contrast, shrub-
associated birds decreased over time along with the Acadian 
flycatcher, common yellowthroat and blue-gray gnatcatcher. 
Of course, all of the increases also came at the expense of  
any harvested wood volume over the 40 year modeling 
simulation. Obviously, this is not an economically viable 
scenario for commercial forests.
 
The set-aside scenario was most striking because it 
benefited bird richness as a whole and many of the guilds, 
probably through increased landscape heterogeneity and a 
modest increase in the availability of older forest. In all cases 
it produced bird habitat benefits that were greater than 
the other managed scenarios (described next) and reduced 
harvested wood volume by 14%. Researchers speculated 
that smaller set-asides would likely produce a lesser, but still 
noticeable wildlife benefit. 
 
The harvest adjacency restrictions scenario had a 
small benefit for some groups, but at considerable cost,  
because these restrictions prevented some larger stands 
from being harvested. In contrast to expectations, this 
scenario did not generate significant benefits. While harvest 
block size restrictions may meet aesthetic objectives, they 
don’t appear to meet some biological objectives.
	
The road closure scenario did not have a large  
impact, indicating that edges caused by roads, at least in 
this study, did not influence diversity, nor did roads cause 
either a positive or negative effect overall. 
 
The riparian buffer scenario (50-meters) had a  
neutral effect. It did not benefit any of the individual  
species or guilds, except the Acadian flycatcher (a riparian-
dependent bird).
 
Taken together, the harvest adjacency restrictions, 
road closure and riparian guidelines had a negative effect  
on total bird richness, canopy nesters, cavity nesters,  
neotropical migrants, and the eastern wood-pewee. They 
had a neutral or positive effect on shrub-associated birds, 
Acadian flycatchers, common yellowthroats, and blue-gray  
gnatcatchers.
Research Surprises
 
Researchers were surprised at the high benefit/cost ratio 
of setting aside a small portion of the landscape or manag-
ing a small portion on an extended rotation. Even more sur-
prising was the fact that all bird species and guilds benefited 
at least to some degree compared to the other manage-
ment scenarios. These results support recommendations to 
set aside some portion of the landscape or manage it on an 
extended rotation and suggest that in at least some cases 
the cost in wood production is relatively low. Set-asides 
might be done at no cost when sufficient noncommercial 
lands, such as parks, are combined with commercial forest-
lands, but each case must be evaluated on its own merit. 
Also, set-aside costs can be reduced when these areas are 
managed for long-rotations and high quality wood. Riparian 
zones could also function as set-asides. 
 
Another surprise was that the other management  
scenarios provided little benefit to breeding birds. The 
harvest-adjacency restrictions (requiring smaller harvest 
units) provided no benefit. Riparian zones benefited only 
the Acadian flycatcher, a bird associated with riparian areas. 
However, only one riparian width (50 meters) was tested, 
and results may vary with different zone widths, age  
structures, or vegetation composition. Researchers also 
pointed out that the Outer Coastal Plain Mixed Province 
landscape includes many small water bodies (ponds, 
swamps, etc.), which may have caused simulation confusion 
in classifying riparian versus upland habitat. 
 
The researchers caution that the study looked only at 
birds and acknowledge that results could be different for 
other animals such as amphibians. They also point out that 
the results are limited by the strength of the bird habitat 
DSS models (there’s always room for improvement) and the 
extent to which birds are representative of overall biodiver-
sity, especially less mobile organisms. The results are specific 
to the area modeled. However, this kind of analysis shows 
the value of landscape-scale planning and the insight that 
DSSs provide for testing alternative management strategies. 
SUMMARY
 
This brief look at landscape-scale planning in the  
Oregon Coast Range and the Coastal Southeast indicates 
that DSSs can help managers understand the effects of  
forest policy on biodiversity and sustainable forestry. In  
today’s Coast Range, the various forest ownerships each 
play a role. Federal forestlands are being managed as  
natural forests, and over time they will provide predomi-
nantly late-succession old-growth, with relatively little  
early-succession habitat. In contrast, private industrial  
forestlands will provide most of the timber supply and will 
C H A P T E R
7

147
DSS Example 4:  
Summit County  
(Colorado)  
Lower Blue Subbasin 
Master Plan
Timeframe: 1995-2000
Spatial size: The analysis 
looked at 178,400 acres 
(72,178 hectares) and 
the maximum “build 
out” estimate under nine 
different development 
scenarios. Biodiversity 
consisted of four  
measures: rare  
vegetation types, habi-
tat for species of special 
concern, neighborhood 
species richness and 
economically important 
species habitat.
DSS Used: custom GIS application (System for  
Conservation Planning – ScoP)
Description: Summit County, CO is home to the  
mountain resorts of Breckenridge, Vail and Keystone 
and has been one of the fastest growing in the  
nation. 80 percent of the county land area is The 
White River National Forest. Researchers at Colorado 
State University helped county government  
Figure 7.12  Lower Blue Subbasin, Summit County, CO. 
David Theobald
and stakeholders integrate biodiversity information 
into county-level planning and understand the impact 
of development regulations on biodiversity by  
projecting the landscape to maximum allowed  
development density. 
For more information:  
http://www.consecol.org/vol6/iss1/art5
s Landscape-scale analyses are needed in other forest 
regions to assess the effects of forest management 
policies on biodiversity. Cross-ownership simulations are 
important. The problem of forest sustainability is that 
species and ecosystems do not follow legal boundaries, 
but policies of forest owners do set the direction for 
Summary
Landscape-scale planning and biodiversity
do it sustainably for at least the next 100 years if local wood 
markets hold. 
 
The Southeast Coastal Plains study describes an  
approach to evaluating costs and benefits of forest  
management guidelines in commercial forest enterprises,  
by measuring biodiversity (multiple bird species and guilds) 
with spatially explicit wildlife response models.
 
Findings of these studies indicate that:
s Landscape planning with DSSs is relevant to forest  
management everywhere. 
s Forest-management policies create landscape patterns 
that strongly influence biological diversity. It is important 
to assess policy effects at the landscape scale when con-
sidering biodiversity and sustainable forestry practices.
biodiversity in a region. Unless it is very big and  
contiguous, a single ownership doesn’t provide a  
complete picture of the changes in a region, and  
policies developed ownership-by-ownership can result 
in loss of diversity or declines in some habitat types. 
However, landscape analyses within single ownerships 
also provide information about biodiversity and  
guidance for sustaining it.
s When estimating biodiversity effects of regional policies, 
it’s important to recognize stand-level characteristics 
such as tree growth after thinning and the number and 
size of wildlife legacy trees. In some cases relatively  
minor changes in stand practices can have landscape 
and regional impacts on biodiversity. 
s Spatial analysis can identify parts of the landscape that 
are crucial to biodiversity conservation and can reduce 
the cost of achieving that biodiversity (for example, 
salmon habitat protection and older forest set-asides  
for birds). 
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 168.
C H A P T E R
7

148
WHY IS THIS SUBJECT IMPORTANT?
 
Today more than ever, forest managers and policy-
makers face uncertainty. There’s uncertainty about how 
to manage the complex and dynamic ecosystems for 
which they are responsible. There’s uncertainty about 
the global markets in which they compete. There’s 
uncertainty about the societal values they attempt to 
satisfy. There’s uncertainty about future climate change. 
And there’s uncertainty about the regulatory environ-
ment that dictates their actions. But even with all this 
uncertainty, forest managers must still make decisions 
based on forest capabilities, their goals, and the best  
available science, accepting that there are limits to our 
knowledge of ecosystem-based forest management. 
 
It’s in this kind of uncertain environment that adap-
tive management (AM) is most valuable. Forest managers 
and policymakers are discovering that AM is a way to 
learn how to deal with uncertainty by deliberately design-
ing and practicing management actions as experiments 
and learning from them. AM combines research and 
management, making management more scientifically 
rigorous and research more policy-relevant. The word 
AM Example 1:  
Adaptive Management of 
Pine-Lichen Woodlands
Where: British Columbia  
(Canfor Corporation)
The Problem: Find silvicultural 
methods that maintain and 
enhance terrestrial lichens 
for woodland caribou after 
timber harvest. 
Timeframe: Ongoing for 5 
years. The slow growth  
rate of lichen requires  
several years to follow 
lichen response to stand-
management practices.
Caribou occupy forests with  
abundant lichens.
Kevin Land
White reindeer lichen is caribou winter food. Lichens grow slowly and 
mature clumps are as much as 100 years old.
Kevin Land
Why is this subject important?
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
Experimental design: Nine  
replicated treatments, approxi-
mately 100 hectares (247 acres) 
each, replicated 3 times. Treat-
ments include a variety of timber 
harvesting systems evaluated by 
monitoring pre- and post-harvest 
lichen abundance. 
Expected results: Best management 
practices that result in policy 
improvements.
More Information:  
www.wildlifeinfometrics.com
C H A P T E R
8

149
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
What do we know about adaptive management?
adaptive implies a need to adjust or continuously 
improve forest practices, based on better science, the 
lessons of experience, and changing public expecta-
tions. In fact, AM may be essential for achieving  
sustainable forestry, because it can help manag-
ers adapt to changes in environmental conditions, 
economic markets, scientific knowledge, experience, 
technology, and social values. 
 
Chapter 1 described how managers in various  
regions of the United States are trying silvicultural  
approaches modeled after natural disturbance  
regimes. The purpose is not to precisely mimic natural  
disturbance and stand development, because that’s 
almost never possible, but rather to achieve ecological  
goals. However, it’s a challenge to silviculturally mimic 
natural disturbance in order to restore ecological  
complexity. Managers need tools that lead to both  
restoration and maintenance of ecological complexity, 
while at the same time meeting timber-management  
objectives. No one can say for certain that these  
approaches will result in biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable forestry, but AM can be used to test these 
approaches, monitor their effects, and adapt to what  
we learn. 
 
AM is valuable because it forces managers to 
keep asking the correct questions and to look beyond 
traditional science. AM encourages scientists and 
managers to engage with stakeholders or sharehold-
ers, those who have legitimate roles in policy-making 
concerning forest use and management. AM is about 
learning while doing. It does not postpone action 
until “enough” is known, but instead acknowledges 
that time and resources are too short to defer action, 
particularly action to address problems of declining 
biodiversity. 
 
Despite its problem-solving potential, examples of  
successful AM initiatives are not common. While it’s a  
logical and compelling approach – learn from what 
you do and change practices accordingly – experience 
shows that AM has fallen short on delivery. For that 
reason, NCSSF sponsored a project to explore AM and 
describe what it is, how it’s different from traditional 
management, and how to use it more effectively. 
NCSSF wanted to know what factors make AM work 
successfully and what factors inhibit its success. This 
chapter describes the findings of that project. It starts 
with background information, identifies AM enabling 
factors, and provides insight from AM practitioners 
about how to use it successfully in forest manage-
ment. Scattered through the chapter are boxes that 
highlight on-the-ground examples of AM.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT  
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT?
What is AM? 
 
Here are some important characteristics of AM:
s It is a form of learning. It deliberately uses management 
actions as a source of learning to inform subsequent 
management policy or actions. 
s It is a systematic process for continually improving  
management policies and practices by learning from  
the outcomes of operational programs. 
s It is the careful combination of management, research, 
and monitoring to gain credible information and allow 
management activities to be modified by experience. It 
acknowledges institutional barriers that need to change 
and designs ways to overcome them.
s It is a rigorous approach for learning through  
deliberately designing and applying management  
actions as experiments.
 
AM was first formally developed in the 1970s (trial 
and error, its common-sense, less rigorous counterpart, has 
been around for a very long time) and has been applied to 
resource and ecosystem management problems throughout 
North America and elsewhere. It’s been applied to attempts 
at salmon rehabilitation in the Columbia River Basin while 
producing hydroelectric power, management of acid rain in 
the eastern United States, and management of water in the 
Florida Everglades. It’s also been applied to forest manage-
ment issues. For example, it has been attempted mostly 
without success in Adaptive Management Areas in the  
Pacific Northwest, with better outcome in the Clayoquot 
Sound of British Columbia and in Alberta, where the  
Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries have adopted AM as the 
guiding principle for their operations.
 
As mentioned above, AM seems so logical – learn by 
doing. Yet, as our list of its characteristics pointed out,  
AM adds a deliberate and formal dimension to framing 
questions and problems, undertaking experimentation and 
testing, processing the results, and reassessing policies in 
light of new knowledge. As shown in Figure 8.1, AM is an 
approach to management that involves: 
s synthesizing existing knowledge about a  
problem (Step 1)
s exploring alternative actions and making predictions 
about their outcomes (Step 2)
s selecting one or more actions to implement (Step 3)
C H A P T E R
8

150
about the effectiveness of the chosen actions. Ideally, the 
plan should yield information to fill the key gaps in under-
standing identified in Step 1. Proposed plans or designs 
should be evaluated on the basis of costs, risks, information 
gained, and their ability to meet management objectives.
	
Step 3, implementation, puts the plan into practice.
	
Step 4, monitoring, monitors indicators (Chapter 5) to 
determine how effectively actions are meeting management 
objectives and to test the hypothesized relationships that 
formed the basis for the forecasts.
 
Step 5, evaluation, compares the actual outcomes  
to forecasts and interprets the reasons underlying any  
differences.
 
Step 6, adjustment, adjusts practices, objectives, and 
the models used to make forecasts to reflect new under-
standing. Understanding gained in each of these six steps 
may lead to reassessment of the problem, new questions, 
and new options to try in a continual cycle of improvement.
s monitoring to see if the outcomes match 
those predicted (Step 4)
s comparing actual outcomes to forecasts 
(Step 5)
s using the results to learn and adjust future  
management plans and policy (Step 6). 
The Six Steps in AM 
 
Some of the steps in AM overlap. Others 
must be revisited over time. Some may require 
more detail than others. All the steps need 
to be planned in advance, though it may be 
necessary to modify them later. All six steps are 
essential to AM. Omission of one or more will 
hamper the ability to learn from management 
actions. In addition, documenting each step 
and communicating the results are crucial to 
building knowledge, especially for projects that 
extend over a long time.
 
Step 1, problem assessment, frames 
the problem by forcing the right questions. For 
example, in the controversy over what man-
agement strategy was appropriate for salmon 
recovery in the Pacific Northwest, it was crucial to identify 
the underlying cause of salmon decline. Fisheries manag-
ers said it was habitat loss, fishermen pointed to preda-
tors, and others said it was water pollution, hydropower 
dams, harvests or hatcheries. Most likely, all of these factors 
contribute to population conditions. The challenge in AM is 
to test each possible factor in a complex, dynamic, interact-
ing ecosystem where all the other factors may be at work. 
Step 1 also emphasizes the social and political aspect of 
AM. It’s a process of “working through” the problem, and 
is often done in a facilitated workshop. All stakeholders (or 
responsible parties in a private sector setting) most likely to 
be affected by the policies being implemented need to be 
involved in defining the scope of the management problem, 
synthesizing existing knowledge, and exploring the poten-
tial outcomes of alternative management actions. Forecasts 
need to be made about the potential outcomes in order to 
assess which actions are most likely to meet management 
objectives. During this exploration and forecasting process, 
key gaps in understanding (those that limit the ability to 
predict outcomes) are identified.
	
Step 2, design, involves designing a management plan 
and monitoring program that will provide reliable feedback 
Figure 8.1  Adaptive Management is a cycle and successful 
AM requires completion of all six steps. One cycle often 
leads to new options and continual cycles of improvement.
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
What do we know about adaptive management?
C H A P T E R
8

151
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
What do we know about adaptive management?
Low
Low
High
High
Focus on Learning
Focus on 
Management
Objectives
conventional
management
basic
research
adaptive
management
How is AM Different? 
 
It’s true that natural resource management has always 
demonstrated an ability to build on previous actions and 
outcomes and change its management policies in light of 
past performance. It’s also true that some learning takes 
place regardless of the management approach; even trial 
and error has been one way to learn and adapt by  
experience. 
 
But what distinguishes AM is its purposefulness, its 
agreed-upon goals and objectives that are used as a  
baseline for measuring progress and lessons learned. AM 
mimics the scientific method by identifying uncertainties, 
specifying and evaluating hypotheses, and designing actions 
that test those hypotheses in field applications. It replaces 
trial-and-error learning with learning by careful tests. It 
acknowledges uncertainty about what policy or practice is 
“best” for the particular management issue. It encourages 
a thoughtful selection process of the policies or practices 
that should be applied. There is careful implementation of a 
plan of action designed to reveal knowledge that is currently 
lacking. There is monitoring of key response indicators.  
The management outcomes are analyzed considering the 
original objectives. And finally, the results are incorporated 
into future decisions.
 
AM is a sociopolitical approach as well as a  
technical-scientific undertaking. It’s about changing  
relationships between scientists, resource managers and  
the public, relationships that are basic to the idea of social 
learning. The adaptive approach encourages learning, along 
with open forums that identify problems and ongoing  
learning and informed debate about alternatives, options, 
and consequences. 
 
Figure 8.2 shows a major distinction of AM. It is  
juxtaposed between managers (conventional forest  
management) and researchers (basic scientific research). In 
that position, it requires dialogue and collaboration between 
managers and researchers because it addresses the interests 
and objectives of both groups. Typically these two groups 
have operated independently. For example, conventional 
forest management tends to focus on meeting objectives, 
with less interest in learning about cause/effect relationships 
between management actions and outcomes. There’s little 
interest in systematically learning whether these actions are 
actually effective in achieving the desired outcomes. Basic 
forest research, on the other hand, tends to focus on  
learning objectives, but often for areas, scales, or topics  
that have little direct relevance to managers. AM brings  
the two together, focusing both on management and  
learning objectives.
Figure 8.2  Adaptive 
management brings 
together the strengths 
of conventional  
management and  
basic research.
C H A P T E R
8

152
What do we know about adaptive management?
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
AM Example 2: Coast Forest Strategy  
(originally the Forest Project)
Where: British Columbia (Western Forest Products 
Inc.) on 2.7 million acres (1.1 million hectares).
The Problem: Conflict over clear-cutting and the  
desire to conserve old-growth forests in coastal 
BC, led to a corporate decision by MacMillan 
Bloedel to adopt an adaptive management strat-
egy to balance ecological, social, and economic 
goals in their forestland management. They set 
out to answer the question: How can we sustain 
biological diversity in managed forests?
Timeframe: From November 1997 to the present.
Group retention harvesting (Franklin River, Vancouver 
Island, BC) is one strategy that was adopted in this  
AM project while phasing-out clearcut harvesting over 
5 years (see Chapter 1, page 45, Variable Retention).
Bill Besse, Western Forest Products, Inc.
Goal of the project: Sustain biodiversity or native 
species richness and its associated values.
Results: Among many, one came from monitor-
ing ground beetles, amphibians, and birds, and 
resulted in a decision to increase retention patch 
size from 0.6 to 1.2 acres (0.25 hectares to 0.5 
hectares), along with more flexible spatial  
distribution of patches.
More information: http://www.forestbiodiversity-
inbc.ca/forest_strategy/default.htm 
C H A P T E R
8

153
Enabling successful AM in forest management
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
What Factors Enable or Inhibit AM?
 
NCSSF-sponsored researchers used three separate  
approaches to identify the factors that enable the success 
of AM. First they reviewed earlier studies of AM. Next, they 
conducted a written/telephone survey with AM practitioners 
who had recently carried out AM projects. And finally, they 
brought together some of the interviewees in a workshop 
designed to gather practical ideas about the relative  
importance of the enabling factors. Twenty AM project 
practitioners participated in the survey. Thirteen projects 
were led by public agencies, six by private forest manage-
ment organizations, and one by a non-governmental 
organization. The projects (four are highlighted in the boxes) 
were distributed across nine states and two Canadian prov-
inces. They ranged from plot to watershed scales and from 
a few hundred to seven million dollars in project costs. Most 
of the AM projects had positive outcomes. Fourteen of the 
twenty projects led to changes in policies or future manage-
ment actions. 
 
The ten factors identified as potentially enabling AM  
are listed in Figure 8.3. Of course, these same factors can 
inhibit AM success if they are not handled properly. AM 
practitioners attending the workshop suggested organizing 
the ten factors into a hierarchy, indicating that some may  
be more important than others, or at least need to be  
addressed very early on. That doesn’t mean, however, that 
the other factors are less important, because each AM  
situation is unique. An AM initiative, led by either the public 
or private sector, will be unique in terms of agency or corpo-
rate culture or structure, relationships with other stakehold-
ers, and the scale and focus of the initiative. The importance 
of each enabling factor needs to be assessed in the context 
of an emerging AM initiative.
 
The enabling factors were organized into three tiers:
s The top enabling factor is the historical and current  
context of the problem that is driving the need for 
experimental management. This factor motivates the 
need for AM.
s The second tier includes four factors: leadership,  
executive direction, problem definition, and  
communications/organization structure. Each is  
essential for enabling AM to get started, but none is 
sufficient alone. They represent different elements  
necessary to gain and maintain a broad level of support 
for the AM initiative and achieve clarity for its focus. 
s The third tier includes community involvement,  
planning, funding, staff training, and the conduct  
of science. All are important elements needed to  
support AM. 
Historical  
Context Driving  
the Problem
Leadership
Executive Direction
Problem Definition
Communications/ 
Organizational Structure
Community Involvement
Planning
Funding
Staff Training
How AM Science is Conducted
Figure 8.3  The three tiers of AM enabling and/or  
inhibiting factors.
ENABLING SUCCESSFUL AM IN  
FOREST MANAGEMENT
 
If you or your organization is considering using  
AM in your forest management operations, this section 
should be useful. It discusses each enabling factor in  
more detail, highlighting the practical suggestions and  
experiences of successful AM practitioners, starting with  
the top enabling factor.
Historical and Current Context
 
Both the historical and current contexts supply reasons 
for an AM initiative. A problem or driving force is needed 
to get an AM project started. For example, without the 
spotted owl there would not have been a Northwest Forest 
Plan (Chapter 7, page 141). It’s also important to pay special 
attention to understanding the nature of relationships (re-
search vs. management vs. stakeholders) in the place where 
the initiative will occur. In other words, is there community-
led support or is there an existing relationship between the 
research community and land managers that supports the 
AM initiative? In contrast, is there an adversarial relationship 
that should be explored rather than ignored with the hope 
that the AM initiative will somehow overcome the situation? 
The important thing is to honestly appraise the social issues 
surrounding the place where the AM initiative will occur.
 
Once the need for an AM approach is recognized,  
leadership, executive direction, problem definition, and 
communications/organizational structure all play a part in 
the decision to proceed, and they all will help sustain the 
project throughout the AM cycle. 
C H A P T E R
8

154
Enabling successful AM in forest management
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
Leadership
 
Leadership is needed to get support to begin an AM 
initiative and sustain it over time. One person needs to 
become the project advocate, selling it throughout the  
organization. In a government agency that person (the 
forest supervisor, for example) can make all the difference 
in the world. In the private sector, the landowner, chief 
forester, or regional manager might be that person. To gain 
support, an AM initiative requires legitimacy in the organiza-
tion and an understanding among employees about why 
the initiative is needed. The leadership role may change 
as the initiative moves through the AM cycle. An initiative 
proposed at an executive level (described below) may end 
up being led at a program or project level. 
 
When AM projects are initiated from the top down, it 
is important to enable success by providing the necessary 
staffing and budgets to secure support at lower levels of 
the organization. It’s also important to tie the organization’s 
performance measurements to the initiative so it is part of 
each individual’s performance at the field level.
 
Leadership is essential but not sufficient for success. A 
key part of leadership is effective communication that gains 
support throughout the organization (described below). 
Executive Direction (Corporate Culture)
 
Current institutions are not designed to carry out AM as 
a formal endeavor. Therefore, a clear executive commitment 
is necessary for success. For example, in the development 
of the British Columbia Coast Forest Strategy (box on page 
152), senior corporate management decided that a new 
approach was needed to the way forests are managed. That 
approach was defined as AM by managers at the project 
management level. Executive direction was then critical to 
moving the company to action. It’s important to note that in 
a later change of ownership, new executives did not show 
the same support for AM, and support from other levels 
in the organization began to erode. As with leadership, 
executive direction/support can erode over time as person-
nel change, so incorporating the goals of the AM initiative 
into the organization’s performance measures may be an 
important means to help maintain support. 
 
Remember, it takes time to transform an established 
institutional culture to one that is willing to embrace the un-
certainty of AM, and it’s important to develop educational 
programs that train personnel to manage that uncertainty.
Definition of the Problem
 
Correctly defining the AM problem is critical because 
it establishes the focus of the work. Take time to get this 
right at the start and revisit problem definition through-
out, because it is likely to change as you learn more (check 
example problem statements). If you don’t do this you will 
be in trouble all the way through the cycle. Failure to clearly 
define the problem leads to later trouble maintaining an 
effective focus. It may be better not to set the focus as a 
“problem” at all, but to express it positively as a goal. Be 
sure to ask the question, “is this really the problem, or is it a 
manifestation of a larger problem?” If the “problem” does 
not capture the larger context, but only reflects a piece of 
it, there’s a danger it will not be “durable” and the focus 
will be lost with a shift toward crisis management as other 
aspects of the real problem emerge over time. Determining 
the “durable” questions should be the responsibility of the 
organization and should not be left to scientists alone.  
Scientists will rarely see the whole picture that managers 
must face because their strength is their expertise on the 
parts they know best. Expressing the problem as a goal is 
consistent with AM because it is really a tool for helping 
managers achieve management goals in the face of  
uncertainty. Coming to grips with uncertainty is a key 
feature of AM and an important element in the process of 
problem definition. Keep in mind that recognition of  
uncertainty can lead to resistance to taking an AM approach 
by the organization, but facing it head on is the only  
effective way to deal with it. 
 
When dealing with uncertainty and establishing the 
focus for AM, it’s important to make predictions about the 
expected outcome. Making predictions forces you to think 
clearly about what is known and not known and identify 
hypotheses that can be explored. Be willing to admit worry 
about uncertainty. Recognize that we do not have all the 
answers and that AM is a tool to help move into an  
uncertain world.
Communications/Organizational Structure
 
Communication needs to be two-way. It’s not just 
communicating the need for the initiative. It’s also about 
a mutual understanding of how AM may affect the needs 
and interests of others in the organization. Organizational 
structure can either help or inhibit communication. It’s im-
portant to get to the right people, but some organizational 
structures can make that difficult. For example, if there’s 
not a venue to get executives, managers, and researchers 
together, create one by meeting in the forest. It’s a neutral 
location that encourages effective communication. Keep in 
mind that:
s Academic disciplines have their own language.
s Academic disciplines may see the world differently.
s Biologists may want to work within a system.
s Engineers may want to restructure the system.
s Researchers tend to focus on what they don’t know.
s Managers tend to focus on what they do know.
 
While cross-discipline communication can be a  
challenge, so can the barriers between researchers and 
managers. Traditionally, managers have been told they 
are not allowed to do research. However, AM promotes 
cooperative management and research in the quest to learn 
and adapt to new knowledge. Develop a team atmosphere 
among biologists, foresters, social scientists, and others by 
making it clear that each brings something valuable to  
the table.
C H A P T E R
8

155
Enabling successful AM in forest management
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
AM Example 3:  
Greater Flagstaff  
Forests Partnership
Where: Coconino National 
Forest, Arizona
The Problem: With the loss 
of traditional logging  
activity, and in an atmo-
sphere of confrontation 
and public distrust, man-
agers recognized a need 
to develop harvesting 
strategies that would put 
a 180,000 acre (72,800 
hectare) landscape on a  
path representative of 
stand structures present  
prior to European settle-
ment. Managers wanted 
to find an ecosystem 
restoration approach to 
forest management while 
protecting communities  
from catastrophic wildfire 
and harvesting small diameter timber. 
Timeframe: From 1998 to present
Goal of the project: Restore the composition, 
structure and function of degraded  
ponderosa pine forests, manage wildfire 
fuels, protect communities and develop  
restoration techniques. Re-establish and 
maintain the historical range of stocking 
variability during stand restoration  
treatments. Emphasize ecosystem  
stability above fiber production and create 
stand structures resilient under natural  
fire regimes. 
Preliminary Results: Treatments have been 
refined as lessons learned from earlier  
projects are incorporated into new projects.
More Information: www.gffp.org
Existing forest conditions contribute to catastrophic wildfire. 
Complex forest structure is the goal of restoration treatments. 
Steve Gatewood, USFS
Steve Gatewood, USFS
 
Effective communication must continue throughout the 
AM cycle, in an effort to close the loop so that useful results 
get integrated into policy. Remember that AM is not simply 
about research at a management scale – the focus has to be 
relevant to management decisions. Be sure you understand 
at the beginning what key advice policymakers need, then 
target their needs specifically. Regularly report the findings 
of AM within the organization. At the end of the AM cycle, 
the strategy is to get people to use the findings. Incorporate 
those findings into guidelines. If you get buy-in from opera-
tions people, policy recognition often will follow. Finally, 
here are two keys to good communication:
s Learn the concerns of the people you are trying to  
communicate with. Be curious about why they think 
the way they do. Be a good listener.
s Be aware of how people are responding to the AM 
process. Are they engaged? Are all sides contributing? 
Some people learn best in the field, others around a 
table, so communicate in both venues.
C H A P T E R
8

156
Enabling successful AM in forest management
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
 
Next comes community involvement, planning, funding, 
staff training and how AM science is conducted. Each has a 
part in AM success.
Community Involvement
 
Community involvement depends on the AM initiative, 
and it mostly applies to AM cases on public lands.  
Community involvement is needed when there’s a clear 
public investment in the issue being addressed or when laws 
or regulations mandate it. Local community knowledge can 
be valuable for scoping and designing the AM initiative. If 
there are interested parties who can either stop or assist 
an initiative, they should be involved. Interested private 
landowners may offer their property for participation or as 
a reference site. Involve the community early so they can 
contribute to problem definition. If the people of the  
community don’t want to be involved, try to find out why.  
It may be that they don’t understand the initiative or it could 
indicate resistance to it. If it’s lack of understanding, keep 
the door open for later involvement.   
 
When engaging the public, be clear about what you’re 
inviting them to do. Some community participants will make 
valuable contributions about values and acceptable alter-
natives but may not want to be involved in the technical 
details. It may be useful to have two committees: a consul-
tative committee and a technical committee. This does not 
mean keeping the public and technical people separated, 
because they need to exchange views, but it does mean 
keeping the focus of discussions clear – not confusing dis-
cussions of values with those of technical issues.
 
A small corporate AM initiative on a plot or stand scale 
may not need community involvement. But keep in mind 
that people who could be affected by the outcome, if it’s 
incorporated into future policy or management actions, may 
be important to help close the loop of the AM cycle.
Planning
 
A distinction needs to be made between planning the 
AM initiative and how that initiative is carried out in the  
organizations existing system of forest management  
planning. Let’s look first at AM initiative planning. Once  
the problem/focus of the initiative is set, planning should 
center on designing and implementing the management 
intervention and monitoring program. This also involves 
how you want to use the findings and how you want to 
incorporate them into the policy-making process. There will 
probably be some adjustments later, but plans for how all of 
this might occur will help with success.
 
Next is how the AM initiative will be carried out in the 
context of existing forest management planning systems. 
Be aware that where the regulatory environment is highly 
risk-averse, existing planning systems can interfere with 
taking an AM approach. This is because acting on the basis 
of existing knowledge is always less risky than conduct-
ing a management experiment to help resolve uncertainty. 
Many existing planning systems tend to be rule-based, the 
opposite of AM initiatives that are designed to explore the 
consequences of different approaches, not just to follow 
the rules. So be prepared to focus effort on how to conduct 
AM within the context of forest management planning. 
Note that the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) can 
work either for or against AM. Learning is part of the NEPA 
model, so there is no reason an AM approach cannot be 
taken. However, you may need to convince people who are 
used to working within a planning system that is counter  
to AM.
Funding
 
Some people think that AM can be done simply and 
cheaply, but the opposite is true. It’s also true that having 
adequate funding to complete the AM cycle is important 
to success, but it won’t guarantee success. It may be that 
having or not having the necessary funds is an indication of 
executive support. Even with strong executive support it’s 
important to recognize that there are other constraints on 
funding cycles that may make funds available at a future 
time if they are not currently available. This is where support 
for the AM initiative from outside the organization may help 
to provide access to grants or other funding sources. Some-
times a lack of funding can stimulate other creative ways to 
get things done, but it’s naive to think you can do the work 
without sufficient funding. 
Staff Training
 
AM means doing things differently from the ways 
they’ve been done before. Embracing AM can require a shift 
in corporate culture, such as shifting from a risk averse/rule-
based culture to one that acknowledges uncertainty and 
seeks to reduce it. That’s why staff training is so relevant to 
AM initiatives. Initial training should be in the basic concepts 
of AM and the broad goals and approaches of an initiative. 
This is related to the discussion above about organization 
structures/communication. And this training isn’t just for 
staff at lower levels in an organization; it’s important for all 
levels of management. Subsequent training has to do with 
C H A P T E R
8

157
Enabling successful AM in forest management
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
details of the initiative itself. If the initiative covers a  
large area with many different people involved in the 
management prescription, training is essential to consistent 
implementation. Final training has to do with the  
knowledge gained through the AM initiative that will be 
incorporated by staff into policy and future management 
practice. Depending on the scale of the AM initiative, some 
or all of this training may be done by hands-on engagement 
of the staff in the initiative. 
AM Example 4:  
Tongas-Wide Young-Growth  
Studies (TWYGS)
Where: Tongas National Forest, Alaska
The Problem: Following clearcutting, 
western hemlock and Sitka spruce 
regenerate naturally. As those stands 
move into the stem exclusion stage 
(25-100 years old), they are nearly 
devoid of understory vegetation, with 
negative consequences for wildlife 
and fish. Is it possible to minimize the 
length and severity of stem exclusion 
by developing understory stand  
structure (herbs and shrubs) that  
supports wildlife while retaining wood 
production? 
Timeframe: From 2001 to present. 
Experimental design: Four silvicul-
tural treatments are being tested,  
including artificially regenerating alder in stands less 
than 5 years old, precommercial thinning (15-25 
year old stands), precommercial thinning and  
pruning (25-35 year old stands) and thinning 
without slash treatment (stands over 35 years old). 
Understory biomass, nutritional quality, a deer  
forage supply model, and a stand growth model 
are all being used to assess the usefulness of these 
treatments for understory forage and timber quality.
Results: Eventually the results will be used in the Tongas 
National Forest 10-year management plan. 
More Information: Forestry Sciences Laboratory,  
Juneau, AK
Stem exclusion stage of Western hemlock/Sitka spruce 
with little or no understory vegetation.
Michael McClellan, USFS
How AM Science is Conducted
 
Earlier, the point was made that AM is a combination of 
research and management in order to learn from manage-
ment experience. To enable AM, both research and man-
agement have to be transformed so management becomes 
more scientifically rigorous and research becomes more 
policy-relevant. How can this be done? First, recognize that 
large-scale AM cannot be as scientifically rigorous as small, 
controlled research experiments. There is a tradeoff. There 
must be a reasonable balance between the rigor of the sci-
entific method and the costs imposed by that rigor, because 
this issue can become an impediment to using the AM 
approach. Don’t let science hang up the process by thinking 
you can only do AM when you have teams of researchers.
One technique being tested to develop understory  
vegetation is thinning without slash treatment.
Michael McClellan, USFS
C H A P T E R
8

158
 
Here is where the distinction between passive and 
active AM is important. With passive AM a single “best-
bet” management alternative is used together with careful 
monitoring to evaluate its effectiveness. With active AM 
more than one management alternative is used at different 
places and/or times, together with monitoring in an effort to 
learn from contrasting results. Active AM offers more rigor 
and more rapid learning. However, risk-averse regulatory 
environments, concern from groups opposed to proposed 
actions, and concerns about costs can make active AM 
more difficult than passive AM, because active AM makes 
all the uncertainty about management completely open.
 
Deciding between active and passive AM requires being 
clear about what is already known and what new knowl-
edge is needed. This must happen by engaging scientists 
with management at the problem-definition stage. The 
important thing is to bring together people with the neces-
sary expertise who can provide correct answers. It’s possible 
that what is needed is the application of existing knowledge 
rather than an AM initiative. Or what might be needed is 
active AM at a smaller scale combined with passive AM on a 
larger scale. The level of rigor needed is linked to the stakes 
of the outcome. 
An Inhibiting Factor
 
While each of the enabling factors, if not handled 
properly, could turn out to be inhibiting, AM practitioners 
at the NCSSF-sponsored workshop identified one additional 
factor that may be inhibiting – the lack of instruction in how 
to do AM. Because AM is not currently being taught either 
in academic institutions or in most public and private forest 
management organizations, managers and researchers have 
to gradually learn from experience. Given the fact that there 
are no governmental organizations whose current culture, 
policy or budget is designed to support AM, managers and 
scientists find themselves trying to shift corporate culture. 
Education is important for dealing with this situation. 
SUMMARY
 
Despite the challenges of AM, the findings of this 
NCSSF project show that it can be and is successfully being 
applied to solve problems with various levels of complexity 
at different scales. There is no single formula for enabling 
AM, but the suggestions provide valuable insight for helping 
future AM initiatives. The simple act of engaging in AM may 
in itself be sufficient to create a shift in corporate culture 
that is more accepting of the need to manage in the face of 
uncertainty. Acceptance of AM requires acknowledging  
uncertainty and dealing with it. It requires people who  
accept the fact that forest ecosystems (including human  
socioeconomic systems) are constantly changing, even 
though regulations are often fixed. Regulatory risk aversion 
may make it infeasible in many forest regions to engage in 
active AM on large landscape scales. In such cases, it may 
be more feasible to use well-monitored passive AM at a 
landscape scale to assess effectiveness, combined with the 
limited application of active AM to assess cause-effect  
relationships at smaller, safer, and easier scales such  
as stands. 
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 168.
Summary
ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT AND BIODIVERISTY
C H A P T E R
8

159
Why is this subject important?
POLICY THAT ENCOURAGES BIODIVERSITY
WHY IS THIS SUBJECT IMPORTANT?
 
How forests are treated can impact their ability to  
provide habitat for rare, local or sensitive animal and  
plant species. Poor forest management or the loss of 
forests to developed land uses can cause these species to 
become threatened, endangered or extinct. Well-informed  
forest management, on the other hand, can sustain  
critical habitat and even contribute to the recovery of 
threatened species. 
 
Forest owners are often unaware of the presence of 
sensitive species, and those who are aware often do not 
know which forest management practices are or are not 
compatible with continued habitat protection. Techni-
cal assistance and financial incentive programs aimed at 
improving forest management may or may not reflect 
the best available science regarding biodiversity conser-
vation. Existing policies aimed at promoting biodiversity 
conservation may or may not serve as an adequate basis 
for supporting biodiversity-compatible forest practices, 
particularly on private lands. 
 
The Commission is committed to helping develop 
policies that encourage biodiversity conservation and this 
chapter focuses on that need.  
	
The first section of this chapter offers ideas devel-
oped from Commission sponsored research over a period 
of six years. Some of the ideas embrace guidebook topics. 
Others raise concerns that reach beyond the guidebook. 
All are meant to stir interest in future forest policy action 
and establish a forum for discussion. They should be 
particularly useful to policymakers involved in forestry 
incentive programs. 
 
The second section examines biodiversity incentive 
programs that are currently available for private forests.  
It answers the question: Do current incentive programs 
encourage biodiversity-compatible practices? Since 
private forests account for more than 70 percent of the 
nation’s forestland, they provide important public con-
servation benefits that would be difficult or impossible to 
replace if they were lost. The Commission believes that 
public policy that encourages biodiversity, especially on 
private forests, is urgently needed.
	
The final section offers policy ideas to help private 
forest owners adopt biodiversity-compatible practices. 
In Chapter 6 (Biodiversity in Managed Forests), Florida 
researchers identified several high-priority biodiversity-
compatible forest practices for the 257,000 private forest 
owners in their state. They calculated the opportunity 
costs for owners likely to adopt those practices and de-
termined that biodiversity conservation costs can be sig-
nificant (Chapter 6, page 126). Since the costs accrue to 
landowners and the benefits are distributed throughout 
society, researchers raised the question: Who should pay? 
The Commission believes that the answer lies in socially 
responsible forest policies like those described in the new 
social contract with rural America (see Karl Stauber  
reference in the Appendix).
POLICY IDEAS FROM THE COMMISSION
 
While identifying gaps in biodiversity 
science and sponsoring research to bridge 
those gaps, the Commission recognized a 
number of issues and concerns. They are 
listed in this first section, not in any  
priority order, to promote discussion and 
focus on needed action. As a backdrop to 
these ideas, it’s important to review the  
three broad principles that governed the 
Commission, described in the Introduction 
(page 6). Those principles include the  
recognition of a forest continuum, the  
importance of public permission, and the 
need to keep forests as forests. 
Changes in United States Forests and Forestry
 
The Commission policy ideas are prefaced by the 
following major changes that are expected over the next 
several decades:
s The next 15-20 years will witness the largest inter-
generational transfer of family forest ownership in the 
nation’s history. What the next generation of woodland 
owners will do with these forests – and how much of it 
will be given over to development and other nonforest 
land uses – is an immense source of uncertainty over 
the future of more than half the nation’s forests.
s The United States population is expected to increase by 
100 million in the next 35 years, mostly in the South 
and West and mostly in urban and suburban areas.
C H A P T E R
9

160
Policy ideas from the Commission
POLICY THAT ENCOURAGES BIODIVERSITY
s Along with this will come increased demand for land 
development, water, recreation, and green space, with 
an urban influence extending far beyond areas actually 
developed.
s Markets for traditional wood products are not  
projected to grow significantly, but wood consumption 
for renewable energy production is expected to more 
than double over the next two decades.
s The shift of timberland ownership in the United States, 
from industry to financial investors is now nearly 
complete and is expected to level off. Returns from 
timberland investments are expected to decline dur-
ing the next 10 to 15 years, however. Many of these 
forestlands will be sold for development. Others will be 
transferred to new forest owners whose management 
goals and objectives have yet to be identified.
Forest History is Important
 
The historical record - both ecological and social –  
provides a context for today’s forests. It tells us how and 
why our forest ecosys-
tems came to be what 
they are: the result of 
natural disturbances 
(fire, wind and flood) 
and human uses (the 
treatment of forest 
ecosystems and what 
humans think about 
forests). Forest history 
is a starting place, a 
step toward restora-
tion of forest processes 
and the preparation of 
forests for the future (Chapter 1). The question is whether  
forest history is useful in managing for biodiversity  
conservation in the future? While 
knowledge of forest history cannot 
be understated, climate change,  
human population growth, non- 
native invasives and fragmentation 
may be moving today’s forests  
in a direction quite different than 
anything in the past. 
 
Along with forest history, what 
may turn out to be just as impor-
tant is the social acceptability of landscape conditions and 
management practices. For example, modern society, for 
obvious reasons, is not 
willing to allow the full 
reintroduction of natu-
ral disturbances (forest 
fires are not allowed to 
burn unchecked and rivers are regulated to prevent floods). 
However, society does accept “let burn” policy for lightning-
induced forest fires in some forests and the reintroduction 
of disturbance through prescribed fires or prescribed flood-
ing (via dam releases). Society also accepts fuel reduction 
treatments, as demonstrated in the Southwest (Chapter 4, 
page 112), and historical fire regimes as guides in the timing 
of prescribed fire in the Southeast (Chapter 1, page 33).  
 
In the future, what will be most important are society’s 
objectives for the conservation of forest biodiversity in light 
of given land use and development changes, population 
growth, invasives and climate change. Forest practitioners, 
landowners, managers and policymakers will all be called 
upon to help society understand dynamic landscapes (how 
forests change over time), and develop management plans 
that achieve society’s objectives. 
Non-native Invasives
 
Introduced species of trees and other plants,  
insects, and diseases are a steadily increasing threat to 
native biodiversity in forests, but effectively addressing 
this issue is exceedingly difficult. Movement of non-native 
species is facilitated by the global mobility of people and 
forest products around the world. New diseases and insect 
pests are appearing each year that attack or out compete 
native species in every region of the country. This calls for 
greatly enhanced monitoring capabilities to prevent entry 
of invasive non-native species, the discovery of new invasive 
species promptly so that they can be contained, and combat 
those that are already established. More cost-effective 
monitoring strategies are needed at the national, state and 
regional scales. 
C H A P T E R
9

161
Policy ideas from the Commission
POLICY THAT ENCOURAGES BIODIVERSITY
Old-growth Dynamics
 
The role of old forests in the pres-
ervation of biological diversity is well 
recognized, but the dynamic nature of old 
forests and the role of younger forests in 
eventually producing biodiversity-friendly 
older forests are less 
well known. To ad-
equately preserve and 
protect the habitat and 
functions of old forests, 
the entire forest life 
cycle must be consid-
ered and managed. 
The extent and role of 
old forests varies with 
land-use history and 
the natural environ-
ment, and their man-
agement guidelines 
must be region- and even locality-specific. Policymakers will 
remember from Chapter 4 that the proportion of remain-
ing old-growth varies by region, and the cost of protecting 
more old-growth will be significant. 
Indicators
 
Tools and processes have been developed to facilitate 
and enhance decisions about the objectives and appropri-
ate systems of managing forests for biodiversity and other 
purposes. No single set of biodiversity indicators serves all 
situations and objectives, but there are processes for select-
ing indicators that are highly relevant and useful (Chapter 
5). However, none of these tools and processes are truly 
functional unless they are employed in an intelligent “social 
conversation” 
that brings mu-
tual understand-
ing and general 
agreement on 
forest values 
and forest 
conditions that 
are important 
to maintain or 
avoid.
Managed Forests
 
Intensively managed forests, including planted forests, 
generally are not as biologically diverse as forests that are 
managed under more “natural” systems with greater variety 
of overstory and understory species. However, managed 
forests are much more diverse than typical agricultural and 
urban landscapes, and in the context of the total forest 
landscape they can add elements of biodiversity that would 
not otherwise be present (Chapter 6). Leaving legacy com-
ponents during harvests can significantly improve long-term 
biodiversity in managed forests. The increased productivity 
of managed forests can relieve harvesting pressures on high 
conservation value forests, and create new opportunities 
for protecting landscapes where biodiversity values are the 
greatest. However, most private landowners depend on the 
economics of forest ownership to keep forestland as forest 
and provide biodiversity legacies. The reality is that there is 
a cost to providing biodiversity and currently those costs ac-
crue to private landowners while the benefits are spread to 
all of society.
The Role of Fire 
 
Many forest eco-
systems are, to varying 
degrees, dependent 
upon natural distur-
bance from periodic 
fires. Understanding 
the role of natural 
fires in a given forest 
ecosystem is key to 
maintaining natural 
species diversity. In 
the West, for example, it is vital to manage understory fuel 
loads to maintain natural fires regimes, and minimize large 
catastrophic wildfires that have negative ecological effects 
as well as unacceptable social and economic impacts. In the 
South, maintaining the traditional role of fire in pine forests 
is increasingly challenging, with significant implications for 
future biodiversity. Air-quality regulations must be modified 
C H A P T E R
9

162
Policy ideas from the Commission
POLICY THAT ENCOURAGES BIODIVERSITY
to accommodate prescribed fire if we are to sustain biodi-
versity values and avoid future increases in catastrophic wild-
fires. In those landscapes where the barriers to prescribed 
fire are insurmountable, alternative approaches must be 
found to replicate the essential ecological functions of fire.   
Decision Support 
Systems and the 
Concept of Scale
 
Policymakers 
faced with choices 
that affect forests and 
biodiversity need bet-
ter decision support 
tools. At the same 
time, they must keep 
in mind that complex 
models are effective 
aids to policy-making, 
but they do not make decisions by themselves (Chapter 7). 
All decision support system models are abstractions that 
can, at best, only approximate the complex web of biologi-
cal interrelationships that exist in the forest as a community 
of organisms. Decisions about the whole forest need to be 
made through social processes aided by models and other 
data sources. Properly used, decision support systems can 
inform the social debate about desired future conditions 
and help find a path to accomplish these objectives. 
 
The degree to which biodiversity is enhanced or dimin-
ished by forest management decisions depends upon the 
results at both the stand and landscape scales. In the past, 
silviculture has tended to focus on individual stands and 
ecology has focused on the landscape, with the result that 
an integrated view of the effects of management is rare. In 
addition, with forests being converted to non-forest uses 
at scales ranging from stands to landscapes, the effects of 
land-use policies and patterns can often overwhelm the 
effects of forestry treatments. Decision support systems can 
help the policy-making process 
when managers consider scale. 
Uncertainties and Tradeoffs
 
Decisions on sustainable 
forest management often 
involve tradeoffs. The 
exact nature of these 
tradeoffs is not always 
well understood, due 
to limitations in 
scientific under-
standing or the 
policymaker’s lev-
el of knowledge. 
Forestry and biodiversity conservation require that land 
managers and policymakers make choices among objectives 
and methods based on imperfect information. Therefore an 
adaptive (learning) approach to management for biological 
diversity values is necessary and must go beyond “trial and 
error” or “learning by doing.” Formal learning designs need 
to be understood and implemented by teams of scientists 
and managers (Chapter 8). A critical role for science is 
providing reliable information about the feasibility and con-
sequences of achieving objectives; and about the benefits 
and costs of alternative methods of pursuing objectives. 
Experience shows that scientific information is often most 
useful to policymakers when it is structured as an analysis 
of tradeoffs among competing objectives with important 
sources and consequences of uncertainty clearly identified.   
Changes in  
Forest Ownership 
and Demand 
 
Forests are dynamic 
in terms of ownership 
as well as biology and 
are subject to the goals 
and values of different 
owners. Changes in the 
relationship between 
forest management and 
biodiversity conserva-
tion can be expected 
as ownership changes, 
and biodiversity conservation strategies must be tailored to 
changing ownership patterns. Similarly, as markets for  
forest products change with the global economy, patterns 
of forest use can be expected to change markedly, and 
these changes must be factored into plans for biodiversity 
conservation. Social costs imposed on landowners can 
adversely affect the retention of forestland as forest unless 
policies are provided that offset the pressure of conversion 
to so-called “higher and better” use.
Forests and Energy, Climate, and Water Policies
 
Forests traditionally have been viewed mostly as a 
source of wood, and forest policies are only now being 
developed to address the full range of ecological, economic 
and cultural values that forests represent. Forests are key to 
the wellbeing of human populations, and should be consid-
ered when developing policies in other areas such as energy, 
climate change mitigation and clean water. Forests affect, 
and are affected by major natural systems. They are, for 
example, the major on-land carbon sink, sequestering, or 
storing, large amounts of carbon, countering the effects of 
carbon dioxide emissions from other sources. They are also 
major reservoirs of on-land biodiversity. As the world seeks 
to move away from its unsustainable reliance on fossil fuels, 
C H A P T E R
9

163
Do current incentive programs encourage biodiversity-compatible practices?
POLICY THAT ENCOURAGES BIODIVERSITY
forests can provide a 
variety of carbon-neu-
tral substitutes. Tradi-
tional technologies for 
using wood for heat 
or electrical power 
generation are evolving quickly to become far more efficient 
and produce far less air pollution. Emerging technologies for 
producing wood-based liquid fuels such as cellulosic ethanol 
could become an important replacement source for petro-
leum-base fuels for the transportation sector. Forests are 
important generators of oxygen, a byproduct of photosyn-
thesis, and forests are the nation’s primary source of clean 
water, and water is already in short supply in many regions.  
Need for an Integrated National Forest Policy
 
Forest laws, regulations, and incentives must be part of 
an integrated national policy that reflects all forest uses and 
values. Many forest laws, enacted 30 or more years ago, 
are outdated and no longer fit current conditions. American 
society and forests have changed immensely since a large 
number of our forest policies, laws, and regulations were 
formulated and implemented. Some are contradictory,  
others address past needs but not current issues and  
concerns (Chapter 4, pages 95 and 100). Many regulations 
that apply to private forests have nearly an opposite effect 
from what was intended, and many “incentives” no longer 
motivate contemporary forest owners.  Unless forest  
policies are relevant, even the best forest science goes  
unused because the conditions are lacking to implement 
it. An integrated policy on forests is needed. At the core of 
that policy should be regulations and incentives aimed at 
minimizing the further net loss of forests through  
conversion and development, and ensuring that the most 
biologically diverse forests are protected and sustainably 
managed.
DO CURRENT INCENTIVE PROGRAMS ENCOURAGE 
BIODIVERSITY-COMPATIBLE PRACTICES?
 
The Commission recognized the need for an in-depth 
evaluation of forest policies, laws, regulations, and  
programs to assess whether they will be rational in the 
world of forests and people that will exist in coming  
decades, when conditions will be very different from those 
that prevailed even two decades ago. It sponsored an 
examination of existing government incentive programs 
to evaluate awareness and knowledge of these programs 
among private forest owners and to assess how many  
actually participate in them. 
 
The federal government has provided financial incen-
tives to private forest owners since the 1940s. The initial 
objective was to encourage owners to become active timber 
managers and contribute to the nation’s timber needs. Early 
incentives focused on tree planting and pre-commercial 
thinning practices. Thousands of forest owners were 
Federal incentive programs that are available to  
private forest owners include: 
s 
Taxation of harvest income as capital gains 
s 
Forest Stewardship Program (FSP) 
s 
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) 
s 
Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) 
s 
Forest Land Enhancement Program (FLEP)
s 
Conservation Security Program (CSP) 
s 
Forest Legacy Program (FLP) 
s 
Landowner Incentive Program (LIP) 
s 
Southern Pine Beetle Prevention and Restoration 
(SPBPR) available only in the South. 
s 
Wetlands Reserve Program (WRP) 
s 
Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program (WHIP). 
State incentive programs that are available to private  
forest owners include: 
s 
various types of preferential property tax for private  
forest owners in all states
s 
forest cost-share programs in some states to help 
fund timber management, wildlife enhancement, 
riparian area protection, and conservation  
easements. 
Other incentives are offered by the forest industry, 
land trusts, and conservation organizations.
C H A P T E R
9

164
Do current incentive programs encourage biodiversity-compatible practices?
POLICY THAT ENCOURAGES BIODIVERSITY
encouraged to follow intensive forest management models, 
with the help of financial assistance provided through incen-
tive programs. During the 1990s, the sustainable forestry 
concept emerged, emphasizing water quality protection, 
biological diversity, and the maintenance of other public 
conservation values derived from public, industry, and  
family forests (see box). Today the question is: Have  
incentive programs kept pace with that concept and are 
they flexible enough to address these needs? 
 
The NCSSF-sponsored research revealed that most  
federal and state incentive programs play only a limited  
role in promoting sustainable forestry practices on private 
forests. Although these incentives offer support for  
sustainable forestry, the researchers found that they are only 
a minor part of the decision-making process that private 
forest owners use in managing their land. The reasons most 
frequently offered are: 
s 
Funding is inadequate, particularly for federal financial 
incentive programs. For example, of the $17 billion in 
conservation funding authorized in the 2002 Farm Bill, 
99.4 percent was devoted primarily to farmers and  
0.6 percent primarily to private forest owners. Yet  
private forest owners control about the same amount 
of rural land as farmers – even more in the eastern 
United States. 
s 
Eligibility requirements for federal incentive programs 
vary among the states. In contrast, both state-funded 
and privately sponsored programs were rated more  
favorable in terms of program stability and effective-
ness in encouraging land conservation and quality 
forest practices. 
s 
There aren’t enough available forestry professionals 
with whom landowners can discuss the range of  
management options on site. 
s 
Inflexible federal assistance programs don’t address 
regional differences in forest characteristics and owner 
objectives. 
 
When researchers interviewed private forest owner 
groups in Pennsylvania, Minnesota, Oregon, and South  
Carolina about incentive programs, they learned that:
s 
The most widely used incentive programs were  
preferential property tax assessment at the state level 
and capital gains treatment for income from timber 
harvesting at the federal level.
s 
Private forest owners’ participation in other incentive 
programs was substantially lower. 
s 
The type of incentive forest owners wanted was  
technical assistance (one-on-one access to a forester or 
other natural resource professional) that can walk the 
land with them. This type of incentive was preferred over 
financial incentives. 
s 
The majority of forest owners acknowledged not having 
a written forest management plan for their forest.
s 
Owners expressed frustration with incentive programs 
that had inconsistent administration and implementation 
and were slow and bureaucratic.
 
To understand more about private forest owners, the  
researchers asked them to describe sustainable forestry. They 
learned that many owners have a long-term management 
perspective and see the concept of sustainable forestry as  
attractive. In spite of that, current practices on many private 
forests do not reflect the broader principles of sustainability. 
While many owners see it as appealing, its meaning is often 
misunderstood. Most owners described sustainable forestry 
as similar to sustained yield (the amount of wood a forest can 
produce indefinitely on a regular basis). Sustained yield  
management implies continuous production, planned to 
achieve a balance between the growth of trees and their har-
vest. In contrast, sustainable forestry specifically includes the 
concept of other forest values, goods, and services, including 
biodiversity conservation. 
 
Four things are clear from these findings:
1	 One-on-one access to a natural resource professional 
is a high priority among private forest owners across 
all regions. 
2	 Differences among forest regions must be  
recognized with respect to how incentive programs 
are administered and how closely they align with 
owner objectives because those interests strongly 
influence forest owners’ participation in the programs, 
and thus their effectiveness.
3	 The benefits of incentive programs must be better 
promoted because existing federal and state programs 
play only a limited role in promoting sustainable 
forestry on private forest ownerships. Many landown-
ers are unaware of these programs, and among those 
who are aware few actually participate in them.
4	 Incentive programs should include a strong  
educational component that emphasizes the  
scientific rationale for biodiversity conservation.
C H A P T E R
9

165
What policies will encourage prIvate forest owners to adopt biodiversity-compatible practices?
POLICY THAT ENCOURAGES BIODIVERSITY
WHAT POLICIES WILL ENCOURAGE  
PRIVATE FOREST OWNERS TO ADOPT  
BIODIVERSITY-COMPATIBLE PRACTICES? 
 
Most national policy efforts aimed at private forests 
have been directed at family forest owners, essentially 
ignoring industrial forest owners. That should change. While 
each group may need different tools to provide biodiversity-
compatible forest practices, policymakers need to listen to 
what owners say and provide what they want. 
 
In the case of family forest owners, research indicates 
that the key is foresters and natural resource professionals 
who can provide necessary information when they “walk 
the land” with landowners and give one-on-one assistance. 
These professionals must be able to explain sustainable 
forestry and biodiversity conservation practices while still 
considering the economic goals of landowners. 
 
This strongly suggests the need, particularly at the  
federal level, to strengthen direct landowner assistance  
programs that provide on-site consultation, even if this 
requires reallocating budget resources from financial  
incentive programs. Financial incentive programs are  
generally regarded as unstable and unreliable, in terms of 
both eligibility requirements and appropriated funding. 
Issues of distribution equity among states further cloud the 
reliability of these federally funded programs. Forest owners 
consistently expressed a need for greater access to direct 
consultation with a natural resource professional (public 
service or extension foresters rather than private consultants 
whose compensation typically is based on a portion of  
receipts from timber sales). This means that funding for 
public service forestry and forestry extension should be a 
higher public policy priority along with new or expanded 
financial incentive programs.
 
The evaluation and redesign of existing forest  
landowner assistance programs should take into account 
the following recommendations that emerged from  
the research:   
s Programs should be designed to put forest owners 
in direct contact with a natural resource professional 
as early as possible, with the development of a forest 
management plan as an explicit objective.
s Participation in landowner assistance programs should 
be linked to accomplishing agreed-upon objectives 
and outcomes for biodiversity conservation and other 
values, rather than simply adopting a particular set of 
forest management practices. Priorities for participa-
tion in incentive programs should be determined on the 
basis of measurable environmental benefits, rather than 
a “first-come, first-served” basis.
s Incentive programs should be monitored and evaluated 
in terms of their biological effectiveness and economic 
efficiency. Monitoring should be aimed at answering 
such questions as: 
• 
Are incentives really achieving biodiversity  
conservation? 
• 
Are incentives keeping up with dynamic  
environmental and ecological problems? 
• 
Is there a more appropriate incentive mechanism?
s 
Finally, programs should be designed with a single 
point of contact for forest owners. These contacts, 
whether at a state agency or university-based exten-
sion office, should be equipped to provide information 
and coordination with other relevant state agencies 
as needed, for wildlife management, water quality, 
wetlands protection, biodiversity conservation, and 
permitting of facilities, transportation systems and 
other forest management-related activities. The primary 
contact can also serve as a source of information to  
forest owners who need the services of resource  
management specialists in one of these areas.
C H A P T E R
9

166
Summary
POLICY THAT ENCOURAGES BIODIVERSITY
SUMMARY
 
Private forests account for nearly 70 percent of the  
nation’s forestland, and they provide important public  
conservation benefits. Yet each year the United States  
permanently loses an estimated one million acres annually 
to development, and many more acres suffer from  
fragmentation and unsustainable forest practices.
 
NCSSF-sponsored research has brought into focus the 
shortcomings of current incentives for forestland protec-
tion and sustainable management. Private forest owners, 
for whom the programs are intended, identify important 
opportunities for improving the effectiveness of incentive 
programs in promoting sustainable management.  
 
Simply putting more funding into nonfunctional  
programs will not help. Effective approaches should be  
augmented, and approaches that are failing should be 
reduced or eliminated. A more comprehensive review and 
evaluation of current landowner assistance policies and  
programs is needed if we are to reverse the current  
disturbing trends in the loss of private forestland and forest 
management that falls short of its potential for protecting 
conservation values.
 
No society that has destroyed its forests has survived.  
The Commission encourages the development of a new 
public consensus on how our society views and values  
forests. The United States has a remarkable legacy of  
forest recovery over the last century, but much of that is  
potentially jeopardized by population growth, urban  
development, and lack of understanding or appreciation 
of the true value of forests for wood, water, wildlife and 
biodiversity, recreation, green space, carbon sequestration, 
oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange, and other  
ecosystem functions.  Forest biodiversity cannot be  
conserved in a vacuum where other forest attributes are 
not recognized.  The rationale of “higher and better use” 
for real estate development of forestland only recognizes 
immediate, short-term financial values at the expense of all 
other explicit and implicit forest values. In reality, the highest 
and best use of a forest to society is its continued existence 
as a forest. “Keeping forests as forests” in the face of all of 
the pressures to convert them to other uses is becoming a 
new national imperative.
 
Responding effectively to this imperative will require:
s Engaging the public and stakeholders in new types of 
meaningful and collaborative social dialogue that  
creates a bold, new vision for U.S. forests and  
establishes agreed-upon management objectives,  
key indicators for preserving biodiversity and a shared 
responsibility for the concept of who pays and  
who benefits.
s Bringing the human dimensions (the understanding of 
public values, attitudes, knowledge, and behaviors) of 
sustainable forestry to the forefront of forest and  
biodiversity management and policy planning.  
s Establishing public-participation strategies that build 
long-term trust, support, and community and national 
leadership on behalf of sustainable forestry.  
s Recognizing the difference that words can make and 
the necessity of creating innovative and effective  
communication programs. Although the public  
generally supports protecting biodiversity, most people 
don’t have a consistent or meaningful understanding of 
the concept and are likely to support decreases when 
put in the context of social and economic tradeoffs.
s Changing the focus of “educating the public” to a 
multi-objective approach focused on educating  
managers and scientists as well as the general  
public – an approach that recognizes the public as an 
equal partner in conserving biodiversity and keeping 
forests as forests.         
To Learn More About This Topic, See Appendix, page 168.
C H A P T E R
9

Chapter 1 
Forest History and Biodiversity
1. Project B1.1: Land Use History Impacts on Biodiversity –  
Implications for Management Strategies in the North-
eastern U.S., including the Lake States, John Litvaitis:  
The University of New Hampshire.
2. Project B1.2: Land Use History Impacts on Biodiversity – 
Implications for Management Strategies in the  
Southeastern U.S., Josh McDaniel: Auburn University.
3. Project B1.3: Land Use History Impacts on Biodiversity –  
Implications for Management Strategies in The Western 
U.S., Gary Nabhan: Northern Arizona University.
4. Project A6: Evaluation of the Role of Ecosystem  
Restoration on Biodiversity, Robert J. Mitchell:  
Joseph W. Jones Ecological Research Center.
5. Project A7: Identification of Biodiversity Research Needs 
Related to Forest Fragmentation (Chapter 5), John A. 
Kupfer: University of Arizona.
6. Woodlands in Crisis: A Legacy of Lost Biodiversity on 
the Colorado Plateau, Nabhan, G.P., Coder M. & Smith, 
S.J. Bilby Research Center Occasional Papers No. 2, 
Northern Arizona University, 2004.  
(Not available on the NCSSF Website)
Chapter 2 
Non-native Invasives and Biodiversity
1. Project A1: Synthesis of Key Science Needs to Reduce 
the Threat Posed by Invasive Diseases, Insects, and 
Weeds to Sustainable Forestry, Elizabeth Chornesky: 
Conservation Science and Policy.
2. Science Priorities for Reducing the Threat of Invasive 
Species to Sustainable Forestry, Chornesky, E.A,  
BioScience, April 2005, Vol.55 No. 4.  
(Not available on the NCSSF website)
Chapter 3  
Fragmentation and Biodiversity
 
Project A7: Identification of Biodiversity  
Research Needs Related to Forest Fragmentation,  
John A. Kupfer: University of Arizona.
Chapter 4  
Old Growth Forests and Biodiversity
1. Project C10.1: Northeastern Late Successional/Old 
Growth Workshop, John Hagan: Manomet Center for  
Conservation Sciences.
2. Project C10.2: Northwest Old Growth Workshop, 
Tom Spies: Pacific Northwest Research Station.
3. Project C10.3: Southwest Old Growth Workshop,  
Wally Covington: Northern Arizona University.
4. Project C10.4: Great Lakes Old Growth Workshop, 
Nancy Langston: University of Wisconsin.
5. Project C10.5: Southeast Old Growth Workshop,  
Robert Mitchell: The Jones Center. 
6. Northwest Forest Plan, The First 10 Years (1994-2003), 
Status and Trend of Late-Successional and Old-Growth 
Forest. General Technical Report, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station. PNW-GTR-646, November 2005.  
(Not available on the NCSSF website)
7. Northwest Forest Plan, The First 10 Years (1994-2003), 
A Synthesis of Monitoring and Research Results. 
General Technical Report, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station. PNW-GTR-651, October 2006.  
(Not available on the NCSSF website)
Chapter 5 
Selecting Indicators for Biodiversity
1. Project A3: Survey the Lessons Learned about  
Managing Forests for Biodiversity and Sustainability 
Based on Practical Experiences, Steven R. Radosevich: 
Oregon State University.
2. Project A8: Identification of Core Biodiversity Indicators 
to Apply Sustainable Forestry, John M. Hagan:  
Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences.
3. Biodiversity Indicators for Sustainable Forestry:  
Simplifying Complexity, Hagan, J. M. & Whitman,  
A. A., Journal of Forestry, April 2006.  
(Not available on the NCSSF website)
Chapter 6 
Biodiversity in Managed Forests
1. Project C1: Templates for Forest Sustainability on  
Intensively Managed Private Forests, Kevin Zobrist:  
Rural Technology Initiative.
2. Project C1: A Literature Review of Management  
Practices to Support Increased Biodiversity in Intensively 
Managed Douglas-fir Plantations, Kevin Zobrist:  
Rural Technology Initiative.    
3.  Project C1: A Literature Review of Management  
Practices to Support Increased Biodiversity in Intensively 
Managed Loblolly Pine Plantations, Kevin Zobrist:  
Rural Technology Initiative.
4.  Project C1: A Template for Managing Riparian Areas in 
Dense, Douglas-fir Plantations for Increased Biodiversity 
and Economics, Kevin Zobrist: Rural Technology  
Initiative.
167
TO LEARN MORE
To learn more about the chapter topics, additional research and organizations involved in forest biodiversity
To Learn More About the Chapter Topics
Beneath each chapter are the research projects  
and additional references. Unless noted, all of the 
references can be found on the NCSSF website: 
www.ncssf.org 

5.  Project C1: Management Templates for Increased  
Biodiversity and Economics in Intensively Managed 
Loblolly Pine Plantations, Kevin Zobrist: Rural  
Technology Initiative.
6.  Project C3: Conservation Context of Forestry:  
Identification and Assessment of Conservation  
Compatible Forest Practices on Non-Industrial Private 
Forest, Janaki Alavalapati, University of Florida.
7.  Project C4.1: Soil Ecosystem Indicators of Post-Fire 
Recovery in the California Chaparral, Louise  
Egerton-Warburton, Chicago Botanic Garden.
8.  Project C4.2: Using Remote Sensing to Evaluate  
Biodiversity Indicators: Implications for Biscuit Post-Fire 
Restoration, Bernard Borman, PNW Research Station. 
See also the following website: www.fsl.orst.edu/ltep
9.  Project C4.3: Short-term Effects of Fire and Postfire 
Rehabilitation on the Forest Understory: A Case Study 
from the Colorado Front Range, Paula Fornwalt, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station.
10. The Possibility of Plantations: Integrating  
Ecological Forestry into Plantation Systems. Report  
from the National Wildlife Federation, May 2006.  
(Not available on the NCSSF website)
Chapter 7 
Landscape Scale Planning and Biodiversity
1.  Project A5 (East): Assessment of the Scientific Basis For 
Standards/Practices at the Stand, Management Unit, 
and Landscape Levels in the Eastern United States,  
T. Bentley Wigley: National Council for Air and Stream 
Improvement, Inc.
2.  Project A5 II (East): Assessment of the Scientific Basis 
For Standards/Practices at the Stand, Management 
Unit, and Landscape Levels in the Eastern United States, 
T. Bentley Wigley: National Council for Air and Stream 
Improvement, Inc.
3.  Project A5 (West): Assessment of the Scientific Basis 
for Standards/Practices at the Stand, Management Unit 
and Landscape Levels in the Western United States, 
Thomas A. Spies: USDA Forest Service.
4.  Project A5 II (West): Assessment of the Scientific Basis 
for Standards/Practices at the Stand, Management Unit 
and Landscape Levels in the Western United States, 
Thomas A. Spies: USDA Forest Service.
5.  Project A10: Decision Support Systems for Forest 
Biodiversity: Evaluation of Current Systems and Future 
Needs, Sean Gordon, Oregon State University. 
6.  Project A10 II: Conserving Creatures of the Forest:  
A Guide to Decision Making and Decision Models for 
Forest Biodiversity, K. Norman Johnson, Oregon State 
University.
Chapter 8 
Adaptive Management and Biodiversity
 
Project D1: Enabling Adaptive Forest Management, 
David R. Marmorek, ESSA Technologies Ltd.
Chapter 9 
Policy that Encourages Biodiversity
1. Project C2: Existing and Potential Incentives for  
Practicing Sustainable Forestry on Non-industrial Private 
Forest Lands, John Green: USDA FS, Southern Research 
Station.
2. Project C5: Assess Public Knowledge, Values, and  
Attitudes toward Biodiversity and Sustainable Forestry, 
Michael Manfredo: Colorado State University.
3. Why Invest in Rural America – And How?  
A Critical Public Policy Question for the 21st Century, 
Karl N. Stauber.  
www.kc.frb.org/Publicat/Exploring/RC015tau.pdf
4. Incentives for Biodiversity Conservation: An  
Ecological and Economic Assessment. Casey, F;  
Vickerman, S; Hummon, C; and Taylor, B.  
Defenders of Wildlife, 2006.
Nontimber Forest Products (NTFP) and Biodiversity
 
NCSSF sponsored research looking at the relationship 
between forest management practices, non-timber forest 
products and biodiversity. Researchers developed an online 
database of over 1300 current or historically harvested spe-
cies, an online bibliographic database, interviewed harvesters 
and surveyed US Forest Service and state forest managers. 
In addition, an interdisciplinary curricula was developed for 
forestry schools and management training programs that 
describes the ecological, cultural and economic importance 
of NTFPs and the role of NTFPs in ecosystem management.
1. Project A4: Assessment of Knowledge about  
Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFP) Management 
Impacts on Biodiversity, Rebecca McLain: Institute for 
Culture and Ecology.
2. Project A4 II: Non-Timber Forest Products Curriculum, 
Kathryn Lynch: Institute for Culture and Ecology.
3. Online NTFP species database available at  
www.ifcae.org/ntfp/
4. Online NTFP bibliographic database available at  
www.ifcae.org/ntfp/
5. The Relationship between NTFP Management and  
Biodiversity in the US. Submitted to NCSSF, Jones, 
McLain, Lynch, March 2004. (Revised August 2005). 
Available at www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssfl
168
TO LEARN MORE
To learn more about the chapter topics, additional research and organizations involved in forest biodiversity
To Learn More About Other NCSSF Research  
Topics Not Included in the Guidebook

Participatory Inventory and Monitoring
 
Efforts to conserve NTFP could be helped with  
inventory and monitoring programs. Inventories would 
indicate commercial quality and quantity. Monitoring would 
indicate sustainable harvest levels. 
1. Project C8: Guidelines for Participatory Biodiversity  
Inventory and Monitoring of Sustainable Forest Man-
agement, David Pilz: Institute for Culture and Ecology 
2. NTFP Inventorying and Monitoring in the US: Rationale 
and Recommendations for a Participatory Approach. 
Available at www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssfl
3. Workshop Guide and Proceedings: Harvester  
Involvement in Inventory and Monitoring of NTFP. 
Available at www.ifcae.org/projects/ncssfl
Changing Forest Ownerships and Biodiversity
 
Project C11: Changing Forestland Ownership Patterns 
in the Northern Forest and Implications for Biodiversity, 
John Hagan: Manomet Center for Conservation  
Sciences, ME.
Forest Ecosystem Rapid Assessment Scorecard
 
This is a ready-to-use forest monitoring system that 
measures forest ecosystem function. NCSSF sponsored its 
development to explore a monitoring system focused on 
measuring forest functions rather than counting species.
 
Project A9: Evaluation of Indicators of Ecosystem  
Function Applicable to Forest Management,  
Daniel Markewitz: University of Georgia
Carbon Trading: A Primer for Forest Landowner
 
Carbon trading is intended to help mitigate the increase 
of CO2 in the atmosphere. Businesses (power generators or 
other manufacturers) that emit CO2 to the atmosphere  
may want to balance their emissions through carbon  
sequestration (purchase carbon credits). Businesses that 
manage forest or agricultural lands might sell carbon credits 
based on their ability to accumulate carbon in trees or  
agricultural soils. This website, developed by NCSSF  
researchers at DB Warnell School Forests Resources, is  
designed for forest landowners who want to learn more 
about how to enter the carbon trading market. The URL is 
http://www.carbon.sref.info. It includes a carbon calculator 
and some of the current carbon sellers.  
NatureServe 
 
A non-profit scientific conservation organization that  
provides information and tools needed to help guide effec-
tive conservation action. NatureServe along with its network 
of Natural Heritage Programs operates in all 50 U.S. 
States, Canada, Latin America and the Caribbean and are a 
leading source of information about rare and endangered 
species and threatened ecosystems. They collect and manage 
detailed local information on plants, animals, and ecosys-
tems. They develop information products, data management 
tools, and conservation services to meet local, national and 
global conservation needs. 
 
NatureServe Vista is a DSS that integrates conservation 
information with land use patterns and policies, providing 
planners, resource managers and communities with tools to 
help manage their natural resources.  
 
NatureServe Explorer is a web application that  
provides an online encyclopedia of plants, animals and  
ecosystems of the U.S. and Canada. Version 4.7 is available 
at: http://www.natureserve.org.
State Wildlife Action Plans
 
Supported by the State Wildlife Grants Program, created 
by Congress in 2000, each state has developed a Wildlife 
Action Plan. The plans assess an identify species of concern, 
gather relevant information about those species, and  
document problems or threats to species and habitats.  
Many of the plans include maps showing biologically unique  
landscapes and habitat quality. All of the plans were  
submitted to the US Fish and Wildlife Service for approval. 
Contact your state Wildlife Resource Agency for more  
information. For a Review of all the State Wildlife Action 
Plans, read the report prepared by the Defenders of Wildlife,  
http://www.defenders.org
169
TO LEARN MORE
To learn more about the chapter topics, additional research and organizations involved in forest biodiversity
 
To Learn More About Organizations  
Involved in Forest Biodiversity
The Commission encourages forest practitioners, 
managers, landowners and policymakers to interact 
with others skilled in biodiversity management  
and innovation. 

170
adaptive management 
the process of learning as you go, where 
research results are continually brought 
forward and management practices are 
continually reassessed as new information 
becomes available 
anthropogenic 
resulting directly from human activity
biodiversity 
 
(biological diversity, natural heritage)
the variety and abundance of all life forms 
in a place – plants, animals, and other living 
organisms – and the processes, functions, 
and structures that sustain that variety  
and allow it to adapt to changing  
circumstances. Includes the complexity 
of gene pools, species, communities, and 
ecosystems at spatial scales from local to 
regional to global
biomass
the total quantity (at any given time) of 
living organisms per unit of space (species 
biomass), or of all the species in a biotic 
community (community biomass)
biota 
all living organisms in a given  
ecosystem, including bacteria and other 
microorganisms, plants and animals 
buffer
land set aside to block or absorb  
unwanted impacts to the area beyond the 
buffer (set asides next to wildlife habitat to 
reduce an abrupt change to the habitat)
canopy
a layer of foliage in a forest stand. Often 
referring to the uppermost layer of foliage, 
but it can be used to describe lower layers 
in a multistoried stand
climate change 
the actual or theoretical changes in global 
climate systems occurring in response to 
physical or chemical feedback, resulting 
from human or naturally induced changes 
in terrestrial, atmospheric, and aquatic 
ecosystems
cohort
a group of trees developing after a single 
disturbance, commonly consisting of trees 
of similar age. It can also include a range of 
tree ages from seedlings or sprouts to trees 
that predate the disturbance
conservation easement
a legal agreement between a landowner 
and a conservation agency that  
permanently restricts the property’s uses  
in order to protect its conservation value
conservation strategy
a management plan for a species, group 
of species, or ecosystem that prescribes 
standards and guidelines that provide a 
high likelihood that the species, group of 
species, or ecosystem, will continue to exist 
as a viable population
corridor
usually linear strips of habitat, differing 
from surrounding vegetation, that connect 
two or more similar patches and intended 
to facilitate movement or dispersal of 
organisms between habitat patches in the 
hopes that metapopulation dynamics will 
be maintained on the landscape 
cover
vegetation used by wildlife for protection 
from predators, or to mitigate weather 
condition, or to reproduce. May also  
refer to the protection of the soil and the 
shading provided to herbs and forbs  
by vegetation
demographic
relating to density, age and distribution of 
individuals in a population
disturbance
a specific event that alters ecosystem  
pattern and process by disrupting  
community structure or changing resource 
availability and allocation. 
natural disturbances  
disrupt the ecosystem and kill trees, but 
relatively small amounts of organic  
matter are consumed or removed 
human disturbances  
can mimic natural disturbance in terms 
of effects, but more often contrast 
sharply with natural disturbances in 
terms of type, intensity, frequency  
and size
disturbance regime  
the type, the frequency and intensity of 
forest disturbance. Disturbance regimes 
can determine the composition and 
structure of tree and other forest  
communities 
low-severity disturbance 
small or low-intensity fires, insect and 
disease mortality, floods and sediment 
deposits where tree mortality is light  
to moderate.
ecological processes
processes fundamental to the functioning 
of a healthy and sustainable ecosystem, 
usually involving the transfer of energy and 
substances from one medium or trophic 
level to another. Three primary processes: 
• production of sugar compounds from 
carbon dioxide (CO2), water and  
sunlight performed by green plants
• consumption of what’s produced,  
performed mostly by animals
• decomposition of organic materials into 
inorganic materials that can be used 
again by plants performed by fungi  
and bacteria.
ecoregion 
a contiguous geographic area with a rela-
tively uniform climate, possibly with several 
vegetation types, and used as an ecological 
basis for management and planning
edge
place where plant communities meet 
or where succession stages within plant 
communities come together. Conceptually, 
edges have environments significantly  
different from the interior of adjacent 
patches and typically differ in biomass, soil 
characteristics, and species composition 
and abundance  
edge effects  
the ecological changes that occur at 
the boundaries of ecosystems, includ-
ing variations in the microclimate, 
influences from adjacent communities 
and land uses, and an altered species 
composition                   
endangered species
any species of plant or animal defined 
through the Endangered Species Act as 
being in danger of extinction throughout 
all or a significant portion of its range, and 
published in the Federal Register
endemic (adjective) endemism (noun)
a plant or animal native or restricted to a 
certain country or area
a disease or condition regularly found in a 
certain area
epiphytes
a moss or lichen that lives on another  
plant, moss or lichen. Old trees may have 
many epiphytes. Epiphytes obtain their  
nourishment from the air and rainwater 
even-age silviculture
manipulation of a forest stand to achieve 
a condition in which trees have less than a 
20-year age difference. Regeneration in a 
particular stand is obtained during a short 
period at or near the time that a stand has 
reached the desired age or size for harvest-
ing. Clearcut, shelterwood, or seed-tree 
cutting methods result in even-aged stands
exotic species 
any species growing or living outside its 
natural range of occurrence and purposely 
or accidentally introduced into countries or 
regions where they do not historically occur 
extant 
currently existing
extinct
a species that no longer exists anywhere 
on Earth
extirpation 
species no longer existing in the wild in a 
certain area, but existing elsewhere
exurbanization
the migration of urban residents to rural 
environments
filter
coarse filter refers to management of 
overall ecosystems and habitats
fine filter management refers to  
management of specific habitats or 
sites for selected individual species
GLOSSARY

171
GLOSSARY
forest
contiguous area of 1 acre of more where 
forest trees of any size or age comprise 
10% or more canopy cover.  Includes  
areas where vegetation development, 
either natural or human aided, will  
eventually lead to forest but where trees 
are not yet present or are present in less 
than 10% of canopy cover
forest structure
the physical distribution of the components 
of a forest including tree density, tree 
heights, tree bole diameters, crown layer, 
shrubs and other non-woody understory 
plants, snags (standing dead trees), and 
down wood (fallen trees on the forest floor)
forest type 
a category of forest defined by its  
vegetation, particularly composition,  
and/or locality, as categorized by each 
country in a system suitable to its situation. 
The broadest general groups are:
broad-leaved (hardwoods)
coniferous (softwoods)
mixed broad-leaved and coniferous
function
the flow of mineral nutrients, water,  
energy, or species
geographic information system (GIS)
a computer system capable of storing and 
manipulating spatial (mapped) data
generalist
species that can use many different  
environments and play many different roles
green-tree retention
a stand management practice in which live 
trees as well as snags and large down logs 
are left as biological legacies within harvest 
units to provide habitat components over 
the next management cycle
habitat 
the place where a plant or animal species 
naturally lives and grows and includes  
characteristics of the soil, water, and 
biologic community (i.e., other plants and 
animals). Examples include: riparian areas, 
bottomland forests, upland forests, and 
wetlands
habitat diversity
the number of different types of habitat 
within a given area
habitat fragmentation
the breaking up of habitat into discrete 
islands through modification or conversion 
of habitat by management activities
heterogeneous 
exhibiting dissimilarity among members of 
a group
heterogeneity 
variation in the environment over 
space and time
spatial heterogeneity 
how stand structure (age, size class, 
snags, large down logs, canopy gaps 
and canopy layers) are arranged across 
a landscape
historical range of variation (HRV)
the range of variation in forest attributes 
that might be expected in a landscape over 
time under a particular disturbance regime 
(for example, frequency, type, and severity). 
HRV can be a useful context for under-
standing the state of present landscapes
homogeneous 
exhibiting similarity among members  
of a group
homogeneity 
with respect to one or more samples 
or populations: the state of being  
identical in some or all parameters
landscape
a general term that may imply scales from 
small watersheds to regions
working at a landscape scale 
integrating actions across jurisdictional 
boundaries, requiring community  
collaboration 
landscape connectivity  
a threshold phenomenon, in which 
even small losses of habitat near the 
critical threshold are likely to  
disconnect the landscape, having 
serious consequences for population 
distributions
legacies
biological pieces such as live and dead 
trees, surviving seeds, spores, and animal 
species inherited from the previous  
ecosystem on the site
matrix
federal lands not in reserves, withdrawn 
areas, or managed old-growth areas
mature trees
trees that have achieved a substantial part 
of their potential height growth
model
an idealized representation of reality  
developed to describe, analyze, or  
understand the behavior of some aspect 
of it. A mathematical representation of the 
relations being studied 
monitoring
the process of collecting information to 
evaluate if objective and anticipated or 
assumed results of a management plan 
are being realized or if implementation is 
proceeding as planned
multistoried
forest stands that contain trees of various 
heights and diameter classes and therefore 
support foliage at various heights in the 
vertical profile of the stand
mycorrhizae
fungi having a beneficial relationship with 
plant roots (aiding water and certain nutri-
ent uptake and sometimes offering protec-
tion against other soil-borne organisms)
nontimber forest product (NTFP)
any forest product except timber,  
including resins, oils, leaves, bark, plants 
other than trees, fungi, and animals or 
animal products
nutrient cycle 
the circulation or exchange of elements 
and inorganic compounds, such as nitrogen 
and carbon dioxide, between non-living 
and living portions of the environment 
old-growth
forests in the later stages of stand  
development after a forest has grown for 
centuries with only low to moderate levels 
of disturbance. These forests contain large 
live and dead trees, a variety of sizes of 
trees, and vertical and horizontal  
heterogeneity
overstory
trees that provide the uppermost layer 
of foliage in a forest with more than one 
roughly horizontal layer of foliage
parcelization
a general shift from a few landowners with 
large holdings to many landowners with 
smaller holdings
patch or remnant
a relatively uniform area of vegetation that 
differs from its surroundings
plantation 
forest stands consisting almost exclusively 
of planted trees of native or exotic species, 
and managed to generally maintain this 
composition at maturity
population
a collection of individual organisms of the 
same species that potentially interbreed 
and share a common gene pool
population density  
the number of individuals of a species 
per unit area
population persistence  
the capacity of a population to  
maintain sufficient density to persist, 
well distributed, over time
prescribed fire
a fire burning under specified conditions 
that will accomplish certain planned  
objectives
primary or original forest
an original forest, usually containing large 
trees, that has not been significantly 
disturbed or influenced by human activity. 
May also be areas that remained in forests 
throughout the history of European  
settlement, but not necessarily old-growth
processes
ecological dynamics that lead to  
development and maintenance of forests. 
For example, rates of succession, gap  
formation, low-severity fire, productivity 
and decomposition.

172
GLOSSARY
productive capacity or productivity 
a potential indicator of soil health, soil 
microbial activity, and nutrient cycling, and 
carbon storage  
a classification of forestland in terms of 
potential annual cubic-measured volume 
growth of trees per unit area at culmination 
of mean annual increment in fully stocked 
forest stands
range (of a species)
the area or region over which an  
organism occurs
refugia
locations and habitats that support popula-
tions (endemic populations) of organisms 
that are limited to small fragments of their 
previous geographic range 
reserves 
areas set aside from extractive and intensive 
uses such as mining and residential  
development necessary to protect some 
species but insufficient for full biodiversity 
conservation 
restoration (rehabilitation) 
the use of silvicultural approaches that 
sustain native biodiversity by integrating 
concepts of ecosystem response to natural 
disturbances
riparian area
an area containing an aquatic ecosystem 
and adjacent upland areas that directly 
affect it. It includes flood plain, woodlands, 
and all areas within a horizontal distance 
of about 100 feet from the normal line of 
high water of a stream channel or from the 
shoreline of a body of water
rotation
the planned number of years between 
regeneration of a forest stand and its final 
harvest. The age of a forest at final harvest 
is referred to as rotation age 
secondary forest
areas that experienced a transition in  
land use during European settlement, 
including clearing for farmland or pasture. 
Disturbances like plowing and grazing 
eliminated native vegetation
senescent
very old, with little or no growth occurring, 
and with decreased ability to resist or  
repair damage
shade-tolerant species
plant species that have evolved to grow 
well in shade
silviculture
the science and practice of controlling  
the establishment, composition, and 
growth of the vegetation of forests stands. 
It includes the control or production of 
stand structures such as snags and down 
logs in addition to live vegetation
spatial 
happening or existing across space
species richness 
a measure of the number of species  
present in a community, ecosystem,  
landscape, region, etc
stand
distinguishable, contiguous area of trees 
reasonably similar in age, composition,  
and structure
stand composition 
the mixture of tree species
stand structure  
the complexity or arrangement of  
tree age/size classes  
stand development
changes in forest stand population/ 
structure as forests age. May or may not 
be accompanied by a change in species 
composition
structure
the various horizontal and vertical physical 
elements of the forest
succession
a predictable development of an  
ecosystem, where one or more species 
replace each other as the ecosystem grows 
older. Generally the species that come later 
are more shade tolerant and are referred 
to as late-succession species, because 
they can regenerate in canopy gaps and 
maintain themselves within closed-canopy 
forests in the absence of stand-replacement 
disturbance.
succession stage 
a characteristic of many ecosystems 
that experience a change in structure 
and/or species on a given site in relation 
to time since a major disturbance 
seral stages  
include early succession vegetation 
through to later succession stages. 
In many cases, the succession stages 
reflect a shift from the dominance of 
shade-intolerant species to that of 
shade-tolerant species
suppression
extinguishing or confining a fire
sustainable forestry 
the suite of forest policies, plans, and  
practices that seek to sustain a specified  
array of forest benefits in a particular 
place. Not all forests can be expected to –  
or are capable of – sustaining the same 
suite of benefits at all times 
place  
can range from as small as a single tract 
of forest to an area the size of water-
sheds, states, regions, nations, or the 
world. As the defined place increases 
to the scale of a state or nation, the 
suite of forest benefits to be sustained 
increases to approach all possible values
forest sustainability  
the capacity of forests, ranging from 
stands to ecoregions, to maintain 
their health, productivity, diversity, and 
overall integrity, in the long run, in the 
context of human activity and use 
suite of benefits 
may include various values, uses, 
products, functions, and services 
from forests. May include but are not 
limited to wood, recreation, watershed 
protection and water quality, native 
and desired non-native species of 
plants and animals, spiritual retreats, 
non-wood forest products, landscape 
aesthetics, carbon storage, and nature’s 
processes of energy transfer, renewal 
and recycling
sustainability
a path which balances economic, social, 
and environmental considerations
a process and an aspiration, not a single, 
immutable end-point or static condition. 
Goals as well as the process for sustainable 
forestry change in response to changes 
in what society values and how science 
and technology inform management and 
conservation
temporal
of or limited by time
viability
the ability of a wildlife or plant population 
to maintain sufficient size so that it persists 
over time in spite of normal fluctuations in 
numbers
variable density thinning
involves varying the thinning intensity 
across a stand
variable retention harvesting
a specific harvesting technique that requires 
retention of some portion of a stand. The 
retained portion is distributed such that the 
influence of forest or residual trees is  
maintained over most of the area. Creates 
a multi-aged stand and patchiness at a 
stand level
well-distributed
a geographic distribution of habitats that 
maintains a population throughout an area 
and allows for interactions of individuals 
through periodic interbreeding and  
colonization of unoccupied habitats

173
INDEX
Abert’s squirrel.......................................... 110
Acadian flycatcher............................ 145, 146
Adaptive management.................... 148, 162
Area effects................................................. 74
Ashley-Edisto District................................ 145
Attrition................................................. 69, 71
Balsam woolly adelgid............................... 58
Baltimore Reservoirs................................. 136
Beech scale.................................................. 59
Biodiversity components.......................... 117
Biodiversity-compatible practices............ 125
Biscuit fire.......................................... 106, 128
Blue-gray gnatchatcher.................... 145, 146
Bottomland hardwoods....................... 96, 98
Brown-headed cowbird............................. 76
Bullfrog........................................................ 57
Cadiz Township, WI.................................... 70
Carbon trading......................................... 169 
Certification programs....................... 62, 116
Cerro Grande fire........................................ 53
Cheatgrass................................................... 59
Chesapeake Forest Plan........................... 142
Chestnut blight..................................... 56, 58
CLAMS................................................140-143
Coast Forest Strategy................................ 152
Coastal Plain forests............................. 30, 96
Colorado Plateau........................................ 49
Common yellowthroat..................... 145, 146
Condition indicator.................................. 118
Corridors.................................................81-83
Decision support systems (DSSs)...... 136, 162
Deer mouse................................................. 75
Dissection.............................................. 69, 70
Dutch elm disease....................................... 59
Douglas-fir development........................... 43
Douglas-fir plantations............................ 124
Eastern bluebird......................................... 20
Eastern wood-pewee....................... 145, 146
Edge effects................................................. 75
Emerald ash borer...................................... 59
European gypsy moth.................... 57, 59, 94
Family forest ownerships................. 125, 165
Fenders’ blue butterfly............................... 83
Fire.................8, 33, 44, 50, 53, 105, 128, 161
Flagstaff Forests Partnership.................... 155 
Forest History........................................ 7, 160
Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA)........... 64
Fragmentation.............................. 68, 71, 116
Gaps............................................................. 18
Giant reed................................................... 58
Gopher tortoise.......................................... 37
Habplan............................................. 137, 145
Hayman fire........................................130-131
Hay-scented fern......................................... 15
Hemlock woolly adelgid............................ 58
Incentives................................................... 163
Indicators........................................... 115, 161
Island biogeography................................... 71
Isolation effects........................................... 74
Ivory-billed woodpecker............................ 97
Japanese honeysuckle................................ 57
Johnson’s hairstreak butterfly................. 103
Karner blue butterfly................................... 9
Kincaid’s lupine........................................... 83
Kudzu.......................................................... 99
Landscape metrics....................................... 78
Landscape scale planning................ 107, 134
Lake states forests................................ 24, 91
Legacy structures............................ 23, 44, 95
Loblolly pine plantations......................... 123
Longleaf pine....................30, 33, 96, 98, 122
Lynx.............................................................. 20
Managed forests........................121-124, 161
Matrix lands................................................ 77
Marbled murrelet..................................... 103
Mesa Verde National Park......................... 53
Metapopulations........................................ 72
Monitoring........................................ 115, 169
Montreal Process....................60, 62, 68, 115
Mycorrhizae.............................................. 133
NatureServe............................................... 169
Non-native invasives........................... 56, 160
Nontimber forest products...................... 168 
Northern hardwoods.................................. 17
Northern goshawk.................................... 110
Northern spotted owl............................... 103
Nun moth.................................................... 58
Old-growth.......................................... 84, 161
Olive-sided flycatcher................................. 20
Ossipee Pine Barrens.................................. 10
Ownership change............................ 159, 162
Pacific coastal forests.......................... 38, 101
Participatory inventory & monitoring..... 169 
Patches of forest......................................... 68
Perforation............................................ 69, 71
Pine barrens.................................................. 8
Pileated woodpecker.................................. 14
Pine-lichen woodlands............................. 148
Pinyon-juniper forest.................................. 50
Prescribed fire...........................11, 16, 33-35,
Pressure indicator..................................... 118
Prater Canyon............................................. 54
Policy..........................................140, 159, 163
Policy response indicator.......................... 118
Port Interception Network (PIN)................ 64
Ponderosa pine................................... 49, 108
Pygmy nuthatch........................................ 110
Quantitative habitat models................... 144
Rapid Assessment Scorecard.................... 169
Red-cockaded woodpecker.................. 37, 97
Red-backed vole......................................... 75
Red tree vole............................................. 103
Red Hills, GA & FL....................................... 34
Sample effects............................................. 73
Sandy River Basin, OR............................... 143
Sirex woodwasp.......................................... 59
Snowshoe hare........................................... 20
Source-sink.................................................. 72
Stepping-stones.......................................... 83
Stoddard-Neel............................................. 34
Sudden oak death.......................... 57, 59, 67
Summit County, CO.................................. 147
Tongas-Wide Young-Growth Studies...... 157
Transition hardwoods................................. 12
Variable retention harvesting........ 28, 45, 80
Variable density thinning................... 47, 124
Weed bounty hunter program.................. 63
White pine................................................... 27
White pine blister rust................................ 59
Wildfire strategies....................128, 130, 132
Wildlife Action Plans................................ 169
Williams fire.......................................132-133
Wintergreen (Gaultheria procumbens)...... 9
Wiregrass............................................... 33, 98
Yellow warbler............................................ 76


The Guidebook is dedicated  
to the memory of 
Phil Janik 
former Commission member  
and Chief Operating Officer of the  
USDA Forest Service
The Guidebook was developed for:
National Commission on Science for  
Sustainable Forestry (NCSSF)
Prepared by:
Robert Logan
Designer:
Nancy Seiler
Illustrator:
Ed Jenne
Photo Assistance:
Eric Aldrich
Greg Aplet
Gary Boyd
Bernard Bormann
Chuck Bullington
Michelle Bussan
Jackie Caldwell
Nils Christoffersen
Marcelle Coder
Robyn Darbyshire 
Dave Egan
Paula Fornwalt
Steve Gatewood
John Hagan
Sharon Haines
Sharon Hobria
Jeff Horan
For additional copies contact:
National Council for Science and  
the Environment
1707 H Street NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 207-0007
The Guidebook is available as a PDF file at:
www.ncssf.org
© Copyright 2007, National Council for Science 
and the Environment
The National Council for Science and the  
Environment published this guidebook. All rights 
are reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or  
transmitted in any form or by any means without 
the written permission of the National Council for 
Science and the Environment.
Clark Howells
Norm Johnson
Mark McCollister
Jason McGee
Robert Mitchell
Robert Pabst
John Randall
Janice Reid
Suzanne Remillard
Barry Rice
Sarah Richards-Desai
Pete Robichaud
Eric Sprague
Paul Sternberg
Nancy Tanner
David Theobald 
Frank Vanni
Editor:
Henry Lansford
Guidebook Steward:
Jim Brown
NCSSF Program Director:
Chris Bernabo

1707 H Street NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 207-0007
