White Mountains 
Stewardship Project 
EVALUATING THE IMPACTS OF THE NATION’S FIRST 
LONG-TERM STEWARDSHIP CONTRACT
Forest treatments completed in Eastern Arizona by 
the White Mountains Stewardship Project.
Sarah Hurteau 2016 ©
Photo by The Nature Conservancy
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT - FINAL REPORT
For more information about this report, please contact: 
Sarah Hurteau, Principal Ecologist
Integrated Biological Solutions, LLC
Sarah.Hurteau@gmail.com
928.225.0272

White Mountains 
Stewardship Project
EVALUATING THE IMPACTS OF THE NATION’S FIRST LONG-TERM CONTRACT
Suggested Citation: 
Hurteau, S. 2015. White Mountains Stewardship Project: Evaluating the Impacts of the Nation’s First Long-term Stewardship Contract. 
Integrated Biological Solutions, LLC, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
For more information about this report, please contact: 
Sarah Hurteau, Principal Ecologist
Integrated Biological Solutions, LLC
Sarah.Hurteau@gmail.com
928.225.0272
IBiS is an equal opportunity provider.
Cover Photo by The Nature Conservancy
Contents page Photos by The Nature Conservancy (top and bottom), Ecological Restoration Institute (middle).
This report was funded by a grant 
from the USDA Forest Service.
Acknowledgments: 
I would like to thank Bruce Greco of the Ecological Restoration 
Institute, Molly Pitts of Pitts Resources Consulting LLC, Matt 
Hurteau of University of New Mexico, and Sue Sitko of The Nature 
Conservancy for their contributions and reviews of this report.
I would also like to thank all of the Forest Service personnel from 
the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests that helped collect or 
provided data for this report. Special thanks goes to Tom Osen 
(former), and Jim Zornes (former) Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forests Supervisors, Wendy Jo Haskins, Gayle Richardson, Jim 
Pitts, Chris Nelson, Jerry Drury, Tessa Nicolete, Paul Brown, Ed 
Collins, and Cody Hutchinson at the USFS; Walker Chancellor and 
Amy Waltz of the Ecological Restoration Institute; Kirby Bristow 
and Michelle Crabb at the Arizona Game and Fish Department; 
Dr. Yeon-Su Kim at Northern Arizona University, and Anne Mottek-
Lucas of Mottek Consulting. 
Symbols used in graphics are courtesy of the Integration 
and Application Network, University of Maryland Center for 
Environmental Science (ian.umces.edu/symbols/).
This report was reviewed by nearly all current members of the 
White Mountains Stewardship Project, Multi-Party Monitoring 
Board and several interested citizens. Special thanks to Jerry 
Brownlow for providing helpful feedback.
Information presented in this report represents the work of many 
researchers and authors. It is meant to provide a single source 
that summarizes the work of many. For more information about 
the original reports, please see the references page for citations.
July 2016
2 How To Use This Report
3 Letter from the Board
4 Executive Summary
Introduction
18 FOCUSED 
MONITORING
Outline of the four major topic areas 
and monitoring questions associated 
with each
Socioeconomics
contents
Administrative
26 LOOKING FROM
THE INSIDE OUT
Changes in internal and external cost 
to the USFS during the WMSP
Ecological
54 FIRE DRILL
How fire models compare to wildfires 
and what it means for the future
68 ALL BIRDS
Evaluating the impacts of forest 
restoration treatments on songbird 
populations
88 BEAR MOUNTAIN
Are bears in Bear Wallow? Let’s follow 
them and see.
106 BUILDING 
CONNECTIONS
How the layout of treatments impact 
wildlife habitat connectivity
94 BMPs
What are Best Management Practices, 
and why do we need them?
118 REBIRTH OF AN
INDUSTRY
A summary of the economic impacts 
associated with the WMSP
125 THE MULTIPLIER
EFFECT
How economic calculations have 
changed over ten years of monitoring
136 FROM THE 
OUTSIDE LOOKING IN
Defining Success may be a matter of 
perspective
Special Sections
24 DO WE MEASURE UP?
150 FOR YOUR
INFORMATION
Literature cited and other appendices
16 FUTURE FORESTS
32 WHERE DOES THE 
WOOD GO?
101 DIRT WORK
Concerns over soil compaction after 
forest treatments
46 STRUCTURAL 
MATTERS
Forest structure evaluations at 
multiple scales
130 SOCIAL EFFECTS
Understanding the WMSP from a 
social researcher perspective
10 RESTORATION BY 
DESIGN
Changing the trajectory of forest 
management 
40 INNER-WORKINGS
A look inside stewardship contracting 
and how it really worked
142 SUM TOTAL
Lessons learned from the WMSP
38 TO CAP OR
NOT TO CAP
How a diameter limit played a role in 
the development of the WMSP
44 THE EVOLUTION IN
TREATMENTS
49 WHAT IS DxD?
60 FIRE METRICS
86 WALLOW FIRE
104 SAN JUAN FIRE
128 JOB CREATION
112 BUILDING HABITAT
134 TEN YEAR 
SOCIOECONOMIC AS-
SESSMENT
Executive Summary

How To Use This Report
This report is broken down into six major sections:
1. Introduction
2. Administrative Monitoring Results
3. Ecological Monitoring Results
4. Socioeconomic Monitoring Results
5. Project Evaluation
6. Appendices
The gist of what’s in 
that section.
Look for the color tabs to 
identify the major sections
Key results from the 
monitoring questions.
At the beginning of each section you will find a lightly 
shaded box titled “In a Few Words” that will give you the 
gist of what’s in that section. 
The dark outlined box provides an overview of the specific 
monitoring questions addressed in this section and the 
main points of what happened.
Within each major section, a short description of the 
analysis methods, results and discussion can be found. 
Don’t be scared, no PhD required. 
This report synthesizes and summarizes many scientific 
research projects and reports, from many authors. You 
may see a little number at the end of a sentence, that 
indicates reference to the original work summarized.11 If 
you are interested in more detail about a particular topic, 
we encourage you to go to the references page in the 
Appendix to find the citation of the original work.
Message from the Board
To Our Readers:
The White Mountain Stewardship Project (WMSP) has proved to be the successful and “great learning 
experiment” that it was anticipated to be when the first tree was cut in 2004. The overall focus of the 
WMSP centered on forest restoration and reduction of fire hazards, while simultaneously building up 
a locally sustainable private wood product industry to offset some of the costs of restoration. The 
timber-harvesting contractors proved able to scale-up modern harvesting technology and industry 
infrastructure to meet the challenges of uncertain business climates that existed for the past several 
years.
The WMSP faced continual challenges and setbacks, including impacts from the nation’s severe 
economic recession of 2008 as well as the largest wildfire in Arizona’s history, the 538,049-acre 
Wallow Fire in 2011. However, the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests leadership, its partners, and 
those implementing the WMSP rose to the challenge to plan, implement, and administer the acreage 
required to meet the contract needs.
Through continual collaboration, monitoring, and adaptive management practices, the desired outcome 
of treating more than 71,000 acres of overgrown, unhealthy forests is a reality. The monitoring 
protocols and framework proved effective to help answer important questions. Additionally, they helped 
add to the tools that agency managers needed to make adaptive management decisions through the 
life of the WMSP, and beyond.
This final report describes the tenacious commitment of many partners, agencies, and organizations 
at local, regional, and national levels. These groups came together with funding, innovative contracting 
methods, implementation strategies, and a monitoring framework to blend diverse perspectives and 
ideas into effective, successful outcomes. It is hoped that this compelling story of the White Mountain 
Stewardship Project and its achievements is one of many yet to come as we work together to restore 
our forests.
Sincerely, 
The Multi-Party Monitoring Board Members
I would like to thank all the people who have been involved with the project from the start.  We lost 
few over the years. I think all of us can stand back and say, “I can finally see the forest instead of the 
trees.”  - Jerry Brownlow
2      WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
3

Executive Summary
Trying to pinpoint the “beginning” of 
the White Mountain Stewardship Project 
(WMSP) is in itself a challenge. Clearly the 
contract signing in 2004 was the official 
start, but there was a long history that 
came before, leading to that very moment. 
We said it in the Five Year Report, but 
it’s worth repeating. What began as 
an attempt to change the potential fire 
behavior around communities evolved into 
the largest and longest national example 
of how various interests, businesses, 
communities, and the federal government 
demonstrated that they can work together 
to improve local economies, enhance 
wildlife habitat, and restore forest health 
using a variety of treatments.
Early into its path, the WMSP was charting 
its own course. It was the first long-term 
stewardship contract in the nation. A 
contract with an unwritten agreement of 
a diameter cap. A contract predicated on 
expanding the scale and pace of forest 
treatments with only a handful of industry 
professionals to make it happen. All with 
limited funds in the USFS Southwestern 
Region (R-3) that were shuffled to one 
forest to essentially conduct a very large, 
very expensive experiment.
THE WHITE MOUNTAIN STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
to be able to learn from the WMSP 
successes and learning opportunities.
Even though the contract has ended, 
many felt that in order to determine final 
success, one must consider the current 
and on-going situation. As the end of the 
WMSP approached, it became apparent 
that there was not a fully operational 
plan in place to transition beyond the 
stewardship contract. 
So many people worked so hard to gain 
the progress made, and yet it could slip 
away again. 
At the end of the day, how is success 
truly determined? There is absolutely 
no question that without the WMSP, the 
communities of Nutrioso, Eagar, and Greer 
would have faced tremendous losses 
during the Wallow Fire than they actually 
did. Many of us believe this makes the 
entire project a success. 
That being said, this project has not 
been without its fair share of hurdles and 
hiccups. Many people involved in the WMSP 
have expressed that it is their hope that 
our lessons learned will be applied. 
Photo by The Nature Conservancy
The Mineral treatment areas were one of the earliest thinned under the White Mountain Stewardship 
Project. In 2014, the San Juan Fire burned through untreated forest (left of road) and into the Mineral 
project area (right of road). This picture embodies the success of the White Mountain Stewardship 
Project; improving forest health, restoring forest structure, and changing fire behavior. 
SURFACE OR PASSIVE CROWN FIRE BEHAVIOR 
Predicted fire behavior would 
be reduced from active crown 
fire to a lower severity by the 
percentage listed below. 
80%
60%
The next big challenge is figuring out 
how to develop a sustainable state-wide 
wood products industry that can support 
businesses in the White Mountains and 
those developing around the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative. One thing is clear, 
the WMSP showed that large scale forest 
restoration can be achieved, and that is a 
valuable lesson learned. 
Quantitative Objectives
Numerical objectives were set for each monitoring 
question to help evaluate the success of the project 
as a whole. This grew out of the results from the Five 
Year Report, which provided lots of conclusions, but 
the collaborative group was limited in their ability 
to determine success. Here is just one example of a 
quantitative objective.
The first five years were a time of trust 
building, experimentation, learning, and 
moving past buzz words and theoretical 
ideas to translate those into on-the-
ground accomplishments. 
With a goal of treating at least 50,000 
and up to 150,000 acres of forested land, 
the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests 
(ASNFs), their partners, contractor, and 
collaborative board really had their work 
cut out for them. They  set monitoring 
questions and data collection targets, and 
embraced the adaptive management cycle 
to improve as they went. 
The Five Year Report provided a summary 
of monitoring data at a critical time. There 
was still enough time in the contract to 
adjust the trajectories that weren’t heading 
in the right direction and to solidify those 
that were. There were many, many lessons 
learned, and even more recommendations. 
Some of these recommendations were 
heeded, while others were missed. 
The Wallow and San Juan Fires were both 
human-caused, and both burned through 
WMSP treatments. These fires represented 
both a defeat and a victory. A defeat in the 
form of 56,000 acres of project areas in 
the pipeline for treatment in the remaining 
years of the contract lost to wildfire, and a 
victory in that the treatments did as they 
were expected to do (shift fire behavior 
from crown fires to surface fires). This 
had a major impact on the final years of 
the contract. So many of the ASNFs staff 
were focused (for good reason) on the 
Wallow Fire aftermath and rehabilitation 
that some of the monitoring data collection 
specific to WMSP was not completed. And it 
bears mentioning that the USFS staff had 
a significant turn-over shortly after the 
Wallow Fire. In total there were four forest 
supervisors and three regional foresters 
that came through during the ten-year 
project, not to mention all of the District 
level staff that changed during this time. 
Even with all of those “basic” challenges, 
the WMSP collaborative group still 
managed to work together, and utilize 
an adaptive management process. The 
ASNFs, Future Forest, and countless 
stakeholders were able to successfully 
complete forest treatment on over 70,000 
acres, and begin to rebuild a failing wood 
products industry. 
The Board has commissioned the final 
report because they wanted other groups 
4      WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
5

ADMINISTRATIVE FINDINGS
RECOMMENDATIONS
ECOLOGICAL FINDINGS
SOCIAL FINDINGS
ECONOMIC FINDINGS
Executive Summary • Key Findings & Lessons Learned
White Mountain Stewardship Project Final Report
What did we 
learn?
As the first ten-year stewardship contract to come to completion, the 
WMSP has set a precedent for future long-term projects. In this regard, it is 
important to pass along our lessons learned so that other groups embarking 
on this journey can learn from our mistakes and gain from our successes. 
Although the objectives of the WMSP were relatively simple-- remove 
small-diameter trees, reduce fire hazards around communities, and 
begin to rebuild the economic viability of the local timber industry-- the 
implementation, accomplishments, and the lessons learned proved to be very 
complex. Here are a handful of examples.
In the end, it was only through patience, hard work, and a willingness to work 
together by all parties involved, that the real results of getting acres treated, 
achieving fire mitigation, and rebuilding a local wood products industry 
became a reality. 
1. Set quantitative objectives by which to 
measure success. Otherwise success is 
very subjective and a matter of opinion. 
Use the adaptive management cycle 
to inform and evaluate priorities and 
strategies throughout the contract.
2. Use data and methods for monitoring 
that are already in place. This saves time, 
money, and headaches about who will 
collect the data, where it will be stored, and 
if it is applicable to the decision making 
process on other forest management 
projects outside of the stewardship 
contract.
3. Have a dedicated funding stream for 
project monitoring. This will guaranty some 
minimum level of project monitoring is 
accomplished.
Area Treated
Biomass Removed
71,303 acres
1,831,578 tons
By the Averages
The following 
numbers are the 
averages across all 
WMSP treatments, 
across all years:
Total Cost to USFS
Cost per Acre
$50 million
$489.71
Cost per Ton Removed
$18.87
Total Monitoring Cost
$1,868,500 or 
3.7% of USFS costs
Forest treatments can and do change fire 
behavior. 
Wildlife have mixed responses to forest 
treatments, so planning at multiple scales 
is important to restore/maintain habitat for 
a diverse suite of species.
Restoration treatments based on historic 
structure were preferred by forest visitors, 
but also included reducing flame lengths 
and fuel loads, and provided many other 
ecological benefits.
Long-term 
stewardship 
contracting 
poses many difficulties that shorter-term 
contracts do not. Better communication 
on the nuanced details of how the 
contract works would help guide partners’ 
understanding of the constraints in which 
the project is working.
The project revitalized, and in some cases 
created, new sectors of a diverse, but 
complementary wood products industry.
The pace and scale of forest treatments 
can be ramped up.
1. Reporting and sharing data with outside 
entities is challenging. Many of the internal 
systems used by the USFS are proprietary 
and the information doesn’t transfer easily.
2. 
Communication 
is 
key. 
Include 
contractors, partners, and cooperators 
early and often in the planning and decision 
making process.
3. Clearly state project objectives, so that 
everyone involved knows what they are 
working towards.
The WMSP stimulated local economies and 
provided tangible community benefits. The 
average number of jobs associated with 
the WMSP was 305 annually.
The project was one of the largest 
economic redevelopment programs in 
the White Mountains Region. On average 
the annual expenditures by businesses 
associated with the WMSP was more than 
$19 million.
Development of support programs to 
give local industry a jumping-off point 
financially, was a must. 
1. People generally aren’t familiar with the 
lingo of economics, so understanding tax 
revenue, how it’s calculated, or multiplier 
effects are best left to the professionals. 
2. Annual progress reports provided by 
contracted economists were invaluable. 
Economic monitoring is recommended to 
be one of the items that is completed each 
year.
3. Remain consistent in your analysis 
through time. The WMSP had the benefit of 
economists who held the majority of items 
analyzed and methodologists constant, 
making the data comparable among years.
Local residents were somewhat familiar 
with the need for forest restoration 
treatments and fire as a natural process 
in the local forests at the beginning of the 
project.
Educational outreach through the use of 
news paper articles, advertisements, and 
websites helped inform local residents 
and vacationers alike of the purpose and 
progress of the project.
The WMSP had tapped into a social “zone 
of agreement” which helped propel the 
project forward to get treatments on the 
ground quickly.
1. Understand the public mindset. Surveys 
conducted at the County scale and 
repeated at the beginning, mid-point, and 
end of the project would help track the 
public’s perception of the project.
2. Initiate a community collaborative 
group as soon as possible. It provides a 
forum for people to have discussions and 
respectfully disagree, ultimately finding the 
points on which they agree.
3. Building trust is a lengthy, but important 
step, and trust is built between individuals, 
not with an agency. Maintain agency 
personnel and stakeholder involvement 
as long as possible. As agency turnover 
happens, the trust-building process 
restarts.
$
$
RECOMMENDATIONS
RECOMMENDATIONS
RECOMMENDATIONS
6      WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
7

The Greer Lakes area is recovering from Arizona’s 
second mega-fire in 15 years. The first mega-fire 
(2002 Rodeo-Chediski) prompted the state to be a 
pioneer in landscape scale forest restoration.
Photo by USDA

In a Few Words
The forests in the White Mountains of Arizona are part 
of the largest contiguous block of ponderosa pine forest 
in the world. These forests, which specifically include 
ponderosa pine, pine-oak, pinyon-juniper and mixed-
conifer, were in desperate need of restoration. The pace 
and scale of treatments was not quick enough in the face 
of these potential large fires. Fires like the 2002 Rodeo-
Chediski that burned more than 469,000 acres in Arizona 
did so due to the vast areas that have not seen treatments 
or fire for decades. These areas were dominated with 
dense stands of ponderosa pine. Trees were fighting 
for space and water and were able to carry flames into 
the canopy. These large fires cost millions of dollars to 
suppress, destroyed homes, affected businesses, and the 
lives of many people who live in the local communities. 
Forest restoration efforts, such as prescribed burning 
and mechanical thinning, at the time had been unable 
to keep pace with the need for treatment at the scale 
needed to address the undesirable conditions across 
the landscape. Across the White Mountains, there was 
limited industry to cut the trees, and almost no market for 
small-diameter wood products. Long-term Stewardship 
Contracting Authority enacted by Congress in 2003 
proved to be at least part of the answer that stimulated 
forest restoration progress and invigorated industry in the 
state by allowing National Forests to provide a long-term 
supply of wood fiber. 
In 2004, the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (ASNFs) 
initiated the nation’s first ten-year stewardship contract, 
called the White Mountains Stewardship Project (WMSP). 
The ASNFs had an ambitious goal of treating more than 
150,000 acres over the ten-year contract period; small 
when considering the scale of the problem, but far more 
acres than had been treated in the past decade. As the 
U.S. Forest Service (USFS) planned landscape-scale forest 
treatments, their goals were to reduce the potential for 
intense wildfires that threatened communities scattered 
throughout the National Forest, create and maintain jobs 
in forest industry in these rural places and restore forests 
so that they would be there for future generations. They 
also hoped that by providing wood supplies guarantied 
by the contract that other industry could be established 
based on building a local demand for small-diameter 
wood products.
The WMSP has now come and gone, ending in August 
of 2014. More than 71,000 acres of ponderosa pine, 
pine-oak, pinyon-juniper and mixed-conifer forests were 
restored. Much progress was made in these forests, 
including the passing of the ultimate test, which was 
the treatment efficacy in the face of multiple wildfires. 
The WMSP created jobs, businesses, tax revenues, 
and demand for small-diameter wood products. What 
remains is a story of experimentation, collaboration, and 
perseverance; all because a community of interested 
people decided it was time to make a change. This report 
not only evaluates ten years of monitoring data, but also 
explores the people, the place, and the achievements of 
the nation’s first long-term stewardship contract.
litter and fuels, limiting seedling establishment, 
and invigorating understory growth.3,5 Mature 
ponderosa pines have thick, platy bark, which 
turns a yellowish hue as they mature, giving 
them the name yellow-bellied pines. That thick 
bark is the difference between life and death 
of a ponderosa pine tree during a surface fire. 
It protects the tree from heat, allowing them to 
live for centuries, often growing to more than 
60 inches in diameter.3 Fire is a natural process 
in these forests, along with other disturbances 
that all contribute to the maintenance of 
this open structure.1,3,6 The legacy of past 
management practices as well as suppressing 
wildfire has left forests overstocked with 
abundant fuels. A century of removing only 
the largest of mature trees, which happen to 
be the most fire-resistant, has left a thicket 
of small-diameter pines (< 12 inches).3,6,7,8 
Forests once characterized by fewer than 50 
trees per acre now have more than 1,000 trees 
per acre. Additionally, intensive grazing had 
dramatically reduced understory vegetation in 
some areas, leaving sparsely vegetated, less 
diverse communities. Regular fires that once 
controlled tree establishment had been all but 
eliminated.3,6-8 The structure created by this 
scenario occurs outside the natural range of 
variability where most disturbance processes 
are all but lost. These conditions, coupled 
with changing climactic patterns, stimulate 
the increasing trend of fire size and severity 
seen in the western US over the past twenty-
five years9; conditions the people of Arizona 
Staggeringly large fires like the 2002 Rodeo-
Chediski were only a symptom of a larger 
problem that was common throughout forests 
in the western US. Large fires such as these 
can be a catalyst for action, bringing people 
together to find new solutions to old problems. 
Fire suppression efforts that began in the 
1900s fundamentally changed the structure 
and function of forests. The result was a 
growing list of uncharacteristically large fires, 
fueled by altered precipitation patterns and 
drought cycles that have impacted not only 
how forests grow, but hindered firefighters 
ability to suppress them. Business-as-usual 
approaches to forest management (i.e., timber 
sales focusing on large diameter trees) used 
over the past century were no longer an 
option, as the majority of trees that needed 
removal were too small to be used or sold 
as timber. Thinning projects were mired in 
disagreement over which trees to cut, and the 
problem further compounded by a legacy of 
policy decisions. A new strategy was needed, 
one that accelerated implementation of forest 
treatments before Arizona’s forests were hit 
with another mega-fire.
Millions of acres of ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) forests exist in a structure that 
hardly resembles their former glory. Historically, 
these pine forests were open, with small clumps 
of mature trees that had a diverse savanna-
like understory.1-4 Low-severity surface fires 
burned through the understory every two to 25 
years5; cycling nutrients into the soil, removing 
Restoration 
by Design
Using Stewardship Contracting to Change the 
Trajectory of Forest Management 
10
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
11
Introduction

12
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
13
were all too familiar with. There continues to be concern over 
the resiliency of forests to disturbance under these new climatic 
conditions, where, in some areas, high-severity wildfires could 
cause a permanent shift away from forests altogether.10
Public perception at the time was that land management 
agencies were making far too little progress. The U.S. Forest 
Service (USFS) had offered numerous timber sales for bid, yet 
most areas went untreated, as logging companies could not 
cover their costs of operation through the sale of small trees. 
Stewardship contracting of single projects (50-1,000 acres), a 
type of “goods for services” agreement, where the USFS pays 
for the removal of trees, had been around for years as an 
alternative to timber sales. Yet these contracting mechanisms 
proved unsuccessful at getting enough treatments implemented 
to match the scale needed to change the trend toward meeting 
the needs for treatment. While these contracts would pay logging 
companies to remove trees to offset operation cost minus the 
value of the timber, contractors were not in favor in this type of 
contract because it required additional “stewardship” work like 
improving wildlife habitat or rebuilding roads that often impacted 
profits.10 Projects encompassing thousands of acres were “piling 
up,” along with the undiminished wildfire hazards.
If Arizona’s forests were going to survive, management approaches 
would need to adapt. The question was; could Arizona’s forests 
be restored before it was too late? Forest management would 
not only require a new approach to administering treatments, but 
also a new collaborative approach to build consensus regarding 
how the treatments would be implemented and a restructuring 
of the wood products industry that focused on product diversity 
instead of solely large timber. It was recognized that making it 
happen would be no small feat.
Meanwhile, western forests kept burning. Congress was receiving 
pressure from western states to fund forest recovery after these 
fires and also make changes to forest management to prevent 
more widespread impacts from large-scale fires. In 2003, 
Congress changed the administrative landscape by enacting 
Public Law 108-7. The new law restructured stewardship 
contracting to allow federal agencies like the USFS to enter into 
long-term contracts up to ten years. This revised tool allowed 
the USFS to pay thinning operators to harvest small-diameter 
trees during a contract long enough that it could potentially 
spur industry investment into diversifying wood products such 
as biomass energy, posts and poles, chips and grindings, 
cabinetry, and furniture accents. The goal was to diversify the 
wood products industry, such that the USFS would no longer have 
to pay to remove small-diameter timber in hopes that it would 
become profitable for operators to remove small trees, improving 
The Benefits & Risks of 
Long-Term Contracting
Pros
• Guaranteed level of wood supply could 
spur industry investment and private 
sector wood-products industry, increasing 
economic benefits to business sector while 
reducing costs to the USFS;
• Long-term contracting would ensure 
landscape level treatment, reducing 
wildfire hazards to communities and 
natural resources;
• Long-term business investment could help 
provide jobs to rural communities;
• A multitude of ecological benefits including 
improved wildlife habitat, increased 
herbaceous understory, improved water 
infiltration and groundwater retention, 
and reduced hazards associated with high-
severity wildfire; and
• Contract award not solely based on 
“lowest bid.” Contractor can be chosen 
for “best-value contracting” based on 
past performance, workforce development 
potential and other factors.
Cons
• Untested at this length, therefore 
outcomes, challenges, costs and 
processes were uncertain;
• Project planning under the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) can 
sometimes be lengthy, and if stalled or 
litigated, could affect project acreage;
• No guaranteed funds from Congress, all 
monies used to pay for NEPA and other 
treatment costs would come from normal 
USFS budgets;
• At a regional scale, the USFS would have 
to realign the needs of this project with 
other priorities in this and other forests; 
• One million dollars was required to be 
set aside as a “contingency clause” if the 
USFS didn’t meet the 5,000 acre minimum,  
which was unavailable for treatment use; 
• The internal process of stewardship 
contracting was unfamiliar to staff, 
challenging them to come up to speed in a 
timely fashion; and
• Awarding a long term contract to one 
contractor could economically strife other 
contractors.  Risk of causing a monopoly 
on the market.
forest health and reducing the impacts associated with 
high-severity wildfire. Understanding that the potential 
benefits far outweighed the potential risks of using this 
reformed contracting mechanism, the ASNFs enacted 
the first ten-year stewardship contract in the nation. 
August 2004 was the beginning of the WMSP.
While 30 years of scientific research clearly outlined 
the structure and function of a restored ponderosa 
pine forest, there was little agreement on the path to 
that end. With the new long-term stewardship contract 
in place, operators began working on the backlog 
of National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) cleared 
projects in an attempt to reduce the immediate fire and 
fuels hazards. Meanwhile researchers and silviculturists 
continue to examine what are the best treatment 
prescriptions for these ponderosa pine forests in 
meeting desired conditions that reflect a historic 
range of variability. Congress’s authorizing language 
restructuring stewardship contracts inserted a new 
social component into the planning process, which 
required the USFS to solicit input on the effects of the 
WMSP through a collaborative, multi-partnered effort, 
an idea not required in previous contracting regulations. 
The Multi-Party Monitoring Board (hereafter referred to 
as the Board) was the result of this mandate. By invitation 
industry, local government, environmental organizations, 
non-profits, university scientists, wildlife agencies, and 
interested citizens banded together to pursue these new 
directives. With a project goal to reduce fire hazard and 
improve forest health on 150,000 acres across the ASNFs 
over the next ten years, the Board’s primary task was to 
prioritize monitoring questions. They were charged with 
working together, and became a group of unlikely allies, 
representing previously conflicting interests, fostering 
The concept was that a long-term contract would 
drive private industry to invest in infrastructure that 
could utilize small-diameter wood products through 
the guarantee of a consistent wood supply.
understanding, sharing perspectives, and determining 
what specific monitoring data should be collected under 
the broad topics of administrative, ecological, economic, 
and social effects of the WMSP. 
In a short amount of time, fuel reduction treatments 
were starting to become a reality, and the Board 
began to outline their priorities. The members of the 
Board agreed that regular trips to the field to inspect 
forest treatments were a critical part of their adaptive 
management cycle. It became clear almost immediately 
that the regular spacing of trees after treatment was not 
the aesthetically pleasing view of a “natural” forest they 
were looking for. Later, the resulting forest structure from 
these early treatments were referred to as “jail bars” 
as the evenly spaced trees gave the illusion of looking 
into a jail. Through trial and error, thinning prescription 
test plots, demonstrations sites and bold ideas built on 
a foundation of science, thinning treatments evolved 
from a purely fuels reduction to more holistically named 
forest restoration. While monitoring was occurring on an 
annual basis grounded in field visits, there were broader 
questions the Board wanted to address through long-
term monitoring. Essentially, the Board wanted to 
understand how the monitoring data could be used 
more effectively to inform forest management practices 
in the future. 
In 2009, the Board commissioned a report: Evaluating 
the Impacts of Forest Treatments: The First Five 
Years of the White Mountain Stewardship Project.11 
This Five Year Report answered questions about how 
the understory was responding after treatment, what 
variation in forest structure remained; did the forest 
structure mimic historic structure, and how were the 
treatments changing fire behavior. The report covered 
Introduction

14
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
15
the four main topics areas; administrative, economic, ecological, and social, which were all mandated by the 
contracting legislation. While the Five Year Report addressed the Board’s initial questions, it also triggered more 
nuanced ideas and gave the Board a clear path forward to continue to refine not only treatments but also the 
monitoring data that would be collected over the final five years of the contract.
In this report, we not only evaluate ten years of administrative, ecological, economic, and social monitoring data, 
but also explore the people, the place, and the achievements of the nation’s first long-term stewardship contract. 
This report describes the overall effect of the WMSP. One major highlight includes where treated areas survived 
the test of wildfires, including the Wallow Fire in 2011 and the San Juan Fire in 2014. 
Rural communities have seen not only an increase in jobs, but better paying jobs, which impacted all levels 
of the local economy. Moreover, the WMSP changed how people viewed forest thinning and its relationship 
with recreation, wildlife, fire, and much more. The Board, in their shared vision of what this landscape could 
be tracked, evaluated, and adapted forest management approaches using thousands of hours of monitoring 
data. This was all made possible due to a community of individuals who brought voice, participated, learned, 
respectfully disagreed in many cases, and in the end found common ground. ◊ 
The Wallow Fire wasn’t all bad. The East Fork of the Black 
River fared pretty well after the big blaze. 
Photo by US Forest Service.
Photo by The Nature Conservancy
Introduction

16
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
17
Introduction
It was an historic day in April of 2004 when 
Dwayne Walker with W.B. Contracting, Inc. and 
Rob Davis with Forest Energy Corporation, made 
the monumental decision to come together to 
form the partnership known as Future Forest, 
LLC and move forward with bidding on the first-
of-its-kind White Mountain Stewardship Project 
contract. This decision was made, when after 
months of meeting with other business owners 
in the White Mountains, it became apparent that 
the others simply weren’t willing to bid. Many 
had dealt with the USFS before and felt that the 
bureaucracy of the USFS would limit their ability 
to provide the guaranteed annual wood supply 
commitment. 
At the time, neither Dwayne nor Rob had any 
idea of what they were signing on for, but 
recognized that doing business as it had been 
done in the past was no longer an option. 
“Forest Energy absolutely needed the wood 
if they wanted to continue and grow, and the 
current projects being offered at the time were 
small and inconsistent” Rob stated.
The two came together to bid on the contract 
because they recognized that not only was 
the contract so big that they would need to 
work together in order to secure the contract 
from their competition, the Eastern Arizona 
Stewardship Center; but it was also the perfect 
partnership. Forest Energy could utilize the 
wood and had no capacity or desire to log, 
whereas W.B. Contracting had the experience 
and equipment necessary to get the work done 
in the woods. Additionally, Dwayne knew that 
collaboration was essential and “was convinced 
it was the way to go.” 
Doing the type of restoration work outlined 
in the Request for Proposals (RFP) was not 
a new concept for W.B. Contracting or Forest 
Energy, who had being doing similar type work 
on the Blue Ridge Demonstration Project on the 
Lakeside Ranger District and on the Fort Apache 
Indian Reservation where they successfully 
utilized the residues for pellets. 
When asked what they were hoping to get out 
of the contract, Rob and Dwayne both agreed 
that money was never a driver. Instead, Dwayne 
stated “he just wanted to keep his crews busy 
and thin the forest so it wouldn’t burn” and 
Rob explained that he hoped that the existing 
business would survive and get healthy. They 
were excited about the long-term nature of the 
contract and the opportunity to treat 150,000 
acres over the course of ten years. 
Neither Rob nor Dwayne were overly concerned 
by the environmental community when bidding 
on the contract, even though they historically 
had been a major roadblock in terms of forest 
management projects. As Rob explained, “Todd 
[Schulke of the Center for Biological Diversity] 
and I had been meeting since 1995 and while 
we don’t always agree on everything, I knew I 
could work with him and felt pretty comfortable 
that he wouldn’t throw me under the bus.” 
Furthermore, Todd had been very involved with 
the Blue Ridge Demonstration Project, proving 
that he was willing to collaborate in order to get 
work done. 
In looking back over the past ten years and 
completion of the largest stewardship contract 
in history, it is apparent that Rob and Dwayne 
are proud of the work that was accomplished. 
At the top of the list of successes is the fact 
that many communities and homes were saved 
during the 2011 Wallow Fire and the 2014 San 
Juan Fire. Without the treatments, the losses 
from these fires may have been so much worse. 
The men behind Future Forest also see other 
successes of WMSP, including:
The Hope of a Better Future
Future Forest, LLC
NEEDS to get done!! Also, as Dwayne reiterated, 
“Rebuilding industry takes a lot longer than it 
does to tear it down.” 
With the WMSP completed, many involved with 
the project are curious if whether Dwayne 
or Rob would ever consider bidding on 
another stewardship contract. When asked 
this question, both replied, “It depends.” 
While support and energy for the project was 
great in the beginning, both felt that because 
national and regional priorities changed 
around the project’s fifth year, the remaining 
years on the project were not very smooth. 
Another issue was the inconsistency between 
districts in terms of implementing the contract 
and the overall turnover with USFS employees 
(by the end of the contract, there had been 
a total of four appointed and several interim 
Forest Supervisors on the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests). Dwayne also explained that 
most involved, whether it was industry, the 
USFS, or the general public, did not understand 
the terms of the contract including the needs 
and expectations. Finally, one of Rob’s biggest 
issues, is the fact that the lessons learned 
during the WMSP aren’t being applied in other 
places to the extent they could be. ◊
• 
Making 
existing 
industry 
healthier, 
establishing new businesses and showcasing 
that industry is an integral part of the solution 
for forest management.
• Highlighting the importance of collaboration.
• Trying out a variety of different treatments 
and utilizing adaptive management to make 
changes when necessary. 
• Developing public approval for forest thinning.
• Bringing national level attention to the 
need for long-term landscape-level forest 
restoration. 
From the outset, it was easy to anticipate that 
there would be many lessons learned, and as 
Rob and Dwayne explained, the WMSP was a 
prime example of “learning as you go.” Being 
the first long-term large-scale contract in the 
country, the WMSP was essentially a testing 
ground for everything from contracting and 
silviculture to monitoring and rebuilding a 
forest products industry. 
“The WMSP proved that silviculture can’t just 
be done strictly in the office and equipment 
operators can either make or break the end 
result of a prescription learned, especially when 
implementing new ideas such as designation by 
description and description by prescription” 
Dwayne says.
When asked, Rob felt one of the greatest 
lessons learned was the fact that industry can 
work with the environmental community and 
get good work done on the ground. Rob also 
felt that over the course of the contract, a lot 
of people began to understand the true need 
for industry and why a partnership is essential. 
Simply put, “work [forest restoration] is not 
going to get done without industry!” And it 
by Molly Pitts

18
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
19
In a Few Words
The Multi-Party Monitoring Board members were given a common mission: 
determine what factors to monitor under the broad topics of administrative, 
ecological, economic, and social effects of the WMSP. Through much deliberation, 
the Board with the help of technical experts, identified specific monitoring 
questions within each topical area and how the budget would be divvied up among 
these priorities. The idea was that the results of the monitoring efforts would be 
incorporated into the USFS planning for the next treatment area, building on what 
they had learned to inform and improve forest management over time.
With funds allocated, the Board set forth with the help of the USFS and outside 
partners to address these initial questions. Many of the initial questions were 
answered in the Five Year Report, some are still relevant and are addressed again 
here, and a few new ideas were developed as a result of moving beyond the basics.
Who was Invited?
The WMSP’s Board membership 
has changed through the years as 
people have moved away, retired, or 
otherwise moved on. The make-up 
of the Board though, has continued 
to represent local government, 
organizations, and interested 
citizens as it did in 2004 when the 
original members were invited by 
the USFS to serve. 
In compliance with the long-term stewardship legislation mandate, the USFS 
established a collaborative, multi-party board to evaluate the effects of the 
WMSP. The legislation states that the USFS must determine the administrative, 
ecological, economic, and social effects of any stewardship project through a 
collaborative effort made up of invited external interests. Shortly after the 
contract was announced in August of 2004, the ASNFs sent invitations to a wide 
range of stakeholders to serve on the WMSP’s Multi-Party Monitoring Board. The 
Board’s primary objectives were two-fold:
1. To work together as a group representing multiple interests to prioritize what 
information was desired from the monitoring effort; and
2. To provide input to the ASNFs on Project outcomes based upon monitoring 
data, in order for the ASNFs to incorporate this information into future planning 
and management in an adaptive management cycle.
The concept of a multi-party monitoring effort assumed that a sharing 
of perspectives between multiple interests and stakeholders would foster 
understanding between camps previously at odds. This group would also serve 
as a conduit to incorporate monitoring results and the ever-growing body of 
scientific knowledge into the planning effort for the next round of treatments, 
resulting in more informed and proactive forest management strategies. As an 
added benefit, the monitoring effort would afford the opportunity to monitor 
landscape level issues not typically measured in project level monitoring often 
associated with NEPA requirements. 
The Board began by identifying priorities for their monitoring program. 
After months of deliberation and advice from the scientific and management 
communities, they arrived at a (very) long list of questions. Along with that list, 
they identified the methods by which the data were to be collected, how it was to 
be analyzed, and who was responsible for those tasks. The Board set up monthly 
meetings to track progress and annual field visits to see first-hand the progress 
being made on the ground. 
Focused Monitoring
The History of the Multi-Party Monitoring Board and their 
Adaptive Monitoring Methods in Action
Photo by The Nature Conservancy
by Sarah Hurteau
Introduction
Representation:
Don Berry*†
Interested Citizen
Jerry Brownlow
Navajo County Board of Supervisors
Steve Campbell
University of Arizona Cooperative 
Extension, Navajo County
Dave Dorum*
Arizona Game & Fish Department
Bruce Greco*
Ecological Restoration Institute
Bill Greenwood*
Town of Eagar; 
Northern Arizona Wood Products 
Association
Dustin Sanders
Red White & Blue Realty
Steve Sims
Creative Green Homes, Inc.
Sue Sitko*
The Nature Conservancy
Larry Stephenson
Eastern Arizona Counties Organization
Lorna Thurman
Life in the Forest
Bob Vahle
Arizona Wildlife Federation
Liz Wise*
White Mountain Conservation League
*Current members
†Current chair

20
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
21
$
$
Question sufficiently answered in the Five Year Report. 
No additional data analysis needed.
Question answered in the Five Year Report, and still 
relevant at the 10 year time frame. Analysis updated.
Question answered in the Five Year Report, and still 
relevant at the 10 year time frame. Data unavailable to 
update analysis.
Internal Costs
What are the annual internal costs for the project?
What are the annual costs for monitoring the contract?
Contract Costs
How does the USFS calculate contract costs?
Has the Project demonstrated an increase in value or in efficiency to the USFS?
How many acres have been treated per year?
Stewardship Contracting
What are some positive aspects of stewardship contracts relating to internal administration?
What are some challenges associated with stewardship contracts relating to internal administration?
Social
Ecological
Economic
Awareness & Support of Forest Restoration
Do people understand and support large-scale mechanical and prescribed fire treatments?
Do people recognize or differentiate USFS treatments from other agency treatments?
Are people aware of the White Mountain Stewardship Project?
Perceived Wildfire Threat
Do people believe that forest treatments reduce the threat of wildfire?
Forest & Fire Ecology
Do people have an understanding of forest and fire ecology?
Local Business Capacity
How many wood-product businesses are directly involved, through either purchasing or 
processing material from the Project?
Where are these firms located?
What is the effect of local expenditures for Project expenses in the community?
What are the opportunities to keep Project expenditures within the local communities?
Employment
How many jobs within these firms are tied directly to the Project?
How many jobs rely on exporting produced goods, thereby bringing “new” money into the 
region?
Given a multiplier effect, how many total jobs in the region can be attributed to the Project?
Do employees live where they work? If not, which communities benefit the most from the 
Project?
Contribution to Regional Tax Base
What is the overall value of the Project (including multiplied effects) to the general tax base of 
the region?
Did forest treatments significantly: 
Stand Structure
reduce tree density?
alter canopy cover? 
alter snag density?
Understory Community
alter community composition?
alter understory percent cover?
Fire Behavior
reduce the threat of uncharacteristic high-
severity wildfire?
reduce crown bulk density?
alter height to live crown?
reduce fuel loading?
Avian Community
alter avian composition?
alter avian density?
alter avian diversity metrics? 
Soil Compaction
alter compacted soil?
Eagar South Demonstration Area Monitoring
Eagar South was a turning point in how treatment prescriptions were viewed 
and written for subsequent project areas. A specialized monitoring program 
was developed specifically to examine this new treatment approach. These 
questions where thoroughly addressed in the Five Year Report.
Each year the ASNF allocated approximately 3% of their annual costs 
associated with the WMSP to monitoring the effects of the project. These 
monies were then supplemented by external grants and partnerships with 
ERI and AGFD.
Forest Landscape
Are remaining trees aggregated or randomly 
dispersed across project areas?
Did forest treatments increase structural 
heterogeneity across the forest?
Are patches of dense forests connected?
Are patches of open forest or pine savannas 
connected?
Black Bears
Did forest treatments significantly alter bear 
movement?
Do bears avoid or prefer treated areas?
Is bear movement correlated with topographic 
features or forest attributes?
Best Management Practices (BMPs)
Did contractors adhere to BMPs?
Do BMPs result in maintenance of water quality 
standards and guidelines?
3% to Fund 
Monitoring
Annual Project 
Budget
Administrative
Introduction

22
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
23
accumulation and renew the understory, but the money just 
wasn’t there, and no one knew if it would ever come. So in the 
absence of fire as a process to jump-start the recovery, how 
was the understory doing? They just couldn’t tell, because so 
little had changed, and so few plots were measured. 
The third and final lesson, which wasn’t really a surprise, was 
that the treated areas needed to be burned (with low-severity 
surface fire, a.k.a. broadcast burning treatments). With the 
help of a forest growth model (Forest Vegetation Simulator - 
FVS), the Board evaluated the life span of various treatments. 
The life span of a treatment is essentially how long the 
objectives for that treatment can be maintained without further 
intervention. Based on the monitoring, it turns out the life span 
is about ten years (the length of this contract). However, if the 
USFS uses prescribed fire as a tool to maintain forest health 
and structure every 10 to 20 years, then life span of those 
same treatments increases beyond 50 years (the length of 
the modeled period). 
The Wallow Fire changed everything. The Board had 
momentum. The adaptive management cycle was more than 
just a buzzword; it was actually working. An area near Beaver 
Creek on the Alpine Ranger District was in the process of NEPA 
review and clearance as the WMSP was about to venture into 
mixed-conifer treatments when the Wallow Fire became the 
A few lessons emerged from this interim report. First, the 
Board again realized that monitoring sounds so easy until you 
have to establish a protocol. With some of the basic questions 
about ecological structure answered, they moved on to the 
more nuanced questions (See Appendices). This led to the 
revision of a few existing questions and the addition of a few 
new questions to their monitoring program. Using the scientific 
literature as a guide, they set quantitative benchmarks for their 
objectives for as many questions as possible, as one metric to 
measure success over the remaining years of the WMSP.
The second lesson came in the form of limited data. Through 
the use of a statistical analysis (power analysis), the Board 
recognized that far more sampling plots were necessary 
to document the small level of change anticipated in the 
understory plant community. There were many voices in 
favor of the use of prescribed fire as a tool to remove fuel 
was a great need to be able to determine if the WMSP was 
successful. And while they had outlined all of these monitoring 
priorities meant to track the progress of the treatments and 
ensure that more good than harm was done to the forest, 
the Board asked itself how do you measure the success of a 
project? They needed quantitative goals by which they could 
literally measure achievement and say one way or the other if 
the WMSP was realizing its intended purpose.
Short on the heels of the Five Year Report, the Board set 
to work making changes to their monitoring program. They 
successfully sought funds from the Eastern Arizona Resource 
Advisory Committee (RAC), and subsequently supported the 
enhancement of the monitoring protocols and the development 
of quantitative objectives. In the meantime, the 2011 Wallow 
Fire burned more than half a million acres of forest in an area 
of mostly mixed-conifer habitat that was next in the queue for 
treatment (see the Wallow Fire Special Section for a detailed 
account). This changing landscape led to the immediate 
need to assess habitat requirements and habitat connectivity 
documenting the impacts of another large, high-severity fire. 
A second report entitled The White Mountain Stewardship 
Project: Evaluating and Adapting an Ecological Monitoring 
Program, An Update to the Five Year Report11 addressed 
these and other immediate analysis needs, knowing that this 
chance wouldn’t come again for another few years. 
The first several years of the contract flew by quickly, 
qualitatively evaluating how treatments appeared and 
watching the monitoring data pile up. The Five Year Report, 
published in 2010, was the first time the monitoring data 
was quantitatively assessed. By this point, the treatments 
had officially transitioned from fuel reduction treatments to 
restoration treatments, as illustrated by the tree spacing 
analysis.10 Some of the other results documented changes 
that seemed obvious and as expected, but everyone agreed 
that it was great to have data to back-up the assertion that 
the treatments were in fact altering the forest for the better: 
reducing fuel accumulation, maintaining wildlife connectivity, 
increasing songbird diversity, and reducing the threat of a 
high-severity fire (see Sitko and Hurteau 2010 for detailed 
results). During the process of analyzing the data for the 
Five Year Report, it became clear to the Board that there 
The Board had momentum. The adaptive management 
cycle was more than just a buzzword, 
it was actually working.
focus of attention. The interim report had planned to model 
habitat connectivity in future treatment areas for other species 
of interest, but was altered to include the effects of the Wallow 
Fire. The models suggested that the Wallow Fire essentially 
removed habitat in a few areas for species like red squirrels 
and wild turkey, but also broadened and enhanced habitat 
for species like pronghorn (see Hurteau and Sitko 2012 
for detailed results). Attention from both the USFS and the 
White Mountain community represented on the Board shifted 
away from strategic monitoring of the WMSP and moved to 
focus on post-fire mitigation and rehabilitation. Salvage 
logging and post-fire monitoring took center stage, followed 
by rehabilitation to prevent erosion and further damage to 
watersheds, and protection of habitats. 
With that necessary shift in focus by the USFS and the Board, 
there was little time available to continue the newly revised 
monitoring program specific to the WMSP. The established 
vegetation plots within the Apache Zone were burned by 
the Wallow Fire, and were no longer valid. All of the WMSP 
post-treatment vegetation plots on the Sitgreaves zone were 
monitored, however, other aspects of the monitoring plan could 
not be completed due to the reduction in work force availability. 
The USFS reached out to the Ecological Restoration Institute 
(ERI) at Northern Arizona University, who took on some of 
the responsibility of monitoring the WMSP. The data available 
for summary, either from the USFS or the ERI, is included in 
this document. The Board has attempted to address all of the 
monitoring questions, as best we could, given the change in 
focus, time, and available funds. The ten year re-measure is 
just coming on-line for the earliest treatments implemented, 
and will need to be assessed in the future to examine a 
more long-term view of the treatment impacts. This report 
will present as much information as was available with a goal 
to be as transparent as possible in highlighting where WMSP 
specific monitoring efforts excelled, where they fell short, and 
how monitoring could be improved. ◊
Introduction
Photo by ASNFs

24      WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
25
Introduction
Do We 
Measure Up?
Since the WMSP’s inception, everyone involved 
wanted it to be successful, but how exactly 
do you measure success? After the Five Year 
Report was released, the Board reassembled 
to establish quantitative measures along 
with some additional monitoring questions to 
address the data gaps that were identified 
after the first round of analyses.
In some cases, monitoring questions lend 
themselves to be quantified; in other cases, 
analysis would proceed qualitatively. 
These categories received great consideration 
and much debate as to what the goals should 
be. With experts at the table, each brought 
suggestions based in science to inform a 
goal that was achievable, but also pushed the 
WMSP to new heights. For a comprehensive list 
of quantitative objectives see the Appendices.
Fire Behavior
80%
60%
SURFACE OR PASSIVE CROWN FIRE BEHAVIOR 
Predicted fire behavior would 
be reduced from active crown 
fire to a lower severity by the 
percentage listed below. 
Ponderosa Pine
Mixed-Conifer
Fire Regime Condition Class is a metric often used to determine how 
close (or often how far off) a given area is from its historic fire regime. 
Post-treatment areas should trend toward a lower number in at least 
80% of ponderosa pine forests and 60% of mixed conifer forests.
3 
2 1 
Active Crown Fire
Modern mimic of 
historic regime
Not even close to 
historic regime
Quantitative Objectives Set by the Board in 2011
By Sarah Hurteau
Forest Landscape
Standing dead trees, also known as snags, are an important and 
rare structure on the landscape. 
Snags and other course woody debris are fragile and are 
often inadvertently removed during forest treatments. To help 
prioritize their continued occurrence in treated areas, the land 
management plan (LMP) guidelines were brought front and 
center.
of sites monitored meet LMP guidelines 
for woody debris, which includes down 
logs, branches, needle cover, and snags. 
These elements are often important 
to wildlife. Too much though, and it 
becomes a fire hazard.
snag creation protocol 
when too few. 
TRIGGER
90%
of landings and burn piles 
do not have exotic species.
treat exotic species within 
one growing season. 
TRIGGER
90%
Wildlife Habitat
75%
of suitable habitat 
Red-faced Warblers 
are found in 
Find out if black bears are using 
treated areas.
100%
Spotted Owl habitat is trending 
towards meeting its recovery 
plan. 
of treated Mexican 
red squirrel midden in 
every two acres of mixed 
conifer habitat
1 ACTIVE
1 ACTIVE
Mitigation
Best Management Practices (BMPs) are 
a list of specific actions used to reduce or 
control impacts to waterways and other 
environmental factors.
The USFS monitors how well they and 
their contractors adhere to these BMPs. 
of landings will be mitigated, 
rehabilitated or naturally recover within 
one year after compaction. 
90%
BMPs are followed 
at least95%
of the time.
Non-adherence to BMPs is documented & 
used to modify future operations.
TRIGGER
CLASS
CLASS
CLASS

Looking 
From the Inside 
Out
Changes in internal costs to the Forest 
Service as a result of the Project
In a Few Words
Administrative monitoring focused on tracking the number of acres treated, the amount of biomass removed, and the cost 
of implementation. These monitoring activities were the responsibility of the ASNFs to continue tracking and documenting 
these aspects. As partners of this contract, Future Forest was also instrumental in tracking the details of what was done, how 
much fiber was removed, by what method, and how much it cost. The aspects of administrative costs that were of great interest 
included planning preparation of the WMSP task orders (NEPA analysis and planning; marking, etc.); task order oversight 
(contract administration); and monitoring costs (special projects and annual expenses). While the price per acre was not the 
best measure by which to evaluate the cost of the contract due to the highly variable conditions across the forest, the Board was 
most interested in how the cost per ton of fiber removed changed over time. This measure speaks to the effectiveness of the 
contract in efficiencies gained and additional benefits of a stewardship contracting approach as opposed to a straight timber 
sale mechanism.
Key Results from White Mountain Stewardship Project Monitoring Questions
What were the internal costs for the Project?
The WMSP cost the ASNFs approximately $50 million 
over the ten-year contract period. That breaks down to 
an average annual internal costs of $5 million, where 
$2.5 million went to task orders and the other $2.5 
million went to salary and expenses , mostly for NEPA 
preparations. How did they keep the salary costs the 
same over a ten-year period? Vacancies kept costs low, 
but it meant many people had to pull double-duty for 
the project. 
What were the monitoring costs for the Project?
Monitoring costs were targeted at approximately 3% 
of the task order cost total. Since the Five Year Report, 
the ERI has assumed the majority of stand structure 
data collection and analysis under contract from 
the ASNFs, and TNC took over the avian monitoring 
and analysis. The USFS did continue some of the 
Best Management Practices (BMPs), stand surveys, 
and range monitoring as well as the fire modeling. 
Contracts with partners and internal monitoring 
costs averaged approximately $225,000 annually. 
With no increase in costs over the life of the WMSP, 
cooperators, partners, and USFS workforce had to 
absorb the additional monitoring needs without 
additional funds.
How many acres have been treated per year?
The WMSP treated more than 71,000 acres over the 
course of ten years. Not quite the 150,000 planned, 
but it was a big step forward in accelerating the 
progress towards treating fire prone areas. Acres 
treated per year ranged from a low of 3,105 in 2005 
to a peak of 9,446 in 2010. More importantly, as the 
biomass energy facility came on-line in Snowflake, it 
provided demand for nearly 2 million tons of slash 
and debris that would have otherwise been left in the 
forest. Tons of biomass material removed ranged from 
73,093 in 2005 to 254,443 in 2011. A greater shift 
towards total removal reduced both the costs of pile 
burning and the fire hazard.
by Sarah Hurteau
Electricity generation from alternative 
fuel sources, also know as the biomass 
energy, is produced at a facility near 
Snowflake, Arizona. With the addition 
of this facility, overall treatment costs 
to the Forest Service went down, as 
the residue from forest treatments no 
longer has to be piled and burned. 
Trucks bring in wood chips form trees 
processed at the WMSP task orders, 
which are hoisted into the sky on a 
giant lift to dump chips into piles for 
future use at the facility.
Photos by 
The Nature 
Conservancy
26
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
27
Administrative

Administrative
Administrative monitoring was the key to understanding the 
changes made across the forest, by providing a more holistic 
view of metrics like acres treated, biomass removed, and cost 
per ton. Stakeholders were interested in understanding how 
a long-term contract improved internal costs and efficiencies 
for the ASNFs, but it was only viewed as a means to eventually 
treating more acres in the end. The initial hope was that the 
cost of treatment per acre to the USFS would slowly go down 
over the life of the contract and ultimately reach zero. Meaning 
that it would not actually cost the USFS anything to restore 
forest structure and reduce wildfire threats, as those costs 
would be borne by the contractor as they sold a diverse suite 
of timber products. In reality, this wasn’t necessarily achievable 
due to how the contract was structured. 
In many forests, productivity changes with topography, aspect, 
location and elevation. Because of these factors and many 
others, no two acres are the same; and therefore measuring 
a cost of treatment on a per acre basis was an unfair 
comparison. The WMSP contract was structured such that the 
cost per ton was set through the life of the contract with limited 
conditions that allowed for adjustments to this fee structure. 
These contract adjustments could only be initiated by the 
contractor, and were limited to a maximum of 6% increase 
every other year to account for rising cost-of-living. Because 
the cost per ton was set, and project areas varied in material 
removed, the USFS and Future Forest had to strike a balance 
for each task order to make the fee for services a fair trade for 
each involved. Monitoring administrative costs and efficiencies 
gained would have to take a more creative approach since the 
services provided for each task order changed and it wasn’t a 
simple number of acres treated calculation. 
The USFS tracked administrative costs including personnel 
time, travel and expenses as they always had, but they also 
started tracking several other aspects of the contract to 
capture this new way of doing business. Contract payments 
and tracking of “acres treated” was based on measured tons 
treated per acre in addition to a straight acre count. This 
method was used through the life of the contract and was 
reported in detail in the Five Year Report.11 No changes in how 
these items were tracked have been made since that report. 
To refresh your memory, tons per acre can be measured in 
two ways: cost per ton removed (removal of all material from 
site); or cost per ton treated (majority of material removed 
but some left behind according to resource needs). These 
measures were used to calculate payments to the contractor 
and were tracked along with types of treatments; average 
tons per truckload; number of truckloads per task order; 
projects and task orders completed; acres treated; and the 
type of material removed from each unit (merchantable timber, 
residue, etc.).
Results & Discussion
ASNF Internal Costs
Little has changed in terms of the broad outcomes since the 
five-year mark; however we felt it was important to present 
the complete picture now that the final numbers are in. The 
WMSP cost the ASNFs approximately $5 million per year; $2.5 
million in task orders and $2.5 million in salary and expenses, 
that mostly funded NEPA preparations of project areas. This 
is consistent with the funding level report in 2011. It is worth 
noting that total salary costs did not rise through the ten years 
of the contract. The USFS was able to “balance the books” 
through vacancies. Because they were never fully staffed, the 
internal salary costs associated with the WMSP stayed flat 
while individual salaries were able to keep pace with inflation 
and regular increases. As a result of being short-staffed, 
some tasks remained incomplete. Due to limited staff, priority 
work was focused on achieving the 5,000-acre minimum and 
other monitoring activities were the secondary focus.
Monitoring Costs 
The total cost of monitoring the WMSP was $1,868,500 over 
the life of the project. This figure equates to 3.7% of the $50 
million project cost. The first five years of monitoring cost 
more than the second half, with subtotals of $1.1 million and 
$763,000 respectively. While progress was made in the first 
five years, due to the Wallow Fire, monitoring slowed a little 
as people focused on fire suppression and post-fire activities.
In the first five years of the contract, the ASNFs spent 
approximately $144,000 annually on regular expenditures 
associated with monitoring. This included wildlife surveys 
associated with NEPA, vegetation plots, songbird surveys, 
economic surveys, and Board activities and reports. There 
was also an effort to add studies to address specific concerns 
such as black bear habitat and potential impacts to goshawks 
and their prey species, which were multi-year projects. In 
an effort to be transparent and provide a detailed progress 
Average annual, multi-year, and special project costs in dollars for the White Mountain 
Stewardship Project, 2004-2014. Figures provided and sub-totaled 2004-2009 repeat 
information presented in the Five Year Report (Sitko and Hurteau 2010). 
Monitoring Activity
Annual Cost    
($)
Multi-Year 
Project Costs, 
per year ($)
One-Time Costs 
($)
Brief Desciption
Wildlife surveys per 
NEPA direction
32,200
         
Baseline wildlife studies; special status 
species surveys
Vegetation plots, forest-
wide
28,600
         
Permianent vegetation plots for forest 
structure, snag, understory composition; fire 
models; and wildlife habitat analysis
Songbird monitoring
35,600
         
Avian density, diversity, and composition
Best Management 
Practices/soil 
compaction
20,200
         
Water quality, erosion, and soil compaction 
monitoring
Annual economic 
anlaysis (contractor)
15,000
         
Employment and business expenditures
Monitoring Board 
administration
9,300
           
Meeting and field trip coordination
Stakeholder's Report
3,000
           
Annual newspaper insert
AGFD black bear 
research project
233,000
      
Black bear habitat use in treated areas
AGFD northern goshawk 
prey study
60,000
         
Prey studies of eight primary prey species of 
northern goshawk
Five Year Report
80,000
         
Monitoring data analysis and report design
Social assessment 
(contractor)
10,000
         
Perspectives on forest management in 
Navajo and Apache Counties
Highway Signs
3,000
           
Project signs designed and placed along 
highways
Annual Subtotal
143,900
      
293,000
      
93,000
         
2005-2009
Five-Year Subtotal 
(2005-2009)
719,500
      
293,000
      
93,000
         
Songbird Monitoring 
(2010-2014)
27,900
         
Avian density, diversity, and composition
Vegetation monitoring 
by ERI
90,000
         
Vegetation plots for forest structure, 
understory composition; fire models; and 
invasive species monitoring
Annual economic 
anlaysis (contractor)
15,000
         
Employment and business expenditures; 
changes in values and multiplier effects 
through time
Final Report
98,500
         
Monitoring data analysis, report design, and 
printing
Annual Subtotal
105,000
      
27,900
         
98,500
         
2010-2014
Five-Year Subtotal 
(2010-2014)
525,000
      
139,500
      
98,500
         
GRAND TOTAL
1,868,500
                                                                                                      
28
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
29

Administrative
30
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
31
report, the results of these monitoring efforts where outlined 
in a report.10 All of which added to the total monitoring 
expenditure for the first five years. Total monitoring costs for 
the first five years ($1.1 million) averaged $221,000 per year, 
slightly more than the 3% annual monitoring cost target. 
In the second half of the WMSP (2010-2014) the annual costs 
associated with monitoring were slightly lower at $105,000 for 
regular expenditures. These monitoring task were consistent 
with those funded in the first half of the WMSP. Songbird 
monitoring was the only multi-year contract during this 
period and again a one-time cost of funding the final report. 
Monitoring costs in the second half of the Project totaled 
$763,000, which averages out to $152,600 per year, slightly 
less than the 3% annual cost expected. 
Contract Award
During the Request for Proposal (RFP) process, the USFS 
requested proposals to treat between 5,000 and 15,000 
acres per year (50,000 to 150,000 acres over the ten-year 
period of the contract). At time of award, the Regional Forester 
guaranteed funding to treat only 5,000 acres per year due to 
the uncertainty of the annual budget process over a ten-year 
period and a desire not to over-commit such a large financial 
obligation. The USFS regional office hoped that the 5,000-acre 
deficiency from their goal would be made-up from end of the 
year funds transferred from other forests. 
Contract Stats
The WMSP removed 1,831,578 tons of fiber from 71,303 
acres treated on the ASNFs. Over the ten-year period this 
averages out to 7,130 acres per year; 2,130 acres per year 
above the 5,000-acre minimum, but far short of the original 
15,000-acre annual goal. The desire to leverage additional 
funds at the end of the fiscal year made it possible to award 
upwards of 8,000 acres through the 2008 fiscal year. For 
most of the ten-year period, end of the year transfers did 
not occur due to unobligated funds being used to pay for high 
fire suppression costs across the country (referred to as fire 
borrowing) and recovery efforts from hurricanes Katrina, Rita, 
and Wilma in 2005/2006.
In 2009, President Obama enacted the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), which funded “shovel ready” 
projects. The WMSP still had lots of “shovel ready” acres 
waiting to be treated. With task orders in need of funds, the 
ARRA dollars provided the additional cash flow necessary for 
project acres in the 2009 and 2010 fiscal years, allowing the 
ASNFs to again stay well above the 5,000-acre minimum. 
The monies received through the ARRA program also funded 
two large marking projects that were assigned in task order 
beyond the 2010 fiscal year. 
Damage from the 2011 Wallow Fire burned thousands of acres 
slated for treatment. While there was some salvage logging 
that occurred within the burned area, had those acres cleared 
through NEPA they would have kept the WMSP moving along 
at the current rate until its conclusion. Yet because of the fire, 
they were no longer available for “green” treatment. 
In early 2014 a decision was made to only fund the required 
guarantee for the ten-year life of the contract and required 
that task orders had to be completed by August 10, 2014. 
This meant that no further payments would be made on the 
delivered wood fiber after that date. With the lag time between 
when task orders are awarded and when the contractors 
complete the harvest, the timing of how many acres to award 
was a difficult decision. Because no one wanted to leave 
anything on the table unpaid, or untreated, the award of 
task orders in 2014 was limited to 1,000 acres. This number 
seems small, but the contractors were still harvesting task 
orders from 2013, and worked up until the very last day of 
the contract.
“The WMSP made 4FRI 
and other long term 
stewardship contracts 
possible.  WMSP was 
the vanguard for the 
stewardship projects 
across the nation.”
-Jerry Drury, ASNFs
Advantages and Challenges
Many of the benefits and challenges outlined at the halfway 
mark still ring true. Efficiencies were gained from bundling task 
orders under a single contract. The contract provided a very 
fast vehicle to obligate funds. Communication was enhanced 
as the ASNFs only had a single industry representative 
and a single managing partner. The contract also allowed 
for the use of designation by description (DxD) and limited 
use of designation by prescription (DxP), both of which 
reduced preparation costs associated with timber marking. It 
streamlined the workflow for office staff, by reducing multiple 
contracts down to just one. 
The real gains in efficiency were realized after the Five Year 
Report. While the cost per acre did not go down as many 
had hoped, the size and duration of the contract made it 
possible to leverage its market share to increase a type and 
volume that the biomass plant accepted including new forms 
of green fiber. Furthermore, with a biomass plant utilized 
slash pile fiber that would have been left behind in the forest, 
a greater proportion of each tree was used, diversifying the 
product market and saving the ASNFs from having to burn 
those piles in the future (not to mention air quality). It costs 
the ASNFs about $100/acre just to burn piles, not to mention 
The total number of acres treated (bars) by federal fiscal year (October 1-Sept 30) under the 
White Mountain Stewardship project 2004-2014. Line graph illustrates the number of tons of 
fiber removed over the same period. 
0	  
50,000	  
100,000	  
150,000	  
200,000	  
250,000	  
300,000	  
0	  
2,000	  
4,000	  
6,000	  
8,000	  
10,000	  
04	  
05	  
06	  
07	  
08	  
09	  
10	  
11	  
12	  
13	  
14	  
Tons	  Removed	  
Acres	  Treated	  
Fiscal	  Year	  

Administrative
32
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
33
WHERE DOES THE WOOD GO?
Traditional logging outfits only sold saw timber for dimensional lumber. The 
Project helped diversify the local forest products industry.
Saw timber
Dimensional 
lumber and 
engineered wood 
products are the 
most common 
uses.
The 4 Ps
Post, poles, pallets, 
and pellets are the 
most common uses 
for this area of the 
tree.
Everything Else
Biomass energy 
plants burn forest 
treatment “residue” 
to generate 
electricity.
Projected
WMSP Period
Volume by Fiber Class
Saw Timber
Biomass
4 Ps
Photos by The Nature Conservancy
Prior to the Project, a lack of social agreement in practices led to a decline in thinning projects. 
Once the Project began and people became unified behind a common goal, more mills came 
back to life and financial investment allowed for a biomass energy plants to help diversify forest 
products. These changes allowed for increased pace of forest treatments and the use of all 
parts of the trees that were cut.
Time

the labor costs associated with piling the material. This one 
activity of transporting slash not only freed up money for 
other prescribed fire priorities, but also reduced the fuel load 
and wildfire hazards that would have remained in the woods. 
Pile burn sites, depending on the size and intensity, can also 
be a source of exotic species invasion and soil degradation 
due to the intense heat during the burn, problems that are 
also eliminated by the biomass plant. Treatment areas in the 
pinyon-juniper woodlands often utilized mastication for fuels 
treatments, but can now be included in the biomass cocktail to 
fuel the power plant. This also saves the ASNFs about $100/
acre over the customary slash dispersal methods (fiber left on 
site). Without the stewardship contract, if the ASNFs wanted 
to have the masticated material removed from the forest, they 
would have to issue a separate contract and have the fiber 
collected and piled at the landing (approximately $500/acre on 
average) and then transported to the biomass facility. These 
additional contracts would go out for bid and on average could 
cost anywhere between $350 and $500/acre. The increased 
cost-effective removal of slash in pinyon-juniper woodlands 
(biomass) included in the stewardship contract (towards the 
end on the Apache Zone) led to utilization of a product for the 
biomass facility, resulting in reduced fire hazards, provided for 
improved range condition, and enhanced watershed function 
following treatment. 
The contract provided a unique opportunity to get a jump-
start on forest restoration. Without the long-term stewardship 
contract, the Forest may not have had the funds, or the 
continued support from the Regional Office, and or staff 
necessary to complete as many acres (and tons removed) 
as they did over the last ten years. It is also the opinion of 
several individuals in the USFS that without the WMSP showing 
the success it did, the Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) 
may not be in existence today. 
Even with these considerable benefits, there were still 
challenges. Many of the challenges came in the beginning of 
the WMSP, as people were fraught with worry about how a 
contract of this size would work, and if it could work. The 
ASNFs had to fund a “cancellation clause” sometimes in excess 
of $1 million that would be paid to the contractor if the USFS 
couldn’t provide their acreage minimum. Because a task order 
for a particular area could not be awarded until it had cleared 
the NEPA process, it created a challenge to keep pace with 
the demand for approved acres. For example, the Rim Lakes 
area that was in the pipeline in the first half of the contract 
was delayed in the NEPA process due to various factors, and 
was ultimately removed as a WMSP. These types of setbacks 
can affect a project of this size as it depends on a steady 
flow of NEPA approved acres to move into the pipeline of 
areas to treat and material to support the fledgling industries. 
While the Natural Resources Working Group (NRWG) set the 
stage in developing a consensus around project objectives, 
the Multi-Party Monitoring Board built on that consensus to 
include collaborative adaptive management. Because no one 
had tried this type of collaborative partnership working at this 
scale, there were still some processes to work through, and 
some people wondered if the Multi-Party Monitoring Board 
would hold up treatments getting on the ground. 
On the administrative side, the biggest challenge was that 
the WMSP size dictated that it be an Acquisition Management 
(AQM) contract, which is a dramatic departure from the timber 
sale contracts everyone was familiar with. For the Contracting 
Officer (CO) or Contracting Officer Representative (COR) on 
the ground and the timber sale CO/COR, it was much more 
difficult to administer an AQM contract, as it’s intended use 
is a services contract, and not a timber contract. An AQM 
contract is more general in nature and a good portion of the 
timber sale stipulations (including the traditional clauses that 
help ensure timber sales are conducted properly with clear 
results) were absent, such that the AQM contract language 
had to be supplemented to address these commonly included 
stipulations already present in timber sale contracts. Because 
AQM contracts have not been used to address timber sales, 
stipulations and the subsequent edits and addition of new 
federal acquisition regulation clauses did not totally capture 
the full extent of possible breaches or contractor responsibility 
to contract infractions. Not an unexpected outcome since it has 
taken timber sale contracts a handful of revisions over a 40-
year period to strike a balance between agency enforcement 
and contractor accountability. These stipulations had to be 
added back in on a case-by-case bases to make sure these 
and many other potential situations were addressed in the 
contract.
The question remaining is, was it enough? Unfortunately there 
isn’t one single answer to this question. A project of this size 
and scale is bound to be complex and multi-faceted leading to 
a moving target of goals and objectives. 
With respect to overall acres treated, the WMSP fell well short 
of its goal. The hope was to treat a total of 150,000 acres 
over the ten-year period averaging 15,000 acres per year. 
This was an extraordinarily ambitious number. 
In retrospect, reviewing the Five Year Report and understanding 
the sentiment of the visit from the Regional Office following the 
report’s release, you could see the seeds of change being 
sown. The 4FRI was beginning to pick up steam, driven by the 
population centers of Williams and Flagstaff on the “west side” 
along the Mogollon Rim. They were witnessing the successes 
of the WMSP and the influx of monetary resources, and they 
wanted similar results in their forests. 
Based on the realization of what the minimum commitment 
had to be, the decision to guarantee only a minimum of 5,000 
acres per year changed what was likely to be accomplished 
on an annual basis. There were a couple of years where the 
number of acres treated was really close to the original annual 
goal of 15,000/year (2006-2008). The economic downturn, 
which started in 2008, directly affected many businesses in 
the timber industry, which provided lumber products to the 
construction industry. It also had the effect of lowering the 
value of the small diameter raw material in the woods. The 
WMSP was unable to meet the goal of zero cost due in part 
to the recession. These external forces also solidified the 
changing mindset from the Regional Office. 
One of the most basic principles of the WMSP was this 
understanding (from the Forest Service) that as treatment 
efficiencies were realized, price per acre would come down, 
allowing more acres to be treated with a given yearly 
allocation. Circumstances changed alright, but due to more 
and more dry mixed conifer being treated, and pine stands 
moderating toward a more restoration treatment prescription 
that did cause the tons/acre removed to skyrocket; improving 
efficiencies in biomass but not acres. The answer was “yes,” 
the efficiencies were improved but the scale had also changed.
In late 2011, the USFS made a significant policy change in 
how it would fund the pre-sale portion of WMSP; it would no 
longer come “off the top” of the Regional budget (as it had 
since 2005) but would be part of the ASNFs “normal yearly 
allocation” for restoration.  That was a $2.5 million “hit” that 
was never fully recovered. Even the funding policy shift had its 
roots in 4FRI and the Five Year Report visit by the Regional 
Office in May, 2010. The Regional Office could see the 4FRI 
contract coming together and “visions of restoration work 
without paying for it” that clouded and tainted the attitude 
toward WMSP. 
The Wallow Fire had a catastrophic effect as well. In the fire 
aftermath, there wasn’t much left that was shovel ready on 
the Apache side of the forest. The WMSP met its contractual 
obligations, but it wasn’t as strong a finish as desired.
During a meeting with ASNFs personnel and industry while 
Wallow smoke was still in the air, they asked if the USFS should 
chase salvage or continue to concentrate  on the green. It 
was a resounding response to salvage “what we can, while we 
can,” so that’s what they did. The salvage (both emergency 
roadside and landscape), and the loss of the $2.5 million 
task order prep funding for the Beaver Creek project area 
really dealt a blow. As did the redirection of efforts toward 
emergency road work, threatened and endangered habitat 
structure inquiry, flooding concerns, Forest closures, health 
and safety issues, the list goes on and on. The USFS estimates 
that the Wallow Fire cost around $110 million, more or less, 
to suppress. Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER) was 
in the neighborhood of $30 million. The ASNFs estimated a 
timber loss of 3 to 3.5 billion board feet. The direct costs 
alone would have treated 280,000 additional acres under 
WMSP. These are staggering numbers that left the ASNFs 
reeling from the impact.
With respect to monitoring costs, 3% appears to be a little low. 
The first half of the WMSP averaged about 4% per year, which 
seemed sufficient. At that rate, regular expenditures for NEPA 
and treatment effects monitoring were covered. That is not to 
say that the WMSP was flush with extra cash; the Board still had 
to prioritize the information and data they wanted to collect. 
That being said, the Board and stakeholders had a good 
sense of what was happening on the ground, and the kind of 
ecological and economic impacts that were occurring. The Five 
Year Report also provided a snapshot into administrative and 
social components of the WMSP. 
Monitoring in the second half of the WMSP was about 2% of 
project costs and only covered the bare minimum. This may 
have been a side-effect from the shift that occurred during 
the reallocation of funding sources in 2011. Many of the 
administrative, economic, and social monitoring questions 
still applied as they did at the project start. The economics 
of the WMSP had risen to the forefront and became tan 
important point of focus. Ecologically, monitoring indicated 
that the anticipated impacts have occurred as expected. After 
answering several of the basic questions regarding ecological 
impacts during the first half, the Board revised their monitoring 
goals and objectives for the second half of the project. This 
second phase of the WMSP is when the monitoring fell short. 
There are still monitoring questions that are difficult to 
evaluate, as there is not enough data to draw any conclusions. 
After the Wallow Fire, the ASNFs were being pulled in multiple 
directions (e.g., NEPA acres needed, Wallow salvage, watershed 
management, health and safety, 4FRI, etc.) making it difficult 
to have a concentrated effort on ecological monitoring for the 
project. In an attempt to continue with at least some of the 
34
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
35
Administrative

Photo by USFS
monitoring, the USFS turned to the ERI to address a few 
of these remaining questions. There was limited BMP 
monitoring reporting to the watershed group, no soil 
compaction or snag monitoring data, no WMSP specific 
Mexican spotted owl habitat monitoring, no understory 
vegetation monitoring, no Land Management Plan 
snag or course woody debris monitoring to determine 
compliance, just to name the major components listed on 
the goals and objectives of the revised WMSP monitoring 
program that went unanswered. 
The Board believes the ASNFs may have been able to 
do a better job at completing the remaining monitoring 
questions if they had had a single person who interfaced 
with the Board. When the WMSP first began there was 
a dedicated person from the supervisor’s office that 
attended all the Board meetings, and when that person 
left the forest, that representation on the Board was 
never filled. Again, the clear point in time when things 
changed was the Wallow Fire. As you read through the 
remainder of the report, you will see what the Board 
determined went well, where improvements could be 
made, and what recommendations are suggested for the 
future. ◊
36
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
37
Administrative
Salvage logging and hazard tree removal were conducted within the 
Wallow Fire footprint in high severity burn areas.

Photos by The Nature Conservancy
This Mexican Spotted Owl 
recovery area was thinned using 
a 16-inch diameter cap.
To Cap
or Not to Cap
At the inception of the USFS in 1905, forests were viewed 
as a resource to be managed for timber productivity 
and utilization and livestock grazing. This message was 
reinforced by forest policy regarding fire. In the first half 
of the 20th Century the demands for lumber to support 
the housing boom across the nation and lumber for paper, 
mining and other uses during this industrial age led the 
USFS focus to manage for large timber that could be 
harvested and utilized by the public. In the Southwestern 
U.S., the USFS recognized the need to thin smaller diameter 
trees. The 30-year Colorado Plateau Pulpwood contract was 
awarded in 1959 and focused on thinning small diameter 
trees on portions of six national forests in Arizona and New 
Mexico. This contract terminated in 1989.
During much of the second half of the 20th Century, there 
was public debate on the appropriate use of the National 
Forests. The White Mountains of Arizona were not immune to 
the changes that occurred as a result of new environmental 
legislation and subsequent lawsuits. In 1995-1996, a court 
case temporarily stopped tree cutting activities on National 
Forest lands in Arizona and New Mexico. In 1997, leaders 
from east central Arizona and within State and County 
Governments, Federal agencies, academia, and other 
interested parties met. After nine months of meetings, the 
Natural Resources Working Group (NRWG) was formed. 
The group wanted to settle disagreements over the use of 
National Forest lands in the field rather than in a courtroom. 
The Blue Ridge Demonstration project on the Lakeside 
Ranger District was implemented in order to display the 
willingness to work together. NRWG has been meeting for 
2 hours/month, eleven months of the year for more than 
15 years now. Working together on projects helped develop 
the trust and working relationships between individuals, 
groups, and organizations with a wide range of interests. 
The USFS, the logging industry, and the environmental 
organizations went through many years of working through 
iterations to find a balance. Within that balance was the 
understanding that small-diameter trees needed to be 
removed from the forest, and yet a few organizations held 
on to past actions focused on cutting only the largest 
trees. Often based on input during the NEPA process the 
Forest Supervisor would make a decision that set a 16-
inch diameter cap. While sometimes this was more socially 
driven than ecologically driven, the cap meant that no 
trees greater in size than the specified diameter would be 
cut within a specific project area. This allowed the NEPA 
process to move forward without threat of litigation. This 
still met components of the purpose and need whereby the 
threat of fire would be reduced and forest health was a 
step closer to being restored. By having an implementable 
decision the logging industry could remain in business and 
provide local jobs for the nearby communities.   ◊
By Sarah Hurteau
38
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
39
Administrative

Administrative
After the Rodeo-Chediski fire burned nearly a half-million 
acres in 2002, the leadership of the ASNFs and stakeholders 
from the public, decided it was critical to find a mechanism 
that would increase the pace and scale of forest treatments. 
Fortunately, when President Bush came to visit the White 
Mountains during the 2002 Rodeo-Chediski mega-fire, the 
USFS gained a strong ally in addressing problems on the 
ground. Shortly there after the Healthy Forest Restoration 
Act was signed which helped streamline the NEPA process 
for hazardous fuel reduction projects, and the 2003 
Appropriations Act (P.L. 108-7) provided the authority to 
implement long-term stewardship contracts, which were 
exactly the mechanisms that would allow the ASNFs to move 
forward with landscape level treatments. And, because the 
ASNFs had been working with stakeholders on the Blue 
Ridge Demonstration Project to build agreement on the 
approach to forest treatments, the ASNFs leadership knew 
they could scale up these treatments and would have the 
support of groups that historically challenged previous 
timber projects. Thus, the ASNFs submitted a proposal to 
the USFS Regional Office to plan and administer what would 
become the WMSP. 
As the first long-term stewardship contract in the nation, 
many called the WMSP “the experiment.” There was 
basically no template to follow as the ASNFs hammered 
out the details of the contract, and the agency had to take 
great risks in determining the length of the contract and 
the number of acres to be treated. Given the parameters 
for what the objectives were, the staff finally decided that a 
stewardship contract would be the best fit for the long-term. 
The initial target of 150,000 acres was derived based on the 
number of acres in the wildland urban interface (WUI) and 
the volume of wood the USFS thought was needed in order 
to attract and sustain industry. The ten-year contract period 
was the result of visiting with industry and understanding 
the length of time that was required in order to attract 
and sustain the industry over the long term. As explained 
by several business owners, a minimum of ten years is 
required in order to obtain financing and realize some 
return on investments. Stewardship projects are contracted 
utilizing an AQM contract, which are different than timber 
sales or service work contracts. AQM contracts are the only 
type of contracts that allow for a ten-year duration and 
cover large contracting amounts. Plus, an AQM contract 
allowed for just a single contract with different areas of the 
forest being treated through specific task orders. 
Acres versus Tons
When the initial Request for Proposals (RFP) was released, 
the contract stipulated that the WMSP should be bid based 
on a per acre basis, as getting acres treated was the 
primary goal of the project. But, within three months of the 
contract, it became obvious that given the drastic difference 
in density (volume) from one acre to another, the contract 
would have to be amended so that the contractor would 
be paid based on volume (green tonnage), rather than per 
acre. According to USFS personnel, this decision was made 
so the advantage was to the contractor, helping to assist 
the industry’s viability. Being paid by the ton eliminated 
uncertainty and provided assurances to the contractor. For 
example, the USFS initially estimated 10.7 tons of material 
would be removed on each acre. As industry developed that 
could utilize more of the forest byproducts (slash, limbs, 
bark, and tops), the tons per acre removed increased to 
an average of 25.8 tons per acre. In some project areas, 
the total removed was as low as 7 tons per acre or as high 
as 80 tons per acre. The majority of project areas were 
between 20 and 45 tons per acre.
It is important to note that the cost per acre, and later on 
the cost per ton, was different for each task order. Even 
though the WMSP had one contract, each new area of the 
forest treated was handled through individual task orders. 
Prior to the task order being signed, Future Forest would 
negotiate a site-specific price. Then, the ASNFs would 
calculate payments to Future Forest based on the number 
of tons of wood harvested per task order, with the cost of 
each ton based upon the type of treatment that occurred on 
that particular site. There were several treatment options 
available for most task orders, ranging from total removal 
of all fiber to a variety of partial-removal treatments. 
Although the average cost of treatment was $500 per acre, 
the reality is that the price per ton changed depending on 
the type of material harvested and site-specific tasks in a 
given task order. The cost per acre/ton paid by the ASNFs 
to Future Forest did not include hauling costs, which meant 
that Future Forest usually had to pass those costs down 
to the businesses purchasing wood. Longer haul distances 
typically meant higher costs per ton for the purchaser, 
whereas shorter distances meant lower costs per ton. 
Depending on whether you were the USFS, the contractor, or 
a consumer of raw material, there ended up being distinct 
advantages and disadvantages of utilizing tons versus 
acres. Since the USFS was accountable for accomplishing 
a specific number of acres per year (a target), it was in 
their best interest to gauge performance on a per acre 
basis. Historically, one way loggers were paid was by using 
a method of scaling where the truck was weighed and the 
estimation of wood per load in thousand board feet (using 
a Scribner Decimal C formula) provided a weight to board 
foot ratio from which the value of the timber was calculated. 
For the contractor, there was incentive to move the trees 
from stump to the scale as quickly as possible to include the 
water weight on the scale. Most of the time, the longer the 
duration from when the trees were cut to when they were 
delivered, the less they weighed. 
For certain industries such as sawmills, paying by the ton 
rather than by estimated board foot, reduced their overall 
profit because more weight did not necessarily equate to 
more finished product. For instance, sawmills and other 
types of industry historically purchased raw material by 
the board foot. Through the use of scaling, industries 
usually only paid for the logs of sound quality and free of 
defect. They also didn’t pay for water weight. Throughout 
the contract, only one firm (a wood pellet mill) ended up 
purchasing raw material based on bone dry tons, which 
is derived from weighing a sample of green chips and 
comparing it to the same sample after being dried, and 
extrapolating the difference to the ton. By doing this, the 
firm eliminated paying for water that was in the green trees/
biomass when it was delivered. 
WMSP Contract Issues
In addition to the acres versus tons issue, it became very 
apparent during the first year that some of the contract 
requirements were from a time gone by. Previous timber 
sale contracts used over the past several decades were 
based on harvesting of merchantable (large timber), 
or “saw logs,” rather than the thinning of over dense 
forests made up of small diameter trees that had little to 
no value These contract and the associated requirements 
and clauses were based on treatments that focused on 
merchantable timber. Receipts from timber sales and other 
sources were used to pay for service contracts with the goal 
of pre-commercial thinning of stands so the trees left could 
grow into a larger future commercial product. This contract 
was different in that it was not based on pre-commercial 
thinning, or post-treatment rather it was focused on 
thinning overstocked stands to meet a desired condition 
where the density and distribution of trees were reduced to 
what was considered historical (pre-settlement) conditions. 
Since mechanized harvesting equipment was being utilized, 
Inner-Workings
An inside look at how the WMSP contract actually worked
By Molly Pitts
40
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
41

Administrative
42
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
43
contract requirements for slash treatments, and flagging skid trails were no longer necessary, but were 
still required in the original WMSP contract. Slash was being utilized in various wood product markets for 
the first time, so that large slash piles were no longer constructed by separate crews. Instead slash was 
either piled during harvesting or disbursed across the treatment area for erosion protection, wildlife 
benefit, and broadcast burning. Loggers explained that these contractual requirements increased the 
amount of time it took to complete a task order. Operators believed that the low market value of 
the small diameter material did not offset the costs in labor necessary to meet these contractual 
obligations and requirements should have been reduced or omitted from contract requirements. These 
requirements traditionally have been put in place for the benefits listed, however these practices cost 
the contractor time and money, all of which leads to controversy in management and what is best for 
the land in balance with what can be asked for by the contractor in a way that allows them to be viable 
and profitable. 
Barriers and Challenges
While the new stewardship contracting authority was instrumental in allowing the ASNFs to move 
forward at an increased pace, the authority came with other barriers and challenges. The following 
ideas are recommendations that come from the Ten Year Socioeconomic Assessment:12
1. 
Prevailing Wage: Contractors performing work under a federally funded or federally assisted 
Stewardship Contract are required to pay employees a “prevailing wage” as determined by the 
Davis Bacon Act. The prevailing wage was identified by in-the-woods operators as one of the 
greatest barriers to the contract as a whole. As explained, the prevailing wage required under the 
contract was much higher, sometimes 15-20% more, than the existing industry rates in the White 
Mountains at the time. Additionally, operators of the highest skill level (e.g. harvest operators who 
were required to cut accurately and quickly) were often paid the same amount as those operators 
who required less expertise (e.g. a loader operator who mechanically placed logs onto a log 
truck). Prevailing wage also mandated that “apprentices” (those new to the job and learning) 
be paid the same amount as “journeyman” (an experienced operator). This resulted in a higher 
treatment cost per acre, as well as reduced employee morale.
2. 
Costs to the Contractor/Subcontractors: Because of requirements within the contract, the cost 
to the contractor or subcontractors to treat an acre of land often made the overall economics 
of the contract not feasible. If the goal was to treat more acres, the USFS needed to understand 
the costs associated with harvesting and match the contractual requirements to these expenses. 
Requirements such as flagging skid trails, and the USFS not marking trees and making the 
operators responsible for implementing prescriptions, increased costs to the operators. Looking 
back, USFS personnel agreed that the contract was “overregulated.”
3. 
Cancellation Ceiling: When utilizing the Stewardship Contracting Authority, the USFS is required 
to set aside a specific amount of funds in case the contract is canceled or defaulted on by the 
government. These funds are to be used to repay the contractor for any capital investments made 
by the contractor to fulfill the contract’s requirements. According to both contractors and USFS 
personnel, this obligation is detrimental to the stewardship contracting authority as it ties up a 
large sum of money that could otherwise be used for on-the-ground treatment.
4. 
Length of Contract: According to industry, ten years is not an acceptable amount of time to get a 
return on investments when financing millions of dollars worth of equipment and infrastructure 
to harvest and process a new size of wood materials.  Simply put, there was not enough time 
to physically build new processing capacity and develop markets, all while trying to increase 
efficiency. Although the ten year time frame did assist some businesses with obtaining financing 
and getting some return on their investment, most businesses believe a longer-term contract (20 
years) with a guaranteed supply of raw material is crucial for any new contracts. 
5. 
Contracting at the Regional Office level: With the use of an AQM contract and the fact that the 
funding allocation of the WMSP exceeded current authorities for the ASNF, the primary Contracting 
Officer Representative (COR) for the contract was an employee of the USFS Regional Office in 
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Because of their physical location and the fact that most of the CORs 
had a very limited timber sale contracting background and had minimal knowledge of the on-the-
ground operations that were occurring through the WMSP, tensions between the Regional Office 
and the ASNF often ran quite high. Many of the loggers felt that not only did the CORs not have 
the experience needed to understand the complexities of the new type of harvesting operations 
that were being implemented; most of them didn’t take the time to visit the sites in order to learn 
or understand the current situation. Further complicating the issue was the high turnover rates 
of the COR position over the ten year contract period.  
With the ten year contract of the WMSP wrapping up in 2014, it is easy to look back with hindsight 
and determine that some things could have or should have been done better. But, for being the first 
ten year long term stewardship contract in the entire nation, many people believe the contract was 
hugely successful in achieving the stated goals, and in fact, is most likely the #1 reason that so many 
other National Forests throughout the US have been able to move forward with stewardship contracts. 
It was hard being first, with many lessons to learn and people quick to criticize; but the reality is that 
the WMSP paved the way for larger projects such as the 4FRI. Was it perfect? Absolutely not. Was it 
successful? Definitely!  ◊

44      WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
45
Ecological
Through the Evolution of Forest
When the WMSP began in 2004, forest treatments were 
focused on reducing the threat of catastrophic wildfire 
in the Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) surrounding the 
communities of the White Mountains of eastern Arizona. 
As these treatments started going in on the ground, some 
of the local residents and stakeholders had issue with the 
appearance of many of the treatments. 
The thinning prescriptions called for even spacing between 
the bole or trunk of the tree often for trees lest than 9 
inches in diameter. An evenly spaced prescription minimized 
the risk of a wildfire moving through the canopy of the 
Early WMSP treatments 
mitigated fire risk but left 
stakeholders feeling jailed.
Treatments under WMSP
forest, and reduced the fuels available for wildfire. This left 
the resulting forest looking overly managed and unnatural. 
Many people called it the “jail bar” or “tree farm” effect. 
From a wildlife perspective, it also reduced habitat for 
many species that utilize a dense or interlocking canopy 
structure. 
Meanwhile, the ERI had been looking into a concept of 
forest treatments focused on what they called “remnant 
evidence,” meaning that the thinning prescriptions for an 
area should mimic the forest structure that existed there 
historically. That structure was determined by old stump 
cuts, stump holes, snags, or down logs from a time gone by. 
A new style of treatment was developed based on the ERI 
research and took into account not only fire and fuels, but 
wildlife, soils, watershed health, and a few other objectives. 
Eagar South was established as a demonstration site to 
illustrate what these new thinning prescriptions looked 
like on the ground. Extensive fire modeling, and wildlife, 
understory, and overstory surveys were completed to 
understand the full effects. These treatments were also 
implemented using the new DxD methods to save time and 
cut preparation costs. 
Through the continued engagement and discussions that 
were able to take place built on trust and agreement, and 
using an adaptive management process, forest treatments 
evolved from purely fire and fuels treatments to true 
ecosystem and forest restoration treatments.  ◊   
1997
Formation of 
the Natural 
Resources 
Working Group 
(NRWG)
2004
Start of the 
White Mountain 
Stewardship 
Project (WMSP)
Building early 
consensus with 
the Blue Ridge 
Demonstration 
Project
Development 
of “Remnant 
Evidence” based 
treatments by 
the ERI
Mineral Treatment Area
Alpine WUI, trial period 
for various treatment 
modifications
Eagar South 
Demonstration Site
Learning how to write 
thinning prescriptions that 
were more ecologically 
based, often called “clumpy-
groupy”
Extensive 
modeling effort 
to understand 
the potential 
effects of the 
“clumpy-groupy” 
structure
2010
WMSP Five 
Year Report 
illustrating 
modeling results
2011 Wallow 
Fire burns next 
large-scale 
project area near 
Beaver Creek
2002 Rodeo-
Chediski Fire
2014
Passing lessons 
learned to 4FRI
By Sarah Hurteau
Photos by The Nature Conservancy

46
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
47
Ecological
Structural Matters
Forest structural characteristics evaluated at multiple scales.
In a Few Words
Many of the project areas on the Apache Forest 
scheduled for post-treatment surveys were burned in 
the Wallow Fire in the summer of 2011. With USFS 
personnel and resources diverted to post-wildfire 
rehabilitation and watershed protection, there were 
few resources available for post-treatment monitoring. 
And because many of the project areas were burned, 
it is impossible to separate the impacts and results of 
the treatment from the fire. Additional data on snags, 
woody debris, understory vegetation, and other metrics 
of interest specified in the WMSP monitoring program 
were not collected due to the lack of personnel, 
funding, and intermixing of fire effects. For project 
areas treated on the Sitgreaves Forest within the 
WMSP, there was limited funding, if any, to complete 
WMSP specific monitoring.
That being said, the ERI did conduct surveys at 
244-point locations on the Apache Forest to evaluate 
post-treatment stand structure metrics, leave-tree patch 
size and connectivity, and non-native invasive species 
presence. They found that the mean diameter of trees 
in both ponderosa pine and mixed conifer treatment 
areas increased, and that the average patch size of 
leave-tree clumps was approximately ten acres in size. 
The ERI also found that non-native species are 
invading treatment areas utilizing mostly bare soil 
locations in full sun. After 3 years of surveys between 
2012 and 2014, they were still accumulating new non-
native species indicating a need for follow-up surveys 
and likely invasive species treatments to prevent their 
spread into more natural areas.
Key Results from White Mountain Stewardship Project Monitoring Questions
Is there a difference in pre- and post-treatment snag 
densities in monitoring sites?
The data to answer this question was not available at 
the time of this analysis. From the Five Year Report we 
know that snags are sometime inadvertently removed 
by equipment, but that BMPs had been put in place to 
reduce the occurrence of this. After the Wallow Fire, there 
was no way to determine if the absence of snags was due 
to fire or treatment. 
Is the mosaic of Vegetation Structural Stage (VSS) 
classes across selected northern goshawk treatments 
meeting these guidelines?
The data to answer this question was not available at the 
time of this analysis. Based on thinning prescriptions 
used focused on uneven-aged management and the 
clumpy-groupy structure, it is likely that a mosaic of 
VSS classes exists. Again, this was not measured, so we 
cannot say for sure.
Are patch sizes of denser (i.e., untreated or lightly 
treated) areas connected? What is the range of areas 
and sizes of these patches?
On average, patches of high canopy cover forest (>50%) 
were less than ten acres in size. Patch size ranges from 
0.2 acres, the minimum patch sized detectable, to 302.6 
acres. The spatial distribution of dense patches was 
not analyzed, however, the methodologies used in this 
evaluation provides an interesting look at the relative 
contribution of the largest patch size of high canopy 
cover (>50%), to the total area of that class within the 
extent of the analyzed landscape. The analysis does tell 
us that on average, the largest high canopy cover patch 
made up approximately 10-40% of the high canopy 
cover area within each project area. This estimate may be 
low, as many of the areas analyzed had also been burned 
in the Wallow Fire.
Are we meeting current (2010) LMP standards for 
woody debris?
The data to answer this question was not available at the 
time of analysis. As part of the fire modeling completed 
by the ERI on the Apache Forest (see next section) 
fuels transects were completed, but many of the areas 
surveyed had been burned by the Wallow Fire, so it was 
not possible to evaluate if sufficient levels of woody 
debris were left post-treatment.
In 2015, the LMP was revised and course woody debris is 
now described as a desired condition by forest type and 
not as a standard. 
Is understory native vegetation ground cover 
increasing?
The data to answer this question is not available at the 
time of analysis. The understory data collection was 
labor-intensive, and with so few people available to 
collect monitoring data, especially after the Wallow Fire, 
there was insufficient people power to collect these data. 
In the future it may be possible for the USFS to go back 
to treatment units to subsample a handful of areas to 
determine if the understory is recovering. 
Are exotic/invasive species present at landings and 
burn piles?
Following the Wallow Fire, landings and burn piles 
generally could not be located, so the ERI modified 
the question to examine if invasive species were 
preferentially found in various types of ground cover 
and amount of sunlight for the plots they measured on 
the Apache Forest. They found a total of eight non-native 
invasive species within sampled plots. The majority of 
invasive species occurred within full sun and on bare 
mineral soil microsites. Invasive species that are wind 
dispersed such as bull thistle and musk thistle are of 
particular concern as they can disperse widely and invade 
newly disturbed habitats. 
After ten years post-treatment, is understory 
vegetative composition/density tending towards 
Potential Natural Vegetation Type?
The data to answer this question was not available at the 
time of analysis. Because so few acres were treated in 
2004, so many of the areas treated have not yet reached 
the ten year mark. In the future the USFS could possibly 
sample a few treatment areas each year to determine 
how forest restoration treatments impacts the potential 
natural vegetation type and if it varies by prescription. 
Photo by The Nature Conservancy
By Sarah Hurteau

48
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
49
Ecological
When the first forest treatments were implemented under 
the WMSP, everyone involved (USFS, stakeholders, citizens, 
conservation groups, and the monitoring board), were 
focused on the details of reducing fire hazards and fuel 
loads, and not necessarily the bigger picture. After seeing a 
few treated areas on the ground, they realized that they also 
needed to consider the broader ecological values, specifically 
structure, and function. At that time, there was a discussion in 
the ecological community focused on how to implement forest 
thinning treatments specific to Southwestern ponderosa pine 
that would: 
• 
mimic historic structure; 
• 
reduce fire severity effects during wildfire; 
• 
allow for the safe reintroduction of prescribed 
surface fire;
• 
provide habitat for a wide range of wildlife 
species; 
• 
maintain rare and ecologically important 
features such as oak clumps, snags, and 
course woody debris; 
• 
reduce fuel loads;
• 
improve understory density and diversity; and
• 
provide for other resource management such 
as recreation or grazing, among many others, 
not to mention the support in rebuilding the 
local timber industry.
Scientists, conservationists, and managers were all working 
through a persistent list of ideas and concepts. The discussion 
was pervasive and like any scientific endeavor, the group 
turned to data. 
In the Five Year Report, overstory and understory data 
were analyzed to determine if forest treatments where 
actually changing forest structure and to help understand 
the nuanced difference between thinning prescriptions. Even 
though the answers sometimes seem obvious, you can’t 
quantify the change without measuring it. To that end, there 
was considerable effort put in to measuring basal area, tree 
density, overstory canopy cover and understory composition 
and cover. Around this time, some of the ideas and concepts 
for a new “style” of forest treatment prescription were tested 
out at the Eagar South treatment area. Forest treatment data 
and analyses were presented in the Five Year Report, were the 
data illustrated when trees are cut, the basal area, a common 
measure of tree density, does in fact decrease. This analysis 
also revealed that with a reduction in trees, there is less canopy 
cover. It was surmised that with that reduction in overstory 
canopy cover, allowed more light to hit the forest floor, and the 
data showed a significant increase in grasses and forbs in a 
few of the plots measures. While these results were common 
across many of the treatment plots measures, Eagar South 
consistently had statistically significant differences in all of the 
measures between pre- and post-treatment conditions. 
The Eagar South treatment prescriptions used as 
demonstration site illustrated how the prescriptions improved 
forest structure and function, met wildlife objectives along with 
fire and fuels objectives. We learned that the prescriptions 
used at Eagar South had the greatest reduction in basal area 
and canopy cover, however there were also the fewest snags. 
Snags are an ecological component that became a more closely 
monitored feature after the accidental removal of several 
individuals during treatment. We also learned that fire behavior 
metrics were significantly reduced, a point that was debated 
whether that would be the case. Finally, these treatments 
were implemented using a method called designation by 
description (DxD) for trees under 9 inches diameter to reduce 
implementation cost. Designation by prescription was used 
in a very limited and experimental nature to determine the 
feasibility of the use of this technique. Through the use of DxD 
and DxP, under the WMSP there was limited need for marking 
crews, or paint, and other costly pre-treatment prep-work or 
administration. This was a turning point in the prescriptions 
and implementation methodology used for WMSP, and with the 
data from the Five Year Report in-hand, these methods were 
used in other project areas. Likewise, the monitoring effort 
also shifted to a more conceptual and nuanced understanding 
of stand structure and the resulting ecological function. 
In 2011 when the Board revised their monitoring questions 
and set quantitative goals, stand structure metrics took a 
different form. To help collect these data, the ASNFs turned to 
the ERI to lend their considerable people-power and expertise 
to the monitoring effort. Between 2012 and 2014, the ERI 
collected field based data at WMSP task orders following 
treatment implementation at a total of 40 project areas. The 
ERI followed the established WMSP monitoring program point-
based protocol developed for stand characteristics and fuels 
transects.11 There were a total of 244 point locations surveyed 
(85 points each in 2012 and 2014, and 74 in 2013), where 
information on trees per acre, basal area, tree species, mean 
diameter, among other metrics were recorded. 
The ERI found similar results to those present in the Five Year 
Report, in that trees per acre and basal area was reduced 
in both ponderosa pine and mixed conifer stands, while 
mean tree diameter increased. On average, basal area in 
Designation by 
Description & Prescription
Photo from 
John Deere
The use of Designation by Description (DxD) and Designation 
by Prescription (DxP) transfers the decision of which trees to 
cut from the USFS to the contractor. There are no marking 
crews, reducing the prep costs for the USFS and speeding up 
the process of issuing timber sales or task orders. However, 
increased cost then fell to the contractor in the form of 
extensive training and logistics.
DxD was used quite extensively on the WMSP and although it 
was rough in the beginning, it eventually became a great tool. 
One of the reasons it was so successful was because the long-
term contract allowed a group of operators to work directly 
with USFS personnel to develop a system that transferred 
thinning prescriptions to on the ground operations. 
While it took a lot of training up front, eventually all involved 
were able to get on the same page and use DxP to achieve the 
desired results. The adaptive management process is critical 
in gaining success. Through trial and error protocols and 
understanding on desired results were achieved. Because the 
WMSP was truly a partnership between the National Forests 
and the contractor, Future Forest, they were able to overcome 
the immense start-up challenges when switching from 
traditional timber sale marking procedures. 
Prescription
Description
Trees are cut based on 
desired end result, like 
thin to 60 BAF or 
remove all juniper.
Trees are cut based on 
character, such as size; 
remove all trees ≤ 9 
inches in diameter.
Authorization
Title 16, US Code, 
section 2104
Considerations
Foresters and contract 
operators don’t always 
see things the same 
way. For example, 
one prescription that 
included tree drip 
lines as a reference 
point was difficult for 
operators to complete 
because most 
equipment doesn’t 
allow operators to 
fully see the area that 
would define a drip 
line.

50
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
51
Ecological
ponderosa pine stands was reduced from 156 to 49 ft2/acre 
and 167 to 57 ft2/acre in mixed conifer stands.13-15 The tree 
mean diameter was increased from 13.1- to 14.7- inches in 
ponderosa pine stands and also increased from 12.5- to 14.2- 
inches in mixed conifer stands. The average trees per acre 
(TPA) were reduced from 248 to 62 in ponderosa pine stands 
and from 260 to 75 TPA in mixed conifer stands. These same 
metrics were collected from post-treatment plots at the Blue 
Ridge project area by the ASNFs, with similar overall results in 
the reduction in trees per acre, basal area, and canopy cover. 
As a point of reference, reconstruction of the natural range 
of variability in ponderosa pine stands was found to have a 
basal area of 16-124 ft2/acre and trees per acre of 11-137.16 
Of the 41 stands measured, all were within the basal area 
range, and four fell outside the TPA range, with 1 below and 3 
above the range, topping out at 205 trees per acre. Stoddard 
(2011) goes on to say that 75% of reconstructed stands fell 
between the range of 22-74 TPA and a basal area of 38-81 ft2/
acre. For the plots measures since 2012, 63% on ponderosa 
pine stands fell within this TPA range, and 59% fell within this 
basal area range. Twelve stands fell below the recommended 
basal area natural range of variability. Overall, the thinning 
prescriptions implemented under WMSP are moving the stands 
towards the natural range of variability and historic structure. 
Similar reconstructed values are not currently available for 
mixed conifer stands. While these metrics weren’t specifically 
part of the monitoring questions outlines in 2011, these data 
were collected as part of the fire and fuels modeling conducted 
by the ERI, and therefore should be reported. 
Evaluating Patch Size
The WMSP set out to mechanically thin 150,000 acres, and 
on a national forest that encompasses 2.1 million acres, of 
which 596,774 acres are considered suitable timberland for 
vegetation restoration treatment, that may not sound like 
much. The Board wanted to make sure that implemented 
treatments weren’t the start of a new habitat fragmentation 
pattern. When the monitoring program was revised in 2011, 
the Board included a question that sought to understand 
the connectivity of dense forest habitat. While the majority 
of species present in southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
evolved with a savanna-type forest structure, there were still 
patches of closed canopy forests that had a higher density of 
trees. These areas supported a different suite of species, both 
plants and animals, than the more open structure that WMSP 
was now aimed at restoring. During the planning process, 
several of the later project areas included strategically placed 
leave areas or lightly thinned, intermediate if you will, task 
order boundaries to provide habitat for these “closed canopy” 
species. 
Between 2012 and 2014, the ERI used a combination of 
Landsat imagery and field based ground data to evaluate 
these concepts. Field-based canopy cover data was used to 
develop the model for detection of four canopy cover classes 
in the Landsat imagery across mechanically thinned project 
areas. The cover classes were identified as: 
1) 
≤ 20% cover;
2) 
21-50% cover;
3) 
51-80% cover; and 
4) 
> 80% cover.
In some project areas class 4 was not detected using their 
minimum mapping unit of a 30m pixel or 323 ft2. The ERI 
also assumed  that “untreated or lightly treated areas” were 
represented in cover classes 3 or 4 with a canopy cover of 
great than 50%. With the help of FRAGSTATS,17 a statistical 
analysis software package, the ERI found that the average 
patch size of class 3 or 4 canopy cover was 9.29 acres.13-15 
There was one patch identified within the Hall Ranch project 
area with an average patch size of 161.9 acres, but this value 
was removed as an outlier since the next largest patch was 45 
acres. The maximum patch sizes ranged from less than 1 acre 
to 135.8 acres, with the outliers at Halls ranch of 302.6 acres. 
In nearly all project areas, there were some patches of forest 
that went untreated. Some areas had steep slopes, some 
were streamside management zones, and others were left 
untreated as wildlife corridors. Untreated zones identified 
as wildlife corridor often utilized narrow drainages or other 
topographic features on the landscape that wildlife could 
use to traverse unsuitable habitat. An average patch size of 
around ten acres would be suitable for many species, however 
wildlife often use patch sizes much smaller than that. Through 
the use of a 30m pixel, many small patches of dense habitat 
would have gone undetected using this methodology, biasing 
the results towards only the largest of patches. From a wildlife 
perspective, in addition to the size of the patch, the spatial 
arrangement of the patches across the landscape is also 
a key factor. The ability of wildlife to maintain populations 
Distance between forested patches left standing after treatments are important 
for many reasons. Within these forested patches the additional canopy 
cover protects bare soil from erosion; some wildlife prefer areas of dense 
canopy for foraging or nesting; dense canopy also creates various micro-site 
characteristics that in turn is suitable for different understory plants; variation 
across the landscape creates structural and compositional diversity; leave trees 
also provide seed source for the next generation of tree species; and finally, if 
a wildfire rolls through, the variation in forest structure creates a patchy mosaic 
where if a fire were go through there is a greater chance that some patches 
torch and some remain intact that in this dynamic landscape.
Are Patches Connected?

52
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
53
Ecological
within these patches and use the postage stamp habitats 
to essentially leap-frog through unsuitable habitat makes 
connectivity of larger core habitat patches more functional.
The ERI used an equation developed by Turner and 
colleagues (2001), to evaluate connectivity. They calculated 
an index of the relative mean patch size in proportion to the 
project area that comprises high canopy cover (classes 3 
and 4). The equation used was:
Ci = LCi / (pi * E)
where Ci = connectivity index for patch type i; 
LCi = size of the largest patch of type i; 
pi = proportion of the landscape in patch type i; and 
E = extent of the analyzed landscape.
Based on this calculation, the ERI reports connectivity values 
ranging from 0.04 to 0.39 with an outlier value of 1.0 at the 
Nutrioso 1B project area. The index values closer to 1 are 
interpreted as greater connectivity among patches. The ERI 
report states that while “some project areas showed larger 
patch size, connectivity was generally low.” 
Three of the areas included in the analysis were burned in 
the Wallow Fire prior to treatment being implemented, and 
several of the project areas were burned in the Wallow Fire 
after treatment. Fires effects on canopy cover were significant 
in places and likely would have presented a different picture 
in the ERI’s evaluation if analyzed post-treatment and pre-
wildfire. 
The methodologies used in this evaluation provide a 
description of the relative contribution of the largest patch 
size of high canopy cover (classes 3 or 4), to the total area 
of that class within the extent of the analyzed landscape, 
but it does not provide insight to the spatial distribution of 
these patches across the landscape. It does not tell us if 
these patches are close together or far apart. It does tell 
us that on average, the largest high canopy cover patch 
made up approximately 10-40% of the high canopy cover 
area within each project area. Because many of the project 
areas were utilizing the same treatment prescriptions, it is 
not unexpected to have multiple project areas with a similar 
leave tree patch size. 
Invasive Species
One of the primary concerns of the Board was whether 
invasive species would invade disturbed areas following 
forest treatments. The ERI set out to determine if invasive 
plant species were present at landings and burn piles, 
however; once the Wallow Fire burned through many of 
the treated areas, the presence of an invasive species was 
confounded by the fire equipment that came after treatment. 
Furthermore, burn pile and landings were impossible to 
relocate. 
The ERI found that treatment areas had up to eight 
difference species of invasive plants. Their surveys of 
invasive plants compares a few areas that had not been 
burned in the Wallow Fire to those that were, and confirmed 
that these areas follow the same general pattern of most 
non-native species invasion. Generally, invasive plants are 
found in bare soil (no litter or duff) and in open areas with 
little to no canopy cover (full sun), which remained consistent 
with the treatment areas surveyed by the ERI. They found 
that bull thistle (Cirsium vulgare) was the most common 
invasive species on the Black Mesa and Lakeside districts in 
2012.13 In 2013 the surveys were expanded to include the 
Springerville and Alpine districts, where cheatgrass (Bromus 
tectorum) and musk thistle (Carduus nutans) were the most 
commonly detected non-natives.14 By 2014, three new 
species appeared including goatgrass (Aegilops cylindrical) 
and common stork’s-bill (Erodium cicutarium) on the Alpine 
district and common purslane (Portulaca loeracea) on the 
Springerville district.15 Some survey areas had no invasive 
while others were very densely covered in non-native plants. 
The ERI surveys illustrate the continued concern and need 
for action on invasive species management. Because no 
surveys were completed prior to treatments or in untreated 
areas, it is difficult to ascertain if this level of invasion is 
common throughout the ASNFs or is confined to treatment 
areas. Further confounding these results, many of the 
areas surveyed were also burned in the Wallow Fire, so 
it is impossible to tease apart the sources of invasion. 
Regardless of the source, the non-native plants have arrived 
and incipient populations should be treated to prevent the 
spread of these invasives to undisturbed and ecologically 
important areas. Based on the information provided by the 
ERI, it is recommended that invasive species monitoring 
be included in the Best Management Practices checklist to 
provide the forest an opportunity for early detection and 
allow a targeted rapid response in treated areas. ◊
The ERI surveyed 244 plots for invasive species between 2012 and 2014. 
The following table illustrates the percentage of plot where each non-native 
species was found by area in 2013 and 2014. The majority of these plots were 
surveyed in areas that had also been burned during the Wallow Fire in 2011.
Common Name
Scientific Name
Alpine (2013 / 2014)
Eagar (2013)
Lakeside (2013)
Springerville(2013 / 2014)
Goatgrass
Aegilops cylinfrica
0 / 25
0
0
0 / 0
Cheatgrass
Bromus tectorum
50 / 50
25
0
0 / 33
Musk thistle
Carduus nutans
37.5 / 33
56
3
14.3 / 37.5
Bull Thistle
Cirsium vulgare
12.5 / 33
13
50
23.8 / 43.2
Bindweed
Convolvulus arvensis
4.2 / 0
0
0
0 / 0
Redstem filaree
Erodium cicutarium
45.8 / 50
13
0
0 / 33
Yellow sweetclover
Melilotus officinale
0 / 0
6
0
0 / 0
Common purslane
Portulaca oleracea
0 / 0
0
0
0 / 33
No invasives found
16.7 / 0
44
50
61.9 / 75.1
% of Plots with Invasive Species Present
Bull thistle 
(Cirsium vulgare) 
was the most 
common invasive 
species detected 
on the WMSP 
monitoring plots. 
Photo by Ed Ogle

54
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
55
Ecological
Fire Drill
How wildfire tested the effectiveness of WMSP forest treatments
In a Few Words
All aspects of the WMSP lead back to wildfires. The 
Rodeo-Chediski Fire was the turning point to gain 
momentum and action to begin the restoration 
process. Forest treatments were geared toward 
reducing high-severity wildfires effects, and using 
fire modeling as a way to understand the progress 
treatments have made toward reducing the hazards to 
the small communities peppered throughout eastern 
Arizona. The hope was that we could make progress on 
treatments because we all knew it was only a matter of 
time until the next big wildfire.
With the help of the ERI fire modeling efforts, we 
learned that eight fire behavior metrics produced 
through a modeling effort are all moving in the right 
direction. Fire models showed that in both ponderosa 
pine and mixed conifer forests, forest treatments 
display a dramatic change of potential fire affects. We 
also learned that using the Fire Regime Condition 
Class index has limited inference, but does indicate 
that the WMSP is moving forests back toward a more 
historic structure and fire regime. 
One key result that you can’t get from modeling is 
what will actually happen in a real world scenario. 
Through the Wallow Fire and the San Juan Fire, 
we learned exactly how forest treatments alter fire 
behavior and severity. We found that forested areas 
where thinning treatments had been implemented 
changed fire behavior such that an active crown fire 
dropped to the forest floor and became a surface 
fire. This allowed fire crews to safely get ahead of 
the fire front and light back burns, protect homes, 
businesses, and other structures, and make progress 
on containment. The strategic placement of several 
treatment plots made a huge difference to two 
communities.
Photo by ASNF Staff 
The areas surrounding the East Fork of the Back River 
experienced high-severity fire effects from the Wallow 
Fire that burned through in 2011.
By Sarah Hurteau

56
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
57
Ecological
surface fire. Many of the treatment areas significantly reduced 
crown bulk density, and fuel loads, and also increased crown 
base height, and crowning and torching indices. This means 
that it takes dryer conditions and higher winds to move fire 
from the forest floor into the canopy where the real damage 
is done. These changes were represented in a series of maps 
illustrating the changes in fire behavior characteristic among 
treatment status. 
The 2010 analysis compared two general categories of 
restoration treatments: “typical” hazardous fuels reduction, 
which focuses on evenly spacing trees far enough apart so 
that fire cannot be carried in the tree crowns; and a more 
ecological approach demonstrated at Eagar South. This style 
of treatment mimicked the natural clumpiness of trees with 
open spaces in between clumps that also prevent fire from 
spreading through tree canopies. As a side note, this style of 
treatment also provides for additional ecological and wildlife 
habitat benefits. Looking at the 2010 modeling results, it 
turned out that Eagar South was one of only two treatment 
locations that had a statistical difference in all fire behavior 
characteristics measured. This was a turning point, not only 
for how future thinning treatments would look and feel, but 
also how we would think about managing fire hazards and 
balancing those needs with other objectives.
In 2011, the Board revamped their monitoring questions 
and set quantitative objectives for as many questions as 
possible, including a few relating to fire behavior. These new 
questions moved beyond the basics and delved into functional 
monitoring to meet fire and fuels objectives, and more broad-
scale questions to address fire on the larger landscape. To 
answer several of these questions, the USFS turned to the 
Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) to lend their expertise 
and people-power for field data collection and analysis.  
Modeled Fire Behavior 2014
Between 2012 and 2014, the ERI collected field based 
data at WMSP task orders on the Apache Forest following 
treatment implementation at a total of 40 project areas. The 
ERI followed the established WMSP monitoring program point-
based protocol developed for stand characteristics and fuels 
transects.11 There were a total of 244 point locations surveyed 
(85 points each in 2012 and 2014, and 74 in 2013), where 
information on trees per acre, basal area, tree species, 
mean diameter, crown base height, crown fuel loads, surface 
fuels, canopy cover, and crown bulk density were recorded. 
Because pre-treatment data were not available, pre-treatment 
estimates were constructed from cut stumps observed in the 
post-treatment measured field plots. These data were then 
evaluated using NEXUS 2.0 crown fire analysis software to 
quantify changes in fire behavior metrics. 
efforts, many people living in the forests of Arizona have come 
to understand that fire is a natural process in our forests, and 
in many cases, integral to the health of these systems. Many 
citizens of eastern Arizona understand that suppression is no 
longer the only strategy we should employ in our forests. The 
debate has now shifted to how we can reintroduce fire back 
into these fire prone forests safely, and effectively, in order to 
provide the benefits to the ecosystems without jeopardizing 
and sometimes even improving protection to homes, 
businesses, wildlife, and recreation resources.
Researchers have provided us with many options, and forest 
treatments were developed from utilizing the most up-to-date 
information and techniques in the scientific literature. The 
initial forest treatments utilized in WMSP were developed for 
the sole purpose of addressing fire and fuels objectives, but 
as stated in other sections of Fire is at the center of all aspects 
of the WMSP. Forests in the White Mountains evolved with low-
intensity surface fires. It was the decades of suppressing fires, 
among other actions, that lead to the need for restoration in 
these forests. The Rodeo-Chediski Fire was what finally pushed 
stakeholders to band together and start restoration efforts. 
Restoration treatments were developed not only to reduce 
fire hazards to communities and prevent another catastrophic 
mega-fire large scale wildfires, but also allow for the return of 
fire as a management tool. As we have learned from the past, 
lower-intensity natural and managed fire is an important, and 
necessary ecological process in these forests. Fire modeling 
has helped us determine whether we were making progress 
towards the goal of reintroducing fire onto the landscape, and 
the San Juan and Wallow Fires allowed WMSP treatments to be 
put to the ultimate test. 
Modeled Fire Behavior 2010
The Board turned to a modeling effort to quantify progress 
and identify treatment prescriptions and project areas that 
still needed improvement. The Five Year Report contained an 
extensive fire modeling effort provided by the Regional Fire 
Ecologist of the USFS that included the use of FlamMap, a fire 
behavior mapping and analysis program. The results of the 
modeling allowed us to statistically test changes in modeled 
fire behavior characteristics between pre- and post-treatment 
conditions. As a reminder, these models include weather data, 
such as relative humidity, temperature, wind speed, etc., and 
weather conditions similar to those during the Rodeo-Chediski 
Fire were used as a “worst case scenario” in the modeling 
effort. 
The Fire modeling effort in 2010 found that the treatments 
implemented under the WMSP were moving fire behavior in the 
right direction. Meaning, that the types of fires were moving 
from the catastrophic mega-fire to a more natural low-intensity 
Key Results from White Mountain Stewardship Project Monitoring Questions
Is there a difference between pre-treatment crown 
fire potential and post-fire desired fire behavior 
across selected analysis areas?
The simple answer is yes. In both ponderosa pine and 
mixed conifer stands modeled by the ERI, crown fire 
potential moved from 100% active crown fire in pre-
treatment stands to 22% active crown fire (ponderosa 
pine) and 33% active crown fire (mixed conifer) in 
post-treatment stands. The remaining treated ponderosa 
pine stands (78%) showed passive fire characteristics. 
For the remaining treated mixed conifer stands, 50% 
showed passive crown fire, and 17% showed surface fire 
characteristics.
Is there a difference between pre- and post-
treatment flame lengths in selected modeled sites?
One metric of particular interest was flame length, a 
combination of fire line intensity and rate of spread, 
which all together helps determine the ability for human 
intervention in fire suppression efforts. Flame lengths 
in modeled ponderosa pine stands were cut in half, as 
pre-treatment flame lengths in the head fire averaged 
81.7 feet and post-treatment averaged 39.5 feet. Flame 
lengths modeled in mixed conifer stands were reduced 
by more than 60%, as pre-treatment averaged 97.3 feet 
and post-treatment averaged 36.9 feet.
What proportion of total acres treated received slash 
treatment and any subsequent kind of prescribed 
fire?
More than 19,000 acres were either broadcast burned 
or hand piles burned following forest restoration 
treatments. This equates to about 25% of the areas 
treated were followed by some form of fire that removed 
fuels.
What proportion of treated acres exhibited a change 
in Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC)?
It turns out we can’t really answer this question as stated. 
Because FRCC is a landscape-scale metric, the small 
size of a single project area was not likely to affect a 
change at the landscape-scale and therefore would not 
be recognized in the FRCC metrics. However, when you 
compare FRCC for the ASNFs between pre-treatment and 
post-treatment periods, it is trending towards a structure 
more similar to the historic range of variability including 
the natural fire regime. 
Has modeled fire behavior been shown to mitigate 
fire risk in areas outside or adjacent to treatment 
areas, and if so, what is the total area mitigated by 
WMSP treatments?
We can’t quite answer this question yet. Fire modeling 
has come a long way in the last decade and has proven 
to be a very useful tool. However, fire ecologists have 
not yet been able to model or document a shadow effect 
of mitigating risk beyond the boundary of a thinning 
treatment.
towards the goal of reintroducing fire onto the landscape, and 
the San Juan and Wallow Fires allowed WMSP treatments to be 
put to the ultimate test.
Fire, used as a tool in forest management, is a tricky idea to 
get behind when people are talking about lighting or managing 
fire on the landscape, especially when that prescribed fire may 
be near homes or businesses. From the outset, the Monitoring 
Board worked hard to communicate the concept of a natural 
fire regime vs. catastrophic wildfire, with the citizens of the 
White Mountains by posting newsletters, developing and 
updating a website, and publishing project updates and 
educational materials in the local papers. Through these 
Fire is at the center of all aspects of the WMSP. Forests in 
the White Mountains evolved with low-intensity surface fires. 
It was the decades of suppressing fires, among other actions, 
that lead to the need for restoration in these forests. The 
Rodeo-Chediski Fire was what finally pushed stakeholders 
to band together and start restoration efforts. Restoration 
treatments were developed not only to reduce fire hazards 
to communities and prevent another catastrophic mega-
fire large scale wildfires, but also allow for the return of fire 
as a management tool. As we have learned from the past, 
lower-intensity natural and managed fire is an important, and 
necessary ecological process in these forests. Fire modeling 
has helped us determine whether we were making progress 

58
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
59
Ecological
hour post-treatment. While that might sound like high winds 
and it is, it’s not as uncommon as you may think. However, 60 
mile/hour winds are far less common than 18 or 20, so again, 
the models show treatments are making a very respectable 
change in the right direction. 
Crown fuel and crown bulk density are terms used to describe 
how much of the canopy is available to burn as fuel if a wildfire 
reaches the forest canopy. The models showed that these 
canopy fuels were reduced by a factor of ten. Rate of fire 
spread and fire line intensity were also dramatically reduced 
by forest treatments in ponderosa pine. Flame lengths were 
cut in half as pre-treatment averaged 81.7 feet and post-
treatment averaged 39.5 feet. 
Similarly, the 12 mixed conifer stands measured by the ERI 
also showed a trend toward lower severity characteristics.13-15 
The pre-treatment estimates indicate that all mixed conifer 
stands analyzed would have had 100% active crown fires, 
while only 33% would have active crown fires post-treatment, 
with 50% passive and 17% surface fires. Average crown base 
height in post-treatment mixed conifer stands increased by 
about 2 feet from pre-treatment conditions. The Crowning 
Index increased from 17.9 miles/hour pre-treatment to 89.2 
miles/hour post-treatment. Crown fuel and crown bulk density 
Fire behavior statistics are generally moving toward lower 
severity characteristics, based on the eight metrics analyzed 
and reported by the ERI.13-15 In 41 ponderosa pine stands 
measured, those consisting of pure pine or with some oak, 
moved from 100% active crown fire to only 22% active crown 
fire, with the remaining stands having passive crown fire 
attributes. Remember that active crown fires burn the living 
part of the trees and lead to higher tree mortality than passive 
crown fires or surface fires.
While counter-intuitive, there are two metrics that should 
increase post-treatment: crown base height and Crowning 
Index. Crown base height is a measure of the distance between 
the ground and the lowest live limb or the bottom of the tree 
canopy. This measurement is important because this is the 
distance the fire has to “travel” to reach the canopy and often 
becomes an active crown fire. Average crown base height 
increased by almost 3 feet. That doesn’t sound like much but 
if the lowest branch is 20 feet off the ground rather than 17, 
it will help keep the fire on the forest floor where it will have 
more benefits than drawbacks. 
The Crowning Index is the wind speed at a height of 20 
feet, where active crown fire is possible. The Crowning Index 
increased from 17.7 miles/hour pre-treatment to 59.6 miles/
Models projected fire 
behavior characteristics for 
pre- and post-treatment 
conditions in six analysis 
areas. Extreme weather 
conditions were used in 
the model to understand 
potential fire affects under a 
worst case scenario.
The Eagar South treatment area was a 
demonstration site that implemented 
a new style of treatment that was 
based more closely on the historic 
structure of Ponderosa Pine forests. 
The modeling demonstrated that fire 
behavior was still reduced with this 
type of treatment. 
The Greer treatment areas showed 
a reduction from passive crown fire 
to surface fire behavior in the 2010 
modeling effort.
NASA image of the Wallow 
Fire illustrates the size and 
severity of the fire footprint. 
This image was acquired by a 
Landsat 5 satellite on June 15, 
2011 and made with infrared 
light. Green shows live trees, 
where as red shows the area 
burned. The communities of 
Greer and Eagar are labeled.
Greer
Eager
Alpine

60
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
61
Ecological
Fire Metrics
The ERI collected field-based data that informed the 
models which produce eight measures that characterize 
fire behavior. Both ponderosa pine and mixed conifer 
areas were measured and modeled.
Crown Base 
Height
Ponderosa Pine
Crown Fuels 
Loads
Crown Fire 
Potential
Crown Bulk 
Density
Mixed Conifer
Surface Fire
Passive Crown 
Fire
Active Crown 
Fire
Rate of 
Spread
Fire Line 
Intensity
Crowning 
Index
Flame 
Length
CROWN BASE HEIGHT 
(feet)
CROWN FUELS (pounds/sq ft)
BULK DENSITY 
(pounds/cubic ft)
CROWN FIRE POTENTIAL
FLAME LENGTH (feet)
CROWNING INDEX 
(wind speed at a 20ft height)
0.23 lb/ft2
0.07 lb/ft2
16.9 feet
19.6 feet
Ponderosa Pine Pre-treatment
Ponderosa Pine Post-treatment
0.017 lb/ft3
0.004 lb/ft3
100% Active
22% Active
78% Passive
0.26 lb/ft2
0.08 lb/ft2
15.9 feet
17.2 feet
0.013 lb/ft3
0.003 lb/ft3
100% Active
33% Active
50% Passive
17% Surface
Mixed Conifer Pre-treatment
Mixed Conifer Post-treatment
9,190 BTU/ft/sec
3,735 BTU/ft/sec
200 chains/hr
131 chains/hr
Ponderosa Pine Pre-treatment
Ponderosa Pine Post-treatment
81.7 feet
39.5 feet
17.7 miles/hr
59.5 miles/hr
11,646 BTU/ft/sec
  3,595 BTU/ft/sec
209 chains/hr
145 chains/hr
97.3 feet
36.9 feet
17.9 miles/hr
89.2 miles/hr
Mixed Conifer Pre-treatment
Mixed Conifer Post-treatment
Graphics by Sarah Hurteau
Ponderosa Pine
Mixed Conifer

62
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
63
Ecological
many discussions, the best metric we could find that got at 
the idea of a natural fire regime, accounted for WMSP forest 
treatments, and could be analyzed given the limited access to 
fire experts and limited budgets, was Fire Regime Condition 
Class (FRCC). The FRCC concept was developed to help land 
managers assess ecological conditions at a landscape scale. It 
is an easily accessible national, standardized spatial database 
used by multiple agencies and regularly updated to provide 
a simple visual representation of forest conditions. FRCC is 
a good surrogate metric to estimate broad-scale structural 
changes to the landscape. 
The FRCC layer is a departure index of ecological condition. 
This means that it illustrates the difference between current 
forest structural conditions and those of reference conditions 
from the historical range of variability. These measures often 
include both successional stage and fire regime. The index 
is split into three categories: conditional class 1 = <33% 
departure; condition class 2 = 33% - 66% departure; and 
condition class 3 = > 66% departure (Rice et al. 2007). The 
higher the condition class, the more altered the system is, 
implying significant departure of stand and landscape function 
from the historic range of variability for that specific vegetation 
type. 
Within the revised monitoring questions developed by the 
Board in 2011, an analysis of FRCC was identified. Because 
FRCC is a landscape-scale metric, the small size of a single 
project area was not likely to affect a change at the landscape-
scale and therefore would not be recognized in the FRCC 
metrics. The hope was that by the end of WMSP, there would be 
enough area (acres) treated across the landscape that there 
might be a recognizable change in FRCC between 2004 and 
2014. The intent was for the analysis to be completed once at 
the end of the project in 2014 and that FRCC would be moving 
toward a lower condition class (from 3 to 2, or from 2 to 1). 
Between 2012 and 2014 the ERI analyzed changes in FRCC on 
various districts on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. 
They found that in general, treatments were in fact moving 
forests along a trajectory towards historic conditions (less 
departed stands).13-15 They also found that these changes 
were small in scale (area) and in the degree to which departure 
classes changed. This was to be expected considering the size 
of the treatments when compared to the total size of the 
National Forests.  
The Ultimate Test
The WMSP was focused on a proactive approach for forest 
and fire management, because it was not a matter of if, but 
when the next wildfire would come. On May 29, 2011 it came. 
The human-caused Wallow Fire started on a Sunday in Bear 
were also reduced by an order of magnitude. Rate of spread 
and fire line intensity were also dramatically reduced by forest 
treatments in mixed conifer. Flame lengths in mixed conifer 
were reduced by more than 60% as pre-treatment averaged 
97.3 feet and post-treatment averaged 36.9 feet.
Fire Restoration
Understanding the potential impacts of wildfire was only the 
first step of the Board’s interest in terms of fire. It became 
clear that part of the fuels solution was to reintroduce fire 
back into areas that had received mechanical thinning under 
the WMSP. The Board set a quantitative objective of a 5% 
increase in acres receiving prescribed fire or broadcast 
burning annually. There was also hope that naturally occurring 
fires (i.e., wildfire) could be allowed to burn safely in treated 
areas, and that those acres would be tracked separately. 
The USFS tracked many metrics by which to measure the 
success of WMSP. Several were reported in the administrative 
section of this report, but those important to fire and fuels 
include acres that received slash treatments and number 
of acres that were burned by prescribed fire. Slash is the 
branches and limbs, leaves, and bark that are left behind in an 
area when it is mechanically thinned. In years past, the slash 
was piled and burned. This strategy of removing excess fuel 
had problems. Burning piles on a limited fire budget left little 
for broadcast burning that would actually improve forest health 
and reduce overall fuel loads. Pile burning also overheats the 
soil, creating patches where invasive species can establish 
more readily than native plant species. When the biomass 
plant came online towards the end of the contract period, 
much of the slash and coarse woody debris was removed with 
the saw timber and trucked to the energy generation plant. 
This created an entirely different problem. Coarse woody 
debris provides habitat for many wildlife species and also 
facilitates seedling establishment, while also reducing erosion 
following the use of heavy equipment. The tradeoffs between 
forest health and business viability required striking a balance 
between retention and removal of harvest residue. 
While the current actions had changed in how the contractor 
was handling slash, there were still many acres of piles in 
the forest from previous treatments. Over the ten years of 
the contract, the USFS burned a little over 19,000 acres of 
broadcast burning and pile burning.  
Fire on a Broader Scale
Because fire was a central tenant of the WMSP, the Board 
was interested in how forest treatments could impact fire 
hazard on a broader scale. Understanding how forest 
treatments implemented across a vast area could influence 
large-scale wildfire is a difficult concept to quantify. After 
Wallow Wilderness, located in eastern Arizona. As residents 
of the Southwest know, springtime often boast steady 10-20 
mph winds with gusts over 60 mph. The late spring of 2011 
was no exception.
Within the first week, the Wallow Fire burned more than 
40,000 acres, nearly 63 square miles, under severe weather 
conditions. Fuels were dry following a winter with below average 
precipitation, temperatures were warm, relative humidity was 
low (around 12%), and winds were high, resulting in several 
days with “Red Flag” warnings. These are the conditions that 
raise heightened concern for fire managers, because these 
conditions can lead to the rapid advancement of a wildfire.
The Wallow Fire burned for over a month and burned within 
an area of 538,049 acres in total (over 841 square miles), 
becoming the largest wildfire ever recorded in Arizona. That 
area is more than half the land area of the state of Delaware. 
The Wallow Fire occurred in four counties in Arizona and one in 
New Mexico including Apache, Graham, and Greenlee Counties 
in Arizona, and Catron County in New Mexico. The difference 
between this fire and the Rodeo-Chediski fire was that forest 
treatments had been put in place to reduce hazards to 
communities nestled in these mountains. The WMSP Board and 
the USFS had been working diligently to reduce the damage 
that would be caused from this very threat. Wildland Urban 
Interface or WUI treatments had been strategically placed 
around communities such as Show Low, Heber-Overgaard, 
and Forest Lakes on the Sitgreaves Forest, and Alpine, 
Greer, Nutrioso, Eagar, on the Apache Forest. The USFS had 
also been working with these communities to promote “Fire 
Wise” home construction and landscaping to give homes and 
outbuildings the best chance of survival for these structures 
Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) is an index used by land managers to illustrate the degree of departure from the historical 
range of variability in forest structure and fire regime. The higher the condition class the farther from historic conditions. The photos  
provide examples of what each condition class may look like. 
Example of FRCC 3 
Example of FRCC 2 
Example of FRCC 1 
Photo by Royo Chiliiwa
Photo by Coconino NF
Photo by USDA

64
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
65
Ecological
People say that an image is worth a thousand words, and in 
this case, illustrates how forest treatments altered the fire 
behavior during the Wallow Fire. On the afternoon of June 2, 
the wind-driven fire topped the ridge encircling Alpine, Arizona. 
Showering embers threatened homes and businesses, igniting 
spot fires ahead of the flame front. The fire reached the WUI 
treatments on the outskirts of town and the blaze dropped 
from tree canopies down to the forest floor. This change in 
fire behavior allowed firefighters to create fuel breaks, ignite 
back burns, and safely extinguish spot fires, protecting homes 
and ultimately stopping the spread of the Wallow Fire into the 
community of Alpine. All but one structure in this community 
survived the fire.
The fire continued its course around Alpine. Two days later, 
the Wallow Fire had moved 21 miles north and west to 
the community of Greer and was threatening homes and 
businesses in that community. A well-placed treatment at 
Amberion Point once again allowed firefighters to get out 
during a wildfire. As a result, the efforts changed the course 
of the fire and proved to the nation that forest restoration 
treatments are an effective tool that can help to influence fire 
behavior.
The Wallow Fire burned through several forest treatment 
areas that were implemented under the WMSP including 
Alpine WUI, Greer WUI, Nutrioso WUI, and White Mountain 
Acres subdivision. These areas span all major habitat types 
treated during the WMSP, which included ponderosa pine, 
mixed conifer, and pinyon-juniper woodlands. By all accounts, 
the forest treatments slowed the spread of the fire, reduced 
the fire intensity and severity, and allowed fire fighters to safely 
attack the fire and protect homes and property. Based on two 
reports issued by the USFS following the Wallow Fire and San 
Juan Fire, we learned that WMSP fuel treatments moved fire 
behavior from active crown fire to passive surface fires under 
severe weather conditions, just as our fire modeling efforts 
predicted. 
in front of the blaze. Fire crews conducted back burns and 
prepped the area around homes and businesses for the 
approaching fire, protecting many cabins, homes, and other 
structures. The fire did move through a different part of the 
Greer valley in an untreated area, where structures were 
unfortunately lost. 
It took an army of firefighters to eventually contain this mega-
fire, and while there were some areas that resulted in high 
severity damage, forest treatments played a significant role 
in bringing this fire to an end. Ground crews had a chance to 
proactively fight the fire, and remain safe because of these 
treatments. Fire severity was low or mixed in areas that had 
previously been treated. This, if for no other reason, is why 
we should implement forest treatments in fire prone forests 
of the southwest. Because communities, homes, business, 
outbuildings, and livestock were all saved because firefighters 
had a chance to protect them as a result of WMSP forest 
treatments. ◊
The Wallow Fire burned through several areas that were 
treated under the WMSP.  Fire behavior changed from 
a crown fire to a surface fire ultimately protecting the 
residential community just downhill for the flame front. 
Active Crown 
Fire
Passive Crown 
Fire
Surface Fire
Treatment 
Zone
Residential 
Area
Photo by IBiS

Photo by the White Mountain Apache Tribe and the USFWS on June 11, 2011.
The Wallow fire burned through Soldier Springs Creek impacting habitat for many wildlife species including, a unique population of 
federally threatened Apache trout (Oncorhynchus apache). 
66
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
67

Creating            
A summary of which birds stuck around and 
which birds move on after thinning.
By Sarah Hurteau
Photos starting in top left and working clockwise are by: Bushtit, Alan Schmierer; Pinyon Jays, Alan Schmierer; Violet-green Swallow, Jacob W. Frank Rocky Mountain 
National Park; Northern Flicker, Len Dap; and Red-faced Warbler, Dominic Sherony.
All Birds 
Photos starting in top left and working clockwise are by: Acorn Woodpecker Alan Hack; Western Tanager, Glacier National Park; Western Bluebird, Alan Schmierer; Dark-eyed 
Junco, Alan Schmierer; and Hermit Thrush, Alan Schmierer.
Habitat For
68
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
69
Ecological

Songbirds were surveyed during the breeding season 
(late May to early July) of each sampling year to evaluate 
the effects of forest fuel reduction treatments on avian 
composition, density, and diversity.
Surveys were initiated in the summer of 2007 and completed 
each year through the summer of 2014. Given the duration 
of surveys (eight years), treated and untreated comparisons 
are available for nearly all vegetation types surveyed. The 
exception is mixed conifer. Due to impacts from the Wallow Fire, 
there were no surveys conducted in treated areas and few 
surveys completed in untreated mixed conifer habitats. 
After eight years of monitoring songbirds under the WMSP 
(2007-2014) a total of 1,846 points were surveyed (n = 
639 in ponderosa pine; n = 551 in pine-oak; n = 590 in 
pinyon-juniper; n = 66 in mixed conifer [untreated only]). A 
total of 9,097 detections were recorded among 97 species. 
Songbirds are well studied and many of the patterns we see 
in the results of these analyses are well documented in the 
literature.18-21 Yet, it was important to the Board to document 
and track changes in the avian community to understand 
the effects of the WMSP-specific treatments. Additionally, 
continued monitoring efforts and periodic analysis of these 
data throughout the 8 years allowed the Board to check in on 
any potential negative impacts so they could make strategic 
changes to forest thinning prescriptions if warranted. It was a 
goal of this project among many others, to monitor changes 
in songbird populations at a landscape scale. Check-up 
analyses were completed in 2010, 2012, and 2014 as part of 
the adaptive management process. Each time, a slightly new 
pattern emerged as we increased the sample size for each 
vegetation type, allowing our analysis to become more precise. 
The data presented in this report is from the final analysis that 
occurred after the 2014 breeding season.
There were three main categories we explored in these long-
term data: density, diversity, and composition. 
Density is a fairly simple concept, how many birds are in a 
particular area. In our analysis, we calculated the number of 
individuals per 100 acres. 
Diversity on the other hand, is a complex ecological concept 
that scientists can spend a lifetime studying. Diversity can be 
defined in many ways, but for the purpose of this Project we 
In a Few Words
Given the changes seen over the course of the ten-
year project, one thing that remained the same was 
the Board’s commitment to monitoring breeding 
songbird populations. Avian community data has been 
collected every breeding season since 2007, and the 
2014 season was no different. A host of volunteers 
and USFS biologists struck out to survey birds of all 
sizes in ponderosa pine, pinyon-juniper, pine-oak, and 
mixed conifer forests across the ASNFs. This section 
highlights the changes between treated and untreated 
forests in avian density and diversity seen over the 
course of the WMSP. Many of the species included in 
these analyses were chosen because they are common 
to particular vegetation types and are well studied. 
Others were chosen because they are management 
indicator species. Given the quantity of data collected 
in a long-term study such as this, we were also able to 
record new information on species that are detected 
so infrequently that we usually can’t estimate density. 
Key Results from White Mountain Stewardship Project Monitoring Questions
Did density, diversity, and composition change in 
the most commonly-observed songbird species in 
each vegetation type surveyed?
It would be very surprising if nothing changed over the 
course of eight years of bird surveys. Check-up analyses 
were completed in 2010, 2012, and 2014. Each time 
a slightly new pattern emerged as we increased the 
sample size for each vegetation type, allowing our 
analysis to become slightly more precise. We calculated 
the density for more than 25 species of birds. Some 
densities went up and some went down. The important 
part is that no species were eliminated. Even after 
71,000 acres of treatments were implemented across 
a diverse landscape that makes-up the ASNFs, the 
thoughtful planning of treatments was evident, as 
thinning prescriptions allowed for continued habitation 
by a wide variety of bird species. With the high volume 
of data collected over the life of the project, the analysis 
was able to move beyond the most common species, 
and get a glimpse of how forest treatments in three 
vegetation communities may be affecting the less 
common species. These unique perspectives also provide 
insight into planning for future forest treatments.
Photos of a Cordilleran Flycatcher, by Alan Schmierer
Comparisons are made among vegetation types for a 
suite of focal species, providing a novel approach to 
these broad-scaled data. 
As with any study, the results vary by group. We found 
that some species responded to treatments just as 
we expected, while other results surprised us. Some 
species preferred open areas and others preferred 
denser vegetation. Some species preferred burned 
areas, and others didn’t.
The unique part of this study was that it gave us a 
perspective on a group of species that we didn’t 
have before, and provided an opportunity to learn 
and advance our understanding of birds in several 
vegetation communities. However you choose to 
look at these data, it does tell us that forest thinning 
treatments can provide habitat for all species when 
multiple objectives are considered.
For selected avian species dependent upon dense 
ponderosa pine forests (i.e. canopy cover greater 
than 60%), did post-treatment survey transects 
contain observations of these species?
Nearly all species that were recorded in untreated areas 
were also recorded in treated areas. Some species 
were only detected in areas that had been treated. We 
found that while some densities decreased in treated 
areas, the species was able to continue to use treated 
habitats. With tracts of untreated areas embedded within 
larger treatment zones, the diversity of habitats was 
maintained on multiple scales.
70
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
71
Ecological

have chosen to use a combination of species richness and 
species evenness as a simplified proxy. The easiest way to 
think about species richness is simply the number of different 
kinds of birds that were found. Conceptually, evenness can 
be thought of as how the different kinds of birds are spread 
across the landscape. Is each species clumped in its own 
group or are they spread out, and evenly distributed? 
Composition is another way to ask which birds species are 
present at the end of the treatments, and if the proportion 
of common to rare birds shifted through the survey years. 
Composition was an important part of the check-in analyses 
to make sure certain species weren’t declining at a rate that 
would indicate a larger negative impact on the population 
stability. 
These factors together help us understand how bird 
populations are responding to large-scale treatments.
Songbird Density
Through eight years of songbird sampling, the project has 
amassed a large number of detections for many species in 
the three focal vegetation types: ponderosa pine, pine-oak 
and pinyon-juniper forests. Consistent with many previous 
studies, responses to forest treatments among focal species 
varied considerably. A minimum of 30 detections was required 
to estimate the density of each species. A global detection 
function was employed to use the power of the full number of 
detections to gain the most accurate estimate possible and 
then post-stratified by treatment type. Nearly all species that 
satisfied the minimum number of detections were analyzed.  
PONDEROSA PINE
Density estimates were generated for two groups of species 
that utilize ponderosa pine habitat, cavity nesters and cup 
nesters. These species groups have very different habitat 
needs and often differing foraging requirements. From a 
biological perspective, the impacts of forest treatments 
on ponderosa pine species are likely to differ among these 
groups. 
Cavity nesting species are those that utilize holes (i.e., cavities) 
in standing dead trees (snags) or partially dead trees for 
nesting structures. These features tend to be rare across the 
landscape and are an important habitat component not only for 
small birds, but also for raptors and owls, turkeys, bats, flying 
squirrels, and many other wildlife species. Density estimates 
for cavity nesting species can provide a surrogate index for 
the prevalence of these features across the landscape and 
ensure post-treatment areas are providing habitat for the 
diverse species that utilize these features. 
Focal species identified in the cavity nester analysis included 
hairy woodpecker (Picoides villosus), northern flicker (Colaptes 
auratus), violet-green swallow (Tachycineta thalassina), white-
breasted nuthatch (Sitta carolinensis), and western bluebird 
(Sialia mexicana). The hairy woodpecker was included in 
the analysis because it is listed as a management indicator 
species and the western bluebird was included because it 
is well-studied in ponderosa pine habitats. The other more 
common species provide an indication of snag density across 
the landscape. 
The cavity nesting focal group had several species that were 
Figure 1. Density estimates (individuals/100 acres ± SE) for five cavity nesting species surveyed in the 
ponderosa pine vegetation type. Density estimates were calculated for both treated and untreated 
areas as well as areas burned by the Wallow fire surveyed between 2007-2014 during the White 
Mountain Stewardship Project. Focal species included the hairy woodpecker (HAWO), northern flicker 
(NOFL) violet-green swallow (VGSW), white-breasted nuthatch (WBNU) and western bluebird (WEBL).
detected within areas that were burned in the Wallow Fire, which for these surveys had been mechanically treated prior 
to the fire, indicating a post thinning, post-wildfire scenario (Figure 1). Therefore, this analysis also includes density 
estimates separately for the Wallow burned area. 
We found:
• 
Low densities for the larger woodpeckers, like the hairy woodpecker and northern flicker, regardless of treatment 
type. Larger birds tend to have larger home ranges, often occurring at lower densities. Many times, the limiting 
factor for these species are trees and snags big enough for the birds to build a nest chamber that the adults can 
fit in. For example, a 9-inch diameter tree is too small for these guys. 
• 
In contrast, white-breasted nuthatch and western bluebird were found at high densities in areas burned by the 
Wallow Fire. Because the areas burned had been thinned before the fire came through, the burn severity was low 
to moderate. These conditions are ideal for insectivorous species, and benefit from increased insect abundance 
following low to moderate fire severity.  
• 
Nuthatchs, bluebirds, and violet-green swallows also had higher density estimates in treated areas than in 
untreated areas. This is consistent with previous research.20,21 Snags and trees with cavities are often more 
abundant in untreated areas, but don’t provide the preferred forest structure components for nesting or access 
to prime foraging sites as those found in the treated areas.
Low
High
Richness
Evenness
Density
72
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
73
Ecological
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
HAWO 
NOFL 
VGSW 
WBNU 
WEBL 
Birds per 100 acres 
Ponderosa Pine Cavity Nesters 
Burn 
Untreated 
Treated 

In many cases songbirds use multiple habitat types. A separate set of focal species that were found commonly in both ponderosa 
pine and pine-oak vegetation communities were analyzed to compare differences in both treatments and habitat types. Several of 
the focal species had detections in areas burned by the Wallow Fire. When these detections occurred, estimates for Wallow burned 
areas were calculated. 
This focal suite of species included dark-eyed junco (Junco hyemalis), Grace’s warbler (Setophaga graciae), mountain chickadee 
(Poecile gambeli), plumbeous vireo (Vireo plumbeus), pygmy nuthatch (Sitta pygmaea), and yellow-rumped warbler (Setophaga 
coronata). For focal species that use both ponderosa pine and pine oak forests, it appears that stand structure and treatment type 
influence density more than vegetative community (Figure 3). We found that: 
• 
Dark-eyed junco and pygmy nuthatch had the highest overall density estimates making them the most common 
species in both communities. Nuthatches appear to be more generalist, using both pine and pine-oak equally, 
whereas juncos had slightly more detections in pine habitats. 
• 
Juncos appear to respond strongly in ponderosa pine burns and weakly in pine-oak burns. As a ground nester, 
juncos are likely affected by other factors not measured that play a role in the density estimates seen here. Pygmy 
nuthatch appear to use treated and/or burned areas more frequently that untreated areas regardless of vegetation 
type. 
The other three species in the focal group had a more measured response to vegetation communities and treatment. 
• 
Yellow-rumped warbler density estimates suggest they prefer treated areas over untreated areas, but are negatively 
affected by fire. 
• 
Grace’s warbler tends to have higher densities in ponderosa pine forests than pine-oak forest, but also prefer 
treated areas to untreated areas. 
• 
Both mountain chickadee and plumbeous vireo occupy dense habitat and are prone to impacts form disturbance, 
as mountain chickadees illustrate with their highest densities in the untreated forests. 
Figure 2. Density estimates (individuals/100 acres ± SE) for six cup nesting species surveyed in the 
ponderosa pine vegetation type. Density estimates were calculated for both treated and untreated 
areas sampled between 2007-2014 during the White Mountain Stewardship Project. Focal species 
included the cordilleran flycatcher (COFL), hermit thrush (HETH), Steller’s jay (STJA), Townsend’s 
solitaire (TOSO), western tanager (WETA), and western wood-pewee (WEWP).
Figure 3. Density estimates (individuals/100 acres ± SE) for six species surveyed in both ponderosa pine 
and pine-oak vegetation types. Density estimates were calculated for both treated and untreated areas 
sampled between 2007-2014 during the White Mountain Stewardship Project. Focal species included 
the dark-eyed junco (DEJU), Grace’s warbler (GRWA) plumbeous vireo (PLVI), pygmy nuthatch (PYNU) 
and yellow-rumped warbler (YRWA).
Cup nesting species are often foliage gleaners or seedeaters and require cover for nest structures that can be at ground level, 
mid-canopy, or high-canopy locations. Because these species use canopy foliage and understory vegetation as cover, they utilize 
different forest components than cavity nesters.  
Focal species identified in the cup nester analysis included Cordilleran flycatcher (Empidonax occidentalis), hermit thrush (Catharus 
guttatus), Steller’s jay (Cyanocitta stelleri), Townsend’s solitaire (Myadestes townsendi), western tanager (Piranga ludoviciana), and 
western wood-pewee (Contopus sordidulus). These species were included because they are primarily use ponderosa pine habitats 
and do not overlap extensively with other vegetation types. These species also had a limited number of detections in areas that 
were burned by the Wallow Fire; therefore, density estimates were not calculated for the post-Wallow scenario.
Our data illustrate mixed results, which is consistent with previous research (Figure 2). More specifically, we found:
• 
Some species occur at higher densities in untreated areas and others have higher densities in treated areas. 
• 
Cordilleran flycatcher, hermit thrush, Steller’s jay, and Townsend’s solitaire all had higher density estimates in 
untreated ponderosa pine forests. These species are often found in closed canopy forest patches and use structural 
characteristics that are more common in untreated areas. 
• 
In contrast, western tanager and western wood-pewee both had higher density estimates in treated areas than 
untreated areas. These species utilize the higher canopy structure, but also prefer the vantage point of an open 
forest for foraging
• 
Several of these species have not yet or rarely documented density estimates. We hope that these estimates will 
add to the overall knowledge of ponderosa pine communities and aid in the management of these vegetation types.
74
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
75
Ecological
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
COFL 
HETH 
STJA 
TOSO 
WETA 
WEWP 
Birds per 100 acres 
Pondersoa Pine Species 
Untreated 
Treated 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
DEJU 
GRWA 
MOCH 
PLVI 
PYNU 
YRWA 
Birds per 100 Acres 
Focal Species 
Ponderosa Pine Burn 
Ponderosa Pine Untreated 
Ponderosa Pine Treated 
Pine-Oak Burn 
Pine-Oak Untreated 
Pine-Oak Treated 

Post-treatment and post-fire in a ponderosa pine dominated stand in the Eagar South treatment area.
Post-treatment in a pine-oak dominated stand on the Lakeside District.
76
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
77
Ecological
Photo by The Nature Conservancy
Photo by The Nature Conservancy

Figure 4. Density estimates (individuals/100 acres ± SE) for five cavity nesting 
species surveyed in the pine-oak vegetation type. Density estimates were calculated 
for both treated and untreated areas as well as areas burned by the Wallow fire 
surveyed between 2007-2014 during the White Mountain Stewardship Project. Focal 
species included the hairy woodpecker (HAWO), northern flicker (NOFL) violet-
green swallow (VGSW), white-breasted nuthatch (WBNU) and western bluebird 
(WEBL).
Figure 5. Density estimates (individuals/100 acres ± SE) for three species surveyed 
in the pine –oak vegetation type. Density estimates were calculated for both treated 
and untreated areas as well as areas burned by the Wallow fire surveyed between 
2007-2014 during the White Mountain Stewardship Project. Focal species included 
the acorn woodpecker (ACWO), American robin (AMRO), and red-faced warbler 
(RFWA).
Three species were analyzed that use the pine-oak habitat type more than pure pine stands, which included acorn woodpecker 
(Melanerpes formicivorus), American robin (Turdus migratorius), and red-faced warbler (Cardellina rubrifrons). These species don’t 
often have enough detections to estimate densities. The acorn woodpecker is frequently overlooked as a species of interest 
because they are common throughout their range and easy to find, whereas the red-faced warbler is identified as an Arizona 
species of special concern. Furthermore, red-faced warbler utilize a specific elevation of canopy and may be more sensitive to 
forest treatments that remove understory fuels. We found that overall densities were low for pin-oak species (Figure 5). More 
specifically:
• 
Density estimates for the acorn woodpecker were highest in the areas burned by the Wallow Fire, followed by areas 
that had been treated. As a species that is clearly linked to oaks for foraging resources, our data showed a positive 
response to habitat improvements in recently treated and or burned areas. This link provides additional support for 
managing oak through mechanical thinning and fire, which benefit growth and generate re-sprouting. 
• 
Density estimates for red-faced warbler showed an interesting pattern, in that they had their highest densities in 
treated areas as well. Mechanical treatments often target ground-level fuel loads that remove primary foraging 
habitat for this species. Red-faced warblers often inhabit dense canopy cover along the rim of small drainages and 
canyons. Some of these areas received a buffer to reduce erosion potential near steep slopes or reduce impacts 
near water. These areas may have been retained on the edge of treatment zones where red-faced warblers can 
thrive at the edge of these treatments. This species primarily feeds on insects, and the increased understory growth 
seen post-treatment would benefit the foraging habits of the red-faced warbler. 
• 
The American robin appears to use all treatment types equally, which is expected, as this species is a habitat 
generalist.
PINE-OAK
Density estimates were also generated for two groups of species that use pine-oak habitats, cavity nesters, and cup nesters. The 
cavity nesting species analyzed for pine oak are the same as those species found in ponderosa pine. Similarly to the ponderosa 
pine analysis, when detections occurred in Wallow burned areas, density estimates were calculated. 
The pattern that emerged for the focal suite of species was different in pine oak than ponderosa pine habitats (Figure 4). We 
found that:
• 
Violet-green swallow and western bluebird had the highest density estimates in pine-oak habitats. Both species had 
the greatest density in treated areas, followed by areas burned by the Wallow Fire. 
• 
Violet-green swallows appear to use pine-oak more frequently than ponderosa pine as their densities were higher 
in pine-oak habitats. 
• 
Bluebirds are more of a generalist species and tend to queue in more on cavities located near openings than the 
composition of the stand.
• 
The difference in these patterns is that the most abundant species in ponderosa pine was western bluebird and 
white-breasted nuthatch. 
• 
Overall the densities seen in pine-oak are lower than that of ponderosa pine. Pine-oak habitats are much less 
frequent across the landscape than pure pine stands, likely accounting for the lower densities. 
• 
The two larger woodpecker species, hairy woodpecker and northern flicker, appear to have equal densities in all 
treatments types. 
• 
Given the similar patterns in density among these two vegetation types, these data suggest that cavity nesting 
species are utilizing pine and pine-oak habitat similarly but may be using oak less frequently as a nesting substrate 
and more as a foraging substrate. Tree size is likely the discriminating factor for hairy woodpeckers and northern 
flickers. 
78
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
79
Ecological
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
ACWO 
AMRO 
RFWA 
Birds per 100 acres 
Pine-Oak Species 
Burn 
Untreated 
Treated 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
HAWO 
NOFL 
VGSW 
WBNU 
WEBL 
Birds per 100 acres 
Pine-Oak Cavity Nesters 
Burn 
Untreated 
Treated 

Estimates of species richness were calculated independently for each vegetation type (Figure 7). We found that:
• 
Species richness was highest in untreated Pinyon-Juniper woodlands. Based on our understanding we concluded 
that the nature of pinyon-juniper woodlands may pre-dispose this vegetation type to host a more diverse suite of 
songbirds. Pinyon-juniper woodlands can range from a more open savannah-type grassland or a denser woodland, 
and the transition between the two is often less severe than the difference between grasslands and, for example, a 
ponderosa pine forest. Because of this, you often get birds from both communities in woodland areas.
• 
Species richness was similar among all other vegetation types regardless of treatment status. 
• 
Furthermore, when the species composition was assessed, nearly all species recorded were found in both treated 
and untreated areas for each vegetation type. This suggests that treatment areas are continuing to provide habitat 
and enough diversity in forest structural components to retain the same species found in untreated areas. 
• 
Because surveys were still detecting species that prefer denser habitat in treated areas, thinning prescriptions are 
likely sufficiently diverse to account for the broad range of species and species habitat preferences. 
• 
In the ponderosa pine vegetation type, the treated areas had slightly higher species richness than untreated areas. 
This is likely due to the return in structure that more closely mimicked the structure these species evolved with, 
providing better foraging and nesting habitat.
Figure 6. Density estimates (individuals/100 acres ± SE) for ten species surveyed in pinyon juniper vegetation 
type. Density estimates were calculated for both treated and untreated areas as well as areas burned in the 
Wallow Fire. Surveys were completed between 2007 and 2014 during the White Mountain Stewardship Project. 
Focal species included the ash-throated flycatcher (ATFL), black-throated gray warbler (BTYW), bushtit (BUSH), 
chipping sparrow (CHSP), gray flycatcher (GRFL), juniper titmouse (JUTI), mountain chickadee (MOCH), pinyon 
jay (PIJA), spotted towhee (SPTO), and western scrub jay (WESJ).
PINYON-JUNIPER
Density estimates were generated for all species that met the minimum detections requirements for analysis in pinyon-juniper 
habitats. Similarly to other vegetation types, when detections occurred in Wallow burned areas, density estimates were calculated 
for these areas as well. Many of the thinning treatments in pinyon-juniper habitat occurred outside of the WMSP contract, however, 
pinyon and juniper were removed as a component of ponderosa pine transition forest within WMSP task orders. Because so little 
publish information is available on pinyon-juniper treatment affects on avian community components, it was included in this analysis 
to inform future management decisions.
Focal species identified in the pinyon-juniper analysis included ash-throated flycatcher (Myiarchus cinerascens), black-throated gray 
warbler (Setophaga nigrescens), bushtit (Psaltriparus minimus), chipping sparrow (Spizella passerina), gray flycatcher (Empidonax 
wrightii), juniper titmouse (Baeolophus ridgwayi), mountain chickadee (Poecile gambeli), pinyon jay (Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus), 
spotted towhee (Pipilo maculatus), and western scrub jay (Aphelocoma californica). Few studies have included pinyon-juniper 
woodlands and density estimates for species primarily using this vegetation type are not well documented. Due to this lack of 
information, all species were included that met the minimum detection requirements. 
We found that most species analyzed had low density estimates, with an average of about 5 birds per 100 acres (Figure 6). More 
specifically, we found that:
• 
The  bushtit, as the exception,  had high densities in pinyon-juniper woodlands burned by the Wallow Fire. It is 
unclear why this species had such high density estimates for burned areas as the next highest densities were 
estimates for untreated areas. These results suggest that the burned areas provide a different habitat structure for 
foraging resources that treated areas cannot provide. 
• 
Gray flycatcher and black-throated gray warbler had higher density estimates in untreated areas than in treated 
areas. This is likely due to higher foraging resource and nesting substrate availability. 
• 
The remainder of species analyzed appears to use treated, untreated and burned areas equally. 
Treatments in pinyon-juniper woodlands can vary greatly from a more aggressive tree removal, to a minimal selective harvest. 
Because we don’t have the same kind of understanding in structure for pinyon-juniper woodlands as ponderosa pine forests, 
restoration efforts are based more on soil type and professional judgment that historical data or dendrochronology. To ensure 
that all species are represented, pinyon-juniper treatments should include areas that retain denser canopy cover to provide habitat 
for species that require a different structural characteristic. Additionally, pinyon-juniper woodlands should maintain some level of 
prescribed fire treatment as many species analyzed had equal densities in the Wallow Fire burned area.
Songbird Diversity
When estimating species richness, we found that as we continued to collect more and more data, our species richness values kept 
going up. Through annual monitoring efforts, new species were detected that previously went unrecorded. They were undoubtedly 
present all along, but went undetected during the initial surveys. This represents the typical nature of sampling; the more data 
collected, often the greater number of species observed, until you plateau near the total number actually present. 
Figure 7. Mean estimates of species richness (first order jack-knife ± SD) for three 
vegetation types surveyed during the White Mountain Stewardship Project, 2007-
2014.
80
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
81
Ecological
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
ATFL 
BTYW 
BUSH 
CHSP 
GRFL 
JUTI 
MOCH 
PIJA 
SPTO 
WESJ 
Birds per 100 acres 
Pinyon-Juniper Species 
Burn 
Untreated 
Treated 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Ponderosa Pine 
Pine-Oak 
Pinyon-Juniper 
Mean Species Richness 
Vegeta0on Types 
Untreated 
Treated 

as indicated by the effects of the Wallow Fire, where treated 
areas appear to have a lower tree mortality rates than 
untreated areas.
Conclusions
Birds can disappear from our environment quickly when we 
don’t understand how our management affects their ability 
to forage, survive, escape predation, and reproduce. If we 
want to retain birds on our landscape, not only because 
they are beautiful and an important recreation resource on 
our National Forests, but because they occupy a vital role in 
food webs and ecosystem function, it is imperative that we 
understand how our forest management actions affect the 
daily lives of these species. Birds can also be an indicator 
for how well the habitats for other species are functioning. 
This study targets that very idea, focusing not only on 
ponderosa pine, which is well studied, but also addressing 
pine oak and pinyon-juniper forests, which are relatively 
new to forest restoration treatments. If we can learn how 
restoration treatments in general affect avian populations, 
and specifically how different kinds of thinning prescriptions 
impact bird populations, then we are better able to manage 
the needs of these species across broad areas that require 
forest restoration treatments. 
Species evenness is a measure of how the species detected are distributed across the landscape. Evenness is also commonly 
considered another aspect of diversity, and the evenness measure we calculated incorporates a measure of dominance instead of 
richness. This measure of evenness increases as species in the assemblage become more evenly distributed across the landscape. 
Evenness was calculated independently for each vegetation type.
We found that species evenness was highest in treated pinyon-juniper woodlands (Figure 8). More specifically:
• 
Many of the pinyon-juniper treatments were more of a grassland restoration, meaning that the trees that were 
thought to be invading grasslands (based on soil type) were removed. This treatment objective simplified the 
structure and made many areas very similar such that species that utilize this type of habitat had lots to choose 
from and likely spread out. This may also indicate species are distributed more evenly across pinyon-juniper habitat 
with few dominant species and many common species. 
• 
Species evenness was similar between treated and untreated areas in both ponderosa pine and pine-oak forests. 
Having mean species evenness slightly higher in treated areas may indicate that more species are distributed evenly 
across the landscape, and that there are fewer dominate species. The results also suggest that untreated areas 
provide additional specific structural characteristic that benefit relatively few species, while the remaining species 
are still present but at a lower abundance. 
• 
Conversely, ponderosa pine has a level of structural diversity that does not exist in the other vegetation types 
analyzed allowing for greater species diversity and niche partitioning providing the variation necessary for the 
species that call this vegetation community home. This results in a lower evenness measure for this vegetation type. 
• 
The pine-oak vegetation community generally provides habitat for bird species found in ponderosa pine, but in 
addition, provides habitat for a few novel species that utilize primarily the oak component. The evenness measure 
indicates that the oak component is relatively well distributed across the landscape.
Over the eight years of surveys and three analysis periods, 
the data suggest that the forest restoration treatments 
implemented in these three vegetation types have 
maintained, if not improved, both species diversity and 
the evenness in the distribution of those species across 
the ASNFs. Given that species composition was similar in 
treated areas and untreated areas, the implementation 
of the mechanical treatments provided an adequate level 
of structural diversity necessary to support the species 
assemblage. Additionally, overall species richness has 
increased when compared to the initial analysis phase in 
2010. It is difficult to determine whether this is a result of 
increased sample size or if the treatments improved the 
habitat such that they attracted new species to the area. 
The increase in species evenness in the treated areas 
indicates that the diversity in structural characteristics and 
therefore species are now more evenly distributed across 
the ASNFs. Meaning that we no longer have vast areas of 
very dense habitat and vast areas of open habitat, that it is 
more intermixed. This diversity in vegetation structure and 
species assemblages is a result of the forest restoration 
treatments implemented through the WMSP. The broader 
impact of these treatments beyond the improvements for 
songbird populations is that the forest is now more resilient 
Figure 8. Mean estimates of species evenness (inverse of Simpson’s Index ± SD) for three 
vegetation types surveyed during the White Mountain Stewardship Project, 2007-2014.
82
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
83
Ecological
Photo by Alan Schmierer
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
Ponderosa Pine 
Pine-Oak 
Pinyon-Juniper 
Mean Species Evenness 
Vegeta0on Types 
Untreated 
Treated 

Recommendations:
• 
Ponderosa pine treatments should continue to vary in both horizontal and vertical structure. Areas 
with higher levels of annual precipitation may support not only larger, denser clumps and groups, 
but also larger openings with a higher understory diversity. 
• 
In areas of low annual precipitation, regeneration may be limited, and may provide habitat to species 
that prefer a more open structure. Understanding how precipitation plays a role in the local planning 
area may help to inform future thinning prescriptions and structural densities post-treatment that 
are appropriate for the area. 
• 
In areas along small canyons and drainages, especially those with ephemeral waters, plans should 
retain a 100m buffer with minimal or no understory thinning, to maintain mid-story canopy, which 
provides foraging, and nesting habitat to a subset of uncommon bird species.
• 
Many avian species rely on insects as a primary food resource or are an important resource at a 
critical period during reproduction. Broadcast burning will provide the pulse of nutrients needed for 
new growth, resulting in increased food resources available to these species. Research has provided 
a plethora of information illustrating that periodic surface fire is a vital process in these forests.
• 
As forest treatments move into mixed conifer habitats, we encourage caution when developing 
treatment plans.  These habitats are by nature much more dense than ponderosa pine, and should 
likely have their own suite of prescriptions developed that are appropriate to this habitat type. 
Similarly, avian populations should be monitored annually to understand the impacts of forest 
structural changes. Utilizing the monitoring program developed for WMSP to target areas we don’t 
clearly understand such as restoration treatments in mixed conifer communities would be a valuable 
resource. 
• 
What we have learned from the WMSP is that a lack of information should not prevent action, but 
rather trigger a more research based approach of adaptive management to gain the detail needed 
to employ treatments on a larger scale.  Mixed conifer and pinyon-juniper communities may be 
habitat types where an adaptive management approach to treatments and continued monitoring of 
avian populations and other ecological factors may be warranted. 
The needs of birds and other wildlife can be balanced 
with forest restoration goals. Restoring both structure, 
and function of our forests to be able to withstand natural 
processes such as fire, disturbance, regeneration, and 
human uses will generally serve to benefit wildlife as well. 
In addition, these forests will be better able to withstand 
changes in precipitation and temperature patterns that 
have shifted due to climate change.
The WMSP has been successful in tracking changes in 
the avian community since forest restoration treatments 
began in 2004. We found that bird species that live in 
ponderosa pine responded just as we expected --some 
species like dense canopy and others prefer more open 
forests. The evolution of the thinning prescriptions used 
over the course of this project ultimately provided the 
structural characteristics needed by all those species as is 
demonstrated by the increased diversity seen in the 2014 
• 
Differentiating pinyon-juniper woodland and grassland restoration treatments would be an important 
distinction in future treatment areas in terms of understanding the desired wildlife component 
post-treatment. In areas where pinyon trees have seen high mortality rates, their retention will 
be extremely important to the avian community, and steps to enhance or restore a reproductive 
population of pinyon trees will play a key role in retaining bird species that rely on this tree for 
foraging and nesting resources. 
• 
Pinyon-juniper woodland treatments should continue to vary in both horizontal and vertical structure. 
Providing a mix of densities will provide a variety of habitats for community specific bird species. 
Broadcast burning in this community also appears to be an important process given the response 
in increased avian density post-fire. 
• 
The oak component in the pine-oak community serves a key role for several species. While important 
to a smaller suite of species, it still plays a vital role to other wildlife species, such as deer, turkey, 
and black bear. Maintaining the oak component through mechanical thinning and prescribe fire will 
provide habitat for many species of wildlife. 
• 
Snags and lightning struck trees also play a vital role to wildlife as a highly utilized habitat feature. 
After our first analysis in 2010, we found snags were not being retained at a sufficient level in 
treated areas. Recommendations in the Five Year Report included snag retention and strategies 
for snag avoidance during treatment implementation. Given that the Wallow Fire burned several 
treated areas, (which would have likely removed snags, but may have also created a few) it is difficult 
to determine if snags are currently limiting. As part of our continued effort to strive for the best 
possible outcomes with restoration treatments, it is our recommendation that snags continue to be 
a priority for retention in treatment areas.
analysis and expected density results in treated, untreated 
and burned areas. 
Analyses of bird populations found in pine oak and pinyon-
juniper have left us with additional questions. It is intriguing 
that violet-green swallows have higher densities in pine oak 
than pine and it is unclear why. Red-faced warblers have 
higher densities in treated areas, which is an anomaly 
since all the literature on this species indicates that treated 
areas that remove the mid-story canopy that this species 
uses most frequently should have the reverse affect. 
Given the spatial modeling exercise we completed in the 
WMSP Five Year Report,11 we hope we provided enough 
guidance to forest managers to consider when developing 
thinning prescriptions including variances from traditional 
prescriptions to provide improved habitat for this species. 
Finally, why are bushtits preferentially choosing the burned 
areas and untreated areas but not treated areas? We found 
that most early pinyon-juniper treatments took more of a 
grassland restoration approach than a juniper reduction 
approach. It may be too early to tell if these newly created 
grasslands will support grassland bird communities and 
shift away from pinyon-juniper bird communities.
We hope that these analyses provide a baseline for pine-
oak and pinyon-juniper communities, as few studies have 
looked at the impacts of forest restoration treatments 
on the avian community in these habitats. Scientists will 
undoubtedly continue to work on these issues, and as we 
learn more about how restoration treatments impact birds, 
maybe those results will help to build on our data and 
observations that we provided. We also recommend that 
the ASNFs continue their monitoring effort as they transition 
to combined objectives with the 4FRI to implement forest 
treatments across at an even larger scale. ◊
Photo by Alan Schmierer
84
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
85
Ecological

Photos starting in top left and working clockwise are by: Wallow Fire, Karl; Green meets Black at Hannagan Meadows, ASNF; Helicopter in smoke and engine at backfire, 
Wayne Clement                                                       
 Guadalupe Fire; Fall out, Will Keightley; BAER Heli mulch, ASNF; torch, Wayne Clement; Elk, ASNF; Hazard Tree Removal, ASNF; Caution Sign, ASNF; Air Drop, USFWS.

Bear 
Mountain
A study conducted by Kirby Bristow at the Arizona Game and Fish Department
In a Few Words
The Arizona Game and Fish Department tracked 47 
black bears fitted with GPS collars between 2005 and 
2010. The study compared vegetation structure used 
by black bears and randomly selected areas within 
the proximity of a bear location that went unused. 
The study also evaluated what habitats were the best 
predictors of bear use at a landscape and local scale. 
Researchers found that black bears avoided forest 
thinning treatments in ponderosa pine habitats and 
chose areas of dense horizontal and vertical structure on 
steep, north-facing slopes. As was known from previous 
research, bears avoided areas with heavy human activity 
and shifted through several vegetation communities 
as the season progressed from late spring to late fall. 
The AGFD research also provided specific conservation 
and mitigation measure that land managers can use to 
reduce impacts to black bear populations in arid forest 
such as those in the mountains of Arizona.
Key Results from White Mountain Stewardship Project Monitoring Questions
Did black bears movements or habitat use change 
between pre-treatment and post-treatment 
conditions in the Black Bear Study Area?
This turned out to be a more complicated question than 
we all thought it would be. The short answer is yes, black 
bears did not use ponderosa pine treated areas very 
often. However, indicators showed the implications of 
this result were not considered detrimental to the bear 
population. 
Bears infrequently used treated ponderosa pine forests 
during the study may have been heavily influenced by 
the presence of humans and the abundance of activity. 
As bears are known to generally avoid areas of high 
human activity, the fact that the majority of treatments 
were in the wildland urban interface is a confounding 
factor when interpreting these results. These two factors, 
human activity and treatments, cannot be separated, so 
that the mechanism or reason for why the bears are not 
using treated ponderosa pine forest is a question for 
future research. 
The AGFD study did provide some concrete details about 
the terrain and habitat features most frequently used 
by black bears in arid forests and mountains of Arizona. 
Bears used mostly mixed-conifer forest habitats, and 
then shifted their habitat use patterns to other forest 
types to follow food availability and cover preferences 
through seasonal changes. The detail of the study also 
provides specific recommendations on how to improve 
bear habitat in light of treatments now moving into the 
mixed-conifer habitat type. This information will prove 
useful in maintaining high quality black bear habitat in 
movement corridors and summer foraging habitats in 
the White Mountains of Arizona.
Photo by AGFD Remote Camera
By Sarah Hurteau
88
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
89
Ecological

Did black bear movements or habitat use change 
between 
pre-treatment 
and 
post-treatment 
conditions? That is what the Board wanted to know. 
As part of their interest and concern over how 
forest thinning treatments may affect wildlife species 
large and small, the Board engaged experts in 
research-based monitoring. To that end, the Board 
and ASNFs teamed up with the Arizona Game and 
Fish Department (AGFD) to fund a multi-year black 
bear study in the White Mountains of Arizona. This 
study was focused on how forest thinning treatments 
associated with the project, might impact various 
aspects of a day in the life of a black bear, such as 
what types of vegetation structure bears were using 
at a landscape scale and on a local or micro-site 
scale. They were also interested in comparing the 
sites bears used verses those they didn’t, to see 
if researchers could focus in on and describe the 
difference. 
The AGFD collared a total of 47 black bears (16 
females and 31 males) with GPS collars and 
tracked their movements over a five-year period 
(2005-2010).22 Bear locations were transmitted 
and recorded every 4-6 hours, enabling AGFD to 
travel to the exact location where the bear was and 
measure the habitat features at that spot (after 
the bears had moved on). There was a concern 
that dense tree and shrub cover could block the 
connection between the GPS collar on the bear and 
the satellite receiver. Researchers at AGFD put out 
“reference” transmitters in various forest canopy 
densities to compare and test the accuracy of the 
locational information. With an acquisition rate of 
GPS locations greater than 95% in all forest and 
grassland communities tested (pinyon-juniper, 
ponderosa pine, mixed-conifer, spruce fir, and 
grasslands), researchers were confident that the 
locational data collected was accurate and that 
nearly all location points were recorded. 
Over the study period, more than 12,000 GPS 
locations were recorded. Because the idea of the 
study was to understand how treatments may affect 
bear movements, bears that were captured near 
treatments and then moved away (some bears 
moved to New Mexico), either outside the study area 
or never came within 3.2 kilometers (km) or about 
2 miles, of a treated area were excluded from the 
study.22 The threshold of 3.2 km was used because 
it is the approximate distance the average bear will 
move in one day of travel. With these exclusions, 29 
bears were left for analysis.22
In the Five Year Report, we learned that home range 
size and daily movement distance differed between 
male and female black bears. The average home 
range size of a male black bear was 75 square 
miles on average, while a female black bear home 
range was less than half the size at 30 square miles 
on average. Remember that a home range is the 
area an animal needs to survive on a daily basis, 
and includes areas to find food, water, and shelter 
or protective cover. Daily average travel distances 
for female black bears just after emergence from 
their winter dens was between 0.6 and 4.3 miles, 
and then increased to 6.2 and 11.2 miles by fall. 
For male black bears, average daily movements 
just after spring emergence was 1.2 to 6.8 miles 
and increased to 5.6 to 14.3 miles by fall. Generally 
speaking, fall is the time when bears are seeking out 
high-fat diets in preparation for winter hibernation. 
We also learned that bears appear to be very 
selective in habitat use, but more information was 
needed to really nail down how bears were using 
different features on the landscape.
The final data are in and bears still appear to be 
very specific about habitat choice. When AGFD 
researchers looked at how many bears, and the 
number of locations that occurred in treated areas 
it was surprisingly low. Two female bears made up 
93% of the locations within treated areas. In fact, 
none of the 29 bears within one-day’s-walk of any 
of the project’s treatments entered a treated area 
in 2005, 2006, or 2008. Between 2005 and 2010, 
only 29 of the 9,578 GPS locations were recorded 
in treated areas; that’s less than 1%. “Moreover, 
despite efforts to trap bears near completed or 
proposed forest thinning treatments, roughly 15% 
of the 29 collared bears were excluded each 
season/year because they were never located within 
3.2 km of a treated area” the AGFD report states.22 
AGFD researchers also found that the home range 
boundaries were often near, but not overlapping 
with the boundaries of treated areas. These data 
suggest that bears are avoiding thinned areas, but 
here is the tricky part with understanding these 
data. The project focused on restoring ponderosa 
pine forests, and black bears are known to frequent 
mixed conifer and other forest communities more 
often than ponderosa pine. Furthermore, treatments 
were focused around human communities, rural 
housing developments, and small towns in the 
WUI, and bears are also known to avoid areas with 
high human activity. Were the bears avoiding the 
treatments or the people? This confounding factor 
in the data makes it impossible to tease apart the 
reasons behind the avoidance. This question will 
have to go unanswered, for now.
While we will have to wait for more answers for 
ponderosa pine forests, the AGFD study does 
provide answers on how bears move across the 
broader landscape. At a landscape scale the AGFD 
data suggest bears use mixed-conifer habitats with 
steeper slopes and greater ruggedness. These 
characteristics were strong predictors of black 
bear use. At a more local or micro-site scale, AGFD 
found that bears used north-facing slopes along 
with areas of higher canopy cover, greater security 
cover, older vegetation age structure, and greater 
number of down logs most often. 
The AGFD study confirms some bear behavior 
previously suggested in the scientific literature, 
but also presents some quandaries. It was clear 
from the beginning that forest thinning treatments 
would have complex effects on bear habitat. With the 
removal or reduction of ground-level cover, it was 
thought that bear activity would decline in treated 
areas, however it was unclear if the increased food 
production would entice bears to use these areas 
even with reduced cover. The AGFD data suggest 
that in some cases this is true. Black bears within 
the study area did shift their diet as fall approached 
to use more pine-oak and pinyon-juniper habitats 
and take advantage of the available food resources 
there. Bears are known to travel great distances as 
evident by their daily movements recorded by the 
AGFD study. This roaming behavior is an important 
factor to remember when drawing conclusions of 
this study and the impacts of treatments on black 
bears.
Photo by 
AGFD Remote 
Camera
Photo by 
AGFD Remote 
Camera
90
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
91
Ecological

Given the intensive study of black bear movements and habitat use AGFD conducted surrounding the WMSP, 
the results provide specific conservation and mitigation measures that can be used in future restoration 
treatment planning efforts. First, while food resources are clearly important to bears and drives some of 
their movement behavior, cover appears to be the primary factor limiting the use of a particular site. The 
following conservation measures provide suggestions for balancing treatments and habitat cover for black 
bears.
• 
Maintain some areas with considerable horizontal security cover (>28%) and canopy 
cover (>50%) to create more mesic environments in ponderosa pine forests. 
• 
Maintain greater ground-level and canopy-level density on north-facing slopes, 
especially in rugged or steep areas to provide travel corridors. 
• 
Treatment areas in mixed-conifer forests should be minimized, especially on steep 
and north-facing slopes. These areas provide bedding, feeding, and denning habitat.
• 
Consider the use of an uneven-age stand structure using selecting harvesting rather 
than clear cuts.
• 
Retain large, mature trees surrounded by horizontal and vertical structure to provide 
security habitat for female bears with cubs.
• 
Maintain areas with scattered logs and slash to provide decaying course woody debris 
for horizontal cover and a source of insects as a preferred food source.
Understanding that bears wander through many vegetation communities in search of food and cover can 
inform the layout and proximity of thinning treatments on the landscape. 
• 
Black Bears shift from primarily mixed-conifer communities to ponderosa pine/pine-
oak and pinyon-juniper through summer and fall. Maintain areas with travel corridors 
and security cover through these vegetation communities.
• 
Consider the timing of habitat use when implementing forest treatments, to reduce 
excluding black bears from available habitat due to human activity.
• 
Retain greater horizontal and vertical cover in buffer strips of untreated habitat 
along drainages, approximately 200-meters wide to provide travel corridors through 
intensively thinned and less desirable habitat.
Understanding the conclusions from the AGFD study will help forest managers mitigate many of the 
potentially negative impacts of forest thinning treatments to black bears in future projects in the mountains 
of Arizona.   ◊
Photos by 
AGFD Remote 
Camera
92
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
93
Ecological

94      WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
95
Ecological
Best 
Management 
Practices
In a Few Words
A best practice is a method or technique that has been 
generally accepted as superior to any alternatives 
because it produces results that are superior to those 
achieved by other means or because it has become 
a standard way of doing business. Best practices are 
used to maintain quality. In many land management 
projects Best Management Practices (BMPs) garner 
much attention as they symbolize our “best efforts” at 
the backstop protection for natural resources we care 
about. They identify the limits for which an impact can 
impact natural resources and methods for mitigation 
to reduce potential project impacts. BMPs also 
represent a good faith effort on the part of contractors 
that they will follow daily procedures meant to reduce 
impacts, and apply remedies to impacts when 
completing a project.
Given that all participants (e.g. USFS, Contractors, 
MPMB, etc.) agreed that BMPs should be implemented 
and that monitoring of their implementation and 
effectiveness should be completed. Monitoring of BMPs 
is part of each task order closeout, where a USFS person 
visits each site to ensure that BMPs were followed 
and no mitigation is needed. These data are recorded 
in the task order Diary. The watershed program also 
supplied a four-page questionnaire that asked many 
of the same questions as are covered in the Diaries. 
The return of these wastershed specific forms had a 
limited completion rate. Out of 61 task orders over the 
ten-year contract, only 25 close-out sheets documenting 
BMPs could be found. With only 41% of closeout sheet 
to summarize here, it only gives us an idea of what 
actually happened in terms of BMP implementation 
and monitoring. The Diaries with full BMP data were not 
made available for analysis, only the watershed program 
forms. For the information that was available, overall the 
contractors did a good job implementing BMPs on skid 
trails, meadow protection, and stream management 
zones. Areas that had some problems include roads, 
landings, and operating during wet periods. The good 
news for implementation and monitoring is that when 
BMP monitoring was documented, 95% of records 
were fully completed in all sections providing excellent 
details about the task order and any mitigation actions 
taken. 
This is an area where monitoring fell short of 
expectations. It was clear from the data analysis in the 
Five Year Report that this area of monitoring needed 
some adjustments. One recommendation was that 
low-risk areas would need sampling at a lower rate 
than high-risk areas, to help alleviate the time crunch 
given the limited capacity for this type of monitoring. 
However, it appears that no changes were made. The 
available data, again lead to recommendations and 
an opportunity to target necessary changes in BMP 
implementation and monitoring.
This photo depicts water bar and lead out ditch to debris pile 
which was effective in removing water and filtering sediment 
from water courses.
Key Results from White Mountain Stewardship Project Monitoring Questions
Did Contractors adhere to Best Management 
Practices?
Only 41% of task orders had close-out forms from the 
watershed monitoring available to determine how 
frequently BMPs were being adhered to. From this data 
source, it is difficult to make generalizations across 
the board, however, where BMPs were addressed; it 
appears overall the contractors adhered to most. When 
BMP monitoring close-out forms were completed and 
retained for this analysis, they were fully completed and 
provided a wealth of information. 
Did BMP monitoring results show >90% of 
measurements as “effective” or “effective at risk” 
ratings?
There was a shift in how BMPs were monitored, such 
that these subjective categories are no longer used. 
While the data available in the close-out forms did 
highlight the implementation of BMPs, there was little 
information regarding the effectiveness of these actions. 
For the data available, we cannot answer this question. 
What percent of ineffective practices have 
documentation to indicate future operations were 
modified to improve ratings?
Again, because effectiveness of a mitigation measure 
or BMP was not recorded on the watershed forms, we 
cannot evaluate whether or not future operations were 
modified to improve ratings. There is no doubt if BMPs 
are going to be in place there needs to be commitment 
and a plan on the monitoring of BMPs.  This did 
not occur to the degree needed. It is very difficult to 
incorporate an adaptive management approach when 
the pertinent aspects of the monitoring are not recorded 
and retained for analysis.
By Sarah Hurteau

96
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
97
Ecological
one instance where waterbars were not 
seeded and another instance when major 
skid trails weren’t seeded. 
Road BMPs remain a problem with 72% of 
task orders having no additional surfacing 
incorporated into the road after the 
work was completed. Also, two locations 
(17% of task orders) did not receive 
waterbar seeding as part of the BMP 
implementation. 
Operation during wet periods is also a 
reoccurring problem. It appears that 
operations were not always suspended 
during wet periods that lead to rutting. In 
23% of these cases, the rutting exceeded 
BMP guidelines. Part of the contract 
requirement was suspension during 
wet periods, and it was up to the field 
operators to not exceed the guidelines 
established in the contract.
Sixty-two percent of landings exceeded the 
BMPs guideline of a 200ft by 200ft landing 
area. Often this was to accommodate 
roundwood decks and accumulate slash 
in larger piles, presumably for transport to 
the biomass plant. 
Implementation and monitoring of BMPs 
in the stream management zones and 
meadow protection areas were excellent 
with only one instance of a stream 
management zone not clearly marked 
on the ground. Anecdotally, many of the 
noncompliance items mentioned above 
were later mitigated, along with numerous 
site visits during ongoing activities. 
Recommendations were provided by 
Watershed personnel on how to mitigate 
specific 
erosion 
and 
sedimentation 
problem areas, guidance on determining 
when operations should be halted due 
to wet soil conditions, and assistance on 
determining when close out objectives 
were met.
In 2013, a national BMP referred to 
as the National BMP Program began 
with a two-year phase-in process to full 
implementation. In conjunction with this 
program monitoring was conducted 
to evaluate the implementation and 
Rutting occurs when 
operations continue 
during wet conditions
Best Management Practices (BMPs) geared to water quality are 
intended to control non-point source pollution and are the mechanism 
to measure and achieve water quality standards in the Clean Water Act 
(Sections 208 & 319). In the context of the WMSP, BMPs are measured 
in two ways; first, where they implemented as designed; and secondly, 
were they effective. 
Best Management Practices implementation was tracked at the close-
out of each task order provided to the Timber Sale Administrator 
(TSA). At the end of each task order, a USFS person visits each site to 
ensure that BMPs were followed and no mitigation is needed before 
the task order is closed-out. BMP adherence data are recorded in the 
task order Diary. The watershed program also supplied a four-page 
questionnaire that asked many of the same questions as are covered 
in the Diaries. The return of these wastershed specific forms had a 
limited completion rate. The Project had a total of 61 task orders 
over the course of the ten years (2004-2014). A total of 25 close-
out forms were rounded up for this final analysis; that equates to a 
41% reporting rate. The quantitative objectives set in 2011 identified 
a 95% adherence rate of BMPs. Because the BMP data recoded in 
the task diaries was not made available for this analysis, we used only 
the information provided by the watershed specific close-out forms, 
therefore, it is difficult to determine if the objective was met. 
The watershed close-out forms include a checklist of six (6) categories 
that were evaluated. Within each of these categories, there were sub-
questions addressing various aspects of that category (see side panel 
for examples). In addition, there was a series of questions at the end 
of the document with space for the TSA or contract official to write 
notes about how the implementation went, actions that went wrong, 
how they were mitigated, and what they learned from this or how they 
would do things differently. These types of questions really highlight 
the incorporation of an adaptive management process within the 
administrative USFS process. 
In the Five Year Report we learned that water quality standards were 
maintained, but that there was a pattern in deficiencies. The data from 
2006-2009 showed that the majority (60%) of BMPs implemented 
were “effective,” with 24% “effective at risk” and 16% ineffective. The 
deficiencies identified at that time were in the creation of skid trails on 
slopes >30% or near drainages, operating under wet conditions, lack 
of water bars, and ruts in roads. It was further identified that high-
risk areas such as steep slopes or drainages might require a more 
intensive monitoring practice to adjust to the conditions. At that time 
there were also recommendations on how to improve implementation 
and monitoring for the remainder of the contract. 
A total of 13 close-out forms where available for the period of 
2010-2014. In an effort to compare the data summary in the Five 
Year Report form the first half of the project with the second half, we 
removed 12 records from this final summary. This was done to limit 
double counting of task orders monitoring scores. 
Skid trail BMPs improved dramatically in their implementation, with only 
Evaluating BMPs
Rating Scale
1. Activity exceeded contract requirements
2. Activity met contracting requirements
3. Activity was a minor departure form 
contract requirements
4. Activity was a major departure from 
contract requirements
Watershed Checklist Categories
1. Skid Trails 
• Proper location
• Drainage with slash & waterbars
• Waterbars & major skid trails seeded
• Closed to travel with berm & slash
2. Roads
• Drainage structures re-established
• Additional surfacing incorporated
• Waterbars used & seeded
• Permanent roads left as prescribed
3. Operation During Wet Periods
• Rain/runoff events warrant attention
• Were operations suspended
• Rutting guidelines exceeded
4. Landings
• Proper location
• Ripped & seeded
• Less than 200 ft x 200 ft
5. Streamside Management Zones (SMZs)
• Clearly marked on ground
• Width specified
• Mechanical equipment restricted
6. Meadow Protection
• Identified on sale map
• Slash removed
• Timber removed per specifications
• Mechanical equipment restricted
• Restoration work after disturbance
Photos by USFS Watershed Staff.

98
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
99
Ecological
Mountain Stewardship task orders were completed within 
the Wallow West salvage project area. Because of the 
potential cumulative impacts of using mechanical logging 
equipment on soils already affected by wildfire, the Forest 
Soil Disturbance Monitoring Protocol (FSDMP) was used to 
assess ground disturbance effects and BMP effectiveness. 
The desired result of Soil Disturbance Monitoring was to 
determine if forest practices were reducing long-term 
soil productivity through modification of soil function via 
compaction, displacement, and/or loss of soils. Monitoring 
the attributes of surface cover, ruts, compaction, and platy 
soil structure were used to generate, inform, and revise 
best management practices to help maintain long-term site 
stability and productivity.23 Detrimental disturbance classes 
have been shown locally to correlate with reductions in 
overall soil condition.24-26 The FSDMP recommends a 
threshold of a 15 percent as the maximum acceptable 
level of detrimental ground disturbing effects. Results from 
monitoring showed detrimental disturbance factors of 7% 
across unit #’s 7 and 13, and 13% across cutting unit #2. 
These results indicate ground disturbing effects from the 
timber salvage operations were within an acceptable range.
Recommendations from the ASNFs staff for future 
restoration efforts involving mechanical thinning based on 
results from BMP monitoring and informal site visits include:
• 
Improved planning for temporary road and skid 
trail locations. More field visits by soil and water 
personnel to aid CORs and operators and lend 
expert advice in identifying potential erosion 
and sedimentation problem areas.  
• 
Improved diligence on halting mechanical 
operations in wet weather. Because multiple 
operations are often occurring simultaneously, 
the CORs cannot be in all of these places at 
once. Better communication between the COR 
and the “woods boss,” the person designated 
by the operator to evaluate each area on a 
case-by-case basis and self-impose temporary 
suspensions due to weather would limit 
violations of BMPs.  
• 
Improved planning and closeout of landing 
operations. Again, increase CORs or inspectors 
during critical periods, and providing lead-time 
for other specialists to schedule participation 
in close out activities would increase BMP 
implementation and effectiveness. Mitigation 
measures could be tailored specifically to that 
location as necessary.    
Photo by USFS Watershed Staff.
• 
Improved maintenance and drainage of forest 
system level 1 roads during use and closure. 
The tendency on Stewardship treatment areas 
was to use existing roads, with little to no 
additional road surfacing after treatment, as no 
funding was available. The outcome was that low 
standard roads in areas susceptible to erosion 
deteriorated quickly with the heavy traffic of a 
thinning operation. Roads were in many cases 
in worse condition than before treatment. One 
solution is to earmark funding either within the 
stewardship vehicle or from outside funding 
sources, solely to maintain roads to the USFS 
standards and to identify and relocate existing 
roads in poor locations that should not be used 
in order to protect the soil and water resources.
• 
Improved tracking of BMP monitoring 
activities through the use of the new database 
developed as part of the National BMP 
monitoring program. The database is now 
functional and provides a central repository for 
BMP monitoring data. Set a standard period of 
evaluation to learn from the results of the BMP 
monitoring. Incorporating the analysis phase 
of an adaptive management cycle will improve 
BMP implementation and monitoring.   ◊
(2) scored as ‘Fully implemented’ and three (3) scored as 
‘Marginally’ implemented. Of the five effectiveness ratings, 
three (3) were scored as ‘Effective’ and two (2) were 
scored as ‘Not Effective’. Composite ratings for the activity 
included two (2) excellent, one (1) Good and two (2) ‘Poor’. 
The road management activity that was evaluated using 
the National BMP program was a ‘Completed Road 
Decommissioning’ 
evaluation. 
The 
implementation, 
effectiveness, and composite ratings for this evaluation 
were ‘Mostly implemented’, ‘Effective’ and ‘Excellent’, 
respectively. 
As with many aspects of the WMSP, the Wallow Fire of 2011 
changed and redirected much of the BMP implementation 
and monitoring on the Forest. A number of White 
effectiveness of BMPs applied to Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests projects and activities. During the two 
year phase-in period of National BMP monitoring, which 
happened to coincide with the last two years of WMSP, 
five mechanical vegetation management evaluations and 
one road management evaluation were conducted in White 
Mountain Stewardship task orders. An interdisciplinary 
team of resource and timber specialists completed 
assessments using the National BMP monitoring protocol. 
Once completed, data from the assessment forms was 
entered into the USFS’s National BMP database. 
The database scored all the individual evaluations and 
provided an overall BMP implementation, effectiveness, 
and composite score for each task order evaluated. For 
the five mechanical vegetation management activities two 

100
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
101
Ecological
Dirt Work
In a Few Words
Soils compaction was a primary concern, as heavy 
machinery used during thinning project would travel 
cross-country in all task orders. With an increase in acres 
treated, the potential for soil compaction increased 
dramatically. There are many detrimental effects of soil 
compaction, but the main concerns include increased 
erosion potential, and reduced water infiltration, 
root growth and overall productivity of a site. Soils 
compaction was measured in 2007 and 2008 and 
presented in the Five Year Report. They found that soil 
compaction was localized to roads, skid trails, and 
landings; but at those sites compaction exceeded 
acceptable thresholds. The tool used to take these 
measurements (a penetrometer) was the wrong tool for 
the job (made for turf grass not forest savannas) and 
recommendations include changing the process for 
measuring soil compaction in future monitoring.
There has been no new soil compaction data collected 
since 2008. While the reframing of the monitoring 
questions in 2011 shifted from “did soil compaction 
occur within treatments” to “were the effects of soil 
compaction mitigated at landings and burn piles” there 
is still no data to answer this question. The best we 
can do is infer the level of mitigation from questions 
addressing this issue in the close-out forms used 
for BMP monitoring. After reviewing the pertinent 
questions on the BMP closeout forms, landings were 
ripped and seeded for all task orders we have records for 
(a total of 25). While the BMP records provide a glimpse 
of mitigation actions taken, it is a monitoring category 
that was not followed-up on.
Key Results from White Mountain Stewardship Project Monitoring Questions
Were effects from soil compaction/impacts at landings 
and burn piles mitigated or rehabilitated?
There was no data collected by the ASNFs or its partners to 
address this question. In 2011, the MPMB set a quantitative 
objective that 90% of the monitored landings and burn 
piles have been mitigated, rehabilitated, or experienced 
natural recovery after at least one year. Anecdotally, we can 
infer from BMP monitoring that 100% of the landings that 
were monitored were ripped and seeded to mitigate soil 
compaction. We have no data or anecdotal reports for any 
mitigation or rehabilitation at burn piles.
How effective is the rehabilitation or mitigation of 
monitored landings and burn piles?
Because we only have a yes or no answer on a checklist, we 
do not know how effective the ripping and seeding was at 
landings. No USFS personnel or partners were deployed 
to landings one year after the mitigation measures were 
implemented to determine if the ripping and seeding was 
effective.
This photo depicts large landing 
placed well out of aquatic 
management zone.  No sediment 
was observed entering Burro Creek 
(photo background) from this 
landing.  Entire length of stream 
was walked along boundary of 
cutting unit as well.  No evidence 
of sediment from harvest/road 
activities was observed entering 
stream. 
Soil Compaction Investigation Post-Treatment
By Sarah Hurteau
Photo by USFS Watershed Staff.

102
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
103
Ecological
compaction at least one-year post-treatment. The Board also stipulated that less than 
10% of monitored sites may continue to show evidence of soil compaction after three 
years. In some cases we have missed the one- and three-year windows for data collection 
to determine the effectiveness of any implemented mitigation measures. In other cases, 
there is still time for the USFS to measure soil compaction at landings, burn piles, and skid 
trails to determine if mitigation measures are effective, and if not alter BMPs to address 
these issues. 
Understanding impacts to soil characteristics is a key component to many other aspects 
of forest restoration this project is focused on. If the soil is compacted the understory 
regrowth may be curtailed, the forest regeneration could be slowed or not occurring in 
highly compacted areas, and it leaves areas susceptible to erosion and exotic species 
invasion. Given the information we have summarized over the course of the WMSP, the 
Board recommends the following for future treatments:
• Select a subset of landings, skid trails, and burn piles to measure disturbance 
and soil compaction. Measurements should be recorded at one- and three-
years post-treatment.
• Mitigation measures should be recorded and include location and timing of 
seeding.
• Evaluation of mitigation effectiveness should be recorded at the time of soil 
compaction sampling. If measurements are not within an acceptable range at 
one year, additional mitigation measures should be suggested. 
• Prioritization of high-risk areas should be identified for mitigation and 
monitoring to ensure rehabilitation of these sites are effective. ◊
When the WMSP first began soil compaction 
was a concern, as heavy machinery and/
or skidding operations would cross nearly 
all areas within task orders. There was an 
effort to measure bulk density, infiltration, 
penetration resistance and aerial extent to 
determine the magnitude of the impacts 
forest treatment would cause on soil 
resources. The challenge of incorporating 
such a broad and interdisciplinary range of 
monitoring topics is that you need experts in 
many fields to complete the monitoring in a 
meaningful way. It also takes an enormous 
amount of people-hours. 
The data gathered in 2007-2008 as part 
of the WMSP monitoring program provided 
the answer to the initial monitoring question, 
which asked if forest treatments resulted 
in compacted soil. The analysis found that 
81% of monitored sites had minimal or no 
disturbance after treatments using the USFS 
Region 1 Visual Disturbance Classification 
Guidelines. Soil bulk density and surface 
resistance measurements indicated that 
locations of concern occurred on skid trails 
and landings, and that minimal impacts 
occurred where machinery was making a 
single pass. 
This single sampling period alleviated 
concerns that significant soil compaction 
would occur everywhere within a task order. 
The Board then shifted their attention to 
focus on soil compaction issues at skid trails 
and landings. In reality, you cannot prevent 
soil compaction at these locations and still 
meet the other objectives of the WMSP, and 
yet potential impacts need to be mitigated. 
This is precisely the role Best Management 
Practices play in forest management. 
In 2011, the Board revised their monitoring 
program and updated many of the monitoring 
questions to fine tune our understanding of 
the impacts of forest treatments. At this time, 
they also identified quantitative objects for as 
many of these questions as possible. For soil 
compaction the revised questions related to 
whether or not focal areas were mitigated 
or rehabilitated and if these actions were 
effective. The Wallow Fire certainly redirected 
efforts to other areas of the forest with more 
pressing matters. Due to this and other 
priorities, the monitoring needed to answer 
the questions was not conducted as it should 
have been.  Therefore, we cannot answer 
these questions with confidence.
Some insight was provided by the close-out 
forms used to monitoring BMPs addressed 
both skid trails and landings. These close-
out forms are check-lists of what was 
done, providing limited information about 
implementation. From the 25 close-out 
forms available spanning task orders from 
2005 to 2014, we found that all of the 
landings in these task orders were ripped 
and seeded. The quantitative objective set 
to this topic was that 90% of the monitored 
landings and burn piles have been mitigated 
or experienced natural recovery within one 
year. While our data is anecdotal, it suggests 
that the ASNFs met the objective for landings. 
There is no information available for burn 
piles. By 2011 when these objectives were 
set, most of the slash was being removed for 
the biomass plant, and not piled and burned 
as has been the practice for many years. 
While we have no data on burn piles, due to 
the reduced number it is likely this was not as 
large of a problem as it once was. The BMP 
close-out forms also tell us that in these task 
orders 96% of major skid trails were seeded.
The second part of the monitoring questions 
addressed mitigation effectiveness. The 
quantitative objectives set by the Board 
stated that 90% of monitored sites should 
recover to an acceptable level of soil 
This photo depicts the 
decommissioning of a 
temporary road at the 
Porcupine Treatment 
Area on the Black Mesa 
Ranger District.
Photo by USFS 4FRI

104
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
105
Ecological
The San Juan Fire was a human-caused wildfire that 
began on June 26, 2014 on the White Mountain Apache 
Reservation and quickly spread to the ASNFs. In the heat 
of summer, dry sustained 20-25 mph winds gusting to 30 
mph, fueled the blaze. A ridge of high pressure was sitting 
over the Southwest, leading to blistering heat, almost no 
humidity, and strong winds. It was a recipe for disaster. 
The fire burned through Gillespie Flat and east toward 
Mineral Creek. After just four days the fire had burned 
6,300 acres and was only 5% contained. Because the fire 
burned into forest treatments that were implemented just a 
few years previously under the WMSP, we were able to see 
first-hand how recent forest treatments can affect wildfire 
behavior.
Where the fire burned into WMSP fuel treatments, fire 
behavior dramatically changed from a crown fire with 
spotting to a surface fire with 8- to 10-foot flame lengths. 
The fuel treatments were able to modify fire behavior and 
limit fire severity effects and thwart sustained crown fire, 
even under extreme fire conditions. 
As the San Juan Fire transitioned from untreated mixed 
conifer to treated ponderosa pine, fire behavior also 
transitioned from intermittent and sustained high-intensity 
crown fire in the untreated stands to a low to moderate 
intensity surface fire in the treated stands. This provided 
fire managers with opportunities to contain the fire in a 
safe and effective manner. Because of these actions, there 
were also limited negative impacts on natural resources 
surrounding communities, and local infrastructure. 
As with many areas in the White Mountains of Arizona, natural 
areas are interspersed within small towns and subdivisions. 
These areas are also important habitat for many species. 
The negative impacts to vegetative communities as well as 
wildlife habitat could have been substantially worse than 
actually occurred. Mexican Spotted Owl, Northern Goshawk 
and Apache (Arizona) Trout are just a few of the species 
of concern known to inhabit the area, not to mention the 
“highly desirable” game species like deer, elk, and antelope 
that also inhabit the area.
The monsoonal rains started on July 2, cooling summer 
temperatures, and increasing the relative humidity. 
Eventually, thunderstorms helped extinguish the wildfire. By 
July 5, the fire was 95% contained and had reached only 
6,975 acres.
If there can ever be an up side to a wildfire, several 
experimental treatment plots established by the ERI within 
the Mineral project area showed numerous benefits. A 
thin and burn treatment area, a burn only treatment, and 
a no treatment area were all burned through, providing a 
side-by-side comparison of what happens under extreme 
fire conditions. What they found was that the burn-only 
treatment was able to mitigate some fire effects, but wasn’t 
as effective as the thin and burn treatment. The burn only 
treatment experienced severe scorching and considerable 
tree mortality, but not like the complete mortality recoded in 
the no treatment area. This once again provided a valuable 
lesson that restoration is a multi-staged process that has 
to include some level of prescribed fire to remove fine fuels 
and increase the crown base height. 
Following the fire, the USFS also evaluated the Burned Area 
Reflectance Classification (BARC) which is a satellite-derived 
data layer of post-fire vegetation condition. The BARC has 
four classes: High, Moderate, Low, and Unburned. The 
majority of high-severity areas identified by BARC overlapped 
with areas that did not have vegetation treatments applied. 
Conversely, in the areas where vegetation treatments were 
applied, the burn severity was classed as Moderate, Low, 
or Unburned. Upon further inspection, they found that soil 
severity dropped off dramatically in thinned areas, and 
even more so in thin and burn treatments. 
These post-fire data showed that there were still living 
trees in the burned areas, and some even still had residual 
ground cover. In terms of soil, the fire returned nutrients 
to the soil without super-heating the soils and killing the 
natural soil biota. Because treatments extended toward 
the banks of Mineral Creek, fire severity was low, improving 
habitat for wildlife and aquatic species like the “Threatened” 
Apache Trout. Stephanie Coleman, aquatic program 
manager for the ASNFs, said “If riparian conditions and 
terrain/topography allow, managers should treat as close 
to the stream as possible to offer protection to aquatic and 
riparian habitats and break up those fuel corridors that can 
threaten the entire stream if a wildfire occurs.” This was an 
excellent summary of treatment effectiveness. ◊
For more information on the lessons learned from the San 
Juan Fire, visit the ASNFs San Juan Fire Fuel Treatment 
Effectiveness Report.24
By Sarah Hurteau
Photo by USFS

106
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
107
Ecological
Vegetation structural characteristics and composition are 
frequently used to define wildlife habitat needs. A few of 
the metrics used to examine wildlife habitat include spatial 
heterogeneity, structural diversity, and vegetation temporal 
dynamics.27 Variation in these metrics across the landscape, 
in patches of optimal, sub-optimal, and deficient habitat, 
are what allows species to co-exist and be sustainable 
over time.28 Wildlife population dynamics are likely to be 
modified by restoration treatments that influence wildlife 
habitat.29 Given that restoration treatments were expected 
to increase in implementation over the lifespan of the WMSP, 
it was important that we understand how these treatments 
influence species of management interest and their 
habitat. The scale at which these changes occur relative 
to the species of interest is also important in assessing 
the potential impacts. Previous research has shown that 
the concepts of ecological scaling, fragmentation, patch 
sizes, and the ability to move between optimal habitats 
are important in assessing how species will respond to 
potential disturbances.30-32 Therefore, we evaluated habitat 
connectivity at a scale appropriate to the species of interest.
Connectivity modeling was introduced as a tool to the Board 
during the initial evaluation of the monitoring data for the 
Five Year Report. Additional species and project locations 
were identified for subsequent analyses. Focal species 
include pronghorn antelope, wild turkey, Abert’s squirrel, 
and red squirrel. Habitat connectivity for these species 
were assessed at the Timber Mesa, Eagar South Phase II 
(Phoneline), Beaver Creek, and Nutrioso project areas.
With over 71,000 acres of treatments implemented during 
the WMSP, the rapidly changing landscape is bound to 
affect habitat use, availability, and movement across the 
landscape. There are many ways to evaluate wildlife habitat 
connectivity, this was just one method that seemed to fit the 
needs of the group. 
We utilized a patch delineation algorithm called Patch-
Morph to characterize functionally connected habitat for 
a suite of focal species. The PatchMorph algorithm allows 
for the use of natural history characteristics specific to the 
focal species to inform the threshold values for habitat 
suitability on the landscape. By overlaying the range of 
threshold distances, PatchMorph creates a connectivity 
surface that can be used to evaluate and visually display 
the functionally connected habitat for a given species.33 This 
algorithm was chosen to evaluate the potential impacts of 
restoration treatments on the WMSP because it has been 
successful in identifying habitat patches for restoration of 
other wildlife species.34
Habitat connectivity was evaluated for red squirrels 
(Tamiasciurus hudsonicus), Abert’s Squirrel (Sciurus aberti), 
and wild turkey (Meleagris gallopavo merriami) at Mineral, 
Alpine, Greet, Eagar South, or Blue Ridge/Los Burros 
treatment areas and maps appeared in the Five Year Report. 
Since the original modeling effort, the Wallow Fire burned 
through the Greer, Nutrioso, Alpine, and Eagar South areas 
changing the impacts seen in the earlier modeling effort. 
Soon after the Wallow Fire, the Board asked the some of 
these areas be reevaluated to determine how the wildfire 
affected habitat connectivity.
In some cases such as Eagar South and Greer, thinning 
treatments had been implemented so the modeling effort 
represented a post-treatment post-wildfire scenario. 
In Nutrioso, some of the earlier treatments had been 
completed, but the next round of task orders had been 
marked but not cut when the Wallow Fire burned through 
that area. The Nurtrioso area was also the site of additional 
research for red squirrels, using connectivity modeling a 
priori to build habitat connectivity into the treatment layout.
Finally, the Beaver Creek site was the next big project area 
that was proceeding through the NEPA process, but had 
not yet been completed when the Wallow Fire struck. The 
modeling effort for Beaver Creek had already begun when 
the plan changed and the deliverables then included a post-
wildfire scenario.
Building 
Connections
Evaluating functional connectivity for wildlife across the WMSP area
By Sarah Hurteau

108
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
109
Ecological
Abert’s Squirrel
The Abert’s Squirrel, also known as the tassel-eared 
squirrel, inhabits ponderosa pine and mixed-conifer forests 
in the Southwestern U.S. and Mexico. They are distributed 
across the Colorado Plateau and the southern Rockies 
of Colorado, Utah, Arizona and New Mexico. The Abert’s 
squirrel is a ponderosa pine obligate species, meaning that 
it is dependent on this species of pine for its foraging and 
nesting requirements.35-38
The Abert’s squirrel is a large (weighing ~ 680-900 grams) 
diurnal species that requires foraging resources associated 
with ponderosa pine trees, which include the inner bark 
of twigs, pollen, seed, and hypogeous fungi associated 
with the roots.35,39 Like many small mammals, there is an 
important symbiotic relationship between squirrels and the 
conifer species that make up their habitat. Squirrels and 
other small mammals consume the underground fruiting 
bodies of mycorrhizal fungi (i.e., truffles), which is an 
important seasonal food resource that then passes through 
their digestive system unharmed and is dispersed by the 
squirrel.38-40 The Abert’s squirrel is unique in that it does not 
store food over winter, so high quality habitat that provides 
foraging resources during the winter is important to their 
survival. The Abert’s squirrel is also an important prey 
resource for the northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis),36-38 
a species of great management interest and one that is 
also thought to be affected by forest management activities. 
Abert’s squirrel connectivity was modeled for the Blue 
Ridge/Los Burros, Mineral, Greer and Eagar South areas. 
The models shown here are the maps shown in the Five 
Year Report. These areas illustrate that forest treatments 
can be implemented and still maintain high quality habitat 
and functional connectivity for squirrels.
The Eagar South project area was one of the initial 
locations where habitat connectivity was evaluated for 
squirrels. On the Grapevine phase of the project, we found 
that restoration-based treatments were a better option for 
squirrels than evenly-spaced forest thinning prescriptions. 
Restoration treatments that maintained interlocking 
canopies in clumps was shown to create high quality habitat 
and maintain functional connectivity across the project area. 
Through an iterative process, this information (along with 
models of other focal species), wildlife habitat corridors and 
treatment layouts were designed for the Phoneline project. 
The restoration-based treatment prescriptions from 
Grapevine were proposed for the ponderosa pine habitat 
in the Phoneline project area, which was to be treated in 
2011. 
The Beaver Creek area was affected by the Wallow fire prior 
to forest thinning, resulting in the second scenario modeling 
post-wildfire conditions. Post-treatment and post-fire 
suitability ratings were assigned based on the vegetation 
type, treatment type, and fire severity condition.
Abert’s squirrel connectivity was modeled for post-wildfire 
scenario within the Beaver Creek project area. The Beaver 
Creek project area was identified due to its remote setting 
by the ASNFs. Several areas of grassland restoration were 
identified along with the group selection strategy proven 
successful in the Eagar South Demonstration project area. 
The proposed treatment prescriptions and boundaries were 
outlined and awaiting approval through the NEPA process. 
Prior to the approval and implementation of this project, the 
Wallow Fire burned through this project area, completely 
encompassing the area proposed for forest treatments. 
Through this modeling exercise, we have illustrated the 
likely results of the existing conditions post-wildfire.
We found that these forest treatments would have likely 
improved habitat suitability for Abert’s squirrels and 
maintained high quality habitat connectivity in the post-
treatment modeling scenario. Areas of lower habitat 
suitability include grasslands and private property. The 
post-fire habitat connectivity model for Abert’s squirrels 
show that the fire severity conditions minimally reduced 
the quality of squirrel habitat available, but maintained 
functional connectivity across the project area. While the 
areas was completely burned during the Wallow Fire, it 
burned mostly at a lower fire severity, removing excess 
fuel loads and opening the understory to new growth. 
There were small patches of higher severity fire effects, 
but overall, this project area was not negatively impacted 
by the wildfire. Squirrel habitat is functionally connected to 
both the North-South and East-West directions. Patches of 
high suitability have shrunk in size but exist at scales large 
enough to maintain squirrel populations.
Legend
Recent Treatments
Treatments in Five-Year Report
Private Property
Post Wallow Fire Model
High 
Low
Post Treatment Model
High
Low
¹
0
3
6
1.5
Miles
Photo by Randall D. Babb

Red Squirrel
Red squirrels are a diurnal species that are active year-
round and defend caches or middens, which serve as 
activity centers within their territory.41 Foraging stations 
and caching sites are frequently associated with large-
diameter (>20 inches dbh) trees, snags and logs.42 Red 
squirrels also require canopy cover that exceeds 60% with 
interlocking branches to create the microclimate necessary 
to preserve and store cones and to provide potential 
nesting locations as well as predator escape routes and 
access to foraging sites.42-44 Douglas-fir dwarf mistletoe 
(Arceuthobium douglasii) infections can form witches’ 
brooms, which have been shown to be a nesting resource to 
red squirrels in Arizona.45 Red squirrels also use brooms for 
foraging, caching, and latrine sites.46 Previous research has 
shown that squirrel density ranges from 1.3 to 1.5 squirrels 
per hectare (2.47 acres) with a home range of ≤0.56 to 
1.03 hectares (1.38 to 2.54 acres).43,45,47
The red squirrel was a focal species identified in the 
WMSP Five Year Report as a species of interest; as such, 
habitat connectivity models were developed for several 
project areas. Mineral, Greer Nutrioso, and Alpine had 
been modeled to understand the post-treatment impacts 
on connectivity for this species. We found that thinning 
prescriptions had a significant impact on the availability of 
habitat for red squirrels. Ponderosa pine habitat is already 
marginal for red squirrels, and once the canopy is opened 
up, it becomes a barrier to movement.
Since the connectivity models were developed, the Wallow 
fire burned through the Nutrioso project area, of which 
only a portion had been treated. We wanted to understand 
how the wildfire changed the forest structure and habitat 
connectivity for red squirrels, so we re-ran the model to 
include fire severity effects on habitat connectivity. We 
found that the primary area of high quality habitat for red 
squirrels was dramatically reduced due to high-severity fire. 
Connectivity was also reduced across the project area. A 
minimum level of connectivity remained in the Phase I area 
likely due to the forest treatments reducing fire severity. 
Field surveys post-fire revealed that very little to no red 
squirrel habitat remained within the proposed thinning 
treatment units. Mid-dens were not mapped due to fire 
affects on the area. Future monitoring of red squirrel 
habitat in this area may be war-ranted to determine the 
time line of red squirrel re-colonizing these areas.
Legend
Recent Treatments
Treatments in Five-Year Report
Private Property
Post Wallow Fire Model
High 
Low
Post Treatment Model
High
Low
¹
0
3
6
1.5
Miles
Photo by AGFD
110
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
111
Ecological

112
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
113
Ecological
One project area of special interest was Nutrioso WUI. This 
project area consisted mostly of ponderosa pine and mixed-
conifer stands including some spruce-fir stands, which 
was a departure form areas previously treated under the 
WMSP. The first phase of treatments had been completed 
several years back and the project area was scheduled for 
its second phase of mechanical treatment. Because red 
squirrels were a focal species in the area, and this areas 
was known to have high quality red squirrel habitat, it was 
an area that we wanted to try something new. 
During the planning phase of the project, a small team 
worked through the details in an attempt to create linkages 
for the squirrels to move through the proposed treatment 
and still maintain connectivity to the heavily treed ridge to 
the east. The second phase treatment layout was modified 
to include areas of higher tree density retention to link 
known high quality squirrel habitat with no treatment zones 
to create wildlife corridors. The spacing and linkage size 
was based on research that identified minimum patch size 
and home range. 
In an effort to validate the connectivity models previously 
developed, the USFS collected field data on the occurrence 
and density of red squirrel middens in the Nutrioso project 
area prior to mechanical thinning. It was our intention to 
return to the area post-treatment and record the same data 
following the same protocol. We wanted to determine if red 
squirrels were using areas that had a thinning prescription 
specifically developed to provide habitat for this species. 
Furthermore, we wanted to overlay the occurrences of red 
squirrel middens to see if their use was congruent with the 
predictive connectivity models.
Unfortunately the Wallow Fire burned through this area prior 
to the treatments being completed. This area experienced 
high fire severity including a significant rate of tree morality. 
We were unable to validate the model to know if these 
thinning prescriptions and project layout based on function 
connectivity models was effective. 
In the aftermath of the Wallow Fire, functional connectivity 
was assessed for several focal species to determine how 
the fire affected these species’ ability to access habitat. As 
Building Wildlife Habitat
By Sarah Hurteau
with many aspects of the project, the results were mixed. 
Some species benefited from the fire, while other lost a 
considerable quantity of available habitat.
This is just one example of how USFS Interdisciplinary 
Teams can evaluate habitat connectivity to achieve multiple 
resource goals. ◊

114
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
115
Ecological
The American pronghorn (Antilocapra americana americana) 
is a large ungulate that was once common throughout the 
West. Known as the fastest land mammal in North America, 
the pronghorn is built for speed to escape predators. 
Though frequently referred to as antelope, it is not related 
to true antelope found in the Eastern Hemisphere and is the 
only surviving member of the family Antilocapridae. While the 
populations of this species were once abundant in the state 
of Arizona, pronghorn have been identified as a species of 
concern by the Arizona Game and Fish Department (AGFD) 
because they no longer inhabit all of their former range.48 
Habitat loss, fragmentation, and the reduction of habitat 
quality are all factors thought to influence abundance, 
distribution, and recruitment in pronghorn populations.49
Pronghorn are most frequently found in grassland and 
shrub-steppe habitats, with some populations utilizing 
open wood-lands, forests, and desert habitats.50 Previous 
research has found that pronghorn  utilize relatively small 
openings in forests and woodlands but spend the majority 
of their time in areas with low visual obstructions.50 
Pronghorn most frequently use gentle terrain with slopes 
less than 5% and generally avoid habitats with slopes 
greater than 40%.51 While they don’t frequently occupy 
areas with high tree densities, pronghorn will move through 
other vegetation types such as pinyon-juniper woodland 
and ponderosa pine forests.50 These movement corridors 
between preferred habitat types (i.e., open grasslands) 
become particularly important during winter months when 
pronghorn move to lower elevation rangelands.
Pronghorn connectivity was modeled for existing vegetation 
within the Timber Mesa-Vernon project area, which was 
considered the pretreatment or existing condition. This 
model shows very little suitable habitat for pronghorn 
across the project area. Small patches of suitable habitat 
existed; however, they were completely disconnected north-
to-south and east-to-west and isolated existing populations 
of pronghorn. Vegetation and likely existing roads and 
highways make movement among potential habitat difficult 
for this species. Because pronghorn are known to be shy 
and unwilling to cross existing barriers such as roads and 
fences, movement among existing patches of habitat was 
restricted.
At the time of model completion, exact treatment 
prescriptions and boundaries had not been established 
by the USFS. For the modeling exercise, we determined 
that forest and grassland restoration treatments would be 
identified by the Potential Natural Vegetation Types (PNVT) 
available from ASNFs. Proposed treatments included 
grassland restoration, which removed the majority of 
conifers from areas identified as grass-lands by the PNVT 
layer; pinyon-juniper reduction, which reduced the tree 
density in these areas; and ponderosa pine restoration 
thinning, which was identified as a reduction to a target 
basal area identified by remnant evidence with leave trees 
grouped into small clumps.
Based on the proposed restoration treatments we 
identified, we modeled the post-treatment conditions as a 
snapshot of how pronghorn connectivity may be improved 
by these restoration treatments. We found that pronghorn 
habitat suitability was dramatically improved across 
the project area by proposed restoration treatments. 
Habitat connectivity was also improved through grassland 
restoration and pinyon-juniper woodland tree density 
reduction treatments. While some barriers still existed, such 
as roads and highways, pronghorn habitat connectivity can 
be greatly improved in this area through the implementation 
of restoration-based treatments.
Pronghorn connectivity was modeled for three condition 
scenarios within the Beaver Creek project area. These 
modeling scenarios included pretreatment or existing 
conditions, and post-treatment connectivity for the proposed 
forest restoration treatments planned for the area. After 
completing the post-treatment modeling scenario but before 
treatments could occur, the Wallow fire burned through the 
project area, resulting in the third scenario, which modeled 
post-wildfire conditions. Pretreatment and post-treatment 
suitability ratings were assigned based on the vegetation 
type, treatment type, and slope condition. Suitability values 
assigned for the post-fire modeling scenario had to be 
adjusted to account for the fire severity across the modeling 
extent.
We found no difference in pronghorn habitat connectivity 
between the pretreatment and post-treatment modeling 
conditions. These results indicate that the grassland and 
forest restoration treatments that were proposed for the 
Beaver Creek project area did not improve, but also did 
not diminish, functional connectivity across the project area. 
While grassland restoration treatments did not change 
Pronghorn
Legend
Recent Treatments
Treatments in Five-Year Report
Private Property
Post Wallow Fire Model
High 
Low
Post Treatment Model
High
Low
¹
0
3
6
1.5
Miles
habitat connectivity for pronghorn, they would have likely 
improved habitat quality. We also found that the Wallow fire 
dramatically improved habitat connectivity for pronghorn 
across the Beaver Creek project area, which is shown in 
the figure. The model suggests that pronghorn could take 
advantage of the reduction in tree density in moderate 
or high severity burn areas, increasing the potential for 
pronghorn use and movement through the project area.
Photo by Darryll Hagen

116
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
117
Ecological
Turkeys require specific habitat characteristics for nesting, 
roosting, foraging, and loafing. Turkey nests are commonly 
associated with large-diameter ponderosa pine trees in 
clumpy, uneven-aged stands which provide many nesting 
options.52,53 Nests are often on slopes > 40% in areas 
of high canopy cover.54,55 Turkeys also utilize landscape 
topographic 
features, 
rock 
outcrops, 
herbaceous 
vegetation, or slash to conceal nests.54,55 Nest locations 
often have low horizontal visibility from shrubs, slash, or 
dead-and-down wood and prefer ground hiding cover 
between 1.5 and 6.5 feet high.53,55,56
Once poults are more than ten days old, brooding hens 
can return to roosting in trees. Turkeys commonly roost 
on ridges or slopes and prefer tall, over-mature ponderosa 
pine trees with widely spaced branches52,54-55. Roost trees 
are often located near meadows and permanent water 
sources.57,58 Clumps of trees used by large flocks of turkeys 
for roosting occur in stands with a basal area of greater 
than 21 m2/ha (92 ft2/ac) with high canopy cover and more 
than 5 trees per site.54-55,59-60
Foraging habitat for turkeys is a mix of forested habitat 
and open areas such as meadows. Access to escape cover 
while foraging is a component of habitat requirements for 
this species. Many of the same nest cover characteristics 
also provide cover at foraging sites.55 Foraging sites that 
are within one mile of roost sites receive the most use.51 
Turkeys most often feed under forest canopy, cienegas, 
or small openings created by group-selection thinning 
treatments.61 Small openings are used more frequently than 
large openings for quick access to escape cover. Turkeys 
have been shown to utilize large openings or meadows, but 
rarely for-age more than 147 ft from cover.57
Loafing areas are another key component of turkey 
habitat. Loafing includes resting, preening, dusting, and 
thermal regulation in the summer months.62 Turkeys use 
areas with topographic relief for loafing, such as canyon 
rims, ridge tops, or small drainages.55 Loafing habitat 
generally consists of dense over-story forests with an open 
understory for good visibility, with large-diameter fallen 
snags or slash and rock outcrops that can be used as 
perches.54 Forested areas most commonly used for loafing 
are small stands that are interspersed with small openings 
that have distinct edge contrast.62 Frequently used loafing 
sites are near (~100 feet) high-quality foraging sites with 
sufficient escape cover.55
Wild Turkey habitat connectivity was modeled for two 
condition scenarios at the Beaver Creek project area. These 
modeling scenarios included post-treatment connectivity 
for the proposed forest restoration treatments and a post-
fire scenario. After completing the post-treatment modeling 
scenario, the Wallow fire burned through the project area 
resulting in the second scenario modeling post-wildfire 
conditions. Post-treatment and post-fire suitability rating 
were assigned based on the vegetation type, treatment 
type, patch size, and fire severity condition.
The Beaver Creek project area was one that was identified 
due to its remote setting within the ASNFs. The public 
comment period was held to identify potential forest 
treatments to be included in this area. Several areas of 
grass-land restoration were identified along with the group 
selection strategy proven successful in the Eagar South 
Demonstration project area. The proposed treatment 
prescriptions and boundaries were outlined and awaiting 
approval through the NEPA process. Prior to the approval 
and implementation of this project, the Wallow Fire burned 
through this project area, completely encompassing 
the area proposed for forest treatments. Through this 
modeling exercise, we have illustrated the likely results of 
the proposed forest treatments and the current conditions 
post-wildfire.
We found that the modeled post-treatment conditions would 
have dramatically improved wild turkey habitat suitability 
and functional connectivity. There are areas within the 
project that were targeted for grassland restoration that 
turkey will likely use the edges of, but the interior of which 
were considered marginal habitat for wild turkey.
Turkey
Legend
Recent Treatments
Treatments in Five-Year Report
Private Property
Post Wallow Fire Model
High 
Low
Post Treatment Model
High
Low
¹
0
3
6
1.5
Miles
The post-fire habitat connectivity model for wild turkey 
show that the fire severity conditions generally improved 
the overall functional connectivity across the project area. 
Because of the patchy nature of wildfire, fire severity 
opened small patches of habitat that may be important for 
turkeys during the successional regrowth of this area. The 
differences in fire severity at small special scales tend to 
create all the different habitat requirement turkey utilize.
The other areas modeled represent post-treatment 
conditions and originally appeared in the Five Year Report. 
◊
Photo by Bruce Sitko

In a Few Words
In the Five Year Report we learned that the Board 
prioritized five economic metrics to be monitored 
through the life of the contract to help understand 
the direct and indirect effects of the contract on local 
and regional economies. These priority indicators 
specifically included: 1) businesses that purchased 
or processed the wood removed from the Forest by 
the WMSP contractor; 2) the number of jobs directly 
and indirectly tied to the WMSP; 3) the amount of 
expenditures made by Project-associated businesses 
both locally and regionally; and 4) cross-commuting 
information. These indicators were monitored and 
analyzed annually by a consultant contracted by 
the ASNFs. This report summarizes the most recent 
2013-2014 Economic Assessment, as well as 
some information from the WMSP Final Ten-Year 
Socioeconomic Assessment. Please see the references 
section for a full citation of these and other reports. 
THE 
REBIRTH 
OF AN 
INDUSTRY
Developing a Diversified Portfolio of Forest 
Products Makes for a Successful Community 
of Businesses
Key Results from White Mountain Stewardship Project Monitoring Questions
How many wood-product businesses either 
purchased or processed Project materials?
In the first four years of the WMSP there were 20 
businesses recorded. Over the course of ten years, 
24 different firms were involved in harvesting and 
processing materials. Part of the momentum that 
was building around 2008 was lost during the Great 
Recession that affected the national wood products 
markets where these items were sold. 
What types of products were produced?
The four primary types of material included: 1) dirty 
chips (includes bark), 2) clean chips (no bark); 3) round 
wood (5 to 9 inch DBH), and 4) sawtimber (logs greater 
than 9 inch DBH). 
These four primary types of products were then turned 
in to wide variety of secondary products such as 
dimensional lumber, heating pellets, posts and poles, 
log siding, etc.
How much financial assistance in the form of grants 
was received by businesses involved with the 
WMSP?
From 2005 through 2011, over $3.2 million dollars 
were awarded to firms in the White Mountains through 
the Woody Biomass Utilization Grants that were 
administered by the Forest Products Laboratory (FPL). 
Of the $3.2 million awarded, $2.6 million was actually 
spent and was matched by another $4.9 million of in-
kind contributions.
What were the expenditures both locally and 
regionally, by these businesses?
Over the course of the ten-year project, the total annual 
expenditures from all businesses surveyed ranged 
from $1.2 million (2005) to $27.4 million (2010). 
Approximately 70% of which was spent locally.
How many jobs, both direct and indirect, are 
attributed to the Project?
Over the course of the ten-year project, the total number 
of jobs, both direct and indirect, attributed to the project 
in the White Mountains ranged from 161 to 466 per 
year, with an average of 305 (210 direct and 95 indirect) 
jobs provided per year between 2005 and 2014.
  
Socioeconomic
118
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
119

Socioeconomic
120
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
121
business’s employment situation (full-time, part-time, and 
seasonal employees) and residency, sale percentages made 
to local companies in the White Mountains, expenditures in 
ten categories made either locally or outside the region, 
and the portion of their business production is based on 
purchases from Future Forest LLC.11 The surveys were 
expanded in 2009 to include the income generated to the 
local tax base. Surveys were again expanded in 2013 and 
2014 to provide a more comprehensive analysis in the final 
years of the contract.63
Finding Financial Support
Although a long-term, guaranteed supply was critical in 
helping to re-established industry in the White Mountains, 
the reality was that without a significant amount of financial 
help (state and federal grants), many of the businesses 
would not have been able to open and/or grow. From 2005 
through 2011, over $3.2 million dollars was awarded to 
firms in the White Mountains through the Woody Biomass 
Utilization Grants that were administered by the Forest 
Products Laboratory (FPL), a branch of the USFS.12 
According to the Ten-Year Socioeconomic Assessment, 
only $2.6 million was actually spent and an additional $4.9 
million was provided by the grant recipients as in-kind 
match contributions such as labor and service.12 These 
grants helped with everything from start-up costs, and 
equipment acquisition, to developing markets and adding 
value through additional processes such as pressure 
treating poles or other products.12
The Northern Arizona Wood Products Association (NAWPA), 
the Little Colorado River Plateau Resource Conservation & 
Development Area, and the Northland Pioneer College Small 
Business Development Center were three organizations 
that were instrumental in helping businesses throughout 
the White Mountains apply for and receive the large amount 
of grant funding that flowed into the White Mountians.12 This 
small group of organizations assisted local businesses with 
technical support such as proposal development and grant 
reporting, financial projections, diesel fuel tax reduction, 
business development workshops, and much more.12 
The addition of a guaranteed long-term supply and 
the reality of grant money to off-set some of the costs 
associated with utilizing small diameter wood, these factors 
allowed local firms to explore new products and markets.12 
It encouraged businesses to expand their market products, 
making the project overall more successful. As stated by a 
stakeholder involved in the project, and quoted in the WMSP 
Final Ten-Year Socioeconomic Assessment, “without the 
Stewardship Contract as a foundation and with the grant 
money as a seed source, I don’t think the White Mountains’ 
situation would be nearly as robust as it was.”12
Products Galore
Over the course of the ten-year project, the types of 
businesses utilizing wood from the WMSP were highly 
varied, each dependent on specific raw material to produce 
a unique wood product.11,12 The four primary types of 
material included:
• 
Clean chips (produced by removing the bark from a 
log and then chipping it); 
• 
Dirty chips (included bark);
• 
Round wood (usually 5 to 9 inch DBH);
• 
Saw timber (logs greater than 9 inch DBH).11,12
Since the primary focus of the WMSP was to remove small 
diameter trees in order to reduce the threat of catastrophic 
wildfire, the majority of material removed was biomass, 
which came in the form of clean and dirty chips.12 This 
was dramatically different from the old logging days. Now, 
operators were removing the majority of material from the 
forest and the proportion of material types had shifted.12 
On average, operators were removing 2.5 times more 
biomass than logs.12 
Given that small diameter ponderosa pine is not typically the 
easiest type of wood to mill and is known for having more 
natural and mechanical defects than other merchantable 
species, operators had to find the “sweet spot” in order 
to produce a marketable finished product that would allow 
an adequate profit margin.12 To accomplish this, most 
mills focused on rough-cut green timber (meaning it was 
not kiln-dried), sold to make pallets in Mexico.12 Ideally, 
mill operators would have produced “full service” finished 
products that were dried, planed, and graded, such as 
dimensional lumber, because they tend to be higher-valued 
products.12 But, lack of infrastructure such as kilns, coupled 
The MPMB also wanted to be sensitive to proprietary 
information of the contractor, and not dictate how the 
business was run. But they also wanted to ensure that the 
group as a whole was achieving all of their goals, including 
the financial aspects. The Board and ASNFs determined that 
an outside contractor with professional economic expertise, 
conducting annual surveys, would be the most appropriate 
method for acquiring this information.11 In 2005, the ASNFs 
contracted with Lay J. Gibson, Ph.D., University of Arizona, 
to monitor and analyze these economic indicators annually, 
which he did for three years until his retirement. In 2008, 
the ASNFs contracted with McClure Consulting, LLC to 
replicate these analyses on an annual basis through 2012. 
For the final two years (2013-2014), Dr. Yeonsu Kim of 
Northern Arizona University and Anne Mottek Lucas, Mottek 
Consulting, conducted the final economic assessment and 
included additional research on the social aspect of these 
economic question.
From an annual survey of all businesses processing 
material from the WMSP, we learned a significant amount 
about building an economic infrastructure around small-
diameter wood industry. These surveys were focused on the 
Many in the forests products industry were forced to either 
close their doors or go elsewhere for work. By the time the 
NRWG was established just a few short years later and had 
developed enough of a shared vision to get the Blue Ridge 
Demonstration Project off the ground, the White Mountains 
had just a skeleton of a forest products industry left. When 
the paper mill in Snowflake transitioned to 100% recycled 
material,12 many people were left wondering whether the 
once very active and prosperous forest industry in the White 
Mountains was truly a thing of the past. 
Given this history of industry nearly lost, the Multi-
Party Monitoring Board (MPMB) recognized the need 
to understand the economic impacts of the WMSP. They 
developed a suite of metrics that would help them 
understand the direct and indirect economic effects of the 
WMSP on the local and regional wood products industry. 
One of their primary goals was to help rebuild the wood local 
industry, albeit not in the same manner as the historic large 
timber industry, but focused on small diameter material. As 
such, the Contractor was invited to participate in the MPMB 
meetings to build a partnership based on trust, rather than 
working as adversaries.
With the Mexican Spotted Owl court case having shut down 
thinning activities on National Forests throughout Arizona 
and New Mexico, loggers and processors were basically shut 
out of the forest with no access to local raw material.
by Sarah Hurteau & Molly Pitts

Socioeconomic
122
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
123
information was based on a multiplier factor of 1.591, 
meaning that one full-time basic job, on average, supports 
0.591 of another “indirect” employee. As a reminder, the 
multiplier was based on sector-specific forest product 
industries, which was not specific to or empirically based 
on the WMSP. 
The 2006 questionnaires also suggested that there were 
expenditures of $22,611,663 by business for products 
associated with the WMSP.11 Expenditures are defined as 
goods and services such as raw material, hauling costs, 
petroleum products, mill equipment, mill parts, heavy 
equipment, vehicle parts/tires, etc. Approximately 71% of 
these expenditures were local to the White Mountains.11 
Additionally, a calculation of estimated tax revenue was 
generated from Navajo County property tax and used to 
extrapolate to Apache County, with the assumption that 
they were similar. Using that method, the 2006 economic 
monitoring report stated that the WMSP generated 
approximately $310,370 in tax revenue during that year. 
Tax revenue is described as 1) taxes generated from these 
business’s expenses; 2) taxes and revenue derived from 
employees as residents within local communities paying 
property and sales taxes and as families with students 
in the school system; and 3) property and sales taxes 
generated from indirect jobs created by the WMSP using 
industry-specific multipliers.11
Over the course of the contract, these numbers fluctuated 
up and down, depending on markets and other outside 
influences such as the Wallow Fire. In 2010, a total of 14 
firms were interviewed that were involved in the harvesting 
or processing of WMSP materials, providing an estimated 
466 direct and indirect jobs. Expenditures totaled 
$27,438,000 (67.2% local).64
Just as many of the businesses were getting their feet 
back under them, rebuilding their businesses and started 
developing steady markets, the Great Recession took hold. 
Since quite a few of the small diameter materials produced 
were directly tied to the housing market (e.g. treated sill 
plates, garden mulch, molding, log siding, post/poles, 
etc.), the recession had a drastic effect on the WMSP.12
Some construction related businesses experienced a sales 
drop up to 70%.12 For a period of several years during 
the recession, there was much more supply of raw material 
available than demand, due to the overall poor economic 
conditions. 
In 2012, McClure “updated” the multiplier to 1.63 to 
account for the increased population and per capita income 
for the 2011-2012 analysis.65 McClure reported that only 9 
they are located within proximity to the area of treatment.12 
Because of high transportation costs (diesel hit $5 a gallon 
during the contract), reducing haul distances to processing 
facilities was critical, especially when transporting low-
value material such as biomass.12 The Final Ten-Year 
Socioeconomic Assessment identified a 50 to 70 mile haul 
radius from harvesting operations to processing facilities 
where the task could be economically viable.12 Ideally, 
a business that utilizes byproducts from a sawmill would 
be located within close proximity, reducing transportation 
costs.12 
The third critical piece in making sure an industry cluster 
works is markets. While the WMSP was able to encourage 
business growth, markets ultimately dictated the types and 
quantities of products these businesses could sell for a 
profit.12 Specialty products such as vigas (a whole-log post 
or rafter used in southwestern style homes) and mulch had 
a limited market.12 If too many firms produced the same 
or similar products, the market would become saturated 
causing the price to drop to a point where a suitable profit 
margin could not be realized.12  
Economic Trends
Besides getting work done on the ground, the forest 
products industry was also hugely successful in creating 
high paying jobs and generating revenue for two of the 
poorest counties in Arizona (Navajo and Apache). The 
monitoring Board, in addition to the USFS, was keenly 
interested in how the WMSP would affect the economics of 
the region.
The evaluation of the economic impacts of the WMSP was 
focused on localized contributions to the White Mountain 
Region. The study area was defined as the contiguous 
area anchored on the east side by the Spingerville, Eagar, 
and Alpine communities, to the south by Whiteriver, to 
the west by Heber and Overgaard, and to the northwest 
by Snowflake and Taylor.63 The basic questions asked of 
businesses each year remained the same, but was revised 
slightly in 2006, and expanded in 2009, and again in the 
2013/2014 surveys.11,63
In 2006 (the first full year economic and job related 
information was tracked), thirteen different firms that were 
either engaged in the harvesting or the processing of wood 
material from the WMSP were interviewed via questionnaire. 
Data provided by these firms estimated that a total of 
302 direct and indirect jobs were tied to the WMSP.11 This 
with the depressed economic conditions and housing 
market, prevented most businesses from going those extra 
steps.12
Clean chips, largely used to manufacture wood pellets for 
home and commercial heating, were one of the primary 
products produced during the WMSP.12 Between 45 and 
55% of the material removed was in the form of clean 
chips.12 The WMSP also produced a significant amount of 
dirty chips, which are typically used for electrical generation 
and mulch.12 Other products produced during the WMSP 
included pressure treated agriculture posts and poles, 
log siding and railing, molding, decking, custom furniture, 
paneling, and firewood.12 Through the use of grants, 
technical assistance, and marketing support, several 
businesses were able to take their simple products and 
add value (like pressure treating) making their products 
more marketable, and their operations more economically 
sustainable.12 
Business Clusters
Having a cluster of wood product businesses developed as 
a result of the WMSP was one of the keys to its success.12 
A cluster is described as a variety of firms where each 
business specializes in a different niche market and 
develops a unique level of expertise.12 Some businesses 
specialized in logging or power production, while other 
specialized in milling, or manufacturing value-added 
products.12 By having multiple businesses instead of just 
one large business, the costs associated with developing 
the niche markets and the retooling necessary could be 
spread across multiple organizations. The cluster allows for 
less competition for products and services procured by the 
firms participating in the cluster, but also promotes efficient 
use of all parts of the tree.12 As one business owner stated 
during an interview quoted in the Ten-Year Socioeconomic 
Assessment, “we all have to exist; if just one of us is not 
there, the whole thing doesn’t work.” 
Three critical points in making a cluster work is: 1) the 
type of industry; 2) the location of businesses; and 3) 
availability of markets.12 The WMSP had more than 24 
firms participating in the harvesting and processing of 
materials.12 In the end, the only reason it worked was due 
to a diversity of businesses that could utilize different parts 
of the tree.12
Location, location, location.
Financial success for businesses in the cluster comes when 
“Without the Stewardship Contract as a foundation 
and with the grant money as a seed source, I don’t 
think the White Mountains’ situation would be 
nearly as robust as it was.” - Interviewee Quoted in the White 
Mountain Stewardship Project Final Ten-Year Socioeconomic Assessment

Socioeconomic
124
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
125
firms were still engaged in the harvesting and processing 
of WMSP materials and that only 6 had responded to the 
questionnaire in 2012.65 However, according to Future 
Forest, records indicate 19 firms engaged in the harvest 
and process of WMSP materials (Dwayne Walker, personal 
communication). As a point of comparison, 12 firms 
reported in 2011, and 14 in 2010.64 
The conclusion of the 2012 economic monitoring report 
concluded the Wallow Fire in 2011 had greatly affected the 
economics of the local wood products industry.65 McClure 
stated that in the aftermath of the fire, wood supply greatly 
increased, decreasing the demand for materials in 2012.65 
Furthermore, the 56,000-acre Beaver Creek project area 
was lost to the Wallow Fire resulting in a shortage of 
treatment-ready acres in the foreseeable future.65 McClure 
also found that the number of jobs was down, likely due 
to the low repose rate, but when the job numbers were 
compared for only those six firms between 2011 and 2012, 
the numbers were up slightly.65
The 2013-2014 economic assessment sent questionnaires 
to six firm that represented only those companies that 
utilized woody biomass from the WMSP.63 All six firms 
responded to the survey supplying the information for the 
final analyses.63 
Under this most recent analysis “direct impacts” included 
those businesses directly utilizing woody biomass, where as 
those firms that were hired by the contractor for logging or 
transportation services were considered “indirect impacts.” 
63 This is a slight change in how direct and indirect impacts 
were viewed and analyzed from previous years. 
In previous annual economic surveys, questionnaires were 
sent to all businesses that were involved in the harvesting 
aspect of the WMSP, as well as the processing and 
utilization.11,64-65 Future Forest supplied wood to 9 firms in 
2013 and employed 6 additional firms to harvest, transport, 
or process material from the WMSP. In 2014, Future Forest 
supplied wood to 10 firms and employed 7 additional firms 
to harvest, transport, or process material from the WMSP. 
This represents a shift from previous surveys in which firms 
were sent questionnaires. 
Based on the 100% response rate of the six firms surveyed 
directly related to the WMSP, firms had 121 full time 
employees in 2013 and 124 in 2014, with an additional 4 
part-time employees for each year.63 This is a considerable 
drop from the 279 full time employees recorded in 2011 
(n=12), and up slightly from 92 full-time employees in 
2012 (n=6).63 With the low response rate in 2012, and a 
change in evaluation tactics in 2013/2014, it is difficult to 
determine if this drop in employment is real or an artifact 
of sampling.
Using the multiplier factor of 1.63, the 2013-2014 
economic assessment report stated a total of 197 direct 
and indirect jobs in 2013 and 204 in 2014.25 In the past, 
employment and expenditures were calculated as exclusive 
categories, and to remain comparable with previous years, 
the final analyses from 2013 and 2014 were no different. 
Expenditure categories were expanded in 2009 and 
2013/2014 to capture more of the goods and services 
provided within the White Mountain economic study region.63 
Expenditures from businesses in the White Mountain region 
totaled $23,022,345 (62% local) in 2013.63 This figure 
went up in 2014 to $29,196,499 (65% local).63 
The 2013-2014 economic assessment also included the 
calculation of state and local tax revenue generated from 
the WMSP through input-output modeling. This method 
estimates the economic contribution of the WMSP to 
the regional economy. They found that WMSP related 
businesses generated approximately 242 jobs (direct, 
indirect, and induced), over $13 million in wages, $106 
million in economic activities, and $15,736,187 in state and 
local taxes industry-wide in 2013.63 About $2,005,736 of 
the state and local tax revenue in that year was attributed to 
the WMSP alone which represents roughly 13%.63
In 2014, they found that WMSP-related businesses 
generated approximately 292 jobs (direct, indirect, and 
induced), nearly $17 million in wages, $118 million in 
economic activities, and $16,122,323 in state and local 
taxes industry-wide.63 About $1,733,681 of the state and 
local tax revenue in that year was attributed to the WMSP 
alone which represents roughly 11%.63 While that number 
was reduced in 2014, it only captures a portion of the 
calendar year, as the WMSP ended in August. This likely 
accounts for at least some of the decrease in revenue 
during the last year of the contract. 
In the Five Year Report the economic analysis also included 
regional tax revenue calculations. At that time, there were 
only three years of data available (2006-2008). With 
that information, the economist calculated an average 
annual tax revenue of $310,370 for the region.11 They 
also ran a projection of the ten-year total tax revenue as 
$6,782,390.11 These calculations were based on data from 
Navajo County that was extrapolated across the study area. 
At the time of the Five Year Report, it was recommended 
that these calculations be re-analyzed near the end of the 
WMSP when actual data for 2009-2014 was avaiable.11 
However, this analysis was not completed for the remaining 
The Multiplier Effect
05 - 10 Analysis
11 - 14 Analysis
1.59 factor
1.63 factor
Calculations
While several people 
assisted with the 
economic analysis 
through the life 
of the contract, all 
employment impacts 
were calculated based 
on the Economic 
Base Theory, to keep 
results consistent and 
comparable.
$ $ $ 
 $
The multiplier effect is the trickle down revenue that is generated from 
a single source input. Each time the USFS issued a task order under 
the WMSP, those federal dollars were expended to pay for treatments. 
The money in-turn went to the contractors and processors providing 
the wood products goods and services. 
Each time those companies paid wages or other expenditures in the 
local economy, it created revenue for other businesses, multiplying the 
effect of each federal dollar into a greater value in the local economic 
system. 
Through economic analysis of employment, wages, tax revenue, and 
other expenditures, we estimated the factor by which the input grew 
and was realized in the marketplace.
USFS spends 
Federal dollars on 
forest treatments.
Contractors 
and processors 
purchase more 
materials locally, 
and hire more 
employees.
Companies that 
get business from 
them hire more 
employees, who 
in turn purchase 
materials locally.

Socioeconomic
126
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
127
years. We can say that state and local tax revenues over 
the past 2 years directly related to WMSP totaled nearly 
$3.7 million.12 Given that total, the data suggested that the 
projected estimate of $6.7 million was low. 
Employment cross-commuting is another metric that helps 
us understand how the WMSP contributing to the economic 
advantage to each community within the study area. Cross-
commuting is described as the comparison between places 
of employment (location of business) and residency of 
their employees. In the Five Year Report we learned that 
Snowflake/Taylor and Springerville/Eagar areas employed 
more workers that lived outside of those communities. 
These areas were considered to “export” jobs, while 
Heber/Overgaard, Show Low, and Pinetop/Lakeside reaped 
the economic benefit from workers employed outside their 
communities. When this analysis was recalculated for both 
2013 and 2014, the pattern still holds true.63 The majority 
of workers that live in Snowflake/Taylor/Clay Springs also 
work there. Same with the Springerville/Eagar area, and 
new to that list is Show Low.63 However, these communities 
also employ workers that live in surrounding communities 
in the White Mountains, and retain their classification as jobs 
“exporting” communities.63
One of the primary goals of the WMSP was to rebuild 
industry in the White Mountains and create markets that 
could eventually pay for raw product, rather than be 
Wood Products Firms
Over the course of the ten year project, 
a total of 24 firms utilized wood from the 
WMSP treatments. 
Pinetop/Lakeside
Canyon Creek Logging
Future Forest
Show Low
Forest Energy Corp. 
Snowflake/Taylor/Clay Springs
Mountain Top Wood Products 
Moulding Accents
Novo Biopower
Snowflake Power LLC
Snowflake Lumber Moulding 
Renergy
TriStar Logging, Inc. 
Western Moulding
Winner’s Circle Soils, Inc. 
Heber/Overgaard
Cooley Forest Products
Alpine/Nutrioso
R&J Eco-Challenge West, Inc/Holliday 
Timber
Nutrioso Logging 
Reidhead Bros. Lumber
Springeville/Eagar
APC Lumber
Arizona Log & Timberworks
Reidhead Bros. Re-manufacturing plant 
Round Valley Wholesale Lumber
WB Contracting 
Western Renewable Energy
Phoenix
APC Pallets
Southwest Forest Products, Inc. 
Types of Expenditures
Raw Material
Hauling (outsourced)
Electricity
Mill Equipment
Mill Parts
Transport Equipment
Petroleum Products
Vehicle Parts, Tires
Heavy Equipment
Heavy Equipment Parts
Water/Sewer
Gas
Insurance
Major product inputs not listed 
above
Facility Rental
Property Taxes
Repairs
Others
Wood product firms and types of 
expenditures were summarized from the 
2013-2014 White Mountain Stewardship 
Project Economic Assessment.63 
subsidized by the USFS through contracts like the WMSP. 
The economic analyses completed over the ten years of 
the WMSP illustrate the continued growth from a fledgling 
industry to a robust employer. One of the main conclusions 
identified in the 2013-2014 Economic Assessment report 
says “the results reveal the WMSP has played a significant 
role in supporting the industry cluster and diversifying the 
forestry sector, despite the economic recession.” 63 This 
success can be directly tied to the fact that there were a 
variety of different businesses, spread throughout the 
White Mountains, each producing a unique product. This 
allowed industry to demonstrate that when provided with a 
guaranteed, long-term supply, they can be a true partner in 
forest restoration. ◊
Photo by The Nature Conservancy

Socioeconomic
128
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
129
How Many Jobs 
were Created?
The numbers are in. Over the course of the ten year 
project, the WMSP created jobs and tax revenue. 
Businesses spent more than $194 million dollars in 
expenditures, where roughly 70% of expenditures 
were local to the White Mountains Region. 
Over the life of the contract, the USFS invested 
about $50 million dollars in federal money that 
flooded the region and was magnified by local 
business expenditures. The multiplier effect, which 
is predetermined based on industry standards, 
was determined to be 1.59 and adjusted to 1.63 
in 2012. While it is difficult to account for all the 
potential ways the WMSP impacted the local and 
regional economies, the direct and indirect effects 
sure did add up.
Quantitative Economic Results of the WMSP
By the Numbers
Data were summarized from the 2013-
2014 White Mountain Stewardship Project 
Economic Assessment.63 
2005
2006
No of Firms 
13
15
Total Employees*
464
263
Local WMSP        
FTE Only
80.6
90.2
Expenditures          
(in thousands)**
1,212
$      
22,612
$    
% Local
N/A
70.6
State & Local     
Tax Revenue***     
(in thousands)
Derived from Economic Base Theory
Direct FTE (A)
228
217
Basic FTE (B)
152
145
Indirect FTE        
(B * Multiplier)
90
85
Total
318
303
*Includes Full time, part time, and seasonal 
employees reported by WMSP firms surveyed.
**Does not include employee compensation
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
15
13
13
14
12
6
6
6
247
258
231
339
318
113
127
133
128
146
158
253
186
88
51
62
20,026
$    
18,492
$    
17,379
$    
27,438
$    
24,542
$    
16,410
$    
21,197
$    
25,141
$    
52.0
76.3
66.6
66.3
74.3
67.2
76.1
82.5
2,005
$      
1,733
$      
213
246
213
317
308
105
124
128
141
190
157
253
217
88
116
120
83
112
93
150
137
56
73
76
296
359
306
466
445
161
197
204

Overall, the project improved the residents’ quality of 
life in numerous ways across the White Mountains. First 
and foremost, residents witnessed the positive impacts 
treatments had on fire behavior and post-fire effects 
during the Wallow Fire — the fire was stopped before 
burning into many communities and destroying homes. 
According to Forest staff, the project received tremendous 
support from the community because they experienced the 
devastating effects of the Rodeo-Chediski Fire. Community 
members understood treatments were necessary to protect 
their community. The work the White Mountain Apache 
Indian tribe completed on tribal lands assisted with fire 
prevention measures on federal lands. Many respondents 
reported the White Mountain Apaches had been proactive 
in implementing forest treatments that assisted in reducing 
the fire’s advance in both the Rodeo-Chediski and Wallow 
fires. 
The fear of fire caused towns in the White Mountains to 
compete for forest treatments. Harvesting operators said, 
“We had people pulling over telling us what a good job we 
did,” and, “The whole mountain embraced the thinning.” 
One stakeholder said the local socio-political environment 
of the White Mountains community was fairly cohesive and, 
in his opinion, not as fragmented as other communities 
across the Southwest. The culture allowed for scaling up 
and working cooperatively on a relatively large project 
like the WMSP. The stakeholder added that the support 
from community members was “almost universal, kind of 
dramatic in its own right.” He added, “[I] can’t imagine an 
effort that was more supported.” 
Although local residents were behind the project, many 
respondents stated seasonal residents, such as those living 
in Pinetop/Lakeside, were not as supportive. Since they 
did not live there year-round, they did not have first-hand 
experience of devastating wildfire impacts. They also had 
a different perception of what the forest should look like 
and preferred what they were used to seeing, which was 
untreated, dense forests.  
Public opinion evolved to support forest treatments as 
the project progressed, but business owners felt that 
continuous positive messaging was critical. A business 
owner said, “[We] have to have a unified message so the 
public understands the value of the forests.”  He added 
it was important for the public to also understand the 
overall value the forest provides in the form of ecosystem 
services (e.g. scenic beauty, watershed and wildlife values, 
recreational opportunities, etc.). A business leader 
agreed and said, “The benefits that come from forests are 
unbelievable, because they are renewable resource.”
Overall Impact/Successes of the White 
Mountains Stewardship Project 
When asked about long lasting successes of the WMSP, 
individual business, forest product Industry and overarching 
legacies of the project were identified. 
The WMSP maintained generational family 
businesses. One of the most significant legacies of 
the WMSP was the ability to maintain generational family 
businesses. Several of these operators were fifth and 
sixth generation loggers. Many of these business owners 
recounted their family’s involvement in the timber industry 
and how the WMSP provided the opportunity to continue the 
family legacy. The WMSP proved that these firms were critical 
to the industries’ culture and their value and contributions 
should be preserved. One business owner said, “We can’t 
stop, it’s in our blood; we just keep trying and trying.” 
Reestablished forest products industry. The WMSP 
revitalized a forest products industry that had once thrived 
in this region. The USFS, interest groups, and citizens 
understood appropriately scaled industry was necessary 
for project success and past perceptions of industry as a 
contributor to degraded wildlife habitat and forest health 
slowly waned. The WMSP also demonstrated that industry 
could process small diameter wood at a relatively large 
scale. Given the challenges that industry faced, they were 
able to conceptualize and produce added value products 
and build an efficient and effective forest industry cluster 
model. Forest staff said the most remarkable success was 
the stewardship project itself. “It was a huge bold step into 
the unknown and all the folks that were involved in that 
creation deserve a huge pat on the back.” 
Acres treated and the impact and benefit of forest 
health. Many business owners said that the greatest benefit 
and most laudable success of the project is witnessing first-
hand the treated forest. The positive impact to forest health, 
watershed resiliency, and wildlife habitat was a huge benefit 
and a substantial savings and investment for national, 
state, and local governments as well as private utilities (e.g. 
Arizona Public Service and Salt River Project) that provide 
water and power to residents across the state. A CEO said, 
“A lot of people deserve an award for that.” A Forest staff 
member said, “It is probably one of the most outstanding 
achievements of the White Mountain Stewardship Contract 
… that work was accomplished.”  
Cooperation amongst USFS, stakeholders and 
citizens. Considering the social/political climate prior to 
the WMSP, including the MSO controversy that according 
to one interviewee “choked and killed the industry,” many 
highlighted the project’s successful collaboration. In the 
contract’s ten years, there were no legal challenges or 
appeals to slow or stop treatments. 
The Forest, contractor, and interest groups decided to 
focus on the majority of issues that they agreed upon, 
rather than a few issues where there was disagreement. 
A representative of a conservation group interviewed 
said it became clear the contractor and interest groups 
held similar objectives. They said, “We moved from being 
a watchdog group to a true cooperator and collaborator.” 
The environmental groups in the White Mountains also 
kept outside interest groups (e.g. Wild Earth Guardians) 
disengaged because they had trust that conservation 
groups directly involved would represent their interests. 
A Forest line officer understood the need to foster 
cooperation because, they said, this was not “business 
as usual.” The line officer understood compromise was 
needed and said, “[It is time to] let them feel victory.” 
Another representative from the Forest said, “The 6,000 
to 8,000 acres that were accomplished every year were 
actually done, so I give big kudos to everybody involved 
— the Forest Service, the environmental community and 
Social Effects
by Anne Mottek Lucas and Dr. Yeon Su Kim
The following article was taken in its entirety from the White Mountain 
Stewardship Project Final Ten-Year Socioeconomic Assessment. The 
complete report can be found on the ERI Library webpage. 
Socioeconomic
130
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
131

Photo by IBiS
2016
Wallow Fire 
Area Near 
Nutrioso, 
Arizona
The Wallow Fire burned 
hot over the ridge near 
Highway 180 between 
Nutrioso and Alpine, 
Arizona. The WMSP 
treatments were an 
important difference to 
those communities. 
the contractor — in having a relationship there that allowed that 
work to be done.” This level of cooperation was a formidable 
shift in values and had a profound effect on the success of the 
WMSP. The collaborative relationships serve as a model for a 
similar community-based project.
Community impact was profound. There was a notable 
economic impact from the WMSP on the small, rural communities 
scattered throughout the White Mountains. Similarly, a 
stakeholder said, the WMSP created a “significant” amount of 
community pride. After the Rodeo-Chediski Fire, the community 
faced problems head-on and developed solutions to prevent 
another severe wildfire. A Forest staff member said the success 
of treatments in the Wallow Fire “galvanized” community 
members, and the “finger-pointing” from the Rodeo-Chediski Fire 
faded. “When the Wallow fire came over the hill, it worked and 
what a great feeling,” a stakeholder said. “That success is pretty 
amazing,” He added that the Wallow Fire marked a new era of 
cooperation and collaboration by “pivoting on the future, rather 
than dwelling on old battles.” The focus also turned to sustaining 
forest health for future generations. 
Reduced wildfire risk and saved communities: Wallow 
and San Juan Fire evidence. Evidence from the Wallow (June 
2011) and San Juan (June 2014) fires showed that fire risk was 
reduced and forest treatments worked. In the absence of a 
guaranteed supply and an industry to process the raw material, 
most respondents believed the fires would have had devastating 
impacts. Business owners said that during the Wallow Fire, towns 
and lives in the eastern portion of the White Mountains — 
Alpine, Greer, Nutrioso, and Eagar — were saved because of the 
treatments. One business owner said, “That was inspirational to 
us.” A stakeholder said evidence of treatment effectiveness from 
the Wallow and San Juan fires assisted in paving the way toward 
large-scale landscape restoration. 
Set the stage for the upcoming largest stewardship 
contract in the nation — The Four Forest Restoration 
Initiative (4FRI). The WMSP, the longest and largest restoration 
project in the nation at the time, had a high profile and allowed 
for innovation for an economically effective model to emerge.  
The project stimulated private industry advances and was what 
one business leader called “a stepping stone to [the next largest 
stewardship contract in the nation], the 4FRI.” Many said that in 
the absence of the WMSP, the 4FRI project would not be a reality 
today.    ◊
Socioeconomic
132
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
133

The once-thriving east-central Arizona wood products 
industry came to a grinding halt in the early 1990s because 
of ongoing legal and social conflicts over federal forest 
management. In 2002, the largest fire in Arizona’s history 
scorched a record number of acres in the area, burning 
many homes and infrastructure. The growing wildfire threat 
and a decline in forest health shifted land management 
policy from gridlock toward collaboration in an effort to 
restore the forests to more natural conditions. Under 
U.S. Forest Service leadership and with a newly formed 
partnership of the Natural Resources Working Group, one 
of the first projects to attempt this was the White Mountain 
Stewardship Project (WMSP). 
The White Mountain Stewardship Contract began on August 
10, 2004 with a goal to treat 150,000 acres of degraded 
federal forests over 10 years. At the time, it was the largest 
and longest running stewardship contract in the country. 
The project focused treatments in wildland-urban interface 
areas throughout the White Mountain region in the Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forest. The WMSP was referred to as 
“the experiment” because no other national forest had 
attempted a large 10-year stewardship contract. For the 
first time in this region, it brought together environmental 
groups, industry leaders, scientists, and community 
members to restore forest health through active forest 
management, protect communities, and re-tool and 
revitalize a local wood products industry. 
One of the project’s biggest hurdles was to develop a 
new, competitive marketplace for the harvesting and 
processing of small-diameter trees/biomass and to provide 
markets for low-value restoration by-products through 
a single contractor model. One of the project’s greatest 
achievements is that implementation occurred in the 
absence of legal challenges — acres were treated, and 
the treatments were successful in protecting communities 
during Arizona’s largest wildfire to date, the 2011 Wallow 
Fire (538,049 acres). This report examines the project’s 
10-year lifespan through a socioeconomic lens and presents 
findings on the project’s impact to forest management, the 
forest product industry, and social and economic conditions 
in the White Mountain region. 
Some project challenges detailed in the report include:
• Stewardship contracting barriers.
• The single contractor model.
• A limited supply of raw material.
• The economic downturn of the Great Recession.
• The Wallow Fire impacts. 
Many project successes are also captured, such as:
• Revitalized forest products industry in the White 
Mountains.
• Generational family businesses maintained.
• Benefits to forest health and ecosystem services.
• Meaningful collaboration among U.S. Forest Service, 
stakeholders, and citizens.
• Wildfire risk reduction and increased community 
protection.
• Paved the way for the nation’s next largest 
collaborative restoration project, the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative, or 4FRI.
U.S. Forest Service personnel, stakeholders, and business 
owners closely involved with the WMSP were interviewed 
for this report. Quotes and summarized information from 
interviews, combined with quantitative economic data, tell 
the story of how an industry, an agency, and a regional 
community shifted from stagnation to stewardship. The 
report explores the economic challenges and opportunities 
faced by industry, and documents lessons learned that 
point to improvements to the stewardship-industry model. 
White Mountain Stewardship 
Project Final Ten-Year 
Socioeconomic Assessment 
Executive Summary
by Anne Mottek Lucas and 
Dr. Yeon-Su Kim
The full version of this report is available at: http://library.eri.nau.edu
Socioeconomic
134
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
135

The objectives of the WMSP were simple: remove the glut of small-
diameter trees from overstocked ponderosa pine forests, reduce 
fire risks to communities, and begin to rebuild economic viability 
of the local timber industry. But, when a project lasts far longer 
than most people are engaged, and the results are more nuanced 
than acres thinned or jobs created, how does one determine if a 
project has been successful?
In a world where life moves quickly and most actions are judged 
in minutes rather than years, and certainly not at the time scale at 
which our forests grow, how do you define success for a ten-year 
project that has experienced significant twists and turns along the 
way? As it turns out, this is not an easy question to answer for 
many of the stakeholders involved, and the meaning of success 
can vary drastically depending on a person’s role within a project. 
When adding in those twists and turns on top of that, the answer 
gets even more complicated. 
In order to find out whether the WMSP was a success, we reached 
out to many individuals involved with the project to hear their 
perspective. Regardless of whom we asked, whether it was Rob 
Davis with Forest Energy, Sue Sitko with the Nature Conservancy, 
or Jim Zornes with the USFS, the simple answer was a resounding 
“yes.” In fact, statements such as “incredibly successful” (Todd 
Schulke with the Center for Biological Diversity) and “absolutely” 
(Dwayne Walker with Future Forest) were common descriptions 
of the ten-year project throughout the various conversations we 
had with stakeholders. The core sentiment from the group was 
highlighted by Randy Nicoll of Arizona Log and Timberworks, 
when he said “if the WMSP had never happened, I wouldn’t be in 
business today.”
Looking In
From the Outside 
Defining Success May Be a 
Matter of Perspective
by Molly Pitts & Sarah Hurteau
Photo by US Forest Service 4FRI
Socioeconomic
136
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
137

At the most basic level, most agreed the WMSP was 
successful in that it achieved what it was set up to do: rebuild 
industry, create jobs, and take the first steps toward large-
scale forest restoration work done on the ground to reduce 
fuels and prevent wildfires. As stated by Ed Collins (USFS 
District Ranger), “as an experiment, it was very successful. 
It helped refine ways of treating small diameter ponderosa 
pine.” Ed further explained that through a combination 
of local, state, and federal support, improvements were 
made to the industry. These improvements allowed industry 
to work more effectively, even during the recession, by 
producing a variety of products. Amy Waltz (Ecological 
Restoration Institute) further supported this claim with 
her explanation that WMSP was “successful on a big level 
being that it was the first national landscape level ten-year 
contract.” Also, “the Wallow fire put the WMSP treatments 
to the test, and the treatments appeared to really improved 
firefighter access.” But, as we have learned, nothing is that 
simple. 
Moving beyond the basic objectives, WMSP was also 
successful in building collaboration and further refining the 
social license that had been already begun to develop. Social 
license is a term used to describe a baseline of common 
agreement on the overall concepts of forest management 
treatments. Many felt that the previous work from the Natural 
Resources Working Group was instrumental to the WMSP, 
in that they were able to build on previous understanding 
and agreement through visiting the treatments on the 
ground and adaptively refine this social license with respect 
for forest management. This refined agreement on how 
forest treatments would be implemented, allowed the NEPA 
process to occur more efficiently and providing “an on-
going experiment” in which other USFS regions could visit 
and see the resulting work. Ed Collins explains, “because 
of the social license, partners from other areas came to 
visit the WMSP as it progressed, because it became a very 
good place to physically see specific treatments on the 
ground.” While nobody kept track of the exact number of 
field trips that were held over the course of the contract to 
show visitors the work being accomplished, those closely 
involved with the contract agreed it was a lot! Additionally, 
according to Sue Sitko, this social license has gone beyond 
WMSP, “becoming a keystone bridge to the work that is 
being done by 4FRI.”
Given the overwhelming agreed-upon success of the WMSP 
on the surface, it was important to ask those involved to 
consider the “issues” with the contract. To truly learn from 
this grand experiment in landscape scale restoration, we 
must reflect on how it could have been improved. While 
answers varied on what the “issues were, three consistent 
themes were common among those asked:
• 
Changes in Forest Service leadership, which equated 
to a change in priorities
• 
The Wallow Fire
• 
East/West Dichotomy
Change in Leadership
While those involved with the WMSP expected issues to 
arise in terms of building capacity to get work done on 
the ground and finding ways to utilize small diameter 
pine, nobody expected a change in leadership to be a 
major issue. Yet in the end, it became one of the most 
challenging aspects. Over the course of the ten-year 
contract, the ASNFs had a total of five different permanent 
Forest Supervisors, as well as a handful of acting Forest 
Supervisors. In addition, the Regional Forester, the position 
ultimately in charge of setting the priorities for the region, 
changed 3 times during the ten years. While turnover is 
going to occur in almost every job, the turnover in both 
Forest and Regional leadership during the WMSP seemed 
to have direct consequences. The contractor, Future Forest, 
felt that the turnover in leadership led to a dramatic shift 
from a true partnership to simply a contract, with a totally 
different agenda. Others felt the “revolving door” of 
personnel meant we (those at the local level) had to re-
justify the whole contract with each new person. This was 
especially true when the main contracting officer out of the 
regional office changed. One person interviewed made the 
comment that “personality is so important” and due to the 
changes in leadership and agendas, by the end, the WMSP 
was only managed to its literal contract terms, rather than 
to the loftier goals expressed in the initial phase by the 
forest supervisors initially involved.   
Wallow Fire 
The Rodeo-Chediski Fire was a catastrophic mega-fire 
that brought many people to the table to overcome their 
differences in opinion for the sake of sustaining the 
surrounding forests. Provided one of the main objectives 
of WMSP was to get the necessary forest restoration work 
done on the ground to reduce fuels and prevent another 
catastrophic wildfire, it was hopeful that all the necessary 
treatments would be completed before the next mega-fire 
hit. Sadly, this wasn’t the case. Many felt the Wallow Fire, 
while proving the WMSP treatments were successful in saving 
several towns, communities, businesses, and improving 
safety for firefighters, derailed the remaining years of the 
contract. Not only did the fire burn up a large majority of 
acres going through the NEPA approval process that were 
critical to the contract, it also strapped forest personnel due 
to the shift in the priority of managing the aftermath of the 
538,000-acre wildfire. Rather than chase salvage (burned 
logs), which few businesses were actually able to utilize, 
there is strong agreement retrospectively that the priority 
should have been on starting a new project area through 
the NEPA process on the remaining green acres. To be most 
effective, the new NEPA area should have included acres 
that were located centrally in the forest, which would have 
continued to build up local industry. Instead, the Wallow Fire 
became a turning point in which the priorities clearly shifted 
from WMSP to 4FRI. Currently, all of the NEPA projects that 
are in the works for the Apache-Sitgreaves is primarily 
located on the West side of the forest, which does little to 
help those existing businesses located on the East side. 
East/West Dichotomy
Since getting more acres treated across the landscape was 
a strong desire of those involved with the WMSP, the initial 
concept of 4FRI was met with enthusiasm by those involved 
with the contract. It was the understanding of those 
involved that the initial funding of 4FRI would not affect the 
support for WMSP. Instead, Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Program (CFLRP) funding gained by the USFS 
would be used to complete the largest NEPA acreage 
clearance attempted in the nation and propel landscape 
level treatments across multiple forests, including the 
Apache-Sitgreaves. Many were cautiously optimistic that 
4FRI could continue to build industry on what became 
known as the East side (i.e., ASNFs) and expand to the West 
side (i.e., Coconino, Kaibab, and Tonto National Forests). 
But, as 4FRI progressed, the divide between the “East” and 
“West” became palpable. Many people involved with the 
WMSP felt that the project was no longer supported and 
had been replaced by 4FRI as the regional priority. Some 
people felt that after the Wallow Fire burned, the WMSP was 
essentially dead. However, the forest continued to offer and 
meet contract requirements with projects on the Sitgreaves 
side of the forest.
Unfortunately, the 4FRI ended up becoming what many 
consider a competitor to WMSP, causing tension throughout 
the two groups. One person interviewed stated he felt it 
was “a violation of the promise when funding was pulled 
over to 4FRI.” Business owners such as Rob Davis, Dwayne 
Walker, and Randy Nicoll feel that too much emphasis has 
been put on 4FRI, without considering the impacts to the 
White Mountain businesses. They were especially frustrated 
with the fact that even though the White Mountains 
side of 4FRI had the capacity, knowledge, and ability to 
perform restoration, the first planning efforts of 4FRI was 
concentrated around Flagstaff, Williams, and Tusayan, where 
capacity was severely limited. Everyone understands that 
there are limited funds, and lots of work still to be done to 
restore our forests, no matter what forest in Arizona you are 
referring. Whether this shift in support is real or perceived, 
it affected the communication, trust, and partnerships that 
had been developed over the past 15 or more years.
The Future of Success 
Even though the contract has ended, many felt that in order 
to determine final success, one must consider the current 
and ongoing situation. According to the business owners 
involved in the WMSP, the flow of wood following the end 
of the contract had been rocky at best, and non-existent 
at worst. As the end of the WMSP approached, it became 
apparent that 4FRI would not be online in time as everyone 
had hoped and there would not be a seamless transition 
from WMSP to 4FRI. Therefore, there would need to be a 
plan to “fill the gap” between the end of wood supplies 
from WMSP and the supply from 4FRI. After the contract 
ended, sporadic sales have not kept pace with business 
needs. Some businesses based on the Apache side of 
the forest have been unable to fill a significant number of 
orders due to the lack of sustained wood supply. Other 
business owners feel the new timber sales are all geared 
to the biomass plant. 
So many people worked so hard to gain the progress this 
report has highlighted, and yet, it could all be lost again. 
At the end of the day, how is success truly determined? 
There is absolutely no question that without the WMSP, the 
communities of Alpine, Nutrioso, Eagar, and Greer would 
have faced tremendous losses and much greater impacts 
during the Wallow Fire than they did, including potential 
human loss. Many of us feel, this makes the entire project 
a success. 
That being said, this project has not been without its fair 
share of hurdles and hiccups. Many people involved in the 
WMSP have expressed that it is their hope that our lessons 
learned will be applied. And if the industry we all worked 
so hard to rebuild dies a slow, painful death due to lack of 
wood, has the WMSP truly been a success? Success is only 
success if it is sustained. 
The next big challenge is figuring out how to develop a 
state-wide wood products industry that can support both 
East and West side businesses. When 4FRI ends and there 
is no more CFLRP money, can we sustain the industry 
that has developed on the West side as a result? And it is 
important that the development of the West side industry 
isn’t at the expense of the East side industry that so 
recently flourished. One thing is clear, the future of success 
for forests in the state of Arizona has to include these two 
factions overcoming their differences to work together for 
a sustained industry across all National Forest units. The 
WMSP shows that it can be done, and that is a valuable 
lesson learned. ◊
Socioeconomic
138
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
139

Photos by The Nature Conservancy
Socioeconomic
140
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
141

Trying to pinpoint the “beginning” of the WMSP in itself is 
a challenge. Clearly the contract started when it was signed 
in 2004, but there was a long history that came before, 
leading to that very moment. 
We said it in the Five Year Report, but we think it’s worth 
repeating. What began as an attempt to change the potential 
fire behavior around communities evolved into the largest 
and longest national example of how various interests, 
businesses, communities, and the federal government 
can work together to improve local economies, enhance 
wildlife habitat, and restore forest health using a variety of 
treatments and adjusting as necessary. 
Early into its path, the WMSP was charting its own course. 
The first long-term stewardship contract in the nation. 
A contract with an unwritten agreement of a diameter 
cap. A contract predicated on expanding the scale and 
pace of forest treatments with only a handful of industry 
professionals to make it happen. And a dichotomy created 
when the majority of funds in the Region are shuffled to one 
forest to essentially conduct a very expensive experiment.
The first five years were a time of trust building, 
experimentation, learning, and really moving past buzz words 
and theoretic ideas into on-the-ground accomplishments. 
During those years the progress started to become visible 
and as the acres (and tons of biomass removed) started 
to add up, it seemed that everyone sighed a little breath 
of relief. But the work wasn’t done. At the end of those 
first five years, the evaluation of all of the monitoring data 
collected really set boundaries for the next five years of 
the WMSP. 
The Five Year Report provided a summary of data at critical 
time. There was still enough time in the contract to adjust 
the trajectories that weren’t heading in the right direction 
and to solidify those that were. There were many, many 
lessons learned, and even more recommendations. Some 
of these recommendations were heeded, others went by 
the wayside. 
The Wallow and San Juan Fires were both human-caused, 
and both burned through WMSP treatments. These fires 
represented both a defeat and a victory. The defeat in the 
form of 56,000 acres of NEPA-approved project areas in 
the pipeline for the remaining years of the contract lost to 
wildfire, and a victory in that the treatments did as they what 
they were expected to do (shift fire behavior from crown 
fires to surface fires). This had a major impact on the final 
years of the contract. So many of the ASNFs staff were 
focused (for good reason) on the Wallow Fire aftermath and 
rehabilitation that some of the WMSP specific monitoring 
data collection just didn’t get done. Many of the monitoring 
efforts towards the end of the contract were also limited 
by funding. And it bears mentioning that the USFS staff 
had a significant turn-over shortly after the Wallow Fire. In 
addition to the five forest supervisors and three regional 
foresters that came through during the ten-year project, 
many district level staff also came and went. 
Even with all of those “basic” challenges, the WMSP still 
managed to work together, utilize an adaptive management 
process, and the ASNFs, Future Forest, and countless 
stakeholders were able to successfully complete forest 
treatment on over 70,000 acres, and rebuild a failing wood 
products industry. 
The Board has commissioned this report because they want 
all the details to be available to other groups so they might 
learn from the WMSP successes and failures. This report is 
meant to be a constructive, yet critical review of all aspects 
of the WMSP and the data collected, in order to facilitate 
overall forest health, reduction in fire hazards, and improve 
the quality of life for communities in future forest projects. 
To that end, some of the lessons learned from the WMSP 
are outlined below.
Building the Foundation
Collaboration, a common buzzword used in natural 
resource management, is defined as “a process where 
groups with different interests come together to address 
management issues across a specified geographic region.” 
Typically, the goal of collaboration is “to build and promote 
a collective vision for how to manage the land.” While the 
concept of collaboration sounds easy on paper, the reality 
in collaboration is quite challenging, but can also be very 
rewarding. 
As we look back at the WMSP and the lessons learned, it 
is important to remember that developing a cooperative 
spirit took time, and did not materialize immediately. Early 
collaboration through the NRWG, which started seven years 
prior to the inception of the WMSP set the stage for the 
WMSP to be successful. 
Building upon the work of the NRWG, the pilot Blue Ridge 
Demonstration Project provided a work-space to test 
concepts and work through ideas and disagreements 
in a collaborative and constructive way. It fundamentally 
changed the roles of “government,” “industry,” and 
“environmentalist” from an adversarial battle to one of 
common goals. Through time, each learned how to effectively 
communicate with each other and how to reach agreement, 
even on potentially contentious issues (e.g. harvesting 
trees larger than 16 inches DBH). In the case of the WMSP, 
harvesting larger trees was debated on a project-by-project 
basis. The process assured all parties were informed on 
the front end, which alleviated potential lawsuits and delays 
through the NEPA process, and continued to build trust on 
both sides. 
That trust also extended to the relationship between the 
USFS and the contractor. Because stewardship contracting 
was a new tool, and a template for building a ten-year 
contract simply did not exist, a lot of guesswork and 
risk went into hammering out the details of the contract. 
But, as time went on, it became evident that the original 
requirements and methods for determining payment would 
need to be changed. Thus, the biggest lesson learned from 
the WMSP in terms of contracting was the absolute need 
for flexibility. Whether determining the level of subsidy, or 
evaluating the need for a fuel price increase, the contract 
must be flexible enough to deal with changing conditions. 
During the ten years of the WMSP, the price of fuel almost 
doubled, a major recession occurred, and another major 
wildfire devastated the project area, as the Wallow Fire 
burned more than 538,000 acres. 
In order to assure changes made to the contract were 
based on facts, rather than emotions, it was important 
Sum Total
Sum Total
Sum Total
Bringing together all components of the 
White Mountain Stewardship Project
Evaluation
142
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
143

Evaluation
144
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
145
to collect and track critical information that allowed for 
an informed evaluation protocol. Only through tracking 
the volume removed per acre in the first months of the 
contact were officials on the ASNFs able to determine that 
the original concept of paying by the acre was not sufficient, 
and a change to paying by the ton was necessary. This was 
the first instance of adaptive management in the WMSP. 
The concept of adaptive management is not a new idea in 
natural resource management; but similar to collaboration, 
what sounds good on paper is not always that easy to 
implement. Because there were no written guides or road 
maps available for the WMSP, the ASNFs, the Contractor, 
and stakeholders were forced to use adaptive management 
as the project progressed. Another great example is 
when the MPMB went back and visited treatments that 
were accomplished during the BRDP and the first year of 
the WMSP, they decided they didn’t care for the spacing 
prescription that was implemented. Through discussions 
with the Contractor and the USFS silviculturists, they were 
able to modify the treatments to look more natural, while 
still achieving the same objectives. These types of visits and 
discussions took place regularly, with changes made each 
year. 
Ultimately, solid collaboration at a smaller scale (BRDP) 
proved that restoration could occur on a relatively large 
scale (WMSP). By starting small and building in scale, pace, 
and capacity, it provided an opportunity for parties with 
varying perspectives to work through “tough questions” 
and develop trust. This trust, which has developed over 
about 20 years, has built the foundation for the even larger 
landscape goals of the 4FRI. With the contract now having 
been finished for almost two years, one of the biggest 
lessons learned with regards to contracting is to have a 
transition plan in place for when the contract expires. Over 
$130 million in industry capital investment (equipment and 
infrastructure); $50 million in federal funds; and well over 
$7 million in grants and financial assistance is currently 
at risk because businesses in the White Mountains do not 
have access to local raw material. The concept of rolling 
straight from the WMSP into 4FRI has not materialized for 
businesses in the White Mountains. 
Monitoring
There are a couple of things that are inherent in the 
long-term stewardship contracting mechanism, one is 
the Multi-Party Monitoring Board (MPMB), and the other 
in monitoring of Administrative, Social, Ecological, and 
Economic impacts of the contract. The MPMB naturally grew 
out of the NRWG, and while they were focused on broader 
issues in forest management even outside of the ASNFs, the 
MPMB was strictly engaged with all things “White Mountain 
Stew.” Given the success with the BRDP treatments, the 
MPMB stakeholders at least had a little experience and 
knew where to start. 
The group put their heads together and came up with a list 
(about 30 pages long) of questions--a wish list of what they 
would like to learn about project treatments. Everything 
they could think to ask about forest treatments. While there 
were many questions about the ecological aspects of the 
WMSP, many stakeholders were outside their comfort zone 
on the administrative, social, or economic aspects. The 
MPMB reached out to scientists, experts, consultants, and 
contractors to gain advice, expertise, and perspective. In 
the end they prioritized as many questions as possible in 
the first round, even though some seemed pretty basic. 
With roughly 3% off-the-top of each task order ear-marked 
to fund monitoring, they were off to the races. The MPMB 
found that:
• 
Funding is critical. No National Forest ever has enough 
money for monitoring, so to have an annual budget 
dedicated to monitoring was a small miracle. 
• 
Go after outside money for additional research. The 
bird surveys on the WMSP were funded each year by 
state and federal grants, which helped immensely to 
have consistent data.
• 
Partner with outside organizations. The MPMB 
partnered with Arizona Game and Fish, The Nature 
Conservancy, Northern Arizona University, Northland 
Pioneer 
College, 
McClure 
Consulting, 
Mottek 
Consulting, and many others to complete multiple 
research projects and gain the expertise and people-
power necessary to address specific questions.
• 
One of the main take-away messages from monitoring 
is to set answerable questions. Get advice from 
topic experts and statisticians to make sure you are 
collecting robust data.
• 
It was also critical to boil down the 30 pages of 
monitoring ideas into meaningful questions that the 
group has the capacity and funding to explore.
• 
Set quantitative objectives, that way you known when, 
or if, you have achieved them. 
• 
Select a lead person from the agency and a lead 
person from the monitoring board to coordinate 
monitoring efforts. Sometimes it was hard to know 
who was doing what, because so many people are 
involved. 
• 
Stay involved as the information is passed through 
the agency to the district-level people who will collect 
the monitoring data. Because agency personnel have 
full-time jobs doing other than WMSP monitoring, it 
sometimes falls through the cracks, or they don’t even 
know they are supposed to be collecting data on said 
topic.
• 
Centralized database for all Project information. This 
was particularly a problem for BMP monitoring and 
administrative monitoring, and at times for ecological 
monitoring. 
• 
Save money for periodic data analysis and reporting. 
The funding for the Five Year Report, this report, and 
several interim reports fell squarely on the shoulders 
of the ASNFs. And if they had extra money lying 
around, we wouldn’t need a stewardship contract.
• 
Prepare for the unexpected. Save a little pot of money 
to address questions that arise from unexpected 
events, like following a wildfire for example.
• 
Be prepared to act quickly. It is important to be 
methodical when planning a long-term, larger-scale 
monitoring program, but there are always exceptions. 
Being prepared to take advantage of these situations 
takes foresight and planning. 
• 
Know the end is coming. Have a sunset plan for any 
final years of data collection, and any post-contract 
data collection so that if there is information you really 
want, you have the time line, agreement, and funding 
to go get it.
Administrative Monitoring
Some of the general administrative lessons learned have 
been shared in previous sections. The following lessons 
learned represent the ideas of many people, some 
presented in other original reports and are summarized 
here:
• 
Have a project “Champion.” Elaine Zieroth, former 
forest supervisor had a vision for the ASNFs and 
was willing to take the risks necessary to make those 
changes. Without Ms. Zieroth the WMSP would not 
have happened. 
• 
Clearly state project goals and objectives. It is critical 
that everyone involved clearly understands what is 
trying to be accomplished. 
• 
Form a strong partnership with industry. The ability to 
work day-in and day-out with the same people builds 
trust, understanding, elevates competencies, and 
aligns goals for mutual benefit.
• 
Understand what the contractor is capable of. In 
some situations, logistically the contractor couldn’t 
achieve what the USFS was planning, and without 
dialog between the two parties, that would have been 
a problem. 
• 
Likewise, it was necessary for industry to fully 
understand how the USFS operates in terms of 
structure, funding cycles, project planning, contracting 
mechanisms, politics, and national budgets to be able 
to work within and adapt to this sometimes ridged 
structure.
• 
Form a strong partnership with the Contracting Officer 
(CO). In the case of the WMSP the CO was in another 
state, which lead to some administrative hiccups. It 
would be best if the USFS provide local COs and CORs, 
with on-the-ground experience. This could significantly 
improve the contract administration.
• 
Have a transition plan. For project continuity, it is 
important to have a transition plan for key contract 
personnel at the regional, forest, and district levels. 
This will save time and money in the long run.
• 
Always track internal USFS administrative costs on 
an annual basis. This helped the WMSP in the first 6 
months. 
• 
Allow for the regular review (maybe every 2 to 3 
years) of the contract details, so that any adjustments 
can be evaluated, discussed, and made if consensus 
if found. 
• 
Heed prior recommendations. In the Five Year report, 
the MPMB suggest more DxP and DxD use, and this 
proved to further reduce costs for the Agency. It wasn’t 
appropriate for every project area, but was helpful in 
the right locations.
• 
One prior recommendation that went unfulfilled was the 
analysis of business niches to expand wood product 
markets. This one was tricky, because no one wanted 
to tell the owners how to run their businesses. One 
option is the financial assistance grants and technical 
support that was provided to WMSP businesses, which 
proved useful in the long run.
• 
Have a plan for what happens after the contract. The 
wood products industry in the White Mountains in 
currently flailing because due to a lack of a long-term 
plan to keep industry viable outside the terms of the 
stewardship contract. And it would not hurt to have a 
back-up plan either.
• 
The USFS needs to be prepared for continuing supply 
after the 10-year contract is up. An investment in a 

Evaluation
146    WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
147
10-year contract is MUCH more than the 10 years.
Ecological Monitoring
This is where the rubber really met the road with adaptive 
management concepts. We learned so much from the 
ecological monitoring data collected. We learned that when 
stakeholders first get involved with implementation, they 
are conservative, and cut fewer trees leading to the need 
for re-entry much sooner than anticipated. We also learned 
that we can reduce the hazard of catastrophic wildfire 
with treatments, as was illustrated by the Wallow and San 
Juan Fires. Over the course of the ten years, the MPMB 
collected overstory and understory vegetation, stand 
structure and tree spacing, soils, watershed health, range, 
wildlife (species-specific and general), fire effects and fire 
modeling, and habitat connectivity data. It all boils down to 
this: when you all have a common goal, you can find a way to 
make it work. The WMSP reduced fire risk by implementing 
WUI treatments, while simultaneously meeting several other 
objectives. Here are a few other take home messages from 
our experiences with ecologic monitoring:
• 
Field visits are a must! It is imperative that stakeholders 
get in the field to see the pre-treatment conditions, 
understand how the operations work logistically, and 
learn from post-treatment outcomes. 
• 
Set quantitative objectives. The MPMB did not do this 
until they were faced with answering the question of 
whether the WMSP was successful. Many felt that it 
was, but without stated quantitative objectives, no one 
could say for sure. 
• 
Revisit your monitoring plan regularly to keep it up to 
date and focused on the information the stakeholder 
group really wants to know.
• 
Funding is critical. The WMSP had roughly 3% of each 
task order earmarked for monitoring. This funding 
also covered administrative, social monitoring, and all 
proved important in the end.
• 
Start the monitoring effort with the broad scale 
questions focused on assisting and informing the 
adaptive management cycle.
• 
Select no more than one or two metrics to track 
through the life of the contract. Monitoring costs 
add up quickly and can very easily spread the money 
allocation and people power too thin.
• 
Partner with outside organizations. This will leverage 
the expertise outside the stakeholder group.
• 
Pursue outside funding. Additional funding from 
grants and other contracts helped address several 
specific research questions that the MPMB couldn’t 
fund, but benefited from the information.
• 
Evaluate any special status species needs. Are there 
species within the project areas that need additional 
planning. The WMSP utilized experts from Universities 
and Arizona Game and Fish Department to augment 
their monitoring needs with pure research. They also 
utilized wildlife habitat modeling to address concerns 
with connectivity on a dynamic landscape. 
• 
Develop the tools and expertise needed to answer the 
monitoring questions. Find partners or universities 
with the ability to provide analysis help when needed.
• 
Build trust through collaboration and the use of “best 
available science.” University researchers can be a 
source of unbiased information that can inform and 
evaluate the impacts of forest restoration.
• 
Use the adaptive management cycle. It took a couple 
of years before the WMSP Board, USFS, contractors, 
and broader stakeholder group found their rhythm, 
but once they did, it really worked for them.
• 
Overlap the monitoring targets as much as possible 
with data already being collected. If necessary, 
modify collection protocols and data sheets to help 
reduce impediments. Time is often a barrier. Through 
streamlining data collection, you can get more for less.
• 
Use freely available data, where possible. More and 
more spatial information is becoming available on-
line. Use what you can, and supplement with field data 
where needed
Economic Monitoring
As stated in the Five Year Report, one of the overarching 
goals of the WMSP was to use a long-term contract 
mechanism to facilitate private business investment in 
utilizing public land resources, with the end result being an 
ecologically and economically sustainable private enterprise 
network that achieves multiple benefits on public land.11 
This goal was evaluated on an annual basis through regular 
economic assessments to track the progress. At that mid-
point analysis, we learned that the contract had large 
administrative costs and economic benefits. With the number 
of acres increasing while annual payments remained stable, 
was touted as a sign of increased efficiency, and that some 
costs had transferred from the public sector to the private 
sector. The White Mountains as a region was also benefiting 
economically from the local expenditures of businesses 
associated with the WMSP. And because these expenditures 
far outpaced the public investment from USFS task order 
payment, it was considered a success. 
The final economic analyses of 2013-2014 were a 
continuation of that pattern. The WMSP continued to create 
jobs, tax revenue, and expenditures that exceeded USFS 
investments. Even through the Great Recession and another 
massive wildfire, the contract and stability of businesses in 
the White Mountains were able to weather these storms. 
Although both affected the WMSP economic benefits in 
different ways. 
Looking back at the recommendations from the Five Year 
Report, there was one idea that didn’t get carried through 
to the end--an evaluation on the return-on-investment 
(ROI) at the end of the WMSP to understand the broader 
economic factors at work. While an extensive economic 
assessment was completed (Ten Year Socioeconomic 
Assessment),12 this analysis wasn’t part of that evaluation. 
Here is what we learned in general from the annual 
economic analyses completed by external partners:
• 
The WMSP stimulated local economies and provided 
tangible community benefits.
• 
The average annual jobs associated with the WMSP 
were 305 (210 direct and 95 indirect).
• 
The WMSP was one of the largest economic 
redevelopment programs in the White Mountains 
Region.
• 
On average, the annual expenditures by businesses 
associated with the WMSP was more than $19 million. 
About 70% of which was within the White Mountains 
region.
• 
The multiplier factor is a valuable tool to estimate the 
number of indirect jobs associated with the financial 
influx of cash in the region, but it is predetermined 
by industry standards, and not specific to the WMSP.
• 
Input-Output modeling can provide a more detailed 
and accurate look at the economic balance sheet of 
a project.
• 
The annual progress reports provided by contracted 
economists were invaluable. 
• 
Economic monitoring is recommended to be one of 
the items that is completed each year.
• 
Remain consistent in your analysis through time. 
The WMSP had the benefit of economists who held 
the majority of items analyzed and methodologies 
constant, making the data comparable. There were a 
few changes made through time that added a nuanced 
complexity to the interpretation.
The final Ten Year Socioeconomic Assessment also provided 
an extensive list of considerations and recommendations.26 
The following statements were taken from the Ten Year 
Socioeconomic Assessment report and represent only a 
small portion of those presented in the full report:
• 
Consider forming a cooperative organization, or “co-
op,” managed by a neutral intermediary organization 
that provides access to all types of raw material at 
competitive prices. A co-op would meet industry needs 
and be a critical link to current USFS supply. This 
would provide consistency in the supply chain so both 
industry and the agency can execute business/work 
plans that accurately reflect future industry demand 
and supply of raw material from federal lands. 
• 
Initiate overlapping contracts with various contractors 
to minimize the interruption of a consistent, accurately 
forecasted wood supply stream to businesses 
throughout the region.
• 
Evaluate contractor performance (e.g. conduct 
surveys/interviews with businesses) that would inform 
contractor selection of future contracts. 
• 
Conduct a needs assessment to ensure a thriving 
forest industry cluster and to better understand gaps 
in infrastructure, supply, and production. Results 
can guide industry, the agency, and stakeholders 
to improve outcomes in fire risk reduction/forest 
restoration objectives and industry’s viability. 
• 
Develop and support programs (e.g. payment 
for ecosystem services, grants) that incentivizes 
establishment, growth, and expansion of a broad-
based forest industry cluster. 
• 
Conduct research and development for small diameter 
ponderosa pine value-added products.
• 
Create opportunities to incentivize novel projects and 
innovations with grants and other financial assistance. 
• 
Create a multijurisdictional statewide strategy that 
includes operational costs savings and efficiencies for 
the forest product industry by
1) Strategically placing infrastructure to minimize 
haul distances from harvesting sites to processing 
facilities.  
2) Sharing and strategically locating kilns and 
scales. 
3) Adopting agency policies and operating 
procedures that conform to current technology and 
equipment.
4) Developing a forest product industry workforce.
i. Fund field-related on-the-job training.

Evaluation
148
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
149
ii. Eliminate costly marking of trees by training 
harvesting operators in conducting operations 
based on designation by description (DxD). 
5) Create tax incentives for the forest product 
industry.
6) Create policies that ensure state resources 
(small diameter ponderosa pine) are used within 
the state (e.g. round guardrail posts manufactured 
for highways in Arizona). 
Social Monitoring
When the WMSP was initiated in 2004, it was close on 
the heels of the Rodeo-Chediski Fire, and wildfire threats 
where still very real in residents’ minds. About that time 
Navajo County conducted a survey, that was expanded by 
the Board to Apache County, which indicated most residents 
understood the need for forest thinning and managed fire. 
The questionnaire was already in place in Navajo County by 
the time the WMSP contract was signed and the survey did 
not include any questions specific to the project. However, 
the Board felt that it provided a glimpse of the general 
publics’ perceptions regarding forest restoration. 
To build on that understanding, the Board launched a 
website that was regularly updated with Project information; 
they worked with the USFS to publicize meetings, field trips, 
and accomplishments through press releases; and they 
established an education and outreach campaign that 
included roadway signs and newspaper articles in addition 
to newspaper inserts for approximately 9,500 subscribers 
in the White Mountains area. 
It was recommended in the Five Year Report that a 
social assessment be developed to survey residents and 
compare to the baseline surveys at the end of the WMSP. 
They had also recommended that a question be added 
that specifically addressed the WMSP. Unfortunately, this 
type of social survey was not completed. However, an 
extensive socioeconomic research project (White Mountain 
Stewardship Ten Year Socioeconomic Assessment) was 
conducted to gain the perspective of USFS personnel, 
industry and stakeholders. This report has approximately 
14 pages of lessons learned and considerations spanning 
the contract and contractual process, collaboration, types 
of industry evaluating the cluster model, engaging the NEPA 
process, and finding grants and other financial assistance. 
The following statements are recommendations from the 
Ten Year Socioeconomic Assessment that pertain directly 
to outreach and education and are applicable to the social 
aspect of the WMSP monitoring: 
• 
Develop and conduct statewide campaigns with a 
unified message to include: 
1) Support for fire mitigation and overall forest 
health initiatives through active forest management; 
2) The value of forest treatments that maintain and 
enhance various ecosystem services (e.g. wildlife, 
recreation, watershed protection/improvements, 
etc.); 
3) Gear campaigns toward the public (especially 
focused on seasonal residents and land owners), 
decision makers, and municipal, state, and 
congressional leaders.12
Closing Thoughts
Although the objectives of the WMSP were relatively simple-
-remove small-diameter trees from overstocked ponderosa 
pine forests, reduce fire risk to communities, and begin to 
rebuild economic viability of the local timber industry--the 
implementation, accomplishments, and the lessons learned 
proved to be very complex. 
In the end, it was only through patience, hard work, and 
a bit of stubbornness in all parties involved that the real 
results of getting acres treated, achieving fire mitigation, 
and rebuilding a local wood products industry were 
accomplished. ◊
The White Mountain Stewardship Project, and this final report that summarizes the data analyses, lessons 
learned, and recommendations herein are the result of an army of people who contributed their time 
expertise, data, and text to make this as comprehensive as possible. Many thanks to all of those who 
contributed to the Project. Please see the acknowledgment section and references page to see the full 
list of contributing authors and editors.

150
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
151
Appendices
1 Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of southwestern ponderosa pine forests 
since white settlement. Ecological Monographs 30:129-164. 
2 Covington, W.W., and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern ponderosa pine forest structure: changes since 
Euro-American settlement. Journal of Forestry 92:39-47. 
3 Covington, W.W. 2003. The evolutionary and historical context. Pp: 26-47. In P. Friederici (Editor). Ecological 
restoration of Southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island Press, USA.
4 Sánchez Meador, A.J., M.M. Moore, J.D. Baker, and P.F. Parysow. 2009. 108 years of change in spatial pattern 
following selective harvest of a Pinus ponderosa stand in northern Arizona, USA. Journal of Vegetation 
Science 20:79-90.
5 Covington, W.W., P.Z. Fulé, M.M. Moore, S.C. Hart, T.E. Kolb, J.N. Mast, S.S. Sackett, and M.R. Wagner. 1997. 
Restoring ecosystem health in ponderosa pine forests of the southwest. Journal of Forestry 95:23-29.
6 Allen, C.D., M. Savage, D.A. Falk, K.F. Suckling, T.W. Swetnam, T. Schulke, P.B. Stacey, P. Morgan, M. Hoffman, 
and J.T. Klingel. 2002. Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystem: a broad perspective. 
Ecological Applications 12:1418-1433.
7 Harrington, M.G., and S.S. Sackett. 1988. Conference: Effects f fire in management of Southwestern natural 
resources. Tucson, Arizona, November 14-17.
8 Swetnam, T.W., and J.L. Betancourt. 1998. Mesoscale disturbance and ecological response to decadal 
climate variable in the American Southwest. Journal of Climate 11: 3128-3147.
9 Westerling, A. L., H. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam. 2006. Warming and Earlier Spring Increases 
Western US Forest Wildfire Activity, Science 313: 940-943. 
10 Hurteau, M.D., and M.L. Brooks. 2011. Short- and long-term effects of fire on carbon in US dry temperate 
forest systems. BioScience 61:139-146.
11 Sitko, S., and S. Hurteau. 2010. Evaluating the impacts of the forest treatments: The first five years of the 
White Mountains Stewardship Project. The Nature Conservancy. Phoenix, Arizona.
12 Mottek Lucas, A., and Y.S. Kim. 2016. White Mountain Stewardship Project Ten Year Socioeconomic 
Assessment. Mottek Consulting and Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff, Arizona.
13 Chancellor, W., J. Crouse, J. Springer, and A. Waltz. 2013. White Mountain Stewardship Program monitoring 
report. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona.
14 Chancellor, W., J. Crouse, D. Huffman, J. Springer, and A. Waltz. 2014. White Mountain Stewardship Program 
monitoring report. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona.
15 Chancellor, W., J. Crouse, J. Springer, and A. Waltz. 2015. White Mountain Stewardship Program monitoring 
report. Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona.
Literature Cited
4FRI  
 
Four Forest Restoration Initiative
AGFD 
 
Arizona Game and Fish Department
ASNFs  
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests
BAER 
 
Burned Area Emergency Response
BARC 
 
Burnes Area Reflectance Classification
DBH 
 
Diameter at Breast Height
DxD 
 
Designation by Description
DxP 
 
Designation by Prescription
ERI 
 
Ecological Restoration Institute
FRCC 
 
Fire Regime Condition Class
IBiS 
 
Integrated Biological Solutions, LLC
MPMB  
Multi-Party Monitoring Board
NEPA 
 
National Environmental Policy Act
PNVT 
 
Potential Natural Vegetation Type
RFP 
 
Request for Proposals
TNC 
 
The Nature Conservancy
TPA 
 
Trees per Acre
U.S. 
 
United States
USFS 
 
United States Forest Service 
USFWS  
United States Fish and Wildlife Service
WMSP  
White Mountains Stewardship Project
WUI 
 
Wildland Urban Interface
Acronyms

152
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
153
Appendices
monitoring studies to evaluate the success of ecological restoration on wildlife. Restoration Ecology 9:293-
303.
30 Wiens, J.A. 1989. Spatial scaling in ecology. Functional Ecology 3:385-397.
31 Kotliar, N.B. and Wiens, J.A. 1990. Multiple scales of patchiness and patch structure: a hierarchical 
framework for the study of heterogeneity. Oikos 59:253-260.
32 Battin, J. and T.D. Sisk 2003. Assessing landscape-level influences of forest restoration on animal 
populations. In: Friederici, P. and Covington, W.W. (eds.), Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa 
pine forests, Island Press, Covelo, CA. pp. 175-190.
33 Girvetz E.H. and S.E. Greco 2007. How to define a patch: a spatial model for hierarchically delineating 
organism-specific habitat patches. Landscape Ecology 22:1131-1142.
34 Girvetz E.H. and S.E. Greco 2009. Multi-scale predictive habitat suitability modeling based on hierarchically 
delineated patches: an example for yellow-billed cuckoos nesting in riparian forests, California, USA. Landscape 
Ecology 24:1315-1329.
35 Patton, D.R. 1984. A model to evaluate Abert squirrel habitat in uneven-aged ponderosa pine. Wildlife 
Society Bulletin 12:408-414.
36 Dodd, N.L., J.S. States, and S.S. Rosenstock.  2003.  Tassel-eared squirrel population, habitat condition, 
and dietary relationships in north-central Arizona.  The Journal of Wildlife Management 67:622-633.
37 Dodd, N.L., R.E. Schweinsburg, and S. Boe.  2006.  Landscape-scale forest habitat relationships to 
tassel-eared squirrel populations: implications for ponderosa pine forest restoration.  Restoration Ecology 
14:537-547.
38 Prather, J.W., N.L. Dodd, B.G. Dickson, H.M. Hampton, Y. Xu, E.N. Aumack, and T.D. Sisk. 2006.  Landscape 
models to predict the influence of forest structure on tassel-eared squirrel populations.  The Journal of 
Wildlife Management 70:723-731.
39 Burt, W.H. and R.P. Grossenheider. 1976. A Field Guide to the Mammals, 3rd edn, Houghton Mifflin 
Company, Boston.
40 States, J.S. and W.S. Gaud. 1997. Ecology of hypogeous fungi associated with ponderosa pine. I. Patterns 
of distribution and sporocarp production in some Arizona forests. Mycologia 89:712-721.
41 Boon, A.K., D. Réale, and S. Boutin.  2008.  Personality, habitat use, and their consequences for survival 
in North American red squirrels Tamiasciurus hudsonicus.  Oikos 117:1321-1328.
42 Vahle, J.R. and D.R. Patton.  1983.  Red squirrel cover requirements in Arizona mixed conifer forests.  
Journal of Forestry 81:14-15.
16 Stoddard, M.S. 2011. Compilation of historical forest structural characteristic across the Colorado Plateau. 
Ecological Restoration Institute Fact Sheet. www.eri.nau.edu.
17 McGarigal, K., S.A. Cushman, and E. Ene. 2012. FRAGSTATS v4: Spatial Pattern Analysis Program for 
Categorical and Continuous Maps. Computer software program produced by the authors at the University 
of Massachusetts, Amherst. Available at the following web site: http://www.umass.edu/landeco/research/
fragstats/fragstats.html.
18 Germaine , H.L., and S.S. Germaine. 2002. Forest restoration treatment effects on the nest success of 
western bluebirds (Sialia Mexicana). Restoration Ecology 10:362-367.
19 Wightman, C.S., and S.S. Germaine. 2006. Forest stand characteristics altered by restoration affect 
western bluebird habitat quality. Restoration Ecology 14:653-661. 
20 Dickson, B.G., B.R. Noon, C.H. Flather, S. Jentsch, and W.M. Block. 2009. Quantifying the multi-scale 
response of avifauna to prescribed fire experiments in the southwestern United States. Ecological Applications 
19:608-621.
21 Hurteau, S.R., T.D. Sisk, W.M. Block, and B.G. Dickson. 2008. Fuel-reduction treatment effects on avian 
community structure and diversity. Journal of Wildlife Management 72:1168-1174.
22 Bristow, K., L.E. Harding, S.R. Boe, M. Crabb, and E.S. Rubin. 2015. Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments 
on Black Bear Habitat Use at the White Mountains Wildland-Urban Interface. Arizona Game and Fish 
Department, Phoenix, Arizona.
23 Page-Dumroese, Deborah S., Ann M. Abbott and Thomas M. Forest. 2009. Soil Disturbance Monitoring 
Protocol Volume I: Rapid Assessment, United States Department of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service Gen. 
Tech. Report WO-82a.
24 USDA, Forest Service. 1999. Region 3 Supplement No. 2509.18-99-1. Forest Service Handbook 2509.18: 
Soil Management Handbook.
25 USDA, Forest Service. 2012. National Best Management Practices for Water Quality Management on 
National Forest System Lands; Volume 1: National Core BMP Technical Guide. FS-990a. Washington DC. pp 
177. 
26 USDA, Forest Service. 2013. Technical Guidance of Soil Quality in the Southwestern Region (R3, Letter 
dated January 16, 2013).
27 Zenner, E.K. and Hibbs, D.E. 2000. A new method for modeling the heterogeneity of forest structure. 
Forest Ecology and Man-agement 129:75-87.
28 Rosenzweig, M.L. 1981. A theory of habitat selection. Ecology 62:327-335.
29 Block, W.M., A.B. Franklin, J.P. Ward Jr., J.L. Ganey and G.C. White. 2001. Design and implementation of 
Literature Cited Continued

Appendices
154
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
155
43 Goheen, J.R. and R.K. Swihart.  2005.  Resource selection and predation of North American red squirrels 
in deciduous forest fragments.  Journal of Mammalogy 86:22-28.
44 Leonard, K.M. and J.L. Koprowski.  2009.  A comparison of habitat use and demography of red squirrels 
at the southern edge of their range.  The American Midland Naturalist 162:125-138.
45 Hedwall, S.J., C.L. Chambers, and S.S. Rosenstock.  2006.  Red squirrel use of dwarf mistletoe-induced 
witches’ brooms in Douglas-fir.  The Journal of Wildlife Management 74:1142-1147.
46 Hedwall, S.J. and R.L. Mathiasen.  2006.  Wildlife use of Douglas-fir dwarf mistletoe witches’ brooms in the 
Southwest.  The Western North American Naturalist 66:450-455.
47 Larsen, K.W. and S. Boutin.  1994.  Movements, survival, and settlement of red squirrel (Tamiasciurus 
hudsonicus) offspring.  Ecology 75:214-223.
48 Ockenfels, R.A., C.L. Ticer, A. Alexander, J.A. Wennerlund, P.A. Hurley, and J.L Bright. 1996. Statewide 
evaluation of pronghorn habitat in Arizona. Arizona Game and Fish Department, Final Report, Phoenix, 
Arizona.
49 McKinney, T., D.E. Brown, and L. Allison. 2008. Winter precipitation and recruitment of pronghorn in 
Arizona. The Southwest-ern Naturalist 53:319-325.
50 Okenfels, R.A., L.W. Luedeker, L.M. Monroe, and S.R.Boe. 2002. A pronghorn metapopulation in northern 
Arizona. Proceedings of the Biennial Pronghorn Workshop 20:42-59.
51 Waddel, R.B., R.A. Okenfels, and S. Boe. 2005. Management recommendations for pronghorn at Camp 
Navajo, Arizona Army National Guard, northern Arizona. Arizona Game and Fish Department, Final Report, 
Phoenix, Arizona.
52 Wakeling, B.F. 1991.  Population and nesting characteristics of Merriam’s turkey along the Mogollon rim, 
Arizona.  Arizona Game and Fish Department, Technical Report No. 7. 
53 Lehman, C.P., M.A. Rumble, L.D. Flake, and D.J. Thompson. 2008. Merriam’s turkey nest survival and 
factors affecting nest predation by mammals. The Journal of Wildlife Management 72:1765-1774.
54 Hoffman, R.W., H.G. Shaw, M.A. Rumble, B.F. Wakeling, C.M. Mollohan, S.D. Schemnitz, R. Engel-Wilson, and 
D.A. Hengel. 1993. Management guidelines for Merriam’s wild turkeys. USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
forest and Range Experi-ment Station, Division Report No. 18.
55 Mollohan, C.M., D.R. Patton, and B.F. Wakeling. 1995. Habitat selection and use by Merriam’s turkey in 
north central Arizona. Arizona Game and Fish Department, Research Branch Technical Report 9.
56 Spears, B.L., M.C. Wallace, W.B. Ballard, R.S. Phillips, D.P. Holdstock, J.H. Brunjes, R. Applegate, M.S. 
Miller, and P.S. Gipson. 2007. Habitat use and survival of preflight wild turkey broods. The Journal of Wildlife 
Management 71:69-81.
57 Scott, V.E. and E.L. Boeker. 1975. Ecology of Merriam’s wild turkey on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. 
Proceedings of the National Wild Turkey Symposium 3:141-158.
58 Phillips, F. 1980. A basic guide to roost site management for Merriam’s turkeys. Wildlife Digest 12:1-6.
59 Boeker, E.L. and V.E. Scott. 1969. Roost tree characteristics for Merriam’s turkey. The Journal of Wildlife 
Management 33:121-124.
60 Lutz, R.S. and J.A. Crawford. 1987. Seasonal use of roost sites by Merriam’s wild turkey hens and hen-
poult flocks in Oregon. Northwest Science 61:174-178.
61 Wakeling, B.F. and T.D. Rogers.  1994.  Characteristics of piñon-juniper habitats selected for feeding by 
wintering Merriam’s turkey. In: Shaw, D.W., Aldon, E.F. and LoSapio, C. (tech. cords.) Desired future conditions 
for piñon-juniper ecosystems. USFS General Technical Report, RM-258, pp. 74-79. 
62 Wakeling, B.F. 1997.  Winter movement patterns of Merriam’s turkeys in north-central Arizona.  Proceedings 
of the Third Biennial Conference of Research on the Colorado Plateau 3:93-100.
63 Kim, Y.S., and A. Mottek Lucas. 2015. 2013-2014 White Mountain stewardship Project Economic 
Assessment. Ecological restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona. 
64 McClure, J. 2011. 2010 White Mountain Stewardship Project Economic Assessment. McClure Consulting, 
LLC.
65 McClure, J. 2013. 2012 White Mountain Stewardship Project Economic Assessment. McClure Consulting, 
LLC.
Literature Cited Continued

Appendices
156
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
157
WMSP Revised Monitoring 
Questions, 2011
QUESTION
1.  Are patches of dense forests connected?
2.  Are patches of open forests or pine savannahs connected?
3.  Are remaining trees aggregated or randomly dispersed across project area?
4.  Did forest treatments increase structural heterogeneity across the forest?
1.  Did forest treatments significantly reduce tree density?
2.  Did forest treatments significantly alter canopy cover?
3.  Did forest treatments significantly alter snag density?
4.  What is the life span of the treatments implemented?
5.  Can desired forest structure be maintained with prescribed fire?
1.  Did forest treatments significantly reduce fire risk?
2.  Did forest treatments significantly reduce crown bulk density?
3.  Did forest treatments significantly alter height to live crown?
4.  Did forest treatments significantly reduce fuel loading?
1.  Did forest treatments significantly alter community composition?
2.  Did forest treatments significantly alter understory percent cover?
1.  Did forest treatments significantly alter avian composition?
2.  Did forest treatments significantly alter avian density?
3.  Did treatments move the avian diversity index towards desired future conditions?
4.  Did species-specific treatments significantly alter prey of the northern goshawk?
5.  Did treatments increase nesting success of northern goshawk known nests?
1.  Did forest treatments significantly alter bear movement?
2.  Do bears avoid or prefer treated areas?
3.  Do bears use treatments in equal proportion to available habitat?
4.  Is bear movement correlated with topographic features or forest attributes?
1.  Did forest treatments significantly alter squirrel abundance?
2.  Do squirrels persist in treated areas?
3.  Did forest treatments affect squirrel habitat and habitat connectivity?
1.  Did forest treatments significantly alter soil characteristics?
1.  Did contractors adhere to Best Management Practices?
2.  Do BMPs result in maintenance of water quality standards and guidelines?
DATA GATHERING METHOD(S)
Patch Morph Connectivity Analysis
Patch Morph Connectivity Analysis
Ripley’s K Spatial Test
Ripley’s K Spatial Test
Stand Exams/Live Tree Variable Plot
Stand Exams/CC Transect
Stand Exams/Snag Fixed Plot
Stand Exams/FVS
Stand Exams/FVS/FlamMap
Stand Exams/FlamMap
Stand Exams
Stand Exams
Brown’s Transects/FlamMap?
Daubenmire Plots
Daubenmire Plots
Songbird Surveys/DISTANCE
Songbird Surveys/DISTANCE
Songbird Surveys/ EstimateS
Prey Studies (density index? Mark-recapture?)
Nest monitoring
Black Bear Spatial Ecology
Black Bear Spatial Ecology
Black Bear Spatial Ecology
Black Bear Spatial Ecology
Squirrel Surveys
Squirrel Surveys
Vegetation Plots, Patch Morph Connectivity Analysis 
Soil Compaction Study
Best Management Practices Compliance Monitoring
Best Management Practices Compliance Monitoring
PARTY RESPONSIBLE
MPMB / TNC / Experts
MPMB / TNC / Experts
MPMB / TNC / Experts
MPMB / TNC / Experts
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS
USFS/MPMB/TNC/Experts
AGFD
USFS
AGFD
AGFD
AGFD
AGFD
USFS
USFS
USFS/MPMB/TNC/Expert
USFS
USFS
USFS
CATEGORY
Forest Landscape
Stand Structure
Fire Behavior
Understory Community
Avian Community
Black Bears
Tassel-eared Squirrels
Soil Compaction
Best Management 
Practices (BMPs)

Appendices
158
WHITE MOUNTAINS STEWARDSHIP PROJECT FINAL REPORT
159
White Mountains Stewardship 
Project Treatment Map
