 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Ecological and Social Implications of Employing Diameter Caps at a  
Collaborative Forest Restoration Project Near Flagstaff, Arizona 
By Mike Stoddard, Senior Research Specialist 
Introduction 
The issue of implementing diameter caps continues to permeate collaborative land management discussions and 
treatment decisions on public lands throughout the western United States. In the Southwest, this typically means 
not cutting ponderosa pine trees 16 inches or greater in diameter. Proponents of diameter caps believe that size 
limits are ecologically and socially necessary in order to protect “old growth” trees from being harvested during 
restoration thinning operations. Opponents typically view diameter caps as arbitrary and, at times, restrictive in 
terms of reducing excess fuels and reaching forest restoration goals, including emulating natural or historic forest 
structural and functional patterns. Collaborative efforts have be-
come an influential process to deal with such controversial land 
management issues. Collaborative partnerships can provide stake-
holders a place to discuss ecological and social concerns and, in 
many cases, increase the chance of successful project implementa-
tion. 
 
A Flagstaff-based collaboration, known as the Greater Flagstaff 
Forest Partnership (GFFP), emerged in 1996 in response to unprec-
edented, stand-replacing fires that scorched tens of thousands of 
nearby forest. The premise of the collaboration was to identify ap-
proaches to forest management that could reduce the hazard of 
stand-replacing wildfires and restore resilient forest conditions on 
U.S. Forest Service-managed lands at the Fort Valley Experimental 
Forest. Members of the collaborative developed a project to test 
alternative restoration treatments. The first phase of the project did 
not employ a diameter cap. This sparked a controversial public debate between restoration proponents and sever-
al environmental groups about the validity and appropriateness of restoration efforts and the proposed restoration 
treatments for Phase II. Ultimately, the collaborative group agreed to implement a 16-inch diameter cap as part of 
the thinning prescription for the second phase of what became known as the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration 
Project.  
 
The Ecological Restoration Institute monitored the ecological results of the project (Phase I) and also studied the 
social aspects of the collaborative effort. This fact sheets presents some of the key findings of that effort to under-
stand the ecological and social results of the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project.  
Key Questions and Findings 
1.  Are there differences in forest structure between capped and non-capped restoration treatments? 
 
Comparisons of forest structure (basal area and tree density) between conditions simulated with a diameter cap 
and stands without a diameter cap had mixed results. The data suggested that site history played a role in how 
a diameter cap would affect the stand structure in terms of tree density and tree size. For example, in a recently 
logged ponderosa pine stand with large, but not particularly old, trees, the 16-inch diameter cap increased both 
     Fact Sheet: Ecological and Social Implications of Diameter Caps   
 
 
  
 
June 2015 
Old-growth forest in the Fort Valley Experimental 
Forest. Photo by Don Normandin 

the tree density (8%) and basal area (13%) by limiting the number of trees available for thinning (Figure 1). The 
16-inch diameter cap had little effect on forest structure where there were numerous small-diameter trees grow-
ing in a matrix of large trees like the conditions found in the Fort Valley Experimental Forest when logging 
ceased in the early 1900s.  
 
2.  Were the fears and concerns of the environmental groups 
that proposed the diameter cap, in fact, warranted? 
 
Results from the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project 
(Phase I, no diameter cap) indicated a 16-inch diameter cap was 
not necessary to protect old-growth (those established before 
1877) ponderosa pine trees, suggesting distinctive old growth 
characteristics outweighed a 16-inch diameter cap in terms of 
protecting old pine trees (less than 0.2 trees per acre were cut, or 
approximately 2% across the entire experiment). 
 
3. What were the perceptions of the collaborative group to 
implementing a diameter cap? 
 
In response to one of several survey questions, 62% of inter-
viewees agreed that the implementation of a diameter cap 
helped avoid litigation. However, in response to a separate ques-
tion, 75% believed that the idea of implementing a diameter cap 
created factions within the collaborative (Figure 2). The stake-
holder surveys indicated that while the discussion of diameter caps caused tension within the collaborative 
group, the overall goal of forest restoration was not compromised.  
 
Conclusions and Management Implications 
The outcome of this study strongly suggests that if a decision is made to 
implement diameter caps, this approach should not be used as a “one-size
-fits-all” solution. Diameter caps have varying results on forest structure, 
depending on initial conditions. Finally, while decisions to implement 
diameter caps are ultimately derived from the values and attitudes of 
stakeholders, the results of this study indicated that the fears and con-
cerns of environmental groups and other concerned citizens over the loss 
of old growth trees were not realized at Fort Valley, where approximate-
ly 2% of old growth was lost to thinning. 
 
Recognizing a need to move beyond the historical debate and move for-
ward with landscape-scale restoration, the Four Forests Restoration Initi-
ative (4FRI) now underway in Arizona has taken a different and more 
nuanced approach to large-tree retention. That stakeholder group pro-
duced a “Large-Tree Retention Strategy” that urges protecting trees 
greater than 16 inches in diameter while allowing the removal of larger 
diameter trees in situations where their removal is deemed necessary and 
acceptable to achieve ecological goals and reduce the risk of unnatural 
fire. As was the case with the Fort Valley Ecosystem Restoration Project, the success of any forestry-related 
collaboration is partially due to addressing existing fears and concerns, and, ultimately, finding a workable 
balance between social and ecological perspectives. 
 
 
 
Contact 
Mike Stoddard, Mike.Stoddard@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
Figure 1. Tree density following alternative restora-
tion treatment shows no difference between capped 
and non-capped stands in the experimental forest, 
whereas in a recently logged forest there was an 8% 
increase in tree density in a capped stand compared 
to a non-capped stand. 
Figure 2. Three-quarters of the re-
spondents agreed that implementation of 
a diameter cap did not avoid factions, 
but instead revealed factions within the 
collaborative group. 
This Fact Sheet summarizes information from the following publication: 
Egan, D., M. Stoddard, and A. Formanack. 2015. Ecological and social implications of employing diameter caps at a collaborative 
forest restoration project near Flagstaff, Arizona, USA. Forest Policy and Economics, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.forpol.2014.11.013 
