SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
 
 
 
Southwest Ecological Restoration 
Institutes (SWERI) 
 
Five Year Evaluation Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by Meridian Institute,the US Institute for Environmental Conflict 
Resolution, and the USDA Forest Service Southwestern Region 
October 13, 2009 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
 
 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................... 1 
 
Preface ...................................................................................................................................... 3 
Background ............................................................................................................................ 3 
Five Year Evaluation Requirement ......................................................................................... 4 
Evaluation Methodology ...................................................................................................... 445 
Context ................................................................................................................................... 6 
New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute Assessment ....................................... 8 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act ...................................................................................... 8 
Achievement of Purposes of the Act ......................................................................................10 
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute Assessment ....................................................................13 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act .....................................................................................13 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act ................................................................................15 
Arizona Ecological Restoration Institute Assessment ................................................................18 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act .....................................................................................18 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act ................................................................................20 
SWERI System Assessment and Recommendations ................................................................23 
System Assessment ..............................................................................................................23 
Affected Entity Recommendations that Apply to the System ..................................................24 
Appendix A – Institute Evaluation Reports ................................................................................27 
NMFWRI Report ....................................................................................................................28 
CFRI Report ..........................................................................................................................35 
ERI Report ............................................................................................................................41 
Appendix B - Interviewees ........................................................................................................52 
 
Appendix C - Summary of Affected Entity Interviews.................................................................53 
Summary of Interviews with Affected Entities with Respect to NMFWRI ................................53 
Summary of Interviews with Affected Entities with Respect to CFRI ......................................58 
Summary of Interviews with Respect to ERI ..........................................................................63 
Appendix D - Acronyms ............................................................................................................69 
 
Appendix E – State Government Charter ..................................................................................71 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
1 
 
Executive Summary 
 
The Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act (P.L. 108-317, 16 U.S.C. 6701(2004)) 
(the “Act”) establishes a unique program of applied research and service via three university-
based restoration Institutes.  The primary purpose of the Institutes is to develop, translate, and 
provide the best available science to land managers, practitioners and stakeholders designing 
and implementing forest restoration and hazardous fuel reduction treatments. 
Section 7(a) of the Act requires a detailed evaluation of the programs and activities of each 
Institute five years after the date of enactment of the Act (October 5, 2004), and every five years 
thereafter to:  
1) ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that the research, communication tools, and 
information transfer activities of each Institute are sufficient to achieve the purposes of 
this Act, including— 
a) implementing active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape 
level; 
b) reducing unnecessary planning costs; 
c) avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts; 
d) increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices; 
and 
e) achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities; 
2) determine the extent to which each Institute has implemented its duties under section 
5(c); and 
3) determine whether continued provision of Federal assistance to each Institute is 
warranted. 
The duties of the Institues are to: 1) develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and 
monitor restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe 
wildfires and improve the health on dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West; 
2) synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement restoration-
based hazardous fuel reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an adaptive ecosystem 
management framework; 3) translate for and transfer to affected entities any scientific and 
interdisciplinary knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 4) 
assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 
and 5) provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
This evaluation is based on reports from each Institute, interviews with the affected entities 
identified in the Act conducted by Meridian Institute and the US Institute for Environmental 
Conflict Resolution, and a review by the Forest Service in consultation with the three State 
Foresters and the Department of Interior. Based on this evaluation each of the institutes have: 1) 
ensured to the maximum extent possible that their research, communication tools, and 
information transfer activities have made signification progress toward achieving the purposes 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
2 
 
of the Act; and 2) implemented the duties described under section 5(c) to the best of their ability 
given scarce resources.  The Institutes have addressed the purposes of the Act by a) 
implementing active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level; b) 
reducing planning costs; c) avoiding duplication; d) increasing public acceptance; and e) 
achieving general satisfaction on the part of the affected entities.   
Some examples of the Institutes activities include the following: The New Mexico Forest and 
Watershed Restoration Institute (NMFWRI) is involved with three landscape-level projects 
implementing ecosystem management and reducing planning costs by guiding local planning 
efforts, which increases long-term efficiency.  The Institute avoids duplication by developing 
work plans in collaboration with major partners.  Their education and outreach efforts 
demonstrate how forest restoration treatments are part of adaptive ecosystem management.  
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute (CFRI) is collaborating with partners to implement 
adaptive ecosystem management at the landscape level on the Uncompahgre Mesas Forest 
Restoration Demonstration Project (UP Mesas), and the Woodland Park Healthy Forest 
Initiative (WPHFI). They are leading a collaborative assessment of historic forest structure to 
design forest restoration treatments that reduce wildfire risk, re-establish historic fire regimes, 
and sustain long-term forest health.  The Arizona Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) leads a 
Long-term Ecological Assessment and Restoration Network (LEARN) in Arizona and New 
Mexico which includes ponderosa pine and mixed conifer forests, as well as piñon-juniper 
woodlands. The sites are located on U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, National 
Park Service, Department of Defense, and state lands. The information obtained from those sites 
is made available to affected entities for designing restoration treatments in the region through 
workshops and onsite technical assistance.  
The affected entities interviewed expressed an interest in: broadening the scope of the Institutes 
to other ecosystems and larger landscapes; consider specialization by the Institutes to create 
more effective synergy; resolving discrepancies in funding among the Institutes; and improving 
coordination and building partnerships with other agencies and research entities. 
 
The Act authorizes an appropriation of $15 million annually, but the total annual federal 
appropriation to implement the Act has ranged from $400,000 to $2.56 million.  Despite this 
limitation the Institutes have successfully leveraged federal funding to secure scarce State 
resources demonstrating the degree to which they have achieved general satisfaction on the 
part of affected entities.  Their effectiveness, however, has been limited by funding levels well 
below the authorized appropriation. 
In conclusion we have determined that each of the Institutes warrant continued provision of 
Federal assistance.  In our view no other existing entity has the capacity or mandate to carry out 
landscape scale forest restoration. As a result of the work that has been completed with scarce 
resources, the Institutes have generated a high degree of demand and relevance in their states, 
and a common understanding among affected entities that they fulfill an important role.  
Interviews with affected entities indicate that their scope may need to be broadened to 
accomplish landscape restoration at a larger scale.  

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
3 
 
Preface 
 
Background 
The Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act (P.L. 108-317, 16 U.S.C. 6701(2004)) 
(the “Act”) establishes a unique program of applied research and service via three university-
based restoration institutes, located in Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico1.  The primary 
purpose of the Institutes is to develop, translate, and provide the best available science to land 
managers, practitioners and stakeholders designing and implementing forest restoration and 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments.  
The responsibility for implementation of the Act was assigned to the Secretary of Agriculture, 
acting through the Chief of the U.S. Forest Service.  The Chief of the U.S. Forest Service 
delegated the implementation of the Act to the Southwestern Region of the U.S. Forest Service.  
In 2005 the Forest Service established a Development Team to work with the Institutes to 
identify projects for annual workplans and an Executive Team to approve those work plans. 
The Development and Executive teams are chaired by the U.S. Forest Service and include 
representatives from the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), US Fish and Wildlife Service 
(FWS), The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), State Foresters from each state, and the three 
Institutes. The annual work plans are reviewed, revised and reconciled with federal 
appropriations by the Development Team and approved by the Executive Team.  On June 13, 
2005 the Governors of Arizona, Colorado and New Mexico signed a charter to clarify the duties 
and operating procedures for the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes, and their 
respective states, as envisioned in PL 108-317 (Appendix E).   
The annual work plans are the basis for requesting federal and state annual appropriations.  
Each Institute’s performance of its duties is tied to the development and successful completion 
of annual work plans that achieve the purposes of the Act.  For this reason, they are a major 
source of information for the five-year evaluation.    
The activities proposed in the work plans (referred to as “projects”) address information and 
service needs identified by land managers and the diverse stakeholders (referred to as “affected 
entities” in the Act).  . Needs are identified in reports from workshops, conferences, surveys, 
collaborative meetings, governmental task forces and councils, field trips, one on one 
communications, by phone, or through correspondence.  The Institutes then work 
collaboratively throughout the year with stakeholders to plan projects that may be included in 
the annual work plan.  
The annual work plans and additional information about the Institutes are available for review 
at http://www.fs.fed.us/r3/partnerships/institutes/team.shtml.  
 
                                                
1 The Act was passed by Congress on October 4, 2004. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
4 
 
Five Year Evaluation Requirement  
Section 7 of the Act requires the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the U.S. 
Forest Service, and in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, to complete a detailed 
evaluation of the programs and activities of each Institute five years after the date of enactment 
of the Act, and every five years thereafter. The evaluation is submitted to the Committee on 
Resources (now the Committee on Natural Resources), to the Committee on Agriculture of the 
House of Representatives, and to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the 
Senate.  The purpose of this report is to satisfy this requirement for 2009 – the first five year 
evaluation.  The intentions of the evaluation, as defined in the Act, are:  
1) To ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that the research, communication tools, 
and information transfer activities of each Institute are sufficient to achieve the 
purposes of the Act, including:   
a. implementing active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the 
landscape level; 
b. reducing unnecessary planning costs; 
c. avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts; 
d. increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management 
practices; and 
e. achieving general satisfaction on the part of the affected entities 
2) To determine the extent to which each Institute has implemented its duties under 
section 5(c) of the Act, which are to:  
a. develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and 
improve the health on dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior 
West; 
b. synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to 
implement restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments on 
landscape scale using an adaptive ecosystem management framework; 
c. translate for and transfer to affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 
d. assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches 
(including monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments; and 
e. provide peer-reviewed annual reports  
3) To determine whether continued provision of Federal assistance to each Institute is 
warranted.  
 
Evaluation Methodology 
As a first step in the evaluation process, the Southwestern Region requested an evaluation 
report from each Institute describing how it had performed the duties specified in the Act. Key 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
5 
 
accomplishments for each duty are summarized at the beginning of each Institute chapter that 
follows.  The Institute evaluation reports are included in full in Appendix A.   
The Southwestern Region then contracted with the US Institute for Environmental Conflict 
Resolution (USIECR) and the Meridian Institute to conduct interviews with affected entities 
(defined in the Act as land managers; stakeholders; concerned citizens; and the States of the 
interior West, including political subdivisions of the States) for the purpose of assessing their 
satisfaction with the Institutes and their views about how well the Institutes had achieved the 
purposes of the Act. The USIECR and Meridian were also tasked with compiling the five year 
evaluation report.  In preparation for the interviews, Meridian and USIECR developed a 
tentative list of interview questions.  They then met with representatives from the three 
Institutes to discuss the interview methodology, solicit feedback on the draft questions, and 
obtain suggestions regarding potential interviewees.  From this list, Meridian and USIECR 
prioritized from the list sixty one people representing a broad diversity of affected entities to 
contact for interviews.  Of those, twenty three people responded and were either interviewed 
by phone or submitted written comments. Interviews were conducted from approximately mid 
July – mid August 2009.  Everyone who expressed an interest in participating in the interview 
process was accommodated.  See Appendix B for a list of interviewees.   
Most of the interviewees were very familiar with the work of the Institute in their State.  A few 
respondents were generally familiar with all three Institutes. The mix of respondents was fairly 
evenly spread among the Institutes; six respondents each had worked most closely with ERI 
and CFRI, and eight respondents were most familiar with NMFWRI.  Three of the respondents 
had detailed familiarity with all three Institutes.  Table 2 shows the mix of perspectives among 
the interviewees. 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
6 
 
Table 2:  
Range of Perspectives
ERI
CFRI
NMFWRI
GENERAL
TOTAL
Directors
1
1
1
3
Academics
2
1
3
State 
Government
1
1
4
6
Local
Government
1
1
2
Private
2
2
Federal
Government
1
1
2
4
Tribal
2
2
Other
1
1
TOTAL
6
6
8
3
23
 
The interviews were conducted with the understanding that interviewee comments and 
recommendations would not be attributed to individuals, but rather captured in an overall 
summary of interview results.  The input was wide-ranging and very frank.  While Meridian 
and USIECR would have preferred a larger response group, they concluded that even with a 
small sample, the interviews resulted in a good overview of affected entity views on the work of 
the Institutes.  The interview results are reflected in the chapters that follow and summarized in 
Appendix C. 
The determination about whether each of the three Institutes as well as the system as a whole 
have accomplished the purposes and duties of the Act is based on the sum of information 
available through the Institutes’ evaluation reports and the interview results.  
 
Context 
In the five years since the Institutes were established they have all developed operational 
capacity and conducted activities to achieve the duties of the Act.    The Act authorizes an 
appropriation of $15 million for each fiscal year, but the total annual federal appropriation to 
implement the Act has ranged from $400,000 to $2.56 million.  Despite this limitation, the 
Institutes have successfully leveraged federal funding with scarce State resources.  Their 
effectiveness, however, has been limited by funding levels well below the authorized 
appropriation.   See Table 3 for actual funding history. 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
7 
 
 
Table 3: Institute Actual Funding  
 
FY2005 
FY 2006 
FY 2007 
FY 2008 
FY 2009 
 
Fed 
State 
Fed 
State 
Fed 
State 
Fed 
State 
Fed 
State 
CFRI 
$50  
$60  
$250  
$60  
$200  
N/A 
$246  
$75 
$246  
$90  
ERI 
$300  
$1,000  
$1,600  
$1,000  
$1,750  
$1,200  
$1,969  
$1,300  
$1,969  
$1,098  
NMFWRI 
$50  
$182  
$250  
$250  
$250  
$250  
$345  
$250  
$345  
$243  
TOTAL 
$400  
$1,242  
$2,100  
$1,310  
$2,200  
$1,450  
$2,560  
$1,625  
$2,560  
$1,431  
Total Fed  
$9,820  
Total State   
$7,058  
Dollars in thousands 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
8 
 
New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute Assessment 
 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act 
Based on the information provided in NMFWRI’s Five Year Evaluation Report (attached in 
Appendix A), the Institute has a performed a significant amount of work towards achieving 
each of the duties specified in the Act.  Examples of significant contributions for each duty are 
summarized below.   
Duty 1:  Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the 
health of dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West 
 
NMFWRI completed pre- or post-treatment ecological restoration monitoring on 18 
thinning projects, encompassing 4,600 acres across the state since January 2007.  
 
In 2007, NMFWRI began developing a catalogue of forest prescriptions, principally 
dealing with fuel treatments, which have been applied by land managers to New 
Mexico forests and woodlands.  Six case studies have been produced and posted since 
2007, and also one re-write of a research station report. 
 
NMFWRI organized and co-hosted a seminar in August 2007 to discuss protocols and 
the formation of a statewide monitoring database.  Fifty participants attended a 1.5 
day meeting consisting of 17 presentations by monitoring practitioners from a variety 
of forest types. In early 2008, the Institute co-hosted a statewide meeting of 
practitioners and scientists to discuss management of mixed conifer and aspen in New 
Mexico, with 75 attendees.  Over the past year, NMFWRI has teamed with other 
organizations to organize a New Mexico Watershed Forum and the New Mexico 
Forests and Climate Change meeting that took place in October and November 2008, 
respectively, in Albuquerque. 
Duty 2:  Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework 
 
Regular bi-monthly meetings with the Santa Fe National Forest, the Valles Caldera 
National Preserve, the Nature Conservancy, and other stakeholders have been 
convened by the NMFWRI since the summer of 2008 to begin planning the restoration 
of the Jemez River basin.  The total planning unit includes about 210,000 acres, with 
the first round of projects envisioned for 46,000 acres.  The NMFWI is working to 
broaden the range of stakeholders involved in the planning, with the goal of applying 
for Forest Landscape Restoration Act funding the first year it becomes available. 
 
Since 2008, NMFWRI has convened the meetings of the Estancia Basin Monitoring 
Steering Committee, which comprises the three Soil and Water Conservation Districts 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
9 
 
(Claunch-Pinto, Edgewood, and East Torrance) of the 1.5 million-acre basin, as well as 
representatives from cooperating groups (State Forestry, New Mexico Environment 
Department, Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), U.S. Forest Service, 
BLM, Chilili Land Grant).  Besides chairing the meetings, the NMFWRI helps with 
mapping, and interacts with consultants as they monitor thinning projects.  
 
The NMFWRI worked with the Tierra Y Montes Soil and Water Conservation District 
and the Las Vegas State Forestry office to build a project map (primarily thinning 
projects) of the Gallinas Watershed.  The Gallinas is the municipal watershed for Las 
Vegas, and has been prioritized by the NRCS, the U.S. Forest Service, and New Mexico 
State Forestry for restoration. 
 
The NMFWRI teamed with the Lower Pecos Watershed Alliance and New Mexico 
Tech in the development of a research project in the Sacramento Mountains to examine 
how thinning would impact surface and subsurface water budget.  The NMFWRI 
established pre-treatment vegetative monitoring plots on the 555-acre treated area in 
the summer of 2008, and on the 359-acre non-treated area in the summer of 2009.  This 
project was partially supported with State funding. 
 
The NMFWRI is the coordinator of the multiparty monitoring training and technical 
assistance that is provided to the U.S. Forest Service’s Collaborative Forest Restoration 
Program (CFRP).  Since mid-2007, the NMFWRI and its contractors have written and 
published eight white papers for CFRP grantees that cover a wide range of topics.     
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments  
 
The NMFWRI established a 10-acre demonstration area in a ponderosa pine stand on the 
Pritzlaff Ranch outside of Las Vegas, highlighting restoration using evidence-based, 
goshawk, and genetic guidelines.  Thinning of this stand was completed in the fall of 
2008.  Four formal groups have visited this site, and additional tours have been made by 
individuals. 
 
The Forest and Watershed Health Information Clearinghouse is a joint effort with the 
Forest and Watershed Health Office of New Mexico State Forestry.  Still under 
construction, it contains links, postings, and videos related to not only prescriptions, but 
groups, funding sources, monitoring protocols, etc., from across the state.  Planning was 
supported by federal funds, but the funding for the clearinghouse is from New Mexico 
State Forestry.   
  
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
10 
 
Duty 4:  Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches 
(including monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels 
reduction treatments 
 
 
Geographic Information System (GIS) aids in planning restoration activities by 
providing a landscape-scale.  Since January 2007, NMFWRI has developed 155 project 
maps for 20 stakeholders groups throughout the State. 
 
Since July 2007, NMFWRI has trained 30 individuals from government and non-profits 
in GIS use, and provided datasets to 16 groups. 
 
NMFWRI has provided funding so the New Mexico Forest Industry Association 
(NMFIA) can retain an executive director.  The Institute supported NMFIA to train 142 
workers in FY 2009. It helped develop the woods-worker safety course, which has 
resulted in a 60% reduction in workman’s compensation insurance costs.   
 
At the request of Alamo Band of the Navajo Nation, the NMFWI taught a two-week 
training course for them in December 2008 that incorporated a week of basic ecology 
and restoration-based fuel reduction principles, and a week of chain saw use and woods 
safety.  This core course has been requested by other groups, and the Institute expects to 
modify it according to results and group needs.  
Duty 5:  Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
Annual reports have been prepared every year.  They have been circulated among the 
Institute’s stakeholder group for comment before being submitted.  The NMFWRI annual 
reports are available at www.nmfwri.org/annual-reports.  
Achievement of Purposes of the Act 
NMFWRI has demonstrated progress towards achieving the purposes of the Act through many 
of its activities and outcomes, including, for example: 
1) Implementing active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level;  
NMFWRI is part of three landscape-level efforts: Estancia Basin Monitoring, which 
comprises the basin’s three Soil and Water Conservation Districts, representatives from 
cooperating agencies, and a contractor; the Jemez River Watershed restoration effort, with 
three major landowners; and the Gallinas River watershed, the drinking-water watershed 
for Las Vegas. 
2) Reducing unnecessary planning costs; 
By participating in local planning efforts like those at Sugarite Canyon State Park, the 
Cimarron Watershed Alliance, and Ramah Navajo, the NMFWRI is able to guide the efforts 
of those local groups, saving them money in the short-term, and increasing their efficiency 
in the long-term.  One specific service the Institute offers is assistance with GIS, providing 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
11 
 
maps that give a project-level point of view.  This service is especially useful for 
communities, tribes, and CFRP grantees who cannot afford to have their own GIS expertise 
or software.  
 
3) Avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts; 
The organization in the State with the mandate closest to the NMFWRI is the Forest and 
Watershed Health Office of New Mexico State Forestry; the Institute avoids duplication of 
effort by weekly conversations with that group, and by participation in the quarterly 
meetings of the group that coordinates WHO’s work.  The NMFWRI does not work with 
private landowners without first contacting the local district office of New Mexico State 
Forestry, and are often on the ground with people from the district office.  The NMFWRI 
has an advisory board made up of seven men and women representing seven different 
stakeholder groups.  The board meets at least once a year to review NMFWI programs and 
to provide advice on effort and direction, and serves as another safeguard to avoid 
duplication of effort.  Finally, all major partner organizations take part in helping the 
NMFWRI develop its annual work plans.   
4) Increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices;  
NMFWRI education efforts to date have been targeted at stakeholders in land management.  
The Institute has compiled case studies on successful prescriptions to reduce the risk of 
catastrophic wildfire, and convened seminars on monitoring and mixed conifer 
management for fire.  The Institute has held numerous small-group trainings on the subject 
of monitoring, and presented to the regional Forest Service timber staff on SWERI’s ability 
to help with restoration efforts.  The NMFWRI is engaged with other institutions in a study 
to examine how thinning a watershed with a mix of forest types affects surface and 
subsurface water budgets.  If a rigorous study were to demonstrate that treatment increases 
water yield, public support for restoration treatments would be likely to increase.   
5) Achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities 
On the basis of the interviews with individuals familiar with the NMFWRI, it is apparent 
that the Institute has been successful at achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected 
entities. The sense from the interviews is that the NMFWRI is responsive to affected entities’ 
needs and that it produces high quality results quickly.  Interviewees reported many 
tangible benefits from their interactions with the NMFWRI, especially with regards to 
training, help with prescriptions, monitoring, GIS/mapping support, and assistance in 
building collaborative partnerships.  A “Joint Powers Agreement” with the New Mexico 
Forest and Watershed Health Office is a mechanism that has been especially helpful, 
because it has enabled State government to accomplish work that could not have been 
undertaken without the Agreement. The NMFWRI is also providing unique benefits to New 
Mexico watershed groups, Tribal entities in the State, and community constituents in terms 
of independent science technology and data. The following comments reflect interview 
sentiments regarding the Institute’s services: “Staff of the Institute are some of the best in 
the field”; “The Institute has always been there when needed and provided answers to 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
12 
 
questions. Staff listen carefully to problems and unique situations, and then formulate an 
appropriate response. “The NMFWRI is surprisingly efficient considering the numbers of 
State-wide projects they are engaged in.” Their level of monitoring is just right – not too 
much.  They do a great job steering treatments in the right direction.” 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
13 
 
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute Assessment 
 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act 
Based on the information provided in CFRI’s Five Year Evaluation Report (attached in 
Appendix A), the Institute has performed a significant amount of work towards achieving each 
of the duties specified in the Act.  Examples of significant contributions for each duty are 
summarized below.   
Duty 1:  Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the 
health of dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West 
 
CFRI co-sponsored, with the U.S. Forest Service and the Colorado State Forest Service 
(CSFS), the development of Ponderosa pine forest management guidelines that 
translated ecological research and principles into applicable management choices.   
 
CFRI produced a widely-used photo guide that provides visual examples of pre- and 
post-treatment forest conditions that meet the twin goals of restoration and fuels 
reduction. 
 
Partnering with the CSFS, CFRI hosted two short courses for land managers on the 
ecology and management of piñon-juniper forests in La Junta and Durango targeting 
land managers.  
 
CFRI’s role in ecological monitoring in the WPHFI will contribute information on the 
effectiveness of hazardous fuels treatments to reduce extreme fire behavior and restore 
healthy Ponderosa pine conditions.  Results from initial treatments will be compiled and 
analyzed in the fall of 2009. 
Duty 2:  Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework 
 
Working in partnership with the Regional Office of the Rocky Mountain Region of the 
U.S. Forest Service, CFRI published four reports on the historic range of variability of 
three regions (Front Range, Grand Mesa, and South-Central Highlands) and one forest 
type in Colorado (Ponderosa pine on the Front Range).  These historic range of 
variability reports synthesized current scientific research on historic disturbance regimes 
and their impact on forest stand structure development.  Such reports provide a 
reference point for managers to define restoration goals and design restoration 
treatments. 
 
CFRI synthesized and produced a publication summarizing the current scientific 
knowledge concerning the historic ecology and disturbance regimes in piñon-juniper 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
14 
 
forest ecosystems, with an eye towards management implications.  Two outreach 
workshops were delivered in tandem with this publication. 
 
 
CFRI synthesized and produced a publication summarizing current knowledge about 
lodgepole pine forests and potential impacts of mountain pine beetle infestation, 
including expert opinions on what is known about catastrophic wildfire in lodgepole 
pine forests and the effect of mountain pine beetles on fire risk and behavior. 
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments; 
 
CFRI sponsored a review of literature and interviews of private land managers for 
barriers to using prescribed fire on private lands.  The review was published and widely 
disseminated. 
 
CFRI has made more than two dozen presentations to agency staff, land managers, 
communities, and policy-makers drawing on available ecological and social science 
regarding issues surrounding forest restoration and hazardous fuels reduction.   
 
Drawing on applied social science research in collaborative environmental management, 
CFRI has provided assistance and support to a variety of forest health collaborative 
around the state.  For example, during the summer and fall of 2008, CFRI helped 
coordinate the transition of the Colorado Bark Beetle Collaborative (CBBC) from an 
intergovernmental cooperative to a multi-stakeholder collaborative group involving 
non-governmental organizations, such as the Colorado Timber Industry Association and 
environmental organizations.  CFRI developed a structured process to redefine the 
group’s organizational structure, by-laws, and operating procedures.   
Duty 4:  Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches 
(including monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels 
reduction treatments; 
 
The WPHFI involves Federal, state, and local governments, and the Coalition for the 
Upper South Platte (CUSP), Colorado Springs utilities, and a local loggers cooperative to 
ramp up implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction projects on 
Federal and non-Federal lands in a 40,000 acre project area.  CFRI has provided technical 
assistance to WPHFI on ecological and socio-economic monitoring.  CFRI will compile 
and analyze the data, and facilitate adaptive management workshops based on the 
evidence. 
 
The UP Mesas project involves the U.S. Forest Service, CSFS, conservation organizations, 
and the timber industry to address forest conditions outside the historic range of 
variability on the Uncompahgre Plateau of western Colorado.  CFRI conducted 
evidence-based field assessments that provided the baseline information used to design 
restoration and fuels reduction treatments.  CFRI is also helping the collaborative group 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
15 
 
monitor ecological and socio-economic indicators to gauge project effectiveness and 
identify needs for adaptation and improvement over the long-term. 
Duty 5: Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
 
The CFRI has prepared annual reports as required under the Act. They have been 
circulated among stakeholder groups for comment before being submitted.  The reports 
are available at http://warnercnr.colostate.edu/cfri-home/. 
 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act 
CFRI has demonstrated progress towards achieving the purposes of the Act through many of its 
activities and outcomes, including, for example: 
1) implementing active adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level:  
CFRI’s two flagship projects are the Uncompahgre Mesas Forest Restoration 
Demonstration Project (UP Mesas) and the WPHFI.  These two initiatives encompass 
approximately 52,000 acres. The UP Mesas project is occurring on the Ouray Ranger 
District of the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, and Gunnison National Forest (GMUG 
National Forest), and involves a collaborative group comprised of the U.S. Forest 
Service, CSFS, representatives from local conservation organizations, private 
landowners, and the timber industry.  CFRI took a leadership role in conducting a 
science-based approach to collaboratively assess historic forest structure as the 
foundation to propose restoration-based treatments to reduce wildfire risk to private 
property, re-establish more ecologically consistent fire regimes, and sustain long-term 
healthy forest conditions.  CFRI is following through with leading a collaborative 
ecological monitoring program with participating stakeholders to gauge the short- and 
long-term effectiveness of proposed management activities, which includes logging and 
prescribed burning.  CFRI will facilitate the learning and adaptive management of 
restoration treatments based on monitoring results over the life of the project. 
In the WPHFI, CFRI is leading a collaborative monitoring effort to gauge the 
effectiveness of treatments to reduce hazardous fuels and restore historic forest 
conditions in the project area.  Monitoring results will be fed back to the WPHFI 
collaborative forum, comprised of the U.S. Forest Service, CSFS, Teller County, the City 
of Woodland Park, and the CUSP, a local non-profit watershed protection group. The 
monitoring results will help with adaptive management on both Federal and private 
lands. 
2) reducing unnecessary planning costs: 
The UP Mesas project is an example of how CFRI’s involvement in science-based 
collaborative assessment and monitoring can feed into U.S. Forest Service’s efforts to 
expand restoration treatments across the Uncompahgre Plateau, a 1.4 million acre 
landscape that has clearly-identified restoration needs.  Monitoring information from the 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
16 
 
17,000 acre demonstration project will help reduce upfront planning costs when the U.S. 
Forest Service proposes additional treatments on the Plateau. 
CFRI has been involved in facilitating collaborative learning between the U.S. Forest 
Service and interested and affected stakeholders to address large-scale aspen decline on 
the GMUG National Forest.  CFRI sponsored a joint workshop including researchers, 
managers, and interested publics to examine ongoing experimental treatments and the 
linkages to local forest products industry, with the intent of laying the groundwork for a 
long-term stewardship contract for aspen management.  By convening a collaborative 
process around the science and management concerns regarding aspen decline, CFRI is 
helping reduce planning costs associated with the stewardship contact. 
The monitoring of current treatments associated with the WPHFI will contribute 
evidence-based information for the planning and design of future proposed fuels 
reduction and forest restoration treatments, not only in the WPHFI project area, but 
across the Ponderosa pine forests of the Front Range.   
CFRI is sponsoring a collaborative learning effort involving federal and state forestry 
agencies, conservation organizations, industry, and interested publics to examine the 
current knowledge and management effects of warm, dry mixed-conifer forests on the 
Pagosa Ranger District of the San Juan National Forest.  The product of the collaborative 
learning will be a published report documenting the scientific and social “zones of 
agreement” around the historic range of variability of warm, dry mixed-conifer forest 
types in Southwestern Colorado, evidence-based information concerning the 
effectiveness of past and current treatments, and a protocol for monitoring future 
treatments on national forest lands.  Such a report will be useful to the U.S. Forest 
Service and possibly private forest landowners in future planning efforts, giving 
managers the confidence to plan and design treatments in warm, dry mixed-conifer 
forests. 
CFRI is in the early phases of working with the CBBC and a new forest health coalition 
in the Roaring Fork Valley to conduct a collaborative learning effort to synthesize 
scientific and evidence-based information, and articulate social zones of agreement 
concerning lodgepole pine forest management in the wake of the mountain pine beetle 
infestation.  This upfront collaborative, science-based effort will support planning and 
treatment design on national forest and adjacent non-federal lands. 
3) avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts: 
By emphasizing the demonstration nature of the effort, CFRI’s involvement in the UP 
Mesas projects lays the groundwork for expanding treatments across other areas of the 
Uncompahgre Plateau with similar restoration and fuels reduction goals.  The U.S. 
Forest Service will not have to reinvent the wheel for every single proposed project 
under the same set of goals.  This philosophy is modeled in each of CFRI’s initiative  – 
i.e., laying the scientific and social zones of agreement foundation for a specific 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
17 
 
landscape, with the intent that subsequent efforts under the same set of goals can build 
off these zones of agreement, rather than having to start from scratch every time. 
4) increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices; and 
CFRI’s role as a convener, facilitator, and science participant has helped bring and keep 
interested and affected publics at the table with managers.  For example, CFRI’s 
participation in the collaborative evidence-based assessment of historic forest 
conditions for the UP Mesas project provided members of the conservation community 
with a high-degree of confidence that the proposed action was based on a solid 
ecological science foundation.  CFRI’s role in the monitoring of the WPHFI 
demonstration project was welcomed by a diversity of organizations, such as 
municipal, county, state, and Federal government agencies; watershed coalitions; and 
others.  
5) achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities 
On the basis of the interviews with individuals familiar with CFRI, it is apparent that 
the Institute has been successful in achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected 
entities. Interviewees reported that CFRI has played a significant role in the restoration 
arena, and that it has grown over time. Increasingly, CFRI is becoming a go-to source of 
information for adaptive ecosystem management. The Institute’s current emphasis on 
investigating the effect of restoration efforts is helping further knowledge and 
effectively encouraging landowners to complete management work on their land.  One 
of the most frequently cited contributions by CFRI is the service it has provided as an 
intermediary and facilitator.  CFRI has demonstrated an ability to serve as a bridging 
organization by bringing together diverse groups, effectively identifying the issues of 
greatest concern, and developing action plans for moving forward constructively. CFRI 
is well respected for its ability to tackle highly polarized issues, develop common 
ground, and keep groups focused on areas of mutual concern.  The CFRI is viewed as 
credible and skilled in working with diverse groups on complex and sometimes 
controversial projects.  Interviewees also spoke highly of the Institute in terms of its 
responsiveness to their needs, including timeliness, quality of response, and 
effectiveness.  Many interviewees attributed the Institute’s recent successes to the 
Director’s leadership, and in particular his understanding of community forestry and 
collaboration.   
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
18 
 
Arizona Ecological Restoration Institute Assessment 
 
Achievement of the Duties of the Act 
Based in the information provided in ERI’s Five Year Evaluation Report, the Institute has a 
performed a significant amount of work towards achieving each of the duties specified in the 
Act.  Examples of significant contributions for each duty are presented below.   
Duty 1: Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the 
health of dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West. 
 
Under the Act, fuel treatment research supported by the ERI has broadened into several 
fields of study: fire behavior, fuels, forest dynamics, plant community responses, 
wildlife responses, and social and economic aspects of forest restoration. These studies 
are carried out throughout the Southwest and in more distant areas of the Intermountain 
West as well. 
 
A central component of the ERI´s studies of restoration treatments is the Long-term 
Ecological Assessment and Restoration Network (LEARN). The network covers the 
ponderosa pine forests of Arizona from the Arizona Strip in the northwest through the 
eastern Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests on the Arizona-New Mexico border. 
Additional sites are located in Colorado and New Mexico. The network includes 
ponderosa pine and mixed conifer forests, as well as piñon-juniper woodlands. Each site 
is set up as a stand-alone controlled, replicated experimental study testing a full 
restoration treatment (i.e., thinning young trees to restore historical density, spatial 
pattern, and species composition; treatment of fuels; re-introduction of low-severity 
surface fire), and an untreated control. The LEARN sites are located on public lands 
including U.S. Forest Service, BLM, National Park Service, Department of Defense 
(DOD), and state lands. The excellent data obtained from the LEARN sites is made 
possible by a substantial investment in human and computing resources; these 
investments pay off when information is transferred from questions and concepts to 
documented information for management. 
Duty 2: Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework. 
 
The premier example of the ERI´s work to adapt research findings to large-scale 
treatments is the Mt. Trumbull ecosystem restoration project in northwestern Arizona. 
Beginning in 1995, this multi-scale collaborative project brought together BLM 
managers, State wildlife experts, and ERI scientists to develop a joint project that 
remains the largest, permanently monitored forest restoration project in the Southwest. 
The long-term Mt. Trumbull treatments were still in progress when the Act was 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
19 
 
authorized. Since then, the ERI staff has developed syntheses of the effects of large-scale 
treatments on potential fire behavior. Carrying the adaptive management cycle to 
completion, the Institute carried out the first landscape-scale monitoring assessment of a 
southwestern forest restoration project that included both implementation monitoring 
(Were the project activities done correctly?) and effectiveness monitoring (Did it achieve the 
desired ecological result?).  
 
The greater Grand Canyon region comprises a vast landscape within which ERI-
supported restoration projects are contributing to improved management and 
conservation. For several years, the ERI staff has worked to characterize historical forest 
conditions and fire regimes in this region along an elevational gradient from ponderosa 
pine to spruce-fir forests. 
 
Looking ahead to the near future, the ERI is collaborating with numerous stakeholders 
in the largest landscape-scale forest restoration effort proposed to date—the Four Forests 
Restoration Initiative - a project covering several hundreds of thousands of acres in 
Arizona. This work, again, is built on the foundation of knowledge and experience that 
the ERI has achieved during the past decade of work, including that funded by the Act. 
Duty 3: Translate for, and transfer to, affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments. 
 
Since 2005, the ERI has translated scientific information to affected entities through a 
variety of means: working papers, white papers, fact sheets, web site/e-Library, 
workshops, and presentations. During that time the ERI has produced 14 working 
papers and 11 white papers.  The ERI Working Papers series present and translate 
scientific findings from the research and observations of ERI researchers as well as 
researchers from other organizations and universities. Topics are chosen for their 
relevance to land managers because they represent the largest audience for these 
publications. The ERI White Paper series is designed to reach policymakers, social 
scientists, and, to some extent, land managers with information about socio-economic 
issues related to forest restoration and hazardous fuels reduction. Working papers and 
white papers are sent by mail and/or electronically to 1,300 affected entities throughout 
the Southwest and beyond. They are also posted on the ERI web site and in the ERI e-
Library.  
 
During the past five years, the ERI Agency Outreach team conducted 13 workshops for 
agency land managers. In these workshops, ERI Agency Outreach personnel provided 
information about ecological restoration and how it could be applied to federal lands to 
reduce hazard fuels while meeting other goals and objectives of the agency. The ERI has 
also hosted and participated in several conferences and workshops during this period. 
For example, the Conserving and Restoring Old Growth in Frequent-fire Forests of the 
American West workshop in April 2006; later that year, the ERI and SWERI hosted a 
three-day workshop--Conserving and Restoring Frequent-fire Landscapes of the West: 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
20 
 
Linking Science, Collaboration, and Practice; in 2007, the ERI conducted two workshops 
for practitioners; the ERI also hosted the SWERI Biophysical Monitoring Workshop in 
October 2008. 
Duty 4: Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches 
(including monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels 
reduction treatments. 
 
The ERI Agency Outreach Team participated in the planning for 23 fuels reduction 
projects during the past five years. These projects took place on lands administered by 
the U.S. Forest Service, including each of the national forests in Arizona, and several 
national forests in New Mexico. Each project was undertaken following a request from 
U.S. Forest Service personnel for ERI services. Featured projects include: Jim Lewis 
Project/Sacramento Ranger District/Lincoln National Forest and Eager South Wildland-
Urban Interface Fuel Reduction Project on the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. 
Duty 5: Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
The ERI has prepared annual reports as required under the Act. They have been circulated 
among stakeholder groups for comment before being submitted.  The reports are available at: 
http://www.eri.nau.edu/joomla/content/view/317/84/lang,en/ 
 
Achievement of the Purposes of the Act 
ERI has demonstrated progress towards achieving the purposes of the Act through many of its 
activities and outcomes, including, for example: 
1) Implementing adaptive ecosystem management practices at the landscape level 
The premier example of ERI´s efforts to implement adaptive ecosystem management 
practices at the landscape level is the Mt. Trumbull ecosystem restoration project in 
northwestern Arizona (mentioned above).  The entire effort is based on being adaptive 
to findings of ERI and Arizona Game and Fish Department researchers as well as 
recommendations about the leave-tree ratio, methods of treating slash, prescribed 
burning prescriptions from federal land managers and environmental groups.  
2) Reducing unnecessary planning costs 
Although it is difficult to quantify any exact reduction in unnecessary planning costs, 
the ERI has made considerable efforts to provide research and expertise to federal land 
planners as well as citizens’ groups that are interested in forest restoration planning.  For 
example, the ERI Agency Outreach Team participated in the planning for 23 fuels 
reduction projects (mentioned above); the ERI has been instrumental in founding and 
supporting the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership; the ERI has worked closely with the 
New Mexico-based Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP) in the 
development and upgrading of handbooks about multi-party monitoring; and the ERI 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
21 
 
has worked with collaborative groups in Ruidoso, New Mexico and in the Pinalenos 
Mountains of Arizona. In addition, ERI staff was instrumental in developing the 
Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests and the Wood Supply Analysis for 
Northern Arizona. 
3) Avoiding duplicative and conflicting efforts 
The ERI is constantly looking to form collaborative arrangements with groups/agencies 
interested in planning and implementing forest restoration treatments. This not only 
helps to avoid duplicative and conflicting efforts, but serves to build strong bonds with 
people and organizations that share like-minded goals. The ERI’s work with Federal and 
state agencies at Mt. Trumbull is a good example of this kind of work, as is the ERI’s 
participation on the Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Council, the Greater Flagstaff 
Forest Partnership board, and, most recently, in the discussions about the Four Forest 
Initiative in Arizona. 
4) Increasing public acceptance of active adaptive ecosystem management practices 
The ERI’s work with public groups, such as the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership, as 
well as groups in Ruidoso, New Mexico, the White Mountains, and the Pinalenos 
Moutains, has helped the public in those areas see the need for adaptive ecosystem 
management practices, especially the importance of pre- and post- treatment 
monitoring.  
5) Achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected entities 
On the basis of the interviews with individuals familiar with ERI, it is apparent that the 
Institute has been very successful in achieving general satisfaction on the part of affected 
entities. According to one interviewee, it is impossible to have a conversation with any 
U.S. Forest Service employee about restoration without some reference to ERI’s work. 
The opportunity to see different prescriptions tested by ERI (including the evolution of 
ecosystems over time), is widely perceived by interviewees as one of the most tangible 
contributions by ERI.  Several interviewees cited ERI’s wealth of useful publications as 
an outstanding resource for forestry professionals everywhere. One specific example 
mentioned was the “Green Book on Restoration of Southwest Pine Forest; in the words 
of the interviewee, “the best available publication on the topic.”  In addition, ERI is 
already seen a leader in helping to expand the scope of restoration thinking to whole 
ecosystems – not only to the ecosystems of the Southwest, but to the whole country.  
Part of this ripple effect is because of the way the Institute impacts Northern Arizona 
University forestry students who later go on to faculties and agencies around the 
country.  ERI is generally viewed as well run, responsive, timely and extremely effective.  
The Institute’s service is enhanced by having high quality, knowledgeable staff and by 
having public relations, policy, and community outreach capacity – the kinds of people 
who are not typically employed at research organizations.  Interviewees provided a 
number of comments on ERI’s exceptional level of service and value to the restoration 
community: “Willingness to stay involved and supportive in partnerships even through 
the ebbs and flows of funding”; “Incredible in their openness and communication”; 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
22 
 
“Congress is getting its money’s worth out of ERI”; and “I can’t stress enough the value 
of having this kind of Institute in the area”. 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
23 
 
SWERI System Assessment and Recommendations 
 
System Assessment 
It is apparent from the Institute reports and the interviews with affected entities that the 
Institutes have all made significant progress towards implementing the duties and achieving 
the purposes of the Act. The Institutes have made a real difference to the health of western 
forest-based ecosystems and performed effectively given available resources. Their productivity 
has been to a large extent proportional to their funding levels, with the Arizona Ecological 
Restoration Institute (ERI) having significantly more resources than the other two Institutes, but 
all three Institutes are achieving the purposes for which they were established.  As a result of 
the work that has been completed, they have generated a high degree of demand and relevance, 
and the sense that they fulfill a unique role that no other institutions or agencies can do.   
The Institutes have faced questions at times about their value-added niche in the ecological 
restoration research arena – particularly their place in the institutional landscape.  They have 
sometimes been viewed as unwelcome competitors for scarce funding, and occasionally as 
irrelevant by players who viewed their expertise as duplicative.  These perceptions seem to be 
largely in the past – although plenty of work is still needed to improve collaboration and 
communication, and to build the kinds of partnerships that will enhance and leverage 
restoration efforts in which so many agencies and groups have an important role to play.  The 
unique value-added niche of the Institutes, as perceived by affected entities, though still 
evolving, has been variously described as “helping democratize science for good use by 
managers”; “asking some of the tough management questions and getting answers”; “pulling 
stuff out of the ivory tower and putting it into a form that can be readily understood”; and 
“conveying the benefits of science to decision makers, local agency staff, sawyers on the 
ground...”.   
The contributions by the Institutes vary, not only because of the differential in funding levels, 
but also because some specialization has occurred. All of the Institutes provide a suite of 
services, but ERI has become especially well known for its ecological research, publications and 
outreach; CFRI for facilitation, collaboration and conflict resolution (especially recently); and 
NMFWRI for workforce development, including training and mechanical treatments as well as 
for its GIS services.  These institutional strengths have developed somewhat organically to 
reflect each state’s biophysical, socio-economic, and political contexts and issues, as well as the 
inclinations and abilities of leadership and staff. An important question for the Institutes is, 
given limited resources (especially for the Colorado and New Mexico institutes), how 
strategically to invest in specialization while continuing to meet the diversity of ecological 
restoration needs in each state. Many of the most appreciated achievements to date for all three 
Institutes are in value-added contributions for small organizations and local governments – 
who have benefited a great deal from the tangible assistance provided by the Institutes in 
designing, implementing, and monitoring on-the-ground treatments as well as from the other 
services provided.   

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
24 
 
Many affected entities believe that the stage has been set, and the imperative exists now more 
than ever due to the effects of climate change, new insect pests, social and economic issues etc., 
for the Institutes to play an increasingly important role in large scale restoration.  The Institutes 
can help address the scientific questions and collaboration challenges that stand in the path of 
this work. To achieve full capability they need stability in directors, continuing improvement in 
host university relationships, and in the minds of many, more funding.   
 
Affected Entity Recommendations that Apply to the System    
The affected entities who were interviewed for the evaluation offered a number of 
recommendations that apply to the system of Institutes. 
1) Broaden the Scope of the Institutes to Other Ecosystems and Larger Landscapes.  Many 
interviewees talked about the need for a broader perspective beyond Ponderosa pine 
and piñon-juniper ecosystems.  For example, the bark beetle epidemic and aspen decline 
are pressing forest ecosystem management issues which extend beyond restoration 
imperatives in dry, frequent-fire forest types. The mandate for a broader perspective is 
not reflected in the legislation that established the Institutes, but there is a perceived 
imperative to scale up restoration efforts in the face of intersecting forces such as climate 
change and rapid population growth in fire-prone landscapes.  The Institutes can play a 
critical role in supporting a broader array of long-term forest health issues beyond large 
scale ecological restoration, but their effectiveness may be limited by too narrow an 
ecological scope.  For example, treatments on upland ecosystems can change the 
dynamics of runoff and impact adjacent or related ecosystems, such as mid-elevation 
grasslands, woodlands, and wetlands that are threaded throughout Ponderosa pine 
forests; all of these landscapes should be considered when assessing treatment 
effectiveness.   
A natural expansion would be to extend the geographic scale of restoration efforts to 
encompass watersheds. The broadening of scope should include outreach and active 
management as well as research, i.e., the kinds of things others are unable to do, but for 
which there is a critical need.  It would also require partnering with many more land 
management entities than is currently the case and, in some situations, working across 
state boundaries.  Thus far, state boundaries are seen as impeding on-the-ground 
jurisdictional cooperation.  There is a great opportunity, and urgency, for the Institutes 
to make a real difference in western ecosystems by expanding the reach of the Institutes 
through watershed approaches, partnering with scientists in other institutions across the 
West, and other creative mechanisms.  One concrete suggestion to enhance cooperation 
across state lines was to call upon the Western Governors’ Association to jointly sponsor 
and organize an initiative to examine the role of the Institutes and others who need to 
cooperate in landscape scale ecological restoration. 
 
2) Consider Some Specialization by the Institutes.  Questions were raised in a few of the 
interviews about possible duplication of effort among the three Institutes (as well as 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
25 
 
with various academic institutions and other research entities).  To avoid these problems 
and to create more effective synergy among the Institutes, several interviewees 
suggested some strategic specialization, which to some extent is already occurring. For 
example, CFRI has demonstrated particular strengths in facilitation, collaboration and 
conflict resolution – high value services because large landscape restoration efforts are 
necessarily cross-jurisdictional, involving many diverse stakeholders who do not always 
agree or coordinate; NMFWRI has developed strong capacity in GIS and workforce 
development, including training and mechanical treatments; and ERI has a well 
developed track record in ecological research and outreach. It would behoove the 
Institutes to work together on a forward looking strategic plan that would address 
choices and priorities for the future, including whether to further specialize in the areas 
where they are already strongest as well as possibly in other areas where there are 
emerging needs.  In any case, specialization should not come at the cost of any 
individual Institute’s ability to meet needs within its State. All of the Institutes should 
build and retain broad enough capacity to provide site specific ecological restoration 
assistance.   
3) Assess Funding Levels and Discrepancies in Funding among the Institutes.  The 
interviewees agreed that additional funding would enable the Institutes to perform 
more of the valuable work they are already doing, expand their scope of impact to large-
scale landscape restoration, and allow them to help respond to looming imperatives 
such as climate change.  Several interviewees suggested increasing funding especially 
for CFRI and NMFWRI, on the assumption that not only are additional services in high 
demand, but that current funding levels are barely sufficient to maintain their 
institutional integrity.  There were mixed views as to the ability of the two smaller 
Institutes to absorb a rapid increase in funding – some interviewees suggested that a 
large infusion of additional resources would not be effectively utilized in the near term, 
while others maintained that those Institutes do indeed have the institutional foundation 
to be able to grow quite rapidly. 
4) Improve Coordination and Build more Partnerships with Other Agencies and Research 
Entities.  It was apparent from the interviews that relationships with other agencies and 
research entities have not always been easy - there have been growing pains and bumps 
in the road, turf battles, and hard feelings over perceived and real slights.  There is still a 
real reluctance in some places (especially, according to some interviewees, on the part of 
some U.S. Forest Service field units ) to take advantage of the services and expertise of 
the Institutes.  In some cases the Institutes are seen as outright competitors, in others as 
diluting the authority/control by local jurisdictions over projects.  However, 
interviewees report concerted recent efforts at improved communication and dialogue, 
which seem to be bearing fruit.  There is also a high degree of interest in seeing more 
advantage taken of Institute services by other Federal agencies in addition to the U.S. 
Forest Service.  Relationships could be further improved by additional outreach, as well 
as continued examination and articulation of the Institutes’ highest value niche in the 
ecological restoration arena relative to other players.   

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
26 
 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
27 
 
Appendix A – Institute Evaluation Reports 
 
Each of the Institutes prepared an evaluation report to comply with the 5 year evaluation 
requirement of the Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act.  Each Institute’s 
evaluation focused on the Institute’s performance for each of the program duties specified in the 
Act. (See Table 1)  An institute’s successful implementation of its program duties demonstrates 
that its programs and activities have sufficiently met the purposes of the Act.  Continued 
federal assistance to an institute is warranted if it has programs and activities that have resulted 
in the achievement of the purposes of the Act. 
  
Table 1:  Duties specified in the Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act (PL 
108-317) 
 
 
1.  Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health of 
dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West; 
2.  Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework; 
3.  Translate for, and transfer to, affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments; 
4.  Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction 
treatments; 
5.  Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
 
 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
28 
 
NMFWRI Report 
Since 2005, the Institutes have developed and completed work plans under the Act.   
The NMFWRI work plans have reflected the views and needs of our statewide stakeholders 
from the beginning.  The first ones were written by NMHU professors.  Fiscal Year 2006 had 
projects on building the capacity of the Institute, developing consensus on ecological restoration 
monitoring, and restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction prescriptions for forests and 
woodlands.  Since Ken Smith came on as Director in January 2007, work plans have been 
prepared by staff.  The 2007 Work plan contained projects which continued the 2006 work, and 
added technical assistance for communities.  These two years were funded at $500,000 each 
year, equally split between Federal and state funds.   
The 2008 Work plan went through several revisions based on budgetary restrictions, but the 
final version continued previous work and added projects on landscape-scale public 
information assessments, public outreach and information dissemination, wood utilization, and 
educational initiatives.  The work was funded with a combination of federal ($345,000) and 
State ($250,000) funds.  The 2009 Work plan also was revised before final funding.  It adds a 
pilot landscape project and continuing education and forest worker safety trainings. Total 
funding is again $595,000, with the Federal-State split as in 2008. 
From the beginning, we have endeavored to work with our two sister Institutes.  The pilot 
landscape project, in Arizona and lead by ERI, is the first planned, on-the-ground joint effort.  
Another example of a successful collaboration was the CFRI-NMFWRI work on the 
Uncompahgre Plateau last summer.  Organized by CFRI, we spent a week determining historic 
stand structure of mixed conifer forests with community members and the U.S. Forest Service. 
 
About The New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute 
The overall goal of NMFWRI is to ensure that the best available science is used by land 
managers and stakeholders to implement effective restoration-based forest treatments in New 
Mexico.  The work plans and agenda for NMFWRI are based on the duties and purposes 
outlined in the authorizing federal legislation, the recommendations found in the New Mexico 
Forest and Watershed Health Plan, and through field conversations with natural resource 
professionals and other stakeholders. The authorizing legislation, Forest and Watershed Health 
Plan, and other related links and documents can be accessed on the NMFWRI web site.  
NMFWRI works closely with the New Mexico State Office of Forest and Watershed Health to 
efficiently utilize resources and avoid redundancy between the two organizations.  The 
NMFWRI advisory board, which consists of natural resource professionals representing some of 
our major stakeholders, meets twice annually to review NMFWRI activities and to provide the 
director and staff with feedback on current or potential projects. 
Since reaching full staffing in mid-2007, NMFWRI has participated in approximately 40 projects 
involving a multitude of land management entities across the State.  Time commitments for 
these projects ranged from a few hours (making maps or global positioning system (GPS) 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
29 
 
training) to multiple weeks (field monitoring and data analysis).  At full staffing, NMFWRI has 
six full-time employees.  In addition to the full-time staff, we employ Highlands’ 
undergraduates as work-studies, a small group of undergraduates to assist with summer field 
work, and contractors as needed. 
 
To What Extent Did The Institute Meet The Duties Under The Act? 
1) Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve 
the health of dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West 
Case studies - One of the initial efforts of NMFWRI was to collect information on fuels 
treatments in southwestern, and especially New Mexican, ponderosa pine and lower mixed 
conifer forests, and piñon-juniper woodlands. One idea that is stressed in the scientific literature 
is that fuels treatment, while beneficial to human communities and helpful in maintaining forest 
health, is not necessarily restoration. Thinning for fuel treatment may not preserve historic 
structure; in contrast, restoration helps move a degraded forest onto a trajectory that is closer to 
the historical range of variability. Thanks to efforts of the Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) 
and the U.S. Forest Service, restoration has become such a part of the thinking of foresters and 
other land managers that restoration principles are incorporated into anything they do.  Except 
for possibly piñon-juniper woodland in the wildland-urban interface, thinnings designed by 
professionals primarily for fuel treatment also take into consideration wildlife, recreation, and 
historic forest structure. Because this is the case, much can be learned from their experience.   
In 2007, NMFWRI started to compile a catalog of forest prescriptions that were applied to the 
landscape in different regions and ecosystems of New Mexico. These case studies provide an 
easily accessible place for stakeholders to review the types of prescriptions that are applied by 
forest managers in various vegetation types.  We include economic data (costs per acre) when 
possible to supplement the prescription information. The majority of the case studies posted on 
our website deal with fuel treatments.   
Day-long seminars - From our beginning, conversations and visits around the state uncovered 
a desire for short, technical meetings focused on a specific topic.   As a result, we have held a 
series of workshops designed to facilitate information exchange between presenters, many of 
whom are practitioners, and audience members.  The first of these one-day seminars brought 
together monitoring practitioners to discuss protocols and the formation of a statewide 
monitoring database.  It was held in August 2007 at the Sevilleta Field Station. This workshop 
was co-hosted with the State Office for Forest and Watershed Health. Fifty participants 
attended a 1.5 day meeting consisted of 17 presentations by monitoring practitioners from a 
variety of forested ecosystems across the state, followed by a discussion about developing a 
statewide monitoring database. All the presentations and the minutes of the monitoring 
database discussion were summarized and placed on the NMFWRI web site (Forest and 
Watershed Monitoring Meeting).  The workshop’s outcomes are driving the future direction of 
the statewide database.  

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
30 
 
In early 2008, NMFWRI co-hosted a statewide meeting of practitioners and scientists to discuss 
management of mixed conifer and aspen in New Mexico (75 attendees).  The goal of this 
meeting was to expose land managers to the current research focused on the types of natural 
disturbance occurring in this forest type, and for the research community to hear about on-
going management practices.  Presentation topics covered the gamut, with presenters from 
New Mexico State Forestry, the U.S.-Forest Service, the forest research community, the forest-
owning public, and included participants from Arizona and Colorado. A synopsis of the mixed 
conifer/aspen ecology and management meeting is posted on our website. 
Over the past year, NMFWRI has teamed with other organizations to organize a New Mexico 
Watershed Forum and the New Mexico Forests and Climate Change meeting that took place in 
October and November 2008, respectively, in Albuquerque. 
2) Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework; 
Valles Caldera-Jemez - In the summer and fall of 2007, the NMFWRI staff participated in a 
series of meetings hosted by the Santa Fe National Forest to explore the possibility of 
developing a multi-jurisdictional stewardship contract in northern New Mexico. NMFWRI and 
other entities contacted potential partners with regard to the development of proposals related 
to the then-proposed Forest Landscape Restoration Act (FLRA). Regular bi-monthly meetings 
with the Santa Fe National Forest, the Valles Caldera National Preserve, the Nature 
Conservancy, and other stakeholders have been held since the summer of 2008 to begin 
planning this landscape-scale restoration effort.  The total planning unit includes about 210,000 
acres, with the first round of projects envisioned for 46,000 acres. This planning has progressed 
to the point that a collaborative plan to solicit input from all area stakeholders has been 
prepared by the Supervisor’s Office of the Santa Fe National Forest, with input from the larger 
group. The next step will be to broaden the range of stakeholders involved in the pre-NEPA 
planning, with the goal of having NEPA-ready sites by the time the FLRA is funded. 
Estancia - In April 2007, the Claunch-Pinto Soil and Water Conservation District requested 
NMFWRI participation in the review of proposals for a long-term monitoring project in the 
Estancia Basin. Since 2008, NMFWRI has convened the meetings of the Estancia Basin 
Monitoring Steering Committee, which comprises the three Soil and Water Conservation 
Districts in the basin (Claunch-Pinto, Edgewood, and East Torrance) and representatives from 
cooperating agencies (State Forestry, New Mexico Environment Department, NRCS, U.S. Forest 
Service, Chilili Land Grant).  Besides chairing the meetings, NMFWRI personnel are closely 
interacting with the SWCA consulting group as they monitor thinning projects throughout the 
basin. We are also helping the three districts map their prior thinning projects (Estancia Basin 
Thinning Map) and we are building property ownership maps to identify possible areas for 
contiguous thinning treatments in the East Mountains.  

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
31 
 
Additional efforts - NMFWRI is also working with the Tierra Y Montes Soil and Water 
Conservation District and the Las Vegas State Forestry office to build a project map (primarily 
thinning projects) of the Gallinas Watershed.  The Gallinas is the municipal drinking-water 
watershed for Las Vegas, and has been prioritized for restoration. 
Following two site visits to the Coleman Ranch in the fall of 2007, NMFWRI teamed with the 
Lower Pecos Watershed Alliance and New Mexico Tech in the development of an on-going 
project designed to examine how thinning in a mixed conifer stand would impact surface and 
subsurface water budget.  NMFWRI conducted a pre-treatment inventory over the 600 acre 
stand in June 2008.  This project was partially supported with state funding. 
CFRP - NMFWRI is the coordinator of the multiparty monitoring training and technical 
assistance that is provided to the U.S. Forest Service’s Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 
(CFRP). (The funding for this effort is separate from the funds received for the NMFWRI federal 
work plan, but the deliverables and required work are related to the objectives in the 
authorizing legislation and the annual work plans, as well as our future workload and funding 
requests.)  In this role, NMFWRI or contracted personnel facilitate multiparty meetings for 
CFRP grantees, help grantees develop a project-specific monitoring plan, provide on-site 
training in data collection for CFRP team members, youth groups, or others who will be 
gathering monitoring data for the project, and provide assistance with data analysis and final 
report writing. Since mid-2007, NMFWRI and its contractors have written and published eight 
white papers for CFRP grantees that cover a wide range of topics of interest to the grantees.  
These papers are disseminated at meetings and are posted on the NMFWRI web site as part of 
the New Mexico Forest Restoration Series.  One of these efforts (Working Paper 5) involved a 
five-person team that identified which of the 102 projects that have been funded since CFRP’s 
inception could be included in a 15-year monitoring effort that is called for in the CFRP 
authorizing legislation. The recommendations of this paper include core ecological variables 
that every CFRP project should monitor, as well as the twenty projects across multiple 
jurisdictions and forest types to be measured at five, ten, and fifteen years after treatment.  This 
long-term monitoring closes the feedback loop essential for adaptive management; it also will 
require additional staff and budgetary resources that have not been requested in the past.   
1) Translate for, and transfer to, affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments; 
Demonstration area - In June 2007, ERI and the U.S. Forest Service held a restoration workshop 
in Albuquerque in which NMFWRI participated.  As a result, NMFWRI established a 10-acre 
demonstration area in a ponderosa pine stand on the Pritzlaff Ranch outside of Las Vegas.  
Areas of equal size were marked according to evidence-based guidelines developed by ERI, 
Northern Goshawk guidelines developed by the U.S. Forest Service, and genetic (phenotypic) 
guidelines developed by NMFWRI.  Areas are large enough for visitors to see what a residual 
stand would look like. The ERI and Northern Goshawk plots exhibit the group-and-opening 
structure characteristic of historic ponderosa pine stands.  In this demonstration of a genetic 
prescription, trees were left or cut without concern for clumps or openings. Thinning of this 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
32 
 
stand was completed in the fall of 2008.  Four formal groups have visited this demonstration 
site since it was marked, and additional tours have been made by individual forest managers. 
Prescription Assistance - One of our major tasks is to work with managers to produce 
prescriptions that blend recommendations for restoration and fuel treatments, which will then 
be adapted and applied to the unique conditions of each stand and watershed.  Restoration in 
New Mexico almost always means the reintroduction of low-intensity fire into the ecosystem.  
In most cases, vegetative structure must be manipulated by removing some trees from the stand 
before fire can be reintroduced safely.   In 2007, NMFWRI began compiling a catalog of forest 
prescription applied in New Mexico. That task is described above under Duty 1.  Another part 
of that task was a survey of the technical literature.  As we worked on this task, we became 
aware of and were greatly impressed with existing collections of information about restoration 
and fuel treatments.  An excellent example is the booklets and other extension material targeted 
at evidence-based restoration that have been produced since 1997 by ERI.  Other groups also 
have published excellent work on restoration-based fuels treatment.  Hunter and others (2007) 
“A comprehensive guide to fuels treatment practices for ponderosa pine in the Black Hills, 
Colorado Front Range, and Southwest,” (published as Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-198) is one 
we recommend to practitioners.  Another publication, Graham and others (2004) “Science basis 
for changing forest structure to modify wildfire behavior and severity,” (published as Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120), we liked so much we synthesized it and posted the synthesis 
(Science basis for changing forest structure) on our website.   While some of the resources 
NMFWRI recommends do not focus exclusively on New Mexico, they are comprehensive in 
scope and excellent in quality, and fulfill the intent to give forest managers a place to go when 
they need information regarding prescriptions used in forest and woodland similar to their 
own.  
A new project is the Forest and Watershed Health Information Clearinghouse, a joint effort with 
the Forest and Watershed Health Office of State Forestry.  This web-based clearinghouse is 
under construction.  It will contain links, postings, and videos related to not only prescriptions, 
but groups, funding sources, monitoring protocols, etc., from across the state.  Planning was 
supported by federal funds, but the funding for the clearinghouse is from State Forestry.  The 
clearinghouse will become a valuable tool for exchanging information about restoration. 
4) Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction 
treatments; 
GIS Services – One of the important areas of our work is in Geographic Information Systems.  
We work closely with project managers at all levels across the state to provide them with maps 
that will assist them with project planning.  This service is especially useful for communities, 
tribes, and CFRP grantees who cannot afford to have their own GIS expertise or software.  
Boundary maps containing either traditional topographic information or images inform the 
public and decision-makers of the geographic context of restoration activities and resources.  
Statewide maps showing locations of project and forest industries have been especially useful to 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
33 
 
elected officials.  GIS aids in planning restoration activities by providing a landscape-scale view 
of historical treatments, fire history, vegetation types and conditions, and community and 
wildland urban interface locations. 
Our GIS unit assists monitoring by enabling unbiased determination of sampling site locations.  
Use of GPS to precisely determine locations of sampling points improves the statistical validity 
of pre-treatment and long-term monitoring.  Training and education of governmental agencies 
and non-profits in the use of GIS and GPS improve the availability of information related to the 
location of restoration activities, further enabling landscape- and project-oriented restoration 
strategies. 
Implementation – A healthy, restored forest depends upon a healthy, restored forest industry.  
NMFWRI has been involved with promotion and support of industry at several levels.  
Notably, we have provided funding to enable the recently formed New Mexico Forest Industry 
Association (NMFIA) to retain an Executive Director.  This monetary support will diminish as 
the industry strengthens, but our moral support for industry will not.  Society’s ability to pay 
for restoration-based hazardous fuels treatments is competing against other needs; we do not 
have the ability to pay for universal health care for children, and forest health is lower on our 
priority list.  A way must be found for small diameter material to pay its way out of the woods.  
In the words of a flooring producer in Las Vegas, “we can’t grant our way to forest health”. 
Training is another part of implementation.  We first paid attention to training to lower the costs 
of workman’s compensation insurance.  We worked with other organizations to modify an 
existing safety course to the point it was accepted by the major insurance underwriters in New 
Mexico, and operators whose workforce received the training had their workman’s comp rates 
reduced by 60%.  That experience, and a belief that knowledge about tools helps both safety and 
efficiency, led us to sponsor training in chain saw use using a program called The Game of 
Logging.   Most recently, the Alamo Band of the Navajo Nation was awarded a CFRP grant to 
establish a crew of woods workers.  Following their request and using that grant money, we 
taught a two-week training course for them that incorporated a week of basic ecology and 
restoration-base fuel reduction principles, and a week of chain saw use and woods safety.  This 
core course has been requested by other groups, and we expect to modify it according to results 
and group needs.  
5) Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
Annual reports have been prepared every year.  They have been circulated among our 
stakeholder group for comment before being submitted.  They are available on our website. 
 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
34 
 
REFERENCES  
NMFWRI web links  
NMFWRI home page  
 www.nmfwri.org 
NMFWRI advisory board   
www.nmfwri.org/images/stories/pdfs/about/2008advisoryboard.pdf 
Catalog of forest prescriptions  
 www.nmfwri.org/images/stories/pdfs/For_Land_Managers/NMForestPrescriptions.pdf 
Forest and Watershed Monitoring Meeting   
www.nmfwri.org/images/stories/pdfs/Restoration_Workshops/2007ForestWatershedMo
nitor.pdf 
Mixed conifer/aspen ecology and management meeting 
www.nmfwri.org/images/stories/pdfs/Restoration_Workshops/2008MixedConiferAspen
.pdf 
New Mexico Forest Restoration Series   
www.nmfwri.org/restoration-papers 
Estancia Basin Thinning Map   
www.nmfwri.org/images/stories/pdfs/Estancia_Basin_Monitoring/small_estancia_6_1_0
8_small.pdf 
Science basis for changing forest structure   
 
www.nmfwri.org/images/stories/pdfs/For_Land_Managers/SummaryofScienceBasis.pdf 
 
 
Other links mentioned in the narrative 
New Mexico Forest and Watershed Health Plan   
www.nmfwri.org/images/stories/pdfs/about/001025-NMFWHPlan-722200842703.pdf 
New Mexico State Office of Forest and Watershed Health  
 
www.emnrd.state.nm.us/fd/FWHPlan/ForestAndWaterShedHealth.htm 
New Mexico Watershed Forum   
www.watershedforum.org/ 
New Mexico Forests and Climate Change  
www.forestguild.org/nmfccworkshop.html 
Forest and Watershed Health Information Clearinghouse   
www.allaboutwatersheds.org 
 
 
Annual Reports 
www.nmfwri.org/annual-reports 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
35 
 
CFRI Report 
 
Since 2005, the Institutes have developed and completed work plans under the Act.   
The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute’s (CFRI) work plans are based on semi-annual 
statewide needs assessments.  The assessments are performed by the director and are 
comprised of targeted interviews and focus group discussions with individuals representing 
affected entities, such as the U.S. Forest Service, BLM, and the Colorado State Forest Service.  
Needs assessments were conducted in 2005, 2007, and 2009.  Dr. Dan Binkley, the founding 
director of CFRI, conducted the 2005 and 2007; Dr. Tony Cheng assumed the CFRI directorship 
May 2008 and conducted the 2009 assessment. 
FY2005 Work Plan 
The main goal for FY2005 was to begin building the organizational capacity to develop and 
sustain programs pursuant to the Act.  This included creating a website, conducting a statewide 
needs assessment, and attending organizing meetings involving the three Institutes.  Federal 
dollars provided under the Act totaled $50,000. 
 
FY2006 Work Plan 
The FY2006 work plan was the first full work plan approved for CFRI in summer 2005.  Three 
goals were identified and worked on: 1) Developing outreach products and activities 
contributing to restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction; 2) an applied study on wood chip 
impacts and decomposition; and 3) conducting a comprehensive assessment of restoration 
issues in piñon-juniper forests.  Deliverables included: researcher-manager field tours 
investigating restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction projects; a statewide networking 
workshop for collaborative forest restoration initiatives; publications describing aspen forest 
conditions and a photo-based guide to restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction 
management; and workshop convening scientific experts on piñon-juniper ecology and fire risk.  
Federal dollars provided under the Act totaled $250,000. 
 
FY2007 Work Plan 
The FY2007 work plan continued the work identified in the FY2006 work plan.  Three goals 
were identified and worked on:  1) Developing outreach activities and products contributing to 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction; 2) continued applied research on fire risk and 
restoration issues in piñon-juniper forests.  Deliverables included: publication of a report 
synthesizing current knowledge of piñon-juniper ecological variation and management; 
publication of management guidelines for restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction in 
Ponderosa pine forests in Colorado’s Front Range; publication of a report synthesizing barriers 
to prescribed burning on private lands; publication of a report on lodgepole pine ecology and 
mountain pine beetle impacts; two networking workshops bringing together wood producers in 
Colorado to learn about economic opportunities associated with forest restoration; and two 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
36 
 
short-courses delivered to managers on piñon-juniper ecology and management.  Federal 
dollars provided under the Act totaled $250,000. 
 
FY2008 Work Plan 
The FY2008 work plan expanded the work of CFRI into more on-the-ground, applied projects.  
Three goals were identified and worked on:  1) Developing outreach activities and products 
contributing to restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction; 2) continued applied research on 
ecological variation and restoration of piñon–juniper forests; 3) evidence-based approaches to 
forest restoration, including an applied demonstration forest restoration project.  Deliverables 
included: evidence-based assessment of historic forest structure for the Uncompahgre Plateau 
Mesas Forest Restoration Project; establishment of a monitoring and adaptive management 
program for the Woodland Park Healthy Forest Initiative; final publication of the scientific 
synthesis of ecological variation and disturbance regimes in piñon-juniper forests in a peer-
reviewed journal; and a second statewide networking workshop for collaborative forest 
restoration initiatives.  Federal dollars provided under the Act totaled $246,000. 
 
FY2009 Work Plan 
The FY2009 Work Plan builds on the momentum from the FY2008 work plan deliverables and 
emphasizes field-based application of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction as well as 
working with affected entities to address the impacts of the mountain pine beetle infestation 
and other forest health concerns that affect long-term forest and community resilience to 
disturbance.  Five goals were identified and in progress: 1) Developing outreach activities and 
products contributing to restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction; 2) Involvement with the 
Northern Arizona University Ecological Restoration Institute and the New Mexico Forest and 
Watershed Restoration Institute in a pilot landscape restoration project; 3) addressing the 
economics of restoration-based projects through wood utilization in partnership with the 
Colorado Wood Utilization and Marketing Program; 4) supporting forest health collaborations 
through science- and evidence-based approaches; 5) evidence-based approaches to forest 
restoration.  Deliverables include: short courses on collaborative forest assessment and post-
treatment monitoring and adaptive management; two networking workshops for wood 
producers; two reports summarizing lessons learned from the Uncompahgre Plateau Mesas 
Forest Restoration Project and the Woodland Park Healthy Forest Initiative; and continued 
implementation of collaborative monitoring programs for restoration-based hazardous fuels 
reduction projects.  Federal dollars provided under the Act totaled $246,000. 
In addition to deliverables identified in the work plans, we have worked with the Arizona and 
New Mexico restoration institutes.  The pilot landscape project, led by the Arizona ERI, 
continues to evolve with the development of a four-National Forest initiative to conduct forest 
restoration at a landscape scale.  The three Institutes also collaborated in designing a workshop 
to identify common monitoring indicators and measures to document and evaluate the 
effectiveness of restoration-based treatments.  Individuals from the NMFWRI participated in 
the historic forest structure assessment conducted for the Uncompahgre Plateau project, and 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
37 
 
efforts are underway to apply work conducted by the ERI to design and implement a 
landscape-scale forest restoration project on the San Juan National Forest. 
 
About The Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
The CFRI is housed within the Warner College of Natural Resources at Colorado State 
University.  As such, it is well-positioned to leverage the science and outreach capacity within 
the College by drawing on the expertise of faculty, staff, and students, and the Colorado State 
Forest Service.  Located in Fort Collins, Colorado, CFRI is fortunate to be located in close 
proximity to the U.S. Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station (RMRS), affording 
opportunities for collaboration with RMRS scientists to synthesize current research pertaining 
to restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction and insect infestation impacts on Colorado’s 
forests, as well as drawing on RMRS research expertise in conducting forest condition 
assessments and monitoring.   
The mission of the CFRI is to build the capacity of land managers, communities, and policy-
makers to address forest health and restoration issues through science- and evidence-based 
approaches to assessing, designing, and adaptively managing restoration projects.  CFRI staff 
brings ecological and social science expertise to bear on forest restoration issues, and are 
constantly called upon to work with agencies, collaborative partnerships, and policy-makers, 
such as the Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council.  Currently, CFRI is staffed by a 
director, a program associate, and a part-time research associate whose time is shared by the 
Colorado State Forest Service’s Wood Utilization and Marketing Program (COWOOD).  CSFS 
also provides the services of an outreach forester. 
To What Extent Did The Institute Meet The Duties Under The Act? 
1) Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve 
the health of dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West. 
 
From the beginning, CFRI has worked with Front Range Fuels Treatment Partnership to 
address the dual goals of forest restoration and hazardous fuels reduction in Colorado’s Front 
Range.  Two items of note has contributed to project implementation.  The first is co-sponsoring, 
with the U.S. Forest Service and the Colorado State Forest Service, the development of 
management guidelines that translate ecological research and principles into management.  The 
second a photo guide that provides visual examples of pre- and post-treatment forest conditions 
that meet the twin goals of restoration and fuels reduction. 
 
CFRI has also conducted more active delivery of principles and recommendations of restoration 
treatments.  Partnering with the CSFS, CFRI hosted two short courses on the ecology and 
management of piñon-juniper forests in La Junta and Durango targeting land managers.  These 
two-day workshops were well-attended and equipped managers with knowledge and 
confidence to restore and manage piñon-juniper forests in line with ecological principles. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
38 
 
2) Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework 
A hallmark project of CFRI is the synthesis and publication of current scientific knowledge 
concerning the historic ecology and disturbance regimes in piñon-juniper forest ecosystems.  As 
the dominant forest type in the southwest, there have been and continue to be numerous efforts 
to manage piñon-juniper systems to reduce fuels and restore conditions.  Yet, surprisingly little 
comprehensive scientific investigations have been conducted that provide insight into the 
question, “Restore to what?”  CFRI led a systematic synthesis and adaptation of findings from 
convention research into piñon-juniper ecology, with an eye towards management implications. 
Concerns over the mountain pine beetle infestation in Colorado’s high country prompted CFRI 
to synthesis current knowledge about lodgepole pine forests and mountain pine beetle impacts.  
A report was published compiling what was known about catastrophic wildfire in lodgepole 
pine forests and the effect of mountain pine beetles on fire risk and behavior.  While it was 
controversial at first, conventional wisdom has evolved to be in line with the findings produced 
in the report. 
3) Translate for, and transfer to, affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments; 
One of the tools in the restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction toolbox is prescribed fire.  
Either as a stand-along treatment or in combination with mechanical treatments (i.e., thinning, 
chipping), land managers, especially on private lands, are using prescribed fire to achieve 
restoration and fuels reduction goals.  However, there are barriers to being able to use 
prescribed fire effectively.  CFRI sponsored a review of literature and interviews of private land 
managers for barriers to using prescribed fire on private lands.  The review was published and 
widely disseminated. 
In addition to published reports and bulletins, CFRI uses short-courses, trainings, and on-site 
field trips to transfer knowledge about restoration-based treatments to affected entities.  CFRI 
has made over two dozen presentations to agency staff, land managers, communities, and 
policy-makers drawing on available ecological and social science regarding issues surrounding 
forest restoration and hazardous fuels reduction.  For example, in 2008, a new community 
coalition in the Roaring Fork Valley formed around concerns about the mountain pine beetle 
impacting the valley’s forests.  Dr. Jessica Clement helped organize workshops bringing 
together researchers, managers, and community members to learn about lodgepole forest 
ecology, fire risk, and the beetle infestation.  Such presentations help coalitions understand the 
key issues and organize to take effective action. 
One key area CFRI is involved in transferring scientific and interdisciplinary knowledge is in 
the design, implementation, and adaptive management of collaborative processes involving 
multiple stakeholders.  Colorado has numerous forest health and restoration collaborative 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
39 
 
initiatives, from subdivision-level Community Wildfire Protection Plan groups to regional 
partnerships, such as the Front Range Roundtable and Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative 
(CBBC).  Drawing on applied social science research in collaborative environmental 
management, CFRI provides assistance and support to a variety of groups.  For example, 
during the summer and fall of 2008, CFRI helped coordinate the transition of the CBBC from an 
intergovernmental cooperative to a multi-stakeholder collaborative group involving non-
governmental organizations, such as the Colorado Timber Industry Association and 
environmental organizations.  CFRI developed a structured process to redefine the group’s 
organizational structure, by-laws, and operating procedures.  As a result, the CBBC continues to 
be an effective voice for drawing federal, state, and local resources to address the impacts of the 
mountain pine beetle on local communities. 
4) Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction 
treatments; 
Since 2008, CFRI has stepped up its efforts in working with affected entities to develop adaptive 
management approaches to restoration and wildfire mitigation.  Two demonstration projects 
are off the ground and are part of multi-stakeholder collaborative efforts to achieve restoration 
and fuels reduction goals, the Woodland Park Healthy Forest Initiative (WPHFI) and the 
Uncompahgre Plateau Mesas Forest Restoration Demonstration Project (UP Mesas).   
The WPHFI was created as a demonstration implementation project of the Front Range 
Roundtable.  Federal, state, and local governments are involved, as are the Coalition for the 
Upper South Platte (CUSP), Colorado Springs Utilities, and a local loggers cooperative.  The 
purpose of the WPHFI is to ramp up implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels 
reduction projects in 40,000 acre project area based on the Teller County Community Wildfire 
Protection Plan and the Pike National Forest’s wildland-urban interface fuels management 
objectives.  CFRI’s role is to provide technical assistance for the group to identify and collect 
monitoring information regarding the ecological and socio-economic outcomes of the project.  
In mid-March 2009, CFRI staff held a “train-the-trainer” field day with land managers, CUSP 
staff, Colorado State University Extension, and local area high school teachers to clarify 
ecological indicators and measurement methods.  Pre-treatment data was collected for one of 
the treatment units; post-treatment data collection will proceed Fall 2009 by CUSP.  CFRI will 
compile and analyze the data, and facilitate adaptive management workshops based on the 
evidence. 
In addition to the ecological monitoring, CFRI is conducting socio-economic assessments and 
monitoring of the project.  A scientifically-valid community survey is being administered by the 
CUSP to gauge local community residents’ understanding and perception of restoration-based 
hazardous fuels treatments.  The economics of the project are being assessed in two ways.  First, 
a cost-analysis of the collaborative effort is being conducted; second, an analysis of wood 
utilization from the project will measure the impact on revenue generation, renewable energy, 
and local jobs. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
40 
 
 
The UP Mesas project addresses forest conditions outside the historic range of variability on the 
Uncompahgre Plateau of western Colorado.  Threat of uncharacteristically large and intense 
fires, and loss of mule deer habitat are among several ecological concerns, as well as the risks 
these pose to local communities and economies.  The ranger for the Ouray Ranger District 
worked with the Uncompahgre Plateau Project, a local non-profit organization working on 
stewardship issues on the Plateau to organize a multi-stakeholder collaborative group to 
provide input and a sounding board for what was originally a 70,000 acre project area; the area 
was negotiated down to 17,000 acres.   
CFRI stepped in to address ecological uncertainties about historic forest structure and 
disturbance regimes by conducting two evidence-based field assessment workshops in summer 
2008.  The historic structure assessment provided the baseline information from which the 
Ouray Ranger District staff developed a proposed action for diverse restoration and fuels 
reduction treatments in Ponderosa pine, mixed-conifer, and aspen forest stands.  The project 
was also intentionally designed to provide local mills commercial timber to retain jobs.  In 
summer 2009, CFRI worked with the collaborative group to identify ecological and socio-
economic indicators, and conducted another field workshop to train-the-trainers regarding 
ecological monitoring measurement methods.  
5) Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 
CFRI has prepared annual reports since its inception.  Each report is distributed to affected 
entities for review and comment before being submitted.  A stakeholder assessment was also 
conducted accompanying the FY2007 annual report.  The FY2006 and FY2007 reports are 
available for viewing on CFRI’s website.  
 
 
 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
41 
 
ERI Report 
 
Since 2005, the Institutes have developed and completed work plans under the Act.  
The ERI work plans are designed to ensure that the best available science is used by land 
managers and stakeholders to develop and implement comprehensive, restoration-based forest 
treatments. Annual work plans of the ERI followed the guidance of the authorizing legislation 
and were approved by both the R-3 Development Team and Executive Team. The activities and 
deliverables in each work plan build upon (1) policy directives from the U.S. Forest Service, the 
Western Governors’ Association, the Department of the Interior, and other organizations 
designed to advance forest restoration and reduce the risk of unnatural wildland fire; (2) 
assessments of needs of land managers and other affected parties; and (3) building upon long-
term work. The following is a summary of the ERI work plans from 2005-2009. 
2005 Work Plan  
 
Budget from federal dollars provided under the Act: $400,000 
 
Three goals identified and worked on 
o Goal One:  Contribute to improving the health of degraded public and private 
forest lands at risk for unnatural, catastrophic fire through the development and 
promotion of science-based restoration treatments for project-level action. 
o Goal Two:  Translate and transfer biophysical and social science research into 
communication products for land managers, communities and other 
stakeholders to inform project-level action. 
o Goal Three:   Support collaborative action to identify utilization options for small 
diameter wood. 
2006 Work Plan 
 
 
Budget from federal dollars provided under the Act: $1.6 million 
 
Four goals identified and worked on 
o Goal One: Support a knowledge-based and spatially explicit collaborative 
landscape-scale assessment to help design a twenty-year strategy for restoring 
degraded frequent-fire forest ecosystems. The strategy will strive to engage 
stakeholders to prioritize the location of restoration-based and hazardous fuel 
reduction treatments to protect and enhance community protection and 
economic viability; human and wildlife habitats; watersheds and other critical 
components of Arizona’s landscape ecosystems. 
o Goal Two:  Develop, transfer, apply, monitor, and update practical science-
based, forest restoration treatments to improve the health of ponderosa pine 
forests. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
42 
 
o Goal Three:  Synthesize, translate and deliver biophysical and social science 
knowledge into communication products for land managers, communities and 
other stakeholders to inform project-level action. 
o Goal Four:   Provide technical assistance to collaborative efforts by affected 
entities to develop, implement, and monitor adaptive ecosystem management 
restoration treatments that are ecologically sound, economically viable, and 
socially responsible. 
2007 Work Plan 
 
Budget from federal dollars provided under the Act: $1.75 million 
 
Deliverables based on nine work projects: ponderosa pine/mixed conifer restoration, 
piñon-juniper restoration, evaluating post-fire re-burn potential and salvage logging 
and other post-fire treatments, landscape assessment, practitioner and stakeholder 
knowledge services, wood utilization, assistance to communities to design and 
monitor treatments, assistance to practitioners, and peer-reviewed reports. 
2008 Work Plan 
 
Budget from federal dollars provided under the Act: $1.97 million 
 
Deliverables based on six projects: ponderosa pine/mixed conifer restoration; 
landscape-scale analysis; technical support for land managers, agencies and tribes; 
issues in utilization and harvest; assistance to stakeholders and communities to 
support  collaborative treatment design; and knowledge services. 
2009 Work Plan 
 
Budget from federal dollars provided under the Act: $2 million 
 
Deliverables based on seven projects: ponderosa pine/mixed conifer restoration; 
piñon-juniper restoration; implementation of restoration-based treatments at the 
landscape scale; technical support for federal, state and tribal land managers; 
support for the restoration economy; stakeholder assistance; and knowledge 
services. 
 
While the three SWERI Institutes have collaborated in the past, this work plan 
expressly calls for such collaboration: “Specific coordinated actions for 2009 include: 
1. Determining overall resource benefits achieved through restoration and reducing 
wildfire threat using a landscape analysis (project 3 in all three work plans); 2. 
Assessing the effectiveness and efficiency of alternative treatments and the strategic 
location of those treatments (project 3 in all three work plans); and, 3. A synthesis of 
our current state of knowledge concerning the ecology and management of 
southwestern mixed conifer and aspen forests. In addition to these specific projects, 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
43 
 
the three Institutes will continue to jointly visit field projects, hold discussions with 
policymakers, and seek better ways to coordinate activities across state lines.” 
 
About The Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University (NAU) is nationally 
recognized for mobilizing the unique assets of a university to help solve the serious problems of 
degraded forest health and unnaturally severe wildfire in the frequent-fire forests of the 
Southwest and Intermountain West. The mission of ERI is to serve as an objective leader in 
research, scholarship, education, and, in collaborative efforts, to help interested parties plan and 
implement restoration treatments for these forests and woodland landscapes. In this light, the 
ERI provides land management agencies and communities with applied scientific knowledge 
(i.e., comprehensive focused studies, monitoring and evaluation research, and technical 
support) about issues related to both the ecological and social aspects involved in restoration 
treatments.  
The ERI was formally established by the Arizona Board of Regents in 1997 and by federal 
legislation in 2004 (Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act of 2004, P.L. 108-317). 
In 2005, the ERI became part of the Southwestern Ecological Restoration Institutes—an 
association that unites the ERI with similar organizations at Colorado State University and New 
Mexico Highlands University. The ERI employs a staff of about 35 people including ecologists, 
administrators, professors, and outreach personnel. In addition, the ERI subcontracts with 
experts in other disciplines (e.g., ecological economics, conservation biology, sociology) to 
provide research and expertise about forest restoration issues. The Institute also provides 
educational and field experiences to NAU undergraduate and graduate students. The ERI is 
funded by a combination of programmatic state and federal funding, and through competitive 
grants programs. More information about the ERI is available at http://www.eri.nau.edu. 
To What Extent Did The Institute Meet The Duties Under The Act? 
1) Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor restoration-based 
hazardous fuel reduction treatments to reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve 
the health of dry forest and woodland ecosystems in the interior West 
Even prior to the passage of the Act, the Ecological Restoration Institute was involved in 
assessing the  dramatic and dangerous changes in forest and wildfire conditions in the 
Southwest, and testing and applying treatments designed to restore characteristic Southwest 
forest structure and a more benign fire behavior (Covington and Moore 1994, Fulé et al. 2001, 
Waltz et al. 2003).  As a result of this strong, pre-existing foundation of forest restoration theory 
and practice, the ERI was well positioned to initiate new investigations of alternative treatments 
once the Act was signed into law. Under the Act, fuel treatment research supported by the ERI 
has broadened into several fields of study: fire behavior, fuels, forest dynamics, plant 
community responses, wildlife responses, and social and economic aspects of forest restoration. 
These studies are carried out throughout the Southwest (Figure 1) and in more distant areas of 
the Intermountain West as well. Moreover, with the support provided by the Act, the ERI has 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
44 
 
been able to transfer and promote its findings through outreach activities and publications, 
workshops, and participation in collaborative groups working on forest-related issues (see 
answers to sections 3 and 4). 
 
 
Figure 1. Map of LEARN sites and other ERI field sites in the Southwest. 
A central component of the ERI´s studies of restoration treatments is the Long-term Ecological 
Assessment and Restoration Network (LEARN). The network covers the ponderosa pine forests 
of Arizona from the Arizona Strip in the northwest through the eastern Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests on the Arizona-New Mexico border. Additional sites are located in Colorado 
and New Mexico. The network includes ponderosa pine and mixed conifer forests, as well as 
piñon-juniper woodlands. Each site is set up as a stand-alone controlled, replicated 
experimental study testing a full restoration treatment (i.e., thinning young trees to restore 
historical density, spatial pattern, and species composition; treatment of fuels; re-introduction of 
low-severity surface fire), and an untreated control. The LEARN sites are located on public 
lands including U.S. Forest Service, BLM, National Park Service, DOD, and state lands. 
Depending on the needs and interests of the managing agency and other stakeholders, 
additional treatments are tested. Examples of additional treatments include comparison of 
different levels of thinning (Fort Valley: Coconino National Forest), testing a “minimal” 
thinning alternative (Grand Canyon National Park), and burn-only treatments (Kaibab, Apache-
Sitgreaves, and San Juan national forests) (Figure 2). The excellent data obtained from the 
LEARN sites is made possible by a substantial investment in human and computing resources; 
these investments pay off when information is quickly transferred from questions and concepts 
to documented information for management. 
The strong scientific design of the LEARN network has resulted in many well-documented 
contributions to knowledge. Examples include the restoration of understory plant community 
composition and productivity (Laughlin et al. 2006, Moore et al. 2006, Laughlin et al. 2008), 
mortality of old trees (Fulé et al. 2007), and assessment of minimal-impact restoration 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
45 
 
treatments (Fulé et al. 2006)—all important issues when considering restoration at either the 
project or landscape scale.  
Restoration-based fuel reduction in piñon-juniper ecosystems provides an example of the ERI´s 
impact in research and development of treatments. Relatively little is known about the fire 
ecology, historical fire regimes, or fire hazards of piñon-juniper ecosystems (Baker and 
Shinneman 2005), despite the fact that piñon-juniper comprises the greatest extent of woody 
vegetation in the Southwest and the Intermountain West. The ERI, in partnership with federal 
and state agencies, initiated early research more than a decade ago in northwestern Arizona.  
Under the Act, the ERI expanded piñon-juniper research to the southwestern region (Figure 3). 
We carried out the first landscape-scale, dendrochronologically precise piñon-juniper fire 
history reconstructions in Arizona and New Mexico, contributing useful information for 
management and finding a new perspective (small-scale, patchy, severe fires) that had been 
missing from previous analyses (Huffman et al. 2008a). The ERI worked with the Kaibab 
National Forest to implement a test of ecologically based cutting and burning treatments in 
piñon-juniper near the Grand Canyon, showing that fuel loads could be reduced while 
conserving old trees (Huffman et al. 2009). Finally, the ERI staff demonstrated that native 
understory species could be restored on harsh piñon-juniper sites by making use of thinning 
residues to enhance soil moisture (Stoddard et al. 2008). These advances have been shared with 
managers in the field and at professional meetings (Huffman et al. 2008b). Under the current 
ERI work plan, we are initiating a systematic review of piñon-juniper fire ecology and 
expanding treatment efforts to larger landscapes in collaboration with land management 
agencies. 
Follow links for full reports of ERI Ecology Group activities from 2004-2005, 2005-2006, and 
2007. 
2) Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework; 
In order for restoration to make a significant impact on the multiple threats to forest ecosystem 
sustainability in the Interior West, treatment activities must move beyond small-scale 
experiments to large landscapes. As scale increases, there is increased need and opportunity to 
use adaptive management to answer critical questions about effects on wide-ranging species.  
The premier example of the ERI´s work to adapt research findings to large-scale treatments is 
the Mt. Trumbull ecosystem restoration project in northwestern Arizona. Beginning in 1995, this 
multi-scale collaborative project brought together federal land managers, state wildlife experts, 
and ERI scientists to develop a joint project that remains the largest, permanently monitored 
forest restoration project in the Southwest. Information that had been derived from the scientific 
literature and from the results of the ERI’s early work was integrated to develop a landscape-
scale test of restoration methods. Prior to treatment, the landscape was measured with 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
46 
 
permanent plots for key vegetation, fuel, and wildlife variables. Studies of mobile species, 
which cannot be accurately done on small plots, were designed into the Mt. Trumbull 
treatments: subjects included invertebrates, small mammals, passerine birds, squirrels, and 
deer. The long-term Mt. Trumbull treatments were still in progress when the Act was 
authorized. Since then, the ERI staff has developed syntheses of the effects of large-scale 
treatments on potential fire behavior (Roccaforte et al. 2008). Carrying the adaptive 
management cycle to completion, we carried out the first landscape-scale monitoring 
assessment of a southwestern forest restoration project that included both implementation 
monitoring (Were the project activities done correctly?) and effectiveness monitoring (Did it 
achieve the desired ecological result?) (Roccaforte et al. 2009). The Mt. Trumbull project is also 
notable for providing the earliest and best-documented research on restoration effects on 
wildlife, through the partnership with the Arizona Game & Fish Department (e.g., Wightman 
and Germaine 2006). 
The greater Grand Canyon region comprises a vast landscape within which ERI-supported 
restoration projects are contributing to improved management and conservation. For several 
years, the ERI staff has worked to characterize historical forest conditions and fire regimes in 
this region along an elevational gradient from ponderosa pine to spruce-fir forests (Fulé et al. 
2002, 2003). Ecological information was applied to test restoration treatments at LEARN sites in 
Grand Canyon National Park and the Kaibab National Forest, as well as testing the effects of 
landscape-scale wildland fire use treatments (Fulé and Laughlin 2007, Laughlin and Fulé 2008). 
Under current ERI work plans, we are using the results of this work to expand large-scale 
studies to the western Grand Canyon region. 
Looking ahead to the near future, the ERI is collaborating with numerous stakeholders in the 
largest landscape-scale forest restoration effort proposed to date--a project covering several 
hundreds of thousands of acres in Arizona. Currently four national forests in Arizona (Apache-
Sitgreaves, Coconino, Kaibab, Tonto) are joining forces to initiate the project. The ERI 
anticipates providing scientific support through syntheses of existing information, development 
of new information, and outreach to managers and the public on all aspects of restoration 
science. This work, again, is built on the foundation of knowledge and experience that the ERI 
has achieved during the past decade of work, including that funded by the Act. 
3) Translate for, and transfer to, affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction treatments; 
Since 2005, the ERI has translated scientific information to affected entities through a variety of 
means: working papers, white papers, fact sheets, web site/e-Library, workshops, and 
presentations. The following is a summary of work in those outreach areas. 
Working Papers 
The ERI Working Papers series presents and translates scientific findings from the research and 
observations of ERI researchers as well as researchers from other organizations and universities. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
47 
 
These findings serve as the basis for the management recommendations that are the primary 
focus of each working paper. Each working paper deals with a particular topic. Topics are 
chosen for their relevance to land managers because they represent the largest audience for 
these publications. The ERI Working Paper series has published 14 papers during the past five 
years. Some of the topics include: restoring understory communities, restoring forest roads, 
treating slash following restoration treatments, controlling invasive species, effects of forest 
thinning treatments on fire behavior, managing coarse woody debris, the effects of prescribed 
and Wildland Fire Use fires, and developing spatial patterns in southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests. Working papers are sent by mail and/or electronically to 1,300 affected entities 
throughout the Southwest and beyond. They are also posted on the ERI web site and in the ERI 
e-Library. 
White Papers 
The ERI White Paper series is designed to reach policymakers, social scientists, and, to some 
extent, land managers with information about socio-economic issues related to forest 
restoration and hazardous fuels reduction. During the past five years, the ERI has published 11 
white papers on a variety of topics. These include: carbon sequestration and forest health, 
public perceptions of forest restoration, effectiveness of communications between U.S. Forest 
Service personnel and homeowners in a high fire hazard area, wilderness management and the 
restoration of fire to the landscape, Forest Service contracting, community stewardship and the 
White Mountains Stewardship Contract, multiparty monitoring, and collaboration within a 
natural resource management context. White papers are sent by mail and/or electronically to 
1,300 affected entities throughout the Southwest and beyond. They are also posted on the ERI 
web site and in the ERI e-Library. 
Fact Sheets 
The ERI produced six fact sheets during the last five years. These relatively brief papers have 
covered topics such as: understanding fire and fire behavior, restoring the ecological and social 
integrity of western forests, forest restoration treatments and fire behavior, diameter caps and 
their effects on restoration treatments, and accounting for watershed and other resource values 
in the NEPA process. 
Multiparty Monitoring Handbooks 
In 2005, the ERI, along with several partners, produced a six-book series about multiparty 
monitoring as part of the U.S. Forest Service Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP). 
These books, which cover a wide range of topics from budgeting to collecting data, have proven 
an invaluable resource for participants in the CFRP and other local groups who are concerned 
about hazardous fuels reduction and restoration. The series has been recently updated and is 
available on-line at: http://www.eri.nau.edu/joomla/content/view/109/120/lang,en/ 
Web site/e-Library 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
48 
 
The ERI web site at http://www.eri.nau.edu has been on-line and continuously updated during 
the past five years. The site has numerous pages covering all aspects of the organization’s 
mission and work. It also features an extensive e-Library that holds all ERI publications and 
other media efforts. Recently, we have added video clips of presentations and teaching to the 
site. More features, including a photo gallery, are planned for the near future. In 2008 and 2009, 
Dave Egan (ERI editor/writer) and Krista Coquia (ERI web design/maintenance) conducted 
surveys of web site use and made suggestions for updates.  
 
Publications Survey 
In 2008, Dave Egan, in collaboration with local survey consultant, Anne Mottek Lucas, 
conducted an on-line survey of people who receive our outreach publications electronically. 
This information has been analyzed and will be used to better address the needs of those 
people—land managers, policymakers, academics, interested citizens—who receive ERI 
publications and visit the ERI web site. A summary of the survey results can found at this link.  
Other Publications 
The ERI played a major role in the writing (Diane Vosick) and editing (Dave Egan) of the 
Statewide Strategy for Restoring Arizona’s Forests—a document commissioned by then-
Governor Napolitano that has since its publication in 2007 served as the basis for restoration 
efforts in the state. 
Workshops 
During the past five years, the ERI Agency Outreach team conducted 13 workshops for agency 
land managers. In these workshops, ERI Agency Outreach personnel provided information 
about ecological restoration and how it could be applied to federal lands to reduce hazard fuels 
while meeting other goals and objectives of the agency.   
The ERI hosted the Conserving and Restoring Old Growth in Frequent-fire Forests of the 
American West in April 2006. This workshop produced a series of papers that were published 
in the on-line journal, Ecology & Society 
(http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/viewissue.php?sf=33). The authors “make a case for taking 
a new look at managing for old growth—one that recognizes the regional and climatic 
differences in forest ecosystems and the effects those variations have on disturbance processes, 
such as surface fire, and, consequently, on forest structure and composition; one that 
understands that, in many dry western forests, catastrophic crown fire, not logging, is now the 
greatest threat to old growth; one that appreciates the need for a tempered, but active, hands-on 
management approach; and one that recognizes that we may have the technical means to make 
a difference in the forests, but we must do a better job of educating and social marketing to 
change peoples’ behaviors.” 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
49 
 
In October 2006, the ERI and SWERI hosted a three-day workshop titled, Conserving and 
Restoring Frequent-fire Landscapes of the West: Linking Science, Collaboration, and Practice. 
The meeting was held on the NAU campus and featured field trips to restoration sites in the 
greater Flagstaff area. Several presentations at the workshop can be accessed at the following 
link: http://www.eri.nau.edu/joomla/content/view/44/85/lang,en/. 
In 2007, the ERI conducted two workshops for practitioners. The first was a meeting with 23 
representatives from the Bureau of Land Management, Arizona Game & Fish Department, and 
the ERI included a field trip to a restoration treatment site in Williams, Arizona. In the second 
workshop, which was attended by 42 participants, Dave Huffman (ERI researcher) presented a 
half-day continuing education for ecosystem managers (CEEM) course on ecological 
restoration. 
The ERI hosted the SWERI Biophysical Monitoring Workshop in October 2008 on the NAU 
campus. The workshop organizers assembled people from throughout the Southwest to discuss 
monitoring forest restoration from four specialized perspectives (botany, wildlife, fire, and 
forestry) and at two different scales—project and landscape. The results of their discussions 
indicate that there are existing methodologies that could be employed to determine whether a 
restoration treatment has been successful in reducing hazardous fuels and restoring the forest. 
A link to the report is available at: 
http://www.eri.nau.edu/joomla/files/NewsEvents/MonitoringWorkshopReport.pdf. 
Presentations 
During the past five years, ERI personnel have made presentations to land managers and other 
groups interested in matters related to ecological restoration and hazardous fuels reduction. For 
example, in 2007, the ERI conducted 33 presentations to various groups in Arizona, New 
Mexico, Texas, Utah, Colorado, and Montana. In addition, ERI staff led ten field trips for diverse 
audiences to demonstrate and discuss the outcomes of forest restoration on ecological health 
and wildfire behavior. 
4) Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches (including 
monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuels reduction 
treatments; 
The ERI Agency Outreach Team participated in the planning for 23 fuels reduction projects 
during the past five years. These projects took place on lands administered by the U.S. Forest 
Service, including each of the national forests in Arizona, and several national forests in New 
Mexico. Each project was undertaken following a request from the U.S. Forest Service personnel 
for ERI services. Featured projects during this time period include: Jim Lewis 
Project/Sacramento Ranger District/Lincoln National Forest and Eager South Wildland-Urban 
Interface Fuel Reduction Project/Springerville District/Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. 
Jim Lewis Project 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
50 
 
In June 2008, the Sacramento Ranger District Interdisciplinary Planning Team asked the ERI 
Agency Outreach Team to provide them with information about the pre-European settlement 
stand structure in mixed conifer, ponderosa pine, and piñon-juniper sections of the forest. The 
ERI team established plots and conducted rapid assessments in the mixed conifer and 
ponderosa pine forests (piñon-juniper areas were not studied because a 1953 fire destroyed 
most of the pre-settlement evidence). All areas studied proved to be outside the range of natural 
variability for tree density and fuel loading. The ERI team provided a report of their findings, 
including recommendations for possible land management actions to restore the forest and 
reduce fuel loads. The ERI Agency Outreach Team has performed similar studies on many 
national forests sites in Arizona and New Mexico. 
Eager South Project 
In preparation of an Environmental Assessment for the Eager South Wildland-Urban Interface 
Fuel Reduction Project, the Interdisciplinary Planning Team from the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests requested assistance from the ERI to help determine pre-European settlement 
stand structure information. The ERI Agency Outreach Team used their rapid assessment 
techniques to compare tree densities and fuel loading between pre-European settlement and 
current conditions. The U.S. Forest Service then authorized about 3,600 acres for restoration 
treatments, including a 400-acre block, south of Point of the Mountain, where the ERI Agency 
Outreach Team advised and assisted the U.S. Forest Service personnel with implementing a full 
restoration mark. This plot has become a template for ecological restoration/hazardous fuels 
reduction in Region 3. 
Members of the ERI Agency Outreach Team have also been active participants in the Greater 
Ruidoso Area Wildland-Urban Interface Working Group, since the group’s inception in 2000. 
As part of this effort, they have participated in the planning, reviewing, and monitoring more 
than 36 projects implemented by the Mescalero BIA, Mescalero Tribal Forestry, Bureau of Land 
Management, Village of Ruidoso, Lincoln County (NM), New Mexico State Forestry, and the 
Lincoln National Forest. 
In addition to work undertaken by the ERI Agency Outreach Team, then ERI Research 
Specialist, Jesse Abrams, conducted a needs assessment for collaborative planning in the White 
Mountains (http://www.eri.nau.edu/joomla/files/Research/WMNeedsAssessmentFinal.pdf). 
This initial study provided significant data to the White Mountains Landscape Data Atlas 
(http://www.forestera.nau.edu/docs/WMLA_Data_Atlas_21Feb06.pdf). The ERI supported this 
project and Jesse was part of the team of researchers. Jesse and other ERI staff (Anne Moote, 
Matt Tuten) were also active in several CFRP projects in New Mexico and the Pinalenos Group 
in southern Arizona, working with stakeholders in these areas on monitoring and collaboration 
issues. 
5) Provide peer-reviewed annual reports. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
51 
 
The ERI has prepared annual reports. They have been circulated among our stakeholder group 
for comment before being submitted. The 2006 and 2007 annual reports are available by 
following the links.  
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
52 
 
Appendix B - Interviewees 
 
James Allen 
 
Executive Director 
 
Northern Arizona School of Forestry 
Dennis Becker  
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Forest Resources, 
University of Minnesota 
Butch Blazer 
 
State Forester 
 
New Mexico 
Tony S. Cheng 
 
Director 
 
Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
Wally Covington 
Director 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
Doug Cram 
NMSU Cooperative Extension 
Carol Ekarius  
 
Executive Director 
 
Coalition for the Upper South Platte 
Bill Ferranti 
Alamo Navajo School Board 
Sam Foster  
 
Director 
 
Rocky Mountain Research Station 
Ron Gardiner 
Land and Water Clinic 
Michael Henio 
Ramah Navajo Chapter 
Jeff Jahnke 
State Forester 
Colorado State Forest Service 
Chad Julian 
Forestry Supervisor 
Boulder County Parks & Open Space 
Carmine Lockwood   
Staff Officer 
 
Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, & Gunnison 
National Forest 
Mark Meyers 
New Mexico State Land Office 
Pam Motley  
 
Outreach Coordinator  
Uncompahgre Plateau Partnership 
Anne Mottek Lucas 
Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership 
Corbin Newman 
 
Regional Forester 
U.S. Forest Service  
Paul Orbuch 
Orbuch Consulting 
R. Kent Reid 
Interim Director NMFWRI 
NMHU  
Susan Rich 
Forest and Watershed Health Office 
State Forestry 
Steve Rosenstock  
Wildlife Biologist 
 
Arizona Game and Fish Department 
Paul Summerfelt  
 
Fuel Management Officer 
City of Flagstaff Fire Department 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
 
 
 
Appendix C - Summary of Affected Entity Interviews 
 
Summary of Interviews with Affected Entities with Respect to NMFWRI 
1) What has been the value-added contribution of the Institute?  What difference has the 
Institute’s contributions made?   
Interviewees reported many tangible benefits from their interactions with the NMFWRI, 
especially with regards to training, help with prescriptions, monitoring, GIS/mapping 
support, and assistance in building collaborative partnerships.  A “Joint Powers Agreement” 
with the New Mexico Forest and Watershed Office is a mechanism that has been especially 
helpful, because it has enabled State government to accomplish work that could not have 
been undertaken without the Agreement.  Some examples of value-added contributions 
follow: 
a. The Alamo Navajo School Board got involved with the Institute as a result of a 
Collaborative Forest Restoration Program (CFRP) grant. The CFRP grant targets Alamo 
Navajo band members who are unemployed in an effort to train them with marketable 
skills. The Institute’s efforts were instrumental in helping get that program established. 
Their technical expertise with regard to needed equipment and training for two different 
crews in hands-on chain saw training and monitoring protocol was viewed as 
invaluable.  
b. Under the previously mentioned CFRP grant there was a need to thin 120 acres in the 
Gallinas region of the Magdalena District, on the Cibola National Forest. Institute staff 
trained the grantee’s personnel, and helped map and set the 13 permanent monitoring 
points for the thinning. In addition, they helped perform the actual monitoring, using 
the standard stand exam and three wildlife transects. When faced with questions about 
whether it was possible under current prescription caps and cutting guides for the 
grantee to meet the final project goals, the Institute analyzed the data and came to the 
conclusion that they could meet the goals under the caps in the prescription. This is one 
example of how Institute staff helped with resolving questions over a potential problem.  
c. The Institute helped put together a four day hands-on chain saw training course for 
crew members to teach safety and felling techniques that they would otherwise not have 
learned. The course was instrumental in grounding students and crew in restoration 
programs. Because of the Institute’s training, the crew built ownership in the program 
and in the concept of ecological restoration. 
d. The NM Forest Industry Association, the entity in charge of safety training for the State, 
is looking at the curriculum developed by the Institute that was used for a hands-on 
safety training event conducted for one group. It is hoped that the training might be 
implemented statewide. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
54 
 
e. To date, there have been no rigorous research products produced on a regular basis such 
as graduate research manuscripts or peer-reviewed papers related to hazardous fuel-
reduction treatments or other issues.  However, there has been a dedicated effort to 
monitor forest stands for trend data.  Management and restoration recommendations by 
the Institute have come from synthesizing current and past literature.  Although the 
Institute is seen as having done a good job of making available knowledge about 
restoration treatments to the federal agencies and private stakeholders through their 
webpage, handouts, and conferences, interviewees commented that they would like the 
Institute be even more active in getting products into circulation and use. 
f. The NMFWRI has provided unique and independent support for fuels reduction 
planning and monitoring through Taos County in a variety of partnerships with the 
Carson National Forest, the Taos County Government, and the Village of Questa. Their 
GIS staff played a key role in several CWPP CORE team plan developments.  
g. The NMFWRI is providing unique benefits to New Mexico watershed groups and 
community constituents in terms of independent science technology and data. In 
particular, the GIS mapping department at NMFWRI is viewed as a key state wide 
resource that would be otherwise unavailable.  
2) What has been the role of affected entities in the Institute’s planning and program 
development process? 
 
The Institute is an instrumental participant in the State’s Forest and Watershed Health 
Office Coordinating Group, which meets quarterly.  
 
The Institute’s Advisory Group has been an effective mechanism for affected entities to 
provide input.  The upcoming selection of a permanent director will provide an 
opportunity to revisit the Advisory Group’s charge, composition, and functioning – i.e., 
to review the best way to truly involve stakeholders and to possibly make some changes 
to improve the Advisory Group’s effectiveness. 
 
 
The Institute has been responsive to recommendations for tailoring training to meet 
specific needs and goals. 
3) What has been the experience of affected entities in terms of the Institute’s 
responsiveness to their needs (timeliness, quality of response, effectiveness)? 
The sense from the interviews is that the NMFWRI is very responsive to affected entities’ 
needs and that they produce high quality results quickly. Interviewees commented 
specifically on the Institute’s responsiveness with regards to GIS, monitoring, thinning 
prescriptions, and serving as an education resource.  The following comments reflect 
interview sentiments regarding the Institute’s services: 
 
“Staff of the Institute are some of the best in the field”.   

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
55 
 
 
“The Institute has always been there when needed and provided answers to questions. 
Staff listen carefully to problems and unique situations, and then formulate an 
appropriate response. The quality provided has always been professional and effective”. 
 
“The NMFWRI is surprisingly efficient considering the numbers of State-wide projects 
they are engaged in.” 
 
Their level of monitoring is just right – not too much.  They do a great job steering 
treatments in the right direction.” 
4) What issues or concerns have emerged in your interactions with the Institutes? How were 
these issues addressed? 
Some concern was expressed about the NMFWRI being able to deliver services because of 
its limited funding base. 
Transition at the director’s level has resulted in some commitments not being followed up 
on as personnel were changed.  These situations were eventually resolved, and are not 
expected to re-occur. 
5) What recommendations do you have for improving the Institute’s service in the future?  
a. Enhance the work it is already doing as an independent source of science, technology 
and data.  Among the specific recommendations in this area were:  
 
Continue the momentum that is already established toward the creation of a 
statewide web portal.  
 
Develop into a strong entity that will provide extensive support for monitoring 
and assessment, the tools needed to succeed with  large-scale restoration 
treatments, and the follow up that is going to be needed for this landscape-scale 
restoration work.  
 
Offer more and longer trainings; one example: provide a 160 hour course 
comprised of hands on training, more in depth monitoring training, silviculture 
and safety training.  
 
Develop a watershed collaborative resource center, dedicated to facilitating 
watershed community plans and project development. 
 
Restart a forest worker safety program that has been tabled. 
 
Expand the opportunities available under the existing Joint Powers Agreement 
by developing additional projects to benefit the State Forest and Watershed 
Office. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
56 
 
b. Build its research capacity.  To be effective, “ahead of the curve”, and responsive to the 
needs of New Mexico stakeholders,  some interviewees encouraged the Institute to 
develop a significant research program, accomplished through formal partnerships with 
other universities, since New Mexico Highlands University has limited research 
capabilities.   
c. Function as the collaborative hub of water and natural resource management agencies in 
the State for planning and monitoring support, and for helping promote coordination 
among multiple land managers on landscapes with checkerboard ownership. The 
NMFWRI should be a key adjunct for the New Mexico State Water Plan, the New 
Mexico Forest and Watershed Health Plan and the New Mexico Non Native 
Phreatophyte Watershed Management Plan.   
d. Build institutional strength and capacity, specifically: 
 
Develop the forestry school at Highlands University in a way that does not 
detract from the Institute – the two entities should complement rather than 
compete with one another. 
 
Make sure there is a direct line from the Institute to the President of the 
University.  The Institute needs strong support from the University to succeed.   
 
Make sure the permanent director is a great communicator, able to sell the 
Institute’s programs. There is a real need to make others in NM aware of, and 
willing to utilize, the Institute’s services. 
6) What has been the Institute’s role in promoting, implementing, and gaining wider 
acceptance for restoration-based adaptive ecosystem management? 
 
a. The Institute has been helpful in translating the concept of restoration-based adaptive 
ecosystem management into terms that the lay person can understand. An example was 
an Institute report on the analysis of the caps in a prescription.  The information and 
data was presented manner that could be used by people who are not necessarily 
familiar with the terms used by forestry professionals. The simpler language made it 
easier to understand restoration objectives and accomplishments. 
b. The Institute has been effective in “selling” restoration to training crews by teaching 
them restoration fundamentals.  
7) In what ways has the Institute contributed to reducing planning costs, duplication, and/or 
avoiding conflicts? 
Interviewees provided the following concrete examples of cost savings 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
57 
 
 
The NM Watershed Health Plan called for a State-wide information clearing house.  The 
Institute has made a significant contribution in that regard by taking on development of 
a State-wide web portal.  Such a portal was impossible under State auspices because of 
IT security concerns.  This initiative illustrates the ability of the Institute to do things that 
state and federal agencies are sometimes unable to accomplish – saving agency money 
as well as responding to a State-wide need.  
 
The Institute provided in-kind training that has enabled an affected entity to save funds 
and use the money to keep a restoration crew moving forward. 
 
The Institute has taken an active role in collaborating with the CFRP program to assist 
grant recipients across the state with their monitoring requirements. 
 
Funders have demonstrated more confidence and willingness to commit resources when 
the Institute is involved because they know they are more likely to get good results.   
 
By working closely with other entities to address landscape needs collaboratively, the 
Institute has helped get a bigger “bang for the buck” when resources were limited. 
8) In what ways has the Institute promoted improved cooperation – with local entities? 
Regionally? With Federal agencies? 
Interviewees provided the following examples of improved cooperation that has resulted 
from the Institute’s efforts: 
 
The Institute helped write a CFRP grant that was subsequently funded due in part to the 
support from the Institute.  CFRP grants require collaboration and cooperation among 
multiple stakeholders. 
 
Staff at the Institute have travelled across the state to help meet collaboration needs.   
 
 
The Institute has helped build connections between affected entities and all levels of 
government as well as with the private sector. In one notable example, the Institute 
arranged for an existing Tribal forestry crew to show new crews how to perform 
equipment maintenance and production cutting –effectively bridging a cultural gap.  
According to the interviewee it would not have happened without the Institute’s help.  
9) Are there any other insights or suggestions regarding past or future work of the 
Institutes? 
Having the stability of a permanent director will be a benefit.  Strong leadership will be the 
key to the Institute’s continuing success. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
58 
 
Summary of Interviews with Affected Entities with Respect to CFRI 
1) What has been the value-added contribution of the Institute? What difference has the 
Institute’s contributions made? 
a. One of the most frequently cited contributions by CFRI is the service it has provided as 
an intermediary and facilitator.  CFRI has a demonstrated ability to serve as a bridging 
organization by bringing together diverse groups, effectively identifying the issues of 
greatest concern, and developing action plans for moving forward constructively. 
Specifically, the CFRI has provided assistance to several groups by soliciting appropriate 
stakeholder involvement, developing mission statements or charters, reviewing 
potential methods of increasing financial support (including the formation of non-
profits), assisting in the development of common agreement within groups concerning 
knowledge transfer of forest management science to various publics, and intervening as 
an intermediary when issues have arisen.  Interviewees said this kind of linkage has 
been invaluable.   
A concrete result of CFRI’s facilitative ability is vastly improved communications 
between researchers and land managers. In Colorado there are several research centers 
dealing with forest ecology, management, and restoration concerns, including the Rocky 
Mountain Research Center, The University of Colorado, and the US Geological Survey.  
CFRI has successfully opened up dialogue to address concerns about research projects 
that land managers did not view as addressing their needs; CFRI has also helped 
researchers understand some of the practical limitations faced by land managers. As a 
result, relationships among groups that were previously at odds are vastly improved.  
Another example is CFRI’s role within the scientific community to help resolve 
disagreements about terminology – again a significant shift has occurred thanks to 
CFRI’s intervention.   
b. CFRI has directly impacted on-the-ground restoration by providing information 
concerning best management practices to achieve healthy and sustainable ecosystems 
through proper restoration techniques that have been incorporated into management 
plans and field work. CFRI’s evidence-based assessments have helped forest managers 
feel more confident about treatment recommendations, especially when these treatments 
have been viewed as controversial. They have also contributed important expertise by 
developing multi-party monitoring protocols and teaching monitoring techniques.  
According to one interviewee, CFRI has helped its managers “view the forest differently 
than we did five years ago”.  Another interviewee noted that “CFRI has contributed to a 
mindset change regarding forest management”.  
c. CFRI is also playing an important role in helping to educate the public about ecological 
restoration. Specifically, they are assisting in the establishment of a public 
demonstration project and in organizing fieldtrips.  These kinds of efforts are seen as 
having the potential to produce huge benefits down the road.  
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
59 
 
2) What has been the role of affected entities in the Institute’s planning and program 
development process? 
Interviewees reported primarily informal communications with the director regarding the 
Institute’s planning and program development processes – and a strong sense that he is 
extremely welcoming of that kind of communication and open to ideas.   
Involvement of people in from Colorado on the Executive Team was noted as another 
effective communication avenue with CFRI and all the Institutes.  
3) What has been the experience of affected entities in terms of the Institute’ responsiveness 
to their needs (timeliness, quality of response, effectiveness)? 
The CFRI has steadily improved over time and currently gets high marks for responsiveness 
and effectiveness. Many interviewees attributed the Institute’s recent successes to the 
quality of Tony Cheng’s leadership, and in particular his understanding of community 
forestry and collaboration.  Several people talked about how accessible and receptive he is, 
and how willing to address needs that arise.  His willingness to “hold the U.S. Forest 
Service’s toes to the fire” was also noted as something that was much appreciated – 
especially since the perception was that there is not anyone else in the State to play that role.  
A few interviewees commented on the perception that CFRI’s effectiveness is limited by 
staffing and resources.  They say it does an outstanding job given those limitations, 
accomplishing a great deal with only a few part time people, but that CFRI is nevertheless 
constrained by those limitations.   
4) What issues or concerns have emerged in your interactions with the Institute? How were 
these issues addressed? 
a. One interviewee mentioned that the accounts payable process is extremely slow.  This is 
not necessarily the fault of CFRI, because finances flow through the university, but it has 
apparently been a bothersome issue for years. 
b. In years past, the Institute had ideas on management responses to fire mitigation issues 
that significantly conflicted with others’ views. Those differences have been resolved. 
c. Another past concern was the perceived overlap of CFRI objectives and responsibilities 
with those of some other entities in the State, and confusion about who was the 
lead/decision-maker when perspectives differed. This issue was effectively resolved by 
clearly defining the role of the CFRI.   
5) What recommendations do you have for improving the Institute’s service in the future?  
Interviewees had a number of concrete suggestions for CFRI’s future direction: 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
60 
 
a. Respond to Colorado’s urgent need to re-energize its forest products industry and 
develop new methods to utilize the massive amount of dead timber (the result of 
mountain pine beetle and other insect infestations). The CFRI has started to work in this 
arena and the Institute should continue to keep this as a priority. Restoration work will 
be significantly impaired without adequate outlets for the raw materials removed as a 
result of forest management projects. 
b. Become a central repository for restoration information in Colorado, and, specifically, to 
information about  the Front Range.  Recent CFRI reports on forest restoration are very 
helpful, but when conducting a search for available material it is hard to know where to 
begin and where to look.  CFRI could make a significant contribution by providing more 
ready access to Colorado-specific materials. . 
c. Convene a meeting about the possible unforeseen consequences in 100 years of current 
management practices across western landscapes (i.e., look for analogies to management 
approaches like fire suppression, which has had such catastrophic results).   
d. Develop a stronger presence in cross-boundary efforts, and go beyond just federal land 
management projects.  This is imperative because many restoration-based adaptive 
ecosystem management needs span federal and non-federal boundaries.  CFRI can 
demonstrate a leadership role in developing a cross-jurisdictional demonstration project 
that meets both short-term wildfire risk mitigation goals and long-term forest 
stewardship and resilience goals.   
e. Increase funding from Congress and broaden the scope of legislation that created CFRI 
to allow the Institute to address major needs that are currently beyond its capacity.  
According to one interviewee: “CFRI’s impact has always been hampered by 
embarrassingly minimal funding. It barely has sufficient funding for supporting the 
directorship, a full-time program associate, and a small number of projects.  While it is 
always the case that more funding is needed, it is definitely the case with CFRI.  At its 
existing funding levels of about $250K/year, CFRI can barely meet demands for its 
services and existing projects, let alone be able to grow and expand its reach and 
impact”.   Several interviewees emphasized the needs associated with the pine beetle 
infestation – an enormous, looming problem for Colorado’s Front Range over the next 
decade and beyond.  They suggested that with more resources CFRI could provide 
critical assistance with both the science and the community response to beetle-kill forest 
management, which is likely to be extremely controversial.  As the legislation reads, this 
issue falls outside the Act’s specification of addressing restoration in dry frequent-fire 
forest types, as lodgepole pine is considered a moist, infrequent-fire forest type (fires 
every 100-350 years). 
6) What has been the Institute’s role in promoting, implementing, and gaining wider 
acceptance for restoration-based adaptive ecosystem management? 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
61 
 
Interviewees reported that CFRI has played a significant role in the restoration arena, 
and that it has grown over time: 
 
Increasingly, CFRI is becoming a go-to source of information for adaptive ecosystem 
management. The Institute’s current emphasis on investigating the effect of 
restoration efforts is helping further knowledge and effectively encouraging 
landowners to complete management work on their land. 
 
The Uncompahgre Plateau Mesas Forest Restoration Demonstration Project (“UP 
Mesas”) was cited as a current demonstration project for restoration-based adaptive 
ecosystem management.  According to interviewees, it has all the necessary elements 
for a successful initiative:  strong agency leadership, active and interested 
stakeholder involvement, collective desire for a strong science basis for defining 
goals and prescriptions, and a commitment to monitoring and learning – all 
developed with support from CFRI.   
 
CFRI has helped promote broader understanding of the value of restoration and the 
need for projects that are economically viable.  As a result, many in the 
environmental community (and others) who were previously opposed to treatments 
are now more willing to accept them. 
 
CFRI is helping managers think about restoration in bigger picture terms – by 
encouraging and facilitating work across boundaries. 
 
Through education and outreach CFRI has been a catalyst for putting fire back into 
the ecosystem.  In one example an interviewee described having conducted more 
prescribed burning last year than in the previous 10 years – as a direct result of what 
had been learned from CFRI.   
7) In what ways has the Institute contributed to reducing planning costs, duplication, 
and/or avoiding conflicts? 
 
CFRI support for monitoring has been an important way in which they have helped 
focus work to be more efficient and cost effective.  They are also engaged in 
monitoring the costs of monitoring – so that future monitoring efforts can be 
designed to be even more cost effective.   
 
Small non-profit organizations and local governments have reaped financial (and 
other) benefits from CFRI through the Institute’s support for conferences, 
subsidizing meeting attendance, providing consultation on planning issues and 
management questions, setting up site visits, etc.  This kind of service is especially 
beneficial for small organizations and local government agencies that lack the 
resources of larger entities.  CFRI’s assistance to these groups also leverages impact 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
62 
 
across broader landscapes and promotes cross boundary and cross jurisdictional 
cooperation and efficiency. 
 
The CFRI is taking an active role in assembling stakeholders to engage in discussions 
about forest management issues. The Institute has been successful in convening a 
broad constituency in open, non-threatening forums so that individual and group 
perspectives can be presented and understood by all.  This allows thoughtful 
consideration about how to meet restoration needs while avoiding conflicts and 
duplication.  
8) In what ways has the Institute promoted improved cooperation – with local entities? 
Regionally? With Federal agencies? 
The CFRI is well respected for its ability to tackle highly polarized issues, develop 
common ground, and keep groups focused on areas of mutual concern.  The CFRI is 
viewed as credible and skilled in working with diverse groups on complex and 
sometimes controversial projects.  Interviewees provided numerous examples: 
 
The collaboration workshops conducted by the CFRI have been mechanisms for 
opening dialogue among groups that may be competing for the same funds or 
political assistance. These groups are beginning to work together on issues such as 
bark beetle impacts and improving the forest products industry. 
 
CFRI has had a lead role in organizing and managing the transition of the Colorado 
Bark Beetle Cooperative (CBBC) from an intergovernmental cooperative to a multi-
stakeholder collaborative.  Through CFRI’s efforts, the CBBC has built on its legacy 
of cooperation between federal, state, and local entities, and expanded its reach to 
other government agencies and non-governmental entities.  It is now a model for a 
regional, place-based collaboratives focused on forest health-related goals and 
objectives.  Its success is manifested in increased attention from policy-makers and 
funding for priority projects. 
 
CFRI participated in the development of management guidelines for ponderosa pine 
and lodgepole pine. 
 
CFRI has contributed science synthesis and management trainings for piñon-juniper 
forest types in response to widespread need of managers to gain greater 
understanding of P-J dynamics and management options.   
 
CFRI provides financial support for a position with COWOOD and the Colorado 
Forest Products marketing program. 
 
CFRI has consulted with the Colorado State Forest Service (CSFS) on the Forest 
Health Advisory Council and the Statewide Forest Resource Strategy, with CFRI 
convening a series of regional strategy discussions around Colorado in fall 2009. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
63 
 
 
 
 CFRI is working on a cooperative agreement with Fort Lewis College to help 
support the testing and evaluation of a pilot Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
(CWPP) organizing framework in SW Colorado.   
 
CFRI will be facilitating listening sessions for Colorado’s draft Statewide Forest 
Resource Assessment. 
9) Are there any other insights or suggestions regarding past or future work of the 
Institute? 
Interviewees expressed a keen interest in seeing the Institute continue to assist agencies 
and Colorado landowners/residents in current research findings, monitoring protocols, 
collaboration efforts, and training.  Many believe that the CFRI can serve as an essential 
bridge between research and management, as well as continuing to provide a neutral, 
objective presence in both place-based initiatives and policy discussions.   
 
Summary of Interviews with Respect to ERI 
1) What has been the value-added contribution of the Institute? What difference has the 
Institute’s contributions made?  
Interviewees cited a number of areas where ERI has made significant value-added 
contributions:  
a. ERI’s on-the-ground projects contribute research results and serve as valuable 
learning tools for forest managers.  Field trips to ERI demonstration projects were 
noted by several interviewees as having influenced the design and implementation 
of their own treatments.  Being able to see different prescriptions tested by ERI, and 
the evolution of the ecosystem over time is widely perceived by interviewees as one 
of the most tangible contributions by ERI.  
b. ERI’s wealth of useful publications was cited by several interviewees as an 
outstanding resource for forestry professionals everywhere.  One example 
mentioned was the “Green Book on Restoration of Southwest Pine Forest ( Friederici, 
P. (ed.). 2003. Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. 
Washington, D.C.: Island Press). ”According to one interviewee, it is the best 
available publication on the topic.  ERI does a particularly good job translating 
scientific information to lay audiences and forest planners in the region. While 
occasionally controversial in its message (which is not uncommon for this subject), 
most see tremendous value in the knowledge provided. Few other entities exist that 
provide comparable knowledge.  
c. ERI’s work has had a large ripple effect – beyond Arizona or even the Southwest – 
because of the way the Institute impacts NAU forestry students who later go on to 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
64 
 
faculties and agencies around the country.  The NAU School of Forestry offers 
students on-the-ground experience with ERI.  That experience is central to their 
learning, and is often the reason they become excited about research and decided to 
continue in the field.  Interviewees see this aspect of ERI becoming increasingly 
important. 
d. ERI’s ability to leverage its value and influence is also reflected in outreach 
conducted by the city of Flagstaff. In the last 10 years the city has been able to share 
wildfire prevention expertise with about 35 other western communities at risk from 
wildfire. While not a visible product of ERI, those communities turned to Flagstaff 
because of what ERI has allowed the city to accomplish.  Many of those communities 
are outside of Arizona. 
 
e. Even though the work of ERI in the social science context has been somewhat 
limited, it was noted by some interviewees as having been very beneficial to 
furthering the role of collaboration and other social processes that have a goal of 
ecological restoration. In particular, ERI has been very beneficial in furthering the 
dialogue among lay audiences and bringing a credible, scientific, neutral voice to the 
debate on controversial forest management issues – thereby helping build 
consensus.  They have also provided opportunities for social science students even 
when their efforts might appear to be out of the “mainstream” of forestry research.  
f. ERI has catalyzed and/or provided the scientific underpinning for other important 
initiatives such as plans completed by the Arizona Forest Health Advisory Council, 
which was initiated by the governor but, behind the scenes, has benefited 
significantly from ERI’s efforts.  Other examples include the Northern Arizona 
Wood Supply Study and the Four Forests Restoration Initiative.  
g. ERI has made a direct contribution to the Arizona State Fish and Game Department 
through its work on applied habitat management.  ERI and the Department 
recognize the synergy between their respective objectives and the need to learn from 
one another about restoration and wildlife.  It has been an extremely effective 
collaboration that has benefited and strengthened both entities. 
h. ERI has emphasized monitoring and the application of adaptive management 
approaches, which have evolved considerably since the inception of ERI. ERI’s 
partnership with the Greater Flagstaff Forest Partnership (GFFP) was noted by 
interviewees as an example in which students are given the opportunity to conduct 
monitoring, supporting their education and providing useful information.  How 
monitoring information is used to inform decision making is somewhat less clear, 
but largely outside ERI’s direct responsibility.  
i. 
In Arizona, ERI played an active role on the Arizona Governors Forest Health 
Advisory Council, which led to the development of a statewide strategy.  ERI 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
65 
 
responded to specific requests for technical assistance though an extensive network 
of land managers, and it has also held numerous workshops on issues they 
determined to be of interest to a wide variety of affected entities. The ERI has also 
developed desired condition statements for restoration treatments in Northern 
Arizona. 
2) What has been the role of affected entities in the Institute’s planning and program 
development process? 
The interviewees had generally not had a role ERI’s planning and program development 
process, except through informal conversations with ERI staff. 
 
3) What has been the experience of affected entities in terms of the Institute’s 
responsiveness to their needs (timeliness, quality of response, effectiveness)? 
ERI is generally viewed as well run, responsive, timely and extremely effective.  ERI’s 
service is enhanced by having high quality, knowledgeable staff and by having public 
relations, policy, and community outreach capacity – the kinds of people who are not 
typically at research organizations.  This enables ERI to become more visible in many 
forums, e.g., local Society of American Foresters’ (SAF) meetings, the Greater Flagstaff 
Forest Partnership, the Governor’s office, Congressional delegations – thereby extending its 
reach and educational impact.  
Part of ERI’s effectiveness can be attributed to its size and organizational flexibility; it is 
large enough to be able to respond to a wide variety of needs, but small and flexible enough 
to avoid the bureaucratic rigidity of many larger government entities.   
Interviewees provided a number of comments on ERI’s exceptional level of service:  
 
Willingness to stay involved and supportive in partnerships even through the ebbs 
and flows of funding 
 
Ability to respond to requests for help, supply speakers, assist with small-scale local 
projects, etc.  
 
Generous provision of student assistance, which many interviewees noted was 
essential to their operations   
 
“Incredible in their openness and communication”.   
4) What issues or concerns have emerged in your interactions with the Institutes? How were 
these issues addressed? 
a. The issues/concerns described generally had to do with how ERI navigates its position 
as the “900 pound gorilla on the block”.  For example, some believe that ERI’s resources 
(which are substantial compared to the other two Institutes) come in part from budgets 
of other resource entities, such as the Rocky Mountain Research Station.  There are on-
going communications to deal with these perceptions. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
66 
 
b. At its inception, ERI was viewed by some as yet another “smokescreen” for clear-cutting 
and other practices – established for the purpose of benefiting the forest products 
industry.  However that concern has been largely, if not entirely ameliorated by ERI’s 
educational and outreach initiatives – which have created broad appreciation for the 
benefits of forest restoration. 
c. There is some concern that ERI’s desire and ability to respond to small, local requests 
may diminish as the Institute’s scope expands to larger scale restoration initiatives.  This 
shift has been slightly in evidence already, although not yet to a significant extent.  
(Note: this concern extends to the other Institutes as well). 
 
d. The Arizona Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council identified action items under 
their state strategy, but those items often did not correspond to U.S. Forest Service 
priorities or work plan and budget constraints.  To address this discrepancy the U.S. 
Forest Service worked with ERI to develop a plan of action that more accurately reflects 
the agency’s work planning timeframe and budget. 
5) What recommendations do you have for improving the Institute’s service in the future?  
There were a few specific suggestions for different/expanded services in the future: 
 
Put more emphasis on social science research relative to restoration, given the dearth 
of information in this area.   
 
Assume an even stronger leadership role in landscape-scale projects.   
 
Help focus the federal dollars going into fire mitigation toward more holistic 
approaches. 
 
Continue to grow the outreach aspect of its operation because of the benefit of 
having ERI’s voice in community discussions about restoration. 
 
Apply additional resources to the unanswered questions about impacts of 
restoration on wildlife. 
 
Work with the U.S. Forest Service and other affected entities to develop projects that 
implement the recommendations of the Governor’s Forest Health Advisory Council, 
and are within the budget constraints and planning horizons of the U.S. Forest 
Service and other land management agencies.  
6) What has been the Institute’s role in promoting, implementing, and gaining wider 
acceptance for restoration-based adaptive ecosystem management? 
ERI is well established as a consistent voice for restoration-based adaptive ecosystem 
management.  According to one interviewee, it is impossible to have a conversation with 
any U.S. Forest Service employee about restoration without some reference to ERI’s work.  
ERI has played a particularly significant role in promoting the monitoring aspect of 
restoration-based adaptive ecosystem management. Monitoring has historically been 
lacking, particularly in the federal agency context.  ERI has been a leader in helping to close 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
67 
 
that gap, and to extend monitoring efforts to landscape-scale ecological restoration and 
health.  ERI has also contributed significantly to monitoring efforts in a variety of local 
projects.  A couple of notable products that have resulted from their work in the restoration 
arena include:  
 
Desired Condition Statements, as a means of moving forward on the Four Forests 
Restoration Initiative in Northern Arizona.   
 
A workshop in 2008 to develop a “Framework for Monitoring the Forested Ecosystem of 
the Southwest.”   
ERI is already a leader in helping to expand the scope of restoration thinking to whole 
ecosystems – not only to the ecosystems of the Southwest, but to the whole country.  ERI has 
used its stature and credibility to promote restoration-based adaptive ecosystem 
management to the public, the Arizona State legislature and to Congress, in a very effective 
manner.   
Because of the inherently controversial nature of some of this work, ERI has sometimes been 
at the center of controversy; overall, however, ERI has succeeded in forging a healthy 
conversation about ecological restoration, leading to identification and eventual resolution 
of conflicts and differences in values and opinions. 
7) In what ways has the Institute contributed to reducing planning costs, duplication, and/or 
avoiding conflicts? 
Interviewees acknowledged the difficulty of quantifying cost savings, but pointed to a 
number of ways that ERI is contributing in a financial sense: 
a. ERI’s ability to provide student assistance to local entities such as the GFFP for pre- and 
post- treatment monitoring, has been invaluable, and it is viewed as the only way much 
of that work could have been accomplished. 
b. ERI’s success at procuring grant funding has been instrumental and of great benefit to 
other entities with whom they partner. 
c. ERI’s emphasis on monitoring will save money in the long term because of the lessons 
learned and the improved project designs that will result. 
d. As noted above, ERI is viewed as a credible neutral entity.  From that perspective, 
through outreach and education, they have helped bridge gaps between opposing 
parties, thereby avoiding potentially costly battles over restoration projects.   
8) In what ways has the Institute promoted improved cooperation – with local entities? 
Regionally? With Federal agencies? 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
68 
 
ERI’s somewhat unique niche as a credible neutral scientific entity has positioned it to play a 
central role in improving cooperation among a variety of agencies and institutions.  The 
Four Forests Restoration Initiative is one example; another is the adoption by the City of 
Flagstaff of a wildland interface code, a three-year effort that was easier to accomplish 
because of ERI’s constructive role in the debate about the code. 
9) Are there any other insights or suggestions you would like to share regarding past or 
future work of the Institute? 
 
“I can’t stress enough *the+ value of having this kind of institute in *the+ area”. 
 
“Congress is getting its money’s worth out of ERI”. 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
69 
 
Appendix D - Acronyms 
 
BIA – Bureau of Indian Affairs 
BLM – Bureau of Land Management 
CBBC – Colorado Bark Beetle Collaborative 
CFRI – Colorado Forest Restoration Institute 
CFRP – Collaborative Forest Restoration Program 
COWOOD – Colorado State Wood Utilization and Marketing Program 
CSFS – Colorado State Forest Service 
CUSP – Coalition for the Upper South Platte 
DoD – Department of Defense 
ERI – Ecological Restoration Institute 
FLRA – Forest Landscape Restoration Act 
FWS – US Fish and Wildlife Service 
GIS – Geographic Information System 
GMUG – Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, Gunnison National Forest 
GPS – Global Positioning System 
LEARN – Long Term Ecological Assessment and Monitoring Network 
NAU – Northern Arizona University 
NMFIA – New Mexico Forest Industry Association 
NMFWRI – New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute 
RMRS – Rocky Mountain Research Station 
SWERI – Southwest Forest Ecological Restoration Institutes 
UP Mesas – Uncompahgre Mesas Forest Restoration Demonstration Project 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
70 
 
USIECR – US Institute for Environmental Conflict Resolution 
WHO – New Mexico Forest and Watershed Health Office 
WPHFI – Woodland Park Healthy Forest Initiative 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
71 
 
Appendix E – State Government Charter 
 
Charter for the Southwest Ecological Restoration Institutes 
This Charter clarifies the goals, duties and operating procedures for the SOUTHWEST 
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES, and their respective states, as envisioned in PL 
108-317. This Charter is entered into by and among the Governors of the States of Arizona, 
Colorado and New Mexico, and the Presidents of Northern Arizona University, Colorado State 
University and New Mexico Highlands University, on behalf of their respective governing 
boards, hereafter referred to collectively as  “the Parties”. 
 
1. 
 
PURPOSE 
A. 
The purpose of the SOUTHWEST ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES 
(“SWERI”) is to bring the unique strengths of the member universities, individually, collectively 
and in cooperation with other institutions to help support land managers and their 
collaborators working to achieve comprehensive ecological restoration treatments on the 
ground.   
B. 
To assure that ecological restoration treatments are effective and efficient, the Institutes 
identified by PL 108-317 will develop, translate and transfer practical, operation-oriented 
scientific knowledge to land managers, collaborative community groups and others who 
cooperate in the design and implementation of ecosystem restoration treatments. A key mission 
is to assure, through systematic collaboration and coordination of resources, that all levels of 
government and stakeholders from the local to the state, regional, and national levels have the 
best information available to ensure that collaborative ecosystem restoration treatments are 
implemented in the most effective and efficient manner for restoring the ecological, economic, 
and social integrity of the greater ecosystems of the Interior West.  
C. 
The SOUTHWEST ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES are established by 
Northern Arizona University, Colorado State University and New Mexico Highlands 
University. The respective states will be involved and represented, at a minimum, by their State 
Foresters. The institutes will have many diverse stakeholders who are involved in the design 
and implementation of ecological restoration treatments in frequent fire forests and associated 
woodlands. These stakeholders may include when appropriate, but are not limited to: the 
federal land management agencies; state governments; tribes; elected officials; local 
governments; and nongovernmental entities that include collaborative community groups and 
environmentalists, the Western Governors’ Association, and business.  
 D. 
The SOUTHWEST ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES has no regulatory 
authority and recognizes that all legal authority is reserved by its members in accordance with 
existing law. It also recognizes that the institutes, by virtue of their affiliation with universities, 
may have duties beyond those specified in this agreement. 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
72 
 
 
2. 
BACKGROUND 
A. 
The need for restoring ecosystem health in the Southwest has been evident for decades, 
especially for its ponderosa pine and drier mixed conifer forests.  As a result of disruption of the 
natural frequent fire regime and past harvesting and grazing practices, forests became dense 
and vulnerable to unnaturally severe, stand-replacing fires.  In many watersheds, over 90% of 
these forests are considered at moderate or high risk for crownfires due to dense stand structure 
and accumulated fuels.  Fire acreage and size have been steadily increasing, culminating in the 
largest fire in southwestern history, the 468,000-acre Rodeo-Chediski fire in 2002, a fire that 
devastated watersheds and economies over an entire region. Entire states and regions are now 
at risk of losing the ecological and environmental benefits of greater ecosystems at the scale of 
millions of acres. 
B. 
Many managers, from resource specialists to land managers, feel that science shows that 
thinning, burning, and other forest restoration techniques can be effective in restoring forest 
health and reducing the threat of unnatural fire in the frequent fire forest types of the Interior 
West. A central question is how to use the best science to get restoration done in the most 
effective and efficient way possible, while learning how to improve our treatments as we move 
forward.  Although there are clear needs for the discovery of additional scientific information, 
the flood of existing scientific literature, the disconnected sources of information, and the 
complexity of environmental analysis can overwhelm the resources of practitioners, 
stakeholders and decision-makers.  Wildland ecosystems and their dependent human 
communities are the ultimate victims if managers cannot mobilize the critical information for 
rapid, thorough, and scientifically defensible environmental analysis. 
 
3. 
STRUCTURE 
A.  
Goals and Legislative Intent 
3.1.  Goal. The goal of the SOUTHWEST ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION INSTITUTES is to obtain, 
summarize, and transfer relevant and accurate scientific information to managers and other key 
stakeholders. 
3.2. Legislative Purpose of PL 108-317 as published is:  
a. To enhance the capacity to develop, transfer, apply, and monitor, and regularly 
update practical science-based forest restoration treatments that will improve the health 
of dry forest and woodland ecosystems and reduce the risk of severe wildfires, in the 
Interior West; 
b. To synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research programs to 
the implementation of forest and woodland restoration on a landscape scale; 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
73 
 
c. To facilitate the transfer of interdisciplinary knowledge required to understand the 
socioeconomic and environmental impacts of wildfire on ecosystems and 
landscapes; 
d. To require the institutes established under this Act to collaborate with Federal 
agencies-- 
i. 
to use ecological restoration treatments to reverse declining forest health 
and reduce the risk of severe wildfires across the forest landscape; 
ii. to design, implement, monitor and regularly revise wildfire treatments 
based on the use of adaptive ecosystem management; 
e. To assist land managers in-- 
i. 
treating acres with restoration-based applications; and 
ii. 
using new management technologies (including the transfer of 
understandable information, assistance with environmental review, and 
field and classroom training and collaboration) to accomplish the goals 
identified in-- 
1. the report entitled `10-Year Comprehensive Strategy: A 
Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire Risks to 
Communities and the Environment' of the Western Governors' 
Association ; 
2. the report entitled `Protecting People and Sustaining Resources in 
Fire-Adapted Ecosystems-A Cohesive Strategy' (65 Fed. Reg. 
67480); and 
3. The National Fire Plan. 
f. To provide technical assistance to collaborative efforts by affected entities to 
develop, implement, and monitor adaptive ecosystem management restoration 
treatments that are ecologically sound, economically viable, and socially responsible; 
and 
g. To assist Federal and non-Federal land managers in providing information to the 
public on the role of fire and fire management in dry forest and woodland 
ecosystems in the Interior West. 
B. 
 Duties 
3.3. Institutes. Each Institute shall engage in the following activities to the extent funding for such 
activities has been appropriated pursuant to PL 108-318 or is otherwise made available: 
a. Provide an annual work plan as a condition to receive federal funds for each fiscal 
year on a date to be determined by the US Department of Agriculture-US Forest 
Service in consultation with the Department of the Interior. The work plan will 
follow the template provided by the Secretaries. 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
74 
 
i. The annual work plans will be developed in consultation with the Secretary of 
Agriculture/US Forest Service, the Secretary of Interior, the State Foresters and 
the stakeholders as described in paragraph 1.C above.  
ii. The work plans will contain assurances and performance measures that are 
satisfactory to the Secretaries and reflect that the activities will serve the 
legislative purpose of PL 108-317 
 
b. Develop, conduct research on, transfer, promote, and monitor ecosystem restoration 
treatments including restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction prescriptions to 
reduce the risk of severe wildfires and improve the health of dry forest and 
woodland ecosystems in the Interior West; 
c. Synthesize and adapt scientific findings from conventional research to implement 
restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments on a landscape scale using an 
adaptive ecosystem management framework; 
d. Translate for and transfer to affected entities any scientific and interdisciplinary 
knowledge about restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction treatments; 
e. Assist affected entities with the design of adaptive management approaches 
(including monitoring) for the implementation of restoration-based hazardous fuel 
reduction treatments;  
f. Provide for continuing education, formal coursework, and public education as 
necessary and useful; 
g. Convene one or more meetings  among the Institutes annually to share lessons 
learned and to coordinate activities so as to avoid undesirable duplication;  
h. Subject to the availability of federal funding, convene, state-by-state, one or more 
meetings annually  of the stakeholders identified in  paragraph 1.C above to: define 
and prioritize science needs; identify and prioritize information needs that can be 
synthesized from existing information; and, identify audiences that will benefit from 
the services provided by the Institutes. If a representative body able to perform these 
functions already exists in the state, an Institute may use its services to fulfill this 
requirement;  
i. 
Provide peer-reviewed annual reports to the university presidents, the Governors, 
the Secretary of Agriculture and Chief of the Forest Service and Secretary of Interior; 
i. For purposes of this Charter, peer review means a meeting of the stakeholders 
identified in paragraph 1.C to review the annual report and work conducted by 
each institute.  
  

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
75 
 
ii. The annual peer-review will be conducted by October 31 following the end of 
the federal fiscal year.  A final report will be prepared by December 31st of the 
same year.  
j. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Charter to the contrary, no institute shall be 
prohibited from performing its duties described herein and other functions by 
contracting for their performance. 
 
3.4.  States. The state funding for the Institutes required under this Section 3.4 may be provided by the 
annual University budget or funding for the Institutes may be provided by other sources as may be 
available and appropriate. Each state: 
a. Shall provide facilities for the institutes; and 
b. Shall provide state funding to support a  portion of the operations of the institutes. 
 
C. 
Charter Implementation 
3.5. Coordinating Committee.  There is hereby created a Coordinating Committee whose membership and 
purposes shall be: 
a. The Coordinating Committee shall consist of the Executive Director(s) of each 
Institute, the State Forester from each state, a designated representative of each 
state Governor and a representative of the Western Governors Association.  
b. The primary purpose of the Coordinating Committee is to implement the 
purposes and intent of this Charter by providing management and 
administrative guidance on matters affecting all the Parties. 
c. The Coordinating Committee shall adopt its own procedures and determine the 
frequency of its meetings. 
d. Examples of matters affecting all the Parties include, but are not limited to: 
(i) 
Establishing  protocols for communications among all 
three Institutes; 
(ii) 
Identifying opportunities for leveraging resources; 
(iii) 
Addressing common interests and opportunities for 
mobilizing critical information for rapid, thorough and 
scientifically defensible environmental analysis; 
(iv) 
Determining how the Institutes should collectively 
model collaboration as a primary value. 
e. Subject to the availability of funds, each Institute will fund its own participation 
in the annual meeting, travel, communications and incidental expenses of the 
Coordinating Committee. 
 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
76 
 
4.  Amendment 
This Charter may be amended only by an instrument in writing executed by an authorized 
representative of each Party.  
 
5. Termination 
If, as a result of the monitoring and evaluation five years following enactment of PL 108-318, the 
Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, determines that an Institute does not 
qualify for further Federal assistance under this Act, the non-qualifying Institute shall receive 
no further Federal assistance under this Act, and shall cease to be a Party to this Charter, until 
such time as the qualifications of the Institute are reestablished to the satisfaction of the 
Secretaries. 
 
6. Participant signatures 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises set forth above, the undersigned 
Parties do hereby execute this Charter, which shall become effective on the date on which it has 
been signed by all Parties. 
 
 
On behalf of the States: 
 
 
Governor Janet Napolitano, Arizona 
 
 
 
Date 
 
 
Governor Bill Richardson, New Mexico 
 
 
 
Date 
 
 
Governor Bill Owens, Colorado 
 
 
 
 
Date 
 
 
 

SWERI Five Year Assessment Report (10/13/09)  
77 
 
 
On behalf of the Institutes: 
 
 
John Haeger, President, Northern Arizona University 
 
Date 
 
 
Manny Aragon, President, New Mexico Highlands University 
Date 
 
 
 
Dr. Larry Edward Penley, Colorado State University 
 
Date 
 
 
 
 
 
