CORRESPONDENCE
Unsupported inferences of
high-severity ﬁre in historical dry
forests of the western United
States: response to Williams and
Baker
ABSTRACT
Reconstructions of dry western US
forests in the late 19th century in
Arizona, Colorado and Oregon based on
GeneralLandOfﬁcerecordswereusedby
Williams & Baker (2012; Global Ecology
and Biogeography, 21, 1042–1052; here-
after W&B) to infer past ﬁre regimes with
substantial moderate and high-severity
burning. The authors concluded that
present-day large, high-severity ﬁres are
not distinguishable from historical pat-
terns. We present evidence of important
errors in their study. First, the use of tree
size distributions to reconstruct past ﬁre
severity and extent is not supported by
empirical age–size relationships nor by
studies that directly quantiﬁed disturb-
ance history in these forests. Second,
the ﬁre severity classiﬁcation of W&B
is qualitatively different from most
modern classiﬁcation schemes, and is
based on different types of data, leading
to an inappropriate comparison. Third,
we note that while W&B asserted ‘sur-
prising’ heterogeneity in their recon-
structions of stand density and species
composition, their data are not substan-
tially different from many previous
studies which reached very different con-
clusions about subsequent forest and ﬁre
behaviour changes. Contrary to the con-
clusions of W&B, the preponderance of
scientiﬁc evidence indicates that conser-
vation of dry forest ecosystems in the
western United States and their ecologi-
cal,social and economic value is not con-
sistent with a present-day disturbance
regime of large, high-severity ﬁres, espe-
cially under changing climate.
Keywords
Fire regime, ﬁre severity, General Land
Ofﬁce survey, historical range of vari-
ability, ponderosa pine, wildﬁre.
INTRODUCTION
A recent study in Global Ecology and Biogeog-
raphy (Williams & Baker, 2012, hereafter
W&B) applied historical data from General
Land Ofﬁce (GLO) surveys c. 1880 to recon-
struct historical dry forests on four large
landscapes in Arizona, Colorado and Oregon
(USA). W&B described forest composition
as characterized by ‘abundant ponderosa
pine (Pinus ponderosa C. Lawson), with
lesser amounts of Douglas-ﬁr (Pseudotsuga
menziesii (Mirb.) Franco), white ﬁr (Abies
concolor (Gord. & Glend.) Lindl. ex Hildebr.),
grand ﬁr (Abies grandis (Douglas ex D. Don)
Lindl.), juniper (Juniperus L.), western larch
(Larix occidentalis Nutt.) and lodgepole pine
(Pinus contorta Douglas ex Louden)’. W&B
infer that the presence of a certain propor-
tion of trees below a site-speciﬁc diameter
threshold is evidence of ‘higher’-severity ﬁre,
a term they use to indicate a combination of
‘mixed- plus high-severity ﬁre’. They then
compare the proportion of plots with evi-
dence of ‘higher’-severity ﬁre to the distribu-
tion of ﬁre severities estimated from satellite
imagery of recent large wildﬁres in the
western
United
States,
concluding
that
modern ﬁres are within the historical range
of variability (HRV) of ﬁre severity. They also
found it ‘surprising’ that dry forests ‘com-
monly thought to have been open and park-
like’ were heterogeneous and relatively dense.
W&B conclude that current management
practices of thinning small trees and ‘other
fuel modiﬁcations’ such as low-severity pre-
scribed burning, will move forests outside the
HRV rather than restore them.
We appreciate the contribution in W&B of
data sets from GLO data (Williams & Baker,
2011). While all historical ecological tech-
niques have strengths and limitations, new
data can enrich ecological insights. However,
W&B contains substantial errors of method
and interpretation. First, the use of tree size
distributions to reconstruct past ﬁre severity
and extent is not supported by age–size rela-
tionship data nor by studies that quantiﬁed
disturbance history in these forests. Second,
the ﬁre severity classiﬁcation of W&B is
qualitatively different from the accepted
modern classiﬁcation, and is based on differ-
ent types of data. Thus, it is inappropriate to
compare these categories in support of the
argument that modern ﬁres are unchanged
in severity from historical burning. Third,
we note that reconstructions of late 19th-
century
forest
structure
(stand
density,
species composition) by W&B are not sub-
stantially
different
from
many
previous
studies, which reached very different conclu-
sions about subsequent forest and ﬁre behav-
iour changes. The objectives of this response
are to identify unsupported scientiﬁc infer-
ences in W&B, and to demonstrate how using
these erroneous conclusions as a basis
for forest management would be inappro-
priate and potentially damaging to native
ecosystems.
INFERENCES ABOUT FIRE
SEVERITY
W&B make a major leap from reconstruc-
tions of forest structure to infer details of the
historical ﬁre regime. W&B assert (p. 1044)
that ‘. . . forest-structure parameters (e.g.
tree sizes) can be used to reconstruct the
severity of disturbances that likely led to the
forest structure. . . . Structural reconstruc-
tion requires an assumption that tree size is
generally related to tree age, and size-class
structure
and
disturbance
severity
are
linked’. However, determining the strength
of an age–size relationship in a tree species
would require site-speciﬁc empirical data
(Bowman et al., 2013), and complex natural
regeneration dynamics confound simpliﬁed
interpretations of past regeneration events.
The assumption that tree diameter distri-
butions can be used to reliably reconstruct
past ﬁre regimes at patch to landscape scales
bs_bs_banner
Global Ecology and Biogeography, (Global Ecol. Biogeogr.) (2013)
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
http://wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/geb
1

in relatively dry conifer forests is not sup-
ported by the scientiﬁc literature on these
forests and ﬁre regimes. Tree size and age are
poorly correlated in ponderosa pine (e.g.
Ehle & Baker, 2003), with variability from site
to site and among age classes even at the same
site, requiring site-speciﬁc empirical data
from cored trees to develop a relationship
(Youngblood et al., 2004). Age and size are
even less correlated in more shade-tolerant
taxa
such
as
Douglas-ﬁr
(Pseudotsuga
menziesii) and true ﬁr species (e.g. Veblen,
1986; Swetnam & Brown, 2010). Hence, the
fundamental inference on which their ﬁre
regime interpretations must stand – namely
that tree size is a proxy for tree age, which
they use to infer ﬁre frequency – is based on
an unreliable assumption that tree diameters
and ages can be equated.
W&B correctly noted in their section titled
‘Limitations of structural-based reconstruc-
tions’ that other confounding factors, such as
delayed regeneration or non-ﬁre disturb-
ances, would affect the inferences about past
ﬁre severity made from tree size data.
However, they concluded that factors other
than severe ﬁre did not provide a‘satisfactory
explanation’ so they proceeded to analyse
their data as if small tree size = young tree
age = evidence of severe ﬁre. In the following
text, we present evidence that the confound-
ing factors are in fact important limitations.
Post-wildﬁre
tree
regeneration
is
often
inconsistent and delayed in dry western
forests, unlike many mesic, higher-elevation
forests where post-ﬁre establishment of tree
cohorts is rapid, consistent and extensive
[e.g. quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides)
or lodegepole pine; Romme et al. 2005;
Margolis
et al.
2007,
2011].
Studies
of
modern (post-1900) wildﬁres in ponderosa
pine-dominant or dry mixed conifer forests
have
shown
highly
variable
post-ﬁre
responses, ranging from no tree regeneration
(up to 60 or more years after ﬁre), establish-
ment of shrub-dominated vegetation with
minimal tree regeneration or, in a few cases,
regeneration of dense patches of pines (Nagel
& Taylor, 2005; Savage & Mast, 2005; Goforth
& Minnich, 2008; Haire & McGarigal, 2010;
Roccaforte et al., 2010).
Regeneration cohorts often appear in the
absence of ﬁre disturbance, contradicting
W&B’s assumption that all stands with
small-diameter trees represent cohort regen-
eration events following lethal ﬁre. Even if
tree sizes were reliably well-correlated with
age, this assumption ignores biotic and
abiotic disturbances that could have been the
cause of synchronized recruitment, such as
bark beetles, wind or climatic synchroniza-
tion of episodic mortality or establishment
events (e.g. Brown, 2006; Brown et al.,
2008a). Stand-scale studies in Colorado
(e.g. Brown & Wu, 2005) and at the regional
scale of the whole southwest United States
(Swetnam & Brown, 2010) have shown that
pulsed ponderosa pine regeneration was
associated with past periods of relatively wet
climate. The broadest cause of synchronous
regeneration in the west has been exclusion
of the historic ﬁre regime (Skinner et al.,
2006). W&B fail to acknowledge or examine
these
alternative
mechanisms
of
demo-
graphic variation, or the climatic drivers of
tree cohort regeneration in dry forest land-
scapes (Swetnam & Betancourt, 1998).
W&B also fail to acknowledge the lack of
contemporary evidence for large, patch-size
crown ﬁres in low- and mid-elevation dry
forest landscapes, such as primary observa-
tion or photographic documentation in the
19th and early 20th centuries. The lack of
direct documentary evidence of extensive
crown ﬁre in ponderosa pine forests in par-
ticular has been noted and reported repeat-
edly by ecologists and land-use historians for
nearly 90 years (e.g. Leopold, 1924; Cooper,
1960). In this error by omission, W&B fail to
address a key inconsistency in their ﬁre sever-
ity interpretations. If high-severity crown
ﬁres in the past burned at frequencies and
extents that are indistinguishable from recent
ﬁres [e.g. Biscuit Fire (Oregon 2002) 202,000
ha; Hayman Fire (Colorado 2002), 55,900 ha;
Las Conchas Fire (New Mexico 2011), 63,000
ha; Rodeo-Chediski Fire (Arizona 2002),
189,000 ha; Wallow Fire (Arizona 2011),
218,000 ha] with total or near-total tree mor-
tality patches of thousands of hectares, why
are there no reports of such extensive events
from the 18th and 19th centuries at the time
of the c. 1880 GLO surveys? Early forest
inventories carefully noted occurrence of
both high- and low-severity ﬁre, as in the
Lang & Stewart (1910) survey of the Kaibab
Plateau (northern Arizona) in ponderosa
pine and lower-elevation mixed conifer
forest: ‘. . . evidence indicates light ground
ﬁres over practically the whole forest . . .’,
whereas high-elevation spruce–ﬁr and aspen
forests had‘vast denuded areas, charred stubs
and fallen trunks . . . The old ﬁres extended
over large areas at higher altitudes, amount-
ing to several square miles’. In reference to
dry mixed conifer forests in California,
Sudworth (1900) commented, ‘most likely
[the older ﬁres] were similar to those
common in the region today. The ﬁres of the
present time are peculiarly of a surface
nature, and with rare exception there is no
reason to believe that any other type of ﬁre
has occurred here’. At a mesic mixed conifer
site in Colorado with ponderosa pine, aspen,
spruce and Douglas-ﬁr, Jack (1900) reported
‘burning here was very complete over many
thousands of acres, where barely a conifer has
yet started to reforest the ground’. Such
reports are lacking in ponderosa pine and dry
mixed conifer forests. If W&B’s conclusions
that large, severe crown ﬁres were a common
occurrence in all dry western forests are
correct, then why is there no corroborating
evidence in the scientiﬁc literature or other
reports of the time?
COMPARISON OF HISTORICAL
AND CURRENT FIRE SEVERITY
Comparing their reconstructions of ﬁre
severity from the GLO data to percentages of
area burned at different severities in modern
western
ﬁres,
W&B
conclude
that
the
modern occurrence of large, severe wildﬁres
is ‘not unprecedented, and has not increased,
relative to the historical record’. This conclu-
sion is not supported by the evidence pro-
vided. First, the reconstruction of ﬁre severity
from the GLO forest structure and composi-
tion data is not reliable or convincing, for the
multiple reasons described in the preceding
section. Second, even if the data were reliable
and the past ﬁres were detected and recon-
structed accurately, there are fundamental
differences between indices of ﬁre severity
used by W&B compared with the techniques
of modern ﬁre severity mapping to which
they compare their results.
Although
ﬁre
severity
is
the
central
concept of W&B, the term is not deﬁned until
the Discussion, where they state that a high-
severity ﬁre is one in which ‘70% or more of
the trees or basal area are killed or removed,’
which W&B modiﬁed for their calculations
to be 70% of tree density. Basal area and tree
density are not equivalent measures. For
example, killing large numbers of small-
diameter trees will have a minimal effect on
basal area or canopy cover if enough large
trees survive.
Much of W&B’s analysis rests on the
lumping of moderate (which they refer to as
‘mixed’) and high-severity ﬁre into their
‘higher severity’ category. By arbitrarily com-
bining moderate and high-severity ﬁre areas,
W&B bias their results toward interpreta-
tions of higher ﬁre severity. Reconstructed
percentages from GLO data of low-, mixed-
and high-severity ﬁre are presented in W&B’s
Table 2. Because a ‘high-severity’ ﬁre as
deﬁned by W&B kills at least 70% of trees, the
‘severe’ ﬁres in their Table 2 may have left up
to 30% of all trees intact at every section
Correspondence
Global Ecology and Biogeography, © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
2

corner and quarter corner; their ‘mixed’ cat-
egory would have left even more. Red and
orange polygons mapped in Fig. 3 of W&B,
supposedly the result of ‘higher’ severity ﬁres
in the 100–140 years prior to the GLO survey
(the time depth of ﬁre detectability varied
according to their assumptions), could repre-
sent places where 30% or more of pre-ﬁre
overstorey trees survived. Modern ﬁre sever-
ity reported by W&B in their Table 2,
obtained from the Monitoring Trends in
Burn Severity (MTBS) project (mtbs.gov),
was
calculated
in
an
entirely
different
manner from historical reconstruction. The
MTBS follows a standard deﬁnition of ﬁre
severity from the National Wildﬁre Coordi-
nating Group: the ‘degree to which a site has
been altered or disrupted by ﬁre, loosely, a
product of ﬁre intensity and residence time’
(Eidenshink et al., 2007). The purpose of
such a broad deﬁnition, rather than one cal-
culated from tree mortality, is that it is more
useful for representing effects on multiple
vegetation types and resources at risk from
ﬁre, such as soil, hydrology, wildlife habitat
and plants. Quantitatively, ﬁre severity is cal-
culated by categorizing the continuous distri-
bution of differenced normalized burn ratios
calculated from spectral reﬂectance captured
in repeated satellite images (Key, 2006; Miller
& Thode, 2007). In practice, the process is
inﬂuenced by site characteristics, seasonality,
focus of the analysis (e.g. post-ﬁre response
often prioritizes the hazard of soil erosion,
not tree mortality per se) and ﬁeld calibration
data such as composite burn index (CBI)
plots. Numerous caveats about comparability
of
MTBS
map
products
are
given
at
mtbs.gov, and current research is focused on
developing relativized map products more
suitable for direct comparison (Miller et al.,
2009). Thus, the ‘high-severity’ reconstruc-
tion of W&B, based on an inference from
forest structure and composition, is not com-
parable in any meaningful sense to the quan-
titative, reﬂectance-based severity categories
created in the MTBS models.
W&B also fail to address differences in the
spatial scale and pattern of historic ﬁres com-
pared with recent large ﬁres. Despite W&B’s
assertions to the contrary, we are unaware of
any ﬁre ecologists who claim that dry western
forests were uniform in composition, struc-
ture or ﬁre regime. For example, in the south-
west, historical patches of high-severity ﬁre
in ponderosa pine have been documented at
scales of 1–100 ha (Swetnam et al., 2011) and
in South Dakota at scales of < 5% of the land-
scape (Brown et al., 2008b). But the spatial
pattern of burning in modern wildﬁres is
orders of magnitude higher, with large (103–
104 ha) contiguous ﬁre-killed patches. The
spatial scale of high-severity patches is an
ecologically important property that inﬂu-
ences post-ﬁre erosion, soil loss and recovery
of the plant community (Haire & McGarigal,
2010). Finally, W&B make a basic typological
error by conﬂating their metrics of typical
ﬁre regime severity with modern reﬂectance-
based measures of the outcomes of individual
ﬁres. These are not subtle differences of inter-
pretation, but errors with signiﬁcant ecologi-
cal and social consequences.
COMPARISONS WITH
OTHER STUDIES
W&B grouped relatively xeric ponderosa
pine and pine–oak forests with relatively
mesic mixed conifer forests, then expressed
surprise at ﬁnding denser structure than
‘open, park-like forests’. If the GLO data dem-
onstrated higher heterogeneity and density
than earlier work, the ﬁnding would be novel
and supportive of their arguments for a sub-
stantial historical role for high-severity ﬁre.
However, their Table S1, which is used for
comparison with the GLO reconstruction,
includes structural data only from selected
pine–oak and pine sites, averaging < 100 trees
ha−1. W&B cite, but do not critically assess,
the results of a large number of existing
studies, including some that encompassed
extensive spatial scales (e.g. Brown et al.,
1999; Fulé et al., 2003; Roccaforte et al., 2010;
see Stoddard, 2011, for a comparison of all
studies over an entire region), in asserting
that their study is uniquely suited to cover
large landscapes and that their results show
unprecedented heterogeneity in terms of
‘high’ forest density. W&B state that there is
‘. . . substantial spatial heterogeneity in his-
torical dry-forest landscapes that were com-
monly thought to have been rather uniform’.
In fact, previously published reconstructed
and historical data from mixed conifer forests
include higher densities than the studies in
their Table S1. For example, dendrochrono-
logical reconstructions of South Dakota
ponderosa pine landscapes averaged > 127
trees ha−1 in 1900 (Brown & Cook, 2006),
and reconstructed mixed conifer forests at
Grand Canyon National Park (Arizona) aver-
aged > 200 trees ha−1 in c. 1880 (Fulé et al.,
2003).
Current tree densities are much higher
than reconstructed densities in these rela-
tively dry forest types, refuting the claim by
W&B that modern forests are not outside
their HRV. For example, W&B report average
densities from the GLO data of < 145 trees
ha−1 at the two Arizona study sites. Current
ponderosa pine density for Arizona averages
300 trees ha−1, double the GLO reconstruc-
tion value (O’Brien, 2002). Many ponderosa
pine landscapes in the west support stand
densities of many hundreds to thousands of
trees per hectare (Cooper, 1960; Youngblood
et al., 2004; Ritchie et al., 2007).Although the
present paper is not focused on the accuracy
of W&B’s forest reconstructions, it is worth
noting that recently published empirical data
from Oregon showed that the GLO-based
estimates of historical forest density were 2.5
times higher than historical plot measure-
ments on the former Klamath Indian Reser-
vation (Hagmann et al., 2013).
WHY IS THIS IMPORTANT?
W&B (2011, 2012) provide a large-scale and
potentially valuable data set of forest compo-
sition and diameter distribution reconstruc-
tions for the late 19th century.We do not take
issue with the reconstruction of forest com-
position and structure from GLO data (but
see Hagmann et al., 2013), and note that
W&B’s ﬁndings are in fact similar to those
reported previously. However, W&B make
a
huge
leap,
unsupported
by
modern
observation and understanding of post-ﬁre
responses of dry forest ecosystems, to infer
past ﬁre occurrence and severity from struc-
tural data. In so doing, they omit key obser-
vations by early surveyors regarding ﬁre in
these landscapes, and decades of subsequent
scientiﬁc ﬁndings drawing on multiple lines
of evidence on forest dynamics, ﬁre history
and silviculture that are not consistent with
their interpretations. Their methods are con-
sistently biased toward interpretations of
higher ﬁre severity, culminating in the
unsupported conclusion that large modern
ﬁre events in ponderosa pine and dry mixed-
conifer forests are essentially unchanged
from the HRV of ﬁre regimes.
In rejecting the unsupported inferences of
W&B, we are not making an assertion that
past ﬁre regimes in dry western forests were
uniformly of low severity. Evidence of past
high-severity ﬁre during the Holocene exists
in some drier, low- to mid-elevation forest
systems (Frechette et al., 2003; Pierce &
Meyer, 2008; Jenkins et al., 2011), as well as
within the tree-ring record (Brown et al.,
1999; Iniguez et al., 2009).Patch size distribu-
tions of past high-severity events are largely
unknown, however, for virtually all forest
types that do not regenerate consistently as
even-aged cohorts within large ﬁre-generated
openings (i.e. patches c. 250 ha). As with any
ﬁre regime, historical ﬁres in relatively
dry forests dominated by ponderosa pine
Correspondence
Global Ecology and Biogeography, © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
3

included a range of ﬁre severities (Agee,
1993). However, the overwhelming weight of
scientiﬁc evidence from historical records and
photos, tree-ring data and the evolutionary
history of dominant species (e.g. Keeley &
Zedler, 1998) stands in contradiction to the
interpretations of spatially extensive high-
severity ﬁre reported by W&B.
W&B conclude that current attempts to
reduce forest fuels and ﬁre severity, grounded
in US federal policy and demonstrably effec-
tive (Stephens et al., 2012), are misguided
because they ‘will move most forests outside
their historical range of variability, rather
than restore them, probably with negative
consequences for biological diversity’.We dis-
agree strongly with this assessment. First, as
we have shown, the interpretation of HRV
presented by W&B is not scientiﬁcally sup-
ported. Second, dry western forests are docu-
mented to be two to ten or more times more
dense than at the time of ﬁre exclusion,
forming more continuous ﬂammable fuel
structures than in the past. Third, except for
unusual circumstances such as the Gila Wil-
derness (New Mexico) where historic ﬁre
regimes have been reinstated, most dry
western forests are increasingly vulnerable to
the potential effects of climate change on
severe disturbance (e.g. Allen et al., 2010;
Williams et al., 2013). Extreme ﬁre behaviour
has affected increasingly large areas in recent
major ﬁres, a result of multiyear drought and
many decades of fuel accumulation (Miller &
Safford, 2012). In addition to tree mortality
and erosion potential on severely burned
steep
slopes,
recruitment
failure
under
current and projected climatic conditions
may represent a threshold process that will
create novel ecosystem conﬁgurations (Falk,
in press). The weight of scientiﬁc evidence
indicates that conservation of native dry
western forest ecosystems and their ecologi-
cal, social and economic values is not consist-
ent with the modern pattern of large, high-
severity ﬁres. Indeed, uncharacteristic large,
high-severity ﬁres pose one of the greatest
risks to ecosystem integrity in the 21st
century. W&B pose an experiment we cannot
afford to conduct.
Peter Z. Fulé1*, Thomas W.
Swetnam2, Peter M. Brown3, Donald
A. Falk4,2, David L. Peterson5, Craig
D. Allen6, Gregory H. Aplet7, Mike A.
Battaglia8, Dan Binkley9, Calvin
Farris10, Robert E. Keane11, Ellis Q.
Margolis2, Henri Grissino-Mayer12,
Carol Miller13, Carolyn Hull Sieg14,
Carl Skinner15, Scott L. Stephens16
and Alan Taylor17
1School of Forestry, Northern Arizona
University, PO Box 15018, Flagstaff,
AZ 86011, USA,
2Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research, University
of Arizona, Box 210045, Tucson,
AZ 85721, USA,
3Rocky Mountain Tree-Ring Research, 2901
Moore Lane, Fort Collins, CO 80526, USA,
4School of Natural Resources and the
Environment, University of Arizona,
325 Biological Sciences East, Tucson,
AZ 85721, USA,
5Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, US
Forest Service, 400 N. 34th Street, Seattle,
WA 98103, USA,
6Jemez Mountain Field Station, US
Geological Survey, HCR 1, Box 1, No. 15, Los
Alamos, NM 87544, USA,
7The Wilderness Society, 1660 Wynkoop
Street, Suite 850, Denver, CO 80202, USA,
8Rocky Mountain Research Station, US Forest
Service, 240 West Prospect Road, Fort Collins,
CO 80526, USA,
9Warner College of Natural Resources,
Department of Ecosystem Science and
Sustainability, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO 80521, USA,
10National Park Service, PO Box 1713,
Klamath Falls, OR 97601, USA,
11Rocky Mountain Research Station, US
Forest Service, 5775 West US Highway 10,
Missoula, MT 59808, USA,
12Department of Geography, The University
of Tennessee-Knoxville, Knoxville,
TN 37996, USA,
13Rocky Mountain Research Station, US
Forest Service, 790 E. Beckwith Avenue,
Missoula, MT 59801, USA,
14Rocky Mountain Research Station, US
Forest Service, 2500 S. Pine Knoll Drive,
Flagstaff, AZ 86001, USA,
15Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station,
US Forest Service, USDA Service Center
PSW, 3644 Avtech Parkway, Redding,
CA 96002, USA,
16Department of Environmental Science,
Policy, and Management, University of
California, 130 Mulford Hall, Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA,
17Department of Geography, Pennsylvania
State University, 302 Walker Building,
University Park, PA 16802, USA
*Correspondence: Peter Z. Fulé, Northern
Arizona University, School of Forestry, PO Box
15018, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA.
E-mail: pete.fule@nau.edu
REFERENCES
Agee, J.K. (1993) Fire ecology of Paciﬁc North-
west forests. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Allen, C.D., Macalady, A.K., Chenchouni, H.,
Bachelet, D., McDowell, N., Vennetier, M.,
Kizberger, T., Rigling, A., Breshears, D.D.,
Hogg, E.H., Gonzalez, P., Fensham, R.,
Zhang, Z., Castro, J., Demidova, N., Lim,
J.H., Allard, G., Running, S.W., Semerci, A.
& Cobb, N. (2010) A global overview of
drought and heat-induced tree mortality
reveals emerging climate change risks for
forests. Forest Ecology and Management,
259, 660–684.
Bowman, D.M.J., Brienen, R.J.W., Gloor, E.,
Phillips, O.L. & Prior, L.D. (2013) Detect-
ing trends in tree growth: not so simple.
Trends in Plant Science, 18, 11–17.
Brown, P.M. (2006) Climate effects on ﬁre
regimes and tree recruitment in Black Hills
ponderosa pine forests. Ecology, 87, 2500–
2510.
Brown, P.M. & Cook, B. (2006) Early settle-
ment
forest
structure
in
Black
Hills
ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology and
Management, 223, 284–290.
Brown, P.M. & Wu, R. (2005) Climate and
disturbance
forcing
of
episodic
tree
recruitment in a south-western ponderosa
pine landscape. Ecology, 86, 3030–3038.
Brown, P.M., Kaufmann, M.R. & Shepperd,
W.D. (1999) Long-term, landscape pat-
terns of past ﬁre events in a montane
ponderosa pine forest of central Colorado.
Landscape Ecology, 14, 513–532.
Brown, P.M., Heyerdahl, E.K., Kitchen, S.G. &
Weber, M.H. (2008a) Climate effects on
historical ﬁres (1630–1900) in Utah. Inter-
national Journal of Wildland Fire, 17,
28–39.
Brown, P.M., Wienk, C.L. & Symatad, A.J.
(2008b) Fire and forest history at Mount
Rushmore.
Ecological
Applications,
18,
1984–1999.
Cooper, C.F. (1960) Changes in vegetation,
structure, and growth of southwestern
pine
forests
since
white
settlement.
Ecology, 42, 493–499.
Ehle, D.S. & Baker, W.L. (2003) Disturbance
and stand dynamics in ponderosa pine
forests
in
Rocky
Mountain
National
Park, USA. Ecological Monographs, 73,
543–566.
Eidenshink, J., Schwind, B., Brewer, K., Zhu,
Z.-L., Quayle, B. & Howard, S. (2007) A
project for monitoring trends in burn
severity. Fire Ecology, 3, Special Issue,
3–21.
Falk, D.A. (In press) Are Madrean ecosystems
approaching tipping points? Anticipating
interactions of landscape disturbance and
climate change. Biodiversity and manage-
ment of the Madrean Archipelago III (ed. by
P. Ffolliott, G. Gottfried and B. Gebow),
Correspondence
Global Ecology and Biogeography, © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
4

USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Frechette, J.D., Gonzales, D.A., Kenny, R. &
Thompson, J.R. (2003) Evidence for a con-
nection between wildﬁres, erosion, and
landscape development over the past 3600
years in southwestern Colorado. Geological
Society of America Abstracts with Programs,
35 (5), 36.
Fulé, P.Z., Crouse, J.E., Heinlein, T.A., Moore,
M.M., Covington, W.W. & Verkamp, G.
(2003) Mixed-severity ﬁre regime in a
high-elevation
forest:
Grand
Canyon,
Arizona. Landscape Ecology, 18, 465–486.
Goforth, B.R.
&
Minnich, R.A.
(2008)
Densiﬁcation, stand-replacement wildﬁre,
and extirpation of mixed conifer forest in
Cuyamaca Rancho State Park, southern
California. Forest Ecology and Manage-
ment, 256, 36–45.
Hagmann, R.K., Franklin, J.F. & Johnson,
K.N. (2013) Historical structure and com-
position of ponderosa pine and mixed-
conifer forests in south-central Oregon.
Forest Ecology and Management, 304, 492–
504.
Haire, S.L. & McGarigal, K. (2010) Effects
of landscape patterns of ﬁre severity
on regenerating ponderosa pine forests
(Pinus ponderosa) in New Mexico and
Arizona, USA. Landscape Ecology, 25,
1055–1069.
Iniguez, J.M., Swetnam, T.W. & Baisan, C.H.
(2009) Spatially and temporally variable
ﬁre regime on Rincon Peak, Arizona, USA.
Fire Ecology, 5, Special Issue, 3–21.
Jack, J.G. (1900) Pikes Peak, Plum Creek, and
South Platte reserves. Twentieth annual
report of the United States Geological
Survey to the Secretary of the Interior,
1898–1899, pp. 39–99. US Government
Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC.
Jenkins, S.E., Sieg, C.H., Anderson, D.E.,
Kaufman, D.S. & Pearthree, P.A. (2011)
Late Holocene geomorphic record of ﬁre
in ponderosa pine and mixed-conifer
forests,
Kendrick
Mountain,
northern
Arizona, USA. International Journal of
Wildland Fire, 20, 125–141.
Keeley, J.E. & Zedler, P.H. (1998) Evolution
of life histories in Pinus. Ecology and
biogeography
of
Pinus
(ed.
by
D.M.
Richardson),
pp.
219–250.
Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Key, C.H. (2006) Ecological and sampling
constraints on deﬁning landscape ﬁre
severity. Fire Ecology, 2, 178–203.
Lang, D.M. & Stewart, S.S. (1910) Reconnais-
sance of the Kaibab National Forest.
Unpublished report. Northern Arizona
University, Flagstaff, AZ.
Leopold, A. (1924) Grass, brush, timber, and
ﬁre in southern Arizona. Journal of For-
estry, 22, 1–10.
Margolis, E.Q., Swetnam, T.W. & Allen, C.D.
(2007) A stand-replacing ﬁre history in
upper montane forests of the southern
Rocky Mountains. Canadian Journal of
Forest Research, 37, 2227–2241.
Margolis, E.Q., Swetnam, T.W. & Allen, C.D.
(2011) Historical stand-replacing ﬁre in
upper montane forests of the Madrean sky
islands and Mogollon Plateau, southwest-
ern USA. Fire Ecology, 7, 88–107.
Miller, J.D. & Safford, H. (2012) Trends in
wildﬁre severity: 1984 to 2010 in the Sierra
Nevada, Modoc Plateau, and southern
Cascades, California, USA. Fire Ecology, 8,
41–57.
Miller, J.D. & Thode, A.E. (2007) Quantify-
ing burn severity in a heterogeneous land-
scape with a relative version of the delta
normalized burn ratio (dNBR). Remote
Sensing of the Environment, 109, 66–80.
Miller, J.D., Safford, H.D., Crimmins, M. &
Thode, A.E. (2009) Quantitative evidence
for increasing forest ﬁre severity in the
Sierra
Nevada
and
southern
Cascade
Mountains, California and Nevada, USA.
Ecosystems, 12, 16–32.
Nagel, T. & Taylor, A.H. (2005) Fire and per-
sistence of montane chaparral in mixed
conifer forest landscapes in the northern
Sierra Nevada Lake Tahoe Basin, Califor-
nia, USA. Journal of the Torrey Botanical
Society, 132, 442–457.
O’Brien,
R.A.
(2002)
Arizona’s
forest
resources, 1999. Resource bulletin RMRS-
RB-2. USDA Forest Service Rocky Moun-
tain Research Station, Ogden, UT.
Pierce, J. & Meyer, G. (2008) Long-term ﬁre
history from alluvial fan sediments: the
role of drought and climate variability, and
implications for management of Rocky
Mountain forests. International Journal of
Wildland Fire, 17, 84–95.
Ritchie, M.W., Skinner, C.N. & Hamilton,
T.A. (2007) Probability of wildﬁre-induced
tree mortality in an interior pine forest of
northern California: effects of thinning
and prescribed ﬁre. Forest Ecology and
Management, 247, 200–208.
Roccaforte, J.P., Fulé, P.Z. & Covington,
W.W. (2010) Monitoring landscape-scale
ponderosa
pine
restoration
treatment
implementation and effectiveness. Restora-
tion Ecology, 18, 820–833.
Romme, W.H., Turner, M.G., Tuskan, G.A. &
Reed, R.A. (2005) Establishment, persis-
tence and growth of
aspen (Populus
tremuloides)
seedlings
in
Yellowstone
National Park. Ecology, 86, 404–418.
Savage, M. & Mast, J.N. (2005) How resilient
are southwestern ponderosa pine forests
after crown ﬁres? Canadian Journal of
Forest Research, 35, 967–977.
Skinner, C.N., Taylor, A.H. & Agee, J.K.
(2006) Klamath Mountains bioregion.
Fire in California ecosystems (ed. by N.S.
Sugihara,
J.W.
van
Wagtendonk,
J.
Fites-Kaufmann, K. Shaffer and A. Thode),
pp. 170–194. University of
California
Press, Berkeley.
Stephens, S.L., McIver, J.D., Boerner, R.E.J.,
Fettig, C.J., Fontaine, J.B., Hartsough, B.R.,
Kennedy, P. & Schwilk, D. (2012) Effects of
forest fuel reduction treatments in the
United States. BioScience, 62, 549–560.
Stoddard, M.T. (2011) Compilation of his-
torical
forest
structural
characteristics
across the southern Colorado Plateau. Eco-
logical Restoration Institute, Northern
Arizona University. Available at: http://
library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/erilibra/
index/assoc/HASH40b3.dir/doc.pdf
(accessed 2 February 2012).
Sudworth, G.B. (1900) Stanislaus and Lake
Tahoe Forest Reserves, California, and
adjacent territories. Annual reports of the
Department of Interior, 21st annual report
of the U.S. Geological Survey, Part 5, pp.
505–561. Government Printing Ofﬁce,
Washington, DC.
Swetnam, T.L. & Brown, P.M. (2010) Com-
paring selected Fire Regime Condition
Class (FRCC) and LANDFIRE vegetation
model results to tree-ring data. Interna-
tional
Journal
of
Wildland
Fire,
19,
1–13.
Swetnam, T.L., Falk, D.A., Hessl, A.E. &
Farris, C. (2011) Reconstructing landscape
pattern of historic ﬁres and ﬁre regimes.
The landscape ecology of ﬁre (ed. by D.
McKenzie, C. Miller and D.A. Falk), pp.
165–192. Springer, Dordrecht.
Swetnam, T.W. & Betancourt, J.L. (1998)
Mesoscale
disturbance
and
ecological
response to decadal climatic variability in
the
American
Southwest.
Journal
of
Climate, 11, 3128–3147.
Veblen, T.T. (1986) Age and size structure of
subalpine forests in the Colorado Front
Range. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical
Club, 113, 225–240.
Williams, A.P., Allen, C.D., Macalady, A.K.,
Grifﬁn, D., Woodhouse, C.A., Meko, D.M.,
Swetnam, T.W., Rauscher, S.A., Seager, R.,
Grissino-Mayer, H.D., Dean, J.S., Cook,
E.R., Gangodagamage, C., Cai, M. &
McDowell, N.G. (2013) Temperature as a
potent driver of regional forest-drought
stress and tree mortality. Nature Climate
Change, 3, 292–297.
Correspondence
Global Ecology and Biogeography, © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
5

Williams, M.A. & Baker, W.L. (2011) Testing
the accuracy of new methods for recon-
structing historical structure of forest
landscapes using GLO survey data. Ecologi-
cal Monographs, 81, 63–88.
Williams, M.A. & Baker, W.L. (2012) Spa-
tially
extensive
reconstructions
show
variable-severity ﬁre and heterogeneous
structure in historical western United
States dry forests. Global Ecology and Bio-
geography, 21, 1042–1052.
Youngblood,
A.,
Max,
T.
&
Coe,
K.
(2004)
Stand
structure
in
eastside
old-growth ponderosa pine forests of
Oregon and northern California. Forest
Ecology
and
Management,
199,
191–
217.
Editor: Martin Sykes
doi: 10.1111/geb.12136
Correspondence
Global Ecology and Biogeography, © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
6
