Trying to pinpoint the “beginning” of the White Mountain 
Stewardship Project (WMSP) is in itself a challenge. Clearly the 
contract signing in 2004 was the official start, but there was a 
long history of collaboration that came before, leading to that very 
moment. 
What began as an attempt to change the potential fire behavior 
around communities evolved into the largest and longest national 
example of how various interests, businesses, communities, and 
the federal government demonstrated that they can work together 
to improve local economies, enhance wildlife habitat, and restore 
forest health using a variety of treatments.
Early into its path, the WMSP was charting its own course. It was the 
first long-term stewardship contract in the nation. A contract with 
an unwritten agreement of a diameter cap. A contract predicated 
on expanding the scale and pace of forest treatments with only a 
handful of industry professionals to make it happen. All with limited 
funds in the USFS Southwestern Region (R-3) that were shuffled 
to one forest to essentially conduct a very large, very expensive 
experiment.
The first five years were a time of trust building, experimentation, 
learning, and moving past buzz words and theoretical ideas to 
translate those into on-the-ground accomplishments. 
With a goal of treating at least 50,000 and up to 150,000 acres 
of forested land, the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (ASNFs), 
their partners, contractor, and collaborative board really had their 
work cut out for them. They  set monitoring questions and data 
collection targets, and embraced the adaptive management cycle. 
The Five Year Report provided a summary of monitoring data 
at a critical time. There was still enough time in the contract to 
adjust the trajectories that weren’t heading in the right direction 
and to solidify those that were. There were many, many lessons 
learned, and even more recommendations. Some of these 
recommendations were heeded, while others were missed. 
The Wallow and San Juan Fires were both 
human-caused, and both burned through 
WMSP treatments. These fires represented 
both a defeat and a victory. The defeat 
in the form of 56,000 acres of project 
areas in the pipeline for treatment in the 
remaining years of the contract lost to 
wildfire, and a victory in that the treatments 
did as they were expected to do (shift fire 
behavior from crown fires to surface fires). 
This had a major impact on the final years 
of the contract. So many of the ASNFs staff 
were focused (for good reason) on the 
Wallow Fire aftermath and rehabilitation 
that some of the monitoring data collection 
specific to WMSP was not completed. And it 
bears mentioning that the USFS staff had 
a significant turn-over shortly after the 
Wallow Fire. In total there were four forest 
supervisors and three regional foresters 
that came through during the ten-year 
project, not to mention all of the District 
level staff that changed during this time. 
Even with all of those “basic” challenges, 
the WMSP collaborative group still 
managed to work together, utilize an 
adaptive management process. The ASNFs, 
Future Forest, and countless stakeholders 
were able to successfully complete forest 
treatment on over 70,000 acres, and begin 
to rebuild a failing wood products industry. 
The Board has commissioned the final 
report because they wanted other groups 
to be able to learn from the WMSP 
successes and learning opportunities.
Even though the contract has ended, many 
felt that in order to determine final success, 
one must consider the current and on-
going situation. As the end of the WMSP 
approached, it became apparent that there 
was not a fully operational plan in place to 
transition beyond the stewardship contract. 
So many people worked so hard to gain the 
progress made, and yet it could slip away 
again. 
At the end of the day, how is success 
truly determined? There is absolutely 
no question that without the WMSP, the 
communities of Nutrioso, Eagar, and Greer 
would have faced tremendous losses during 
the Wallow Fire than they actually did. Many 
of us believe this makes the entire project 
a success. 
That being said, this project has not 
been without its fair share of hurdles and 
hiccups. Many people involved in the WMSP 
have expressed that it is their hope that 
our lessons learned will be applied. 
The next big challenge is figuring out 
how to develop a sustainable state-wide 
wood products industry that can support 
businesses in the White Mountains and 
those developing around the Four Forest 
Restoration Initiative. One thing is clear, 
the WMSP showed that large scale forest 
restoration can be achieved, and that is a 
valuable lesson learned. 
The WMSP Final Report was funded by a 
grant from the USDA Forest Service.
For more information about this report, please contact: 
Sarah Hurteau, Principal Ecologist
Integrated Biological Solutions, LLC
Sarah.Hurteau@gmail.com
928.225.0272
IBiS is an equal opportunity provider.
Copies of the full printed version of the report are available from the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests. Information presented in the full report represent the work of many researchers and 
authors. The Final Report is meant to provide a single source that summarizes data associated with the White Mountains Stewardship Project. Text and graphics by Sarah Hurteau. 
Photo by The Nature Conservancy
White Mountains 
Stewardship Project 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Photo by The Nature Conservancy

Photo by The Nature Conservancy
ADMINISTRATIVE FINDINGS
RECOMMENDATIONS
ECOLOGICAL FINDINGS
SOCIAL FINDINGS
ECONOMIC FINDINGS
1. Set quantitative objectives 
by which to measure success. 
Otherwise 
success 
is 
very 
subjective and a matter of 
opinion. 
Use 
the 
adaptive 
management cycle to inform and 
evaluate priorities and strategies 
throughout the contract.
2. Use data and methods for 
monitoring that are already in 
place. This saves time, money, 
and headaches about who will 
collect the data, where it will be 
stored, and if it is applicable to 
the decision making process on 
other forest management projects 
outside 
of 
the 
stewardship 
contract.
3. Have a dedicated funding 
stream for project monitoring. 
This will guaranty some minimum 
level of project monitoring is 
accomplished.
Forest treatments can and do 
change fire behavior. And through 
the use of quantitative objectives, 
the successes were measurable.
Wildlife have mixed responses to 
forest treatments, so planning 
at multiple scales is important to 
restore/maintain habitat for many 
species.
Restoration treatments based on 
historic structure were preferred 
by forest visitors, but also reduced 
flame lengths and fuel loads, and 
provided many other ecological 
benefits.
Long-term 
stewardship 
contracting poses many difficulties 
that shorter-term contracts do 
not. Better communication on 
the nuanced details of how the 
contract works would help guide 
partners’ understanding of the 
constraints in which the project is 
working.
The project revitalized, and in 
some cases created, new sectors 
of a diverse, but complementary 
wood products industry.
The pace and scale of forest 
treatments can be ramped up.
1. Reporting and sharing data 
with outside entities is challenging. 
Many of the internal systems used 
by the USFS are proprietary and 
the information doesn’t transfer 
easily.
2. Communication is key. Include 
contractors, 
partners, 
and 
cooperators early and often in 
the planning and decision making 
process and other discussions.
3. Clearly state project objectives, 
so that everyone involved knows 
what they are working towards.
The 
WMSP 
stimulated 
local 
economies and provided tangible 
community benefits. The average 
annual jobs associated with the 
WMSP were 305.
The project was one of the 
largest economic redevelopment 
programs in the White Mountains 
Region. On average the annual 
expenditures 
by 
businesses 
associated with the WMSP was 
more than $19 million.
Development of support programs 
to give local industry a jumping-off 
point financially, was a must. 
1. People generally aren’t familiar 
with the lingo of economics, so 
understanding tax revenue, how 
it’s calculated, or multiplier effects 
are best left to the professionals. 
2. Annual progress reports 
provided by contracted economists 
were 
invaluable. 
Economic 
monitoring is recommended to be 
one of the items that is completed 
each year.
3. Remain consistent in your 
analysis through time. The WMSP 
had the benefit of economists who 
held the majority of items analyzed 
and methodologists constant, 
making the data comparable 
among years.
Local residents were somewhat 
familiar with the need for forest 
treatments and fire as a natural 
process in the local forests at the 
beginning of the project.
Educational outreach through 
the use of news paper articles, 
advertisements, and websites 
helped inform local residents and 
vacationers alike of the purpose 
and progress.
The WMSP tapped into a social 
“zone of agreement” which 
helped propel the project forward 
to get treatments on the ground 
quickly.
1. Understand the public mindset. 
Surveys conducted at the County 
scale and repeated at the 
beginning, mid-point, and end of 
the project would help track the 
public’s perception of the project.
2. 
Initiate 
a 
community 
collaborative group as soon as 
possible. It provides a forum for 
people to have discussions and 
respectfully disagree, ultimately 
finding the points on which they 
agree.
3. Building trust is a lengthy, 
but important step, and trust 
is built between individuals, not 
with an agency. Maintain agency 
personnel 
and 
stakeholder 
involvement as long as possible. 
As agency turnover happens, the 
trust-building process restarts.
RECOMMENDATIONS
RECOMMENDATIONS
RECOMMENDATIONS
The Mineral treatment areas were one of the earliest thinned under the White Mountain Stewardship 
Project. In 2014, the San Juan Fire burned through untreated forest (left of road) and into the Mineral 
project area (right of road). This picture embodies the success of the White Mountain Stewardship 
Project; improving forest health, restoring forest structure, and changing fire behavior. 
What did we 
learn?
As the first ten-year stewardship contract to come to completion, the WMSP has set a precedent 
for future long-term projects. In this regard, it is important to pass along our lessons learned 
so that other groups embarking on this journey can learn from our mistakes and gain from our 
successes. 
Although the objectives of the WMSP were relatively simple-- remove small-diameter trees, 
reduce fire hazards in communities, and begin to rebuild the economic viability of the local timber 
industry-- the implementation, accomplishments, and the lessons learned proved to be very 
complex. Here are a handful of examples. An extended list of findings and lessons learned are 
available in the Final Report.
In the end, it was only through patience, hard work, and a willingness to work together by all 
parties involved, that the real results of getting acres treated, achieving fire mitigation, and 
rebuilding a local wood products industry became a reality. 
Area Treated
Biomass Removed
71,303 acres
1,831,578 tons
By the Averages
The following 
numbers are the 
averages across all 
WMSP treatments, 
across all years:
Total Cost to USFS
Cost per Acre
$50 million
$489.71
Cost per Ton Removed
$18.87
Total Monitoring Cost
$1,868,500 or 
3.7% of USFS costs
Photo by ASNFs
