Shade responses of five grasses native to
southwestern U.S. Pinus ponderosa forests
Elke Naumburg, Laura E. DeWald, and Thomas E. Kolb
Abstract: Recent increases in Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws. forest density in the southwestern United States have
severely reduced understory herbaceous biomass and altered understory species composition. To examine whether
changes in graminoid species composition are caused by increased shading, we studied the effects of shade on leaf gas
exchange, biomass, and reproductive characteristics of five grass species native to Arizona P. ponderosa forests in a
greenhouse study. Blepharoneuron tricholepis (Nash) Torr., Koeleria cristata (L.) Pers., Festuca arizonica Vasey,
Muhlenbergia montana (Nutt.) Hitchc., and Sitanion hystrix (Nutt.) J.G. Smith were grown under three light levels
representative of photosynthetic photon flux densities and red/far-red ratios that occur beneath P. ponderosa canopies.
In general, all species grew better under unshaded conditions, but all survived and flowered even under the dense shade
treatment. Reduction of net assimilation rate by shading was the strongest during early reproductive shoot growth for
all species except K. cristata, whose assimilation rate was unaffected by shading. Biomass allocation and reproductive
responses to shading varied among species. Biomass of S. hystrix was the least affected by shading of all species, and
it showed no response in biomass allocation to reproduction but increased height and weight of individual flower stalks
under shade. Overall, S. hystrix and K. cristata, species that occur in dense P. ponderosa stands, were least affected by
experimental shading, which suggests that shade is a contributing factor to the distribution of grass species in Arizona
P. ponderosa forests.
Key words: native grass, leaf biomass, reproduction, photosynthesis, red/far-red ratio.
Résumé : L’augmentation récente de la densité des forêts de Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws. dans le sud-ouest des
Etats-Unis, a réduit considérablement la biomasse des plantes herbacées de sous-bois et a modifier la composition en
espèces. Au cours d’essais conduits en serre pour vérifier si les changements de la composition en espèces graminoïdes
sont causés par l’augmentation de l’ombrage, les auteurs ont étudié l’effet de l’ombre sur les échanges gazeux foliai-
res, sur la biomasse et sur les caractéristiques de la reproduction, chez 5 espèces herbacées indigènes. Ils ont cultivé
les Blepharoneuron tricholepis (Nash) Torr., Koeleria cristata (L.) Pers., Festuca arizonica Vasey, Muhlenbergia mon-
tana (Nutt.) Hitchc., et Sitanion hystrix (Nutt.) J.G. Smith sous trois régimes lumineux représentatifs des densités de
flux de photons photosynthétiques et de rapports rouge clair / rouge sombre observés sous les canopées du P. ponde-
rosa. En général, toutes les espèces poussent mieux en pleine lumière, mais elles survivent et fleurissent toutes sous
des traitements fortement ombragés. La diminution par l’ombrage du taux net d’assimilation est plus marquée au cours
du début de la croissance des tiges reproductrices chez toutes les espèces, sauf chez le K. cristata dont le taux
d’assimilation n’est pas affecté par l’ombrage. L’allocation de la biomasse et les réactions de la reproduction à
l’ombrage varient selon les espèces. De toutes les espèces, la biomasse du S. hystrix est la moins affectée par
l’ombrage, ne montrant pas de réaction dans l’allocation de la biomasse vers la reproduction, mais une augmentation
de la hauteur et du poids des tiges florifères, sous l’influence de l’ombre. En général, le S. hystrix et le K. cristata, es-
pèces qu’on retrouve dans les peuplements denses du P. ponderosa, sont les espèces les moins affectées par l’ombrage
expérimental, ce qui suggère que l’ombrage serait un facteur influençant la distribution des espèces graminoïdes dans
les forêts de P. ponderosa en Arizona.
Mots clés : herbacées indigènes, biomasse foliaire, reproduction, photosynthèse, rapports rouge clair / rouge sombre.
[Traduit par la Rédaction]
Naumburg et al.
1009
Introduction
Prior to Euro-American settlement, Pinus ponderosa Dougl.
ex Laws. forests in the southwestern United States were
open and consisted mostly of large-diameter trees (Covington
and Moore 1994a). Currently, tree densities in many stands
are 40–50 times greater than presettlement densities, and
small trees are the dominant size class (Covington and Moore
1994b; Covington et al. 1997). These changes, caused in
part by management practices such as heavy grazing early
Can. J. Bot. 79: 1001–1009 (2001)
© 2001 NRC Canada
1001
DOI: 10.1139/cjb-79-9-1001
Received August 17, 2000. Published on the NRC Research Press Web site at http://canjbot.nrc.ca on August 21, 2001.
E. Naumburg,1,2 L.E. DeWald, and T.E. Kolb. School of Forestry, P.O. Box 15018, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff,
AZ 86011, U.S.A.
1Corresponding author (e-mail: elke@dri.edu).
2Present address: Desert Research Institute, 755 E. Flamingo Road, Las Vegas, NV 89119, U.S.A.

this century and active fire suppression (Cooper 1960; Sav-
age 1991; Covington and Moore 1994a; Covington et al.
1994), have altered productivity and diversity of herbaceous
understory vegetation.
As a general trend, the productivity of graminoid, forb,
and shrub biomass decreases in a concave relationship with
increased P. ponderosa density and canopy cover (Clary et
al. 1975; Wilson 1987; Clary 1988; Moore and Deiter 1992).
A largely ignored question is whether individual graminoid
species respond differently to increased tree density. Among
the few studies examining this question, two suggest that
Blepharoneuron tricholepis (Nash) Torr., Festuca arizonica
Vasey, and Muhlenbergia montana (Nutt.) Hitchc. grow better
in the open (Arnold 1950; Merkle 1962), while Sitanion
hystrix (Nutt.) J.G. Smith grows well under dense stands
(Merkle 1962). Further, Pearson (1967) reported that growth
rates of F. arizonica under dense canopies decreased more
than M. montana. More recently, Naumburg and DeWald
(1999)
showed
that
B.
tricholepis,
M.
montana,
and
Muhlenbergia virescens (H.B.K.) Kunth. occurred preferen-
tially in forest openings, while Koeleria cristata (L.) Pers.
occurred in a variety of light environments, and S. hystrix
occurred preferentially beneath dense pine stands.
Research attempting to link field productivity and cover of
southwestern graminoid species with environmental vari-
ables has failed to establish clear relationships that explain
differences in species performance. McLaughlin (1978)
found that grass biomass correlated best with light quantity,
soil potassium content, and stand age, but responses varied
among species. In Oregon’s interior P. ponderosa forests,
density and cover of most herbaceous species responded
positively to increased light, whereas some species appeared
to respond to both increased light and increased below
ground resources (Riegel et al. 1992, 1995). In eastern
Washington, Moir (1966) concluded that both light and ni-
trogen availability affect understory biomass and cover.
While factors such as nitrogen (Moir 1966) and water
availability (Riegel et al. 1992) likely influence the perfor-
mance of some grass species, light intensity is probably
important as an influence on photosynthesis and carbon (C)
balance to allow persistence in shade. In general, changes in
biomass allocation caused by shading, especially under lower
red/far-red light conditions, are typically greater for species
adapted to sites with full light conditions (“sun species”) than
shade-tolerant species (Fitter and Ashmore 1974; Morgan and
Smith 1979, Smith 1982). Further, sun species have higher
net photosynthetic capacity and, when shaded, show a greater
reduction in photosynthetic capacity than shade-tolerant spe-
cies (Boardman 1977; Björkman 1981). However, exceptions
to these patterns exist. Some shade species can achieve photo-
synthetic rates similar to those of sun species (Chow et al.
1988; Murchie and Horton 1997), and they can be successful
in high-light environments despite low acclimation of their
photosynthetic apparatus (Adamson et al. 1991; Osborne et al.
1994). A study of 22 species from different shade environ-
ments indicated that the mechanism of acclimation differed
among species (Murchie and Horton, 1997): sun species re-
sponded at the leaf morphological level by increasing specific
leaf area (SLA), while shade species responded at the chloro-
plast level.
To further explore how shading by P. ponderosa forests in
the southwestern United States affects native grasses, we
used a greenhouse study to examine the photosynthetic,
biomass allocation, and reproductive responses to shade by
five grass species (B. tricholepis, F. arizonica, K. cristata,
M. montana, and S. hystrix). We tested whether differences in
species responses to shading can explain their occurrence in
different light environments within the forest and, thus, iden-
tify shading as a driving force behind shifts in understory spe-
cies composition.
Material and methods
Plant material
A factorial greenhouse study with grass species and shade level
as factors was conducted to test for differences in photosynthetic,
biomass, and reproductive response to shading. Blepharoneuron
tricholepis, S. hystrix (also known as Elymus elymoides (Raf.)
Swezy), F. arizonica, M. montana, and K. cristata were used in
this study. These grass species were selected because they are com-
mon to P. ponderosa forests in the southwestern United States
(U.S. Forest Service 1937; Gould 1951), and they represent a range
of genera, phenologies, photosynthetic pathways, and forest growth
environments. All species are perennial bunchgrasses lacking rhi-
zomes (Gould 1951). Blepharoneuron tricholepis and M. montana
have the C4 photosynthetic pathway (Watson and Dallwitz 1992),
flower relatively late (September) in the growing season (Pearson,
1967), and have been described to prefer open habitats in P. pon-
derosa forests (U.S. Forest Service 1937; Arnold 1950; Merkle
1962). Festuca arizonica is a C3 grass (Watson and Dallwitz 1992)
that flowers in June or July (Pearson, 1967), has been associated
with open habitats (U.S. Forest Service 1937; Arnold 1950; Merkle
1962), but occasionally occurs in shaded, moist areas (U.S. Forest
Service 1937). Sitanion hystrix and K. cristata are C3 grasses (Waller
and Lewis 1979) and are widely distributed in North America (U.S.
Forest Service 1937) with different ecotypes in different regions
(Robertson and Ward 1970; Clary 1975). Sitanion hystrix begins
flowering in July (Clary 1975) and can grow under relatively dense
P. ponderosa canopies (Merkle 1962; Naumburg and DeWald 1999).
Koeleria cristata flowers in June–July (Robertson and Ward 1970)
and shows no habitat preference with respect to P. ponderosa density
in central Arizona (Naumburg and DeWald 1999).
Mature plants (2–4 cm crown basal area) were collected in early
December from the south-facing edge of a P. ponderosa stand in
the Coconino National Forest approximately 8 km south of Flag-
staff, Ariz. The stand was adjacent to a meadow and had a closed
canopy of 36 cm diameter trees growing at a density of 235
trees/ha. The grasses were cut back to a height of 2.5 cm; planted
in 8.9-L containers in a mixture of 50% topsoil (loam rich in mont-
morillonite), 25% peat moss, and 25% perlite; and overwintered
outside. The following March the plants were transferred into a
greenhouse and placed under the shade treatments.
Shade treatments
Three light levels were chosen to mimic light quantity and red/
far-red ratio (R/FR) conditions of full sun, intermediate shade, and
dense shade found under native P. ponderosa canopies. The target
values of photosynthetic photon flux density (PPFD; 400–700 nm)
and R/FR of the shade treatments were based on a literature review
of light quantity and quality under conifer canopies (e.g., Morgan
et al. 1985; Ross et al. 1986; Messier et al. 1989). Full sun is char-
acterized by a R/FR of 1.15 (Smith 1982), while dense conifer
stands transmit only 5–10% of PPFD and have an average R/FR of
0.40. A reduction in PPFD and R/FR to create the shade treatments
in the greenhouse was achieved using window film made by 3M
© 2001 NRC Canada
1002
Can. J. Bot. Vol. 79, 2001

Corp., St. Paul, Minn. The window film RE-35-BRARL (33% PFD,
R/FR = 0.80) was used for the intermediate-shade treatment and
P12-AR (14% PFD, R/FR = 0.42) was used for the dense-shade
treatment, because these films were closest to the target values.
The PPFD and R/FR measurements of these films were made by
Dr. David Lee (Florida International University, personal commu-
nication) with a LI-1800 spectroradiometer (Lincoln, Neb.). Clear
plastic film was used for the no-shade treatment. The window and
clear plastic films were cut to make 130 × 75 × 75 cm3 cages sus-
pended from steel cables above the plants. Shade treatments were
replicated in six blocks with each shade cage containing three
plants per species in separate pots that were randomly arranged
within each block.
A LI-1800 spectroradiometer (LI-COR, Lincoln, Neb.) was used to
compare greenhouse light conditions under the shade treatments to
light levels measured under P. ponderosa stands. Results indicated
that forest PPFD at mid-day in dense shade averaged about
70 µmol·m–2·s–1, while the greenhouse dense shade treatment aver-
aged about 150 µmol·m–2·s–1. However, the R/FR values were compa-
rable at 0.43. Overall, forest R/FR at a comparable PPFD was 20%
higher than R/FR under greenhouse conditions because of slight light
reductions by the greenhouse glass.
Growth conditions
Greenhouse temperatures were based on the 30-year average
maximum and minimum temperatures in Flagstaff, Ariz., for the
months of June–August (Green and Sellers 1964; Sorenson 1974)
and were set to a maximum day and minimum night temperature of
23 and 10°C, respectively. Pots were watered using a dilute (5% of
recommended
strength)
fertilizer
solution
(Peters
Complete
20:20:20 (N–P–K); Peters Fertilizer Products, Fogelsville, Pa.) to
provide the plants with steady-state nutrient availability (Ingestad
1977). Because of the different water use of plants in different
shade treatments, no-shade plants were watered twice a week,
while dense-shade plants were watered once every 1.5 weeks to
maintain moist soil during the study.
Leaf gas exchange
Net assimilation rate was measured on two of the three plants per
species in each shade treatment and block on April 29 (only the C3
species had sufficient foliage), May 31, June 30, July 22, and Septem-
ber 11 using a LI-6200 portable photosynthesis system (LI-COR, Lin-
coln, Neb.) with a 0.25-L cuvette. All measurement days were sunny.
Measurements were made on one to four healthy and fully expanded
leaves originating at the base of the plant. Net assimilation rate was
measured in the light environment the plants were growing in. Envi-
ronmental conditions in the cuvette during the measurements
(380 µmol·mol–1 CO2, 35% relative humidity) were generally within
10% of ambient conditions in the greenhouse. After the measurement,
the leaves were clipped for area and dry mass determinations. The
projected area of the leaves was measured using a monochrome
AgVision system (Decagon Devices Inc., Pullman, Wash.). The invo-
lute morphology of F. arizonica leaves caused a consistent underesti-
mate of leaf area for this species compared with the other species that
had a planar leaf geometry. Leaf dry mass was measured after oven-
drying at 70°C for 24 h. Net assimilation rate was normalized against
area (m2) and dry mass (kg) to give net assimilation per leaf area
(Aarea) and leaf dry mass (Amass).
Biomass and reproductive characteristics
Throughout the growing season, phenological development was
monitored weekly on all plants. The following developmental stages
were recorded: shift to reproductive shoot initiation, flower emer-
gence, and anthesis. The time of flower development was calcu-
lated by subtracting the days until reproductive shoot initiation
from the days until flower emergence.
Flower stalks of the C3 species senesced prior to the final harvest
so they were removed for biomass measurements as they senesced
throughout the season. For the final harvest in late October, the
biomass of each plant was separated into flower stalks (culms with
inflorescences), leaf blades attached to flower stalks, and vegeta-
tive biomass. None of the species had significant amounts of stem
material in their vegetative biomass so this fraction was not sepa-
rated from the leaves. The height of flower stalks was measured
after clipping the stalks at their base, and the total number of
flower stalks was recorded for each plant. Soil was washed from
the root systems, which were then air-dried, and any remaining
perlite and other contaminants were manually removed. All plant
material was oven-dried at 70°C and weighed.
Biomass ratios were calculated from the dry mass data by divid-
ing a particular biomass component by the total plant biomass.
These ratios included leaf mass ratio (LMR), flower stalk mass ra-
tio (FMR), and root mass ratio (RMR). The average flower stalk
mass included leaves that were attached to the stalk.
Data analyses
The Aarea and Amass data were analyzed with repeated measures
analyses of variance using the means of the two plants measured
per treatment and block. For dates where the date × species ×
shade interaction was significant, analyses were conducted sepa-
rately for each date. Biomass and reproductive variables were ana-
lyzed using univariate analyses of variance. For those variables
with a significant species × shade interaction, the shade effect was
reanalyzed by species with analysis of variance, and shade treat-
ment means were compared using Duncan’s multiple comparison
test. Because the effect of PPFD on net assimilation rate was af-
fected by plant phenology (see Results below), we created a data
set of measurements that most closely corresponded to the
phenological stages of flower initiation and flower emergence. We
analyzed this data subset with an analysis of covariance that tested
for separate slopes and intercepts among species for the two differ-
ent phenological stages.
By the end of August, nearly half of the S. hystrix plants had
died; their roots had begun to decay and could not be separated
from soil at the final harvest. Mortality in this species occurred
across all shade treatments and appeared to be related to the large
number of reproductive tillers. Reproductive tillers of grasses die
after seed set (Briske 1991), suggesting that S. hystrix mortality
was not caused by the treatments but, rather, was a consequence of
high reproductive effort. Therefore, the root data of S. hystrix was
excluded from statistical analyses, while the leaf biomass and
flower stalk data were not. All statistical tests were conducted with
general linear methods and regression procedures in SAS (version
6.09) and used a significance level of 0.05.
Results
Leaf gas exchange and specific leaf area
Both the Amass and Aarea repeated-measures ANOVA had
significant date × species × shade interactions, suggesting
that species differed in their response to shading and that
this response varied over the growing season. For Amass,
analyses of individual dates showed a significant species ×
shade interaction in April and June only (F[4,40] = 4.8,
p < 0.01, F[8,70] = 3.5, p < 0.01, respectively), while for Aarea
all dates showed a significant interaction (F > 7, p < 0.001).
In April, the shade treatments did not significantly affect
Amass of K. cristata, reduced Amass of F. arizonica only under
dense shade, but reduced Amass of S. hystrix under both shade
treatments (data not shown). In June, shade did not affect
© 2001 NRC Canada
Naumburg et al.
1003

Amass of K. cristata, but Amass of S. hystrix and M. montana
was significantly decreased in the dense-shade treatment.
The Amass in the intermediate-shade treatment in June was
significantly lower than in the no-shade treatment for both
B. tricholepis and F. arizonica.
Results for Aarea were generally consistent with Amass;
F. arizonica had the highest Aarea but also the greatest reduc-
tion in Aarea as shade increased, especially in April (data not
shown). The greatest reduction in Aarea over the growing sea-
son for both B. tricholepis and M. montana occurred in June,
and the response to shade was also strong for B. tricholepis
in July. Of the five species, K. cristata and S. hystrix had the
overall lowest Aarea and the smallest Aarea response as shade
increased (data not shown).
We reanalyzed net assimilation rate data according to pheno-
logical stage with an ANCOVA model to determine whether
phenological stage affected species-specific shade responses
(Table 1). All species except K. cristata, which showed little
photosynthetic response to shade, had greater photosynthetic
reductions under shade when they were shifting to reproductive
growth than at flowering (Fig. 1). Further, during early repro-
ductive shoot growth, regression slopes between photosynthesis
and PPFD were closely related to species forest distributions
with species capable of growth under shade having the lowest
slopes (Table 1).
Specific leaf area of all species increased significantly by
shading and responses to shading varied among species (p =
0.05) (Fig. 2). The increase in SLA between the no-shade and
dense-shade
treatment
was
largest
for
K.
cristata
and
S. hystrix and least for M. montana and B. tricholepis. More-
over, SLA in the no-shade treatment varied significantly
among species with the following rank order: B. tricholepis >
K. cristata = S. hystrix > M. montana.
Biomass and reproductive characteristics
All biomass and flower stalk variables, except days until
onset of reproductive shoot growth, flower emergence, and
anthesis, had significant species × shade interactions. For the
variables related to the timing of reproductive development,
both species and shade effects were significant. Shade
shifted the onset of reproductive shoot growth to an earlier
date for B. tricholepis and S. hystrix, while flower emer-
gence and anthesis for B. tricholepis and M. montana were
delayed under shade (Table 2). The time between reproduc-
tive shoot initiation and flower emergence remained constant
under shade for F. arizonica and K. cristata but increased
significantly by 20–27 days for S. hystrix, M. montana, and
B. tricholepis with increasing shade (Table 2).
Total biomass of all species except S. hystrix decreased
significantly under each shade treatment (Fig. 3). Sitanion
hystrix plants growing in the no-shade and intermediate-
shade treatments did not differ significantly from each other,
but the dense-shade plants had 46% less biomass than the
no-shade plants. Of the five species in the study, F. arizonica
had the greatest biomass under the no-shade treatment, and
total biomass decreased 63% under dense shade. The other
three species had similar large biomass responses to shade
where the dense-shade plants had 75–80% less biomass than
the no-shade plants (Fig. 3).
Koeleria cristata and S. hystrix allocated relatively more
of their biomass to leaves as shade increased compared with
the other species, and this reallocation came at the expense
of roots (Fig. 3). Absolute leaf biomass of K. cristata was
reduced only in dense-shade relative to no-shade plants,
while S. hystrix showed no significant effects of the shade
treatments on leaf biomass (Fig. 3). The relative biomass al-
location pattern in F. arizonica followed a similar trend, but
LMR did not increase for dense-shade compared with inter-
mediate-shade plants. Blepharoneuron tricholepis allocated
more biomass to leaves only under dense shade and under in-
termediate shade, FMR increased while RMR decreased com-
pared to no-shade plants. Muhlenbergia montana biomass
allocation was remarkably stable across all shade treatments
and was characterized by a high LMR (Fig. 3).
Koeleria cristata and M. montana flower stalk numbers
were not affected by the shade treatments, and the average
mass of flower stalks decreased only under dense-shade
compared with no-shade plants (Fig. 4). The average height
of K. cristata’s stalks also decreased only under dense shade,
© 2001 NRC Canada
1004
Can. J. Bot. Vol. 79, 2001
Fig. 1. Mean net assimilation rate (Amass) for five measurement
dates and five species in response to three shade treatments at
two phenological states. Error bars are SE. Within a species, bars
with the same letters are not significantly different (p > 0.05).
Letters are not shown in the second panel because the species ×
shade interaction was not significant. Bltr, Blepharoneuron
tricholepis; Mumo, Muhlenbergia montana; Fear, Festuca
arizonica; Kocr, Koeleria cristata; Sihy, Sitanion hystrix.

and many of these dense-shade flowers showed deformities
such as twisted stalks. Flower stalk height of M. montana
followed a similar pattern, but heights did not differ signifi-
cantly with shade (data not shown). Festuca arizonica
flower stalk characteristics changed from plants having a
few stalks with thick culms under no shade, to almost twice
the number of stalks with a fourfold lower average mass and
a one-third shorter height under the dense-shade treatment
(Fig. 4). Average flower stalk mass of F. arizonica was sig-
nificantly lower under intermediate shade than under no
shade, whereas flower stalk height and number were signifi-
cantly different for the dense-shade plants. Flower stalk
height of S. hystrix differed from the other species by in-
creasing significantly with shade, while average flower stalk
mass did not change with shading. However, the number of
flower stalks decreased significantly under shade with
dense-shade plants having only about half the flowers of no-
shade plants (Fig. 4). Blepharoneuron tricholepis had the
greatest number of flower stalks per plant compared with the
other species, and all flower characteristics decreased signif-
icantly in the dense-shade treatment compared with no-
shade plants.
Discussion
Leaf gas exchange
Of the five species examined, the relationship between
Aarea and Amass with PPFD was the weakest for K. cristata,
especially
early
in
the
growing
season.
In
contrast,
B. tricholepis and M. montana generally had stronger rela-
tionships between Aarea and PPFD. This result is consistent
with numerous studies documenting that species successful
in shaded conditions experience a lower decrease in photo-
synthetic capacity per leaf area under shade than species that
are most successful in sunny enviroments (Pons 1977;
Bazzaz and Carlson 1982; Ward and Woolhouse 1986; Smith
and Martin 1987; Sims and Pearcy 1989). This trend has
also been shown for Aarea (Ashton and Berlyn 1992; Holmes
and Cowling 1993; Walters et al. 1993), and Amass (Kuiper
and Smid 1985; Walters et al. 1993) for shade species.
While the five species we examined differed in photo-
synthetic response to shading throughout the study, these
differences were greatest during early reproductive shoot
growth. At this stage, assimilation versus PPFD regression
© 2001 NRC Canada
Naumburg et al.
1005
Initiation of reproductive shoot growth
Flower emergence
Species
Date
Aarea
Amass
Date
Aarea
Amass
Blepharoneuron tricholepis
June 30
6.41ab
67.5b
Sept. 11
3.98a
16.0
Muhlenbergia montana
June 30
6.46b
73.2b
Sept. 11
4.99a
43.5
Festuca arizonica
April 29
11.34c
58.4b
May 31
10.43b
35.5
Koeleria cristata
April 29
4.20a
–11.3a
May 31
3.89a
–2.0
Sitanion hystrix
May 31
5.58a
40.3b
July 22
3.25a
31.1
Note: Species are ordered according to their apparent ability to grow under dense pine forests, with open canopy species at
the top of the table. Slopes followed by the same letter within a column do not differ significantly at p < 0.05, and letters are
only indicated for significant species × shade ANOVA interactions.
Table 1. Slopes for simple linear regressions between the natural logarithm of PPFD at the time of measure-
ment and net assimilation per area (Aarea) and dry mass (Amass) for measurement dates closest to the initiation of
reproductive shoot growth and flower emergence.
Fig. 2. Specific leaf area for five species (abbreviations as in
Fig. 1) and shade treatments. Error bars are SE. Measurements
were taken in April for K. cristata and S. hystrix, and in May
for B. tricholepis and M. montana on newly developed, fully ex-
panded leaves. Within a species, bars with the same letters are
not significantly different (p > 0.05). Festuca arizonica was ex-
cluded from statistical analyses because its involute leaves af-
fected leaf area measurements.
Fig. 3. Biomass relationships of five grass species (abbreviations
as in Fig. 1) grown under three shade treatments (N, no shade; I,
intermediate shade; D, dense shade). Within a species, total bio-
mass is not significantly different (p > 0.05) for bars with the
same letters.

slopes ranked consistently with the species’ forest growth
environment, with the exception of the Aarea slope of
F. arizonica (Fig. 1; Table 1). Also at this stage, slopes were
generally the greatest of the season suggesting a greater rela-
tive reduction in C gain for the shaded plants at this pheno-
logical stage. After emergence of the first flower, species
differences in photosynthetic response to shading disap-
peared. Carbon limitation in shade during early reproductive
shoot growth could result in reduced reproductive success.
At this stage, floral primordia are initiated and inflorescence
sizes determined for some grasses (Hay and Walker 1989).
Further, C limitations may reduce the number of reproduc-
tive tillers that develop (Hay and Walker 1989). As a conse-
quence, the species that were less tolerant to shade in our
study may survive under dense shade, but their reproductive
success could be severely hampered.
A second implication of greater photosynthetic sensitivity
to shade during early reproductive shoot growth relates to
the time period from onset of reproductive shoot growth to
flower emergence. Flowers of K. cristata and F. arizonica
emerged about 18 days after the onset of reproductive shoot
growth regardless of the shade treatment (Table 2). Sitanion
hystrix, M. montana, and B. tricholepis had longer time peri-
ods between onset of reproductive shoot growth and flower
emergence than K. cristata and F. arizonica that increased
further for shaded plants relative to the unshaded plants
(Table 2). Consequently, shaded plants of these three species
could be impacted longer by low photosynthetic rates during
reproductive shoot growth compared with K. cristata and
F. arizonica. For example, Aarea and Amass versus PPFD
slopes of B. tricholepis were equally high during early re-
productive shoot growth (June 30) and the following mea-
surement date (not shown). This finding suggests a greater
negative impact on the growing season C balance of shaded
B. tricholepis plants compared with shaded plants of the
less-affected species.
Festuca arizonica was the only species in this study whose
photosynthetic response to shading differed between the leaf
area- and mass-based expressions of net assimilation rate (Ta-
ble 1). While the fine, involute leaves of F. arizonica resulted
in an overestimate of Aarea, the interpretation of the Aarea ver-
sus PPFD slopes should be valid since the overestimation oc-
curred at all light levels. Generally, Amass is a better predictor
of overall plant C balance of plants (Givinish 1988; Garnier
1991) and tree seedling survival in shade (Kitajima 1994;
Walters and Reich 1996) than Aarea. Given these indications of
greater relevance of Amass to shade tolerance, we consider
F. arizonica to be intermediate in its ability to assimilate in
shade relative to the other species. Further, this would suggest
that K. cristata, which showed no decrease in Amass under
shade early in the season, should be the most suited to grow in
shade.
Biomass and reproductive characteristics
If success in shade is equated with maintaining biomass
production relative to unshaded conditions, then S. hystrix
would be the most successful species in this study. However,
the more sensitive response of biomass to shading by the
other four species does not necessarily demonstrate poor
performance
in
shade.
For
example,
the
shade
grass
Deschampsia flexuosa (L.) Trin has shown similar growth
rate responses across various PPFD as the sun grass Festuca
ovina L. (Foggo and Warrington 1989), and other shade spe-
cies show significant increases in biomass under high- versus
low-growth light conditions (Adamson et al. 1991; Clabby
and Osborne 1997).
Of the biomass characteristics measured, the response of
leaf biomass to shading corresponded best with the species’
distributions in the forest. Sitanion hystrix is generally found
in dense stands and showed no significant decrease in leaf
biomass across all shade levels (Fig. 3). This, in combination
© 2001 NRC Canada
1006
Can. J. Bot. Vol. 79, 2001
Shade level
No shade
Intermediate
Dense
Days until onset of reproductive shoot growth
Blepharoneuron tricholepis
85.3a
72.5b
75.6ab
Muhlenbergia montana
78.7a
72.1a
76.2a
Festuca arizonica
32.8a
35.7a
36.8a
Koeleria cristata
32.5a
22.2a
28.6a
Sitanion hystrix
61.0a
42.2b
39.8b
Days until first flower emergence
B. tricholepis
143.9b
142.2b
161.3a
M. montana
147.8b
152.9ab
168.8a
F. arizonica
49.4a
53.7a
53.3a
K. cristata
49.9a
44.7a
51.5a
S. hystrix
103.9a
105.7a
106.3a
Note: Values are the mean number of days from transfer into the
greenhouse on March 22, 1995. Values within a row followed by the
same letter are not statistically different for that species at p < 0.05.
Table 2. Timing of reproductive development of five grass spe-
cies grown under three shade levels.
Fig. 4. Reproductive characteristics of five grass species (abbre-
viations as in Fig. 1) grown under three shade treatments. Error
bars are SE. Mean flower stalk masses include leaves attached to
the stalk. Within a species, bars with the same letters are not
significantly different (p > 0.05). ns, not significant.

© 2001 NRC Canada
Naumburg et al.
1007
with strong adjustments in SLA (Fig. 2), probably contributed
strongly to the small effect of shading on total biomass of
S. hystrix. In contrast, the two species preferring open areas
(B. tricholepis and M. montana) showed larger decreases in
leaf biomass between the no-shade and intermediate-shade
treatments and had comparatively small increases in SLA in
response to shading. Thus, it appears that shifts in biomass
allocation and changes in leaf morphology to maintain
photosynthetic area minimized shade effects on biomass of
S. hystrix and less so for the other species.
Relative biomass allocation to roots, leaves, and flower
stalks in our study did not vary consistently with the distri-
bution of grass species in the forest. Each species appeared
to have a distinct response to shading. This result is unex-
pected based on research indicating that shade-tolerant spe-
cies have smaller changes in biomass allocation toward
stems and leaves when grown under shade than intolerant
species (Fitter and Ashmore 1974; Morgan and Smith 1979;
Grime 1981; Smith 1982; Corré 1983). However, other stud-
ies have shown that shade-tolerant species can show equal or
greater changes in biomass allocation compared with intoler-
ant species (Mitchell and Woodward 1988; Dale and
Causton 1992; Hutchings and de Kroon 1994). In our study,
B. tricholepis, M. montana, and S. hystrix showed little
change in RMR in response to shading (Fig. 3). These spe-
cies had comparatively low root biomass and RMR and a
later date of flowering that coincides with the wetter portion
of the growing season in the American Southwest. In con-
trast, K. cristata and F. arizonica showed significant de-
creases in RMR under each shade treatment (Fig. 3), had
high relative and absolute biomass allocation to roots, and
had an early date of flowering (Table 2) that coincides with
the onset of the early summer drought season. This effect of
RMR size on the ability of RMR to change under shade has
been observed by Dale and Causton (1992) as well. The lack
of consistency among studies in the magnitude of changes in
biomass allocation for shade-tolerant and -intolerant species
may be due to allometric constraints. These constraints may
affect biomass allocation patterns independently from shade
tolerance such that resource-limited plants may not be able
to shift more biomass to the organ that captures the most
limiting resource (Menges 1987; Grime 1994).
All species were capable of reproductive growth under the
shade treatments suggesting that, while all grew more poorly
under shade, this limitation was not strong enough to elimi-
nate costly reproductive biomass. Rather, shade slowed flower
development of B. tricholepis, M. montana, and S. hystrix by
shifting the onset of reproductive growth to an earlier date
but with the same or later date of flower emergence (Ta-
ble 2). The degree to which flower development was delayed
appears closely related to the natural seasonality of flower-
ing for these species rather than distribution in the forest.
Koeleria cristata and F. arizonica flower early and showed
no or little delay with shading. For S. hystrix, which flowers
later in the season, the time of flower development was in-
creased more by shading than for the early flowering species
but less than for the latest flowering species, B. tricholepis
and M. montana.
Sitanion hystrix was the only species whose flower stalk
mass was unaffected by shading while height increased
(Fig. 4), suggesting reallocation of biomass to reproduction
in shade (Fig. 3). A similar response has been observed for
seedlings of D. flexuosa, where allocation shifted toward
fewer but larger tillers under shade, which would enable it to
grow better in shade (Foggo 1989). The same argument has
been made regarding reduced tillering rates of pasture
grasses exposed to low R/FR, which presumably improves
the fitness of individual plants growing in competition with
other plants (Casal et al. 1985, 1987). Flower stalk mass de-
creased under the dense-shade treatment for the other spe-
cies in our study. In fact, F. arizonica showed a large
decrease in flower stalk mass, while the number of flower
stalks increased with shading (Fig. 4).
Conclusions
The C4 species, B. tricholepis and M. montana, showed
the greatest decrease of all species in Aarea and Amass during
early reproductive shoot growth and in leaf biomass in
response to shading. Both these species also showed a large
decrease in total biomass with shading. In contrast, the C3
species, S. hystrix and K. cristata, showed the least response
of Aarea and Amass to shading during early reproductive shoot
growth. Additional indications of the higher shade tolerance
of S. hystrix were low sensitivity of leaf biomass, total bio-
mass, and mean flower stalk mass to shading. Koeleria
cristata’s leaf biomass decreased only under intermediate
shade, but its decrease in total biomass was similar to that of
B. tricholepis and M. montana. Festuca arizonica had inter-
mediate to high photosynthetic sensitivity to shading. Fes-
tuca arizonica’s leaf and total biomass responses to shading
were similar to those of K. cristata, yet its flower stalk re-
sponse to shading suggests that has low shade tolerance.
These results apply to populations of these species on the
Colorado Plateau near Flagstaff, Ariz., as genetic variation
in shade response among ecotypes has not been addressed
for these species.
In conclusion, several of the response variables measured
in this study suggest differences in shade tolerance that agree
with the distributions of these species in P. ponderosa forests
in northern Arizona. However, all five species grew better
under the no-shade treatment but were also able to survive
and produce flowers under the dense-shade treatment after
one growing season. One growing season may not fully
show the impact of successive years of shading on the more
intolerant species because of carbohydrate storage in roots
and crowns from the previous year. Still, our results indicate
that decreased light availability contributes to the absence of
B. tricholepis, M. montana, and F. arizonica under dense
P. ponderosa forests.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by McIntire-Stennis funding.
The authors thank Brian McCormick, Laura Moser, Nicole
Csaszar, Pat Bohin, Lil Jonas, Joe Stone, Scott Curran, and
Steve Wood for their help with this project as well as numer-
ous reviewers whose comments improved the manuscript
significantly.

References
Adamson, H.Y., Chow, W.S., Anderson, J.M., Vestk, M., and Suther-
land, M.W. 1991. Photosynthetic acclimation of Tradescantia
albiflora to growth irradiance: morphological, ultrastructural and
growth responses. Physiol. Plant. 82: 353–359.
Arnold, J.F. 1950. Changes in ponderosa pine bunchgrass ranges in
northern Arizona resulting from pine regeneration and grazing.
J. For. 48: 118–126.
Ashton, P.M.S., and Berlyn, G.P. 1992. Leaf adaptations of some
Shorea species to sun and shade. New Phytol. 121: 587–596.
Bazzaz, F.A., and Carlson, R.W. 1982. Photosynthetic acclimation to
variability in the light environment of early and late successional
plants. Oecologia, 54: 313–316.
Björkman, O. 1981. Responses to different quantum flux densities.
In Physiological plant ecology. Vol. 1. Responses to the physical
environment. Edited by O.L. Lange, P.S. Nobel, C.B. Osmond,
and H. Ziegler. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. pp. 57–107.
Boardman, N.K. 1977. Comparative photosynthesis of sun and shade
adapted plants. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 28: 355–377.
Briske, D.D. 1991. Developmental morphology and physiology of
grasses. In Grazing management: an ecological perspective. Edited
by R.K. Heitschmidt and J.W. Stuth. Timber Press, Portland, Oreg.
pp. 85–108.
Casal, J.J., Deregibus, V.A., and Sánchez, R.A. 1985. Variations in
tiller dynamics and morphology in Lolium multiflorum Lam.
Vegetative and reproductive plants as affected by differences in
red/far-red irradiation. Ann. Bot. (London), 56: 553–559.
Casal, J.J., Sánchez, R.A., and Deregibus, V.A. 1987. The effect of
light quality on shoot extension growth in three species of grasses.
Ann. Bot. (London), 59: 1–7.
Chow, W.S., Qian, L., Goodchild, D.J., Anderson, J.M. 1988. Photo-
synthetic acclimation of Alocasia macrorrhiza (L.) G. Don to
growth irradiance: structure, function and composition. Aust. J.
Plant Physiol. 15: 107–122.
Clabby, G., and Osborne, B.A. 1997. Irradiance and nitrate-
dependent variation in growth and biomass allocation of Myrcelis
muralis. An analysis of its significance for a functional categori-
zation of ‘sun’ and ‘shade’ plants. New Phytol. 135: 539–547.
Clary, W.P. 1975. Ecotypic adaptation in Sitanion hystrix. Ecology,
56: 1407–1415.
Clary, W.P. 1988. Silvicultural systems for forage production in pon-
derosa pine forests. In Ponderosa pine: the species and its manage-
ment. Symposium proceedings. Edited by D.M. Baumgartner and
J.E. Lotan. Washington State University Press, Pullman, Wash.
pp. 185–191.
Clary, W.P., Kruse, W.H., and Larson, F.R. 1975. Cattle grazing
and wood production with different basal areas of ponderosa
pine. J. Range Manage. 28: 434–437.
Cooper, C.F. 1960. Changes in vegetation, structure, and growth of
southwestern pine forests since white settlement. Ecol. Monogr.
30: 129–164.
Corré, W.J. 1983. Growth and morphogenesis of sun and shade
plants. II. The influence of light quality. Acta Bot. Neerl. 32:
185–202.
Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 1994a. Postsettlement changes
in natural fire regimes and forest structure: ecological restoration
of old-growth ponderosa pine forests. J. Sust. For. 2: 153–181.
Covington, W.W., and Moore, M.M. 1994b. Southwestern ponder-
osa pine forest structure. Changes since Euro-American settle-
ment. J. For. 92: 39–47.
Covington, W.W., Everett, R.L., Steele, R., Irwin, L.L., Daer, T.A.,
and Auclair, A.N.D. 1994. Historical and anticipated changes in
forest ecosystems of the Inland West of the United States. J.
Sust. For. 2: 13–63.
Covington, W.W., Fule, P.Z., Moore, M.M., Hart, S.C., Kolb, T.E.,
Mast, J.N., Sackett, S.S., and Wagner, M.R. 1997. Restoration of
ecosystem health in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. J. For.
95: 23–29.
Dale, M.P., and Causton, D.R. 1992. The ecophysiology of Veron-
ica chamaedrys, V. montana and V. officinalis. I. Light quality
and light quantity. J. Ecol. 80: 483–492.
Fitter, A.H., and Ashmore, C.J. 1974. Response of two Veronica
species to a simulated woodland light climate. New Phytol. 73:
997–1001.
Foggo, M.N. 1989. Vegetative responses of Deschampsia flexuosa
(L.) Trin (Poaceae) seedlings to nitrogen supply and photo-
synthetically active radiation. Funct. Ecol. 3: 337–343.
Foggo, M.N., and Warrington, I.J. 1989. Light and vegetative growth
in the grasses Deschampsia flexuosa (L.) Trin and Festuca ovina L.
Funct. Ecol. 3: 439–445.
Garnier, E. 1991. Resource capture, biomass allocation and growth
in herbaceous plants. Trends Ecol. Evol. 6: 126–131.
Givinish, T.J. 1988. Adaptation to sun and shade: a whole-plant
perspective. Aust. J. Plant Physiol. 15: 63–92.
Gould, F.W. 1951. Grasses of the southwestern United States. Uni-
versity of Arizona Press, Tucson, Ariz.
Green, C.R., and Sellers, W.D. 1964. Arizona climate. University
of Arizona Press, Tucson, Ariz.
Grime, J.P. 1981. Plant strategies and vegetation processes. John
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, U.K.
Grime, J.P. 1994. The role of plasticity in exploiting environmental
heterogeneity. In Exploitation of environmental heterogeneity:
ecophysiological processes above- and belowground. Edited by
M.M. Caldwell and R.W. Pearcy. Academic Press, San Diego,
Calif. pp. 1–19.
Hay, K.M., and Walker, A.J. 1989. An introduction to the physiol-
ogy of crop yield. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Holmes, P.M., and Cowling, R.M. 1993. Effects of shade on seed-
ling growth, morphology and leaf photosynthesis in six subtrop-
ical thicket species from the eastern Cape, South Africa. For.
Ecol. Manage. 61: 199–220.
Hutchings, M.J., and de Kroon, H. 1994. Foraging in plants: the
role of morphological plasticity in resource acquisition. Adv.
Ecol. Res. 25: 159–238.
Ingestad, T. 1977. Nitrogen and plant growth: maximum efficiency
of nitrogen fertilizers. Ambio, 6: 146–151.
Kitajima, K. 1994. Relative importance of photosynthetic traits and
allocation patterns as correlates of seedling shade tolerance of
13 tropical trees. Oecologia, 98: 419–428.
Kuiper, D., and Smid, A. 1985. Genetic differentiation and pheno-
typic plasticity in Plantago major ssp. major: I. The effect of
differences in level of irradiance on growth, photosynthesis, res-
piration and chlorophyll content. Physiol. Plant. 65: 520–528.
McLaughlin, S.P. 1978. Productivity of the understory community
in an Arizona ponderosa pine forest. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Arizona, Tucson, Ariz.
Menges, E.S. 1987. Biomass allocation and geometry of the clonal
forest herb Larportea canadensis: adaptive responses to the
environment of allometric constraints? Am. J. Bot. 74: 551–563.
Merkle, J. 1962. Plant communities of the Grand Canyon area, Ari-
zona. Ecology, 43: 698–711.
Messier, C., Honer, T.W., and Kimmins, J.P. 1989. Photosynthetic
photon flux density, red:far-red ratio, and minimum light re-
quirement for survival of Gaultheria shallon in western red ce-
dar – western hemlock stands in coastal British Columbia. Can.
J. For. Res. 19: 1470–1477.
© 2001 NRC Canada
1008
Can. J. Bot. Vol. 79, 2001

© 2001 NRC Canada
Naumburg et al.
1009
Mitchell, P.L., and Woodward, F.I. 1988. Responses of three wood-
land herbs to reduced photosynthetically active radiation and
low red to far-red ration in shade. J. Ecol. 76: 807–825.
Moir, W.H. 1966. Influence of ponderosa pine on herbaceous vege-
tation. Ecology, 47: 1045–1048.
Moore, M.M., and Deiter, D.A. 1992. Stand density index as a pre-
dictor of forage production in northern Arizona pine forests. J.
Range Manage. 45: 267–271.
Morgan, D.C., and Smith, H. 1979. A systematic relationship be-
tween phytochrome-controlled development and species habitat
for plants grown in simulated natural radiation. Planta, 145:
253–258.
Morgan, D.C., Warrington, I.J., and Rook, D.A. 1985. Some obser-
vations on the spectral distribution characteristics of short-wave
radiation within Pinus radiata D. Don canopies. Plant Cell En-
viron. 8: 201–206.
Murchie, E.H., Horton, P. 1997. Acclimation of photosynthesis to
irradiance and spectral quality in British plant species: chloro-
phyll content, photosynthetic capacity and habitat preference.
Plant Cell Environ. 20: 438–448.
Naumburg, E., and DeWald, L.E. 1999. Relationships between Pinus
ponderosa forest structure, light characteristics and graminoid spe-
cies presence and abundance. For. Ecol. Manage. 124: 205–215.
Osborne, B.A., Clabby, G.T., Horsley, D., Nolan, P.F. 1994. Is accli-
mation required for success in high light environments? A case
study using Mycelis muralis (L.) Dumort (Asteraceae). New
Phytol. 127: 363–375.
Pearson H.A. 1967. Phenology of Arizona fescue and mountain
muhly in the northern Arizona ponderosa pine type. USDA For.
Serv. Res. Note RM-89.
Pons, T.L. 1977. An ecophysiological study in the field layer of ash
coppice. II. Experiments with Geum urbanum and Cirsium
palustre in different light intensities. Acta Bot. Neerl. 26: 29–42.
Riegel, G.M., Miller, R.F., and Krueger, W.C. 1992. Competition for
resources between under story vegetation and overstory Pinus
ponderosa in northeastern Oregon. Ecol. Appl. 2: 71–85.
Riegel, G.M., Miller, R.F., and Krueger, W.C. 1995. The effects of
aboveground and belowground competition on understory species
composition in a Pinus ponderosa forest. For. Sci. 41: 864–889.
Robertson, P.A., and Ward, R.T. 1970. Ecotypic differentiation in
Koeleria cristata (L.) Pers. from Colorado and related areas.
Ecology, 51: 1083–1087.
Ross, M.S., Flanagan, L.B., and Roi, G.H.L. 1986. Seasonal and
successional changes in light quality and quantity in the under-
story of boreal forest ecosystems. Can. J. Bot. 64: 2792–2799.
Savage, M. 1991. Structural dynamics of a southwestern pine for-
est under chronic human influence. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 81:
271–289.
Sims, D.A., and Pearcy, R.W. 1989. Photosynthetic characteristics
of a tropical forest understory herb, Alocasia macrorrhiza, and a
related crop species, Colocasia esculenta, grown in contrasting
light environments. Oecologia, 79: 53–59.
Smith, H. 1982. Light quality, photoreception, and plant strategy.
Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 33: 481–518.
Smith, M., and Martin, C.E. 1987. Photosynthetic responses to
irradiance in three forest understory species of the C4 grass ge-
nus Muhlenbergia. Bot. Gaz. 148: 275–282.
Sorenson, P.W. 1974. Climate of Flagstaff, Arizona. U.S. NOAA
Tech. Memo. NWSTM WR-95.
U.S. Forest Servivce. 1937. Range plant handbook. U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Waller, S.S., and Lewis, J.K. 1979. Occurrence of C3 and C4 photo-
synthetic pathways in North American grasses. J. Range Manage.
32: 12–28.
Walters, M.B., Kruger, E.L., and Reich, P.B. 1993. Growth, biomass
distribution and CO2 exchange of northern hardwood seedlings in
high and low light: relationships with successional status and
shade tolerance. Oecologia, 94: 7–16.
Walters, M.B., and Reich, P.B. 1996. Are shade tolerance, survival,
and growth linked? Low light and nitrogen effects on hardwood
seedlings. Ecology, 77: 841–853.
Ward, D.A., and Woolhouse, H.W. 1986. Comparative effects of
light during growth on the photosynthetic properties of NADP-
ME type C4 grasses from open and shaded habitats. I. Gas ex-
change, leaf anatomy and ultrastructure. Plant Cell Environ. 9:
261–270.
Watson, L., and Dallwitz, M.J. 1992. The grass genera of the
world. CAB International, Oxford, U.K.
Wilson, M.J. 1987. The effects of harvest intensity on predicting
tree basal area increment, volume increment, and herbage stand-
ing crop in ponderosa pine. M.Sc. thesis, School of Forestry,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Ariz.

