20
Ecological Restoration Institute
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Controlling Cheatgrass 
in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper
Restoration Areas
November  2007 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Ecological restoration is a practice that seeks to heal degraded ecosystems by reestablishing native
species, structural characteristics, and ecological processes. The Society for Ecological Restoration
International defines ecological restoration as “an intentional activity that initiates or accelerates
the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability….Restoration
attempts to return an ecosystem to its historic trajectory” (Society for Ecological Restoration
International Science & Policy Working Group 2004).
In the southwestern United States, most ponderosa pine forests have been degraded during the last
150 years. Many ponderosa pine areas are now dominated by dense thickets of small trees, and
lack their once diverse understory of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Forests in this condition are highly
susceptible to damaging, stand-replacing fires and increased insect and disease epidemics.
Restoration of these forests centers on reintroducing frequent, low-intensity surface fires—often
after thinning dense stands—and reestablishing productive understory plant communities.
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. By
allowing natural processes, such as fire, to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish
healthy forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
The ERI Working Papers series presents findings and management recommendations from
research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations. While the ERI staff recognizes
that every restoration project needs to be site specific, we feel that the information provided in the
Working Papers may help restoration practitioners elsewhere.
This publication would not have been possible without funding from the USDA Forest Service.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the United States Government. Mention of
trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States
Government.
Cover: A monotypic stand of cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) colonized disturbed areas two
years after burning and thinning restoration treatments at Mt. Trumbull in northwest
Arizona. Photo courtesy of Chris McClone-c

Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
Introduction
Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) is widespread
throughout western North America and is a significant
concern for land managers conducting restoration
treatments in southwestern ponderosa pine and
pinyon-juniper forests. It is common on a few
restoration treatment areas in northern Arizona, on
severely burned mature/old growth pinyon-juniper sites
at Mesa Verde National Park in southwestern Colorado
(Floyd et al. 2006), throughout wildfire areas in Zion
National Park in southern Utah (U.S. National Park
Service 2007), and on areas consumed by wildfire in
northern Arizona (Sieg et al. 2003). There is concern
that cheatgrass populations may expand further with an
increase in the scale and frequency of restoration
treatments in southwestern ponderosa pine and
pinyon-juniper ecosystems (Pierson and Mack 1990b).
Researchers have demonstrated that restoration
treatments (i.e., thinning and burning) in ponderosa
pine ecosystems increase both the diversity and
abundance of invasive plant species (Griffis et al. 2001,
Dodson 2004, Wienk et al. 2004). However, the exact
nature of this relationship is still uncertain. For
example, in a thin/burn treatment in northwestern
Arizona, ERI researcher, Chris McGlone and his
colleagues observed little correlation between different
levels of forest thinning and changes in cheatgrass
frequency, suggesting that while some level of forest
thinning must occur in order to provide the right
conditions for cheatgrass invasion, other factors, such
as weather conditions, may be equally important
(McGlone et al. unpublished). While this study sheds
important light on the topic of cheatgrass invasion in
restored ponderosa pine sites, it is only one study and,
as Keeley and his colleagues (2006) point out, long-
term studies are needed to determine whether
management practices, such as thinning and/or
burning, provide an opportunity for cheatgrass to gain
a foothold that will allow it to persist for a long time.
The goals of this working paper are to provide land
managers with: 1) basic information about cheatgrass,
2) discuss the effects that have been observed when it
invades an area, 3) summarize methods that have been
used to control cheatgrass, and 4) make
recommendations for reducing the invasion and spread
of cheatgrass in ponderosa pine and pinyon-juniper
restoration treatments.
The Characteristics of Cheatgrass
Cheatgrass is a non-native, annual grass first introduced
into the western United States in the late 1880s. Now
found throughout the United States, Mexico and
Canada, it is also known as downy brome, downy chess,
early chess, drooping brome, downy cheat, cheatgrass
brome, slender chess, downy bromegrass, military grass,
broncograss, and Mormon oats (Upadhaya et al. 1986).
Cheatgrass is usually a winter annual grass, but it can
assume the characteristics of a spring annual when
limited moisture during the fall inhibits its germination
(although spring-germinated plants tend to be less
vigorous and have low reproduction) (Mosley et al.
1999, Zauhar 2003). It typically germinates in early fall,
and overwinters as small seedlings (Mosley et al. 1999).
The stems of the seedlings and mature plants are bright
green, erect, slender, and hairless or slightly soft-hairy.
The leaves, however, are conspicuously hairy, hence the
alternate common name, downy brome. The leaves also
have a distinctive curly form (Figure 1).
Figure 1: A cheatgrass seedling pulled in late October from a dry,
gravelly site in Flagstaff, Arizona. Note the fiberous roots,
prominent midrib in the leaves, the twisted nature of several leaves,
and the red/purple markings at the base of the stem.
Seedlings grow quickly in the spring and often become
mature and set seeds before most other species.
Cheatgrass is extremely successful at using moisture
and nutrients
from the upper
layers of the
soil, partly
because it
starts growing
earlier than
most other
species
(Upadhaya et
al. 1986,
WWIRC
2007). Plants
1
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 2: Mature cheatgrass plant with large
seedhead. Note the slender, erect stem and the
drooping panicles covered with many
spikelets. Each spikelet produces two to eight
seed-producing florets.

typically grow 20-24 inches tall, and have a finely
divided, fibrous root system that typically reaches a
depth of less than 6 inches, although it may reach about
12 inches in some situations. When environmental
conditions are poor and/or when grazing animals crop
it, cheatgrass plants can still flower and produce viable
seed even though they may only be 2-4 inches tall.
Cheatgrass is considered to be highly competitive under
drought conditions (Melgoza et al. 1990).
Cheatgrass reproduces only by seed (Mosley et al.
1999). Plants produce seed heads in late April to early
May, which mature in mid- to late-June (Upadhaya et
al. 1986) (Figure 2). During seed ripening, cheatgrass
plants turn purple and then brown as they mature and
senesce. Seeds begin to fall shortly after the purple stage
is reached (Zouhar 2003). Seeds are viable when the
fruits have barely started to turn purple and are still
mostly green (Zouhar 2003). Cheatgrass seeds remain
viable for two to five years in the soil or when stored
dry within bales of straw or hay (Mosley et al. 1999).
Figure 3. Cheatgrass spikelets have two or three uneven-sized
glumes. Note the long, straight awns at the end of the glumes. These
awns and other spikelet parts adhere to clothing, footwear and
animals, aiding in the spread of cheatgrass.
Cheatgrass plants produce many seeds, depending on
the environment and the spacing and size of the plants.
Individual plants growing in high densities may
produce about 25 seeds each, while a large, open-grown
plant can produce about 400 seeds (Zouhar 2003).
Cheatgrass seeds (Figure 3) are easily dispersed because
the awned spikelets readily attach to clothing, footwear,
animals, machinery, and vehicles.
While cheatgrass produces many seeds, its plant density
is really defined by the number of available sites in the
seedbed capable of supporting germination (Young and
Evans 1985). Cheatgrass seeds require a cover of soil,
litter or mulch to germinate in drier environments
(Young and Evans 1978, Mosley et al. 1999). However,
Keeley and McGinnis (2007) report that cheatgrass was
inhibited by a dense surface layer of ponderosa pine
needles in low-elevation forests in Kings Canyon
National Park in southern California.
Cheatgrass is usually found in disturbed shrub-steppe
areas, rangeland that has been overgrazed, road edges,
and other heavily disturbed areas, such as abandoned
fields. It has also been found in undisturbed areas as
well (Carpenter and Murray 1999). In all plant
communities, disturbance from livestock grazing and
fire seem to be prerequisite for cheatgrass colonization
(Warg 1938, Stewart and Young 1939, Young and Evans
1978, Knapp 1996).
Some researchers (Warg 1938, Hulbert 1955) have
reported cheatgrass establishment in lower-elevation
forests dominated by ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa),
but these communities are generally considered to be
less vulnerable to invasion than shrubland and
grassland ecosystems (Pierson and Mack 1990a, 1990b;
Pierson et al. 1990). This is particularly true for forests
where fire suppression has effectively excluded fire for
much of the twentieth century (Keeley et al. 2006, cited
in Keeley and McGinnis 2007). However, following
disturbance, cheatgrass is capable of invading drier
forests because logging, burning, and herbicide
treatments are known to encourage cheatgrass invasion
(McDonald and Everest 1996, Pierson and Mack 1990a,
1990b, Crawford et al. 2001, Keeley et al. 2003). In
pinyon-juniper ecosystems, cheatgrass tends to be more
invasive on southern and western exposures than on
northern exposures (Zouhar 2003).
Upadhaya et al. (1986) report that cheatgrass grows in
areas receiving 6-22 inches of annual precipitation.
Cheatgrass has been found growing on almost any soil,
but has been reported to prefer course-textured soils. It
does not grow well on extremely heavy or dry soils
(Upadhaya et al. 1986).
Cheatgrass has been found at elevations up to 13,000
feet in the United States, but it does not flourish or
form viable populations in the late-successional forest
zones of the Intermountain region of western North
America (Carpenter and Murray 1999). The inability of
cheatgrass to establish persistent populations under
dense, high-elevation forest canopies is attributed to: 1)
its relatively shade-intolerant physiology, 2) the short
growing season at high elevations, and 3) the role
herbivores, such as elk and deer, can play by grazing
cheatgrass, thus preventing it from maturing during the
short growing season (Pierson and Mack 1990b). It
should be noted, however, that founder populations
will establish under solitary pinyon or juniper trees in
the drier, warmer environments of the high desert.
Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
2
Figure 3.

Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas a
Ecological Restoration Institute
Ecological Effects of Cheatgrass on
Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-juniper
Ecosystems
In areas it has invaded, cheatgrass has been found to
substantially change the local fire regime (Whisenant
1990), alter soil characteristics (Evans et al. 2001,
Norton et al. 2004) and significantly reduce plant
diversity (Mack 1981). Moreover, these changes have
consequent cascading effects on wildlife species.
Shortened fire-return intervals and increased fire risk
Because cheatgrass complete its growth cycle more
quickly than most plants, it dries early in the growing
season and becomes highly combustible. These dry
plants can then fuel wildfires, and, in some areas, their
presence can greatly increase the length of the fire
season (Keeley and McGinnis 2007). Because cheatgrass
is widely recognized as being fire-adapted, increasing
fire frequency favors its own establishment and spread
(Ziska et al. 2005).
Carpenter and Murray (1999) report that cheatgrass
has an important competitive advantage because of its
ability to alter the frequency of fire. This effect is most
evident in sagebrush steppe habitat where fire intervals
are now significantly shorter due to cheatgrass (Mosley
et al. 1999). At these greater fire frequencies, native
shrubs and perennial grasses cannot recover and a
cheatgrass monoculture develops after a few wildfire
cycles. This monoculture further increases the
frequency of fires and increases the dominance of
cheatgrass in the area.
In pinyon-juniper woodlands, a dramatic increase in
fire size and frequency has been observed as the cover
of nonnative annuals, such as cheatgrass, increases
(Zouhar 2003). Working in Nevada, Billings (1994)
found that where fires have burned in a singleleaf
pinyon-Utah juniper (Pinus monophylla-Juniperus
osteosperma) woodland invaded by cheatgrass, the
woodland is being replaced by great expanses of annual
grassland, dominated by cheatgrass.
Zouhar (2003) reports that fire suppression and
livestock grazing have contributed to the decline of
perennial grasses, an increase in nonnative annuals such
as cheatgrass, and an increase in shrubs and trees at
many sites within pinyon-juniper woodlands. This has
subsequently increased the number of large, high-
severity fires and the resultant loss of pinyon and
juniper trees. When cheatgrass is present in the
understory with little or no perennial vegetation,
removing pinyon and juniper trees usually leads to
cheatgrass dominance (Zouhar 2003).
Fires in ponderosa pine forests, especially high-severity
fires, can lead to cheatgrass invasion and dominance
(Zouhar 2003). At Sequoia-Kings Canyon National
Park, prescribed burning in ponderosa pine in the
Cedar Grove section appears to have promoted a
vigorous invasion of cheatgrass (Keeley 2001).
Crawford et al. (2001) reported higher cover of
cheatgrass on severely burned sites, compared to less
severely burned sites, in ponderosa pine in Arizona. The
presence of cheatgrass-dominated ecosystems adjacent
to these dense forests is also likely to cause larger, more
frequent, and more severe wildfires (Crawford et al.
2001).
Severe fire can remove the entire root of annual
cheatgrass, killing the plants and resulting in bare soil
exposed to erosion from wind and water. Cheatgrass
seeds are susceptible to heat kill, but can survive fires of
low severity if the entire topsoil layer is not consumed
or if seeds are buried deeply enough to be insulated
from the heat (Young 1991).
Displacing native vegetation  
The tendency of cheatgrass to displace native vegetation
is of particular concern in the western United States.
This is especially true in sagebrush steppe habitat where
cheatgrass has become the dominant plant community
in many areas (WWIRC 2007).
Evans et al. (2001) found that burning cheatgrass
changes the soil chemistry, leading to decreased
nitrogen availability and altered plant species
composition. In addition, mature cheatgrass plants add
organic matter to the soil surface, thereby enhancing
germination and establishment of young cheatgrass
plants (Evans et al. 2001). Established cheatgrass has
been found to interfere with both the growth and
survival of native species, such as bluebunch wheatgrass
(Pseudoroegneria spicata) (Harris 1967). Cheatgrass can
displace both rare and common plant species, thus
reducing the genetic diversity of native plants in
invaded communities (Zouhar 2003). In a study at
Canyonlands National Park in southeast Utah, Belnap
et al. (2005) found that the invasion of cheatgrass
resulted in a decrease in species richness and a species
shift in plants, microarthropods, fungi, and nematodes.
Cascading effects on birds and mammals
Forest restoration treatments often result in an
improved herbaceous community (Covington and
Moore 1994), which can be beneficial to many wildlife
species. For instance, Wightman and Germaine (2006)
found that restoring or maintaining at least a 20%
ground cover composed of grasses, forbs, and bare soil
improved western bluebird (Sialia mexicana) habitat in
ponderosa pine restoration treatments in northwestern
3

Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
Arizona. Citing the work of other researchers (Murdoch
et al. 1972, Haddad et al. 2001) who found a correlation
between insect diversity and ground cover
heterogeneity, Wightman and Germaine caution that
monotypic invasive species, such as cheatgrass, could
reduce the quality of ground cover conditions for
western bluebirds by reducing the diversity of available
insect prey.
While forest restoration treatments may improve
conditions for some wildlife species, vegetation type
conversion, like that produced by cheatgrass, can
negatively affect some wildlife ranging from herbivores
to carnivores, and reduce overall biodiversity (Brooks
and Dyke 2001). Dellasala et al. (2004) report that the
spread of cheatgrass into Idaho’s Bird of Prey National
Conservation Area has shortened fire-return intervals
with cascading effects on the ecosystem, including the
loss and fragmentation of shrub communities, changes
in small mammal populations, and concomitant losses
of falcons (Falco spp.), golden eagles (Aquila
chrysaetos), and bald eagles (Haliaeetus leucocephalus).
Control of Cheatgrass
An effective cheatgrass management program needs to:
1) control existing populations by eliminating live
plants; 2) prevent seed formation; 3) control seed
germination and emerging seedlings; and 4) develop a
management plan to deter re-infestation of cheatgrass
(Zouhar 2003). Since cheatgrass reproduces entirely by
seed, the key to controlling existing infestations is to
eliminate new seed production and deplete the existing
seedbank.
Methods that have been used to control cheatgrass
include hand-pulling, mowing, grazing, burning,
herbicides, and cumulative stress methods. Because
most land managers are working with extensive
acreages, we will not discuss hand-pulling (which can
be effective on a small scale) or mowing (which is not
generally effective at any scale). Although grazing is
cited as a vector in the spread of cheatgrass, some
research indicates that prescribed grazing may help
control of cheatgrass, but only if done at the correct
time and intensity. However, because the risk of
spreading cheatgrass by grazing appears to outweigh
the benefits, we recommend against the use of grazing
to control cheatgrass and further suggest that, if
feasible, managers defer grazing after restoration
treatments for a minimum of three years.
Burning
In areas only partially infested with cheatgrass, burning
is usually not recommended as a means of control
(Carpenter and Murray 1999). Cheatgrass populations
can rebound quickly after a fire and the temporary
elimination of the native species will only give
cheatgrass the opportunity to spread. Cheatgrass can
invade recently burned sites from offsite seed sources,
from contamination of native seeds spread in the area
(Keeley et al. 2006), or from seed in the seedbank, even
if plants are absent from the site at the time of the fire
(Zouhar 2003). McClone et al. (unpublished) observed
a lag time of two to five years after a prescribed fire
before cheatgrass invaded burned sites.
Results of experiments in low-elevation ponderosa pine
forests in Kings Canyon National Park on the
interaction of cheatgrass and fire show that burning
stimulates cheatgrass populations, regardless of whether
it occurs in late spring or early fall (Keeley et al. 2006,
Keeley and McGinnis 2007). Based on their work and a
finding that indicates that pine needle litter has the
potential to inhibit cheatgrass invasion, these
researchers suggest that, where feasible, fire managers
should consider fire frequencies that reduce serious fire
hazard but do not increase plant invasions or cause
long-term negative effects for the ecosystem.
Keeley and his colleagues (2006) suggest that burning
larger areas may be another way to alter the invasive
threat because small fire treatment patches have a larger
perimeter-to-area ratio, making the burned area more
vulnerable to invasion, whereas large burn patches have
a smaller perimeter-to-area ratio, making the bulk of
the burned area less susceptible to colonization from
outside invaders, such as cheatgrass.
While burn patch size may be important when
attempting to minimize the spread of cheatgrass, it is
also important to consider the pattern of invasive plant
distributions in the landscape (Keeley et al. 2006). For
example, if forest patches are adjacent to open habitat,
they are much more susceptible to invasion than forests
surrounded by more closed forest (Keeley et al. 2003).
Young (1983) reports that burning cheatgrass may
reduce germination rates, but may enhance seed
production per plant. Bunting et al. (1987) and
Rasmussen (1994) indicate that burning in the fall,
followed by herbicide application before seed-set the
following year can be used to reduce vigor and the
seed-set rates of remaining cheatgrass plants. However,
Carpenter and Murray (1999) recommend burning in
late May or early June, after the plants have dried,
followed by a reseeding effort.
Herbicides
Used either alone or together, repeated applications
(every 2-5 years) of herbicide have been used to control
4

Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas a
Ecological Restoration Institute
cheatgrass (Zouhar 2003). The herbicides typically used
include quizalofop (Assure II, Pilot Super, Targa D+,
and Targa Super), paraquat (Gramaxone Extra),
glyphosate (Roundup Pro, Rascal), imazapic (Plateau),
atrazine (Aatrex, Aktikon, Alazine, and many other
names), fluazifop-b-butyl (Fusilade 2000, Fusilade DX,
Fusilade Five, Fusilade Super), sethoxydim (Poast,
Tritex-Extra, and Vantage), and sulfometuron methyl
(Oust Weed Killer and DPX 5648) (Mosley et al. 1999,
Zouhar 2003). Sieg et al. (2003) indicate that these
herbicides show promise, when integrated with
reseeding programs that establish a competitive
perennial plant community. Indeed, land managers at
Zion National Park are currently using aerial
applications of imazapic (and glyphosate, if cheatgrass
has begun to grow) during the fall to control cheatgrass
and other invasive annual grasses on thousands of acres
of pinyon-juniper that were consumed by wildfires in
2006 and 2007 (U.S. National Park Service 2007). They
are planning to follow these treatments with plantings
of native grass and shrub species.
Timing of herbicide treatment and application methods
vary depending upon the herbicide used. The Nature
Conservancy’s Weed Control Methods Handbook
provides detailed information about many of the
herbicides listed in this section. It can be found at:
http://tncweeds.ucdavis.edu/handbook.html. One of
the main concerns is applying an herbicide at times that
will effectively control cheatgrass, but not harm
existing, desirable vegetation. This is usually not a
concern when working in monocultures of cheatgrass,
but it may very well be in diverse forest openings.
Cumulative stress method 
The “cumulative stress” method of controlling
cheatgrass infestations is reported to provide lasting
control of cheatgrass by implementing a combination
of chemical control, physical control, vegetative
suppression, and proper livestock management (if the
land is grazed). This method is designed to keep the
cheatgrass constantly under stress, reducing its ability
to flourish and spread. A cumulative stress approach
also provides a level of redundancy in situations where
one type of treatment is not implemented or proves to
be ineffective (Carpenter and Murray 1999).
For larger areas where herbaceous vegetation is
dominated by cheatgrass, Carpenter and Murray (1999)
suggest a two- to three-year combination of burning,
herbicide application, and reseeding to control
cheatgrass and revegetate the area with native
vegetation. They suggest the following steps:
• Burn and re-seed the area with native perennial
grasses during the first year. The following spring,
apply herbicides (quizalofop, fluazifop, sethoxydim,
glyphosate, or imazameth) before the seeded
perennial grasses emerge in order to eliminate any
cheatgrass that emerged from the seedbank after the
burn.
• If necessary, apply the same herbicide early in the
spring of the third year (prior to the emergence of
native grass species) to control any new cheatgrass
seedlings, and provide time for native grasses to
establish.
Carpenter and Murray (1999) report that applying this
series of treatments should control the cheatgrass,
deplete the existing cheatgrass seed bank, and provide
adequate time for perennial grasses to establish to the
point where they can suppress any new cheatgrass
invasions.
Recommendations for Cheatgrass
Management Associated with Restoration
Treatments in Ponderosa Pine and Pinyon-
juniper Ecosystems
An inherent risk exists when carrying out restoration
treatments in ponderosa pine and pinyon-juniper
ecosystems because cheatgrass is known to respond to
the disturbance associated with thinning and prescribed
fire treatments. However, leaving unhealthy forest
ecosystems completely untreated is not an effective
solution. Thus, it is necessary to carefully plan and
implement restoration treatments that assist in
preventing severe wildfires and also help prevent the
invasion of cheatgrass into previously unoccupied sites.
Below are a series of recommendations when
implementing restoration treatments in ponderosa pine
and pinyon-juniper forests. While it may not be possible
to implement all of the recommendations listed below,
we encourage land managers to strive to incorporate as
many of them as possible in restoration treatment
management plans, using a triage strategy as necessary.
• Conduct a pre-treatment inventory that includes
randomized sampling and mapping of the
restoration project area and adjacent lands to
determine the distribution and severity of cheatgrass
infestation as well as all other invasive species, such
as diffuse knapweed (Centaurea diffusa) and
dalmation toadflax (Linaria dalmatica). This is one
of the most important steps managers can take
when planning a restoration project. The
information gained during the inventory will help
managers to make sound decisions about the
invasive species in the project area.
5

Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
a
Ecological Restoration Institute
6
• Prioritize treatment areas after analyzing the pre-
treatment inventory.
a) Postpone restoration in areas with high levels of
cheatgrass until control efforts have been in place
long enough to significantly reduce their
populations and the seedbank.
b) Aggressively treat small infestations of cheatgrass
prior to conducting restoration treatments
because these treatments will likely be successful
and will help curtail the spread of cheatgrass to
other areas of the site.
c) Ensure that heavy traffic areas, such as roads,
staging areas and landings, have no cheatgrass
present.
• Minimize soil disturbance by avoiding road
building, tree removal, and unnecessary pile or
prescribed burning, as much as possible. For
instance, managers can take advantage of existing
roads and use them as fire breaks during prescribed
fire treatments rather than building new fire lines.
Hand-piling slash is preferable to skidding and
small, tall piles result in less disturbed soil than
large, spread out piles.
• Prevent the transfer of seeds to the restoration site
by washing the undercarriage of field vehicles. Avoid
carrying mud on vehicles and have workers wear
gaiters when walking through cheatgrass-infested
areas.
• Seed restoration project areas with native species.
Fast-growing native species, such as squirreltail
(Elymus elymoides), may help slow the spread of
cheatgrass. Thurber’s needlegrass (Achnatherum
thurberianum), western wheatgrass (Pascopyrum
smithii), sand dropseed (Sporobolus cryptandrus),
Sandburg bluegrass (Poa secunda), thickspike
wheatgrass (Elymus lanceolatus), purple three awn
(Aristida purpurea), and fourwing saltbrush
(Altriplex canescens) have shown that they can
reseed areas previously occupied by cheatgrass
(Monson 1994 as cited by Zouhar 2003, Haile et al.
2006). The warm-season native grass, hilaria or
James’ galleta (Hilaria jamesii), has been observed to
grow well in cheatgrass-infested areas of the
Colorado Plateau whenever it can take advantage of
warm, summer rains (Carpenter and Murray 1999).
Seeding native perennial grasses into former
cheatgrass-infested areas is usually necessary after
burning, otherwise cheatgrass and other weeds will
simply reestablish in the disturbed area (Carpenter
and Murray 1999). When seeding does not occur,
cheatgrass has been observed to return to pre-burn
densities within a few years (Carpenter and Murray
1999).
However, managers should recognize that native
seed mixes may be contaminated with cheatgrass
and other invasive species. Insist on clean, certified
native seed from reputable seed dealers, and inspect
seed bags when they arrive for cheatgrass seeds.
Weigh the costs and benefits of using potentially
contaminated seeds in areas where cheatgrass has
not invaded. It may not be worth the risk of
potentially introducing this and other invasive non-
natives.
• Minimize burn severity when conducting
prescribed fires. Burn slash piles with low-intensity,
short-duration fires. High-severity fires can result in
the loss of nutrients as well as seeds, microscopic
plants, and mycorrhizae in the soil, reducing the
chance of native plants to naturally colonize the site.
Low-intensity prescribed fire results in fewer
negative effects on the native understory. One
means to help ensure that prescribed fire is of low
intensity is to remove excess biomass created by the
restoration thinning so that prescribed burning can
be conducted within the natural range of variability.
• Avoid burning during dry years when native
plants can’t recover as quickly. Managers need to
consider the likelihood of the recovery of native
species after prescribed burning. If feasible,
reschedule burning for years when native species are
not stressed due to drought conditions.
• Monitor after restoration treatments and
immediately treat cheatgrass infestations that begin
to colonize an area. Monitoring after treatment is
vital and should be done annually.
While cheatgrass is a significant problem in many lower-
elevation ecosystems of the West, control of cheatgrass is
still possible in the ponderosa pine and pinyon-juniper
ecosystems. Awareness by managers of the presence of
cheatgrass in and/or adjacent to restoration treatment
areas is of foremost importance. Then, creation of an
active and effective course of management can be
determined and implemented.

Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas a
Ecological Restoration Institute
7
References
Belnap, J., S.L. Phillips, S.K. Sherrod, and A. Moldenke. 2005.
Soil biota can change after exotic plant invasion: Does this
affect ecosystem processes? Ecology 86(11):3007-3017.
Billings, W.D. 1994. Ecological impacts of cheatgrass and
resultant fire on ecosystems in the western Great Basin.
Pages 22-30 in S.B. Monsen and S.G. Kitchen, eds.
Proceedings, Ecology and management of annual
grasslands. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-313. Ogden, UT:
USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station.
Brooks, M.L. and D.A. Pyke. 2001. Invasive plants and fire in
the deserts of North America. Pages 1-14 in K.E.M. Galley
and T.P Wilson, eds. Proceedings of the invasive species
workshop: The role of fire in the control and spread of
invasive species. Fire conference 2000: the first national
congress on fire ecology, prevention, and management,
November 27-December 1; San Diego, CA. Miscellaneous
Publication No. 11. Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research
Station.
Bunting, S.C., B.M. Kilgore, and C.L. Bushey. 1987. Guidelines
for prescribed burning sagebrush-grass rangelands. Gen.
Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-231. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest
Service, Intermountain Research Station.
Carpenter, A.T. and T.A. Murray. 1999. Element stewardship
abstract for Bromus tectorum L. (Anisantha tectorum (L.)
Nevski) cheatgrass/downy brome. Arlington, VA: The
Nature Conservancy. http://tncweeds.ucdavis.edu/
esadocs/documnts/bromtec.pdf.
Covington, W.W. and M.M. Moore. 1994. Southwestern
ponderosa forest structure: Changes since Euro-American
settlement. Journal of Forestry 92:39-47.
Crawford, J.A., C.H.A. Wahren, S. Kyle, and W.H. Moir. 2001.
Responses of exotic plant species to fires in Pinus
ponderosa forests in northern Arizona. Journal of
Vegetation Science 12:261-268.
Dellasala, D.A., J.E. Williams, C.D. Williams, and J.F. Franklin.
2004. Beyond smoke and mirrors: A synthesis of fire
policy and science. Conservation Biology 18:976-086.
Dodson, E.K. 2004. Monitoring change in exotic plant
abundance after fuel reduction/restoration treatments in
ponderosa pine forests in western Montana. Masters
thesis. Department of Forestry. University of Montana,
Missoula.
Evans, R.D., R. Rimer, L. Sperry, and J. Belnap. 2001. Exotic
plant invasion alters nitrogen dynamics in an arid
grassland. Ecological Applications 11:1301-1310.
Floyd, L., D. Hanna, W.H. Romme, and T.E. Crews. 2006.
Predicting and mitigating weed invasions to restore
natural post-fire succession in Mesa Verde National Park,
Colorado, USA. International Journal of Wildland Fire
15:247-259.
Griffis, K.L., J.A. Crawford, M.R. Wagner, and W.H. Moir.
2001. Understory response of management treatments in
northern Arizona ponderosa pine forests. Forest Ecology
and Management 146:239-245.
Haddad, N.M., D. Tilman, J. Haarstad, M. Ritchie, and J.M.H.
Knops. 2001. Contrasting effects of plant richness and
composition on insect communities: A field experiment.
American Naturalist 158:17-35.
Haile, S., C. Deuser, M. Brooks, and J. Vollmer. 2006.
Management and research to control exotic annual
Bromus sp. in Zion NP. Presentation at the Red
Bromegrass Symposium, held May 16-17, 2006 at Arizona
State University, Tempe, Arizona.
http://www.poly.asu.edu/star/presentations/Haile_Deuser.
ppt.
Harris, G.R. 1967. Some competitive relationships between
Agropyron spicatum and Bromus tectorum. Ecological
Monographs 37:89-111.
Keeley, J.E. 2001. Fire and invasive species in Mediterranean-
climate ecosystems in California. Pages 81-94 in K.E.M.
Galley and T.P. Wilson, eds. Proceedings of the invasive
species workshop: The role of fire in the control and
spread of invasive species. Fire conference 2000: the first
national congress on fire ecology, prevention, and
management; 2000 November 27-December 1; San Diego,
CA. Miscellaneous Publication No. 11. Tallahassee, FL:
Tall Timbers Research Station.
___. 2006. Forest management impacts on invasive plants in
the western United States. Conservation Biology 20(2):375-
384.
Keeley, J.E., D. Lubin, and C.J. Fotheringham. 2003. Fire and
grazing impacts on plant diversity and alien plant
invasions in the southern Sierra Nevada. Ecological
Applications 13:1355-1374.
Keeley, J.E., C.D. Allen, J. Bentacourt, G.W. Chong, C.J.
Fotheringham and H.D. Safford. 2006. A 21st century
perspective on postfire seeding. Journal of Forestry 104:1-2.
Keeley, J.E. and T.W. McGinnis. 2007. Impacts of prescribed
fire and other factors on cheatgrass persistence in a Sierra
Nevada ponderosa pine forest. International Journal of
Wildland Fire 16:96-106.
Knapp, P.A. 1996. Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum L.)
dominance in the Great Basin Desert: History, persistence,
and influence of human activities. Global Environmental
Change 6:37-52.
Mack, R.N. 1981. Invasion of Bromus tectorum L. into
Western North America: An ecological chronicle. Agro-
Ecosysems 7:145-165.
McDonald, P.M. and G.A. Everest. 1996. Response of young
ponderosa pines, shrubs, and grasses to two release
treatments. Research Note, PSW-RN-419-web. Portland,
OR: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research
Station.
McGlone, C.M., J.D. Springer, and W.W Covington.
Unpublished. Cheatgrass encroachment on a ponderosa
pine ecological restoration project in northern Arizona.
Flagstaff, AZ: Ecological Restoration Institute.

Controlling Cheatgrass in Ponderosa Pine and
Pinyon-Juniper Restoration Areas
a
8
Ecological Restoration Institute
Melgoza, G.R., S. Nowak, R.J. Tausch. 1990. Soil water
exploitation after fire: Competition between Bromus
tectorum (Cheatgrass) and two native species. Oecologia
83:7-13.
Monsen, S.B. 1994. The competitive influences of cheatgrass
(Bromus tectorum) on site restoration. Pages 43-50 in
S.B. Monsen and S.G. Kitchen, eds. Proceedings--Ecology
and management of annual rangelands; 1992 May 18-22;
Boise, ID. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-GTR-313. Ogden, UT:
USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station.
Mosley, J.C., S.C. Bunting, and M.E. Manovkian. 1999.
Cheatgrass. Pp. 175-188 in R.L. Sheley and J.K. Petroff,
eds. Biology and management of noxious rangeland
weeds. Corvallis: Oregon State University Press.
Murdoch, W. W., F.C. Evans, and C.H. Peterson. 1972.
Diversity and pattern in plants and insects. Ecology
53:819-829.
Norton, J.B., T.A. Monaco, J.M. Norton, D. A. Johnson, and
T.A. Hones. 2004. Soil morphology and organic matter
dynamics under cheatgrass and sagebrush-steppe plant
communities. Journal of Arid Environments 57:445-466.
Pierson, E.A. and R.N. Mack. 1990a. The population biology
of Bromus tectorum in forests: Distinguishing the
opportunity for dispersal from environmental restriction.
Oecologia 84:519-525.
___. 1990b. The population biology of Bromus tectorum in
forests: Effect of disturbance, grazing and litter on
seedling establishment and reproduction. Oecologia
84:526-533.
Pierson, E.A., R.N Mack, and R.A. Black. 1990. The effect of
shading on photosynthesis, growth, and regrowth
following defoliation for Bromus tectorum. Oecologia
84:534-543.
Rasmussen, G.A. 1994. Prescribed burning considerations in
sagebrush annual grassland communities. Pages 69-70 in
S.B. Monsen and S.G. Kitchen, eds. Proceedings: Ecology
and management of annual rangelands. Gen. Tech. Rep.
INT-GTR-313. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service,
Intermountain Research Station.
Sieg, C.H., B.G. Phillips, and L.P. Moser. 2003. Exotic invasive
plants. Pages 251-258 in P. Friederici, ed. Ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Stewart, G. and A.E. Young. 1939. The hazard of basing
permanent grazing capacity on Bromus tectorum. Journal
of the American Society of Agronomy 31:1002-1015.
U.S. National Park Service. 2007. Finding of no significant
impact, post-fire aerial application of herbicide. Zion
National Park, Utah.
http://www.nps.gov/zion/parkmgmt/upload/Post-
Fire%20Aerial%20Herbicide%20FONSI_with_signature.
pdf.
Upadhaya, M.K., R. Turkington, and D. McIlveride. 1986. The
biology of Canadian weeds. 75. Bromus tectorum L.
Canadian Journal of Plant Sciences 66:689-709.
Warg, S.A. 1938. Life history and economic studies on Bromus
tectorum. Masters thesis, State University of Montana,
Missoula, MT.
Western Wildfire Impact Reduction Center (WWIRC). 2007.
Cheatgrass: Non-native cheats farmers and ranchers out
of their land.
http://www.westernwildfire.org/pages/researchabtcheatgra
ss.html.
Whisenant, S.G. 1990. Changing fire frequencies on Idaho’s
Snake River Plains: ecological and management
implications. Pages 4-10 in E.D. McArthur, E.M. Romney,
S.D. Smith, and P.T. Tueller, eds. Symposium on
cheatgrass invasion, shrub die-off, and other aspects of
shrub biology and management. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-
GTR-276. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Research Station.
Wienk, C.L., C.H. Sieg, and G.R. McPherson. 2004. Evaluating
the role of cutting treatments, fire and soil seed banks in
an experimental framework in ponderosa pine forests of
the Black Hills, South Dakota. Forest Ecology and
Management 192:375-393.
Wightman, C.S. and S.S. Germaine. 2006. Forest stand
characteristics altered by restoration affect western
bluebird habitat quality. Restoration Ecology 14(4):653-
661.
Young, J.A. 1991. Cheatgrass. Pages 408-418 in L.F. James and
J.O. Evans, eds. Noxious range weeds. Westview Special
Studies in Agriculture Science and Policy. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, Inc.
Young, J.A. and R.A. Evans. 1978. Population dynamics after
wildfires in sagebrush grasslands. Journal of Range
Management 31:283-289.
_____. 1985. Demography of Bromus tectorum in Artemisia
communities. In J. White, ed. The population structure of
vegetation. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Dr. W. Junk
Publishers.
Young, R.P. 1983. Fire as a vegetation management tool in the
Intermountain Region. Pages 18-31 in S.B.Monsen and N.
Shaw, eds. Managing Intermountain rangelands--
Improvement of range and wildlife habitats. Gen. Tech.
Rep. INT-GTR-157. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service
Intermountain Research Station.
Ziska, L.H., J.B. Reeves III, and B. Blank. 2005. The impact of
recent increases in atmospheric CO2  on biomass
production and vegetative retention of cheatgrass
(Bromus tectorum): Implications for fire disturbance.
Global Change Biology 11:1325-1332.
Zouhar, K. 2003. Bromus tectorum. In: Fire Effects
Information System. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station Fire Sciences
Laboratory. http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.

Author: Michele A. James
Scanned Images: Dave Egan  
Reviewers: Dave Brewer, Dave Egan, Chris McClone, and Judy Springer
Series Editor: Dave Egan
For more information about forest restoration,
contact the ERI at 928-523-7182 or www.eri.nau.edu
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Printing Services/G64410/900/10-07
Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
1:
Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management
Practices
2:
Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3:
Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4:
Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5:
Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration
6:
Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
7:
Establishing Reference Conditions for Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests
8:
Controlling Invasive Species as Part of Restoration Treatments
9:
Restoration of Ponderosa Pine Forests to Presettlement Conditions
10: The Stand Treatment Impacts on Forest Health (STIFH) Restoration Model
11: Collaboration as a Tool in Forest Restoration
12: Restoring Forest Roads
13: Treating Slash after Restoration Thinning
14: Integrating Forest Restoration Treatments with Mexican Spotted Owl Habitat Needs
15: Effects of Forest Thinning Treatments on Fire Behavior
16: Snags and Forest Restoration  
17: Bat Habitat and Forest Restoration Treatments
18: Prescribed and Wildland Use Fires in the Southwest: Do Timing and Frequency Matter? 
19: Understory Seeding in Southwestern Forests Following Wildfire and Ecological
Restoration Treatments

Ecological Restoration Institute
PO Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
ERI34ET
