USDA Forest Service 
June, 1992 
 
Old-Growth Forests in the Southwest and 
Rocky Mountain Regions 
Proceedings of a Workshop 
 
 
March 9-13, 1992 Portal, Arizona 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical Coordinators: 
 
Merrill R. Kaufmann 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station 
 
W. H. Moir 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station 
 
Richard L. Bassett 
Southwestern Region 
Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture 
 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range  
Experiment Station  
Forest Service 
U.S. Department of Agriculture  
Fort Collins, Colorado 
 
 
The Southwestern Region is headquartered in Albuquerque, NM; the Rocky Mountain Station is 
headquartered in Fort Collins, Colo., in cooperation with Colorado State University 

Old-Growth Forests: What Do We Know 
About Their Ecology and Management 
in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain Regions?1 
Merill R. Kaufmann, W. H. Moir, and w. W. Covington2 
This paper reviews the science and management of old-growth forests and summarizes discussions among 30 
participants at a workshop in Portal, Arizona, March 9-13, 1992. 
Concepts of old-growth forests -- the perceptions, values, definitions, characteristic features, ecological functions, 
and landscape importance -- vary widely. Because concepts are complex, scientists, resource managers, and the public 
will continue to bring old growth into clearer focus as knowledge is gained. Regardless of the concepts chosen for 
viewing old growth, on an ecological basis old-growth forests represent a stage in forest development characterized by 
certain structural, functional, and compositional features. 
Managers are concerned with how much old growth exists, where it is, and what condition it is in. Improved 
inventory procedures are needed, including both remote-sensing technology and conventional on-the-ground procedures. 
Where will tomorrow's old growth be found, and how soon will younger stands attain old-growth conditions? Pathways of 
forest succession into old growth are poorly known for most forest types. We need better knowledge about how 
disturbances such as fire, insects, forest diseases, exotic organisms, pollution, and changing climate affect old growth and 
forest succession. 
Allocation is another problem for planners. How much old growth is enough? How many stands should be old 
growth at any given time, what are the sizes and shapes of the stands, and how should they be distributed over various 
forest habitat types? How should old-growth stands be connected by forest corridors, and how are their functions 
modified by their setting? These are difficult but researchable questions. Lacking clear answers to these questions, 
should managers find clues from pre-European settlement forests? Is it reasonable to attempt to restore forests to their 
natural conditions? Or have changes since settlement precluded returning to earlier conditions? 
In this paper, we review our knowledge of the influence old-growth stands on biogeochemical cycles and the roles 
of wildlife, decomposer organisms, cryptozoans of logs and snags, and other kinds of "hidden diversity." To what extent 
are the legacy of old trees and other genetic reserves in old-growth forests carried into the future? We know little about 
how present old-growth influences the development of future forest generations. 
We conclude by looking at some tools for old-growth management. How can managers use fire or silviculture to 
assure future old-growth supplies, while at the same time meeting present and future extractive demands? Can younger 
stands be "treated" to hasten their development into old growth, or can existing old growth be altered without seriously 
compromising old-growth value? 
 
INTRODUCTION 
This volume of papers, given at a workshop on 
old-growth forests, represents much of what is known 
about old-growth forests of the central and southern 
Rocky Mountains and Southwest. This summary paper 
reviews the current state of knowledge available to 
 
1 Summary paper of the Old-Growth Forests in the Rocky 
Mountains and Southwest Conference (Portal, AZ, March 
9-13, 1992). 
2 M. R. Kaufmann is Principal Plant Physiologist and  
W. H. Moir is Principal Plant Ecologist, Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort 
Collins, CO. W. W. Covington is Professor of Forest 
Ecology, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. 
 
guide forest management and presents the most 
research needs. It is not our intent in this summary 
article to review the literature. Rather, we refer to 
specific papers in this volume for relevant 
literature on individual topics. 
Old-growth forests in the central and 
southern Rocky Mountains and Southwest have 
important biological and social values. Certain 
ecological characteristics of old-growth forests are 
unique, and because of these features such forests 
provide a necessary component in the forest 
landscape. Important biological values of old 
growth include habitat for a variety of animal and 
plant species, biodiversity and pools of genetic 
resources, and long-term biological records of 
climate. Old-growth forests also are valued for 
supplying economically important forest products, 
recreational experiences, and cultural (spiritual) 
heritage. Of these, perhaps the most 
 
  
 
1 

compelling mandate for old-growth conservation is its 
role as habitat for organisms which, over evolutionary 
time, have become dependent upon old-growth 
conditions. 
Figure 1. Mature Engelmann spruce-subalpine fir 
stand in the San Juan Mountains, Colorado. 
Many geographic areas in the Rocky Mountains 
and Southwest have experienced a sharp decline in virgin 
forest in the landscape, and in some forest types, 
old-growth forest has been reduced to a fraction of the 
amount existing before settlement. Nonetheless, th
tremendous opportunity for retaining or enhancing 
biological features unique to old-growth ecosystems. In 
Europe and Asia, in the rainforests of Brazil, and in the 
eastern United States, many forest areas have been either 
exploited through intensive and often repeated harvest or 
impacted by deterioration in air and soil quality to the point 
that the existence of old-growth forests in a historical 
condition is nearly impossible. That point has not yet been 
reached in the central and southern Rocky Mountains and 
Southwest, but threats to old-growth forests in the 
landscape are real and substantial. 
ere is a 
cal 
 
Perceptions of Old Growth 
 
An issue surfacing repeatedly at the workshop and 
elsewhere is the application of the term "old growth." The 
subjective "feel" of what constitutes high quality 
old-growth forests varies tremendously among individuals 
and may differ from scientifically determined ecologi
conditions that characterize old growth. It is important to 
recognize these differences because they represent the 
range of expectations placed upon forest lands by the 
various viewers and users. 
Consider three contrasting forest scenarios 
discussed at this conference. These scenarios are described 
to illustrate that the issue of old-growth quality is very 
complex. First is a mature Engelmann spruce/subalpine fir 
ecosystem found low on a north-facing slope near the 
riparian zone (Fig. 1). This forest has multiple canopy 
layers, a number of large trees (some of which are in poor 
health), a number of snags and large down logs, and a few 
very old stumps. Second is a ponderosa pine forest having 
relatively few very large, old trees intermixed with many 
smaller trees in several additional canopy layers (Fig. 2). 
Large and small down logs occur, but there are no signs of 
prior harvest or other silvicultural intervention. Third is a 
small stand of very old limber pine trees on a rocky 
outcropping with little soil (Fig. 3). The trees are only a 
few meters tall and are widely spaced. 
These stands may be viewed very differently by 
various individuals. The spruce/fir stand may be rated by 
most viewers as the highest quality old-growth forest of the 
three described because of the complex 
Figure 2. Old ponderosa pine with saplings 
filling in a small meadow. From the Monument 
Canyon Research Natural Area, New Mexico. 
 
2

 
Figure 3. Limber pine trees 1,500 years old 
near Red River, New Mexico (photo by Ann 
Lynch). 
 
stand structure, numerous big trees, and the large amount 
of dead and down material. However, a close 
examination may reveal that the oldest trees are only 200 
years old and hardly approach the maximum age or size 
supported on that site. Furthermore, the dead and down 
material may have resulted from normal thinning 
as the stand matured and not from the decline of the oldest 
trees in the stand. Thus from a stand development view, 
the stand may barely qualify as old growth at all. Such 
a stand may satisfy a viewer's perception that "large" 
means "old," and it may well meet wildlife needs for a 
diverse stand structure, but ecologically the stand may not 
even be old growth. 
The ponderosa pine stand has majestic old trees 
and no signs of disturbance. Many viewers might judge 
this stand to be ideal old growth because of the 
relatively high tree density and multiple canopy layers 
plus the presence of large old trees and dead and down 
logs. Yet this stand may be a far departure from the 
classic old-growth ponderosa pine forest of pre-European 
settlement times, because fire suppression has allowed 
the development of several younger age classes of trees 
and the accumulation of dead material on the forest floor 
(Covington and Moore, this volume). 
The limber pine stand meets few viewers' 
expectations for an old-growth forest. The trees are 
 
very small and widely spaced, giving the stand little 
"feel" that it is old growth. Yet these trees may 
exceed 
1,500 years in age and the stand is truly an ancient 
forest (Swetnam, this volume). 
Researchers and managers of all disciplines 
interested in old-growth forest structure and function, 
as well as individuals and groups attaching 
significance to old forests perceived to be old growth, 
must strive to adhere to scientifically credible terms 
and concepts. Doing so will help reduce conflicts over 
the many and often conflicting goals that old forests 
are expected to serve. In this regard, it is important 
that hidden agendas be addressed clearly and openly. 
While issues such as maintaining roadless areas, 
providing habitat for threatened or endangered species, 
sustaining the economic viability of a community 
through timber harvest, and honoring the cultural 
heritage of forests are very important, it is also 
important to apply those issues to old-growth forests 
only when the issues are appropriately linked 
specifically to the old-growth condition. By being clear 
about definitions and goals, it may be possible to limit 
conflict and misunderstandings and better resolve 
resource management problems, especially when forest 
lands are expected to meet goals that may not involve 
the requirement for true old-growth conditions. 
 
DEFINING OLD GROWTH 
 
The process of defining old-growth forests has 
been difficult because of the range of issues related to 
the old-growth condition. Because of this confusion, 
no single value has been universally accepted as the 
defining characteristic of old-growth forests. For 
example, in silviculture, forest ecology, and 
ecophysiology, the successional pathways and 
structural and functional aspects of stand development 
may be critical in definitions of old growth (Moir, and 
Kaufmann, this volume). In dendrochronology, the 
presence of very old trees may be the most important 
feature (Swetnam, this volume). For animal habitat, 
stand structure may be highly important (Reynolds, 
this volume), and for planning purposes, an easily 
applied forest structure/composition/age classification 
may be necessary (Mehl, and Lowry, this volume). For 
spiritual value, the presence of large trees and the lack 
of obvious human disturbance may be critical 
(Kramer, this volume). 
 
Definition versus Characterization 
 
In some cases the term "old growth" has been 
used in ways that distort or at least blur the ecological 
basis for distinguishing old growth from other stages of 
 
 
3 

forest development. Thus stands having features 
similar to those of certain old-growth forests, including 
multiple canopy layers with mature trees and 
considerable amounts of dead and down material, may 
be incorrectly termed old growth because they lack old 
trees. Stands having large trees that are not old may be 
perceived as old-growth stands even when the trees have 
not reached an old age for that site. Alternately, stands 
having old trees that are not large may not be perceived 
as old growth when they really are. 
Another difficulty in characterizing "old growth" 
stems from applying strictly structural concepts in 
perceiving old-growth forests, when functional concepts 
also are important (Kaufmann, this volume). 
Functionally, old-growth ecosystems are characterized 
by having a component ("cohort") of old trees that have 
a biochemistry of secondary metabolic products, some of 
which may provide high resistance to insects and 
disease. Relative to younger trees, the oldest trees have 
approached their maximum size and have nearly ceased 
height growth, and the tree crowns may be in various 
stages of decline. On average, the rate of production of 
new biomass is offset by mortality and respiration, and 
net productivity of the ecosystem is near zero. These 
functional aspects provide important additional 
constraints as to which forest stands qualify for the 
old-growth designation and which do not. 
A final difficulty in old-growth characterization 
is deciding the extent to which old growth should 
resemble primeval or presettlement conditions. 
Livestock grazing, fire suppression, and logging have 
brought about substantial changes in most western 
forests, so much so that current forest conditions may be, 
decidedly "unnatural" from an evolutionary point of 
view. Where this is the case, certain species dependent 
upon presettlement ecosystem structures and functions 
may be at risk. Thus from a biological conservation 
perspective, contemporary "old growth" conditions may 
be inadequate habitat in many western forest types. 
Under these circumstances, ecological restoration 
treatments (e.g., elimination of exotic species, 
reintroduction of native species, prescribed burning, 
thinning, snag or down tree creation) may well be 
necessary for providing critical habitat (Covington and 
Moore, this volume). 
As a step toward better understanding of 
old-growth ecology and management, scientists in the 
U. S. Forest Service and in universities and other 
agencies have gone to considerable effort in recent 
years to develop a general definition for old-growth 
forests. Given some of the confusion regarding how 
the term "old growth" is used, it seems worthwhile to 
present the definition developed by the U. S. Forest 
Service and approved by the Chief of the Forest Service, 
and to discuss how it applies specifically in the Rocky 
Mountains and Southwest. 
 
Agency Generic Definition 
 
The Generic Definition (USDA Forest Service 
1990) is as follows: 
Old-growth forests are ecosystems distinguished by 
old trees and related structural features. Old-growth 
encompasses the later stages of stand development 
that typically differ from earlier stages in several 
ways including tree size; accumulations of large, 
dead, woody material; number of canopy layers; 
species composition; and ecosystem function. 
 
Workshop attendees suggested that for certain 
forest types, most notably ponderosa pine that 
historically was influenced by frequent fire, this 
definition is somewhat restrictive, particularly regarding 
the accumulation of coarse woody debris, number of 
canopy layers, and species composition. The group 
suggested the following General Definition for 
Old-Growth Forests in the Central and Southern 
Rocky Mountains and Southwest: 
Old-growth forests are ecosystems distinguished 
by old trees and related structural features. 
Old growth encompasses the later stages of 
stand development that typically differ from 
earlier stages in structure, composition, function, 
and other attributes. 
This definition is broad and workable for 
communication, but the definition does not permit us to 
recognize old-growth stands. For this we turn to 
structural characteristics, which in turn reflect functional 
ecosystem processes. The group suggested slight 
rewording of the old-growth description to make it more 
appropriate for the central and southern Rocky 
Mountains and Southwest. The reworded Description 
is: 
Structural features that characterize old 
growth in the central and southern Rocky 
Mountains and Southwest vary widely 
according to forest type, climate, site 
conditions, and disturbance regime. Old 
growth is characteristically distinguished 
from younger growth by some but not 
necessarily all of the following attributes: 
 
 
4 

• Large trees for species and site. 
• Wide variation in tree sizes and spacing 
between trees. 
• Relative to earlier stages, high 
accumulations of large, dead standing and 
fallen trees. 
• Decay in the form of broken and deformed 
tops or bole and root rot. 
• Multiple canopy layers. 
• Canopy gaps and understory patchiness. 
"Old" is not necessarily virgin or primeval. 
Structure and function of an old-growth 
ecosystem may be influenced by its stand size 
and landscape position. Given sufficient time, 
old growth can develop following human or 
natural disturbances, such as logging or 
wildfire. 
 
While there has been some concern expressed 
that old-growth forests in the Rocky Mountains and 
Southwest are different from those in the Pacific 
Northwest, the definition and description published in 
1990 as slightly refined here are appropriate in both 
geographic regions if properly applied. For example, 
only some of the descriptive elements above may be 
appropriate. The accumulation of large amounts of 
dead and down material and multiple canopy layers 
may be significant characteristics of some forest types 
(e.g., old-growth spruce-fir). But in presettlement 
old-growth ponderosa pine stands, the frequency of fire 
contributed to open stands of large trees having little 
dead and down material and perhaps only one canopy 
layer (Covington and Moore, Harrington and Sackett, 
this volume). Similarly, very old limber or bristlecone 
pine trees may develop in highly stressful sites and 
reach only a few meters in total height, but for those 
sites the trees are large. 
 
Variables in the Characterization of Old Growth 
 
Missing from the old-growth definition and 
description above is any mention of specific tree age or 
size, or density of old trees in the stand. While initial 
attempts to inventory old-growth forests have required 
the development of preliminary quantitative 
descriptions for each forest type (Mehl, this volume), it 
is clear that certain features of old-growth stands vary 
depending on site productivity and geographic location. 
Within a forest type, old-growth stands may be found in 
a number of habitat types and across a wide range of 
physiographic settings (Robertson, this volume). 
Thus the characteristics defining the old-growth 
condition, particularly those involving tree size, age, 
stand density, canopy structure, and the accumulation of 
dead materials, may be very different among sites and 
habitat types within a forest type. This precludes a 
strict use of "minimum" characteristics in old-growth 
definitions when "old growth" is meant to include all 
forest stands meeting ecological criteria for this stage of 
forest development. 
Two particularly pressing research needs are to 
determine how presettlement forest conditions varied 
among forest types, habitat types, and site conditions, 
and to clarify how the minimum criteria should vary 
accordingly. Such research requires an extensive field 
data base including samples from a matrix of 
site/habitat combinations. In the absence of such a 
data base and analysis, it is nearly impossible to 
determine the criteria to be used in the inventory and 
management of old-growth forests in the landscape 
without either excluding a number of true old-growth 
stands on poorer sites or including marginal old-growth 
stands on better sites. It may be possible, if the data 
base is large enough, to develop a classification model 
in the form of a key for old-growth conditions that 
accounts for variation in old-growth characteristics 
among habitat types and sites. 
 
OLD GROWTH QUALITY 
 
Many of us have been conditioned to believe 
that stands of big trees are old growth, when 
biologically such stands may not be good examples of 
late developmental stages for the forest type in its 
specific site condition. Some of us believe that signs of 
human disturbance such as skid roads and stumps 
seriously weaken the quality of an old-growth stand, 
when from an ecological point of view such evidence of 
disturbance may have little to do with the structural and 
functional features characterizing old growth or its 
value as animal habitat. A recreationalist seeking time 
in a pristine forest, or an individual seeking spiritual 
value, may be disturbed by rotting stumps in an 
old-growth forest but may be satisfied by an unroaded 
and undisturbed mature forest not meeting old-growth 
criteria. Some people may view a pine forest having 
multiple canopy layers and many down logs as ideal old 
growth, while from an ecological view such forests 
reflect significant disturbance in the form of fire 
exclusion. 
We propose that the approach to old-growth 
definition in the previous section is the most appropriate 
one in many cases because it is ecologically sound and 
it is useful in decision-making processes regarding the 
inventory and management of old-growth forests in the 
landscape. We recognize that other values also are 
important, and we suggest, in 
 
 
5 

keeping with earlier remarks in this paper, that other 
terminology or concepts be used when dealing with 
wildlife habitat, visual or spiritual issues, etc., that in 
some cases may not require old-growth conditions to 
be present. 
 
Disturbance and the Issue of Quality 
 
Evidence of prior disturbance may affect how 
observers view an old forest. Some old-growth stands 
may have survived many centuries with no human 
intervention and with little change in history of biotic or 
abiotic disturbance. The question of disturbance is not 
a simple one, however. Many stands have no evidence 
of prior silvicultural activities, but fire has been 
effectively removed as a natural process during most of 
this century, and in some cases insect or disease control 
treatments have been applied. Thus large areas of 
presumably undisturbed forest have, in fact, taken on a 
structure quite different from what might have existed 
had natural disturbance regimes not been interrupted. 
Many ponderosa pine forests, for example, 
historically had fire return intervals of less than every 
decade. But since the beginning of this century, fires 
have been excluded almost completely, with the result 
that new age groups of trees and considerable amounts 
of dead material exist in stands that otherwise might 
have had the classic, park-like appearance with 
numerous grassy openings characteristic of 
presettlement times. Fire suppression has resulted in 
much higher numbers of trees per area and the loss of 
most openings. And when fires occur, they often are of 
such intensity that the entire plant community is 
replaced. 
Ecologically, many forested areas that now exist 
should be considered disturbed by fire suppression even 
though no other signs of human disturbance are found. 
Little is known, however, about how various observers 
and users of forest lands view fire suppression and other 
signs of human disturbance (such as evidence of 
silvicultural activities) as impacts on the quality of 
old-growth forests. 
 
OLD-GROWTH FORESTS IN THE LANDSCAPE 
Landscape Issues 
 
Old-growth forests historically constituted a 
significant component of the landscape mosaic, 
providing an array of features not found in forests at 
other developmental stages. Many very important 
questions are being asked about old-growth forests in 
the landscape. Some of these questions have been 
addressed above, such as why old-growth forests are 
needed and how they are recognized. Numerous other 
issues emerge when Forest Plans are appealed or 
subject to revision or when the ecology of old-growth 
forests is considered: 
• How much old growth is enough? 
• How serious is the impact of various 
management practices upon fragmentation, and 
how is fragmentation measured? 
• Are old-growth forests found more frequently in 
some plant associations than in others? 
• How large should old-growth stands be, and how 
should they be buffered by mature forests or by 
corridors that connect to other old-growth 
patches? Are the concepts of corridors and 
distribution useful in a naturally fragmented 
landscape? 
• What organisms do patches and corridors serve? 
• How do different alternatives in Forest Plans 
affect biological diversity within patches and the 
overall landscape diversity? 
• What were the structure, composition, and 
geographic/topographic forest patterns (which 
included old growth) during presettlement times? 
• How has fire suppression (or other broad-scale 
changes) during the last century affected 
old-growth conditions for wildlife habitat, 
epicenters of insects or plant pathogens, or the 
propagation of large-scale disturbances? 
• How are ecological processes different in 
old-growth forests compared with other stages of 
development? 
• How can the transitions into and out of the 
old-growth state be evaluated? 
• What is the role of old growth in the 
development of subsequent forests on a site? 
It is noteworthy that the important management 
questions also are priority research questions. Scientists 
and managers attending the workshop suggested that 
cooperation of researchers and managers is essential 
when dealing with landscape issues. Because of the 
large scales of space and time that are relevant for 
landscape processes, it is necessary that science and 
management cooperate in making 
scientifically sound management decisions while being 
aware that experimentation to answer a number of 
landscape questions may not be practical. The most 
 
 
6 

likely contribution of science to management at a 
landscape scale will be the development of appropriate 
ecosystem models that can be used to assist managers 
with landscape issues. 
 
Biodiversity 
 
Old-growth forests are considered by scientists 
and managers to be an important component of 
biological diversity, or "biodiversity," which is the 
richness and distribution of different forms of life in 
an area. The contribution of old growth to 
biodiversity occurs at all spatial scales. In the 
landscape, old-growth stands provide structural and 
functional contrasts to younger forests. The number of 
old-growth forest stands and their sizes and 
arrangement in the land contribute to landscape 
diversity. Scientists need to test various measures of 
landscape diversity for usefulness to forest managers. 
A research problem is to relate measures of landscape 
diversity to how landscapes are functioning in terms of 
various treatments and outputs such as water yield, 
nutrient cycling, recreation visitor days, or wildlife 
population levels. 
Old-growth forests may be the preferred 
habitat for certain microbes, fungi, bryophytes, and 
higher plants (Romme et al., this volume). They are 
known to be the preferred habitat for a number of 
vertebrate species, such as martens, flammulated owls 
(Reynolds, this volume), or animals requiring tree 
cavities for reproduction. Animal populations of species 
preferring old growth are limited not only by the size of 
old-growth stands, but also by the number and 
arrangement of stands in the landscape. However, 
research lags far behind the manager's need to know 
about minimum viable populations, as illustrated for 
example by the Mt. Graham red squirrel on the 
Coronado National Forest in Arizona. 
Much of the diversity within old-growth forests 
is associated with the numerous detrital and other 
heterotrophic food webs (e.g., metabolism based upon 
respiration rather than upon photosynthesis). 
Old-growth stands are rich with fungi and other 
microorganisms (such as nitrogen-fixing bacteria 
associated with rotting wood). These in turn support 
myriads of cryptic (hidden) micro-arthropods and other 
invertebrates in intricate food webs. Many small 
mammals include fungi in their diet; furthermore, their 
fecal pellets may function as mycorrhizal inoculum or 
fertilizer for germinating seeds. Several carnivores, 
such as woodpeckers, plethodonid salamanders (Scott, 
this volume), certain kinds of hymenopterans (e.g., 
bees, ants, wasps), or roaming black bears cap these 
food webs. This diversity is more complex in 
old-growth forests than in younger stands in part 
because of the numerous kinds and amounts of 
chemical energy accumulated in wood and litter. For 
example, decaying wood is an important microsite 
governing ectomycorrhizal activity in forest soils 
(Larsen et al., cited in Moir, this volume). 
At the genetic level, old-growth forests may 
harbor genotypes of species adapted to later stages of 
forest development and thus different from their genetic 
cousins in younger forests. Considerably more work is 
needed, however, to elaborate upon this theme. Indeed, 
the difficulty facing forest managers and researchers is 
that so little is known about the requirements of most of 
the species in old-growth ecosystems. Although 
animals such as Northern goshawks or Mexican spotted 
owls may symbolize old-growth dependency, knowledge 
about the breadth of ecological and habitat tolerances is 
often lacking even for them. 
Research also is needed on the manner in which 
the biodiversity of old-growth forests contributes to the 
functional health of forests that follow. This has 
important implications in residue management and other 
practices that provide a structural link between 
successive forest generations. 
 
Ecophysiology of Old-Growth Trees and Stands 
 
The behavior of old-growth forests with regard to 
the carbon, nutrient, and water resources is understood in 
a general sense, but many specific questions have not 
been answered. It is known that at the late developmental 
stage we refer to as old growth, the net productivity of 
the ecosystem approaches zero and may even become 
negative. This means that newly produced biomass is 
offset, on average, by heterotrophic respiration plus 
mortality of individual trees or tree parts such as foliage, 
branches, and roots. It is also believed that as trees age, 
they not only experience a decrease in productivity in 
the form of reduced leaf area and growth, but they also 
undergo certain changes in secondary product 
metabolism resulting in biochemical changes in plant 
composition that may be related to increased resistance 
to insect or disease attack. 
Many of the details of these processes are not 
understood for each forest type, nor is it clear exactly 
how the ecophysiological characteristics of old trees can 
be used to judge when a mature stand reaches 
old-growth status or when an old-growth stand 
deteriorates to the point it no longer functions as an 
old-growth ecosystem. It seems clear, however, that a 
stand does not qualify for the old-growth status if none 
of the oldest trees have reached the conditions in which 
 
 
7 

general vigor is being lost and no structural and 
functional changes accompanying longevity 
and senescence processes are occurring. 
It is also obvious that some conditions required 
for achieving old-growth status can occur in stands that 
have had prior silvicultural treatment (including 
harvest), and it may be possible to influence, through 
silvicultural intervention, the development and 
persistence of the old-growth condition. Recent 
analyses of the growth history of old lodgepole pine 
trees has shown that trees presently having low leaf area 
and approaching mortality grew more rapidly during 
their first 100 years, compared with neighbor trees of 
the same age, height, and bole volume but currently 
having high leaf area (Kaufmann, this volume). This 
suggests that trees growing rapidly early in the life of 
the stand became the first trees reaching old-growth 
status. The trees growing slower initially but surviving 
to old age now extend the time during which the 
old-growth status occurs. 
How this applies to even-aged stands of other 
forest types or to uneven-aged conditions is not known. 
It seems reasonable, however, to suggest that 
manipulation of stands early in their development may 
have considerable influence over their old-growth 
characteristics, and careful treatments may improve the 
character and longevity of old-growth stands. This is 
discussed more below. 
 
Forest Development and Synchrony 
of Old-Growth Characteristics 
 
Forest community development is both a 
stochastic and a deterministic process. The incidence 
and intensity of stand-altering events such as fire, 
climatic fluctuations, windthrow, insect attack, disease 
outbreak, regeneration success, stress-induced mortality, 
and other biotic and abiotic variables are highly 
unpredictable. The developmental trajectory by which 
forest communities reach the old-growth condition may 
vary widely within forest types both within and across 
geographic regions. Consequently the desirable features 
of old-growth stands may not peak at the same time in 
different environments, and considerable latitude is 
required in classifying stands. This is why, in the 
old-growth description given earlier, only some of the 
descriptive characteristics can be expected to occur 
simultaneously. Furthermore, certain characteristics are 
not equally expressed for all forest types. For example, 
the accumulation of coarse woody debris and 
development of multiple canopy layers are important for 
old-growth spruce/fir forests, but perhaps the best 
examples of old-growth ponderosa pine would be the 
rare cases in which fire has continually limited 
the accumulation of coarse woody debris and the 
development of younger age classes of trees. 
Relatively little is known about the range of 
successional pathways that can lead to old growth, 
nor is much known about how the different paths 
affect the quality of the resultant old-growth stands. 
It is important to understand that the old-growth 
condition is temporary. While stand-replacing 
disturbances may be very infrequent in some 
locations, eventually they are likely to occur. Some 
of the highest-quality old-growth stands, such as the 
Engelmann spruce/subalpine fir old-growth forest in 
Bowen Gulch near Rocky Mountain National Park 
in Colorado, may have had no significant 
disturbance for many centuries, but such stands are 
the exception rather than the rule, and even for 
those stands there is no assurance that a major stand 
replacement disturbance will not happen in the near 
future. 
Seral stands can acquire old-growth 
characteristics and can be classified as old growth. 
Seral stands are expected to be transient, provided 
conditions are appropriate for stand structure and 
composition to change. However, climax stands 
also are transient when considered at more 
comprehensive scales of space and time, and there 
is little reason to distinguish between seral and 
climax forest communities when evaluating the 
old-growth condition. The likelihood of more rapid 
loss of old-growth characteristics may be higher in 
some sera] stands (e.g., aspen), however, and this 
may be a factor in determining the role of sera] 
old-growth stands in landscape management. 
In areas where low-intensity fires had been 
frequent before settlement, the absence of fire during 
most of this century has resulted in very different 
developmental trajectories for stands. From an 
ecological perspective, some old-growth 
characteristics may still have developed, but the 
forests represent a new kind of old-growth 
condition. The degree to which novel stand 
conditions might be classified as old growth depends 
on the role of functions or conditions such as 
biodiversity, ecosystem health, and stability. To 
answer this question correctly, information is needed 
both about the ecological impacts (especially on 
biodiversity) of the altered developmental trajectory 
and the willingness of old-growth forest users to 
accept a modified type of old-growth forest. 
 
MANAGING OLD-GROWTH FORESTS 
The Baseline of Comparison 
 
The issue of whether or not to use manage- 
ment techniques to affect the amount and quality of 
 
 
8 

old-growth forests, and whether any intervention is 
permissible at all, must be evaluated against the 
changes that have already occurred in all forests since 
settlement by Europeans. All old-growth forests have 
been impacted by man, whether or not the effects are 
obvious. The most apparent impacts in the central 
and southern Rocky Mountains and the Southwest 
involve timber harvest in ponderosa pine, which 
has sharply reduced the acreage of old-growth forests, 
and fire exclusion, which has altered the structure of 
old-growth stands that historically had frequent 
low-intensity fires. 
Other impacts also have occurred. For 
example, the pattern of old-growth forest distribution 
in the landscape has been changed dramatically since 
presettlement times, with much of the remaining 
old-growth forest now relegated to less accessible 
areas and perhaps to less-productive sites. The 
atmospheric concentration of CO2 has increased 40 % 
since the mid-1800's, and this may have far-reaching 
effects on the development and stability of old-growth 
stands. And there have been order-of-magnitude 
increases in atmospheric deposition of certain 
chemicals containing nitrogen, sulfur, etc., into forest 
ecosystems. 
Given the variety of past, present, and future 
impacts, an important question, in those situations 
where managing for old-growth qualities is 
appropriate, is the baseline of comparison. From a 
biodiversity standpoint, presettlement conditions may 
be the most desirable baseline, because those 
conditions represented the natural system in all its 
detail and complexity (Covington and Moore, this 
volume). Yet over the near term, presettlement 
conditions may be difficult to restore on any extensive 
basis, because of the major impacts timber harvest and 
human community development have had in forested 
areas. It may not even be possible to restore 
presettlement old-growth conditions on any spatial 
scale, because of the unknown impacts of increased 
COY in the atmosphere and increased atmospheric 
deposition of chemicals. 
Thus the question of old-growth management 
and the issue of selecting an appropriate baseline 
requires increased knowledge about changes that 
have occurred since settlement impacts began and the 
degree to which present physical and chemical 
environments affect old growth and other 
ecosystems. These are difficult issues, and it is likely 
that old-growth management decisions often will have 
to be made with inadequate knowledge of the 
ecological and environmental consequences. It is 
important that all management decisions, and even 
the decision not to intervene with the normal 
ecosystem processes, be done with clear 
understanding of the scientific knowns and 
unknowns. 
Silvicultural Treatment 
 
It was suggested earlier that, given enough 
time, it is quite possible for old-growth conditions to 
develop in stands where prior human disturbance had 
occurred. For example, a subalpine forest may have 
old lodgepole pine trees in various stages of decline, 
with a significant stand component of Engelmann 
spruce and subalpine fir that has developed after 
harvest near the turn of the century. Such stands may 
have a complex structure and considerable amounts 
of coarse woody debris, but also skid roads and very 
old stumps. The oldest trees in these stands, chiefly 
lodgepole pine, were left during the earlier harvest, 
and presently they help the stand meet some 
old-growth criteria. 
While for certain uses past or future 
disturbance is not considered acceptable, there may 
be important situations in which silvicultural 
intervention is highly desirable to improve the 
quantity, quality, distribution, or duration of 
old-growth forests in the landscape. An example is 
ponderosa pine along the Front Range in Colorado, 
where old-growth stands are scarce. It may be 
possible and desirable to enter such stands and alter 
the structure, age distribution, and amount of coarse 
woody debris to favor the development of old-growth 
features. Such an effort could be part of a program to 
restore some of the desirable qualities of the 
ecosystem (biodiversity, etc.) that had existed before 
settlement, harvest, and fire suppression so drastically 
altered the landscape. 
 
Reintroducing Fire 
 
It is clear from discussions above that fire 
suppression since settlement of the West has had 
major effects on forests. It was the conclusion of the 
workshop participants that fire be used in forest 
ecosystem management because historically it has 
been a very important ecological process in most, if 
not all, forest types in the central and southern Rocky 
Mountains and Southwest. There are several forest 
types in which fire is a critical natural element in the 
forest landscape, and the effects are reasonably 
well-understood. There are other types, however, for 
which relatively little is known regarding the impacts 
of fire, although it is known that total fire suppression 
in the landscape is unrealistic. 
The reintroduction of fire in landscape 
management is not easy. The buildup of fuels has 
reached such a level in many forests that any fire is 
likely to be so intense that the entire forest 
community will be replaced. Thus where fires 
historically were frequent enough to help maintain 
old-growth conditions, now fires may totally destroy 
the trees that 
 
 
9 

 
10 
might otherwise have been protected by more frequent 
fires (Covington and Moore, Harrington and Sackett, 
this volume). Furthermore, human communities have 
developed in many forested areas that typically had 
frequent fires (particularly along the Front Range in 
Colorado), and both the accumulation of fuels and the 
presence of buildings severely limit prescribed burning 
in most situations. Intense fires in some cases even 
result in the destruction and replacement of the human 
community development. 
The accumulation of fuels during the extended 
period of fire suppression has resulted in the 
accumulation not only of large amounts of coarse 
woody debris, but also in large amounts of litter beneath 
large trees. Thus far researchers have not been able to 
develop reliable techniques for using fire in ways that 
prevent lethal temperatures from developing at the base 
of trees as this accumulated litter burns, even when fire 
is used in cool, moist seasons of the year (Harrington 
and Sackett, this volume). Considerable research is 
needed to determine how fire can once again be made a 
more significant part of landscape ecology. It may be 
possible to achieve some of the structural effects 
resulting from fire by using silvicultural techniques not 
aimed at timber harvest. Research is needed on the 
potential for using silvicultural treatments to simulate 
the effects of fire. 
 
Inventory Techniques 
 
Inventories of old-growth forests and of forests 
that have potential for transition into the old-growth 
condition are extremely important in forest planning. It 
is critical that inventories are conducted using guidelines 
with a sound scientific basis. Presently, most inventory 
of old-growth forests is conducted using some type of 
scorecard, often with both quantitative and qualitative 
features (e.g., Lowry, this volume). This has been a 
useful interim approach, but considerable modifications 
tare needed (Robertson, this volume). The main problem 
with existing approaches is that they almost totally 
exclude old growth on poorer sites, because the 
scorecards make use of minimum criteria relating to tree 
size and stand structure (Mehl, this volume). 
Furthermore, certain scorecards favor structural 
diversity that in some cases (e.g., ponderosa pine) should 
be considered a quality-reducing factor rather than a 
quality-enhancing factor, and little attention is given to 
functional features that distinguish old growth from 
other successional stages. 
Several rating systems have been used to 
quantify dead material on the forest floor, but not all 
systems have been used to quantify all of the standing 
and down dead material important in characterizing old 
growth. Convenient methods are needed to evaluate 
all portions of the accumulated dead materials in forest 
communities, including their states of decomposition. 
Research also is needed to improve inventory 
techniques for detecting old-growth forests at the 
landscape scale. The scorecard approach has evolved 
on individual National Forests, often with major 
differences in criteria among Forests for distinguishing 
old growth in similar forest types. General guidelines 
are needed for conducting inventories over large 
geographic areas. This research requires not only 
increasing our understanding of how old growth varies 
among sites and habitat types within forest types (see 
discussion above), but also improving the technology 
for completing accurate inventories. The development 
of remote sensing techniques (Nel, this volume) holds 
considerable promise for conducting broad-scale 
inventories. 
 
Ecological Knowledge for Management 
 
Synthesizing current and future scientific 
knowledge into a format useable in natural resource 
management is a formidable task. The necessity for 
addressing the likely ecological consequences and 
environmental impacts of various management 
scenarios (including no action) at comprehensive spatial 
and temporal scales overwhelms conventional 
approaches for integrated resource analysis. A central 
conclusion of working sessions at this meeting was that 
spatial and temporal ecological modeling coupled with 
formulations of desired future conditions is needed to 
support analyses not only for old-growth management 
decisions but also for landscape management in 
general. 
Additionally, we concluded that management 
experiments and demonstration areas at the landscape 
level would be necessary for testing hypotheses and 
developing models that can aid decision-makers in 
guiding both research and management. To 
accomplish these tasks, improved access to remote 
sensing technology, geographic information systems, 
process-based simulation models, and other advanced 
technologies is necessary both for researchers and for 
managers. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
It is clear from the wide array of topics covered 
in this volume that although much is known about 
old-growth forests in the central and southern Rocky 
Mountains and Southwest, many important questions 
remain unanswered. It is the responsibility of 
researchers to address these questions, because without 
 

adequate scientific answers, it is likely that serious 
mistakes will be made that could have long-term 
negative environmental and ecological 
consequences. 
At the same time, it is the responsibility of 
forest managers to incorporate the most up-to-date 
scientific knowledge in making decisions about the 
management of forest landscapes to protect and 
enhance the unique values of old-growth forests. It is 
also important that scientists and managers 
acknowledge those areas in which scientific 
knowledge is inadequate, to proceed cautiously when 
that is the case, and to inform researcher leaders and 
interested members of the public of such problems. 
Some of the changes imposed on the forest 
landscape since settlement began presently restrict 
management options in the near future. Yet we have 
a tremendous opportunity to turn the pattern of 
change into a more positive one. This can be done 
through appropriate integration of sound scientific 
principles into guidelines for managing forests in 
ways that meet both present and anticipated future 
needs. It cannot be done by science alone, or by 
management alone, or by overreacting to the 
demands of narrowly focused interest groups. 
Managing old-growth forests in the landscape 
requires a long-term landscape perspective supported 
by informed communication among scientists, 
resource managers, and the public. 
 
11 
