Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Yazzie, V. 2007. The tribal perspective of old growth in frequent-fire forests—its history. Ecology and
Society 12(2): 21. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
Synthesis, part of a Special Feature on The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth in Frequent-fire
Forests of the American West
The Tribal Perspective of Old Growth in Frequent-fire Forests—Its
History
Victoria Yazzie 1,2
ABSTRACT. Anyone who has not lived in “Indian country” cannot understand just how extensively the United
States government and its laws affect Native Americans and their natural resource management. These effects are
sobering, and touch upon sensitive issues that all Native Americans hold within us. In this article, I outline the historic
cycle of tribal entities, and characterize today’s tribal self-determination in forest management. I provide an historical
account from the “colonial” period and its use of the Doctrine of Discovery to the relations between the United States
government and Native Americans from the 18th through the 20th centuries, during which time Native Americans
struggled to establish their legal status as tribes, and solidify their land base to sustain and conserve culturally
important lands, including areas of old-growth forests, to the current self-determination and self-governance potential
of Indian tribes. More importantly, I discuss the cultural connectivity that Native Americans have to the land, and
address the unique inherent right of tribes to integrate this cultural view into current forest management, including
the protection of old-growth forests, on their reservations.
Key Words: Bureau of Indian Affairs; Doctrine of Discovery; indigenous peoples’ forest management; Marshall
Court; tribal self-determination
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, I focus on the history of tribal forest
and woodland management, and the tribal
perspective of old growth in Indian country, and
how extensively the federal government and its laws
affect Native Americans and their current natural
resource management. Federal Indian law began
with the cultural conflicts between Native
Americans and European settlers during the early
colonial period, and continues to this day to
influence Indian law and policy and how tribes
manage their resources. By recognizing this
beginning, an understanding may unfold about of
the divergence of ideas and practices between
Native Americans and Europeans—a cultural
difference that expressed itself in the Native
Americans’ use of fire, which created old growth
before European invasion, and the rare presence of
old-growth forests today, which is due in large part
to a European-based idea of resource management
without fire.
NATIVE AMERICAN HISTORY BEFORE
EUROPEAN INVASION
Native Americans used fire for hundreds to
thousands of years to manage forests and construct
old-growth structure before European settlement
(Cronon 1983, Delcourt and Delcourt 1997,
Anderson 2005). Details of these practices can be
generalized from historic records and reconstructions
of habitat characteristics before European contact.
Although the intent to uncover history validates
historic habitat structure, the evidence of Native
American influence is minimized or lost through
misinterpretation by non-Indian perceptions of
American Indian history (Wilson 1996) and the
effects of traditional ecological knowledge (TEK)
use (Simpson 2004). Native American people have
long had an immediate relationship with their
physical environment and were cognizant of its
rhythms and resources. Their management of
natural resources and the altering of landscapes with
fire are grounded in generations of accumulated
wisdom and a reciprocal obligation with all animals
and inanimate beings (TEK; Simpson 2004).
1Ecological Restoration Institute, 
2College of Menominee Nation

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
EUROPEAN COLONIAL PERIOD
In the 15th century, the race for empire in North
America coincided with a rise in the economies of
the Netherlands, England, France, and Spain. Each
nation was in varying stages of a transition to
capitalism, and each was on the threshold of creating
a new and more dynamic economy built upon trade
strategy. North America and its inhabitants were
seen as a means to augment the material ambitions
of the invading European powers, and the
inhabitants immediately became both pawns and
participants in the strategies of the world market.
Colonization in New England began at a time when
the ecological conditions of extensive regions of
North America depended on prescribed fire use by
Native Americans. The ecology of these landscapes
began to be changed by European settlers who
altered the uses of the land, and by the forced decline
of the Native American people and their use of
ecological knowledge (Cronon 1983, Stewart
2002). Changing patterns of native resources use by
European invasion altered the physical and cultural
landscape in this “New World.”
To the Europeans, the overall resource abundance
of the New World—as evidenced by the old-growth
forests, large herds of animals, large flocks of birds
—seemed infinite. The fur trade and lumber
industries opened the door to resource exploitation.
A clause in the 1691 Massachusetts charter
describes the fate of old-growth white pine (Pinus
strobus) forests: “all [mast] trees of the diameter of
twenty-four inches and upward at twelve inches” to
be marked for use by the British Royal Navy
(Cronon 1983, p. 110). In 1630, 24 sawmills
provided white pine ship masts for the British Royal
Navy. White pine trees were 61–122 cm (2–4 ft) in
diameter and 36.6–61 m (120–200 ft) tall. Intense
lumbering that favored “the richest and straightest”
trees was commonplace up to the late-19th century
(Cronon 1983, p. 111).
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT:
FEDERAL LAWS AND LEGAL DECISIONS
THAT DEFINED NATIVE AMERICANS AND
THEIR LANDSCAPES
Since its inception, the United States government
has enacted laws and policies oppressing and
marginalizing Native Americans and depriving
them of their lands and traditional cultural practices.
These laws, legal decisions, and policies are based
on the Doctrine of Discovery, a medieval doctrine
that gave property rights to the country that
discovered a piece of land. The European countries,
and later the United States, used this doctrine to
justify imposing unilateral state ownership on
indigenous lands and guardianship over indigenous
peoples because of their assumed racial and cultural
inferiority (Miller 2005).
Race, racism, extermination, and conquest were the
driving forces behind the laws pertaining to
indigenous people. The Trade and Intercourse Act
of 1790 states the ownership and guardianship of
indigenous lands and people under the United States
government:
No person shall be permitted to carry on
any trade or intercourse with the Indian
tribes, without a license of that purpose
under the hand and seal of ...such...person
as the President of the United States shall
appoint for that purpose... (Section 1), and
No sale of lands made by any Indians, or
any nation or tribe of Indians within the
United States, shall be valid to any person
or persons, or to any state...unless the same
shall be made and duly executed at some
public treaty, held under the authority of the
United States” (Section 4). 
Later, the Non-Intercourse Act of 1793 mirrored
and supported the conquest idea in early colonial
America:
No purchase, grant, lease, or other
conveyance of lands, or of any title or claim
thereto, from any Indian nation or tribe of
Indians, shall be of any validity in law or
equity, unless the same be made by treaty
or convention entered into pursuant to the
Constitution. (Chapter 19, Section 8, 1 Stat.
329, 330.) 
Federal government power over Native Americans
and their lands derives from the legislative
enactments and judicial decisions during the time
of Chief Justice John Marshall (Robertson 2005).
In the landmark 1823 case, Johnson v. McIntosh, the
United States Supreme Court defined the
relationship between the federal government and
the tribes by applying the finder’s law analysis to
the discovering European claim to land title in native

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
America. In writing the majority opinion, Chief
Justice Marshall indicated that the Indians’ right of
occupancy could be terminated by the European
sovereign and exclusive power to acquire Indian
lands by “purchase or conquest” (Johnson v.
McIntosh 1823, at 587). The aim was to ensure
exclusive right to the discoverer to appropriate the
lands occupied by Indians, and that the sovereigns
of Europe had granted lands still in possession of
Indians (Johnson v. McIntosh 1823, at 584).
The Supreme Court handed down another landmark
decision in Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831), in
which the court ruled that Native American tribes
were “domestic dependent nations” of the federal
government, with the federal government acting as
equals after the Revolutionary War (Pevar 1992).
This ruling of tribes as “domestic dependent
nations” rather than “foreign states,” within the
meaning of Article III, Section 2 of the United States
Constitution, defines federal judicial power. Tribes
were defined as “states,” but not considered as
“foreign” states, characterizing them as being “in a
state of pupilage,” whereas before the relationship
was defined as one of guardian and ward. The Court
denied the Cherokees’ request for an injunction
against the enforcement of Georgia statute that
extended the laws of Georgia over Cherokee land
and abolished the laws of the Cherokee Nation.
In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831), the Court’s
determination created the foundation for today’s
sovereignty doctrine and self-determination policy
(Cross 2003, Yazzie 2006). The sovereignty status
of Indian tribes has its basis in the theory of “inherent
right” to control the lands within the exterior
boundaries of their reservations (Mettler 1978,
Getches et al. 1993, Yazzie 2006). Despite this
decision, tribes remain engaged in a 500-year
struggle to safeguard their lands from outside
expropriation and destruction of their natural
resources and cultural integrity.
Worchester v. Georgia (1832), the third opinion of
the Marshall-led court, described Indian nations as
“distinct political communities, having territorial
boundaries, within which their authority is
exclusive,” and excluded the states from power over
Indian affairs within those boundaries (Worchester
v. Georgia 1832, at 515, 557-61). The Georgia
legislature in 1828, enacted legislation to “add the
territory within the limits of the state, and occupied
by the Cherokee Indians” extending the laws of the
state over Cherokee Nation. In 1829, Andrew
Jackson was sworn into office as president of the
United States. He urged Congress to adopt
legislation to complement Georgia’s and Alabama’s
extension jurisdiction over the Cherokees and the
Creeks. Many states followed suit in abrogating
Indian lands and rights of occupation to state
jurisdiction. Jackson’s notion to the tribes was
submit to the states or leave! John Marshall was
distressed at Congress’s cooperation in the coercive
measures begun by the states of Georgia, Alabama,
and Mississippi and with the strong support of
President Jackson. In 1830, President Jackson
signed the Indian Removal Act into law. In
Worchester v. Georgia, Marshall intended to undo
Johnson v. McIntosh, the discovery rule. However,
in 1835, with Johnson dead, President Jackson
appointed James M. Wayne (a former member of
the Georgia Supreme Court) as Chief Justice. The
Johnson discovery rule was restored, and Indian
tribes ceded all the lands east of the Mississippi
River in exchange for fee lands west of the
Mississippi River.
In 1789, the United States Congress placed Native
American relations within the War Department, and
by 1806, Congress created a Superintendent of
Indian Trade, who was charged with maintaining
the factory trading network of the fur trade. With
the abolition of the factory system in 1822, the
Secretary of War John C. Calhoun formed and
created on 11 March 1824 the current Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA), without authorization from
the United States Congress. In 1849, the “Indian
Office” was transferred to the Department of the
Interior, and renamed the Bureau of Indian Affairs
in 1947 from the original Office of Indian Affairs.
The BIA is an agency of the federal government of
the United States within the Department of the
Interior charged with the administration and
management of land held in trust by the United
States for American Indians, Indian tribes, and
Alaska Natives.
Federal Indian policy changed between 1825 and
the 1850s. The federal government began openly
discussing moving all tribes west of the Mississippi
River—a dialogue that resulted in the Indian
Removal Act of 1830, which was signed by
President Andrew Jackson. During the 1830s, many
tribes were forcibly marched to “Indian Territory”
in Oklahoma (Cherokee “Trail of Tears”). The
federal policy to slowly and methodically remove
all tribes to the Indian Territory was overwhelmed
by the opening of the Oregon Trail in the early

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
1840s, and the discovery of gold in California in
1849. Vast areas of the American West were now
“up for grabs” (Cross 2003). In Louisiana, the
Southwest, and the Northwest, the federal
government purchased or acquired the land from
foreign powers in preparation for western settlement
and the creation of territories. Tribal title west of
the Mississippi River had to be extinguished so that
the property rights of future private non-Indian land
holders would be secure.
From the 1850s until 1887, Native Americans in the
interior West, like those across the United States,
exchanged vast amounts of previously occupied
land for the reservations on which they now reside;
these exchanges were “federal diplomatic ‘cover’
for coerced and patently unfair Indian land cession
agreements” (Cross 1998, p. 427). In addition,
millions of acres of Indian timber were transferred
by executive order into adjacent national forests and
parks, and Native American people were banned
from setting fires (Lewis 1995).
In 1887, Congress passed the General Allotment
Act or Dawes Act, which caused substantial
amounts of reservation lands held in trust to be
divided into individual parcels. Every Indian living
on the reservation at that time received a parcel
based on their age and status, with surplus parcels
sold to non-Indian settlers. Indians not living on a
reservation or whose tribe was not assigned a
reservation 
could 
apply 
for 
“surveyed 
or
unsurveyed lands of the United States not otherwise
appropriated” (General Allotment Act 1887, section
4; Monette 1995). However, all lands of the United
States were already appropriated. The idea of the
General Allotment Act was to minimize the
American Indian land base, as well as to assimilate
Indian people into white culture by encouraging
them to engage in agriculture and ranching. The
fragmentation of ownership includes beneficial
ownership (as Indians communally), trust and fee
ownership (as Indians individually (allotments)),
and non-Indian fee land ownership (Cohen 1941,
Getches et al. 1993). The General Allotment era,
which ended in 1934 with the Indian Reorganization
Act, set the stage for continual legal battles about
tribal property and territory, and began the period
of the “trust’ doctrine (Getches et al. 1993, Cross
2003, Yazzie 2006). The trust doctrine was
developed on the premise that the tribes were
incompetent and unable to manage their resources
and affairs with respect to property ownership. Most
Indian lands are held in trust by the federal
government for benefit of the tribe and allottees.
Thus, the BIA of the United States Department of
the Interior is charged with the management
function of the trust responsibility.
NATIVE AMERICANS, THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, AND TIMBER
While Euro-American settlement was taking place
and expanding westward, Native American people
struggled to keep their traditional cultural integrity
intact. Much of their landscape was changing
because of Euro-American exploitation and trespass
of both public and tribal timber, range, mineral, and
water resources (Getches et al. 1993). In Wisconsin
and Minnesota, extensive forests on Indian
reservations were prime targets for exploitation by
non-Indian timber industries (Godfrey 1996). As
white pine, red pine (Pinus resinosa), and eastern
white cedar (Thuja occidentalis) disappeared in the
Lake States (Ryan 2006), timber corporations
moved to easily accessible private and public
domain in the West, and then to Indian timber
(White 1992, Lewis 1995, Ryan 2006).
Federal law on Indian tribal timber has gone through
three tortuous and distinct stages. The following
sections briefly define the context of ownership and
control of tribal timber: 1) a broad prohibition on
the sale of Indian timber, 2) a restricted ability to
sell dead timber, and 3) a restricted ability to sell
any timber.
United States v. Cook (86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 591 1873),
in 1873, marks the first case to decide the legal status
of Indian timber. In United States v. Cook, the United
States sued to recover possession of logs sold by
Oneida Indians to a non-Indian, George Cook. The
Court ruled that Indians had no more right to sell
logs than to sell the land itself. The Circuit Court
for the Eastern District of Wisconsin viewed Indian
rights to reservation lands and to the timber upon it
as rights of occupancy only. In United States v.
Cook, the judges ruled:
The timber while standing is a part of the
realty, and it can only be sold as the land
could be. The land cannot be sold by the
Indians and consequently the timber, until
rightfully severed, cannot be ...
The timber was cut for sale and nothing
else. Under such circumstances, when cut,
it became the property of the United States

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
absolutely, discharged of any rights of the
Indians therein ...
To maintain his title under his purchase it
is incumbent on the purchaser to show the
timber was rightfully severed from the land. 
(86. U.S. (19 Wall.) at 593 1873.) 
This narrow view was based on rulings in Johnson
v. McIntosh and Cherokee Nation v. Georgia that fee
title to tribal lands belongs to the United States.
In 1883, the approach of United States v. Cook was
mirrored in the Act of 3 March, which provided
among other things that “the proceeds of all
pasturage and sales of timber, coal, or other products
of any Indian reservation, shall be covered into the
Treasury ...” (22 Stat. 590 (Code of Federal
Regulations 25 U.S.C. § 197)). As the Indians did
not own the resources on the reservations, all
revenue from those resources belonged to the
United States and was properly deposited into the
Treasury of the United States. Even after the General
Allotment Act made the individualization of tribal
or communal lands generally possible, the Attorney
General of the United States determined that the rule
of United States v. Cook also applied to Indian
individuals’ land allotments (United States v.
Mitchell, 19 Op. Atty. Gen. 232 1889).
The Act of 7 June 1897 (30 Stat. 90 (Code of Federal
Regulations 25 U.S.C. § 197) allowed Indian
reservations in Minnesota to harvest and sell dead
timber, whether standing or fallen. This authority
was extended to other reservations by the Act of 16
February 1889 (25 Stat. 673 (Code of Federal
Regulations 25 U.S.C. § 196). Both the 1897 and
1889 acts authorized the adoption of regulations by
the Secretary of the Interior. One of the conditions
that the Commissioner of Indian Affairs imposed
on timber sales under these acts was that 10% of the
gross proceeds derived from the sales should go to
the stumpage or poor fund of the tribe, from which
the old, sick, and otherwise helpless might be
supported (Pine River Logging & Improvement Co.
v. United States 1902 186 U.S. 279, 285). Thus, the
regulations sought to ensure that the timber would
provide some communal benefit, in addition to the
individual employment opportunities created by
these acts.
The 1889 Act met requirements of the Non-
Intercourse Act as to timber sales within its scope,
and it led to many Indian timber sales as well as to
widespread abuse in the Great Lakes region (Pine
River Logging & Improvement Co. v. United States 
1902, Green v. Menominee Tribe 1914, and others).
Pine and cedar in the Lake States was logged off
public and Indian lands. Lumbermen took financial
advantage of many tribes, with no federal oversight.
From the 1870s to roughly 1890, three national
issues influenced the lumber industry and
Wisconsin’s Indian reservations. They were: (1) the
development of federal regulations to sell Indian
timber, (2) the prevention of development of federal
regulations to sell Indian timber, and (3) the shift
from reservation policy to allotment policy
(Godfrey 1996). In 1888, Congress passed
legislation to address the timber trespass on Indian
reservations (Godfrey 1996).
In the Act of 25 June 1910 (Code of Federal
Regulations 36 Stat. 858; 43 U. S. C. 148), Congress
made a concerted effort to intensify the management
and productivity of a wide variety of Indian
properties and federal programs for Indians. The
Act substantially amended the General Allotment
Act of 1887, provided for heirship proceedings
conducted by the Interior Department for deceased
allottees, regulated wills made by Indians, tightened
the criminal penalties for timber trespass or fire
damage to Indian lands, authorized reserving Indian
lands for reservoir and power purposes, and
authorized allottees to lease their properties, among
other provisions.
In 1911, the Interior Department promulgated
detailed regulations for Indian forest management
that were intended “to obtain the greatest revenue
for the Indians consistent with a proper protection
and improvement of the forests” (USDI Office of
Indian Affairs 1911).
However, until the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA;
1934), both individual and tribal forest lands
continued to suffer from timber trespass and abuse
under the Act of 1910. The new legislation instead
bridled the intensive use of Indian timber. Section
6 of the IRA provided:
The Secretary of the Interior is directed to
make rules and regulations for the
operations and management of Indian
forestry on the principle of sustained-yield
management, to restrict the number of
livestock grazed on Indian range units to

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
the estimated caring capacity of such
ranges, and to promulgate such other rules
and regulations as may be necessary to
protect the range from deterioration, to
prevent soil erosion, to assure full
utilization of the range, and like purposes. 
(Code of Federal Regulations 25 U.S.C.
§ 466; emphasis added.) 
One of the key sponsors of the IRA, Representative
Edgar Howard, explained that the sustained-yield
requirement was intended to “assure that the Indian
forests will be permanently productive and will
yield continuous revenues to the tribes” (78 Cong.
Rec. 11730 1934). With regard to Indian timber
trespass, John Collier, the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs, stated “we have to stop the slaughtering of
Indian timber lands, to operate them on a perpetual
yield basis and the bill expressly directs that this
principle of conservation shall be applied
throughout” (Hearings on H.R. 7902 before the
House Committee on Indian Affairs, 73rd Cong.,
2nd Sess. Part 1 at 35 1934).
It was not until the BIA began management of Indian
forest lands (timber harvesting and management)
that regulation and timber harvesting on Indian
forest lands took place (Indian Timber Sales Act of
1964). The trust responsibility under the BIA is to
regulate and oversee timber harvesting on Indian
forest lands for production, development, and
protection of tribal timber resources (United States
v. Cook 1873, United States v. Shoshone Tribe of
Indians 1938, Indian Timber Sales Act 1964).
Pursuant to the Indian Timber Sales Act (1964),
tribes were able to harvest timber on their
reservations and the United States federal
government began to allow more Indian tribal
access to the benefits accruing from the sale of
reservation timber (Yazzie 2006). Tribal timber
corporations and government-managed timber sales
brought a level of economic prosperity after World
War II. However, the early efforts of the BIA and
Forest Service officials to manage timber resources
were directed at outlawing beneficial Indian fires in
the fire-dependent landscapes of the West (Lewis
1973, White 1992, Lewis 1995, Godfrey 1996).
TRUST RESPONSIBILITY, AND TRIBAL
SELF-DETERMINATION AND
GOVERNANCE OF OLD GROWTH: THE
“MODERN” CONTEXT
The National Indian Forest Resource Management
Act (1990) and the Code of Federal Regulations (25
C.F.R. 163 et seq.) currently outline forest
management in Indian country. In addition, the
Tribal Forest Protection Act (2004) opens the door
for stewardship agreements with adjacent federal
agencies to reduce the threat of fire, insects, and
disease to tribal lands. The National Forest
Management Act (1976) does not regulate Indian
forest lands or management. Tribal lands are not
public lands and are held under the trust
responsibility of the Federal government. There is
a government-to-government relationship between
federally recognized Indian tribes and the federal
government. President G. W. Bush’s Executive
Memorandum in 2004 states:
The United States has a unique legal and
political relationship with Indian tribes and
a special relationship with Alaska Native
entities as provided in the Constitution of
the United States, treaties, and federal
statutes. Presidents for decades have
recognized this relationship. President
Nixon announced a national policy of self-
determination for Indian tribes in 1970.
More recently, Executive Order 13175,
entitled “Consultation and Coordination
with Indian Tribal Governments,” was
issued 
in 
2000. 
I 
reiterated 
my
Administration’s adherence to a government-
to-government relationship and support for
tribal sovereignty and self-determination
earlier this year in Executive Order 13336,
entitled American Indian and Alaskan
Native Education. (Bush 2004.) 
Thus, each federal agency must have a process to
ensure meaningful and timely input by tribal
officials in the development of regulatory and other
polices with substantial direct effects on one or more
tribes, on the relationship between the federal
government and tribes, or on distribution of power
between the federal government and tribes.
In the Department of the Interior, the BIA’s mission
is “to enhance the quality of life, to promote
economic opportunity, and to carry out the

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
responsibility to protect and improve the trust assets
of American Indians, Indian tribes and Alaska
Natives” (Mission Statement of the Bureau of
Indian Affairs). The BIA responsibility is the
administration and management of 22.5 million ha
(55.7 million acres) of land held in trust by the
United States for American Indians, Indian tribes,
and Alaska Natives. However, each federal agency
shares in this trust responsibility.
Tribal people manage their landscape differently
than public land or private land managers because
the laws mandated through Congress differ in Indian
country (Yazzie-Durglo 1998, Yazzie 2006).
However, the principles of the Doctrine of
Discovery remain evident in federal Indian law and
in the self-determination era of the federal–Indian
relationship in that the United States continues to
have dominant control over tribal politics,
commercial and real estate issues, and the sale or
use of trust-allotted lands held by individual Indians
(Cross 2003, Yazzie 2006). Despite the trust status,
the most significant factor in tribal management is
that tribal cultures and economies are motivated by
a strong sense of connectivity to the land and ethical
duty (Yazzie 2006) to protect their interests for the
generations to come (Morishima 2006).
One can postulate that a similarity exists between
the reduction of old-growth forests and the decline
of Native American populations, which have been
forced to assimilate, and the outlawing of their TEK
practices, such as the use of fire.
Native American lands decreased in size from 56.7
million ha (140 million acres) in 1887 to 20.2
million ha (50 million acres) by 1934 (Cohen 1941,
Monette 1995), with a checkerboard land ownership
pattern on some reservations due to the General
Allotment Act. Tribes now possess and manage
about 6.5 million ha (16 million acres) of valuable
tracts of forests land on 214 reservations in 23 states
(Intertribal Timber Council 1993). Half of these
acres are considered commercial timberlands, and
the rest are woodlands (Intertribal Timber Council
1993). The percentage of old-growth forests on
Indian reservations collectively is unknown, as is
the percentage of old-growth forests on public lands.
We do know that the expansion of the United States,
which includes timber exploitation, intense
overgrazing, and fire-suppression policies, dramatically
reduced the quantity and quality of old-growth
forests on both public and tribal landscapes.
The Indian Affairs Manual (USDI BIA 2006) states,
“Indian forests are closely linked to the well being
of Indian communities (53 IAM 2006, p. 3), and
forest management must recognize the needs of the
community along with other social and economic
programs. Within the manual, the BIA ensures
adequate forestry programs, and promotes direction
for forest management polices and procedures.
However, given the distinctive differences in Indian
tribes, and unique differences in forest management,
tribal membership concerns, etc., old-growth
characteristics are undefined, and should remain so
in Indian country.
TRIBAL PERSPECTIVE ON OLD-GROWTH
FORESTS: “GROWING GENERATIONS”
AND SELF-DETERMINATION
The difference in forest management in Indian
country is that, at the heart of tribal cultures and
other indigenous cultures of the United States, there
is a strong bond between the health and welfare of
the tribal people and the natural environment
(Pecore 1992, Kimmerer and Lake 2001). Most
Native Peoples understand that the environment is
a blend of what is known as science and
management (Pecore 1992, Yazzie-Pina and
Covington 1994, Wolfey 1998, Yazzie 2006).
Indeed, tribal communities have been preserved for
centuries because of their knowledge of the natural,
spiritual, 
and 
ecological 
world, 
and 
their
understanding and respect for the interconnectedness
between humans and all other living things (Moller
et al. 2004). Additionally, tribal people possess a
culture-based knowledge of ecosystems that has
evolved and accumulated, and is continually tested
and improved to maintain tribal existence (Kellert
and Wilson 1993, Garibaldi and Turner 2004). The
collection and use of this complex knowledge of the
natural world is an integral part of any tribal
decision-making process in the management of
timber resources today (Pecore 1992, Yazzie-
Durglo 1998, Yazzie 2006).
Baptiste Ritchie, a Lil’wat territory elder, gives an
account of past fire use that maintained the forest
habitat 
conditions 
that 
produced 
culturally
important species in British Columbia:
If you go to burn then you get into trouble
because the white men want to grow trees.
Because they changed our ways they do
good for us and we eat the food that the

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
white men use. Then we forget the good food
of our earliest forefathers. ...Now they have
all disappeared because the hills grow
weedy and no-one seems to tend them, no-
one clears them as our forefathers did so
thoroughly. (Turner 1991, p. 62.) 
Diné CARE (Citizens Against Ruining the
Environment), an environmental activist group on
the Navajo Nation, fought against and were
instrumental in closing down the Navajo Forest
Products Industry in the early 1990s. They described
old growth as “grandfather” trees. However, old
growth goes far beyond the physical appearance of
older-aged trees that have specific diameter caps.
Old growth can be associated with a combination
of grandfather trees with an understory of multi-
cohort recruitment trees to replace the aging
grandfathers. As part of the Navajo philosophy, the
health and well-being of the people is associated
with the health and well-being of the environment.
This includes living within the carrying capacity of
the land, agriculturally and as a people, and may
bring 
more 
equity 
in 
determining 
forest
management 
for 
future 
generations. 
Forest
management is essential to Navajo forestry, and
preserving the forests only shows neglect and
undermines Navajo conservation practices.
The perception of old growth was developed by the
non-Indian community. Old-growth structure and
condition were a product of Native American fire-
use practice. The use of fire to maintain, cultivate,
and enhance certain habitat conditions gave Native
Peoples culturally important resources. Old-growth
remnants are rare or gone in most forests, and most
remaining forests today are second- or third-growth.
The impetus for maintaining and restoring old
growth is to satisfy the aesthetic, spiritual, cultural,
and ecologic cravings of society today, and is a
worthy goal.
SUMMARY
Since the arrival of European-Americans, Doctrine
of Discovery principles have influenced and
permeated American Indian laws, policies,
traditions, and natural resources. The Doctrine of
Discovery constitutes a double blow to indigenous
rights because it validates the extension of foreign
sovereign authority over indigenous peoples
without their consent, violating the precepts of self-
determination. The underlying impetus of the
Doctrine was also to discriminate against
indigenous people on the basis of race, preventing
any legal security or stability on their communal
lands and promoting the property rights of non-
indigenous people. However, change is in the wind
as promising avenues of self-determination and self-
governance of tribal resources have begun to more
strongly influence natural resource management
and policy changes, and enhance trust responsibility.
Coupled with culture-based knowledge and tribal
self-governance and determination (Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act 1975,
amended 1988, Tribal Self-Governance Law 1994),
tribes are now asserting their inherent right to self-
governance to manage natural resources under the
protection of the federal government’s BIA and
within the guidelines of sustained-yield management
(National Indian Forest Resource Management Act
1990).
More importantly for Native American tribes, the
land base remains an ancestral entity that is revered
for the most part because of the importance of the
memories it holds for their culture. Together with
self-governance principles, Native American tribes
can now tailor silvicultural treatments that reflect a
cultural ethic, and restore and conserve old-growth
structure while still satisfying economic needs
(Yazzie 2006). Silvicultural strategies that foster
multi-cohort stand structure and conserve large, tall,
fire-adapted trees (which take longer to grow) may
satisfy both short-term economic incentives and
long-term biological and sociocultural considerations.
Tribal control of silvicultural treatments can thus
reflect the tribes’ desires and enhance culturally
important resources rather than those of the federal
government.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/responses/
LITERATURE CITED
Anderson, M. K. 2005. Tending the wild: Native
American knowledge and the management of
California’s natural resources. University of
California Press, Ltd., Berkeley and Los Angeles,
California, USA.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
Bush, G. W. 2004. Memorandum for the heads of
Executive departments and agencies: government-
to-government relationship with tribal governments.
White House, Office of the Press Secretary,
Washington, D.C., USA. (online) URL: http://www
.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2004/09/20040923-4.
html.
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia. 1831. 30 U.S. (5 Pet.)
1, 8 L.Ed. 25.
Code of Federal Regulations. 25 C.F.R. §§ 163 et
seq.; § 196; § 197; § 466; and 36 Stat. 858; 43 U. S.
C. 148
Cohen, F. S. 1941. Handbook of Federal Indian law. 
United States Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Cronon, W. 1983. Changes in the land: Indians,
colonists, and the ecology of New England. Hill and
Wang, New York, New York, USA. 
Cross, R. 1998. Sovereign bargains, Indian takings,
and the preservation of Indian country in the twenty-
first century. Arizona Law Review 40(425):.
———. 2003. The federal trust duty in an age o f
Indian self-determination: an epitaph for a dying
doctrine? Tulsa Law Review 39(369):.
Delcourt, H. R., and P. A. Delcourt. 1997. Pre-
columbian Native American use of fire on southern
Appalachian landscapes. Conservation Biology 11
(4):1010–1014.
Garibaldi, A., and N. Turner. 2004. Cultural
keystone species: Implications for ecological
conservation and restoration. Ecology and Society 
9(3):1–18.
General Allotment Act. 1887. 24 Statute 388.
Getches, D. H., D. F. Wilkinson, and R. A.
Williams, Jr. 1993. Federal Indian law. West
Publishing Co., St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.
Godfrey, A. 1996. A forestry history of ten
Wisconsin Indian reservations under the Great
Lakes Agency: pre-contact to the present. United
States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian
Affairs, Branch of Forestry, Minneapolis Area
Office, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
Green v. Menominee Tribe of Indians in
Wisconsin. 1914. 233 U.S. 558.
Indian Reorganization (Wheeler-Howard) Act. 
1934. 25 U.S.C.A. § 461 et seq.
Indian Self-Determination Act Amendments. 
1994. Public Law No. 103-413, tit. 2, 108 Stat. 4250.
Indian 
Self-Determination 
and 
Education
Assistance Act. 1975. 25 U.S.C. §§ 450 et seq.; Title
III, Public Law 93-638.
Indian Timber Sales Act. 1964. Public Law No.
88-301, 78 Stat. 186 (codified at 25 U.S.C. §407
(1994).
Intertribal Timber Council (ITC). 1993. An
assessment of Indian forests and forest management
in the United States III-13. The Indian Forest
Management Assessment Team, Portland, Oregon,
USA.
Johnson v. McIntosh. 1823. 21 U.S. (8 Wheat.) 543.
Kellert, S. R., and E. O. Wilson. 1993. The
biophilia hypothesis. Island Press, Washington, D.
C., USA.
Lewis, D. R. 1995. Native Americans and the
environment: a survey of twentieth-century issues.
American Indian Quarterly 19(3):423–477.
Lewis, H. T. 1973. Patterns of Indian burning in
California: ecology and ethnohistory. Ballena
Press, Ramona, California, USA.
Mettler, E. 1978. A unified theory of Indian tribal
sovereignty. Hastings Law Journal 30:89–113.
Miller, R. 2005. The doctrine of discovery in
American Indian law. Idaho Law Review 42(1):1–
122.
Moller, H., F. Berkes, P. O’Brian Lyver, and M.
Kislalioglu. 
2004. 
Combining 
science 
and
traditional ecological knowledge: monitoring
populations for co-management. Ecology and
Society 9(3): 2. (online) URL: http://www.ecologya
ndsociety.org/vol9/iss3/art2/.
Monette, R. A. 1995. Governing private property
in Indian country: the double edge sword of the trust
responsibility arising out of early Supreme Court

Ecology and Society 12(2): 21
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art21/
decisions and the general allotment act. New Mexico
Law Review 25:35, 39.
Morishima, G. 2006. A school of red herring.
Evergreen Winter:17–20.
National Forest Management Act. 1976. 16 U.S.C.
A. §§ 1601 et seq. (partially revised in 1991).
National Indian Forest Resource Management
Act. 1990. 25 U.S.C.A. §§ 3101 et seq.,; Public Law
101-603.; 104 Stat. 4532-4544.
Pecore, M. 1992. Menominee sustained-yield
management: a successful land ethic in practice.
Journal of Forestry 90(1):12–16.
Pevar, S. L. 1992. The rights of Indians and tribes. 
Second edition. Southern Illinois University Press,
Carbondale, Illinois, USA.
Pine River Logging & Improvement Co. v. United
States. 1902. 186 U.S. 279.
Robertson, L. G. 2005. Conquest by law: how the
discovery of Amrica disposessed indigenous
peoples of their land. Columbia University, New
York, New York, USA.
Ryan, J. C. 2006. Minnesota cedar. The Voice of
the Timber Industry Timber Bulletin 62:30–33.
Simpson, L. R. 2004. Anti-colonial strategies for
the recovery and maintenance of indigenous
knowledge. American Indian Quarterly 28(3–
4):373–382.
Stewart, O. 2002. Forgotten fires: Native
Americans and the transient wilderness. University
of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Oklahoma, USA.
Tribal Forest Protection Act. 2004. Public Law No.
108-278, H.R. 3846.
Tribal Self-Governance Law. 1994. Title IV, Pub.
Law 93-638.; 108 Stat. 4250.
Turner, N. 1991. Burning mountain sides for better
crops: aboriginal landscape burning in British
Columbia. Archaeology in Montana 32(2):57–73.
United States v. Cook. 1873. 86 U.S. (19 wall. 591,
22 L.Ed. 210).
United States Department of the Interior (USDI)
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). 2006. 53 Indian
Affairs manual, Chapter 1, Forestry, policies,
authorities and responsibilities. 1.4 Scope. USDI,
BIA, Washington, D.C., USA.
United States v. Mitchell. 1983. 463 U.S. 206; 1980.
445 U.S. 535.
United States Department of the Interior (USDI)
Office of Indian Affairs. 1911. Regulations and
Instructions for Officers in Charge of Forests on
Indian Reservations. USDI Office of Indian Affairs,
Washington, D.C., USA.
United States v. Shoshone Tribe of Wind River in
Wyoming. 1938. 304 U.S. 111.
White, R. 1992. Indian land use and the National
forests. Pages 173–179 in H. K. Steen, editor.
Origins of the national forests: a centennial
symposium. Forest History Society, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
Wilson, A. C. 1996. American Indian history or
non-Indian perceptions of American Indian history.
American Indian Quarterly 20(1):3–5.
Wolfey, J. 1998. Ecological risk assessment and
management: their failure to value indigenous
traditional ecological knowledge and protect tribal
homelands. American Indian Culture and Research
Journal 22(2):151–169.
Worchester v. Georgia. 1832. 31 U.S. (6 Pet.).
Yazzie, V. 2006. A cultural ethic in tribal forest
management and self-determination: the human
dimension of silviculture. Dissertation, University
of Montana, Missoula, Montana, USA.
Yazzie-Durglo, V. 1998. The right to change tribal
forest management. Journal of Forestry 96(11):33–
35.
Yazzie-Pina, V., and W. W. Covington. 1994.
Conservation biology, restoration ecology, and a
Navajo view of nature. Pages 122–124 in W. W.
Covington 
and 
L. 
F. 
DeBano, 
technical
coordinators. Sustainable ecological systems:
implementing an ecological approach to land
management. 
U.S. 
Forest 
Service 
General
Technical Report RM-247.
