A Guide for Residents of
Southwestern Ponderosa
Pine Forests
Forest
Restoration
for Homeowners
Historically, most southwestern ponderosa pine forests were fairly
open, with clumps of large pines and many grasses.
I
f you live among ponderosa pines, you can
reduce fire risks to your home and property
by carrying out restoration-based
landscaping and fire-prevention projects
around your house. Use these tips as guides
toward restoring ecological health and living
safely in the Southwest’s beautiful, but fire-prone,
ponderosa pine forests.
Fire in the forest
Fire has always been a part of ponderosa pine
forests. It provides nutrients to plants and
maintains open forest stands. But fire today is
unlike what it once was.
Fire has changed because our forests have
changed. Previously, low-intensity fires burned
ponderosa pine forests every few years, charring
the ground but leaving large trees standing. By
removing dead needles and thinning young pines,
fire stimulated native wildflowers, shrubs, and
grasses.
Humans allowed few of these healthy fires to burn
in the twentieth century. As a result, forests grew
dense with small, highly flammable pines. Those
thickets can carry ground fires into tree crowns,
creating dangerous and fast-moving fires that can
kill large trees, destroy buildings, and threaten
lives.
What’s restoration?
Forest restoration thins dense stands and uses
prescribed fire to protect big, old trees and lower
the risk of catastrophic wildfire. By reducing
competition for water and nutrients, restoration
improves the health of remaining trees, allowing
them to better resist drought and bark-beetle
attack. It also promotes growth of grasses,
wildflowers, and shrubs. That’s good for wildlife—
and for people.
How to starve a fire
Armies of firefighters can’t prevent fire from
burning southwestern ponderosa pine forests—but
we can help control fire by controlling the fuels it

Beyond 100 feet from your house
• Remove “ladder fuels” to reduce crown fire danger. At
distances over 100 feet from the house, you can lower the
danger of crown fire without losing the forest’s natural
qualities. Do so by removing small trees and dead, dangling
branches that could carry fire from the ground into the tree
canopy. Be sure to remove thinned materials promptly.
• Protect big, old trees. Large pines provide important wildlife
habitat, increase property values, and look great. The same
actions that can protect your house will help to protect old
trees: rake pine needles and woody debris at least 2 feet away
from their trunks, and trim nearby small trees and shrubs that
could carry fire into their crowns.
• Think clumps. You can leave some clumps of dense trees and
shrubs standing for visual screening or for wildlife habitat, as
long as they’re separated from your house and from one
another by defensible open space—and placed so they can’t
carry fire into the crowns of large trees.
• Think openings. Openings with grasses and other low
vegetation are important for many wildlife species, and can
help stop a fire.
• Think wildlife habitat. Living trees with dead branches are
particularly important for birds such as woodpeckers and
bluebirds; so are scattered patches of denser vegetation.
• Clear out piles of downed logs and branches. Remove heavy
accumulations of downed brush and logs. If you or firefighters
burn piles to get rid of this material, make sure they are far
enough from remaining trees to avoid scorching living crowns.
• Consider prescribed burning. Prescribed fires can help reduce
dangerous fuel accumulations and stimulate grass and
wildflower growth. Check with your fire department—some
conduct prescribed burns on private land.
Landscaping ideas
You can help increase fire resistance—and provide good wildlife
habitat—through smart landscaping. Fire-safe landscaping can
include varied wildlife habitats and low-water-use plants that
conserve precious water supplies.
• Mow grasses and wildflowers low around shrubs, trees, and
buildings. This can interrupt a fire’s fuel ladder.
• Plants nearest your home should be widely-spaced and low-
growing. Consider low, native ground covers—see page 4 for
ideas.
• Keep plants immediately around your house well-watered and
well-maintained. Regular watering, and removal of dead leaves
and branches, can help reduce fire danger.
• Don’t plant in large masses that can intensify fire. Use small,
irregular clusters of plants. If you plant trees or shrubs for
privacy, place them in “islands” at a distance from buildings or
large trees.
• Use decorative rock, gravel, and stepping stones for
landscaping and paths. They can break up ground fuels.
• Use mulch to conserve water and inhibit weed growth. Rock
mulch, cinders, or gravel can maintain soil moisture without
increasing fire danger.
• Use native plants that tolerate local conditions. For a list of
native, fire-resistant plants, consult your local Cooperative
County Extension office, botanic garden, planning department,
or garden club.
needs. The key lies in ensuring that fire travels on the ground,
where firefighters can combat it, rather than in tree crowns,
where they cannot. You can do this by controlling fuels on your
property in three different zones.
Around your house
• Replace your roof and siding with fire-resistant materials.
Embers from even a distant fire can ignite flammable wood
shingles. Consider fire-resistant materials when it’s time for
construction, repair, or replacement. Ask your city or county
building department for more information.
• Remove flammable materials from around your house. Remove
pine needles and other flammable materials from your roof
and gutters. Ensure that branches don’t hang over the roof or
grow under eaves. Rake fallen leaves and pine needles away
from your home’s foundation, creating a 2-foot-wide
perimeter down to bare mineral soil. Move firewood and
propane tanks well away from the house. Make sure that wood
fences, walkways, and decks don’t allow fire to spread to your
house.
• Have tools and water ready for fire. Maintain an outdoor water
supply, with a hose and nozzle that can deliver water to all
parts of your home and yard. Store fire-fighting tools (rakes,
hoes, axes, shovels) in an accessible place.
Within 100 feet of your house
• Create a defensible zone around buildings. Ensure that fire
cannot spread within 100 feet of your house or other
buildings. In this zone, mow dry grasses and weeds; prune
branches of taller trees to a height of between 6 to 10 feet;
remove dead limbs, fallen leaves, and other dry fuels; keep
plants watered; and maintain open space between tree crowns.
• Clear pine needles, leaves, and branches. Dispose of heavy
accumulations of pine needles, fallen leaves, and other
flammable materials.
• Allow good access. Maintain a wide, uncluttered driveway with
sufficient vertical and horizontal clearance to allow fire
engines to enter and to turn around. Post your house number
so that it is visible from the street.
Careful prescribed
fires can reduce fuel
accumulations and
wildfire risk.

• Choose fire-resistant plants. Many native southwestern plants
resist fire. Some have succulent leaves that store moisture and
don’t burn readily.
• Use deciduous plants for privacy and wildlife habitat. Many
deciduous trees have low resin content, are less flammable
than evergreens, and attract birds and mammals. Native shrubs
can also provide visual screening and wildlife food and cover.
• Leave extra space on slopes. Fire travels more quickly up slopes
than on flat ground, so make sure tall, woody plants or
groupings on slopes are spaced widely. Well-maintained native
perennial ground covers can control erosion without
significant fuel increases.
• Create rock piles rather than brush piles. Try providing cover
for wildlife with rocks rather than with piled dead brush.
• Control invasive species. Such nonnative plants as Dalmatian
toadflax, cheatgrass, and spotted knapweed threaten natural
forest diversity. Some of these species readily carry fire.
Prevent their spread by mulching, maintaining native plants,
and avoiding unnecessary soil disturbance. If they appear,
hand-weeding and selective herbicide use can control them.
Living with smoke
Fire is here to stay in southwestern ponderosa pine forests. To
help prevent wildfires from reaching private property, land
managers often treat surrounding forests with thinning and
prescribed burning to reduce fuel loads.
Prescribed fire produces smoke—but much less than an
uncontrollable, dangerous wildfire does. The choice is simple: if
we refuse to tolerate occasional light smoke from controlled,
prescribed fires, we will probably experience heavy smoke from
unpredictable and dangerous wildfires at some time.
Smoke will sometimes be carried long distances by wind, or into
drainages in the cool of evening. Areas far from the fire can
become smoky. Forest managers work to minimize smoke
impacts, and typically give advance warning of prescribed burns.
Contact the agency conducting burns if you have concerns
about smoke; many have plans for warning and temporarily
moving people who are sensitive to smoke.
Where to go for help
• Ask your local fire department or Cooperative County
Extension office. Some fire departments will help in marking
trees before thinning; some also assist with thinning and
prescribed burning on private land. They can refer you to
contractors who thin trees and clear brush.
• Find extension information online (see below). Extension
services have compiled many publications on rural home fire
safety, fire-resistant landscaping, invasive species, and related
topics.
• Check out Firewise information. See www.firewise.org for
more information about home fire protection.
Landscape for privacy and
wildlife with clumps
separated by open space.
Protect big trees by removing
fuels under them.
Stack firewood away from
your house and other
buildings.
Maintain good access.
Trim branches away
from your roof.
Fireproof around
exterior walls.
Remove low-hanging
branches near your house.
Keep grasses
mowed low near
your house.
Arizona: www.ag.arizona.edu/extension/firewise
Colorado: www.colostate.edu/Depts/CSFS/homefire.html
New Mexico: www.emnrd.state.nm.us/forestry/20Communities/Handbook_TOC.htm
Utah: www.extension.usu.edu/publica/natrpub2.htm
Extension
information
online
Writer: Anne Minard; Editor: Peter Friederici; Drawing: Emery Edwards; Produced by the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University

Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
2ERI 35AE
Trees
Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii)
Quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides)
New Mexico locust (Robinia neomexicana)
Box elder (Acer negundo)
Rocky Mountain maple (Acer glabrum)
Shrubs
Buffaloberry (Shepherdia spp.)
Snowberries (Symphoricarpos spp.)
Utah serviceberry (Amelanchier utahensis)
Wild roses (Rosa spp.)
Three-leaf sumac (Rhus trilobata)
Golden currant (Ribes aureum)
Fendler’s buckbrush (Ceanothus fendleri)
Grasses
Blue grama (Bouteloua gracilis)
Arizona fescue (Festuca arizonica)
Indian ricegrass (Achnatherum
hymenoides)
Western wheatgrass (Pascopyrum smithii)
Mountain muhly (Muhlenbergia montana)
Muttongrass (Poa fendleriana)
Prairie junegrass (Koeleria macrantha)
Little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium)
Wildflowers
Common yarrow (Achillea millefolium)
Silvery lupine (Lupinus argenteus)
Blue flax (Linum perenne)
Penstemons or beardtongues
(Penstemon spp.)
Coneflowers (Echinacea, Ratibida, and
Rudbeckia spp.)
Ground Covers
Creeping barberry (Mahonia repens)
Cinquefoil (Potentilla spp.)
Kinnikinnick (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi)
Prairie smoke (Geum triflorum)
Alum root (Heuchera spp.)
Pussytoes (Antennaria spp.)
Native Plants for Landscaping
• Work with your homeowners’ association. Planning for
subdivision fire protection can help protect all the homes
within it.
• Learn how to landscape for wildlife. For tips, see
www.nwf.org/backyardwildlifehabitat.
• Plant natives. See Native Plants for High-Elevation Gardens
(Fulcrum Press, 2003) or Beyond the Ponderosa: Successful
Landscape Trees for Higher Elevations in the Southwest
(Flagstaff Community Tree Board, 1998) for landscaping ideas;
check with a botanic garden or native plant society; or see
www.hort.usu.edu/natives/nurseries/Alpha.html for a list of
native plant nurseries in your area.
• Get to know your local weeds. Visit www.weedcenter.org or
www.usgs.nau.edu/SWEPIC for guides to identification and
control of noxious plants.
• Contact your state forest service. State foresters can provide
advice, and sometimes can arrange cost-sharing plans for
private landowners interested in thinning forest land through
the National Fire Plan; see www.stateforesters.org for a
directory.
• Contact the Ecological Restoration Institute for information
about forest ecology and restoration. Visit our website at
www.eri.nau.edu, or call us at 928-523-7182.
NAU Creative Communications A49868/20M/12-02 • NAU is an Equal Employment/Affirmative Action Institution    
Printed on recycled stock using renewable ink.
