 
 
Rodeo fire chases its fighters 
By ANNE MINARD 
Sun Staff Reporter 
06/22/2002 
SHOW LOW -- Severe winds and extreme 
fire behavior whipped up the Rodeo fire 
Friday, making it too risky to send 
firefighters to dig a line around the racing 
inferno.  
"This fire is going to raise its head and get 
up and run today," Jim Paxon, lead 
information officer, told reporters at 
Friday's daily briefing. "We are very much 
not in control."  
Infrared monitoring put the fire at 120,000 
acres Friday morning -- not the 85,000 tha
was previously reported. By the end of the day, the fire was estimated to have grown by
only 10,000 acres, not nearly as much as officials predicted -- but the fire was also
erratic, making it dangerous for firefighters and keepi
 
 
Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Sun The sun emerges from 
thick smoke from the Rodeo Fire as it sets along 
Highway 77 near Holbrook Friday.  
t 
 
 highly 
ng residents on edge for miles.  
Officials say calmer winds predicted for today may spell hope for firefighters, whose 
primary tactic Friday was to get out of the way. By Friday night, more than 1,000 
personnel had arrived to fight the fire, along with 21 bulldozers, 40 engines, 18 water 
tender trucks and four helicopters. The main tool used in Friday's firefighting efforts were 
bulldozers, used to try to clear fuel from the fire's path.  
Fire crews still feared that the Rodeo fire would combine with the smaller 15,000-acre 
Chediski fire, burning just 12 miles away, within days. If that happens, the combined 
blaze will have reached an estimated 300,000 acres -- easily the largest Western fire this 
year.  
The FBI and the Bureau of Indian Affairs are investigating the cause of the Rodeo fire, 
but have released no leads.  
At least 20 Pinedale homes were destroyed in the blaze, though no official damage 
estimates are expected until Monday. Though there were no further evacuations after the 
4,000 residents of Linden, Pinedale and Clay Springs were forced out Tuesday, 
evacuation alerts remain in effect for Pinetop, Lakeside, Hon-Dah and Show Low.  

As of 10 p.m. Friday, residents of Show Low -- previously the most threatened town -- 
were told to get a good night of sleep because the immediate danger had passed.  
Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., who surveyed the fires by plane Friday afternoon, said he 
expects President Bush to declare the 10-by-15-mile fire a federal disaster area.  
"I have no doubt it meets every qualification," he said.  
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKFIRE  
McCain blamed fire-supressed forests crowded with trees for allowing the blaze to burn 
hot and fast through the forested areas -- and lawsuits for blocking the thinning efforts 
that could save forests from catastrophic blazes.  
"We've been discussing this for years," he said. "Efforts have been hampered by lawsuits, 
delays, violations of the Clean Air Act. We need to change these policies so clearing can 
take place."  
McCain was in Flagstaff last month discussing the same topic with members of the 
Ecological Restoration Institute, housed at Northern Arizona University, which advocates 
thinning to reduce forest fuel. The problem, they agreed, was that entrepreneurs are 
reluctant to start businesses that would use small-diameter timber without a guaranteed 
supply -- and that supply is put at risk when so-called extreme environmental groups put 
up roadblocks to logging.  
"You're not going to get to clear the forests ... unless there's a commercial industry to 
come in, harvest this wood and make money off of it," McCain said Friday.  
NATURE RULES RODEO  
But for the Rodeo Fire -- with its horizon-wide plume of thick smoke that stretches from 
Two Guns, 20 miles east of Flagstaff, to Albuquerque, N.M. -- it's too late for 
preventative medicine. At this point, the name of the game seems to be to stay out of its 
way.  
"Mother Nature is in control," Paxon said.  
Under his direction, firefighters have been on standby for their own safety at a base 
camp, set up in the playing fields at Show Low High School. Dozens of fire crews -- 
about 700 individuals -- from all over the West passed their time Friday in fierce, 
relentless winds while the smoke billowed ominously over their heads. In reality, the 
blaze was more than 8 miles from base camp, but seemed much closer because of its size.  
Crew members from the San Carlos, Ariz., Fire Crew laughed and ribbed each other as 
they threw games of horseshoes in the playground.  

"It brings everybody out," explained Jesse Lechuga, one of the crew's squad bosses. "We 
have to relax."  
The crew was working one of the fire's flanks near the point where it started, less than a 
mile northwest of a small community called Cibeque, on Tuesday.  
"It just took off," said Gilbert Manuel, another squad boss. "It just took off in all 
directions." Manuel said flame heights exceeded 20 feet, and their bus made a narrow 
escape out.  
"When we got here it was less than a half-acre," added Lechuga. "It got out of control 
right away. The panes were dropping and dropping and dropping. But by the time they 
would refuel, it would run again."  
As he spoke, the wind whipped a tarp the crew had tied to some playground equipment 
for shade.  
"It makes us nervous," he said, eying the huge, twisted columns of smoke looming 
overhead. "That's why we're not out there. It makes the bosses nervous."  
Reporter Anne Minard can be reached at aminard@azdailysun.com or 556-2253  
 
Additional photos for this story:  
 
Greg Bryan/Arizona Daily Sun Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Southwest Firefighters Sam Martin, left, and David 
Keryte sit atop playground equipment as the Rodeo 
Fire continues to burn behind them Friday while they 
wait in the base camp at Show Low Elementary School. 
High winds made conditions too dangerous for ground 
crews to start surrounding the blaze. 
 
