Poor prospects for ponderosas 
By Cyndy Cole 
Sun Staff Reporter 
03/27/2005 
 
Dense ponderosa pine stands consumed by the Rodeo-Chediski fire are giving way to a 
more varied forest of oaks, junipers and shrubs in the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, 
according to research by two Northern Arizona University graduate students.  
The students are studying how the trees and lower-growing plants regenerate following 
the 2002 fire, comparing areas that were thinned or burned before the fire to those that 
weren't.  
The research is unfinished as of yet, but this much is clear: In the unthinned areas, which 
burned the most completely, ponderosa pines are unlikely to make a comeback for 
decades, perhaps centuries.  
The trees were wiped out thoroughly enough in some areas that there are few left to leave 
seeds to help the ponderosas regenerate, forestry graduate student Barb Strom said.  
In their place, manzanita is growing as much as 20 times thicker than average for the 
area. Gambel oaks, New Mexico locust and alligator juniper also are springing up.  
"In untreated areas, we're seeing a ton of Gambel oak regeneration, manzanita and the 
occasional ponderosa pine," Strom said.  
Two years will be put into measuring the impact of the state's largest fire on ground 
vegetation, with a second year of field work this summer by graduate student Amanda 
Kuenzi. She and Strom spent last summer on and off in the field, gathering data for their 
master's theses by examining hundreds of plots on Forest Service and White Mountain 
Apache land.  
Kuenzi is examining the overall health of the plants on the ground, the understory, 
looking for nonnative plants to invade and for other changes. The fire has opened up 
spaces where tree canopy used to block light, allowing lush growth of wildflowers and 
shrubs, she found. Nonnative species hadn't gained much of a foothold as of last year.  
"We want to just have a healthy and diverse understory community," Kuenzi said, adding 
that this study could add to understanding of how to better manage forests.  
Both say thinning forests to return them to a natural state, before fire suppression became 
the norm, is necessary based on their findings.  

Strom is trying to answer the question of what the area will look like in 50 to 100 years. 
She expects pine stands to remain in areas that didn't burn intensely and oak and 
manzanita shrubs to cover the rest. She hopes to gain a better idea of the size of each type 
of forest in coming months.  
Both students are doing research as part of NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute. Strom 
plans to graduate this spring, and Kuenzi next year.  
Reporter Cyndy Cole can be reached at ccole@azdailysun.com or at 913-8607.  
 
