 
 
Forest thinning appeals denied 
By SETH MULLER 
Sun Staff Reporter 
06/29/2004 
The Coconino National Forest rejected two appeals Monday filed by five environmental 
groups on a forest restoration project southwest of Flagstaff -- and one group does not 
anticipate a lawsuit because of another legal resolution.  
Coconino County Deputy Forest Supervisor Joe Stringer said he is upholding the Woody 
Ridge Forest Restoration Project, the third of 10 projects planned for the Flagstaff region 
in order to prevent the outbreak of catastrophic wildfire in the overgrown forest.  
The first two are under way in Fort Valley and near Kachina Village. Woody Ridge 
covers 8,600 acres in the vicinity of Woody Mountain Road.  
The Flagstaff-based Southwest Forest Alliance, the Grand Canyon chapter of the Sierra 
Club, the Center for Biological Diversity and two New Mexico groups, Forest Guardians 
and Wild Watersheds, joined to file appeal against the Woody Ridge. They contended the 
project removed too many large trees.  
"After reviewing the appeal and the project record I have determined that the Woody 
Ridge project is in full compliance with applicable laws and regulations," said Stringer, 
the recently named deputy supervisor at the Coconino. "In addition, it will provide 
healthier forest conditions while decreasing the risks of major forest fires."  
Under the new Healthy Forest Restoration Law, the office of the local forest supervisor 
acts on appeals, not the regional forest supervisor. A decision to uphold a project is 
followed by a 15-day period in which those who filed the appeal can report an intent to 
sue.  
After that, the Forest Service can move forward on the project.  
However, Sharon Galbreath of the Alliance said that the Woody Ridge situation is much 
more complex, and her organization's contentions are tied to what's known as goshawk 
guidelines within the management plan for Woody Ridge.  
The goshawk is a predatory bird that indicates the healthiness of the forest, and the 
guidelines call for opening up the forest canopy. The guidelines have been challenged in 
the courts by environmentalists, who have contended they ignore good science and call 
for the removal of more large trees than necessary.  

The application of those guidelines is being reviewed by the Forest Service as requested 
by the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals out of San Francisco. For this reason, Galbreath does 
not anticipate they will take the Forest Service to court specifically over the appeal 
decision on Woody Ridge.  
"It's highly unlikely that we would choose to litigate," Galbreath said.  
The appealing groups have contended that the Forest Service is ignoring its own practices 
in its decision to remove 20,000 trees that are 16 inches or larger in diameter from the 
8,600-acre project area. The section of woods is located west of U.S. 89A above Oak 
Creek Canyon.  
This ties into the use of goshawk guidelines in the formula for tree removal.  
But the Forest Service contends the harvesting of those 20,000 large trees amounts to 
only 2.3 trees removed per acre, and 6.5 percent of the 328,000 trees 16 inches in 
diameter in the cutting area, according to Forest Service reports.  
Ken Frederick and Gene Waldrip with the Coconino National Forest both defended the 
forest restoration project, which primarily removes small-diameter trees and debris from 
the forest area. This would rob and weaken an advancing wildfire of its fuel before it 
reached Forest Highlands, Kachina Village or the city of Flagstaff.  
The Forest Service has identified Woody Ridge as a key area in the Coconino that needs 
immediate treatment because the prevailing winds from the southwest would push a fire 
from there into developed areas.  
Reporter Seth Muller can be reached at 913-8607 or at smuller@azdailysun.com  
 
