Feds to fund forest restoration: NAU prof seeks slice of $54 
million emergency grant 
By GARY GHIOTO 
Sun Staff Reporter 
 
06/02/2000 
 
and THE ASSOCIATED PRESS  
A fight is shaping up in Congress not over how to restore unhealthy, fire-prone forests, 
but over who will get the money.  
Professor W. Wallace Covington, director of NAU's Ecological Restoration Institute, and 
officials from Grand Canyon Trust met with Clinton administration officials and 
members of the Arizona and New Mexico congressional delegation last week to discuss 
an emergency funding proposal last week.  
Spurred on in part by the Los Alamos fire, the Clinton administration and some western 
senators are crafting a proposal to spend up to $54 million in emergency funds to cut fire 
risks in the populated areas closest to western federal lands.  
The funds would be used to remove small trees and brush -- which the Forest Service 
says pose the greatest fire risk -- from about 55,000 acres of what agency officials call the 
"urban-wildland interface."  
The senators hope to add the money to an agriculture spending bill pending on the Senate 
floor soon after they return from a Memorial Day recess in the first week of June. They 
may add other land agencies, such as the Bureau of Land Management, to the proposal, 
which could increase the price tag of the measure.  
Covington met with Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, Forest Service Chief Michael 
Dombeck, U.S. Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz., U.S. Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., and U.S. Rep. 
J.D. Hayworth R-Mesa.  
"The overcrowded conditions around Los Alamos exist all over the mountain West," said 
Covington.  
"It's only by the grace of God that the tragedy that occurred there is not happening right 
now in dozens of other forest communities such as Flagstaff, Payson, Prescott, 
Strawberry, Pinetop, Cloudcroft and Ruidoso," he added.  

Covington proposed that restoration projects in the Flagstaff area being overseen by the 
Institute receive the necessary funding in order to accelerate on-the-ground results and 
reduce the threat of devastating wildfires.  
Projects include thinning trees and conducting prescribed burns to restore forests to a 
near-settlement condition.  
They also include wildlife and plant research, seeding, monitoring and studies involving 
the use of wood from small diameter trees.  
The ponderosa pine forests of northern Arizona make up the largest continuous stand of 
ponderosa pines in the world. Restoration projects identified by the Institute for 
immediate attention include those near Grand Canyon, Camp Navajo in the White 
Mountains, Los Alamos and the Coconino National Forest surrounding Flagstaff.  
The Ecological Restoration Institute is located on the Northern Arizona University 
campus.  
Currently the Institute and the Grand Canyon Forests Partnership are proposing to "treat" 
a total of 100,000 acres of forest in the Flagstaff area over the next decade.  
Funding for the project is being sought from private foundations, the Forest Service and 
the eventual sale of forest products removed by limited logging.  
The $54 million emergency funding package under consideration by the Clinton 
administration would be spread out across the West, but the Flagstaff project would likely 
receive some of the money.  
At the recent restoration conference sponsored by the Institute and Partnership in 
Flagstaff, the cost of restoring a single acre was estimated to be $750. That would bring 
the cost for the Flagstaff project alone to $75 million.  
Conference researchers and economists estimate that some 1.5 million acres across the 
West need restoring to prevent wildfires and restore forest health. The cost of treating all 
of those acres is estimated at $1 billion.  
ONE SUMMER AT A TIME  
Some senators, however, are looking at the problem only one summer at a time. Wildland 
fires claimed more than 1 million acres this year as of May 30, making 2000 the worst 
fire year so far since 1996.  
The Forest Service estimates that one of every five acres of national forest land -- 39 
million acres, mostly in the West -- is at a high risk for damaging, high-intensity 
wildfires.  

The risk of damage is greatest in fast-growing areas where development has encroached 
to the edge of forests or grasslands -- places like Flagstaff, Missoula, Mont., Santa Fe, 
N.M., Sequim, Wash., and Ashland, Ore.  
"We have what we consider to be an emergency situation," said Jim Bonham, spokesman 
for Sen. Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M. "What we don't want to have is a summer full of 
national news coverage of communities all across the West burning just because 
Congress failed to act."  
But the money threatens to get ensnared in a debate about logging -- even though the 
administration and Congress members say that is not what they want.  
Environmentalists in the past have accused Forest Service officials of using the threat of 
fires and bug infestation as an excuse to log. Now, however, Forest Service officials are 
trying to avoid that perception.  
Forest Service Chief Mike Dombeck said in the letter to the New Mexico delegation late 
last month that the agency would only use the emergency fire prevention money to 
remove trees that are 12-inches in diameter or smaller.  
Removal of larger trees -- if needed -- would be done through a traditional timber sale, 
not through the congressional appropriation, he said.  
"What we don't want to do is turn this into a cut-it-to-save-it debate," said Chris Wood, a 
Forest Service spokesman. "We can minimize fire risk and minimize controversy at the 
very same time."  
But Republicans say they want to make sure the Forest Service doesn't avoid certain 
high-risk fire areas just because the agency is afraid to offend people.  
The GOP also wants to make sure the Forest Service makes the best use of the money -- 
and they say that could mean having loggers take out some of the more threatening 
timber in return for doing work to improve the forests.  
"The question is how will the money get used," said Sen. Larry Craig, R-Idaho. "If this 
becomes a fight over the environment again ... then my guess is we can't get it done."  
Frank Gladics, president of the Independent Forest Products Association in Portland, 
Ore., said the Clinton administration wants to avoid logging so it won't offend 
environmental supporters.  
That strategy, however, is increasing fire risk, he said.  
"Loggers are a hell of a lot more controllable than wildfires," Gladics said. "We haven't 
had any instances of loggers going through towns and burning houses down 
indiscriminately."  

But Mike Anderson, an environmentalist with The Wilderness Society in Seattle, said the 
Forest Service seems to be making the right move. Historically, agency officials have 
allowed loggers to remove large trees that are not a fire risk along with the smaller timber 
that is the greatest threat to communities.  
Now, however, the agency seems to be focusing only on the fire threat, he said.  
"There's a lot to be said for putting a maximum size limit on these thinnings," Anderson 
said. "That's a pretty good approach."  
On the Net: National Interagency Fire Center: http://www.nifc.gov/  
 
