 
 Ecological Restoration Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to the restoration of fire-adapted forests and woodlands. ERI provides services that support the social 
and economic vitality of communities that depend on forests and the natural resources and ecosystem services they provide. Our efforts focus on science
-based research of ecological and socio-economic issues related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach and education.  
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928.523.7182, FAX 928.523.0296, www.nau.edu/eri 
Administrative Support in Collaborative Forest Restoration 
By Bryce Esch, Policy and Partnerships Program Coordinator 
 
Introduction 
The Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Pro-
gram (CFLRP) has helped the U.S. Forest Service and 
collaborative groups overcome some of the financial 
barriers to national forest restoration by providing ad-
ditional funding for restoration projects. Yet CFLRP 
funds cannot be used to support the collaborative 
group process or administration, and group members 
find that increasing collaboration and restoration plan-
ning requires a significant investment of coordination 
and organizational effort. It is generally recognized 
that administrative support is crucial to the efficient 
functioning of a collaborative group. Without con-
sistent sources of funding or specific guidance on how 
to manage administrative support, CFLRP groups have 
had to develop their own approach to meeting these 
administrative needs. 
Overview 
The Ecological Restoration Institute conducted a survey in 2015 to better understand how the various CFLR 
projects are procuring their administrative support and what lessons have been learned for maintaining ca-
pacity for administrative functions. 
Method 
A 16-question survey was sent to 60 CFLRP contacts, often those in co-chair or other leadership positions, 
at all 23 CFLR projects. Survey questions focused on how participants fulfill, fund, and perceive administra-
tive support. We received 39 responses from collaborative participants at 22 projects, with between 1 and 4 
responses per site.  
Findings 
CFRLP groups see administrative support as essential, and think it is best to have a dedicated position to fill 
that role. Groups are successfully meeting administrative needs in a multitude of ways; there is no single 
best approach. When funding is an issue, sharing administrative tasks among collaborative members can get 
the job done, however reliable funding for administrative support can reduce demand on group members and 
make support more consistent.  
     Fact Sheet: Administrative Support in Collaborative Forest Restoration   
 
 
  
 
June 2015 
Collaborative groups responding to the survey all reported that 
administrative support was considered an important function of 
their collaborative. Photo of Dinky Collaborative participants, by 
Dorian Fougères.  

Collaborative groups value administrative support 
All responding groups had administrative tasks they considered important to the function of their collaborative. 
Some thought field trip organization was more important than website administration, or meeting note-taking was 
more important than field trip organization, but nearly every respondent had at least one administrative function 
they thought “essential.” 
 
Administrative functions include meeting organization, field trip organization, recording and distributing meeting 
notes, and website administration. In addition to these tasks, groups reported that their administrative duties in-
clude: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In many groups, administrative duties are shared among collaborative group members and USFS staff.  
 
Funding is the primary challenge 
Fluctuations in funding influenced how much support groups were able to maintain. When funding decreased, 
group members often found it necessary to donate their time for administrative support instead of having a dedicat-
ed person complete important tasks. Group members also covered administrative support “overtime” or needs that 
exceeded the support that was available. Most groups also found that their need for administrative support fluctuat-
ed over time, either growing to support increased meetings and activity, or shrinking during quieter times.  
CFLRP groups are using a combination of in-kind donations of time and monetary funding to support administra-
tive work. Direct funding comes from private, local, state, and federal grants; from participating organizations; 
from the USFS through Resource Advisory Committees or Memorandums of Understanding. In kind donations of 
time come from a single or multiple participants or participating organizations, and from the USFS. 
 
Insights from collaborative group participants 
 “Develop and budget enough time and funds for a person to conduct administrative activities. The collabora-
tive process will suffer without consistent and thorough administrative work.” 
 “Having a dedicated administrator has been essential to keeping us moving forward, but sometimes, I think 
we have not taken enough responsibility ourselves for doing the necessary work between meetings. I also 
think we have not taken enough responsibility for setting and meeting goals. It has simply been enough to let 
the administrator schedule meetings, we show up, and we call it progress. I would encourage new groups to 
use an administrator to goose them along but not to defer all responsibility for making progress to the admin-
istrator.” 
 “Having paid coordination and facilitation help is essential to the success of our collaborative.” 
 “The focus of a person dedicated to the administrative duties is like glue ... it keeps all the pieces together and 
functioning. Not a “nice to have” — a definite “need to have.” 
 “Administrative support, particularly facilitation, is critically important to a successful collaborative effort. It 
takes far more time than most people realize, and is often undervalued, including by members and the Forest 
Service.” 
 “Administration is essential. Secure one person to take this on and pay him/her to do this. Be careful not to 
overwork that person, as there is a great deal to do. Cultivate a culture in the collaborative of appreciating that 
it is work to set up and run effective meetings and help out with set-up and clean-up to improve morale.” 
Acknowledgements 
The Ecological Restoration Institute would like to thank the collaborative group participants who took part in this 
survey, and our National Forest Foundation partners who provided feedback on the survey and its findings. Their 
comments were instrumental in developing this fact sheet. 
 
 
 
Contact 
Bryce Esch, Bryce.Esch@nau.edu 
 
NAU is an equal opportunity provider.  
This research was funded by a grant from the USDA Forest Service.  
 
 
 Document and presentation drafting and editing 
 Sharing information within the group (like re-
porting monitoring data) 
 Fundraising and grant administration  
 Budget management  
 Communications  
 Outreach  
 Coordinating group work and tasks 
 Coordinating with USFS personnel  
 Task specific duties, like organizing/assisting 
with annual reporting  
 Facilitation  
