Good Fire, Bad Fire
How to think about 
forest land management 
and ecological processes

The ﬁrst rule of tinkering is to save all the parts, according to forester, 
philosopher, and hunter Aldo Leopold. Leopold was thinking about 
wildﬁre 50 years ago when he also was questioning his own role in 
exterminating large predators, wondering how their removal might 
affect forest ecosystems in the future. Leopold was well ahead of his 
contemporaries in ecological thought. Like predators, ﬁre cleans and 
regenerates the systems it touches. A generation later, we’re seeing the 
dramatic consequences of excluding ﬁre from ﬁre-adapted ecosystems.

1
W
hen Colorado’s Hayman ﬁre erupted on June 9, 2002, it did something no one had 
witnessed in the Front Range of the Rockies. The ﬁre swept into a solid forest 
canopy of ponderosa pine and Douglas-ﬁr and raced 19 miles in a single day, sending 
convection currents to 21,000 feet and sparking new blazes more than a mile ahead of 
its blistering front. Nothing like it had happened in Colorado’s recorded history. 
No amount of air support or ground attack could stop it. Fire crews could only get 
people out of the way. Fighters couldn’t contain the conﬂagration for the next 10 
days. When weather ﬁnally slowed the ﬁre, it had touched 138,000 acres and set 
an ominous record: 60,000 acres of nearly total forest destruction. While smaller-
scale, stand-renewing ﬁres appear throughout the tree-ring record in the southern 
Rocky Mountains, this was the worst known ﬁre in at least 700 years.
Conditions were ripe. Rainfall had been well below normal for the previous 
four years, the result of a distant La Niña event in the southern Paciﬁc. Relative 
humidity was about 5 percent and winds were 20 to 50 mph from a direction 
favoring rapid ﬁre spread. But another factor that had nothing to do with the 
weather led to the blaze. The forest itself had built up to this for almost a century.
Consequences

2
That something was awry in the forest escaped notice for a long time, partly because the problem 
had more to do with what wasn’t happening. The forest had been operating for decades without all its 
systems intact, and the missing part was ﬁre itself.
Without periodic ﬁres the forest lost an important control mechanism, allowing excessive 
regeneration and a build-up of fuels beneath the forest overstory. Though obvious now, in the early 
1900s people saw wildﬁre as a destroyer of forests, a threat to human safety, and an unacceptable 
waste. That ﬁre might serve as an integral part of the forest machine, preserving its health, assuring its 
future, protecting the quality of our air and water, was unimaginable in the new West. So the natural ﬁre 
cycle as a regulatory system was often deliberately or indirectly altered—and the wonderfully 
complex, self-running, self-correcting forest machinery broke.
The story was much the same throughout ﬁre-adapted ecosystems of the West. In 
the semi-arid grasslands, ranchers have viewed wildﬁre as the greatest single threat. 
A range ﬁre’s appetite for grasses seemed surpassed only by that of the cattle. 
Fire threatened isolated houses and respected no property boundaries. Thus, 
every ranch became every other rancher’s concern and ﬁre exclusion became 
the highest priority—a matter of economic survival. But range ﬁres are an 
important part of the prairie machine too, and when they were removed 
the machine sputtered. Aggressive shrubs, held at bay by recurring ﬁres 
of the distant past, encroached upon grasslands. Eastern red cedar moved 
westward, usurping resources that once belonged to the prairie, and soon 
ranchers were spending their money trying to eradicate the invasive plants.
The lessons sifted from the ashes of 2002 are obvious. When the 
Hayman ﬁre went haywire in Colorado because the forest machine had ran 
too long without all its parts, it ended up costing 132 homes, $42 million in 
suppression efforts, and incalculable loss of opportunity. It is clear that our 
social and economic well-being depends upon maintaining our ecosystems and that 
disruption of self-regulating processes can be disastrous.
But we ﬁnd ourselves now in a difﬁcult position: that of having to manage complex 
landscapes without all the information we would like. We still don’t know much about nature’s 
regulatory processes, such as energy ﬂows and nutrient cycling. Parts of the system interconnect in 
ways we cannot see or comprehend, and the functional roles of individual species are incompletely 
understood. As expressed by American ecologist Frank Egler, “Ecosystems are more complex than we 
think—they may be more complex than we can think.” Here, however, is where the words of Leopold 
ring like a hammer on steel:
The ﬁrst rule of tinkering is to save all the parts.

3
Sidebar: The Niobrara River-Nebraska Sandhills Region
The Niobrara River-Nebraska Sandhills region encompasses some 12 million 
acres of squelched slow-growing shrubs. The near elimination of wildﬁ res in the 
last century has had many adverse effects including the accumulation of fuel 
hazards, changes in plant community composition, and lost range-management 
options. Ranchers now face far greater threats from ﬁ re than under previous 
natural conditions. In parts of northern Nebraska and southern South Dakota, 
ranchers have lost 60-70 percent of their productive rangeland to invading 
shrubs, translating into annual income losses of $20,000 or more for some.
More ranchers in the Niobrara-Sandhills region are learning the beneﬁ ts of 
returning ﬁ re to its natural role, thereby reducing forage losses and tree 
invasion. Consequently, a 12-member partnership of landowners and other 
stakeholders formed to create a new ﬁ re management paradigm. The partnership 
includes private landowners and commercial businesses, eight rural ﬁ re districts 
in four counties, several state and federal government agencies, and the 
Nature Conservancy. They focus on education and regional ﬁ re management 
infrastructure, including the funding and retraining of volunteer ﬁ re ﬁ ghters 
in the tools and techniques of prescribed burning. Though independent 
stakeholders often have diffferent land management objectives, partners have 
identiﬁ ed common ground in a desire for restored ecosystem integrity through 
improved wildﬁ re management and appropriate use of prescribed burns. 
Common beneﬁ ts include community protection from severe ﬁ res, improved 
productivity of ranch land, and greater protection of plant and animal species.

4
Fire as Process: Pre-settlement
A 
blackened forest doesn’t appear to support much life, so ﬁre exclusion might seem 
the ﬁrst rule of saving all the parts. But the right kind of ﬁre, as we have seen, helps 
maintain conditions necessary to support life. Certainly, in the short term, ﬁre destroys many 
living organisms. But ﬁre also creates opportunity. Plants and animals differ in their site 
requirements and competitive abilities. Many depend on the presence of openings in the 
existing plant cover to establish and complete their life cycles. Fire helps maintain a mosaic 
of habitat conditions in the landscape and thus preserves biodiversity. Just as diversity in 
an investment portfolio offers stability in the face of market ﬂuctuations, diversity in nature 
is often the key to ecosystem stability and protection of rare or uncommon species. It is 
important to draw a distinction, however, between natural ﬁre regimes and the altered ﬁre 
behavior that we now witness.
What constitutes a “natural” ﬁre regime? Much scientiﬁc probing has gone 
into answering this question. Through meticulous research, past forest conditions and 
ﬁre histories have been reconstructed for some forest sites in the Colorado Front Range 
extending as far back as 1200 A.D. Detailed journals from early explorers, old photographs, 
historical forest inventories, logging records, and General Land Ofﬁce surveys have all 
helped to piece together a picture of what our forests looked like when settlers arrived in the 
West. The greatest insights into past ﬁre regimes have come from deciphering the permanent 
history of climate, forest ﬁre, and insect outbreaks recorded in the annual growth rings of 
living and dead trees—the science of dendrochronology. By precisely dating ﬁre scars in the 
tree-ring record and then mapping the locations 
of trees with scars of the same age, we gain an 
accurate picture of ﬁre frequency and size in 
prehistorical times. Analyzing the age structure of 
old-growth stands in previously burned areas also 
reveals the severity of these ﬁres, especially in 
areas that escaped earlier logging. Crown ﬁres, for 
example, result in complete stand replacement and 
restart. All this information can then be compared 
with other historical records and current stand 
analyses to indicate how conditions have changed 
in the past century.

5
What have these investigations revealed? Today’s forests are often very 
different in structure from pre-settlement forests. Forest ﬁres behave much differently 
from the past as a result of changes in forest structure.
Scientiﬁc reconstructions show ﬁre to have played a recurring role in shaping 
plant communities in almost every forest and grassland ecosystem in the western United 
States, as well as in the oak-shrublands and pine forests of southern and eastern regions. 
In prairie and savanna ecosystems the natural return interval for ﬁre pre-historically 
may have been as short as 1-4 years. Even in oak woodlands and southern shortleaf-
pine forests, a return interval of 5 years was not uncommon. In many mid-elevation 
ponderosa pine forests, particularly in the Southwest, the natural ﬁre return interval 
ranged from 6-20 years. Only in the moist spruce-ﬁr forests of higher elevations or in the 
dry piñon-juniper woodlands of western foothills (where widely spaced trees and a lack 
of groundcover carried ﬁre poorly) did the average ﬁre interval stretch out to 200 or 400 
years or more.
This does not mean, however, that all oak woodlands burned every 5 years, or that 
a ponderosa pine forest was “overdue” if it had not experienced ﬁre for 20 years. In one 
of the most extensive investigations of its kind, studies in central Colorado’s ponderosa 
belt—in the very place where the uncharacteristically severe Hayman ﬁre burned—
revealed a total of 77 ﬁre years between 1197 and 1963 (the latter being the most recent 
ﬁre year until 2002). Fires ranged in scale from thinning of small stands of trees to 
scorched hillsides across the forest landscape. However, intervals between individual ﬁres 
were highly variable, between 3 and 58 years in one stand to over 100 years in others. 
And though the average ﬁre return interval for the entire 10,000-acre study area was 
only 9 years, intervals for individual areas were about 50 years. Large portions of the 
landscape did not burn for a 128-year period between 1723 and 1851.

6
What were the ecological effects of recurring ﬁre in these ecosystems? Where 
return intervals were short—such as ponderosa pine forests of the Southwest—ground 
ﬁres of low intensity removed seedlings and saplings, consumed accumulated tree litter, 
and accelerated the return of nutrients to the soil. This was nature’s population control, 
maintaining open, park-like forest stands with a continuous ground cover of grasses, herbs, 
and shrubs beneath the forest canopy. Overstory trees surviving the ground ﬁres were 
fewer and larger, in some old-growth forests numbering 40 trees or less per acre. Where 
return intervals were longer—perhaps one or two ﬁres a century as in ponderosa pine in 
the Hayman ﬁre area in Colorado—“mixed severity” ﬁres spread into the canopy in some 
stands. In other stands, ﬁre burned only fuels on the ground. Mixed severity ﬁre left behind 
a much more complex forest landscape. When this happened, temporary openings were 
created in the forest, some of which would persist for many decades while others were soon 
colonized by nearby seed sources. The record shows that these pulses of tree recruitment 
occurred on average every 50 or 60 years. Thus, the most important result of this pre-
historical, mixed-severity ﬁre regime was the creation of a diverse, ever-changing mosaic of 
forest habitats. This ﬁre regime supported maximum biodiversity, ecosystem sustainability, 
and watershed protection over large areas.

7
The Changing Landscape: 
  The Last Two Centuries
T
hree things happened in the last two centuries to change the natural role of 
ﬁre: The ﬁrst, oddly enough, was the loss of human-caused ﬁres. A wealth of 
archaeological evidence, ethnographical studies, and oral histories document use of 
ﬁre by Native Americans in many parts of the country—for resource management, 
pest control, land clearing (sometimes for ﬁre-prooﬁng villages), and even malice 
and warfare. Fire probably escaped to burn far more than intended, though there 
also were areas where Native American burning was uncommon because population 
densities were low. With the spread of Euro-Americans across the continent, the 
ﬁres of indigenous peoples were gradually quelled (though in some areas, especially 
where mining and railroad construction occurred, Euro-American settlers caused 
accidental ﬁres). As the indigenous ﬁres were extinguished, the landscape changed 
in other ways. When Juan de Oñate led his troop of settlers and livestock north out of 
Mexico in 1598, the animals spread faster than range ﬁre, and a different way of life 
was established for the West. By the time the Sacramento National Forest Reserve 
in southern New Mexico was created in 1907, an estimated 17,000 cows and horses, 
10,000 sheep, and 40,000 goats grazed the forest. Free-roaming livestock quickly 
cropped the native grasses in the forest understory, and the lack of fuel reduced the 
frequency and effectiveness of lightning-sparked ground ﬁres. Grazing pressure began 
to diminish in the prolonged droughts of the late 1800s and early 1900s, but it was too 
late for the ﬁre-deprived forests. By then a policy of aggressive ﬁre suppression was in 
place throughout much of the West. Tinkering with the forest ecosystem had started in 
earnest and ﬁre was the ﬁrst piece of the green machine to be dropped.
Western forests also were seen as a ready source of timber. Mining, railroading, 
and the rapid growth of communities in the West resulted in more than extraction 
of minerals from the earth. Vast areas were subjected to logging. Virgin forests of 
ponderosa pine and other species provided a seemingly unlimited frontier of tall, 
straight trees for lumber. Smaller trees provided railroad ties, mining timbers, and 
fuel. Logging removed many of the old trees, and just as importantly created seedbeds 
for millions of new seedlings to be established. In short order, forests of scattered 
large ponderosa pine trees were replaced by denser forests dominated by young trees.

8
What were the consequences of these changes in natural ﬁre regime and 
structure of the forests? The conﬂagrations of 2002—in Colorado, Arizona, and 
Oregon—tell much of the story. As decades of ﬁre exclusion and repeated logging 
allowed successive crops of new seedlings to gain a foothold, the understory began to 
ﬁll in. Gradually the composition and structure of our forests changed. Fire-sensitive 
Douglas-ﬁr often became prominent in ponderosa forests and stand densities reached 
new highs. Rather than having 40 or 50 trees per acre, our mountain slopes were soon 
supporting upwards of 200-400 trees per acre—often 10 or more times the normal 
density. Openings no longer were created by small and isolated stand-replacing ﬁres, and 
those previously existing gradually ﬁlled in. The forest canopy, once a diverse mix of 
stands of differing ages, was soon uninterrupted over hundreds of square miles.
This set the stage for ﬁres with very different behavior. As the forest canopy 
closed overhead, young trees reaching for light became fuel ladders, carrying ground 
ﬁres quickly into the crowns of trees. And, once into the crowns, a ground-clearing ﬁre 
is transformed into an all-consuming rage. Witness the record-breaking Hayman ﬁre 
in Colorado: there is no evidence in the scientiﬁc record that any ﬁre in pre-historical 
times produced such extensive stand destruction. The diverse patchwork maintained by 
recurring smaller or less severe ﬁres would likely have prevented such from happening. 
These threats were not limited to ponderosa pine forests either. Similar alterations were 
occurring in other ecosystem types across the United States where natural ﬁre was a 
frequent visitor, clearing the way for invasions 
of destructive non-native species better-adapted 
to the new ﬁre regimes and hence able to often 
crowd out natives.

9
Tough Love: Realigning Our Ideals 
With Ecological Reality
S
cience and history tell us that much of the western landscape we grew up knowing 
and loving is an artifact of human management from the late 19th century. With ﬁre 
removed from ecosystem processes, and nothing to limit shrub invasions in prairies or 
millions of seedlings in forests, our landscape has become unnatural and unsustainable. 
When ﬁre strikes now, it’s a different problem because the land has been too long 
without. The ﬁrst step in redressing this situation may be the most difﬁcult--that of 
changing our collective perception of what a healthy and sustainable forest or prairie 
looks like. We have to learn to understand what we see, for we have grown up accepting 
our experience, believing the forests we see today are natural. To deliberately alter 
them seems contrary to the very ethic of good environmental stewardship. But good 
stewardship, and good ecology, often means realizing that many of today’s forests are not 
natural at all. Here the scientiﬁc community can help. Carefully done science can provide 
common ground for agreement among different stakeholders, enabling communities to 
unify.
Can we remedy the situation by 
reintroducing ﬁre? Yes, at least partially. 
Can we simply allow natural ﬁres to burn 
again and let nature take over from there? 
As a general rule, no. In many cases our forests, 
due to our tinkering, have become too vulnerable to 
runaway crown ﬁres. Even the most carefully planned 
“controlled” burns may constitute unacceptable risk 
to the many people who live in or near the forest, 
at the wildland-urban interface. The best science 
available tells us that at some point we must reinstall 
this missing ecosystem process so the natural 
machinery functions properly again. We have to do 
it cautiously until our forests are restored to a more 
natural condition, and we may need treatments other 
than ﬁre to reduce the risks of reintroducing ﬁre. In 

10
many other places, such as some prairies and shrublands, it is only our perception of 
the role of ﬁre that we must overcome to restore normal ecosystem processes. Fire can 
threaten ranch structures, but lack of ﬁre can be a greater threat to long-term ranching 
livelihood. The larger questions then become: What does restoration involve, on 
what scale is it needed, and how will we accomplish it?
Short of rekindling primordial ﬁres, the best way now to reduce the density of our 
forest stands that currently support many more trees per acre than in historical times 
is through mechanical thinning. For many people, however, the prospect of removing 
half or more of the trees from our forests might seem untenable. Objections often come 
down to questions like: What will the new forest look like? Who will proﬁt from 
thinning? Where is thinning ecologically appropriate?
In light of past experience, these are legitimate questions. Most of us treasure the 
forests we grew up with, even if they are ecologically “out of whack.” Suspicion of land 
management agencies as a result of past contracting practices on public lands has not 
always been unjustiﬁed. There is some uncertainty as to where logging is warranted. Not 
all forests—for example, high-elevation spruce-ﬁr or lodgepole pine with naturally long 
ﬁre return intervals—have been altered in the same way, so they need different types of 
restorative treatments.
Photo series: Reducing forest density may promote larger and healthier 
trees, fewer disease and insect outbreaks, and greater biodiversity.

11
Still, evidence from recent research 
in the Paciﬁc Northwest, as well as in 
Colorado and the Southwest, indicates 
that less dense forests may promote larger 
and healthier trees, fewer disease and 
insect outbreaks, and greater biodiversity. 
This translates into several social and 
economic advantages: robust game and 
non-game wildlife populations, enhanced 
wildland recreational values, and watershed 
protection. There may be some short-term 
ecological costs; logging on any scale 
temporarily disrupts natural communities, 
shifts competitive balances between species, 
and alters energy ﬂows and nutrient cycles. 
Access roads may increase erosion and 
sedimentation in watersheds, allow greater 
human entry into previously roadless 
areas, and provide conduits for exotic 
species invasions. Nonetheless, carefully 
planned and executed mechanical thinning 
may be the only way back to restoration 
of self-regulating ecosystem processes, 
guaranteeing future generations all the 
physical and spiritual beneﬁts of a diverse 
and healthy forest environment.
And we must recognize this too: 
doing nothing may result in even greater 
long-term ecological costs associated 
with unnaturally large and severe ﬁres. 
Catastrophic ﬁres can set back forest 
recovery many centuries, cause massive 
erosion in watersheds, reduce habitat for 
threatened or endangered species, and 
irreversibly spread non-native species.
Sidebar: The Jemez Mountains Fire Restoration Project
The Jemez Mountains Fire Restoration Project is situated in northwestern New Mexico 
and encompasses 987,000 acres of mid- to upper-elevation piñon-juniper, ponderosa 
pine, and montane mixed-conifer forest, with ﬁre-adapted grassland and shrub 
communities intermixed. Homes are dispersed widely throughout the area, with 
37,000 acres classed as wildland-urban interface. The project area falls within 10 
different federal, state, and tribal jurisdictions.
Several large, high-intensity ﬁres in recent years (e.g., Cerro Grande) have seriously 
impacted forest ecosystems, archaeological resources, and the economic well-
being of the region, raising public awareness of the ecological issues involved. With 
assistance from The Nature Conservancy, a team of academic advisors, private 
consultants, and government agency personnel has been assembled to implement a 
new ﬁre management policy to make communities safer and ecosystems healthier. 
The team has identiﬁed the following priority tasks:
ÿ Gather and organize baseline ecological and social information.
ÿ Integrate ﬁre risk-reduction with ecological restoration and maintenance.
ÿ Create partnerships that include federal, state, and local agencies and 
organizations and private landowners.
ÿ Build connections between the scientiﬁc community and land managers to ensure 
that policy decisions are informed by the best science available.
ÿ Provide a framework for adaptive management - planning, implementation, 
monitoring, and evaluation - within and across administrative and political 
boundaries.
The team has compiled and reﬁned data layers showing ﬁre history and past, current, 
and planned fuel-reduction treatments of the Jemez Mountains. They have also 
constructed models of ecological function for each ﬁre-adapted ecosystem. From 
this information the team has assessed threats to, and measures of the ecological 
integrity of the Jemez landscape.
Now, the goal of the Jemez Mountains Fire Restoration team is to build consensus for 
a coordinated landscape-scale approach to ecological restoration, and then work with 
community leaders on watershed-scale ﬁre management planning.

12
Our Task
O
ur task will not be easy. The ﬁres of 2002 and others in recent years demonstrated a 
landscape-scale problem, and isolated small-scale corrective measures are likely to 
be completely overwhelmed in a large burn as they were in the Hayman ﬁre. Thinning 
on a large scale will require commitment and innovation from the private sector. The 
land area, public and private, requiring restoration is now vast. Most trees that must be 
removed from our forests are of small diameter and presently non-merchantable— thus 
requiring imaginative new-product development and ﬁnancing. Though this may 
sound formidably difﬁcult and expensive, we as a people have never shied away from 
innovation. We have seen repeatedly in recent years that more sustainable management 
of our resources has led to signiﬁcant economic and social beneﬁts.
The problem facing us today did not occur overnight, and it’s not likely to be 
corrected overnight. Complex problems are rarely solved with little effort. This shouldn’t 
discourage us, however, from taking steps toward a solution, for the road may turn out 
smoother than we think. Good ideas evolve as we gain new ecological insights and 
adjust management activities accordingly. We don’t need all the information available to 
get started, provided that management decisions are continuously re-evaluated with new 
information and experience.
Starting simply can yield incalculable beneﬁts in the long run—and a good start 
might be to expand on Aldo Leopold’s admonition. Save all the pieces—save all 
the processes. Ecosystems must have the potential for supporting all naturally 
occurring organisms and their assemblages—the pieces—in the system, along with the 
physical environment needed to support them, regardless of whether their role in the 
system is understood. In addition, ecosystem processes and their frequency, distribution, 
and intensity must be retained or restored to allow ecosystems to self-regulate. These 
processes include natural disturbances such as ﬂoods and ﬁre. To this short list we might 
add think long term. Ecosystems function in time scales well beyond the normal 
human experience. Soils develop over millennia and forests require centuries to mature. 
Some management goals will be accomplished only over generations of leadership. But 
small steps make for great strides. What matters most now is getting started and using 
the best science available to guide the process.

13
What can you do?
4Get involved in a community-based conservation group working on 
local landscape restoration projects.
4Educate yourself about the role of ﬁre in your local ecosystems.
4Provide feedback on National Forest, BLM, or other agency land 
management plans.
4Consult with regional experts or The Nature Conservancy on how to 
safely reintroduce ﬁre to your ranch or land holding.
4Participate in local Firewise workshops to learn how to treat fuels 
around your home and create defensible space (www.ﬁrewise.org).
Start simply. But start.

Authors:
Merrill R. Kaufmann, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fort Collins, CO
Ayn Shlisky, The Nature 
Conservancy, Boulder, CO
Peter Marchand, Catamount 
Center for Geography of the 
Southern Rockies, Woodland 
Park, Colorado
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on 
the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, 
age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, 
or marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases 
apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who 
require alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, large print, audio-tape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 
720-2600 (voice and TDD).
To ﬁle a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, 
Director, Ofﬁce of Civil Rights, Room 326 W, Whitten 
Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, 
D.C. 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). 
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
