Chapter 14 
Understory Vegetation 
JULIE E. KORB AND JUDITH D. SPRINGER 
:~h e herbaceous understory in southwestern ponderosa pine forests  
: j~cl u d es a diverse array of vascular plants that grow beneath the tree  
~~n opy - sh ru b s , grasses, forbs, ferns, and cacti. It includes both visible  
~~ege ta tion and underground propagules, such as dormant seeds and roots,  
. that can germinate or sprout following disturbance or other environmen­
:~l cues. Nativebunchgrasses that grow in large clumps, including Arizona  
:fescue (Festuca arizonica), mountain muhly (Muhlenbergia montana),  
'.lnuttongrass (Poa fendleriana), and squirreltail (Elymus elymoides), often  
'predominate. Although most Arizona and New Mexico ponderosa pine  
lorests contain relatively few shrubs, they are a dominant component of  
, ,'~any Utah and Colorado ponderosa pine forests (Bradley et al. 1992) and  
.'a-ijIay have been more important in the past in Arizona and New Mexico  
~ Coop e r 1960). 
..., Evolutionarily an'd functionally, bunchgrasses and other herbaceous  
,;;Species held soils in place, contributed nutrients, provided food and cover  
'for wildlife, and carried low-intensity surface fires. They prevented wide­ 
~ sp re a d establishment of pine seedlings by competing for water (Pearson  
;; ~942 ). Fire suppression and heavygrazing by domestic and wild ungulates  
~have led to species composition changes, soil erosion, pine needle accu­ 
{ rnulation, and dense tree canopies that allow little light to reach the forest  
';:floor (see Ffolliott and Clary [1982] for a comprehensive bibliography of  
t~ 
• 
~,tmde rs tory-ove rstory vegetation relationships). These dense forests support 
t~a lower number and variety of understory plant species than nearby mead­
",:owsand areas with fewer trees (Clary 1975; Moore and Deiter 1992). 
';' Thinning of dense postsettlement overstory trees combined with pre- . 
~c ribed fire allows increased light to reach the forest floor and enables more 
. " ~ 

234 
RESTORIt\'G AND PROTECTING BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY 
mineral soil to act as a seedbed, but there are many challenges to restoring '.;1
understory vegetation. Because historical species composition and abun- ::'
-dance are largely unknown, it is difficult to identify reference conditions or ';{
restoration targets. Each treatment site exhibits its own introduced plant ' -~
species and pathogens,changesin soil nutrients and hydrology, and impacts-':;
from road-building and herbivory. Every site differs in physical and chemi- '!
cal soil properties, aspect, slope, potential erodibility, elevation, pollinators, :
mycorrhizae, management history, and climate.The composition and abun- ' 
~:
dance ofthe contemporary plantcommunity (and,therefore, the plant mate- -:\
rial available to the restorationist) result from the interaction of these and "?
numerous other factors, Restoration treatments themselves cause varying ~ ,
chemical, and sometimes physical, changes in abiotic and biotic soil and -~. 
plant communities, affecting which plants and animals can survive. 
, 'i
Herbaceous plants vary significantly in their ability to disperse into' ',::
newlycreated habitat. Wind-dispersed species (including manygrasses and 
:;
comr:)Qsite family species) can spread quickly and dominate a site. Species A
that rely on vegetative means of reproduction or have gravity-dispersed :'
seeds may take decades or centuries to colonize even a small area. Selec-
:::
tive grazing by herbivores alsochanges species composition and can slow"
recovery (Clary 1975). 
:.
The restorationistcan take twoapproaches to restoringthe understory: ?
allow natural regeneration to take place, or attempt to speed recolonization '~
by seeding, transplanting, or other means (Moore et al. 1999). In neither _' 
case is restoration simple. Limited and bimodal precipitation in these arid .
forests, and the large quantities of wood and litter produced by pine trees, 
necessitate both thorough ecological knowledge and reliance on nature to 
aid restoration. 
Reference Conditions 
Historical data about understoryvegetation are insufficientin most south­
western ponderosa pine forests . What relatively little information exists .-,
about reference conditions might be obtained from both cultural evidence 
 
(archaeological sites, ethnobotany, written records, oral histories, maps and 
photographs, and government land office surveys) and biological evidence 
(pollen studies, packrat middens, and phytoliths) (Egan and Howell 2001), 
although this latter information is limited mostly to relatively long-term _
reference conditions. 

~§)~:. '. .  
14. Understory Vegetation ', 
235 
".;.i\}',·:-
uch as Beale (1858) described an open Arizona forest 
'~ }" -" lorers s 
;~;~fo o t b~ing covered with the finest grass, and beautiful broad  
_. -~~~~ _ . .t nding in every direction." Ives (1861), Rothrock (1878),  
··:,o:t. :ales ex e 
-
. 
d S ' 
(1890) 1 d 
ib d  
..,. )~~t- · -S' 7) and Ivlernam an 
temeger 
a so escri e open  
~ 
- n :(l 8 ~,' 
.
d 
d
h  
,......~l -i >/. : 
: 
herbaceous vegetatIOn, an grassy mea ows; owever, some 
_ . ';V: ~ di\'e rse  
. 
"",,\,,::r-';:':' '
d" "th' ker tree growth and little to no understory, Such accounts 
'1 ., . ha , Ic  
d I' 
. -
. 
:;:P \;;(ipeculators a.nd .settlers-an .ivestock. WIth the animals came _ 
i ., .~PL 
b',:e specIes in hay and fur. By the early 1900s, the effects of 
,  ~ ."nonna 
. 
' 
.•~#;rr~ kovergrazing were WIdespread in the Southwest (Leopold 1951; 
.....;c;r r I960; Dick-Peddie 1993; Abruzzi 1995). Few areas remained free 
-.,.~fs:: pacts ofgrazing by cattle, sheep, goats, and horses. Grazing and  
"'k3:~~;re s s i o n favor woody species ~t the expense of herbaceous species.  
" 'i?~ - tha tca n be used as reference sites, therefore, are rare.  
:;!%ng-termpermanent plots are perhaps of greatest value in studying  
. )c:~teim vegetation changes and community dynamics. The Forest Service  
i~'Jish ed ~everal series of ~lots in Arizona a?,d New Mexic,~ ponderosa  
'>=fiieforests in the early twentieth century. The Woolsey plots were estab­ 
f~h.kd to examine ponderosa pine regeneration in understory microhabi­ 
.,i.:ta·'~ ·(Pea rs on 1942). These plots were protected from livestock grazing and  
'~fi;e . S inc e then, overstory density has increased and understory species rich­ 
=:.~;~'ss has declined significantly. The importance of functional groups such  
"'ef1iU~gu m es and shrubs has declined; while that of other species, particu­ 
j~Jy ' g rami no ids such as sedges, mountain muhl y, and squirreltail, has  
4<t~~c rea s ed (unpub. data, J. D. Bakker, Ecological Restoration Institute). The  
l~iH il1 plots" were established on the Coconino National Forest to e~amine  
~th e recovery of understory vegetation when protected from livestock graz­
~ting . When mapped periodically over the next thirty years, they showed a 
~7decl ine in bunchgrass cover (Arnold 1950; unpub. data in the Fort Valley 
~{; Exper imen ta l Stationarchive, Flagstaff). Remeasurernent of these plots will 
?"provide insight into vegetation dynamics at a finer temporal scale than is 
r possible with the Woolsey plots (pers. comm., J.D. Bakker).
- -Parts of the Grand Canyon's North Rim serve as reference sites because
t fires have occurred fairly regularlyand livestock grazing has been excluded 
 for decades. Understory plant cover here exceeds 40 percent at times, ver­
sus 15 to 20 percent on nearbysiteswhere fire has been excluded (Springer 
 et a1. 2000), and nonnative species remain uncommon. Grasses in general 
constitute a higher percentage of cover on the frequently burned sites; 
legumes, shrubs, and C4 grasses also make up a higher percentage and 
exhibit greater diversity on those sites than on less frequently burned sites, 

236 
RE ST ORIN G AN D P ROT ECTI NG BI OLOGI CAL DIVERSIT Y 
Finally, when establishing reference conditions, it is important to col­
lect data from multiple years to offset yearly fluctuations in species richness, 
cover, and biomass. Plant communities can vary greatly on small spatial 
and temporal scales, implying that reference conditions should not be 
determined from only one site or year (Gildar 2002). If, as seems likely, 
climate change accelerates, reference areas will be increasingly hard to 
find and reference conditions will become harder to determine. 
Mycorrhizal Fungi 
Mycorrhizae play an important role in plant nutrition, nutrient cycling, 
food webs, and the development of soil structure (Johnson et a1. 1999). A 
mycorrhiza isgenerally a "mutualistic relationship between plant and fun­
gus localized in a root or root-like structure in which energy moves pri­
marily from plant to fungus and inorganic resources move from fungus to 
plant" (Allen 1991). Over 80 percent of plants form relationships with 
arbuscular mycorrhizae. 
Numerous researchers have suggested a relationshipbetween the abun­
dance of infective fungi propagules and the recovery time of disturbed 
ecosystems (Reeves et a1. 1979; Allen and Allen 1980; Noyd et a1. 1995). 
A large and growing literature documents the role and dynamics of arbus­
cular mycorrhizae in tallgrass prairies (van der Heijden et a1. 1998a, 1998b; 
Hartnett and Wilson 1999; Eom et a1. 2000; Klironornos et a1. 2000) and 
other grass-dominated ecosystems (Dhillion and Anderson 1993; Koske 
and Gemma 1997), but little is known about their status in ponderosa pine 
forests. Two northern Arizona studies have shown that densities of their 
propagules were higher after restoration thinning and after thinning and 
burning than in control areas (Korb et a1. 2003). Propagules were more 
abundant where grass cover was greater and tree canopy cover was less. 
These fungi probablyspread from preexisting mycorrhizal hyphae in liv­
ing and dead plant roots; increased light and water in treated stands also 
probablyincreased photosynthesis and mycorrhizal infection. Arbuscular 
mycorrhizae propagules were also more abundant under beetle-killed pon­
derosa pine stands in Colorado than under nearby living pine stands 
(Kovacic et a1. 1984), reflecting the presence of host herbaceous species. 
Fire severity significantly affects the densityof these propagules. Low­
severity burns char litter and duff; moderate bums mostly consume litterand 

1-+. Understor), Vegetation 
2~'"
) / 
duff; and severe burns completely consume it, leaving white ash (USDI 
i'\ational Park Service 1992). Comparisons between thinned-only and 
thinned and burned treatments suggest that propagule densities are not 
signific~Jntly affected by prescribed fire when burns are of low intensity and 
short duration (Kerb et a1. 2003), but high-intensity, long-duration burning of 
slash piles results in significantly lower densities (Korb et a1. 2001; Figure 
14.1)· 
E\'idence suggests that some ponderosa pine understory communities 
prior to the mid-1880s may have been dominated by warm~season (C-l) 
grasses, which are often strongly mycotrophic (Cooper 1960; Pearson et 
a1. 1971 ). For example, data from plots measured in 1912 showed that C, 
grasses predominated over C3 grasses (Arnold 1950). The timing of cattle 
grazing may have shifted this balance (Pearson et a1. 1971) because cattle 
grazing between June and October favored C3 grass establishment by uti­
lizing C4 grasses more heavily (Arnold 1950). However, a phytolith study 
near Flagstaff that used plant silica remains to assess vegetation history sug­
gested that C4 grasses may historically have been widely distributed but 
less abundant than C3 grasses (Kerns et a1. 2001). 
Currently, species that often form no mycorrhizal associations, such as 
sedges, and weakly mycotrophic C 3 grasses dominate southwestern pon­
derosa pine forests. These forests will probably continue to lack produc­
tive understory communities.unless treatments are implemented that favor 
arbuscular mycorrhizae and herbaceous host plants by reducing tree 
canopy coverand litter cover. Studies in other ecosystems have shown that 
C4grasses generally outcompete C.,grasses when grown in the presence of 
arbuscular mycorrhizae, but C 3 grasses are competitively superior in soils 
without them (Noyd et a1. 1995; Hetrick et a1. 1994). Increased fungi pop­
ulations in restoration treatment areas might help perennial mycotrophic 
species replace non- and weakly mycotrophic species, thereby increasing 
C4 grass cover (Johnson 1998). Fungi presence, though, does not always 
lead to growth ofdesirable species. For example, Marler et a1. (1999) found 
that arbuscular mycorrhizae enhanced competitive effects of the invasive 
spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa) on a native bunchgrass during 
greenhouse tests. Increasing fungal propagule densities, then, may not 
always be a goal of restoration treatments intended to promote native herba­
ceous species diversity and productivity. 
Future research in ponderosa pine forest reference and restoration areas 
should focus on assessing how belowground fungal diversity influences 

FIGURE 14-1. Intense slash pile fires can destroy plant materials, promote the 
growth of invasive 'species, and slow understory recovery. Photograph by Doc 
SmithlEcological Restoration Institute. 
aboveground plant diversity and communitystructure. Recent studies have 
shown that increasing the diversity of arbuscular mycorrhizae can 
increase plant diversity and overall community structure (van der Heij- . 
den et al. 1998b; Klironomos et al. 2000). More studies should quantify 
propagule densities in different restoration and reference areas, as well as . 
the maximum soil temperature and fire duration that fungi can withstand 
before their density is reduced during prescribed burning. We also sug- . 
gest experimental studies to determine arbuscular mycorrhizae effects 
on competitive interactions between exotic species and native bunch­
grasses. 

14. Understory Vegetation 
239
~!~~K:t" : 
~
.· .:;::S: · ,]'-"Seed Banks
{fJf
' ; 
~r";~t· 
01 
~:\~iY " ~ . d banks-reser,es of viable, ungerminated seeds in the soil or on 
"",;: :;.. SOlI see 
'1979) 
1 " 
1 . 
.
ft 
fti'~'0. ,.. '" - 'I rface (GrIme 
-p ay an Important ro e In revegetation a er 
~m.. ' thesor sun,  
di;( .~ ,..·..·. b ce Where native seeds are common in the soil, plant communi­ 
: ','-" distur an .  
j;:i-~ ;:'; ..- -
often reestablish themselves without manual seeding. Seed banks . 
'.'-" ".bes can 
:.~~:F -
· · '., rve as I'ndicators of early successional communitv response following
:';1,' an se ' 
/ 
~'? ~sturbance by providing information on potential species composition, 
~~~'i:' rd a tive abundance, and distribution (van der Valk and Pederson 1989); 
i-ir they can also serve as a.geneticall7 local see.d source, Restoration ec~lo­
: ~?; 
' ists are generally most Interested In the persistent seed bank that survives 
)J,i-" · =t leastuntil the second germination season following maturation (Baskin 
;~ ::':~' a n d Baskin 1998) because it represents the long-term survival of individual 
~,{~;: species in the community and can provide a so-called "memory" of his­
::r " torical vegetation composition and abundance (Baker 1989). There is a 
' i\:.- wealth of knowledge regarding the role and dynamics of seed banks in 
i< ; grassland ecosystems (Bakker et a1. 1996; Kitajima and Tilman 1996; 
: " Tilman 1997) and other herb- and shrub-dominated ecosystems (Koniak 
Y ·.,and Everett 1982; Hassan and West 1986; Putwain and Gillham 1990; 
· " 
Warr et a1. 1994), but little in ponderosa pine forests. 
Viable seed numbers and species composition varygreatly among seed 
bank studies in ponderosa pine forests, from highs of viable seeds of fifty­
seven species found in a Washington study (Pratt et a1. 1984) to only three 
. species in a study near Flagstaff (Vose and White 1987), and low numbers 
of viable seedlings in soil samples from the Black Hills of South Dakota 
(Wienk et a1. 2000). In the Uinkaret Mountains of northern Arizona, high 
proportions of nonnative seeds but relatively few native perennial grasses 
were found in the ponderosa pine forest soil seed bank (Springer 1999). In 
contrast, in a seed bank study in Fort Valley, near Flagstaff, thirty-six species 
were found, most of them native perennial forbs and grasses (Korb et a1. 
2000). Seed bank species composition was also dominated by native peren­
nial forbs and grasses in ponderosa stands at the Gus Pearson Natural Area 
near Flagstaff (Harper 1999). 
Restoration thinning did not alter distribution of seeds in Fort Valley 
(Korb et a1. 2000) or the Uinkaret Mountains (Springer 1999). The effect 
of prescribed burning on the soil seed bank has not been quantified in 
large-scale restoration treatments, However, fire did not affect the seed bank 
in one 40-acre (l6-hectare) unit thinned and burned at low intensity in 

240 
RE STOR I i\' G Ai\' 0 PROTEe T I x G B I 0 LOG I CAL 01 VE RS [TY 
Fort Valley. In contrast, high-intensity, long-duration slash pile burns '  
significantly reduced the seed bank through seed consumption (Korb et  
al. 2001; Figures 14.1 , 14.2).  
In undisturbed environments, seed banks and aboveground vegetation 
are often poorly correlated (Pratt et al.,1984; Ingersoll and Wilson 1993). 
This trend was observed in undisturbed ponderosa pine forests in the Fort 
Valley and Uinkaret Mountains studies. However, the seed bank and 
aboveground vegetation were strongly correlated in both areas after restora­
tion thinning. For example, blue-eyed Mary (Collinsia parviflora ), a native 
, annual, was the most abundant species in the seed bank and aboveground 
vegetation following thinning in the Uinkarets (Springer 1999). The sim­
ilarity between the soil seed bank and aboveground vegetation after thin­
ning illustrates the potential importance of seed banks in establishing early 
successional herbaceous communities following restoration treatments. 
More studies are needed in different restoration areas to determine the 
quantity of viable seeds in the soil seed bank, their nativity, longevity, and 
germination cues, and their relationship to aboveground vegetation before 
and after restoration. In addition, research should examine how recruitment 
from the soil seed bank can be manipulated through different treatments. 
Understanding how recruitment from the soil seed bank is affected by the 
size, frequency, and intensity of thinning and prescribed burning treatments 
will be crucial in promoting the recruitment of native rather than nonna- , 
tive and exotic species. Keddy (1989) outlined three main questions 'that 
we suggest adapting for ponderosa pine forest restoration: What environ­
mental factors regulate germination in vegetation gaps created by thinning 
and prescribed burning? How do target species respond to these factors? 
Which factors are most easily manipulated to obtain desired effects? 
Herbaceous and Shrub Understory Response , 
Herbaceous and shrub response to thinning and prescribed burningisdepen­
dent upon numerousfactors, includingextantvegetation, treatment intensity,  
mycorrhizal associations and soil properties, soil seed bank, disturbance his­ 
tory, herbivory, and climatic variation. As a result; general statements on  
understory response to restoration treatments throughout the Southwestare  
difficult to make, especially since the majority of studies monitoring under­

FIGURE 14.2. Native, ruderal (early successional), and exotic seeds per square 
meter along a slash pile gradient seven months after burning. These intense fires 
can both impoverish the soil seed bank and alter postfire plant community compo­
sition. From Korb 2001 b. 
storyresponse to restoration treatments are still in their early stages. Here we 
present the results of individual studies on these responses. More research on 
these responses is needed to assure the persistence of understory vegetation 
following treatments. 
Response to Prescribed Fire' 
Numerous studies have been conducted on how prescribed fire affects 
overstory trees in southwestern ponderosa pine forests, but relatively few 
have investigated its effects on understory species (Pearson et al. 1972; 
Eakle 1976; Harris 1978; Andariese 1982; Harris and Covington 1983; Vose 
1984; Vose and White 1987, 1991; Wh ite et a1. 1991). Overall, burning in 
ponderosa pine seems to favor grasses over forbs (Weaver 1951b; Pearson 
et al, 1972; Harris and Covington 1983\ and appears to cause an overall 
increase in plant production, or biomass (Pearson et al. 1972; Harris and 
Covington 1983; Covington et a1. 1997). 
Most of the literature on understory plant response to prescribed fire in 
these forests focuses on grasses, which can respond in a highly species-specific 
way (White et a1. 1991). Arizona fescue and mountain muhly both failed to 

z-t2 
RESTO RING AN D PROTECTI NG BI OLO GICAL DIVE RS ITY 
flower the first year following a prescribed fire, for example, but both resumed 
flowering the second year; these plants invested resources in vegetative growth 
during the first year and then resumed reproduction. In contrast, phenology 
was not significantly alteredfor muttongrass or squirreltail. While mountain 
muhlysuffered high mortality and a loss ofbiomass following prescribed fire 
in both open and dense forest patches, squirre1tai1 maintained the same bio­
mass following fire in dense patches and increased in biomass after fire on 
open sites (Vose and White 1991). 
Woody and herbaceous dicot species also show individual responses to 
prescribed fire. Fendler's ceanothus (Ceanothus (endleri) experienced high 
mortality from prescribed fire in one Arizona study; however, it resprouted 
vigorously (Vose and White 1991). Thistles showed a positive response to 
prescribed fire, while Wright's deervetch (Lotus wrightii) and Woods's rose 
(Rosa arizonica) were not affected (Vose1984). Overall, Vose (1984) found 
that the major source of seedling recruitment after fire was from seed pro­ 
vided by plants onsite; seed rain from outside sources and the seed bank  
had little effect on recruitment. Vose and White (1987) suggest that a pre­
treatment inventory of species composition, density, and seed production 
can be useful in predicting understory response to prescribed fire. 
Individual species response to fire isbeyondthe scope ofthis book. How­
ever,manygoodsourcesof information are available, in particular the Fire 
Effects Information System (FEIS) database (USDA Forest Service 2002). 
Response to Thinning and Prescribed Fire 
The longest-running southwestern studyofunderstory response to restoration 
thinning aloneand tothinning and prescribed fire isat the Gus Pearson Nat­
ural Area. This study hasmonitored herbaceous understoryresponse for five 
years in a control area, an areatreatedonlywiththinning, and an area treated 
with thinning and prescribed fire. Treatment type.had a large influence on 
understory response, but the canopy type of forest patches had an equal or 
greater influence (Casey 2001). Four patch canopy types occurred. 
• Presettlement patches with trees generally greater than 14.8 inches  
(37.6centimeters) dbh (diameter at breastheight), or yellow-barked  
• Postsettlernent patches with trees less than 14.8 inches dbh, or black­ 
barked - these areas were thinned, with some trees retained  
• Postsettlement patches converted to openings through removal of all trees 
• Remnant natural grassy openings (COVington et a1. 1997) 

14. Understory Vegetation 
243 
overall herbaceous production in both thinned-only and thinned and 
burned areas increased substantially after treatment (Casey 2001). Forbs
decreased in the area thinned, but increased in the areathinned and burned 
, (Casey 2001). Presettlement patches showed the lowest production in the 
thinned-only and thinned and burned treatments, while grassy remnants 
had the highest production and were relatively stable in composition and 
abundance for all five years following restoration treatments (Casey 2001). 
In areas where all trees were removed, understory production was 1.5 times 
higher than in areas where postsettlement trees were retained. 
~'1onitoring also revealed species differences in response to both thin­
ning and prescribed fire , Both silvery lupine (Lupinus argenteus), a forb, 
and pine dropseed (Blepharoneuron tricholepis), a grass, increased in den­
sity, height, and reproducti ve output in treated areas (Machina et a1. 2001), 
but a drought in 2000 had a greater impact on lupine response than on 
that of pine dropseed. These results suggest that silvery lupine is less tol­
erant of drought than pine dropseed in both control and treated areas, and 
that both these species grow and reproduce less in dense forests than in 
treated areas. 
Understory herbaceous and shrub responses to thinning-only and thin­
ning and prescribed burning treatments have also been monitored following 
thinning in 1998 and burning of one block in 1999 in FortValley. Two years 
after thinning-only and thinning and burning treatments, significantly more 
species were found in treated units than in controls (Korb 200la). Cover by 
nonnative and ruderal (early successional species that respond to high soil 
nutrient levels) species increased significantly two years after thinning and 
one year after prescribed fire treatments, even in drought conditions, likely 
because their seeds were abundant in the soil seed bank before treatment. 
Therewas no significant difference, though, in total herbaceous and shrub 
cover two years after treatment. Instead, the second year following treatments 
showed declines in cover. These results likely occurred because 2000 was a 
year ofbelow-average precipitation, as declines werepresentin both control 
and treatment areas (Korb 2001a), as well as in restoration treatments in 
southwest Colorado (Romme et a1. 2001). In general, areas with higher pre­
treatment cover also had higher posttreatment cover. 
Response of Fendler's ceanothus to the same treatments was generally 
positive, although it was constrained by mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) 
and elk (Cervus elaphus) herbivory (Huffman 2001; Huffman and Moore 
in press). Seedlings were more abundant in burned areas, and plants also 

. 2++ 
RESTO RI"G A"D PR O T E C T I " G BIOL O G IC AL DI VE R SIT Y 
resprouted after burning. Although stem numbers increased more than  
100 percent on average in areas that had been thinned and burned and  
were subsequently protected from herbivores, they decreased in unburned  
plots, even those that were protected from herbivory.  
In general, thinning in combination with prescribed burningappears to  
have the greatest positive effect on native species (Huffman 2001). The  
effects of prescribed fire are unlike those of high-intensity fires that burn  
hot enough to cause high tree mortality; many grasses, for example, are  
generally favored by prescribed fire, but negatively affected by intense  
wildfires (Sackett and Haase 1998). Stand-replacing wildfires can also pro­ 
mote nonnative plant invasion (Griffis et a1. 2001).  
Revegetation  
The soil seed bank is the initial primary source of colonizing propagules in  
treated areas, though wind and animal dispersal can also be important 
mechanisms forseed movement. Over time, onsiteplants become increas­
ingly important as propagule sources, but areas degraded by past manage­ 
ment activities likely have seed banks that either lackviable seedsofdesired  
native species or are dominated by early-successional, "weedy" species,  
both native and nonnative. If small populations ofnative species are also  
negatively affected bylow levels ofavailablesoilnutrients or limited mycor­ 
rhizal propagules, natural regeneration may be insufficient, and seeding  
.or transplanting may be necessary. Active revegetation of a restoration site  
can also help slow soil erosion following thinning and burning. 
Site Assessment 
One of the most valuable tools in planning revegetation is a site assess­ 
ment, or determination of site potential. The revegetation approach taken  
and the amount of information that can be gathered will depend upon the  
time and money available,  
The "cadillac" approach, utilizing a full-scale site assessment, is prefer­ 
ablewhen moneyand time are unlimited.Atthe scale ofmost largerestora­ 
tion projects, however, land managers will have to aim for whatevercan be  
achieved within the limits of modest budgets. A full-scale site assessment  
should take the following abiotic factors into account:  
• Soils: physical and chemical characteristics, nutrients available to  
plants, visible soil erosion  

14, Understory Vegetation 
245 
• Precipitation: annual amount and seasonality 
• Light: levels available to plants before and after thinning of overstory , 
trees 
• Fuel loading: predicts impacts of fire On vegetation 
• Fire history: fire intervals, time since last fire 
• Aspect and slope: north-facing slopes are cooler and moister than 
south-facing slopes; soils accumulate at the bottom ofsteepslopes 
• Climate: temperature and prevailing winds 
A complete site assessment should also include biotic factors, such as: 
• Mvcorrhizae 
/ 
• Seed sources and plant material available onsite 
• Soil seed bank density and species composition 
• Plant commun ity composition, including invasive nonnatives 
• Grazing by wild or domestic ungulates 
• Human impacts, past and present, such as silvicultural treatments, "  
past herbicide applicati ons, and recreational uses  
• Pathogens that might infect native species 
The factors determined are dependent on available time and money,  
but information on several is critical. Surveys of the surrounding plant com­ 
munity are essential in formulating a species list. At a minimum, soil and  
precipitation characteristics should be considered when determining  
desired species for planting; otherwise, revegetation is likely to fail. The  
plant community may no longer resemble the historic community, so any  
nearby reference sites are valuable for determining species composition  
and abundance. Because some plant species require mycorrhizal associa­ 
tions for normal growth, knowing whether a site has mycorrhizal propag­ 
ules is also important.  
Seed Collection and Seeding 
With adequate planning and basic knowledge of life cycles and phenol­ 
ogy, it is possible to collect propagules from species present in the study  
area for seeding or propagation of container plants (Busco and Maschin­ 
ski 1999). This requires appropriate collecting permits from land manage­ 
ment agencies. To decrease the risk of negatively impacting local genetic  
adaptations of species in the treatment area, seed should be collected on,  
or within a few miles of, the area undergoing restoration. Seed collection  
is time-consuming and requires knowledge of each species' phenology. For  

246 
RESTORING AND PROTECTING BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY 
optimal results, plants must be monitored so that seed is collected at the 
appropriate time to obtain maximum germination potential. Seed can also 
be collected onsite in limited quantities and then planted in a production 
garden at or near the restoration site, where it can be closely monitored 
and harvested at the appropriate time in larger quantities . This approach 
is challenging in the arid climate of the Southwest. A similar method is to 
"farm out" seed by shipping it to farms or ranches where it can be irrigated, 
harvested, and shipped back to the restoration site for planting, In the inter­
est of maintaining genetic integrity, open pollination with other genotypes 
of the same species growing nearby should be prevented, particularly in 
the case ofrare species (Falk and Holsinger 1991; Falk et al. 1996). 
For best results in collecting seeds, it is important to consider the fol­
lowing (Knapp and Rice 1994; Busco and Maschinski 1999; pers, comm., 
J. Busco): 
• Annual seed production can be highly dependent on weather 
conditions. It is not unusual to find successful reproduction in a 
nearby area or similar habitat if plants have failed to set seed at one 
location. Likewise, where seed collection is hampered by herbivory, it 
maybe possible to time collections before seed is grazed, or to locate 
collections where animals have not removed fruit. When seed is 
absent or in short supply, vegetative means of propagation (cuttings, 
division, bulb-scales) may provide propagules of some species. 
• Seed should be collected in areas free of invasive, nonnative species. ' 
If this is not possible, less mechanized, more labor-intensive means of 
seed collection should be employed. 
• Knowledge of weather patterns and animal movements can aid in 
collecting seed before it is damaged by frost, hail, grazing, wind, or 
other environmental factors. 
• Personnel must be trained to recognize desired species and seed­
development stages. 
,. To maintain genetic integrity and environmental adaptations, collect 
seed from many plants; several hundred to a few thousand may be 
necessary for some genotypes. Local populations, though, can be 
harmed by overcollecting. 
• Because neighboring plants may be related, collect seed from widely 
separated plants. Using a transect, or collecting perpendicular to 
prevailing winds, may reduce risks of collecting seed from related 
plants. 

H. Understory Vegetation 
247 
• Seed should be collected from plants in microclimates similar to  
those of the restoration site, and from plants with varying phenotypes,  
including both robust and less vigorous plants. Plants growing in poor  
en\'ironments may have adaptations to suboptimal conditions.  
• Seed should be handled carefully, kept from excessive heat, cold, and  
moisture, and be stored in a cool, dry place free of insects and  
rodents. Prestorage treatment (e.g. freezing, or insecticide or  
desiccant use) can help prevent losses to insects and rodents.  
There are several main pitfalls to collecting native species: 
• Some native species have seed production that is cyclical or tied to  
varying weather patterns, thereby hampering collection.  
• Few large, accessible areas with native seeds lack noxious weeds. 
• Environmental factors such as frost, hail, grazing, and wind, and ,  
physiological characteristics such as seed shatter, impede collection.  
• Improper collection, storage, and cleaning practices can cause seed  
mortality (Dunne 1999).  
This chapter is not detailed enough to cover the seeding requirements 
of species found in southwestern ponderosa pine forests; for such informa­
tion see Young and Young (1986) and Baskin and Baskin (1998), contact the , 
nearest USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Plant Materials 
Center, or see resources provided by the Native Plants Network (2002). 
If seed must be obtained commercially, it should stem from approxi­ 
matelya 100-mile (l60-kilometer) radius of the restoration site, and from 
a similar habitat (Millar and Libby 1989; Knapp and Rice 1994). Com­
mercial seed mixes can introduce invasive species. The extra expense of 
certified weed-free seed is often justified when weed-control costs are con­ 
sidered. Seed should be inspected visually before planting and rejected if 
it is of the wrong species or if a high proportion of undesirable species is 
detected. Aftergermination, revegetated areasshould be selectively weeded  
if invasive species are present-prevention before infestation pays off in  
the long run .  
Moisture iscritical in determining seeding success in dryclimates; prop­ 
erly timed precipitation is crucial. The best time to seed varies by species.  
Ifseeding must be accomplished at one time, it should be done prior to the  
, summer monsoon (typicallymid-June to early July) (Lavin and Springfield 
1955). Seeds often fail to germinate, or seedlings often die, if monsoonal 
rains are insufficient. In areas of dependably heavy snowfall, seed may-also 

"':;.:j; 
. ~f· 1
248 
RESTORING AND PROTECTING BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY  
'=i~ 
:.;:.;;
be planted after September 15 (Lavin and Springfield 1955). Fall seeding~~
of native grasses, forbs, and shrubs has been successful in revegetation in ~ 
the Uinkaret Mountains.  
.
Seedbed preparation is also critical. Rough soil surfaces with pits and) 
holes tend to capture seeds (Chambers and Maclvlahon 1994). Treatrnents 
: ~
that increase surface roughness or provide wind barriers while minimizing , '~
soil disturbance are desirable.Nloisture-holding mulch, too, can promote '
seedling survival (Chambers 2000). Litter and mulch in small quantities '~ :
form desirable microsites. One abundant mulching material is pine nee- \
dles, a light application a few centimeters thick will help conserve moisture , ,
(pers. comm., J. Busco). However, pine needles also have a low carbon-to- <
nitrogen ratio and are acidic. Various mechanical methods, such as drilling :
or covering seeds with soil after planting, and soil amendments such as ' 
mulches, tackifiers, and mycorrhizal inoculants, have exhibited varying'
degrees ofsuccess and are extremelysite-and weather-dependent. Any new 
.  
. -
seeding method or amendment should be tested on a small scale before ' 
being applied more broadly. Judicious selective seeding in protected habi-
, tats and microclimates has been used successfully in southwestern forests 
(pers. comrn. J. Busco) , 
,
, Seeding can be successful. It has aided in reestablishing native vegeta- '
tion in the Uinkaret Mountains (Chapter 12). In a forest road revegetation 
project near Flagstaff, road-ripping followed by seeding of native plants 
increased plant cover and density more than did ripping alone (Elseroad 
2001). Addition of ponderosa pine mulch increased the density of certain 
species, but not all.Coveringburned slash pile siteswith a mix ofseeds and 
soil naturally inoculated with arbuscular mycorrhizae has been shown to "
promote revegetation more quickly than seeding directly on ashbeds (Korb 
2001b). In choosing species, managers may want to consider fast-growing 
plants that reproduce within a year and provide a valuable seed source for 
collection and dispersal to adjacent restoration sites (pers. comm., Craig 
'Dremann). 
Transplanting 
Although costly and notwidely available, containerized plants often expe- '
rience a higher survival rate than directly applied seeds (pers. comm., J. 
Busco). They can result from vegetative division or cuttings, or from seed. 
Vegetative propagation more quickly produces morphologically mature 
and relatively large specimens than does seeding (Hartmann and Kester  

]-f, Understory Vegetation 
249 
1975 ), The best times to transplant are prior to, or during, the monsoon sea­
"son and during the dormant season, from before soil freezing in fall until 
soil has thawed in spring. Time-release water products (such as DRi\VA­
TER) can increase transplant survi val when incorporated into container 
planting mixes or planting backfill. Container plants can also be inocu­
lated \\'ith mvcorrh izac (St. John 1990). 
Transplants should be grown with large, healthy root systems and sturdy, 
"but not lush, top gro\\th. Actively growing greenhouse transplants should 
be hardened-off before planting. It is vital that container soils are well mois­
tened before planting out, that transplants are thoroughly watered upon 
planting, and that soils retain moisture until precipitation occurs. Appli­
cation of pine needles, organic debris, or rock mulch can help preventsoil 
drying and resultant mortality. Containerized specimens for dormant 
planting should be hardened-off and allowed to reach full dormancybefore 
planting."Dormant plants should also be watered before and during plant­
ing. Mulches can insulate transplants from frost-heavingduring dormancy 
(pers. comrn., J. Busco). 
Grasses and forbs should be planted in a random spatial arrangement 
and close together in "islands" that create moderate microclimates. Plant­
ing uphill of or upwind of a desired area of colonization can allowgravity 
or prevailing winds to further spread seeds. Protected locations, including 
areas adjacent to rocks that will hold water and act as thermal insulators, 
can aid in establishment. Because containerized plants are costly, they 
should be planted in selected microsites where establishment and long­
term survival can be monitored. 
In the Uinkaret Mountains, four species were transplanted following 
restoration treatments (unpub. data, Springer). Specimens of blue grama 
(Bouteloua gracilis), White Mountain sedge (Carex geophila), muttongrass, 
and squirreltail were removed in early November 1996 (a drought year) 
from adjacent forested areas and planted in a treatment area one day after 
a prescribed burn. No supplemental watering was done. Five years after 
transplanting, muttongrass and squirreltail exhibited much higher survival 
rates than the other species. Transplants of all four species in an untreated 
control area nearby experienced 100 percent mortality. 
Fertilization 
Incorporation of a balanced, slow-release fertilizer into planting mixes, or 
injection of fertilizer into irrigation water, will produce healthy, vigorous 

250 
RESTORING AND PROTECTING BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY 
container plants. Fertilizer formulations should be depleted bythe time of';.
planting at the restoration site. Once plants are established outdoors, fer-
.~ ~~
tilization is generally not encouraged because increased soil nutrients, par-
, ~.
ticularly nitrogen, can promote growth of early successional species, par- .z~
ticularly undesirable non natives. Little research has been done in' : :
southwestern ponderosa pine forests to determine if fertilization may be : ': '
desirable in some instances. In southeastern longleaf pine (Pinus palus- :
iris) forests biomass ofnativespecies was initially greater on phosphorus-fer-
, ~
tilized plots, but byseven years aftertreatment it was greater on unfertilized ' <
plots (Brockway et al. 1998). Most native species in southwestern pon- '
derosa pine forests have mycorrhizal relationships that allow sufficient ,
phosphorus uptake in a fairly harsh environment. Following burning, :
increased soil nutrients often favor nonnative species over the more stress- '
tolerant natives (St. John 1987). 
Monitoring and Maintenance 
Monitoring and documentation of methods, precipitation, and timing of 
planting are essential in determining restoration success arid planning 
future modifications. Restored areas should be protected from grazing and 
recreational impactsforat least twoto five years to prevent soilcompaction 
and allow understory plants to become established. Areas severely impacted 
by past management practices, recent drought, or other factors that have 
slowed plant community recovery may require deferrals of grazing or rec­
reation for much longer periods. Additional studies and guidelines will be 
necessary in determining when an area can be considered "restored." 
Revegetation of restorationsites is an evolvingpractice; there isstillmuch 
to be learned. 
