Copyright © 2007 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Fiedler, C. E., P. Friederici, M. Petruncio, C. Denton, and W. D. Hacker. 2007. Managing for old growth in
frequent-fire landscapes. Ecology and Society 12(2): 20. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/
iss2/art20/
Synthesis, part of a Special Feature on The Conservation and Restoration of Old Growth in Frequent-fire
Forests of the American West
Managing for Old Growth in Frequent-fire Landscapes
Carl E. Fiedler 1, Peter Friederici 2, Mark Petruncio 3, Charles Denton 4, and W. David Hacker 5
ABSTRACT. There is no one-size-fits-all approach to managing frequent-fire, old-growth forests.
However, there are general guidelines to follow: 1) set objectives for both structure (tree density, diameter
distribution, tree species composition, spatial arrangement, amount of coarse woody debris) and function
(nutrient cycling, desired tree species regeneration); 2) prioritize treatments according to ecological,
economic, and social needs and risks; 3) identify the potential treatments (natural fire, prescribed fire,
silvicultural cutting) that best meet the objectives and scale of the project; and 4) implement the treatment
(s). We discuss each of these guidelines in this article.
Key Words: fire, forest management, function, silvicultural treatments, structure, thinning 
ESTABLISHING A FRAMEWORK FOR
OLD-GROWTH MANAGEMENT
In their article in this special issue, Kaufmann and
his colleagues (2007) point out the difficulty of
defining the elusive term “old growth.” However,
examining multiple definitions reveals some
common themes, including the importance of
structure, function, and associated disturbance
regime. For example, management treatments
proposed for old growth in landscapes visited only
every several centuries by stand-replacing fire are
generally viewed as unacceptable, yet treatments
may be critical for restoring structures or processes
in forests historically influenced by fire every few
years or decades. It is these frequent-fire-dependent
forests that we will focus on in this article.
Ownership and management goals also define the
range of treatments that may be compatible for
restoring old-growth structures or processes. For
example, treatments appropriate for designated
wilderness, national parks, national monuments,
and roadless areas are typically limited to natural or
prescribed fire, whereas silvicultural cutting is a
common treatment on private, state, and tribal
ownerships, and on lands managed under
conservation easements. Forests with old-growth
structure largely intact, but with altered processes,
will likely require a different suite of treatments than
forests lacking essentially all old-growth structural
components. In this article, we propose a variety of
treatment approaches appropriate for a range of
ownership goals and old-growth restoration needs.
SETTING OBJECTIVES FOR TREATMENT
When issues threatening sustainability have been
identified in old-growth areas relative to ownership
objectives, managers need to consider treatments
that develop or maintain old-growth conditions.
Several key attributes provide focus for managers
as they set objectives for treatment. These attributes
can be classified as either structural or functional.
Structural Attributes
Structural features are perhaps the most significant
and observable characteristic of old-growth
conditions. Although structural features alone do
not old growth make, large old trees and modest
amounts of large dead material (standing or
downed) are essential components of old growth.
Features 
such 
as 
stand 
density, 
diameter
distribution, age distribution, species composition,
and spatial arrangement provide managers with
1College of Forestry and Conservation, University of Montana, 
2School of Communication, Northern Arizona University, 
3Forestry Program, Yakama
Nation, 
4Ecological Restoration Institute, 
5Forestry Department, New Mexico Highlands University

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
ranges of conditions as targets for treatment, and
with benchmarks for assessing progress following
treatments. Although the primary objective of
managing for old growth may be ecological or
visual, structural objectives, such as numbers and
patterns of old trees or ranges of other structural
components (e.g., reserve basal area densities or
diameter distributions), typically provide more
immediate and measurable treatment goals.
 Density
High stand density (basal area) might seem an
obvious characteristic of old growth. However, it is
not a hallmark of uneven-aged, old-growth stands
adapted to frequent, low-intensity disturbance. Such
stands are primarily composed of shade-intolerant
pines that require the creation of scattered openings
every one to several decades to regenerate a new
age class. The young pines need nearly full light to
develop through the vulnerable juvenile stage and
ultimately grow to large size. Establishing ranges
of density as an objective of treatment ensures that
such conditions will be created in parts of the stand
during a given treatment entry. One approach is to
set a reserve basal area density as a general target
for the post-treatment stand. For example, a post-
treatment basal area of 10–18 m2 per hectare may
provide the conditions for regeneration in parts of
the stand, while reducing the density around larger
trees to enhance their growth and vigor. The actual
density on any given acre within a stand will
typically vary considerably from the overall target
or average, ranging from small openings in some
parts of the stand to occasional high-density patches
in others (Fiedler 1996). Most to all large, old trees
are retained under this approach, with some trees
retained in all diameter classes, if available, until
the average target basal area for the stand is reached.
Another approach is to reserve all trees that
established before about 1880 (i.e., presettlement
trees) and reserve additional post-settlement trees
based on lingering evidence of presettlement snags
and stumps. Under this approach, a certain ratio of
post-settlement trees, often ranging from 1.5 to 6
depending on tree size and intensity of the thinning
prescription, is retained proximate to evidence of
each presettlement tree (Friederici 2003). A
hallmark of this approach is that the retained trees
approximate the spatial arrangement of the
historical stand.
 Diameter distribution
Historical stands ranged from those dominated by
large, old trees of approximately the same size to
those that supported a wide range of tree sizes,
including saplings, poles, and medium-sized and
very large trees (Woolsey 1911, Anderson 1933,
Meyer 1934, Cooper 1960). Treatments aimed at
maintaining or developing large-tree-dominated
structures will retain most or all of the large trees in
the existing stand. Treatments on federal lands
typically reserve all (or nearly all) large trees,
whereas treatments applied to private, state, or tribal
lands may remove a portion of the larger trees to
achieve a range of objectives, including economic
ones. If smaller trees or trees of other species are
numerous, nearly all will be removed other than the
few needed as large-tree recruits for the future. An
approximate target reserve density can be specified
for stands where a range of diameters is appropriate.
Most of that density will be reserved as large trees,
with modest amounts of basal area allocated to trees
across the full range of diameters, if available
(including small trees of the desired species), until
the overall target density is reached.
 Species composition
Old-growth stands occurring on sites classified
within the frequent-fire regime were historically
dominated by ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa var.
ponderosa). The primary compositional target
should also contain ponderosa pine when managing
for old growth because of its adaptation to frequent,
low-intensity disturbances. Ponderosa pine is also
more resistant to insects and disease than its more
shade-tolerant 
competitors 
(e.g., 
Douglas-fir
(Pseudotsuga menziesii var. glauca) or true firs
(Abies spp.)), if present.
 Spatial arrangement
Historical old-growth stands were characterized by
clumpy to random spatial arrangement (Cooper
1961, Morgan et al. 2002), whereas old trees in dry
savanna conditions typically occurred in random
arrangement. Clumpiness may have resulted from
regeneration in microsites especially hospitable to
seedling establishment, such as protected areas
behind downed logs, recently burned patches, or
small openings created by beetle-, lightning-, or
windthrow-caused deaths of one or several trees
(Weaver 
1951). 
Clumpy 
to 
random 
tree

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
arrangement should also guide the marking of
prescriptions focused on restoring or maintaining
old-growth structures.
 Coarse woody debris/snags
Large dead trees (snags) and downed logs are
integral parts of old-growth structure. Although no
specific historical data are available related to snags
or large dead and downed pieces, researchers have
deduced that frequent, low-intensity fires likely kept
these features at low levels. Anecdotal evidence
from historical photographs of old-growth stands
show few snags or downed logs. However, large
dead wood, whether standing or down, provides
important habitat for certain wildlife species and
invertebrates, so at least some of these features per
hectare should be maintained or developed in
prescriptions focused on restoring old-growth
structures.
Functional Attributes
The processes associated with historical old-growth
forests are less evident but, perhaps, even more
important than the structures themselves. Decades
to more than a century without fire have allowed
historically open, old-growth structures to fill in
with small- and medium-sized (often late-
successional) trees. Lack of disturbance (i.e., fire)
combined with high tree density have drastically
slowed nitrogen cycling processes, halted formation
and subsequent addition of charcoal to the soil,
reduced or eliminated many disturbance-dependent
and light-requiring native understory plants, and
virtually halted regeneration and reasonable
juvenile growth of ponderosa pine. Collectively,
these changes diminish or negate the processes that
characterize and sustain old-growth forests.
 Nutrient cycling
Research in ponderosa pine forests shows that late-
successional conditions slow nutrient cycling,
particularly of nitrogen (MacKenzie et al. 2004).
Studies by Covington and Sackett (1984) and Kaye
and Hart (1998) in Arizona, DeLuca and Zouhar
(2000) and Gundale et al. (2005) in Montana, and
Wienk et al. (2004) in South Dakota show increased
nutrient cycling following burning treatments
compared with untreated controls, although nutrient
cycling processes following a sustained, long-term
burning regime are not known (Hart et al. 2005).
 Ponderosa pine regeneration
The dense conditions that characterize many
present-day old-growth stands preclude regeneration
of a new age class of ponderosa pine that is needed
to provide old-growth recruits for the future. Given
that historical old-growth stands were broadly
uneven aged (Meyer 1934, Weaver 1951), periodic
regeneration is essential to sustain them. A detailed
regeneration study in old-growth ponderosa pine
stands in Montana found virtually no vigorous pine
regeneration established during a 15-year period in
untreated areas, whereas numerous pine seedlings
established in areas that received selection cutting
or selection cutting plus prescribed burning
restoration treatments (Fiedler 2000). Treated
stands that do not result in some pine regeneration
within a decade or two suggest that silvicultural
cutting or burning treatments did not adequately
reduce overstory density.
 Understory species diversity
Diverse understory communities in historical old-
growth forests reflect the availability of light,
moisture, and nutrients associated with open forest
conditions and frequent surface fires. As canopies
gradually close in the absence of disturbance, native
understory species that require high light conditions
or disturbances to germinate or sprout either
gradually diminish in vigor or disappear. Studies of
understory plant communities in South Dakota
(Wienk et al. 2004) and Montana (Fiedler et al.
2006, Metlen and Fiedler 2006) show increased
overall richness and increased numbers of native
species following restoration treatments compared
with untreated controls.
TREATMENT PRIORITIZATION
The maintenance and restoration of healthy old-
growth stands is seldom the only goal of forest
management. As a result, the conservation,
restoration, and development of old growth must be
balanced with other needs, and managers must
consider legal land status, economics, social
preferences, wildfire hazard, and proximity to
human communities when establishing treatment
priorities. Such decisions must be made on a site-
by-site basis and are beyond the purview of this
article. Here, we discuss how to prioritize treatments
to perpetuate existing old growth and develop
additional old-growth areas.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
The first step in prioritizing treatments is to classify
current forest conditions into one of three
categories: 1) forests that currently feature old-
growth structural components, 2) forests with
developing old-growth structural components, or 3)
forests lacking old-growth structural components.
Because old trees and old-growth conditions are rare
in most frequent-fire forests of western North
America, it is imperative to conserve and manage
them where they exist. For that reason, many
managers will focus their limited resources on
managing Category 1 areas—existing old growth.
However, it is also important to prepare some areas
as future old growth. To do so, a holistic
management approach on some properties will
include treatments in Category 2 and Category 3
areas where development of future old growth can
be accelerated through thoughtful treatments.
Although forest tracts seldom fall entirely into only
one of these categories, the guidelines below
provide ideas for prioritizing treatments within each
category. In reality, managers should consider
guidelines from all three categories for any
treatment.
Category 1
Where old-growth structural components exist,
several important questions should be addressed:
What is the biological and conservation value? Old-
growth stands and old trees have a variety of values.
Sites with extraordinarily old or large trees, or with
particularly high wildlife or aesthetic value, will
often merit particular consideration for treatment.
What is the risk of treatment? Restoration treatments
can themselves damage old-growth stands through
mechanical damage or damage from prescribed fire,
and these risks must be taken into account.
What is the risk of doing nothing? Two old-growth
stands with similar value may be at very different
levels of risk. For example, a stand isolated on a
rocky mesa may be at much lower fire risk than one
surrounded by dense forest, or one stand may be
much more heavily invaded by young trees than
another.
What is the feasibility of treatment? Many of the
stands with greatest old-growth value exist today
because in the past they were too inaccessible or too
steep to log. Mechanical treatments may be severely
limited in steep terrain if needed to remove dense
sapling/pole understories or shade-tolerant firs.
Prescribed fire or wildland fire use is also limited
on steep slopes due to the undesirable “chimney”
effect that allows surface fires to torch into the
overstory.
Category 2
Where old-growth structural components are
developing, it is useful to consider the previous
criteria, as well as several others:
What is the landscape setting? In treating areas
currently lacking developed old-growth features,
managers are essentially deciding where to
accelerate the development of future old-growth
conditions. It is helpful to consider the overall
landscape matrix in this process: Where will old-
growth conditions be most useful to wildlife and
people? Conservation biology provides tools that
can help assess what landscape habitat conditions
are important for healthy wildlife and plant
populations. For example, it may be beneficial to
species such as the Mexican spotted owl (Strix
occidentalis lucida) to establish future old-growth
conditions in an area connecting two existing old-
growth tracts, or it may be useful to develop old-
growth conditions in remote or roadless areas that
offer the opportunity for management using natural
(lightning-ignited) fire.
How can overall effectiveness be maximized? Some
areas are treated more easily than others, and it
should be part of every prioritization exercise to
consider whether to maximize treated acreage or to
focus on particular high-value tracts that may be
more expensive to treat.
Category 3
Extensive acreages of western pine forests lack any
old-growth conditions, and restoration treatments
carried out within them must take the long view.
The previous questions, as well as those listed
below, should be considered when prioritizing
treatments in these areas.
What temporal scale should be considered? 
Managers treating Category 3 areas are working to

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
establish old-growth conditions at some future time.
By conducting treatments in different places and
times across the landscape, managers can ensure
that a mosaic of forest conditions will exist across
the landscape in the future.
What can be gained through protection of adjacent
areas? Forest tracts do not exist in isolation. Some
of the most effective means of protecting existing
old-growth stands include thinning and prescribed
burning in adjacent Category 2 and Category 3
areas, especially those that are situated upwind or
are topographically lower. Such treatments can help
protect existing old growth from unnaturally intense
disturbances and accelerate development of old-
growth conditions in the surrounding treated areas.
What future maintenance will be required? Because
treatments are expensive and often difficult to
implement, long-term benefits can be gained by
placing them across the landscape in ways that
minimize the cost of future maintenance (additional
thinning or prescribed burning). Conducting
thinning or prescribed burning treatments in
locations that maximize the acreage potentially
treatable with natural fire is one example of this
strategy.
Prioritizing Beyond Categories
Decisions to prioritize treatment areas are not made
in isolation. In most settings, managers will have to
consider treating areas that contain at least some
acreage in each of the three categories, and they will
have to decide how to allocate resources among
those tracts. Addressing the questions posed above
will help in this allocation process. Spatial
assessment tools, such as those used in the
ForestERA Project (www.forestera.nau.edu), can
provide additional help. Qualitative assessments
should also be considered. As other authors in this
special issue have pointed out, the definition (and
appreciation) of old growth for many observers
involves primarily aesthetic and intangible
considerations. As a result, it may make sense to
prioritize treatments to protect or enhance old-
growth qualities in a certain area simply because it
is valuable to a community.
Overall stand health and tree vigor are also
important considerations in deciding treatment
priorities. For example, among Category 1 areas,
stands composed of old trees with declining vigor
would generally receive higher priority for
treatment than those with vigorous old trees. In
contrast, only stands comprised of vigorous middle-
aged and maturing trees would be candidates for
treatment in categories 2 and 3.
MANAGEMENT TREATMENTS
Management treatments may be needed, depending
on current conditions, to maintain or develop old-
growth conditions. Treatments can reduce stand
density, remove infected trees, promote ponderosa
pine regeneration, reduce fuel hazards, and alter tree
spatial 
distribution, 
structure, 
and 
species
composition. One or more of these modifications or
effects are needed in many old-growth areas
because the absence of low-intensity fire has
diminished their capacity to withstand more intense
fires. Likewise, treatments may be needed outside
these areas to help protect them from the increasing
risk of unnatural disturbances. Treatments may vary
from silvicultural cutting treatments to prescribed
or natural fire, used singly or in combination.
However, even with these treatments, not all old-
growth areas can be perpetuated indefinitely. An
area may lose its old-growth characteristics through
time if the old trees die and are not replaced by
mature recruits. Additionally, it is inevitable that
some areas will be lost through disturbance agents
or events such as insects, disease, or wildfire,
whether previously treated or not.
Natural and Prescribed Fire
Fire is a natural and key component of old-growth
in frequent-fire forested ecosystems and is
necessary for their health and sustainability.
However, use of natural (lightning-ignited) fire will
be severely limited in most old-growth areas until
existing fuel loads are substantially reduced. Once
old-growth structures are reasonably restored,
natural fire can be a primary tool for maintaining
these characteristics in some areas. Fire, whether
natural or prescribed, may be the only treatment
allowed or available in wilderness areas and
national parks. Paradoxically, the manager has less
control using fire than when applying cutting
treatments, yet fire has unique benefits. Prescribed
burning in inaccessible terrain also presents special
challenges and risks, but it can be accomplished with
careful planning and execution.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
Prescribed burning may be the only restoration
treatment applied in some old-growth areas, either
because of administrative constraints on cutting or
because of desired treatment effects, such as
minimizing soil disturbance. More commonly,
prescribed burning will be conducted as a follow-
up to silvicultural cutting to reduce natural fuels plus
those generated by the harvest activity. In isolated
situations, carefully applied prescribed burning may
be needed before silvicultural cutting to reduce
existing fuels before even more fuels are created in
the form of slash. Even after cutting, careful burning
is necessary to reduce damage to leave trees,
particularly if slash is left within the stand. Raking
thick duff layers away from the base of old trees
may be beneficial in some situations to reduce
mortality from prescribed burning (Covington et al.
1997).
Intermediate Treatments
Intermediate cutting treatments that modify stand
density, structure, or species composition may be
necessary to develop or maintain old-growth
characteristics 
in 
some 
areas. 
Intermediate
treatments have moderate-level, short- to mid-term
effects intended to move conditions closer to the
long-term old-growth goal. Thinning, improvement
cutting, and sanitation cutting are examples of
intermediate treatments commonly applied in
restoration prescriptions to make mid-course
corrections in stand density, species composition,
or health and vigor. Their purpose is not to secure
regeneration. Subsequent intermediate treatments
will likely be less frequent and invasive than those
applied initially to maintain or develop old-growth
structures. However, multiple treatment entries over
decades or centuries may be needed to maintain or
develop old-growth conditions.
Thinning
Thinning helps protect old-growth areas invaded by
younger trees from damage by fire or insects. It also
reduces competition for limited resources, thereby
improving the vigor and growth of remaining trees.
Most old-growth areas adapted to frequent fire
cannot be maintained without some form of
thinning, whether by fire or silvicultural cutting.
Improvement cutting
This 
intermediate 
treatment 
is 
aimed 
at
manipulating species composition, improving
overall tree form and quality, and increasing vigor.
The most common application in old-growth stands
is to remove shade-tolerant species (e.g., Douglas-
fir and true firs) that are generally more vulnerable
to insects, disease, and fire.
Sanitation cutting
Once areas meet structural and compositional goals,
periodic treatments may be needed to maintain
overall stand health and perpetuate old-growth
characteristics. Sanitation cutting is aimed at
removing insect-infested (e.g., bark beetles
(Dendroctonus spp.)) or diseased (e.g., dwarf
mistletoe (Arceuthobium spp.) trees that pose an
immediate threat to surrounding trees.
Regeneration Treatments
Regeneration treatments are conducted to establish
a new age class of trees in a stand. Many old-growth
areas have not had successful ponderosa pine
regeneration for decades. Regeneration cuttings are
needed in some of these areas to recruit young trees
that will develop into large-tree recruits in the
distant future. A short-term reduction in the quality
of old growth resulting from regeneration cutting
may be the trade-off for higher-quality old-growth
characteristics in the future, with much-extended
life expectancy.
Traditional uneven-aged regeneration methods,
such as individual tree or group selection cuttings,
need to be modified in various ways to promote old-
growth conditions. Customized selection cuttings
have been designed and implemented to develop or
restore old-growth in Montana (Fiedler 2000, Arno
and Fiedler 2005). These modified approaches to
selection cutting are not aimed at regulating growth
and yield in the traditional sense, but focus instead
on developing and perpetuating uneven-aged
conditions that include a primary component of
large, old trees. Reserve basal areas of 10–18 m2 per
hectare are prescribed for post-treatment stands.
Densities at the high end of this range are retained
in stands dominated by large trees, as significantly

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
lower resource use is associated with a square meter
of basal area in larger trees than in smaller ones
(Fiedler and Cully 1995). Virtually all of the large,
old pines are retained, as well as healthy ponderosa
pines across the full range of diameters, if available,
until the target density is achieved. The post-
treatment stand exhibits high vertical and horizontal
diversity, ranging from occasional patchy openings
to variably spaced trees of different sizes to clumps
of larger trees. A primary treatment objective is to
regenerate a new age class of pine in scattered
patches throughout the stand, with the long-term
goal of perpetuating old-growth conditions in place,
over time. Although modified selection cutting
approaches are based on a combination of
silvicultural and ecological factors, treated stands
bear some resemblance to ecological restoration
treatments based on numbers and locations of pre-
European settlement trees (Friederici 2003).
Staged Treatments
Clearly identified objectives are fundamental to
determining the type(s) of treatments needed within
designated old-growth areas. These objectives
should identify both short- and long-term needs.
High on the list of immediate needs would be to
address existing threats, such as insects, disease,
wildfire, and human encroachment.
Although protective treatments may be essential in
the short term, longer-term strategies for moving
old-growth areas toward healthy and sustainable
conditions are also needed. Such activities may need
to be staged over long periods of time, depending
on existing conditions and their degree of departure
from desired conditions. Treatments to reduce
immediate threats could entail one or several
intermediate treatments, such as thinning or
improvement cutting to alter tree density and
species composition, or sanitation cutting to remove
infected trees that threaten surrounding trees. These
activities may temporarily diminish old-growth
attributes, but greatly improve quality and
sustainability over the long term.
Scale of Treatment
The size of an existing or a desired old-growth area
is an important factor in determining what treatment
(s) might be used to achieve desired results. Old-
growth areas range in size from landscapes to stands,
and in some cases, even sub-stands or patches. As
the size of the old-growth area and associated
treatment increases, so sometimes do the ecological
benefits. For example, wildlife habitat for some
birds and mammals—a key old-growth function—
may be enhanced by landscape-scale treatments
(Sisk et al. 2005). Larger areas, particularly those
being developed as future old growth, can typically
be treated more efficiently and economically than
smaller areas.
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTATION
Prescriptions to treat old-growth forests cannot be
developed or implemented based on ecological
considerations alone. Other potentially influential
factors include local, state, and federal policies and
regulations; 
social 
acceptability; 
operational
realities; cultural sensitivity; and economics
(Cortner 2003). Implementation of restoration
treatments—on federal lands in particular—will not
proceed without integrating public viewpoints and
concerns in project planning and prescription
development.
Fire Treatments
Fire is an integral treatment or disturbance process
in the restoration of old-growth forests. Just how
this disturbance process is implemented largely
depends on ownership and management goals.
Natural fire (lightning ignited) will likely only be
used on public lands and in administrative units,
such as wilderness areas, that preclude other forms
of management. Even in those settings, an oversight
team closely monitors the size, spread, and intensity
of the fire in light of current and forecast weather
conditions, fuel, and terrain. The team can call for
direct suppression at any time. Natural fires will
likely remain a relatively little-used option for
treating old-growth stands until restoration cutting
treatments, particularly in Category 2 and 3 areas
outside wilderness, are conducted at landscape
scales.
The use of fire as a restoration treatment primarily
occurs in the form of prescribed burning on public
or tribal lands. Burning is used relatively little by
state and private landowners because of the cost and
hazard associated with its use, and because such
ownerships typically occur as isolated parcels
surrounded by other ownerships. The potential legal

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
and financial penalties if a prescribed burn gets
away are perceived by these landowners to far
outweigh potential benefits. Where prescribed
burning is used, it must be conducted under carefully
monitored conditions to achieve desired treatment
effects, adequately disperse smoke, and minimize
chances of fire escape. Prescribed fire introduced
into overgrown stands may produce effects too
severe for mature trees to survive (Zimmerman
2003). Indeed, use of fire alone is risky considering
the existing high fuel loads in most old-growth areas
(Fulé et al. 2004). Prescribed burning in these
conditions will be safer and conducted with more
predictable results if preceded by mechanical fuel
removal. Conversely, prescribed fire applied in an
overly conservative manner may result in under-
consumption of fuels, survival of undesirable
understory trees, and wasted effort and expense
(Zimmerman 2003).
Two burning techniques—jackpot burning and
broadcast burning—are generally perceived as
having positive ecological effects. Jackpot burning
involves igniting concentrations of fuels on the
forest floor, whether they are natural fuels or fuels
resulting from a silvicultural cutting treatment (also
referred to as activity fuels). Broadcast burning
involves burning surface fuels across virtually the
entire area under prescription. It is typically
implemented using a strip head-fire technique that
involves igniting strips with a drip torch along the
contour of a slope, progressing from top to bottom.
On flat terrain, ignition generally starts at the
leeward side of the area and proceeds into the wind.
Widening or narrowing the width between strips
increases or decreases fire intensity, respectively.
Season of burning also differentially affects both
the site and reserve trees. Spring burning is popular
in some parts of the western United States because
smoke dispersal is generally good, treated areas with
heavy fuels can be burned more safely, soil damage
is minimal because forest floor and duff materials
are only partially dried, spotting is reduced because
surrounding areas have “greened” up, post-burn
mop-up is simpler and cheaper, and it is easier to
retain coarse woody materials desired for ecological
objectives. One disadvantage is that roots of old
trees and crowns of all trees are especially
vulnerable to damage if burning is conducted after
growth has begun. Fall prescribed burning perhaps
better approximates natural fire because understory
vegetation has cured, so a greater proportion of the
area is burned. Greater duff reduction is also
achieved, which benefits regeneration of ponderosa
pine. However, fall burning of the heavy fuel loads
resulting from treatment is risky, and atmospheric
inversions greatly limit the number of burning days
because of poor smoke dispersal.
Silvicultural Cutting Treatments
Achieving restoration objectives through the use of
silvicultural cutting treatments depends not only on
characteristics of the treatments themselves, but
also on how they are marked and implemented.
Marking the prescription
The first step in the field application of a silvicultural
cutting prescription involves marking “cut” or
“leave” trees. Experience in both the Inland
Northwest and Southwest demonstrates the
advantages of leave-tree marking: 1) it allows the
marker to visualize the stand after treatment in terms
of the numbers, sizes, and juxtaposition of the
remaining trees, 2) it allows an exact determination
of reserve stand density, because every tree
designated for leave is known, 3) it generally
involves marking fewer trees, particularly in the first
entry, 4) it is easier to approximate the desired future
stand (target stand) compared with marking cut
trees, and 5) it is far less likely that a diseased tree
will be missed compared with cut-tree marking.
Implementing the prescription
Silvicultural cutting in old-growth stands, whether
in the form of intermediate or regeneration
treatments, entails cutting some trees and leaving
others. Both hand and mechanical methods are
reasonable options for cutting trees. Hand-felling
trees with chain saws has little effect on the site, but
is more likely to damage reserve trees because of
the restricted control the feller has about where trees
fall. Hand felling may be the only option on fragile
soils or steep terrain (i.e., slopes >40%), or in
situations where some cut trees exceed the size
capabilities of mechanical fellers. In contrast, use
of mechanized harvesting equipment (e.g., feller-
bunchers and single-grip harvesters) allows greater
control over the felling and placement of trees after
they are cut. These machines have a cutting head
(continuous disk saw or bar saw), typically located
at the end of an articulated boom. They are more

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
efficient than hand felling, but the high cost of
moving them in and out of a project area limits their
use on small treatment areas. Other factors,
including availability of skilled fallers or
mechanized harvesting equipment, may determine
which felling method is used in a given situation or
locale.
Where trees are cut and used for products, two
harvest methods (log length or whole tree) are
commonly employed to implement treatment
prescriptions. In the log-length method, trees are
hand felled and bucked into logs in the woods and
later transported to a landing. Alternatively, trees
can be felled with a cut-to-length machine,
processed into logs, and piled in the woods for later
skidding/forwarding. Whole-tree methods involve
felling trees (either by hand or mechanically) and
skidding them intact to a landing, where they are
then processed into logs. On steep terrain, trees are
usually hand-felled and later transported to a
landing via cable, skyline, or helicopter.
Logs may be skidded in a ground-based harvest
system using four-wheel-drive farm tractors,
rubber-tired grapple skidders, bulldozers, or log
forwarders. Tractors and rubber-tired skidders
typically cause the most equipment-related soil
compaction. Both bulldozers (equipped with tracks)
and log-forwarders (equipped with large, inflatable
tires) dissipate pressure across a large surface area,
resulting in relatively little compaction. Skidding
when soils are frozen can greatly reduce both soil
displacement and compaction, regardless of
skidding method.
Treating the slash
Large volumes of slash accumulate in the woods or
at the landing, regardless of whether some trees are
removed for products or whether all trees are too
small or low-value to be used. Slash in the woods
is a fire hazard, visually obtrusive, suppresses
growth of understory plants, and serves as a physical
barrier to use by livestock and wild ungulates.
Conversely, it can serve as a source of nutrients and
organic matter for the soil, provide protection for
tree regeneration, reduce soil erosion, and provide
small mammal habitat. If slash loads are light, they
can be left to decay. Heavier slash accumulations
can be lopped and scattered, chipped, crushed,
masticated, piled and burned, jackpot burned, or
broadcast burned. Activity fuels typically require
about a year to cure before burning. Pile burning
effectively reduces fire hazard but has few
ecological benefits, and the intense burning in
localized spots can damage soils and provide
hospitable substrate for invasive plant species.
Jackpot and broadcast burning effectively reduce
fire hazard and accelerate recycling of nutrients.
Mechanical methods of treating slash (e.g., lopping
and scattering, chipping) result in only very gradual
decomposition because the high carbon:nitrogen
ratios in wood significantly slow microbial activity
and subsequent nutrient recycling.
Other Considerations
Protection of soil and water resources is essential
for long-term ecosystem health. Consequently, all
treatments in old-growth stands should be
implemented 
using 
locally 
applicable 
best
management practices. Best management practices
provide flexible guidelines and site-specific options
to help reduce soil erosion and protect water quality
during silvicultural operations.
The types of treatments needed to develop or
maintain old-growth areas, or to buffer and protect
existing old growth, may not be allowed under
federal environmental laws (e.g., Endangered
Species Act or Clean Air Act), agency regulations,
or local policies. Existing regulations or policies
may need to be amended to allow treatments to
occur. Additionally, local or regional socio-political
issues may restrict the type or frequency of
treatments. Such issues can be difficult to overcome
and may be more constraining than operational,
economic, or ecological factors.
Other factors, such as wildlife issues or
archaeological/cultural resources, may severely
restrict treatment options or rule out management
altogether. Issues associated with wildlife can
greatly affect the timing of treatments. Managers
must be aware of seasonal issues, such as nesting
season for birds and calving/fawning seasons for
game species. Seasonal use by threatened and
endangered species may also affect when treatments
are implemented, if at all. Archaeological/cultural
resources, such as Native American burial areas and
habitations, old mines, and cabin foundations may
restrict or preclude prescribed burning because
combustible remains may be consumed (Romme et
al. 1993), and non-combustible materials may
experience physical or chemical change by

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
prescribed fire. Physical damage or destruction
during mechanical treatments also pose concerns
(Traylor et al. 1990), so specialists from appropriate
disciplines should be contacted before treatments
are implemented.
CONCLUSIONS: MANAGING FOR THE
FUTURE
Old-growth forests that were historically shaped by
frequent surface fires now show alarming decline
at several levels, including individual tree health
and vigor, sometimes changing species compositions,
and increased stand-level vulnerability to insects,
disease, and severe fire. Management treatments
have potential to ameliorate many of these
problems. However, we must recognize that the old-
growth “problem” has no simple or complete
solution; the current “hands off” or passive
management approach to this problem is not
working (Agee 2002); and that active management
by humans offers the greatest hope for restoring
functional old-growth areas—maybe the only hope.
Old-growth areas can, perhaps, be perpetuated for
decades or centuries with thoughtful management,
but they may not be “permanent” on a multi-century
or millennial time scale. Hence, prospective old-
growth areas need to be identified and treated to
develop replacements for existing areas over the
longer term. Moir and Dieterich (1988) identified
open, mistletoe-free pine stands with 150- to 200-
year-old trees as areas with high potential for old-
growth recruitment (e.g., Category 2 and 3 areas).
Silvicultural cutting and prescribed burning in these
areas should reduce fuels, recycle nutrients,
invigorate trees and understory plants, and
regenerate a new age class of pine. Treating
landscapes instead of stands will further increase
the functionality and ecological value of these areas
over time, and increase their resiliency to
disturbance and climatic change. Because old-
growth pine respond to temperature and moisture
conditions both during and outside the growing
season (Steele and Fiedler 1996), treatments that
increase tree vigor should also make existing old-
growth stands more resilient to changing
temperature and precipitation regimes.
Restoration at any significant scale cannot be
accomplished without a supporting infrastructure,
which includes people and equipment to do the work
and markets for the associated wood products and
waste material (Arno and Fiedler 2005). The
availability of skilled workers and appropriate
equipment allows treatments to be implemented as
designed, with minimal negative effects on both the
site and the remaining trees. A healthy and diverse
infrastructure includes sawmills, pulp mills, wafer-
board plants, post-and-pole plants, log home
manufacturers, and specialty product makers,
among others. The availability of markets for
different kinds and sizes of trees reduces the amount
of woody fuel that must be treated on site to reduce
hazard. The presence of multiple outlets for wood
products or biomass also provides revenue that can
help offset treatment costs, allowing greater
numbers of hectares to be treated. This is essential
if treatments are to occur on most non-federal lands.
A wide array of forest conditions and management
objectives exist across the federal, state, tribal, and
private entities that provide stewardship of old-
growth forests. The kinds of management employed
by one landowner may not be appropriate for
another. However, varied management approaches
will yield valuable lessons and diverse examples of
old-growth conditions (existing and developing)
from which all ownerships can learn and adapt their
management over time.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/responses/
LITERATURE CITED
Agee, J. K. 2002. The fallacy of passive
management of western forest reserves. Conservation
Biology in Practice 3:18–25.
Anderson, I. V. 1933. Application of selective
logging to a ponderosa pine operation in western
Montana. Bulletin No. 339. University of Montana,
Missoula, Montana, USA.
Arno, S. F., and C. E. Fiedler. 2005. Mimicking
nature’s fire: restoring fire-prone forests in the West. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Cooper, C. F. 1960. Changes in vegetation,
structure, and growth of southwestern pine forests
since white settlement. Ecological Monographs 
30:129–164.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
———. 1961. Pattern in ponderosa pine forests.
Ecology 42:493–499.
Cortner, H. J. 2003. The governance environment:
linking science, citizens, and politics. Pages 70–80
in P. Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration of
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Covington, W. W., and S. S. Sackett. 1984. The
effect of a prescribed burn in southwestern
ponderosa pine on organic matter and nutrients in
woody debris and forest floor. Forest Science 
30:183–192.
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, S. C.
Hart, T. E. Kolb, J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and
M. R. Wagner. 1997. Restoration of ecosystem
health in southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
Journal of Forestry 95:23–29.
DeLuca, T. H., and K. L. Zouhar. 2000. Effects of
selection harvest and prescribed fire on the soil
nitrogen status of ponderosa pine forests. Forest
Ecology and Management 138:263–271.
Fiedler, C. E. 1996. Silvicultural applications:
restoring ecological structure and process in
ponderosa pine forests. Pages 39–40 in C. Hardy
and S. Arno, editors. The use of fire in forest
restoration. U.S. Forest Service Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station General
Technical Report RM-278.
———. 2000. Restoration treatments promote
growth and reduce mortality of old-growth
ponderosa pine (Montana). Ecological Restoration 
18:117–119.
Fiedler, C. E., and J. F. Cully, Jr. 1995. A
silvicultural approach to develop Mexican spotted
owl habitat in southwest forests. Western Journal of
Applied Forestry 10:144–148.
Fiedler, C. E., K. L. Metlen, and E. K. Dodson. 
2006. 
Restoration/fuels 
reduction 
treatments
differentially affect native and exotic understory
species in a ponderosa pine forest (Montana).
Ecological Restoration 24:44–46.
Friederici, P. 2003. The “Flagstaff model.” Pages
7–25 in P. Friederici, editor. Ecological restoration
of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Island
Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Fulé, P. Z., A. E. Cocke, T. A. Heinlein, and W.
W. Covington. 2004. Effects of an intense
prescribed forest fire: is it ecological restoration?
Restoration Ecology 12:220–230.
Gundale, M. J., T. H. DeLuca, C. E. Fiedler, P.
W. Ramsey, M. G. Harrington, and J. E. Gannon. 
2005. Restoration treatments in a Montana
ponderosa pine forest: effects on soil physical,
chemical and biological properties. Forest Ecology
and Management 213:25–38.
Hart, S. C., T. H. DeLuca, G. S. Newman, D. M.
MacKenzie, and S. I. Boyle. 2005. Post-fire
vegetative dynamics as drivers of microbial
community structure and function in forest soils.
Forest Ecology and Management 220:166–184.
Kaufmann, M. R., D. Binkley, P. Z. Fulé, M.
Johnson, S. L. Stephens, and T. W. Swetnam. 
2007. Defining old growth for fire-adapted forests
of the western United States. Ecology and Society 
12(2): 15. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandso
ciety.org/vol12/iss2/art15/.
Kaye, J. P., and S. C. Hart. 1998. Ecological
restoration alters nitrogen transformations in a
ponderosa pine–bunchgrass ecosystem. Ecological
Applications 8:1052–1060.
MacKenzie, D. M., T. H. DeLuca, and A. Sala. 
2004. Forest structure and organic matter analysis
along a fire chronosequence in the low elevation
forests of western Montana. Forest Ecology and
Management 203:331–343.
Metlen, K. L., and C. E. Fiedler. 2006. Restoration
treatment effects on the understory of ponderosa
pine/Douglas-fir forests of western Montana, USA.
Forest Ecology and Management 222:355–369.
Meyer, W. H. 1934. Growth in selectively cut
ponderosa pine forests of the Pacific Northwest.
USDA Technical Bulletin No. 407.
Moir, W. H., and J. H. Dieterich. 1988. Old-growth
ponderosa pine from succession in pine–bunchgrass
forests in Arizona and New Mexico. Natural Areas
Journal 8:17–24.
Morgan, T. A., C. E. Fiedler, and C. W. Woodall. 
2002. Characteristics of dry site old-growth
ponderosa pine in the Bull Mountains of Montana,
USA. Natural Areas Journal 22:11–19.

Ecology and Society 12(2): 20
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol12/iss2/art20/
Romme, W. H., L. Floyd-Hanna, and M. Connor. 
1993. Effects of fire on cultural resources at Mesa
Verde National Park. Park Science 26:28–30.
Sisk, T. D., M. Savage, D. A. Falk, C. D. Allen, E.
Muldavin, and P. McCarthy. 2005. A landscape
perspective for forest restoration. Journal of
Forestry 103:319–320.
Steele, B., and C. Fiedler. 1996. Kalman filter
analysis of growth–climate relations in old-growth
ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir stands. Radiocarbon 
38:303–314.
Traylor, D., L. Hubbell, N. Wood, and B. Fiedler. 
1990. The 1977 La Mesa Fire study: an investigation
of fire and fire suppression impact on cultural
resources in Bandelier National Monument.
Professional Paper No. 28. U.S. National Park
Service, Southwest Cultural Resource Center.
Weaver, H. 1951. Fire as an ecological factor in
southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Journal of
Forestry 49:93–98.
Wienk, C. L., C. H. Sieg, and G. R. McPherson. 
2004. Evaluating the role of cutting treatments, fire
and soil seed banks in an experimental framework
in ponderosa pine forests of the Black Hills, South
Dakota. Forest Ecology and Management 192:375–
393.
Woolsey, T. S., Jr. 1911. Western yellow pine in
Arizona and New Mexico. USDA Forest Service
Bulletin 
No. 
101. 
USDA 
Forest 
Service,
Washington, D.C., USA.
Zimmerman, G. T. 2003. Fuels and fire behavior.
Pages 126–143 in P. Friederici, editor. Ecological
restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
