ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION IN  
NORTHERN ARIZONA  
PONDEROSA PINE FORESTS:  
Effects on Native and Introduced Plant Species  
JUdy Springer 
Memories of the worst drought and fire season in 
recent history are still vivid. There is an ongoing 
and unprecedented bark beetle outbreak that is 
killing numerous trees in northern Arizona's forests. 
Forest restoration projects attempt to regain forest 
health by lowering tree density and reintroducing 
fire. These actions enhance habitat for many plant 
and animal species and decrease the risk of cata­
strophic wildfire. 
Environmentalists, scientists, land managers, and 
citizens attempt to find common ground in the 
complex challenge of forest restoration. 
Unfortunately, following a large and devastating 
wildfire, there is a willingness to assign blame, over­
simplifying the issue. Meaningful dialogue and 
compromise on how reforestation can be accom­
plished are lost in finger pointing. 
Because ecosystems differ, it's dangerous to apply 
restoration principles garnered from one part of 
the country to ecosystems in another part of the 
country. There's no one-size-fits-all application of 
restoration. Tree thinning is subject to debate 
although the majority of the floral and faunal diver­
sity is on the forest floor and in the soil, not in the 
tree crowns. Still, there are many types of fauna 
that do rely on the tree crowns, so conservation of 
old-growth trees is paramount. Restoration of fire­
suppressed forests and recovery following wildfires 
in northern and eastern Arizona will take decades -­
potentially centuries. 
Ecological restoration is defined as lithe process of 
assisting the recovery of an ecosystem that has 
been degraded, damaged, or destroyed" (Society for 
, Ecological Restoration 2002). Before restoration 
can be implemented on the ground, we must deter­
mine reference conditions and do a site assessment. 
Reference conditions create a target for site restora­
tion, usually to the former state existing before peo­
ple of European descent settled the area. The ideal 
reference for the plant community is a relict area 
that has never been grazed by domestic animals, has 
Plant Press, Autumn 2002 
not been commer­
cially logged, and 
has maintained a 
regular fire interval. Such areas are very rare, but a 
few sites occur on the North Rim of the Grand 
Canyon and on mesas in southern Utah . 
Site assessments involve gathering information on 
details of forest structure and fire history, composi­
tion and abundance of plant and animal species, 
physical and chemical characteristics of the soil, 
presence of pathogens, and land use history. 
Decomposition rates of dead trees in the 
Southwest are slow, allowing dendrochronologists 
(scientists who study tree rings) to reconstruct what 
the forest looked like in the late 1800's. Many tree 
species -- ponderosa pine in particular -- will form 
scars during fires. Dendrochronologists can date 
these scars to reconstruct fire history. Non-woody 
herbaceous species do not leave much permanent 
evidence to aid in re-establishing the herbaceous 
plant community, but historical accounts and pho­
tographs, oral histories, pollen studies and packrat 
middens could be used. 
' 
Southwestern ponderosa pine forests are character­
ized by frequent, cool, and low-to-the-ground fires 
that occur every 2-20 years. The Rodeo-Chediski 
fire in the White Mountains differs from these 
smaller fires by its severe heat that burned into the 
crowns of trees. A severe fire like the Rodeo­
Chediski is uncharacteristic of this ecosystem. 
Other definable characteristics of our local forest 
are large trees interspersed with grassy meadows 
and a diverse productive understory of native grass­
es, sedges, wildflowers and shrubs. Since approxi­
mately 1850 when European-Americans began to 
settle the land, an increasing number and density of 
small trees have led ,to a closed tree canopy causing 
little light to reach plants on the ground. Factors 
such as active fire suppression by government agen­
cies, increased woody material (fuel load) on the 
forest floor, and overgrazing by both cattle and elk 
have all contributed to a 
cont'd. on page 4 
3 

Ecological Restoration (cont'd. from page 3) 
decreased abundance and diversity of understory 
plants. 
. 
After European colonization, we hypothesize that 
the plant community has declined in species palat­
able to cattle and elk, in clisturbance-adapted species 
or early successional species, and in understory 
cliversity and biomass. The percentage of shade­
tolerant species has probably increased. Wetland 
habitat has also disappeared in these forests foster­
ing an equal decline in aquatic species. 
' 
Restoring overcrowded forests can be expensive, 
both economically and ecologically. Various 
approaches are used such as removing some small 
trees while retaining old-growth trees, followed by 
prescribed burning. There is not a commercial mar­
ket for many of the small trees, so they are often 
left on the ground to be burned, thus contributing 
to the fuel load. If the fuels burn too hot some 
nutrients may volatilize and be forever lost from the 
site. Researchers are examining ways to market the 
small timber andto bum the thinning slash so that 
nutrients will remain on site and to lessen the 
impact on extant vegetation above ground and in 
the soil seed bank. 
. 
. 
A favorable restoration increases light water nutri­
ents, and exposed mineral soil to act ~s a seedbed. 
Natural regeneration relies on the soil seed bank 
and the colonizing ability of existing plants to re­
vegetate an area following restoration treatment. In 
areas that have been heavily impacted, there may be 
a depauperate seed bank and few native plants to 
act as a seed source. On a small scale, seeds could 
be collected in a homeowner's yard, then brought to 
.the site. On a large restoration project, a commer­
cial source of seeds may be the only option if 
ground cover is needed to prevent soil erosion. 
Seeding and transplanting are still experimental. 
Seeding with native species might achieve success, 
provided there is sufficient rainfall or snowfall. 
Seeding will increase species diversity and abun­
dance, but there are many drawbacks. Native 
species are expensive and it is difficult to locate a 
sufficient supply of locally collected seeds. But per­
haps the most undesirable effect is the introduction 
of new genotypes that originate far from the study 
area. These genotypes can interbreed with, or even 
outco~pete, the ~ocally adapted stock, leading to 
potentially undesirable changes in the gene pool. 
They may not be adapted to harsh conclitions, such 
as severe drought, and may die if these conditions 
arise. New species can be unintentionally intro­
duced through seed mixes or carried on tools, 
clothing and vehicles. 
Non-native species are often an undesirable out­
come of restoration. In many cases, both native 
and .non-nati:re early successional species are pres­
e?t In the soil .seed bank and emerge following thin­
rung and burning. Most non-natives are not detri­
mentally affected by fire, having evolved in ecosys­
tems WIth frequent fires, quickly capitalizing on the 
newly created habitat. Whether native or not, early 
successional species can playa valuable role by pre­
venting soil erosion, but monitoring is essential to 
detect invasions by noxious weeds. To prevent seri­
ous outbreaks, control efforts may need to be insti­
tuted prior to (or early in) the restoration process. 
Further research is necessary to study the effects of 
restoration on rare species. Uncommon species are 
infrequently detected during monitoring. Plenty of 
habitat is created by thinning and burning, fostering 
the potential for an increase in rare species, particu­
larly those that prefer increased light. But shade­
tolerant species also need to be identified and pro­
tected and, for many species, there is insufficient 
seed source to quickly colonize a restored area. 
Ant- and gravity-dispersed species are particularly 
susceptible to competition from animal- or wind­
dispersed species. 
For more information on ecological restoration and 
restoration ecology: 
Centerfor Restoration Ecology 
http://www:ies.wisc.edu/cre/ 
Ecological Restoration Institute 
http://www.eri.nau.edu 
Native Plant Propagation N etwork 
. http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org/network/ 
5ode!)for Ecological Restoration 
http://www.ser.org/ 
Plant Press, Autumn 2002 
4 
