 
 
 
Managing Boundaries, Healing the Homeland:  
Ecological Restoration and the Revitalization of the White Mountain 
Apache Tribe, 1933 – 2000 
 
 
David C. Tomblin 
 
 
Dissertation submitted to the faculty of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of 
 
 
 
Doctor of Philosophy 
In 
Science and Technology Studies 
 
 
 
 
 
Mark V. Barrow, Jr., Chair 
Barbara Allen 
Eileen Crist 
R. Bruce Hull 
 
 
 
April 27, 2009 
Blacksburg, Virginia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Boundary Work, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Eco-cultural Resources, 
Ecological Restoration, Fish and Wildlife Service, Natural Resource Management, Native 
Americans, White Mountain Apache Tribe 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Managing Boundaries, Healing the Homeland: Ecological Restoration and the 
Revitalization of the White Mountain Apache Tribe, 1933 – 2000 
 
 
 
David C. Tomblin 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The main argument of this dissertation is that the White Mountain Apache Tribe‟s appropriation of 
ecological restoration played a vital role in reinstituting control over knowledge production and eco-
cultural resources on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation in the second half of the twentieth century. As 
a corollary, I argue that the shift in knowledge production practices from a paternalistic foundation to a 
community-based approach resulted in positive consequences for the ecological health of the Apachean 
landscape and Apache culture. The democratization of science and technology on the reservation, 
therefore, proved paramount to the reestablishment of a relatively sustainable Apache society. 
Beginning with the Indian New Deal, the White Mountain Apache slowly developed the capacity to 
employ ecological restoration as an eco-political tool to free themselves from a long history of Euro-
American cultural oppression and natural resource exploitation. Tribal restoration projects embodied the 
dual political function of cultural resistance to and cultural exchange with Western-based land 
management organizations. Apache resistance challenged Euro-American notions of restoration, nature, 
and sustainability while maintaining cultural identity, reasserting cultural autonomy, and protecting 
tribal sovereignty. But at the same time, the Apache depended on cultural exchange with federal and 
state land management agencies to successfully manage their natural resources and build an ecologically 
knowledgeable tribal workforce. 

 
 
 
 
iii 
 
Initially adopting a utilitarian conservation model of land management, restoration projects aided the 
creation of a relatively strong tribal economy. In addition, early successes with trout, elk, and forest 
restoration projects eventually granted the Tribe political leverage when they sought to reassume control 
over reservation resources from the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Fish and Wildlife Service. Building 
on this foundation, Apache restoration work significantly diverged in character from the typical Euro-
American restoration project by the 1990s. While striving toward self-sufficiency, the Tribe hybridized 
tribal cultural values with Western ecological values in their restoration efforts. These projects evolved 
the tripartite capacity to heal ecologically degraded reservation lands, to establish a degree of economic 
freedom from the federal government, and to restore cultural traditions. Having reversed their historical 
relationship of subjugation with government agencies, the Apache currently have almost full decision-
making powers over tribal eco-cultural resources.  
 

 
 
 
 
iv 
 
Table of Contents 
 
List of Figures 
 
viii 
Acknowledgements 
 
ix 
 
List of Acronyms 
 
xii 
Introduction 
 
1 
The Significance of White Mountain Apache Ecological Restoration 
 
6 
Theoretical Considerations: Native American Societal Decline and the 
Cultural Appropriation of Western Science and Technology 
 
12 
Resistance and Exchange: A Dynamic Eco-political Model of Self-
Determination 
 
 
18 
Chapter 1 - Visions of the White Mountain‟s Past: Multiple 
Baselines for Restoration 
 
 
29 
White Mountain Apache Visions of Restoration: “The Earth is Set Up” 
 
31 
Euro-American Visions of Restoration 
 
41 
The Indian New Deal and a Vision of Eco-cultural Restoration 
 
51 
Conclusion: Restoration and Culture 
 
 
62 
Chapter 2 - The Political Origins of White Mountain Apache 
Eco-cultural Restoration: The Indian New Deal 
 
67 
 
The Foundations of American Indian Self-Determination and Political 
Autonomy 
 
69 
John Collier‟s Indian New Deal 
72 
The Indian New Deal and the White Mountain Apache 
81 
Paternalism and the White Mountain Apache 
89 
 
 

 
 
 
 
v 
 
Conclusion 
 
106 
Chapter 3 - The Civilian Conservation Corp – Indian Division: 
Acquiring Expertise and Knowledge in Western Restoration and 
Conservation Techniques 
 
 
 
107 
The Philosophical and Sociological Foundations of the CCC-ID 
109 
Idealism versus Reality: Early Apache Conservation Education, 1933 – 
1937 
 
116 
A New Direction in Conservation Education, 1938 – 1942 
 
121 
Conclusion: The Lasting Implications of the CCC-ID and Indian New Deal 
 
 
127 
Chapter 4 - The Ironic Foundation of Eco-cultural Restoration: 
The Williams Creek Fish Hatchery 
 
 
132 
The Path toward an Unlikely Partnership 
 
137 
Shaping the Fort Apache Landscape as a Euro-American Recreational 
Playground 
 
156 
A Pathway of Ambivalence toward Eco-cultural Restoration and 
Modernization 
 
160 
Conclusion 
 
 
166 
Chapter 5 - Institutionalizing Resistance and Exchange: The 
White Mountain Recreational Enterprise 
 
 
169 
The Social and Political Context (1945 – 1960) 
170 
Building towards a Recreation Development Program 
180 
The Birth of an Eco-cultural Enterprise 
191 
The First Year 
197 
Resistance: The Battle over Hawley Lake 
202 

 
 
 
 
vi 
 
The WMRE: Foundation for Cultural Exchange 
212 
Conclusion 
 
218 
Chapter 6 - The 1960s: Ecological Restoration as a Mediator 
between Economic Development and Eco-cultural Degradation 
 
 
221 
The Social and Political Context (1960 – 1970) 
 
224 
Building Expertise and Government-to-Government Relationships 
 
231 
Resistance: Not your Wilderness, But our Wilderness 
 
241 
Exchange: Apache Trout Restoration 
 
253 
Conclusion 
 
 
264 
Chapter 7 - Elk Restoration and Management: The Battle to 
Control Knowledge Production on the Fort Apache Indian 
Reservation 
 
 
 
266 
The Social and Political Context (1970 – Present) 
 
269 
Transition in Power on Fort Apache 
 
275 
The History of Elk on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
 
284 
Resistance: The White Mountain Apache Tribe vs. Arizona Game and Fish 
Department 
 
294 
Exchange: Return to a Frontier Hunter‟s “Paradise” 
 
315 
Conclusion 
 
 
320 
Chapter 8 - The 1990s:  Moving Towards an Epistemological 
Restoration 
 
 
323 
The Connection between the Philosophy of Ecosystem Management and 
the Traditional Apache Subsistence System 
 
329 
The Endangered Species Act, Sovereignty, and Apache Culture 
334 

 
 
 
 
vii 
 
 
 
Watershed Restoration: Healing Past Discretions, Building Respect for 
Apache Knowledge 
 
 
345 
Cultural Restoration: Reconnecting Apaches to the Land 
 
352 
Managing Success, Limitations to Progress 
 
356 
Conclusion 
 
 
362 
Conclusion - The Ecological and Cultural Significance of 
White Mountain Apache Restoration 
 
 
365 
The Meaning of Restoration for the White Mountain Apache 
 
366 
The Geography of Restoration 
 
371 
Challenges to Euro-American Conceptions of Ecological Restoration 
 
380 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
viii 
 
List of Figures 
 
 
Fig. 1 – Reversing Dependency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  14 
 
Fig. 2 – Paternalism and the Apache relationship to Science and Technology 
 
 
  24 
 
Fig. 3 – A 1937 Map of Roadless Areas on Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
 
 
  59 
 
Fig. 4 – Mount Thomas (Baldy) in 1941 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  60 
 
 
Fig. 5 – CCC-ID work projects in 1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 
 
Fig. 6 – Fort Apache Fire School in 1937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
 
Fig. 7 – Williams Creek prior to construction of the hatchery in 1939 
 
 
 
141 
 
Fig. 8 – Rearing ponds at Williams Creek Fish Hatchery in 1941 
 
 
 
 
151 
 
Fig. 9 – Learning “genuine conservation” at Williams Creek Fish Hatchery in 1941 
 
159 
 
Fig. 10 – Silas Davis working on his fire protractor  
 
 
 
 
 
195 
 
Fig. 11 – Hawley Lake and Smith Park Dam  
 
 
 
 
 
 
203 
 
Fig. 12 – Map of the Mount Baldy Wilderness Area  
 
 
 
 
 
248 
 
Fig. 13 – Ecological Restoration as a site of resistance and exchange 
 
 
 
328 
 
Fig. 14 – Corduroy Watershed Project in 1956 
 
 
 
 
 
 
346 
 
Fig. 15 – Restoration of Soldier Spring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
351 
 
Fig. 16 – Emphasis on values associated with ecological restoration over time 
 
 
367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
ix 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
When I first decided to study of the historical roots of Native American ecological restoration efforts, I had no 
idea what I was getting into. What started as an interesting topic that would narrow the focus of my dissertation 
from the impossible task of a complete history of ecological restoration became an eye-opening revelation. 
Obviously this should be the case for all dissertation projects, but for me, my research operated on a very personal 
level. Like most Americans, I had a rudimentary understanding of Native American history and political affairs. I 
certainly held sympathetic feelings for their predicament, but did not have a grasp of the complexity of Native 
American affairs. That I have gained a new appreciation for what Native Americans have achieved in the last 100 
years through my attempt to tell a small part of the White Mountain Apache story would be an understatement. 
Given the political, legal, ecological, economic, cultural, and social obstacles they have endured, I have gained a 
deep respect for what American Indians accomplished in modern times. In short, this dissertation project became 
much bigger than just understanding the meaning of Native American restoration. It became a venue for 
understanding how a group of people overcame insurmountable odds to begin righting horrid injustices they 
incurred. Indeed, the White Mountain Apache story goes well beyond ecological restoration.  But telling this story 
through both the metaphor of restoration and the socio-technical material reality of restoration seemed an apt way 
of describing an extremely complex and empowering story.  
Of course I have numerous people I should thank for helping bring this project to fruition. All the people I 
mention below in their own way gave me support, guidance, and encouragement throughout the emotional, 
intellectual, and cultural struggle I felt as I pieced together this project. First, I would like to thank Janet Abbate, 
Shannon Brown, Beverly Bunch-Lyons, Anne Laberge, Ellen Paul, and Lee Zwanzinger for excellent courses that 
enriched my research on ecological restoration. All of them gave valuable input that enhanced my dissertation 
research. Anne Laberge way back in 1997 opened my eyes to a whole new way of thinking through her History of 
Science course. This course eventually led me down the path of entering the STS program in 2003. And if it had 
not been for Shannon Brown‟s History of Technology course, I might not have ever stumbled on to this very rich 
topic.  

 
 
 
 
x 
 
I also attended a number of workshops and conferences that influenced the direction of my research. In the 
early stages of my research, I received many supportive and critical comments from the participants of a graduate 
student conference on Humanities and Geography at Brown University in the spring of 2006. I am also forever 
grateful to Marcus Hall for inviting me to participate in the workshop “Restoring or Renaturing? The Presence of 
the Past in Ecological Restoration” held in Zurich, Switzerland in July of 2006. The participants of this workshop 
provided a wealth of constructive criticism as I presented a very early version of my ideas on Native American 
ecological restoration. I also would be remiss if I didn‟t thank Bill Jordan and Liam Heneghan of the Institute of 
Nature and Culture at DePaul University for inviting me to give a presentation in February of 2007. Bill Jordan in 
particular has helped guide and refine my ideas almost from the beginning. His vast historical insights, 
experiences, and role in developing the idea of ecological restoration certainly helped me put Native American 
restoration efforts into context.  
Without the insights of Jonathan Long, this project probably would never have come to fruition. He read 
through a number of early proposals for this project and provided invaluable advice and encouragement. I also 
appreciate the perspectives I gained from listening to Al Medina at the Arizona Section Society for Range 
Management workshop in August 2007. Both Al and Jonathan‟s knowledge of the White Mountain region opened 
my eyes to the complex political nature of ecological restoration on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation and the 
surrounding National Forests. The workshop also gave me the opportunity to visit the reservation and meet with 
several tribal members. I am grateful that Cheryl Pailzote, Phil Stago, Jr., and the rest of the White Mountain 
Apache Tribe entertained the possibility of me conducting oral histories/interviews relevant to this project. 
Although this has not happened yet, I still hold hopes that someday I might be able to build a positive relationship 
with the Apache people.  
I visited a number of archives throughout my research. The numerous staff members I called on for assistance 
from the National Archives and Records Administration in Washington DC, the Library of Congress, the Arizona 
State Archives and Public Library in Phoenix, Arizona, and the Cline Library Archives at Northern Arizona 
University all were extremely gracious with their time and services. In particular, Cheryl Oakes of the Forest 
History Society went above and beyond the call of duty, unearthing a number of sources I might have never found 

 
 
 
 
xi 
 
otherwise. All of the people I met at the various archives I visited enhanced my research efforts and made my 
stays pleasant.  
My dissertation committee was extremely supportive as I struggled to refine my dissertation topic and then 
bring it together. My committee chair, Mark Barrow, Jr., never seemed to waiver in his confidence for me and 
created an environment of intellectual freedom. Besides doling out invaluable guidance, he gladly worked with 
me on improving my writing skills. Bruce Hull introduced me to a number of prominent members of the 
restoration community that proved useful to the project, including Bill Jordan. Bruce also kept me on my toes 
with his provocative and forthright comments. Eileen Crist‟s analytical insights and conceptual suggestions 
encouraged me to explore beyond the bounds of STS and make this project my own. And Barbara Allen, beyond 
her intellectual contributions, made it possible for me to come back to school and pursue my PhD. She offered me 
an assistantship in 2004 and continued to fight for financial support for me for the first three years of my studies.  
I received a number of grants that supported my research. A Bell Fellowship gave me the opportunity to 
explore the archival resources of the Forest History Society. A Graduate Student Assembly dissertation research 
grant helped pay for one of my excursions to Arizona. And a Phillips Native American Fund research grant from 
the American Philosophical Society paid for numerous research expenditures and a second stay in Arizona.  
Finally, the Science and Technology in Society Department at Virginia Tech funded several trips to academic 
conferences and workshops that enriched my research efforts.   
Lastly, I must thank my family. My father and mother, Robert and Pamela Tomblin, have always encouraged 
and supported my intellectual endeavors. If it weren‟t for them, I wouldn‟t be the curious person that I am. My 
wife, Laura Zepp, endured the brunt of my emotional travails throughout my schooling experience. She was there 
for both the ups and downs, and always had faith that I would finish, even when I doubted myself. I will forever 
cherish her love and support throughout this experience. And perhaps the biggest catalyst in the whole process 
was my daughter Evelyn. She came to the game late, but desperately wanted to contribute, as would any one year 
old that is fascinated with buttons; especially it seems, with computer keyboards. Beyond this contribution, her 
beautiful, cheerful disposition gave me happiness and courage during the long, arduous writing phase of my 
dissertation. 

 
 
 
 
xii 
 
 
List of Acronyms 
 
 
ACIA  
 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs 
 
AGFC 
 
Arizona Game and Fish Commission 
 
AGFD 
 
Arizona Game and Fish Department 
 
BIA  
 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
 
CCC  
 
Civilian Conservation Corps 
 
CCC-ID 
 
Civilian Conservation Corps – Indian Division 
 
CCF  
 
Central Classified Files 
 
DOI  
 
Department of Interior 
 
ESA  
 
Endangered Species Act 
 
FATCO 
 
Fort Apache Timber Company 
 
FAIR  
 
Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
 
FHS  
 
Forest History Society 
 
FWS (USFWS) 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service 
 
HPAIED 
 
Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development 
 
ICC  
 
Indian Claims Commission 
 
IRA  
 
Indian Reorganization Act 
 
MOU  
 
Memorandum of Understanding 
 
NCAI  
 
National Congress of American Indians 

 
 
 
 
xiii 
 
 
OEO  
 
Office of Economic Opportunity 
 
RG 
 
 
Record Group 
 
SRVWUA  
Salt River Valley Water User‟s Association 
 
USGS  
 
United States Geological Survey 
 
WMRE 
 
White Mountain Recreational Enterprise 
 
WMAT 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
1 
 
Introduction 
 
Salt Banks was real pretty once, but then two whitemen destroyed it. I think it was around 1932 or 
1933…It used to be kind of like a porch from the roof and you could see the salts hanging down from up 
there. They looked like pipes, white pipes hanging down. Those were the salts and water was dripping 
out of them. The water was kind of milky-looking. It was real salty. We used to stand there and it 
dropped in our mouth…Like I told you, those two whitemen destroyed the salt cave. They destroyed the 
porch-looking part. Now it‟s all down on the ground. It‟s all chopped up. They used powder – dynamite 
– to destroy it. I don‟t know why they did that. I don‟t know what they were looking for. Long years 
ago, people were crazy for gold – maybe that‟s what they thought.1   
 
In 2004 Eva Tulene Watt, a White Mountain Apache elder, told this story about the destruction of an 
Apache eco-cultural resource.2  This story symbolizes the ecological and cultural losses the Apache have 
endured since their Tribe‟s isolation on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation in 1870. Salt Banks is both a 
sacred site - a place to pray to Changing Woman who gave birth to the White Mountain Apache - and a 
place where tribal members derive sustenance for their daily existence.3 Fate perhaps served almost 
immediate justice for this atrocity because as the story goes, the two whites who desecrated Salt Banks 
were struck by lightning. The demise of these two perpetrators, however, failed to protect the Tribe‟s 
cherished lands from interlopers.  Because of such mistreatment of their lands, by the 1930s the Apache 
                                                 
1 Eva Tulene Watt, Don’t Let the Sun Step Over You: A White Mountain Apache Family Life, 1860-1975 (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2004), pp. 171-174. 
2 I use the term “eco-cultural” resources to refer to what is typically divided into separate categories in Western 
land management practices: cultural and ecological resources. Although Western academics and land managers 
recently developed the term eco-cultural to characterize a growing recognition among them that separating natural 
and cultural resources into separate categories is both socially and physically impractical, the term also fits the 
way Native American groups in general have historically defined their relationship to nonhuman nature. They do 
not separate nature and culture. See for example, Dennis Rogers Martinez, “Protected Areas, Indigenous Peoples, 
and the Western Idea of Nature,” Ecological Restoration 21 (2003): 247-250. More specifically, in contrast to 
Western science, an abstract separation of nature and culture is impossible for the Western Apache. Keith Basso 
claims, “All Apache narratives are verbally anchored to points upon the land with precise depictions of specific 
locations.” Keith Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1996), p. 
87. 
3 Keith Basso, The Cibecue Apache (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, Inc., 1970); Greenville Goodwin, 
Myths and Tales of the White Mountain Apache (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1994); Winfred 
Buskirk, The Western Apache: Living with the Land Before 1950 (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 
1986). 

 
 
 
 
2 
 
began voicing the need to protect the Salt Banks and other tribal resources from outsiders. Eva Watt 
warned, “Nobody‟s supposed to fool with our salt place. It‟s not supposed to be touched. That place is 
sacred. It was used by Indian people long years before us. We still get our salt there. We still pray and 
bless ourselves when we go down there. From now on, that place must be protected.”4  
The 1930s constituted a watershed moment in the history of the White Mountain Apache. Prior to 
the 1930s, the White Mountain Apache suffered extensive damage to grazing lands, timber, and water 
resources due to federal mismanagement. Even though the Apache recognized that Euro-Americans 
were destroying their eco-cultural resources long before the destruction of Salt Banks, they had little 
recourse to do anything about this exploitation. During the 1930s, however, a major shift in federal 
Indian policy provided the Apache with the political foundation to begin a long journey to protect, 
restore, and control the Fort Apache Indian Reservation landscape.  John Collier‟s Indian New Deal 
became the launching point for this journey. For the first time in American history, the White Mountain 
Apache, along with other American Indian tribes, received significant federal aid to protect their lands. 
Unfortunately, despite this federal aid, Euro-American exploitation of Native American resources 
continued for many years to come. Nonetheless, this time period marked the beginning of widespread 
efforts to restore the eco-cultural resources of Native American tribes. In addition, the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs (BIA) for the first time attempted to train American Indians how to use Western land 
management techniques. Eventually combining their own local knowledge and management styles with 
the credibility they earned from mastering Western science, the White Mountain Apache Tribe managed 
to slowly reinstate political control over their homeland by the 1990s.  
This dissertation explores the struggle of the White Mountain Apache Tribe to gain autonomy over 
the management of their eco-cultural resources through the cultural appropriation of ecological 
restoration. Early on, some of these restoration programs benefitted the Tribe and some of them 
                                                 
4 Watt, Don’t Let the Sun Step Over You, p. 174 

 
 
 
 
3 
 
benefitted outsiders. Eventually, however, the political will of the Apache led to almost complete control 
of land management decisions on the reservation, thus a restoration program that reflected the cultural 
and ecological concerns of the Apache people. And in taking care of themselves, they began to benefit 
others through providing a healthy reservation-wide ecosystem, which constitutes the headwaters of the 
Salt River, a significant water source for residents of the Salt River Valley and the city of Phoenix. 
This story isn‟t unique to the White Mountain Apache Tribe. Perhaps one of the best kept secrets in 
American history is the political resurgence of Native American tribes in the latter half of the twentieth 
century. Moreover, Native American groups asserting control over natural resource management science 
and technologies on their reservations plays a pivotal role in this ascension. Unfortunately historians, 
anthropologists, political scientists, and sociologists are guilty of neglecting the environmental, political, 
and cultural consequences of marginalized cultures appropriating Western science and technology to 
ensure the survival of their societies.5 In the past 20 years, American Indian tribes from coast to coast 
have embraced ecological restoration as a tool not only to restore damaged ecosystems, but also to 
reintegrate their cultural traditions into the North American landscape.6 This movement is significant 
because Indian country constitutes over 100 million acres of the United States, an area similar in size to 
                                                 
5 David Rich Lewis, “Native Americans and the Environment: A Survey of Twentieth-Century Issues,” American 
Indian Quarterly 19 (Summer, 1995): 423-450; Louis S. Warren, “The Nature of Conquest: Indians, Americans, 
and Environmental History,” in A Companion to American Indian History, Phillip J. Deloria and Neal Salisbury, 
eds. (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2004), pp. 287-306. 
6 See for example Dennis Rogers Martinez, “The Sinkyone Intertribal Park Project,” Restoration and 
Management Notes 10(1) (1992): 64-69; S. M. McCorquodale, R.H. Leach, G.M. King, and K.R. Bevis, “The 
Yakima Indian Reservation: Integrating Native American Values into Commercial Forestry,” Journal of Forestry 
95 (1997): 15-18; Dave Egan and M. Kat Anderson, eds., “Theme Issue: Native American Land Management 
Practices in National Parks,” Ecological Restoration 21 (2003): 245-310; A. Garibaldi and N. Turner, “Cultural 
Keystone Species: Implications for Ecological Conservation and Restoration,” Ecology and Society 9 (3): 1. 
[online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss3/art1; Robin W. Kimmerer and Frank W. Lake, “The 
Role of Indigenous Burning in Land Management,” Journal of Forestry 99 (1999): 36-41; Anne Moote, 
“Community-Based Forest Restoration,” in Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests, P. 
Friederici, ed. (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2003), pp. 335-352; S. Torbit and J. McNaught, Restoring the 
Prairie, Mending the Sacred Hoop: Prairie Conservation and Restoration of the Cheyenne River Reservation 
(National Wildlife Federation and Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, 2003); Ken Zontek, Buffalo Nation: American 
Indian Efforts to Restore the Bison (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2007. See also the Indigenous 
People‟s Restoration Network, www.ser.org (last accessed December 8, 2006). 

 
 
 
 
4 
 
the entire National Park System.7 Since the inception of the Indian New Deal in 1934, in the lower forty-
eight states alone, the American Indian land base increased from 48 million to 60 million acres.8 
Furthermore, American Indian restorationists are challenging Western-based natural resource policies 
that traditionally have undermined tribal sovereignty and marginalized Native American knowledge 
about resource management on reservations and adjacent public lands.9 They also complicate the Euro-
American standard of ecological restoration and wilderness management in National Parks and 
Wilderness Areas - a management regime that emphasizes the importance of maintaining a pre-
European settlement landscape, which until recently in popular culture, has been depicted as free of 
large-scale human intervention and intentional design.10 In contrast, American Indian restorationists and 
their allies claim that aboriginal cultures intensively managed the North American landscape prior to 
European colonization.11  
The rise of American Indian involvement in land management decisions parallels historical shifts in 
federal policy from an expert-driven, technocratic approach to more democratic, community-based 
approaches. In recent years, the implementation of co-management plans by and statements of 
                                                 
7 Indian country is the legal name that collectively describes reservations, dependent Indian communities, and 
Indian allotments under federal jurisdiction. The legal definition of Indian lands is commonly derived from the 
following federal statute: 18 U.S.C. 1151. 
8 Charles Wilkinson, “Filling in the Blank Spots on Powell‟s and Stegner‟s Maps: The Role of Modern Indian 
Tribes in Western Watersheds,” Journal of Land Resources and Environmental Law 23 (2003): 41-56. 
9 Brian Czech, “American Indians and Wildlife Conservation,” Wildlife Society Bulletin 23 (1995): 568-573; Gary 
S. Morishima, “Indian Forestry: From Paternalism to Self-Determination.” Journal of Forestry 95 (1997): 4-9; 
Catherine A. O‟Neill, “Restoration Affecting Native Resources: The Place of Native Ecological Science,” Arizona 
Law Review 42 (2000): 343-380; Shelly D. Stokes, “Ecosystem Co-management Plans: A Sound Approach or a 
Threat to Tribal Rights?” Vermont Law Review 27 (2003): 421-452. 
10 William Cronon, “The Trouble with Wilderness; or, Getting Back to the Wrong Nature,” in Uncommon 
Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature, William Cronon, ed. (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 
1996), 69-90; Gary Nabhan, “Cultural Parallax in Viewing North American Habitats,” in The Great New 
Wilderness Debate, J.B. Callicot and M.P. Nelson, eds. (Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1998), 628-
641. 
11 Robin W. Kimmerer, “Native Knowledge for Native Ecosystems.” Journal of Forestry 98 (2000): 4-9; Thomas 
Alcoze, “First Peoples in the Pines: Historical Ecology of Humans and Ponderosas,” in Ecological Restoration of 
Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests, P. Friederici, ed. (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2003), 48-57; Martinez, 
“Protected Areas, Indigenous Peoples, and the Western Idea of Nature.” 

 
 
 
 
5 
 
agreements between various tribes and federal agencies have become common. Furthermore, many 
tribes, including the White Mountain Apache, now have their own natural resource bureaucracies. These 
developments necessitate probing four basic questions. First, how did American Indians use ecological 
restoration to reestablish their influence over eco-cultural resources in the United States? Second, what 
social, political, and ecological conditions in the second half of the twentieth century reinvigorated these 
so-called “vanishing” indigenous cultures? Third, did American Indian restoration efforts differ in 
character from other cultures that implement restoration projects (e.g., governmental agencies, 
academics, NGOs, industry, grassroots community-based projects, etc.)? And fourth, as a consequence 
of cultural differences, did Native American management systems shape Indian country differently than 
federal agencies?  In other words, have historical and cultural context influenced the physical and social 
outcome of ecological restoration?  
A historical case study of the White Mountain Apache Tribe‟s struggle to control and restore their 
eco-cultural resources affords an excellent opportunity to explore these questions. Moreover, historical 
observation of the White Mountain Apache use of ecological restoration to break the shackles of 
dependency, to escape paternalistic policies, and to begin restoring their lands, culture, and political 
sovereignty provides insight into the larger American Indian cultural and political “revolution” of the 
second half of the twentieth century. Like most Native American groups, the Apache resisted federal 
policies of cultural assimilation and land dispossession in an attempt to maintain and reclaim their 
culture and land.12 As of 2009, the White Mountain Apache Tribe has achieved a fair amount of 
autonomy concerning the management of eco-cultural resources on their reservation. However, their 
                                                 
12 Vine Deloria, Jr., Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1970); Mark D. Spence, Dispossessing the Wilderness: Indian Removal and the Making of the National 
Park (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999); Donald J. Pisani, “Irrigation, Water Rights, and the Betrayal of 
Indian Allotment,” in Out of the Woods: Essays in Environmental History, C. Miller and H. Rothman, eds. 
(Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1997), 243-260; Karl Jacoby, Crimes Against Nature: Squatters, 
Poachers, Thieves, and the Hidden History of American Conservation (Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press, 2001), pp. 149-192. 

 
 
 
 
6 
 
current political success didn‟t come easy and remains in tension with a fickle federal government that 
has a long history of breaking its fiduciary responsibility to American Indian tribes. Understanding this 
journey, in part, requires an analysis of the interaction between the Apache and land management 
agencies during the second half of the twentieth century.  
In short, the main argument of this dissertation is that the White Mountain Apache cultural 
appropriation of ecological restoration played a vital role in the Apache reinstituting control over 
knowledge production and eco-cultural resources on Fort Apache. Assuming control allowed them to 
direct knowledge production towards the benefit of the Tribe rather than Euro-Americans. As a 
corollary, I argue that the shift in knowledge production practices from a paternalistic foundation to a 
community-based approach had positive consequences for the ecological health of the Apachean 
landscape and Apache culture. To support this argument, this dissertation has three primary goals: 1) to 
uncover the social, political, epistemological, and ecological factors that facilitate and constrain the 
restoration of eco-cultural resources on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation; 2) to demonstrate the 
political, philosophical, social, and technical innovations of  White Mountain Apache restoration work; 
and 3) to describe the significant role that culture plays in the physical and social product of ecological 
restoration projects.  
 
The Significance of White Mountain Apache Ecological Restoration 
 
The Ndee (the People) or the White Mountain Apache is one of several bands (San Carlos, Cibecue, 
Northern Tonto, and Southern Tonto) that belong to the Western Apache group.13 Both Cibecue and 
                                                 
13 For stylistic reasons, I intermittently shorten the Tribe‟s full name, White Mountain Apache, to Apache. In 
these cases I am only talking about the Native Americans who reside on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. The 
White Mountain Apache are one distinct band of Apache among the Western Apache and the Eastern Apache, 
which include the Chiricahua, Mescalero, Lipan, and Kiowa-Apache people.  For background on the Western 
Apache groups see, Keith Basso, “Western Apache,” in Handbook of North American Indians: Southwest, Vol. 

 
 
 
 
7 
 
White Mountain Apache live on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. For the purposes of creating a 
sovereign identity, they have chosen to collectively call themselves the White Mountain Apache Tribe, 
although locally tribal members still distinguish between the two bands. Unlike so many other Native 
American groups, the federal government allowed the Apache to remain on their homeland, the White 
Mountains of east-central Arizona.  
According to Ronnie Lupe, the current Tribal Chairman, “The White Mountain Apache Tribe is 
fortunate to have a land base that is rich in natural beauty and bounty.”14  In order to survive as a culture, 
the Tribe depends greatly on this good fortune – the extensive natural resource base of the reservation. 
The reservation population has almost quadrupled since the 1930s from approximately 3,000 members 
to just fewer than 12,000 members as of the 2000 census.15 This population growth, along with the 
Tribe‟s desire to remain a sovereign nation, furthers their dependence on the reservation ecosystem‟s 
goods and services. Currently timber, cattle, hunting, fishing, ecotourism, a ski resort, and a casino 
support their economy.16 Lupe believes “[o]ur resources provide us with the potential and opportunity 
for sustainable development for future generations of Apaches.” He also realizes that in order for this 
goal to succeed, the Apache people have to adapt to a changing world, combining Western science and 
technology with Apache traditions. Because of the environmental, economic, and political demands of 
maintaining tribal sovereignty and sustaining reservation resources, ecological restoration has become 
an increasingly important tool in the Tribe‟s quest for cultural survival.  
                                                                                                                                                                         
10, Alfonso Ortiz, ed. (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian, 1983), 462-488; Richard J. Perry, Western Apache 
Heritage: People of the Mountain Corridor (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1991); Richard J. Perry, 
Apache Reservation: Indigenous Peoples and the American State (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1993). 
14 Ronnie Lupe, The Challenges of Leadership and Self-Government: A Perspective from the White Mountain 
Apaches (John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University: Harvard Project on American Indian 
Economic Development, October 1992), 2.  
15 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000.  
16 Basso, “Western Apache.”  

 
 
 
 
8 
 
Documenting the White Mountain Apache‟s evolving relationship with ecological restoration is 
important for three basic reasons. First, among American Indians, they have been at the forefront of a 
nationwide struggle to control natural resource management within Indian country. They pioneered 
cooperative agreements with state and federal land management agencies other than the BIA. They also 
developed the first comprehensive natural resource management program independent of the BIA.  In 
1952 the Apache established the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise (WMRE) to manage, restore, 
and develop the reservation‟s recreational potential and to train tribal members in natural resource 
management techniques. In addition, well before the inception of the Endangered Species Act, the 
WMRE attempted to protect the Apache trout from extinction. As the Tribe‟s natural resource 
management capacity grew, they were among the leaders in the fight for the right to manage and restore 
reservation resources for the benefit of Indian people. From these battles with federal and state land 
management agencies emerged an internationally recognized trophy elk management program and a 
nationally recognized endangered species management program.  In general, other Native American 
groups have modeled their restoration and management strategies after the success of the White 
Mountain Apache.   
Second, ever since the Indian New Deal, the White Mountain Apache have had a continuous, visible 
history of political engagement with state and federal land management agencies. Furthermore, the Fort 
Apache Indian Reservation became a “laboratory” for cutting-edge experimental restoration work: 
prescribed burns, endangered species protection, and watershed management. These restorative 
experiments in conjunction with long-term, continuous Apache involvement in natural resource politics 
provide a unique opportunity to trace the evolution of ecological restoration on an Indian reservation. As 
a consequence of the White Mountain Apache‟s active, continuous participation in restoration and 
management efforts since the Indian New Deal, we can observe several social, political, cultural, and 

 
 
 
 
9 
 
ecological phenomena:  1) the political revitalization of the Apache people in connection with the 
democratization of science and technology; 2) the Apache‟s accumulation of political capital through the 
gradual cultural appropriation of ecological restoration; 3) a  transition in knowledge production systems 
from a paternalistic model to a community-based model; 4) the evolution of restoration during the 
Indian New Deal from a single species/purpose (e.g., range, timber, game) approach to a more 
integrative ecosystem approach; 5) the incremental layering of social values onto ecological restoration 
over time; and 6) the changing impact of ecological restoration on a landscape as the values associated 
with this work shifts from one culture‟s perspective to another.   
Finally, the political, scientific, and technological feats of the White Mountain Apache represent a 
prominent counter-example to the notion of the “vanishing Indian.”17 The Apache story directly speaks 
to existential questions that plague Native American societies in contemporary times. For example, what 
does it mean to be an American Indian in modern society? In the eyes of non-Indians, why does the 
adoption of modern science and technology threaten American Indian cultural identity? Oren Lyon, a 
late twentieth-century Onondaga leader, once rhetorically pondered these questions: “So, what are we? 
Are we traditionalists or are we assimilated? If you [Euro-Americans] can get away from your 
categories and definitions, you will perceive us as a living and continuing society.”18 With this proposal, 
Lyon sought to break rigid, static cultural classifications that deny Native Americans modernity.  
Whether Native Americans live up to the ideals of the “ecological Indian,” have assimilated into the 
mainstream of Western society, or remain traditionalists is a moot point. These categories obscure the 
reality of Native American life in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. American Indian cultures 
                                                 
17 Peter Iverson, “We Are Still Here”: American Indians in the Twentieth Century (Wheeling, Illinois: Harlan 
Davidson, Inc., 1998); Donald L. Parman, Indians and the American West in the Twentieth Century 
(Bloomington, IN: University of Indiana Press, 1994); Charles Wilkinson, Blood Struggle: The Rise of Modern 
Indian Nations (New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2005); Deloria, Custer Died for Your Sins. 
18 Oren Lyon, “Traditionalism and the Reassertion of Indianness,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed. 
(Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986), 244-246, p. 245. 

 
 
 
 
10 
 
continue to persist in modern society, adopting Western science and technologies to actively manage the 
eco-cultural resources of Indian country.  
Yet stale conceptions of American Indian culture persist. According to the standards of late 
nineteenth-century anthropologists, a native group remained a distinct culture only if they managed the 
impossible task of keeping their “primitive” traditions pure. Any introduction of Western technology 
tainted this purity. Euro-American anthropologists based these comparisons on the false perception that 
Western society had attained a higher level of civilization than Native American societies.19 
Furthermore, they believed technology carried Western society to the pinnacle of civilization. Therefore, 
through manifest destiny, Western society represented the forefront of technological progress.20 This 
misguided reasoning influenced the architects of nineteenth-century federal assimilation programs. They 
believed that introducing agricultural technologies into native societies would civilize American Indians, 
thus mainstreaming them into American society. In the long-run the assimilationist philosophy failed as 
Native Americans reacted to this program in unpredictable ways. Some groups rejected agrarian 
technologies outright, others adapted them to enhance their own agricultural technologies, and other 
groups simply failed.  However, residual elements of this philosophy continued to guide Euro-American 
perceptions of Native American uses of Western technology deep into the twentieth century. 21  
                                                 
19 Vine Deloria, Jr., Red Earth, White Lies: Native Americans and the Myth of Scientific Fact (Golden, CO: 
Fulcrum Publishing, 1997); Deloria, Custer Died for Your Sins; Devon A. Mihesuah, “American Indian Identities: 
Issues of Individual Choices and Development,” in Contemporary Native American Issues, Duane Champagne, 
ed. (Walnut Creek, CA: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1999), 13-38; Fergus M. Bordewich, Killing the White 
Man’s Indian: Reinventing Native Americans at the End of the Twentieth Century (New York, NY: Anchor Press, 
1996);  Robert F. Berkhofer, Jr., The White Man’s Indian: Images of the American Indian from Columbus to the 
Present (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1978).  
20 David E. Nye, American Technological Sublime (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1994); Leo Marx, The 
Machine in the Garden (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1964); Merritt Roe Smith and Leo Marx, eds., 
Does Technology Drive History?: The Dilemma of Technological Determinism (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 
1994). 
21 Frederick Hoxie, The Campaign to Assimilate the Indians, 1880-1920 (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska 
Press, 1984); David Rich Lewis, Neither Wolf Nor Dog: American Indians, Environment, and Agrarian Change 
(New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1994). 

 
 
 
 
11 
 
The assimilationist philosophy and technological determinism deny Native American societies 
historical agency to determine their fate. In the quest to restore political sovereignty and maintain 
cultural identity, twentieth-century Native American groups battled misconceived Western social 
constructions of their people that either doomed them to cultural extinction (assimilated Indian) or froze 
their identities in idealistic perpetuity (traditionalist, ecological Indian). Instead, Native American 
societies, like the White Mountain Apache, understood that cultural survival required the adoption of 
Western science and technology. However, while Euro-American anthropologists, politicians, 
missionaries, and educators saw these adoptions as stepping stones towards assimilation, some Native 
Americans viewed these introductions as an opportunity to reassert tribal sovereignty, thus maintain 
cultural identity.22  
For the Apache in particular, the appropriation of science and technology didn‟t necessarily 
compromise their existence as a unique culture. In fact, from the seventeenth through the nineteenth 
centuries, the Apache adoption of Spanish and Euro-American technologies allowed their culture to 
persist. As the Apache adjusted to the presence of these new cultures, they absorbed new technologies 
such as the domesticated horse, but sustained their identity.23 Adaptation remained a characteristic of 
Apache culture throughout the twentieth century. In the second half of that century, as the Apache 
modernized reservation life, some cultural elements from the past persisted and others faded away. They 
even used Western science and technology to restore lost cultural elements. In short, the White 
Mountain Apache story of cultural appropriation of ecological restoration defies the notion of the 
vanishing Indian. The history of the Apache people demonstrates that culture shapes science and 
                                                 
22 For a number of Native American testimonies on this distinction see Kenneth R. Philp, ed., Indian Self-Rule: 
First-hand Accounts of Indian-White Relations from Roosevelt to Reagan (Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986). 
Vine Deloria also articulates this point in Custer Died for Your Sins. 
23 Grenville Goodwin, The Social Organization of the Western Apache (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 
1969). 

 
 
 
 
12 
 
technology just as much as science and technology shapes culture.  The environmental and cultural 
implications of this reciprocal process are explored further in the next section of this chapter.  
 
Theoretical Considerations: Native American Societal Decline and the Cultural Appropriation of 
Western Science and Technology 
Most histories of Native Americans describe the decline of their societies.24 For example, Richard 
White in The Roots of Dependency employs a variation of dependency theory to explain the cultural and 
political downturn of the Choctaws, Pawnees, and Navajos. In his own words: 
 The collapse of their subsistence systems and their integration into world markets brought 
increasing reliance on the capitalist core, lack of economic choice, and profound political and 
social changes within their societies…At its most extreme, the process rendered the Indians 
utterly superfluous – a population without control over resources, sustained in its poverty by 
payments controlled by the larger society, and subject to increasing pressure to lose their group 
identity and disappear.25 
 
White criticizes past historians for over-determining dependency theory with the capitalist economic 
system, rendering Native Americans passive agents in their decline. Instead he argues that cultural and 
political factors have been equal partners with economic and environmental factors in transforming 
Native American societies to dependent nations. This long and convoluted pathway entailed much 
resistance to and exchange with the capitalist system before almost complete subjugation occurred. 
                                                 
24 The literature detailing the demise of Native American societies is extensive. Literature relevant to this study 
include environmental histories such as Richard White, Roots of Dependency: Subsistence, Environment, and 
Social Change among the Choctaws, Pawnees, and Navajo (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1983); 
Spence, Dispossessing the Wilderness; Philip Burnham, Indian Country, God’s Country: Native Americans and 
the National Parks (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2000); William Cronon, Changes in the Land: Indians, 
Colonists, and the Ecology of New England (New York: Hill and Wang, 1983); Pisani, “Irrigation, Water Rights, 
and the Betrayal of Indian Allotment”; Carolyn Merchant, Ecological Revolutions: Nature, Gender, and Science 
in New England (Chapel Hill, NC: North Carolina Press, 1989); Theodore Catton, Inhabited Wilderness: Indians, 
Eskimos, and National Parks in Alaska (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1997). For 
traditional Native American histories that deal with natural resource overexploitation see Donald Fixico, The 
Invasion of Indian Country in the 20th Century: American Capitalism and Tribal Natural Resources (Niwot, CO: 
University of Colorado Press, 1998); Hoxie, The Campaign to Assimilate the Indians; Lewis, Neither Wolf Nor 
Dog; Donald A Grinde and Bruce E. Johansen, Ecocide of Native America: Environmental Destruction of Indian 
Lands and Peoples (Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Publishers, 1995).  
25 White, The Roots of Dependency, p. xix. 

 
 
 
 
13 
 
Throughout this historical process, culture and politics shared a reciprocal relationship with economic 
systems and the environment. Initially Native Americans controlled exchanges with Euro-Americans. 
But gradually, various cultural, political, environmental, and economic factors led to a loss of control 
over their destiny, leading to the eventual dependence on the federal government for almost their entire 
livelihood. However, this subjugation was never complete. My story, which picks up where White‟s left 
off, demonstrates that the same reciprocal relationship that brought about the demise of Native 
American groups planted the seeds for a political and cultural resurgence. Eventually many American 
Indian nations began combining elements from both Native American and Western traditions to 
reimagine not only their eco-cultural landscapes but also their political and economic systems (Fig. 1).  
As White thoroughly demonstrates, cultural resistance to and exchange with Western traditions has 
long been part of American Indian history. James Merrell‟s study of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century 
mid-Atlantic Indian tribe‟s responses to the arrival of Europeans and Africans expands on this theme. 
Merrell‟s study provides an excellent example of Native American social and political flexibility to 
reimagine their societies in the wake of ecological change and cultural disruption. He illustrates that the 
cultural appropriation and adaptation of Western technology proved key to the long-term survival and 
reivention of American Indian cultures. Merrell asserts that just as Europeans and Africans experienced 
a “new world” upon arrival in North America, so too did American Indians. They found themselves in a 
drastically different cultural and ecological milieu from pre-European colonization conditions. As 
European colonizers moved inland, disrupting native political and social systems, American Indians had 
to adapt. Population decimation due to pathogens introduced by Europeans; integration into the world 
market through exchange of technology, cultural artifacts, and raw materials; and encroachment on 
tribal territories failed to annihilate mid-Atlantic Indian culture. Instead, a number of groups, including 
the Eno, Santee, Saponi, Catawba, responded in culturally and politically innovative ways. Most groups

 
 
 
 
14 
 
Self 
Governance 
(1990s - ???) 
Pre-
Columbian 
(until 1492) 
European 
Colonization 
(1492 – 1871) 
Treaty Era 
(until 1871) 
 
Reservation 
Era (1870s+) 
 
Assimilation & 
Allotment 
(1871-1933) 
Indian New 
Deal (IRA) 
(1933-1945) 
Termination 
Policy (1946 
– 1960) 
American Indian 
Rights Movements 
(1960-1975) 
Self 
Determination 
(1975 - ???) 
Cultural change is a product of 
Cyclical time interacting with linear 
time. Aspirations to return to an 
ideal past or maintain a status quo 
interact with agents of change 
(cultural, biotic, and abiotic)  
Autonomy & 
Exchange 
Dependency & 
Colonialism 
(exploitation) 
Fluctuations over linear time 
represent cycles of cultural 
resistance, restoration (renewal), 
and adaptation (includes cultural 
appropriation of Western traditions 
and technology) interacting with 
outside influences of oppression 
and exploitation. 
Fig. 1 – Reversing Dependency 

 
 
 
 
15 
 
 in that region became part of what was known as the Catawba Nation. As a matter of survival, remnant 
factions of old societies fused together to form a new society in a “new world.” This new society drew 
cultural and political elements from the traditional remnants of the numerous fragmented mid-Atlantic 
groups, Europeans, and Africans. 26   
The Catawba Nation‟s ability to understand and manipulate the colonial political and economic 
system proved very useful in their struggle to survive. Key to this survival was their legal acquisition of 
a portion of their traditional land base, which in turn allowed them to hold at bay the land claims of 
settlers. This land base also served as a source of commodity exchange, renting their surplus land to 
European farmers for cash, livestock, and manufactured goods. Although there was a certain level of 
conformity associated with these actions, members of the Catawba Nation also carefully preserved some 
of their cultural traditions. They resisted Christianization and held intact the cultural infrastructure that 
maintained traditional customs, religious practices, and trade skills from one generation to the next. 
Outwardly, the Catawba Nation embraced certain forms of exchange, borrowing some European 
political and cultural traditions in order to survive. But internally, they worked to restore and maintain 
some of their traditions. The new society selectively embodied both past and present conditions in order 
to create possibilities for the future.27  
Arguably the Catawba Nation story repeated itself again in the twentieth century with the evolution 
of eco-cultural resource management on American Indian reservations. In response to lingering cultural 
assimilation and land dispossession policies, American Indians, through various forms of resistance and 
a rejuvenating push from the Indian New Deal, have attempted to restore their cultures and land. In 
essence, cultural resistance to and exchange with Western society has enabled many American Indian 
                                                 
26 James H. Merrell, “The Indians‟ New World: The Catawba Experience,” The William and Mary Quarterly 41 
(October, 1983): 537-565. 
27 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
16 
 
tribes to persist. And these same socio-political characteristics spawned the twentieth-century Native 
American political resurgence. 
Cultural resistance to and exchange with Western traditions, therefore, has been part of American 
Indian history since first contact with Euro-Americans. As Europeans moved inland, spread disease, 
introduced new technologies and Christianity, waged wars, and disrupted native political and social 
systems, Native Americans had to adapt. As a matter of survival, these societies adopted cultural, 
political, and technological elements from both the traditional remnants of numerous fragmented tribes 
and European colonizers. This story of cultural survival, hybridization, and coexisting worlds remained 
alive into the twentieth century with the evolution of eco-cultural resource management on American 
Indian reservations. Since 1934, with the implementation of Indian New Deal policies, many Native 
American groups have gradually obtained greater political autonomy, reclaiming control over eco-
cultural resources on their lands. Associated with this political resurgence were a growing number of 
ecological restoration projects on reservations. These projects helped buttress the foundation of this 
political movement. However, the need to resist some policies and technologies of the federal 
government failed to dissipate after the onset of the Indian New Deal.  
Resistance remained in both subtle and overt forms among tribal members and in tribal 
governments. The fact that the federal government railroaded Native American groups into becoming 
dependent communities meant that tribal governments for the foreseeable future would have to interact 
with the BIA and other governmental agencies. Most tribal leaders eventually recognized the 
untenability of a complete return to the past. Modernization with an eye towards reintegrating lost 
traditions became the most efficacious path to restoring a sovereign identity. However, this meant 
carefully reestablishing government-to-government relationships with state and federal agencies – 
instituting a process of cultural, technological, and scientific exchange between tribal governments and 

 
 
 
 
17 
 
non-Indian governments that would move tribes towards self-governance rather than dependence.  As 
American Indians began to restore eco-cultural resources, they contended with the same predicament 
that David Lowenthal eloquently points out about all political and ecological restorations:  inherent in 
the process is a negotiation with both “times arrow” and “times cycles.”28 To create a sustainable future, 
American Indians employed ecological restoration not only to reconstruct the past, but they also 
adjusted its product in accordance with contemporary political and social requirements.29  
Fidelity to the past is an important part of American Indian restoration projects, but within certain 
physical and historical constraints. A survey of current American Indian eco-cultural resource 
management strategies reveals no plans to take their societies back to 1492. Nonetheless, it is not 
uncommon to find tribes co-managing projects with federal agencies and environmental NGOs that have 
the goal of returning ecosystems to a semblance of pre-European contact conditions. However, their 
reasons for participating usually have a different cultural basis than Western restorationists. For 
instance, many tribes, including the White Mountain Apache, are currently involved in the restoration of 
large vertebrates such as wolves, bald eagles, and bison. These animals are important characters in tribal 
legends, serve spiritual and ceremonial roles, or provide essential dietary sources. Most American Indian 
restoration projects, however, focus on the restoration of disrupted ecosystem processes, water quality, 
hazardous waste contamination, and species important to the production of cultural artifacts (e.g., 
medicinal plants, plant fibers for basket making, and timber).  
Through a variety of restorative approaches and even wilderness preservation, American Indians on 
a regional and continental scale are collectively restoring Indian country. This growing movement is 
                                                 
28 David Lowenthal, “Reflections on Humpty-Dumpty Ecology,” in Greening History: The Presence of the Past 
in Environmental Restoration, Marcus Hall, ed. (New York, NY: Routledge, forthcoming). 
29 Wilkinson, Blood Struggle.  

 
 
 
 
18 
 
adapting ecological restoration for the local needs of each tribe.30 The cultural appropriation of 
restoration is one of the many ways that American Indians are coping with rapid social change, while 
attempting to restore a semblance of cultural and ecological stability on their lands.31 
 
Resistance and Exchange: A Dynamic Eco-political Model of Self-Determination  
I draw on STS theory to develop a model of eco-political change that aptly characterizes the White 
Mountain Apache struggle to regain control over their homeland. In this quest, the Apache had to 
regulate, traverse, defend, and establish four types of boundaries: political, cultural, epistemological, and 
geographic. In an 1870 Executive Order, President Ulysses S. Grant dictated to the Apache the Fort 
Apache Indian Reservation‟s political boundary. Ever since, the Tribe has had to police this boundary 
from the intrusion of outside interests that wished to exploit Apache resources. On the cultural front, in 
the early twentieth century the Apache defended against the onslaught of federal assimilation policies. 
From the Indian New Deal on, as modernization programs infiltrated the reservation, the Tribe‟s 
defensive posture switched to one of regulation and social negotiation with introduced science and 
technologies. Epistemologically, the cultural survival of the Apache in the wake of rapid modernization 
depended on first acquiring Western knowledge and technical skills, and then modifying them to benefit 
the Apache people. The acquisition process required building the capability to cross epistemological 
boundaries and translate Western knowledge into a form that assisted the Tribe‟s quest to control their 
resources. Ultimately, this meant controlling Western knowledge production within reservation 
boundaries, then, in turn integrating it with Apache epistemological traditions.  
                                                 
30 David Tomblin, “The Ecological Restoration Movement: Diverse Cultures of Place and Practice,” Organization 
& Environment 22 (June, 2009): xxx-xxx. 
31 M. Kat Anderson, Tending the Wild: Native American Knowledge and the Management of California’s Natural 
Resources (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005); Garibaldi and Turner, “Cultural Keystone 
Species.”  

 
 
 
 
19 
 
Finally, the geographic boundaries of mountains, rivers, and watersheds played a significant role in 
the Tribe‟s cultural and political revitalization. When President Grant confined the White Mountain 
Apache to a reservation, they retained a sizable chunk of their homeland. From a recreational, timber, 
and hydrological standpoint, the Fort Apache landscape came to represent some of the most desirable 
land in Arizona. For example, the reservation is a watershed for the Salt River, a source of water for 
Phoenix. As the Arizona population grew, Euro-Americans increasingly demanded the diversion and 
extraction of water from the reservation to grow crops, run businesses, water lawns, support factories, 
and so on. Because of this growing demand, the Apache had to establish legal boundaries to protect the 
ecosystem services of the reservation‟s geography. 
Apache ecological restoration efforts eventually figured into the maintenance of all four boundary 
types. Because political, cultural, epistemological, and geographic boundaries are inherently fluid and 
porous, ecological restoration became a venue for mediation between the White Mountain Apache and a 
whole host of non-Indian interests (federal and state land management agencies, environmentalists, 
academics, and industry) – a site of perpetual resistance and exchange.  In combination with the tenets 
of environmental history, STS theory can help frame this mediation process by providing conceptual 
frameworks for a dynamic eco-political model of self-determination. 
First, I turn Thomas Gieryn‟s notion of boundary work into a tool of liberation. Gieryn originally 
applied the concept of boundary work as a model to explain the self-preservation techniques of 
scientists. As science grew in stature, scientists developed “an ideological style” that demarcated science 
as superior to other forms of knowledge production. By employing this political tool, scientists put 
themselves in a position of power that engenders a sense of authority for facilitating the procurement of 
resources. Scientists, however, imbue the act of boundary work with ambiguity. This flexibility allows 
scientists to define the domain of science for whatever political battle they are fighting. Towards that 

 
 
 
 
20 
 
end, Gieryn identified three basic areas of political discourse: expansion of authority and expertise into 
other professional domains, monopolization of resources, and autonomy from responsibility for the 
unintended consequences of their research.32 
The boundary work concept has become a very useful tool in the STS research for understanding the 
dynamics of scientific communities in six basic ways: 1) interactions between science and society (e.g., 
who gets to do science); 2) power relations that inform the disciplinary formation process (e.g., 
restoration ecology, wildlife management, forestry); 3) defining what is “normal” or “pathological” 
(e.g., baselines for restoration, sustained yield, healthy wildlife populations, the existence of a species, 
ecological integrity, etc.); 4) delineations of practice that occur within a discipline such as “basic” and 
“applied” research; 5) the establishment of hierarchies based on prestige and cultural authority within a 
discipline; and 6) the establishment of hierarchies among disciplines (e.g., biology vs. physics).33 The 
first three conceptualizations of boundary work are particularly relevant to this study. In addition, I 
expand the application of this concept to the political struggle of a disenfranchised group, the White 
Mountain Apache.  
Typically scholars apply this concept to describe the political maneuvers of scientists defending their 
disciplinary turf, acquiring resources, or attempting to create a new discipline. While scientists generally 
have the advantage of employing boundary work from a privileged position, other groups seeking to 
enroll the benefits of science typically don‟t – the very reason being that scientists employ boundary 
work to protect their domain. Health activists, environmental justice groups, and grassroots 
restorationists all attempt to procure credibility for their knowledge production practices with little or no 
                                                 
32 Thomas Gieryn, "Boundary-Work and the Demarcation of Science from Non-Science: Strains and Interests in 
Professional Ideologies of Scientists," American Sociological Review 48 (1983): 781-795. 
33 Adele Clarke, Disciplining Reproduction: Modernity, American Life Sciences, and The Problems of Sex 
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1998), pp. 269-271. 

 
 
 
 
21 
 
training in Western science.34 Native Americans also struggle to legitimize the use of Western science 
and traditional knowledge production practices.35 Non-Western cultures in particular have difficulty 
succeeding in this goal, especially since Western society, in a broad act of boundary work, unjustly 
discredited indigenous knowledge production systems and grossly underestimated the intellectual 
capabilities of these cultures.  In this study, I reframe the boundary work concept as a liberatory tool for 
marginalized cultures. As the White Mountain Apache worked to regain control over their eco-cultural 
resources, they also strove to control knowledge production on the reservation. The Tribe first employed 
boundary work to define how land management agencies implemented Western science and technology 
on the reservation. Later, boundary work evolved as a tool to reestablish the legitimacy of Apache 
knowledge.  
To aid their quest, the Apache adapted ecological restoration as a political vehicle for boundary 
work. Ecological restoration became what Susan Star and James Greissmer call a boundary object.36 The 
boundary object concept is an analytical tool that elucidates the transactions and translations that take 
place across different cultural boundaries. Boundary objects are capable of being both abstract and 
concrete, consisting of techniques, devices, actions, organisms, landscapes, and ideas that link different 
cultures together. The boundary object concept is useful for demonstrating how interacting cultures 
(e.g., scientific disciplines, social movements, land management agencies, local communities adopting 
environmental technologies, etc.) co-evolve over time through the exchange of knowledge, artifacts, and 
                                                 
34 Steven Epstein, Impure Science: AIDS, Activism, and the Politics of Knowledge (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1996); Barbara Allen, Uneasy Alchemy: Citizens and Experts in Louisiana’s Chemical Corridor 
Disputes (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003); Reid M. Helford, “Rediscovering the Presettlement Landscape: Making 
the Oak Savanna Ecosystem „Real,‟” Science, Technology, & Human Values 24 (1999): 55-79. 
35 Kathryn M. Mutz, Gary C. Bryner, and Douglas S. Kenney, eds.,  Justice and Eco-cultural resources: 
Concepts, Strategies, and Applications (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2002); Richmond L. Clow and Imre 
Sutton, eds., Trusteeship in Change: Toward Tribal Autonomy in Resource Management (Boulder, CO: 
University of Colorado Press, 2001).  
36 Susan Leigh Star and James Greissmer, “Institutional Ecology, „Translations‟ and Boundary Objects: Amateurs 
and Professionals in Berkeley‟s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-1939,” Social Studies of Science 19 (1989): 
387-420. 

 
 
 
 
22 
 
techniques. In general, a boundary object helps define what is unique to each culture and what is shared 
among cultures. Boundary objects such as ecological restoration “are both plastic enough to adapt to 
local needs and the constraints of several parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a 
common identity across sites. They are weakly structured in common use, and become strongly 
structured in individual site use.”37 For example, the White Mountain Apache and the land management 
agencies they interacted with loosely agreed on the purpose of ecological restoration. Such a common 
ground potentially allowed different cultures to transcend social and political barriers by facilitating 
communication on a global level, while maintaining local goals and cultural integrity. In other words, 
each culture could both maintain their own integrity while capitalizing on other cultures useful 
knowledge.  
However, when an unequal power distribution exists between cultures, a boundary object can 
become a tool for boundary work. In this circumstance, the boundary object, when controlled by the 
disenfranchised, transforms into a site for building political capital, acquiring expertise, developing 
technical skills, and demonstrating the legitimacy of local knowledge production.  For instance, initially 
federal land management agencies held a paternalistic relationship with the White Mountain Apache, 
thus control over knowledge production in restoration projects. The BIA dictated to the Apache the 
goals of restoration work. At first, the Apache had no recourse to challenge BIA plans.  Despite this 
predicament, over a sixty year period ecological restoration slowly became a boundary object and a site 
of boundary work. Operating through ecological restoration, the Tribe acquired the technical expertise to 
understand the environmental and cultural consequences of BIA restoration work. In addition, they 
developed the skills to conduct restoration projects that benefitted the Apache community.  This long 
and arduous journey eventually led to the Tribe regaining almost complete control of reservation 
resources and the revitalization of Apache knowledge and traditions.   
                                                 
37 Ibid, p. 393. 

 
 
 
 
23 
 
In essence, the boundary object of ecological restoration represents historical locations of technical 
and scientific interchange between Western-based land management agencies and the White Mountain 
Apache. Within this conceptual framework, ecological restoration becomes a focal point for identifying 
possible routes to more democratic uses of science and technology. Since this study focuses on the 
Apache appropriation of ecological restoration, it is imperative to document the evolution of knowledge 
production practices on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation.  Whoever controls knowledge production 
also controls the fate of eco-cultural resources.  For most of the twentieth century, the BIA controlled 
knowledge production on Fort Apache. They embarked upon a large number of paternalistic land 
management projects that had varying impacts on the eco-cultural landscape of the reservation.  
Paternalistic programs often create distrustful relationships with science and technology for program 
recipients.38 In the White Mountain Apache case, the BIA and their benefactors - the timber industry and 
cattle ranchers - introduced science and technology designed to exploit natural resources for the benefit 
of outside interests (Fig. 2). From approximately the early 1900s, when relatively large numbers of 
Euro-Americans began moving into the Southwest, until the early 1970s, timber extraction, grazing, fish 
and wildlife recreation, and water development commenced as projects that sent most economic benefits 
off-reservation. For their troubles, especially in the first half of the twentieth century, the Apache 
received low wages and low skill jobs, if any at all; programs of forced assimilation that resulted in 
severe cultural disruption; and overexploitation of natural resources that only minimally benefitted the 
                                                 
38 For general claims of this nature see Bryan G. Norton, Sustainability: A Philosophy of Adaptive Ecosystem 
Management (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005); Sandra Harding, Is Science Multicultural? 
Postcolonialisms, Feminisms, and Epistemologies (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1998); Andrew 
Feenberg, Questioning Technology (New York, NY: Routledge, 1999); Hannah J. Cortner and M.A. Moote, The 
Politics of Ecosystem Management (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1999). More specifically for Native 
Americans, see Fixico, The Invasion of Indian Country in the 20th Century; Hoxie, The Campaign to Assimilate 
the Indians, 1880-1920; Larry Nesper, The Walleye War: The Struggle for Ojibwe Spearfishing and Treaty Rights 
(Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2002). 

 
 
 
 
24 
 
Federal Government/Industry (1870 – 1970): 
Natural Resource Technologies (Restoration) 
1. Timber exploitation (Sustained Yield) 
2. Water Development (Divert Off-
reservation) 
3. Ranching (Grazing) 
4. Fisheries and Wildlife (Recreation) 
Paternalism, Top-down 
Knowledge Production 
White Mountain Apache relationship with 
S&T 
1. Low wage, unskilled labor (No knowledge 
exchange) 
2. Assimilation/Cultural Disruption 
3. Resources directed towards off-reservation 
interests led to ecological degradation 
4. Created resistance 
Fig. 2 – The White Mountain Apache relationship with science and technology through the first 
100 years of reservation life. The Apache regained limited control of resource management prior 
to the 1970s, but for the most part they remained subject to federal paternalism until the 1970s. 

 
 
 
 
25 
 
Fort Apache community. As a consequence, federal paternalistic science and technology policies created 
a lasting aura of distrust among the White Mountain Apache.  
In order to liberate themselves from the hegemonic bonds of paternalistic, top-down knowledge 
production, the Apache politicized science and technology. Sandra Harding‟s notion of “strong 
objectivity” provides an epistemological framework for describing the White Mountain Apache quest to 
control knowledge production on the reservation.39 Harding characterizes knowledge generation from a 
paternalistic, universal standpoint as “weak objectivity.” In contrast, she advocates strong objectivity, an 
approach that is inclusive of multiple cultural perspectives, which limits the ideological bias of a 
singular, universalist perspective. Generating knowledge from a single standpoint often results in blind 
spots that obscure important local environmental and cultural information vital to the successful 
management of eco-cultural resources.40 This happens because all knowledge production, whether it is 
from the universal or local standpoint is value laden. These values act as filters that bias knowledge 
production in favor of the practicing culture. Because of this, knowledge produced from a single 
standpoint often results in the undemocratic imposition of untested, culturally insensitive, universal 
knowledge onto marginalized groups and non-human nature. In effect, these communities become the 
experimental laboratories of top-down, expert-driven knowledge producers.41  
                                                 
39 Sandra Harding, Is Science Multicultural?  
40 For specific Native American accounts see, Jeanette Wolfley, “Ecological Risk Assessment and Management: 
Their Failure to Value Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Protect Tribal Homelands,” in 
Contemporary Native American Cultural Issues, Duane Champagne, ed. (Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press, 
1999),  293-306; Rebekah C. Beatty Davis, Conservation and Culture: The Soil Conservation Service, Social 
Science and Conservation on Tribal Lands in the Southwest, 1934-1994 (Washington, D.C.: USDA, Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, 1997). 
41 In general the twentieth-century history of natural resource management work of the Forest Service, Fish and 
Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Reclamation exemplify the shortfalls of top-down knowledge production. For 
studies that demonstrate these short falls see, Paul Hirt, A Conspiracy of Optimism: Management of the National 
Forests since World War II (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1994); Nancy Langston, Where Land and 
Water Meet: A Western Landscape Transformed (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2003); David E. 
Nye, America as Second Creation: Technology and Narratives of New Beginnings (Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press, 2003).   

 
 
 
 
26 
 
On Fort Apache during the 1950s and 1960s, the BIA conducted a number of forest and watershed 
restoration experiments that yielded marginal results and in some cases further degraded the reservation 
landscape. In addition, non-Indians received most of the economic benefits from this work. In contrast, 
after the White Mountain Apache appropriated Western technology and learned the language of Western 
science, they changed this exploitative pattern while creating a more inclusive, eco-culturally sensitive 
form of land management. Furthermore, combining Apache local knowledge with Western (universal) 
knowledge avoided some of the pitfalls of a top-down knowledge production system. The 
epistemological restoration of Apache knowledge involved integrating Apache stories, legends, moral 
frameworks, natural histories, philosophical dispositions towards the land, and local ecological 
knowledge with Western science.42 In short, the Apache‟s intimate local knowledge of their homeland 
helped fill gaps in Western knowledge. Moreover, Apache knowledge redirected the application of 
science and technology towards the local ecological, economic, and cultural concerns of the reservation 
community. In essence, within the context of the twentieth century, neither form of knowledge alone 
could save the Apache homeland. However, together Apache knowledge and Western knowledge paved 
the way towards the cultural and political revitalization of the White Mountain Apache Tribe.  
The White Mountain Apache‟s context-specific, historical appropriation of ecological restoration is 
an instructive example of how a local community can positively react and adapt to the introduction of 
environmental technologies.  Capitalizing on the interpretive flexibility of ecological restoration, the 
Apache molded ecological restoration to address the needs of the Apache people. This intervention 
broadened the beneficiaries of restorative technologies to include not only non-Indians, but also the 
Apache people and non-human nature. The political actions of the White Mountain Apache embodied 
                                                 
42 I derived my descriptions of Apache knowledge mainly from historical documents. However, for a specific case 
study that describes how Apache stories provide sources of ecological, moral, historical, and cultural knowledge 
see, Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places. For a general description of Native American knowledge systems see, Clara 
Sue Kidwell, “Native American Systems of Knowledge,” in A Companion to American Indian History, Philip J. 
Deloria and Neal Salisbury, eds. (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2004), 87-102.   

 
 
 
 
27 
 
what Feenberg calls the democratic rationalization of science and technology.43 In other words, the 
White Mountain Apache story provides hope that marginalized cultures can create avenues of 
communication with the dominant society that potentially develop unifying goals, while simultaneously 
addressing the local socio-economic needs and maintaining eco-cultural integrity of oppressed peoples 
and their lands.  
This study provides an excellent opportunity to combine the concepts of boundary work, boundary 
object, democratic rationalization, and strong objectivity into a single dynamic model of eco-political 
self-determination and liberation – in short, resistance and exchange. The rhetorical device of resistance 
and exchange serves as conceptual shorthand for the theoretical framework developed above. In essence, 
the White Mountain Apache employed resistance and exchange to police the political, cultural, 
epistemological, and geographic boundaries between the Apache and other cultures. Apache resistance 
and exchange also forged a pathway towards scientific and technological empowerment, which led to 
freedom from federally mandated technocratic oppression and Euro-American industrial exploitation.  
More specifically, the White Mountain Apache cultural appropriation of ecological restoration 
embodied the dual political function of cultural resistance to and cultural exchange with Western-based 
land management organizations. On the one hand, Apache resistance to the foibles of Western society 
delineated legal and cultural differences, reasserted cultural identity, reestablished cultural autonomy, 
and helped maintain tribal sovereignty. This process also entailed challenging bi-polar Euro-American 
restoration goals, which either focused on rehabilitating economically important species or returning 
segments of North America to a wilderness condition.  On the other hand, the White Mountain Apache‟s 
unfortunate legacy of dependency necessitated exchange with the federal government. The Apache 
depended on cultural exchange with federal land management agencies to successfully manage their 
eco-cultural resources. Exchange also facilitated the development of a labor force conversant with 
                                                 
43 Feenberg, Questioning Technology. 

 
 
 
 
28 
 
Western science and technology, which was important for communication across cultural boundaries. 
The physical and social results of exchange formed eco-cultural hybridizations of science, technology, 
and landscapes. The sites of these hybridizations reveal a framework of fruitful interchange between an 
indigenous culture and Western society. Discerning how the Apache and governmental land 
management agencies mediated competing goals and struck an agreeable balance of power through 
cultural exchange is a key component of this study.44  
The next chapter outlines the eco-cultural implications of Apache resistance to and exchange with 
Western society for the outcome of ecological restoration projects on the Fort Apache Indian 
Reservation.  Because resistance and exchange is an interactive process, its product involves the 
mediation of several visions of nature.  In order to conduct restoration work, restorationists have to 
decide on a historical and ecological basis for the project. Determining this baseline depends on the 
cultural perspective of the restorationists. Historically, along with the White Mountain Apache, a 
number of naturalists, ecologists, land managers, bureaucrats, politicians, and businessmen also 
projected their visions of nature on the Fort Apache landscape. These competing visions played a 
significant role in shaping the evolution of ecological restoration on the reservation.  
 
                                                 
44 Helen Watson-Verran and David Turnbull, “Science and Other Indigenous Knowledge Systems,” in Handbook 
of Science and Technology Studies, S. Jasanoff, G.E. Markle, J. Petersen, and T. Pinch, eds. (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications), 115-139. 

 
 
 
 
29 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 Visions of the White Mountain’s Past: Multiple Baselines for Restoration 
 
 
Ecological restoration is a historical practice. Culture in conjunction with history plays a determining 
role in the outcome of restoration work. Many restoration ecologists concede that deciding which 
aspects of ecosystems to restore is “fundamentally normative rather than scientific.”1 The contingent, 
dynamic nature of ecosystems engenders a wide range of interpretations among practitioners.  In theory 
multiple steady-states are possible in any given ecosystem: Pleistocene communities, “wilderness,” 
colonial agricultural landscapes, Progressive Era managed forests, pre-Columbian Native American 
managed lands, and so on. As a consequence, social values influence which historical reference 
condition restorationists choose to guide their work. Furthermore, restorationists may choose not to 
completely emulate a reference condition; instead, they might limit their efforts to specific species, 
functions, processes, or services.2   
Although ecologists and land managers only recently abandoned the Clemenstian ideal of an 
equilibrium climax community for multi-linear, hierarchical models of ecosystem dynamics, they have 
always made choices about reference baselines for restoration projects.3 Both models allow for choice. 
For the better part of the twentieth century, land managers used the Clemenstsian model to guide their 
work, the theory that after disturbance, biotic communities naturally return to a pre-determined state of 
                                                 
1 D.J. Simberloff, D. Doak, M. Groom, S. Trombulak, A. Dobson, S. Gatewood, M.E. Soule, M. Gilpin, Carlos 
M. del Rio, and L. Mills, “Regional and Continental Restoration,” in Continental Conservation: Scientific 
Foundations of Regional Reserve Networks, M. E. Soule and J. Terborgh, eds. (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 
1999), 65-98, p. 65. 
2 S.T.A. Pickett and V. T. Parker, “Avoiding the Old Pitfalls: Opportunities in a New Discipline,” Restoration 
Ecology 2 (1994): 75-79, p. 76. 
3 For histories on guiding ecological paradigms, see Joel B. Hagen, An Entangled Bank: The Origins of Ecosystem 
Ecology (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1992); Frank B. Golley, A History of the Ecosystem 
Concept in Ecology (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1993); Sharon E. Kingsland, The Evolution of 
American Ecology, 1890-2000 (Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005). 

 
 
 
 
30 
 
equilibrium. This model offered a predictable guideline from which land managers could formulate 
management plans. Theoretically, land managers could intervene to interrupt the linear path towards 
equilibrium, maintaining ecosystems or a single species at any stage of succession. In the first seventy 
years of the twentieth century, most land managers attempted to “restore” plant communities to their 
most economically productive successional stage.4  
Regardless of the guiding paradigm, land managers have always made choices about which 
historical reference point and specific aspects of ecosystems they attempted to restore. This is a 
consequence of the fact that the goals of institutions practicing restoration vary, depending upon their 
values and beliefs about nature. The types of goals that typically drive restoration projects include 
economic, aesthetic, ecological, recreational, biodiversity, scientific investigation, wilderness protection, 
educational, spirituality, and community (man as part of nature). Therefore, multiple values and beliefs 
about nature interact with the knowledge that one can “shape” ecosystems into any number of potential 
“states.” Add into the mix the fact that non-human nature plays a role in shaping itself, and what 
emerges is a highly complex historical process driven by a diversity of actors. Such a complex historical 
process played out on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. 
This chapter introduces the value systems of the primary restorative agents who influenced the 
Apachean landscape during the twentieth century: the White Mountain Apache, the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs (BIA), the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the Arizona Game and Fish 
Commission (AGFC). Before outlining the value systems that were in place during the Indian New 
Deal, I first explore the historical origins of the values that motivated these agents of change. First, I 
consider White Mountain Apache pre-reservation perspectives on and visions of the White Mountains. 
                                                 
4 On the significance of Clementsian ecology to the practice of ecological restoration see, Justin Reich, “Re-
Creating the Wilderness: Shaping Narratives and Landscapes in Shenandoah National Park,” Environmental 
History 6 (2001): 95-117; Emily Brock, “The Challenge of Reforestation: Ecological Experiments in the Douglas 
Fir Forest, 1920-1940,” Environmental History 9 (2004): 57-79; Marcus Hall, Earth Repair: A Transatlantic 
History of Environmental Restoration (Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press, 2005). 

 
 
 
 
31 
 
They arrived in the region in the sixteenth century, replacing the Mogollon and Anasazi cultures that 
vanished two to three hundred years earlier. However, we should note that the Apache believe their 
ancestors originated in the White Mountains, a belief that prominently figures into their vision of 
restoration.5 Second, I document the views of the early Euro-American visitors to the White Mountains. 
By the mid-nineteenth century, explorers, military officials, and naturalists began projecting their 
visions of nature onto the Apachean landscape. Later, early twentieth century land managers and 
bureaucrats imposed their rigid constructions of nature. Third, I describe how these past perspectives 
began to coalesce into competing visions of restoration during the Indian New Deal – the period of first 
serious introduction of Western restorative technologies into the region. Finally, I set the stage for the 
seventy-year political battle that ensued, culminating with the Apache controlling almost all restoration 
work on the reservation.  
 
White Mountain Apache Visions of Restoration: “The Earth is Set Up” 
 
The Apache believe they originated from their homeland in the White Mountains. According to the 
Apache creation story, “The Earth is Set Up,” initially four people worked together to make the earth. 
The first attempt failed, as the earth buckled under the strength of the wind. The four admitted they had 
underestimated the complexity of creating a stable existence. With the next attempt, they stretched the 
earth in the four cardinal directions, fashioning each side into the shape of a foot. To provide further 
support, they placed a stalk of obsidian thorn-covered wild cane in each corner of the earth. Each cane 
was a different color: black in the east, blue in the south, yellow in the west, and white in the north.  
                                                 
5 The exact arrival date of the Western Apache in southeastern Arizona is highly controversial. Some 
anthropologists claim that the Apache settled the region as early as the sixteenth century; however, others suggest 
as late as the early eighteenth century. For more on this controversy, see Michael W. Graves, “Apache 
Adaptations to the Mountains,” in Cholla Project Archaeology: The Q Ranch Region, Vol. 3, J. Jefferson Reid, 
ed. (Tucson, AZ: Arizona State Museum, 1982), 193-215, p. 194-195; Keith Basso, “Western Apache,” in 
Handbook of North American Indians: Southwest (vol. 10), Alfonso Ortiz, ed. (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian, 
1983), 462-488, pp. 464-465. 

 
 
 
 
32 
 
Once in place, Black Wind Old Man and Black Water Old Man – personifications of the wind and water 
- threw themselves against the earth, causing forceful winds and powerful thunder. This time the earth 
withstood the test.  
Even though the earth stabilized, the four people noticed another problem: “My friends, what‟s the 
matter with this earth? It is cold and freezing. We better give it some hair.” To warm the earth, they 
planted trees, grasses, and bushes. After creating a milder climate, they decided the earth remained 
weak, requiring bones for further support. To rectify this situation, they built mountains. Once they 
completed this task, they realized that the earth needed a way to breath. So they sequestered the services 
of Black Thunder, who “whipped the earth with lightning,” provoking water to emerge from the ground. 
Ever since then, all water moved from east to west. Finally, they experimented with placing the sun and 
the moon in the sky. Their first placement of the sun was too close, resulting in the “people crawling 
around, because it was too hot.” Several attempts later, they found the optimal position. In order to strike 
the right balance between night and day, the positioning of the moon also required several trials. Once 
the four people correctly positioned the sun and moon, the earth was ready to support thriving 
communities of life.6 
This creation story reveals several characteristics about White Mountain Apache relationships with 
nature. First, the Apache were actively involved in the creation of their homeland, unlike many Western 
creation stories where a supreme being is responsible.  The Apache believe manipulating the land is 
necessary for survival. Moreover, culture and nature are inseparable. People and non-human nature 
depend on an intimate relationship for existence. Second, creating the Apache world entailed a learning 
process. Their ancestors accumulated knowledge about creating the earth as they went along. In many 
ways, the Apache creation of their homeland is analogous to trial and error experiments. For instance, 
                                                 
6 This is a paraphrase of the Apache legend, “The Earth is Set Up.” Palmor Valor, an Apache elder, told this 
legend to Grenville Goodwin in the early 1930s. Grenville Goodwin, Myths and Tales of the White Mountain 
Apache (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1994), pp. 1-2. 

 
 
 
 
33 
 
when they realized the sun was too close to the earth, they adapted, repositioning it until they found the 
appropriate distance. In subsequent legends, as the earth matured, people learned survival skills from 
their animal brethren, setting in motion a reciprocal relationship between the Apache and non-human 
nature. The Apache became stewards of non-human nature, and non-human nature showed the Apache 
how to live. Third, the Apache relied heavily on non-Apache forces – Black Thunder, Black Water Old 
Man – to complete the earth. In other words, they live in an interdependent world, full of interacting 
beings that played important roles in sustaining the homeland.   
The Apache believe all living and non-living entities in nature have qualities of life. They live in an 
animate world.  The earth, sky, wind, and sun are alive. The earth is a female, with her head lying to the 
east and her feet towards the west. The trees are her hair, the mountains are her bones, and the sky, sun, 
moon, and stars stabilize her existence. Water flows from her head in the east to the west, providing the 
“lifeblood” of all organisms. The most significant origin of this water, the sacred Mount Baldy (also 
known as the White Mountain or Mount Thomas), represents the highpoint in their homeland at 11, 496 
feet above sea level.  Water itself embodies life, as it permeates all beings and brings them sustenance. 
For this reason, springs are considered sacred, a source of vitality.7  
The four cardinal directions, represented by the four great winds, are vital to all Apache rituals and 
ceremonies. The Apache assign a color to each direction: east is black, south is blue, west is yellow, and 
north is white. They associate all living and non-living entities with a direction and a gender. Entities 
associated with the east and west are male, and entities associated with the north and south are female. 
Plants are people, divided into related groups. Each species of mammals, bird, insect, and reptile 
represents a different “tribe” with different languages and customs.  The nature of these customs is laid 
out in detail in Apache legends, often guiding the Apache on how to live in the world. For example, 
                                                 
7 Grenville Goodwin, “White Mountain Apache Religion,” American Anthropologist 40 (January/March, 1938): 
24-37, p. 24. 

 
 
 
 
34 
 
animals taught the Apache how to hunt, farm, acquire fire, and find medicinal plants. In addition, many 
plants and animals contain power that the Apache acquire through ceremonies. These powers embody a 
form of knowledge that enhances a person‟s chance of success in their daily activities. For instance, in 
order to kill a deer, one acquired “deer power,” which lends the hunter special insight into deer behavior. 
“Bat power” allows Apaches to avoid death during battle, “root power” helps heal the sick, and “horse 
power” bestows the practitioner with the ability to tame wild horses. Other powers guide the Apache in 
their endeavors to find food, farm, and use fire to manage the land. Deriving power from non-human 
entities provides the Apache with knowledge about living in an unpredictable, variable environment. In 
sum, the Apache have a long history of knowledge exchange with non-human nature.8 
The White Mountain Apache base this reciprocal process on the belief that there is no separation 
between the natural and supernatural world. Mystical beings, spiritual powers, and ghosts interact and 
live with the tangible elements of nature. In other words, the supernatural is just as real to the Apache as 
water, deer, and mountains. According to Keith Basso, supernatural forces “are integral components of 
[Apache society], and they are approached and dealt with accordingly.”9 The traditional Apache 
knowledge system organizes nature into three classes: hinda, desta, and godiyo. Hinda includes all 
entities that move under their own volition, such as humans, mammals, birds, insects, reptiles, fish, 
plants, and in modern times, motorized vehicles. Desta constitutes all entities that require outside forces 
for movement, such as geographic features and material culture. Godiyo are “holy” entities – 
ceremonies, ritual paraphernalia, celestial bodies, wind, rain, lightning, myths, mythological beings, 
ghosts, and power derived from plants and animals.10 This classification system is integral to how the 
Apache relate to non-human nature.  
                                                 
8 Ibid, p. 25.  
9 Keith H. Basso, The Cibecue Apache (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1986), p. 36. 
10 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
35 
 
A seemingly unified entity, such as a bear, may hold the source for more than one entity. For 
instance, “bear power,” “root power”, and “elk power” are classified as godiyo, but are derived from 
entities classified under hinda, plants and animals. Water (desta) creates rivers, erodes mountains, and 
makes material culture possible. This interdependence makes the Apache homeland sacred, subject to 
respect and rituals that honor its existence. The Apache have also imbued the land with stories where 
desta, hinda, and godiyo interact to provide moral frameworks, historical knowledge of the landscape, 
and emotional support for their people.11 Intact, this knowledge system is a guide for living with the land 
and amicably coexisting within the Apache community. All entities – living, non-living, and 
supernatural – form an animated, interdependent community.  Disrupted, the health of the land and the 
Apache people are in jeopardy; restoring harmony becomes a priority. When the United States 
government confined the White Mountain Apache to the Fort Apache Indian Reservation, they initiated 
the development of a rift between the Apache people and non-human nature.  
The pre-reservation range of the White Mountain and Cibecue Apache (the two bands of Apache 
confined to Fort Apache) included the White Mountains to the east into the lowland deserts to the west. 
The Fort Apache Indian Reservation, a fragment of the Apache‟s former range, contains four of the five 
life-zones they exploited during pre-reservation times: upper Sonoran desert, piñon-juniper woodlands, 
ponderosa pine forest, and spruce-fir forest. The federal government excluded the lowland Sonoran 
desert zone, excising many Apache winter camp sites. The elevation on the reservation ranges from 
approximately 2,500 feet above sea level to 11,496 feet at its highest point, Mount Baldy. Prior to 
confinement on the reservation, the Apache saw their homeland as a diverse set of resources from which 
they derived a living, created a culture, and formed spiritual bonds with sacred sites.  
                                                 
11 Keith Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Language Among the Western Apache (Albuquerque, NM: 
University of New Mexico Press, 1996). 

 
 
 
 
36 
 
The White Mountain Apache, living in an unpredictable and ecologically heterogeneous landscape, 
relied on a flexible style of semi-nomadic subsistence that entailed five general modes of food 
acquisition: hunting, wild plant collection, farming, trading, and raiding. Subsistence activities revolved 
around seasonal cycles. In the spring, as early as March, Apache migrated from their winter camps in the 
lowlands to find wild foods and reestablish farm sites within the piñon-juniper life-zone. Farm sites 
served as a hub for all subsistence activities from spring through late fall. The Apache cleared fields in 
March and by May planted crops of corn, beans, and pumpkins. Families living at the same farm site 
cooperated in building an irrigation system. After they planted the crops, groups of men and women left 
for wild plant gathering expeditions ranging in time from a few days to several weeks. These groups 
traversed the lowland deserts and piñon-juniper woodlands searching for mescal, saguaro, prickly-pear 
cactus, sourberry, acorns, mesquite beans, yucca fruits, piñon nuts, and juniper berries. These wild foods 
provided sustenance until crops from the farms matured in the fall. The Apache hunted year around, but 
the period of most intense effort occurred between November and early spring, when food garnered 
from farming and wild plant collection was less available. The Apache preferred deer, but they also 
hunted elk, antelope, bear, rabbits, turkey, and a variety of small game. In order to ensure a regular 
source of food during the winter, the Apache supplemented hunts with raids on nearby Spanish 
settlements and Navajo villages to capture livestock and other available food products.12 
Guided by spiritual relationships with non-human nature, the Apache actively managed their 
homeland. A description of Apache irrigation systems and fire applications serve as useful examples of 
the constructive ways the Apache manipulated the landscape.  When families resettled farm sites in the 
spring, they began building an irrigation system to divert water from streams into their fields. This 
system first required digging shallow ditches from the stream to the field. Once dug, they built a dam. 
                                                 
12 Graves, “Apache Adaptations to the Mountains”; Winfred Buskirk, The Western Apache: Living with the Land 
Before 1950 (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1986); Grenville Goodwin, Social Organization of the 
Western Apache (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1969). 

 
 
 
 
37 
 
The whole process usually required two weeks of labor. From his boyhood memories prior to living on 
the reservation, John Rope, a former Apache scout, described how his people built these systems:  
The men and women worked together, digging with sharp pointed sticks. The women carried the 
loose dirt off in baskets. After the ditch was finished, they started to make a dam to turn the 
water into it. They first set up a series of four poles tripod-like, across the creek in a line. These 
poles were driven into the creek bed in a square if about three feet, and their tops brought 
together and tied… [W]hen it was done they laid bear grass lengthwise along the upper side of 
the tripods from one to another. Over the bear grass they packed the dry inner bark of cedar and 
cottonwood… Around the tripods and between them they put piles of rock to hold them steady. 
Now, on the upper side right along where the bear grass had been put, they built a wall of flat red 
stones all along till it was as high as the posts… Between this wall and the bear grass was a space 
which they filled in with gravel and dirt, which the women dug out and brought in their 
baskets.13  
 
These intricate works were quite extensive socio-technical systems. Several families lived at a farm site. 
Within a farm site, respective families had four to six fields of three-fourths of an acre each. However, 
half of these fields remained fallow each year, so as to not overtax the soil. Nevertheless, building and 
maintaining an irrigation system required intense labor. As a consequence, all families living at a farm 
site helped construct the irrigation system. Later, when residents left the farm site to gather wild foods, a 
few women and most elders stayed behind to tend the fields and irrigation system.14  One tool employed 
to maintain farm sites was fire. 
The Apache, however, deployed fire in many contexts besides farming.15 Historically, the creation of 
large conflagrations during warfare and raids received the most attention from Spanish explorers, the 
                                                 
13 John Rope, “John Rope,” in Western Apache Raiding and Warfare: From the Notes of Grenville Goodwin, 
Keith H. Basso, ed. (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1971), 93-185, p. 95.  
14 Buskirk, The Western Apache, pp. 23-26, 41-46. 
15 The extent that the White Mountain Apache used fire is unclear. Early Spanish explorers, U.S. military 
expeditions, and Euro-American settlers generally attributed Apache use of fire to warfare and raids.  This bias 
resulted from their immediate concern with the danger Apache raids and warfare presented to settling Arizona. 
Unfortunately, anthropologists such as Grenville Goodwin and Pliny Goddard neglected this area of inquiry as 
well – they simply didn‟t ask about fire use. Therefore, descriptions of the application of fire other than warfare 
and raids are rare. Nonetheless, enough descriptions exist to compile a list of the ways the Apache employed fire 
to manage their homeland. For similar problems with the Chiricahua Apache, see J. Mark Kaib, “Fire History in 
Riparian Canyon Pine-Oak Forests and the Intervening Desert Grasslands of the Southwest Borderlands: A 
Dendroecological, Historical, and Cultural Inquiry” (Master‟s Thesis: University of Arizona, 1999). For general 
debates about the extent that Native American fire influenced the southwestern landscape see, Thomas R. Vale, 

 
 
 
 
38 
 
U.S. military, anthropologists, and settlers. However, receiving less attention from these early observers 
was the Apache‟s precise, careful application of fire to manage the Apachean landscape. The Apache 
also employed fire for hunting, clearing fields, maintaining irrigation ditches, improving forage, 
extracting honey from beehives, managing crops, making fertilizer, and enhancing the quality of 
culturally important plants. More specifically, as a technique for modifying wild plants for cultural 
purposes, the Apache set gentle fires around willow and sumac trees to coax young shoots, which the 
Apache preferred for basket making. In terms of hunting, the Apache used fire to smoke wild turkey 
from their roosts and trap rabbits. Catching rabbits involved hunters creating a fire circle, sometimes as 
large as a mile in diameter, with a small unlit gap. The fire funneled rabbits through the gap so hunters 
could easily kill them with a club.16 The Apache also used fire to improve forage for deer, elk, antelope, 
and their horses. Despite the federal fire suppression policies of the twentieth century, this practice 
persisted among Apache cowboys to improve forage for their cattle.  However, BIA foresters 
discouraged this practice, especially after World War II.17 Although they had a reputation for 
carelessness, growing evidence suggests that the Apache mastered techniques for preventing and 
directing fire, especially near settlements. They cleared flammable plant materials from the vicinity of 
farm sites and even conducted controlled burns to reduce potential fuel sources. Apparently the Apache 
were cognizant of the dangers that uncontrolled blazes might present in arid surroundings.18 Despite 
                                                                                                                                                                         
ed., Fire, Native Peoples, and the Natural Landscape (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2002), especially chapters 
4 and 5. 
16 Buskirk, The Western Apache, pp. 135, 165-166. 
17 Harry Kallander to Harold Weaver, October 25, 1951, FHS, Harold Weaver Papers, Folder #8; “Master Forest 
Management Plan,” Fort Apache Indian Reservation, Arizona, 1954, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, File #3269-55, 
Dec. 339, Box #29; George M. Wheeler, Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the 100th 
Meridian, Vol. 1, Topography (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1878). 
18 Historians such as Steven Pyne and geographers such as Conrad Bahre promoted the idea that the Apache were 
careless with fire. Most of their documentation came from the biased eye-witness accounts of settlers, military 
expeditions, and Spanish explorers. Steven Pyne, Fire in America (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1982), pp. 515-529; Conrad J. Bahre, “Wildfire in Southeastern Arizona between 1859 and 1890,” Desert Plants 
7 (1985): 190-194. For a typical nineteenth century account, see S.J. Holsinger, “The Boundary Line between the 
Desert and the Forest,” Forestry and Irrigation 8 (1902): 21-27. For more on this bias in the historical literature, 

 
 
 
 
39 
 
their careful and precise deployment of fire, the military, and later the BIA, curtailed most Apache uses 
of fire once they were confined to Fort Apache. 
In general, reservation life restricted many aspects of the pre-reservation Apache subsistence system. 
The Apache became subject to assimilation policies, as the BIA encouraged sedentary farming. 
However, the attempt to convert the Apache into yeoman farmers failed. Based on the structure of their 
traditional subsistence system, the Apache knew all along that a complete reliance on an agrarian 
lifestyle wouldn‟t succeed. If their significantly larger pre-reservation territory compelled the Apache to 
adopt a variety of food procurement strategies, the reservation certainly provided insufficient arable land 
to support the entire Apache population year around without supplementation. Furthermore, the Apache 
refused to give up many traditional customs. For instance, out of necessity the Apache continued to hunt 
and gather wild foods to supplement farming. However, over the years, wildlife and plant populations 
began to suffer because the BIA confined Apache hunting and gathering activities to the reservation, 
thus forcing many Apache onto government rations. In the early 1900s, as an alternative to farming, the 
BIA introduced cattle to the reservation, but ranching only accommodated a limited number of Apache. 
The BIA leased most Fort Apache rangeland to non-Indians until the 1940s.19   
White Mountain Apache frustration with BIA policies led to three nativistic religious movements 
between 1870 and 1933. These movements contained elements of a religious and political restoration, 
with the leaders inspiring people to return to pre-reservation days. The first occurred in 1883 and sought 
the return of important dead Apache military leaders “for a joint uprising with the Chiricahua against the 
                                                                                                                                                                         
see Kaib, “Fire History in Riparian Canyon Pine-Oak Forests,” pp. 109-166. Others have downplayed the role of 
man-caused fires in the Southwest. See Vale, Fire, Native Peoples, and the Natural Landscape, chapters 4 and 5. 
19 P. Bion Griffin, Mark P. Leone, and Keith H. Basso, “Western Apache Ecology: From Horticulture to 
Agriculture,” in Apachean Culture, History, and Ethnology, Keith H. Basso and Morris E. Opler, eds. (Tucson, 
AZ: The University of Arizona Press, 1971), 69-76. 

 
 
 
 
40 
 
Army.”20 The Army squelched this movement with the infamous “Cibecue Massacre.” The second 
movement emerged in 1903, provoking considerably less anxiety from Americans. In fact, the goal of 
the movement was quite inclusive. The leaders wanted to create “a new world for the good people of all 
the nations of the earth,” including white people. This movement eventually faded away as the leaders‟ 
attempts to persuade people that the “new world” was obtainable ran into wide-spread skepticism. Silas 
John, a charismatic Apache medicine man, established the third movement in 1924. He aimed to restore 
Apache society to the days before Euro-American intervention, thus eliminating the influence of 
modernity. However, John‟s movement subsided once he landed in jail for killing his wife.21   
White Mountain Apache participation in these movements embodied their desire to restore their pre-
reservation life-ways. After confinement to the reservation, the Apache continued to resist Western 
influence. Up until the Indian New Deal, BIA policies altered the Apache subsistence system, but 
leveled only a subtle impact on their religion, customs, and social organization. However, the Apache 
realized something dreadful was happening to their homeland. Euro-American technology and customs 
began degrading their lands. The BIA leased land to Euro-American ranchers, sold Apache timber 
without their consent, and introduced farming technologies that taxed the soil. Just off the reservation, 
the state of Arizona opened a fish hatchery that introduced non-native game fish into the region. These 
new technologies caused extensive overgrazing, deforestation, soil erosion, and a decline in biodiversity. 
Because of this degradation, many Apache yearned for the past. Palmer Valor, born in the 1830s, clearly 
expressed this desire in 1932. His memory of the pre-reservation days documents some of the aesthetic, 
cultural, and ecological changes Euro-American technologies wrought on the Apache homeland:  
Then the earth was like new, and there were lots of animals and plants. There were four kinds of 
grass we used to live off that were growing all over this country then.  There was red grass, 
yellow grass, blue grass, and white grass. When the wind blew through these grasses as it is 
                                                 
20 Grenville Goodwin and Charles Kaut, “A Native Religious Movement among the White Mountain and Cibecue 
Apache,” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 10 (Winter, 1954): 385-404.  
21 Goodwin and Kaut, “A Native Religious Movement,” pp. 387-388; Basso, The Cibecue Apache, pp. 92-93. 

 
 
 
 
41 
 
blowing now, the air smelled sweet. Now it is different.… In those days, there were no White 
people in the country.… All the country here belonged to us alone. All the mountains here had 
names and now they have none. In those days there were lots of us and the trails around through 
these mountains were well traveled, like roads. Now they are all faded out and hard to see.22  
 
 
The replacement of Apache place-names with Euro-American place-names symbolized Apache loss 
of control over their eco-cultural resources and their cultural destiny. At the dawn of the Indian New 
Deal, the Apache sought the return of values they associated with social prosperity and political 
freedom:  a spiritual relationship with non-human nature, a sense of community with nonhuman nature, 
a flexible subsistence system, and an adaptive view of land management. Remnants of these values 
would eventually serve political efforts to regain control of their destiny. However, life for the White 
Mountain Apache as they once knew it had ended.  The Indian New Deal ushered in an unprecedented 
introduction of modern technology to the Apache people. If the Apache could adapt, as they had done in 
the past, this new technology offered a new, uncharted path towards cultural survival. But this meant 
reconstituting a relationship with a society that held visions of nature that conflicted with Apache values.  
These foreign values began to impose a significant influence on the White Mountain landscape just 
before the establishment of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. During this period, Euro-American 
explorers, naturalists, and land managers began projecting their own visions of nature onto the Apachean 
landscape. The next section describes a handful of Euro-American perspectives on the Apache homeland 
that emerged between 1850 and 1933.   
 
 
Euro-American Visions of Restoration 
 
In contrast to the Apache, Euro-Americans had a different cultural perspective of the White 
Mountains. From the first Spanish explorers to the practitioners of modern land management practices 
the values associated with the resources of the White Mountains evolved considerably. In 1540 en route 
                                                 
22 Palmer Valor, “Palmer Valor,” in Western Apache Raiding and Warfare, Keith Basso, ed. (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press, 1971), 41-71, pp. 41-43. 

 
 
 
 
42 
 
to Zuni, Francisco Vasquez Coronado, the first European explorer to traverse the White Mountains, 
found the region “worser way of mountains and bade passages, then we had passed already.”23 
Apparently, the White Mountains constituted some of the roughest territory Coronado had explored to 
date. Finding the White Mountains undesirable, he recommended to Spanish royalty that the region held 
little value. After Coronado‟s visit, the rugged terrain of the Apache homeland afforded the them 
relative isolation from European influences until the mid-nineteenth century when U.S. military forays 
into the region escalated.   
A naturalist accompanied each of the Army‟s early expeditions into the White Mountains. In 
contrast to Coronado, their opinions of the mountains were unanimously quite positive from an aesthetic 
standpoint. In 1858 Lt. Edward Beale reported, “We came to glorious forest of lofty pines through 
which we have traveled ten miles. The country was beautifully undulating, and although we usually 
associate the idea of bareness with the pine regions, it was not so in this instance; every foot being 
covered with the finest grasses, and beautiful broad grassy vales extending in every direction. The forest 
was perfectly open and unencumbered with brush wood, so that the traveling was excellent.”24 In 1873 
Lt. George Wheeler of the renowned Wheeler Expeditions was the first Euro-American to reach the 
summit of Mount Baldy. On his descent, he made one the few positive observations of Native American 
fire use of the time, attributing the good condition of forage grasses to their practices. He noted, “For a 
little less than 2 miles the grass is of the old crop, then begins the new and juicy growth of the year 
subsequent to the burning over by fire set by Indians.”25 All the expeditions between 1850 and 1880 
reported excellent grazing, plentiful game, abundant fish, and valuable timber, enticing Euro-American 
                                                 
23 Quote taken from Charles F. Cooper, “Changes in Vegetation, Structure, and Growth of Southwestern Pine 
Forests since White Settlement,” Ecological Monographs 30 (April, 1960): 129-164, p. 130. 
24 Ibid., 130. Cooper cites the naturalists of all the major expeditions into this region. They all had high praises for 
the aesthetic qualities of the White Mountains.  
25 Wheeler, Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the 100th Meridian. 

 
 
 
 
43 
 
settlers to exploit the abundant natural resources of the region.26 These early descriptions eventually 
became the basis of the modern ideal for an ecologically sound southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystem 
– a fire adapted community with wide open spaces and a lush undergrowth of grass among large, high-
crowned pines.27 However, the “original” condition of this ecosystem would soon degrade in the wake 
of ranching, hunting, fishing, logging, and eventually federal fire suppression policies.   
 Edward Nelson, a zoologist and eventual Chief of the Bureau of Biological Survey (1916-1927), 
saw the first evidence of this decline in the 1880s. After several arduous collecting expeditions in the 
wilds of Alaska, he contracted tuberculosis. In 1881 Nelson and his mother left for the White Mountains 
to recover in isolation. Initially they lived in a tent, with his mother providing care. Drawn to the 
wilderness setting of the White Mountains, eventually he and his brother established a ranch near 
Springerville, a town just northeast of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. In periods of relatively good 
health, Nelson toured the White Mountains, hunting, collecting, and describing specimens for the 
Smithsonian Institution.28 Nelson documented a precipitous decline in large game from when he arrived 
in 1881 to when he left in 1888. This decline coincided with the arrival of cattle ranchers and sheep 
herders.29 Later, in 1902 when the extinction of the prized Merriam‟s elk became imminent, he proposed 
converting portions of the Black Mesa Forest Reserve (the precursor to the national forests adjacent to 
northern and eastern borders of Fort Apache) into a game preserve. His proposal also included the 
                                                 
26 Cooper, “Changes in Vegetation,” pp. 130-131. 
27 For example, the Ecological Restoration Institute of Northern Arizona University is an aggressive advocate of 
returning southwestern ponderosa pine ecosystems to their nineteenth-century structure. See Peter Friederici, ed., 
Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2003). 
28 Edward A. Goldman, “Edward William Nelson – Naturalist, 1855-1934,” The Auk 52 (April, 1935): 135-148, p. 
145. 
29 Edward W. Nelson, “Explorations in southern Arizona,” Smithsonian Institution Annual Report (1884): 20-24; 
Edgar A. Mearns, Mammals of the Mexican Boundary of the United States (Washington, D.C.: Government 
Printing Office, 1907), pp. 216-218. 

 
 
 
 
44 
 
eastern mountainous portions of Fort Apache, which contained “some of the finest game country” in the 
White Mountains.30   
Noticeable ecological degradation of the region‟s watersheds weren‟t far behind the decline in 
wildlife. Overgrazing and its negative consequence, erosion, reached a crisis condition in the White 
Mountains by the turn of the century.31 Comparatively speaking, the ranges on Fort Apache remained in 
good condition. A representative of the Salt River Valley Water Supply Protective Association, a group 
that would eventually attempt to restrict Apache water development in the second half of the twentieth 
century, noted, “The White Mountain Indian Reserve [Fort Apache] was visited and the parks in it 
showed no deep cuts or channels to carry the rain water away in torrents.”32 However, the relatively 
good grazing conditions on Fort Apache would soon take a turn for the worse. In 1900 the BIA had just 
issued the first grazing leases to Euro-American ranchers and sheep herders.33 In the mean time, the 
declining conditions of the range in the Black Mesa Forest Preserve drew the attention of Gifford 
Pinchot. 
In May of 1900, Pinchot left Phoenix for the Black Mesa Forest Preserve. En route, he passed 
through Fort Apache under military escort, fearing attack from the Apache. During his visit, he scaled 
Mount Baldy where he witnessed an Apache “setting the woods on fire.” He surmised the man was 
hunting deer “because the hunter has a better chance under cover of the smoke.” However, he revealed 
his prejudice against fire, concluding, “It was primeval, but not according to the rules.”34 Once in the 
forest preserve, Pinchot witnessed extensive evidence of overgrazing, especially from sheep. He noticed 
                                                 
30 Edward W. Nelson, “Forest Reserves as Game Reserves,” Forest and Stream 58 (May 17, 1902): 385. 
31 Cooper, “Changes in Vegetation,” p. 135. 
32 Sam F. Webb, Report to the Salt River Valley Water Supply Protective Assn (Miscellaneous Collections, 
University of Arizona, 1900). 
33 Theodore B. Dixon and Arthur Dodwell (prepared by F.G. Plummer), Forest Conditions in the Black Mesa 
Forest Reserve, Arizona (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, USGS, Professional Papers 23, 
1904). 
34 Gifford Pinchot, Breaking New Ground (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1947), pp. 178-179. 

 
 
 
 
45 
 
that sheep had “bitten off” most pine seedlings, leaving nothing but stems. Much of the soil was bare, 
eroding into streams “where it does not belong, and so to the sea, silting up reservoirs on the way.”35 So 
for Pinchot, sheep jeopardized the health of the ponderosa pine forest. They not only reduced tree 
reproduction, but also destroyed ground cover that prevents erosion. This led to wide-scale watershed 
degradation, threatening the water supply for downstream users.  Furthermore, Indian and natural fire 
wasted valuable timber. In essence, the inefficiency of man and nature proved detrimental to the future 
productivity of the Black Mesa Forest Preserve. Pinchot‟s vision of nature involved reducing natural and 
man-made “waste” -  in this case, fire, overgrazing, and erosion. His suggested tools of restoration 
included grazing control, sustained-yield timber management, and fire suppression.  Properly applied, 
these tools would create highly productive forests that “safeguard the headwaters of most Western 
rivers.”36  
Within the forestry traditions of the time, J.P. Kinney, Chief of the BIA‟s Forestry Branch (1914-
1933), attempted to carry out sustained-yield management of Indian timber lands. However, with less 
financial resources and fewer trained personnel than the Forest Service, he had limited success 
implementing this ideal.37 Furthermore, the Commissioner‟s of Indian Affairs in the early 1900s focused 
their concerns on assimilation and allotment policies. Allotment in particular created difficulties for 
Kinney‟s comprehensive management plans. With much of Indian country broken into private plots, 
Kinney found coordinating the numerous Native American and Euro-American interests difficult.38 
                                                 
35 Ibid. 
36 Ibid., p. 181. 
37 J.P. Kinney, “Forestry on Indian Reservations,” Journal of Forestry 10 (September, 1912): 471-477; J.P. 
Kinney, “Forestry Administration on Indian Reservations,” Journal of Forestry (December, 1921): 836-843; J.P. 
Kinney, “Forest Policy on Indian Timberlands,” Journal of Forestry 25 (April, 1927): 430-436; Alan S. Newell, 
Richmond L. Clow, and Richard N. Ellis, A Forest in Trust: Three Quarters of a Century of Indian Forestry, 
1910-1986 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Division of Forestry, 1986), 
Chapters 2 and 3. 
38 J.P. Kinney, “The Administration of Indian Forests,” Journal of Forestry 28 (December, 1930): 1041-1052. 

 
 
 
 
46 
 
Nonetheless, he tried to introduce sustained-yield management to reservations, and because Fort Apache 
remained unallotted, the White Mountain Apache homeland became a focal point of his efforts.   
Even on Fort Apache, local bureaucrats presented obstacles to Kinney‟s goal. In a 1923 report, 
Kinney observed that sheep destroyed all but a few pine seedlings in the reservation‟s forests. He found 
very few trees “less than 22 to 26 years of age,” and since sheep began grazing on the reservation in 
1900, they had “killed nearly every tree that had not reached a height of two feet.”39  On top of this 
damage, in 1922 sheep devoured one of “the best seed years the Arizona yellow [ponderosa] pine has 
had in a quarter century.” 40 As a consequence, he predicted that in the coming years a severe decline in 
merchantable timber would occur. He advised Charles Davis, the Superintendent of Fort Apache, that 
grazing fees collected from Euro-American sheep herders amounted to relatively less profit for the 
White Mountain Apache than timber sales.  Kinney encountered great trouble convincing Davis to 
restrict the number of livestock, with Davis essentially refusing to alter grazing policy. The 
mismanagement of these lands would continue until the 1930s, when New Deal policies curtailed the 
activities of non-Indian ranchers and sheep herders on the reservation.41 Reflecting on the source of this 
mismanagement, Kinney blamed Commissioner Cato Sells (1913-1921): “With no background of forest 
and range conservation and with a decided interest, as a former banker, in the profit angle of business, 
Commissioner Sells was easily influenced by those who placed the emphasis upon current income.”42  
Nelson, Pinchot, and Kinney‟s views of nature derived from the Progressive Era ideology that 
valued economy, efficiency, paternalism, and control. They all sought to discipline people and nature, 
whether through classifying nature, protecting game, efficiently managing forests and range, or 
                                                 
39 J.P. Kinney, Indian Forest and Range (Washington, D.C.: Forestry Enterprises, 1950), p. 256. 
40 Ibid., p. 257. 
41 Peter Iverson, When Indians Became Cowboys: Native Peoples and Cattle Ranching in the American West 
(Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1994), pp. 131-133. 
42 Kinney, Forest and Range, p. 253. 

 
 
 
 
47 
 
spreading the utilitarian conservation philosophy.43 Moreover, they all served as high-level, scientific 
bureaucrats who held technocratic worldviews. In other words, they believed that only scientific elite 
could effectively manage resources for the greatest good of all; thus they created a political relationship 
with nature and people in direct contrast to that of the Apache - a political relationship that sterilized 
spiritual, cultural, and emotional connections with nature. Furthermore, this “objective” arrangement 
funneled all nature through a sieve that divided the world into that which was useful and that which was 
waste (fire, predators, disease, dead trees, etc.), privileging economic value over aesthetic, spiritual, 
democratic, and communal values.  Rather than adapting to the complexity of nature, Pinchot, Kinney, 
and Nelson all sought to simplify ecosystems, converting them into machines of economic efficiency.44  
Aldo Leopold‟s presence in the White Mountains represented the projection of a different set of 
values onto nature. Leopold‟s first stop after Yale Forestry School was the White Mountains. He arrived 
in Springerville in July of 1909. His brief two-year stay and a subsequent trip in 1921 sparked Leopold‟s 
evolution of thought on conservation. Fresh from forestry school, he was a disciple of Pinchot‟s 
utilitarian conservation philosophy: predators, fire, insect infestations all represented inefficient waste of 
natural resources.45 However, Leopold‟s journey into the White Mountains inspired a different view of 
nature. What initially impressed him was that “the White Mountain was a horseman‟s world.”46  Travel 
otherwise proved impossible. This impression eventually contributed to Leopold‟s wilderness ideal. By 
                                                 
43 The notion of “disciplining nature” was inspired by Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the 
Prison (New York: Random House, 1977). For extensive application of this idea, see Arturo Escobar, “After 
Nature: Steps to an Anti-essentialist Political Ecology,” Current Anthropology 40 (1999): 1-30; Arturo Escobar, 
Territories of Difference: Place, Movements, Life, Redes (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008); Timothy 
Luke, Capitalism, Democracy, and Ecology (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1999); Arun Agrawal, 
Environmentality: Technologies of Government and the Making of Subjects (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
2005).  
44 Samuel P. Hays, Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency: The Progressive Conservation Movement, 1890-
1920 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959); Chris Maser, The Redesigned Forest (San Pedro, CA: R. 
and E. Miles, 1988); James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition 
Have Failed (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998). 
45 Curt Meine, Aldo Leopold: His Life and Work (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988), pp. 88-105. 
46 Aldo Leopold, A Sand County Almanac and Sketches Here and There (New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press, 1968), p. 122. 

 
 
 
 
48 
 
the 1920s, Leopold began lamenting the affect the automobile had on the American landscape. His 
rugged, backwoods experience in the White Mountains triggered a long philosophical journey, 
concluding with the notion that the federal government should spare some of America‟s wild lands from 
“Henry Ford‟s revolution.” Leopold believed that wilderness offered a refuge from civilization, a place 
where people could test their character and recharge individual creativity. Recreation from the safety of 
an automobile or with the conveniences of the modern world at hand was all well in good, “but too 
much safety seems to yield only danger in the long run. Perhaps this is behind Thoreau‟s dictum: In 
wildness is the salvation of the world.”47  
The aesthetic qualities of the White Mountains also spiritually affected Leopold. For instance, in 
describing his experience with the four seasons of the region, summer “invited you to get down and roll 
in its new grass and flowers… Every living thing sang, chirped, and burgeoned. Massive pines and firs, 
storm-tossed these many months, soaked up the sun in towering dignity.”48 His experiences along the 
Blue River, just east of the White Mountains, inspired his famous essay, “Thinking Like a Mountain.” 
After shooting a wolf and watching the “fierce green fire dying in her eyes,” Leopold began to question 
whether federal predator eradication policies benefitted nonhuman nature and humans.49 These early 
contemplations gave rise to his later views on biodiversity, community, democracy, and land 
management.   
As he continued to explore the Southwest, Leopold‟s views on predator control, the role of fire in 
ecosystems, and sustained-yield management evolved. His arrival in the White Mountains in 1909 gave 
him a relatively long-range perspective on the effects that utilitarian conservation techniques had on the 
Arizona landscape. He witnessed the degradation of forests and range due to fire suppression policies 
                                                 
47 Ibid., p. 133. For more on Leopold‟s views concerning mechanized travel and wilderness, see Paul S. Sutter, 
Driven Wild: How the Fight against Automobiles Launched the Modern Wilderness Movement (Seattle: 
University of Washington Press, 2002). 
48 Ibid., p. 125. 
49 Ibid., p. 130. For more on the origin of this essay, see Meine, Aldo Leopold, pp. 458-459. 

 
 
 
 
49 
 
and the deer irruptions that menaced the plants communities of the Kaibab Plateau.50 He eventually 
concluded that the decline of southwestern ecosystems resulted from human removal of integral 
components of biotic communities. All living and non-living entities played a role in maintaining the 
integrity of those communities.  
Leopold‟s experiences in the Southwest became fundamental to the formulation of his “land ethic,” 
an idea that would increasingly gain capital among ecologists, land managers, and environmentalists 
during the second half of the twentieth century. Of primary interest, the “land ethic” broadened the 
notion of community to include both humans and non-humans. However, Leopold understood well the 
multiple values that people project onto nonhuman nature. He also understood that these conflicting 
values made achieving a consensus on how to conserve, preserve, and restore natural resources a 
difficult proposition. Indeed, Leopold proclaimed that if we as a society were going to do anything about 
our environmental predicament, the average person had to become an ecological citizen. In effect, 
enlarging “the boundaries of the community to include soils, waters, plants, and animals, or collectively: 
the land”51 This sense of community introduced the idea of participatory democracy to land management 
agencies. For Leopold, human political diversity and biodiversity had to coexist. If humans, no matter 
the cultural, political, or philosophical persuasion, failed to see their rightful position amongst the plants 
and animals of the world, there was no hope for solving the looming environmental crisis.52   
Like Nelson, Pinchot, and Kinney, Leopold‟s political relationship with nature contrasts with 
Apache visions of nature. Nonetheless, some similarities occur, and in many ways, Leopold‟s ideals 
proved more compatible with the Apache relationship with nature. Leopold‟s idea of community is 
                                                 
50 Aldo Leopold, “Grass, Brush, Timber, and Fire in Southern Arizona,” Journal of Forestry 22 (October, 1924): 
1-10; Aldo Leopold, “Conservationist in Mexico,” American Forests 43 (1937): 118-120, 146; Aldo Leopold, 
“Some Fundamentals of Conservation in the Southwest,” Environmental Ethics 1 (1979): 131-141. 
51 Leopold, Sand County Almanac, p. 204. 
52 Aldo Leopold, “Land Use and Democracy,” Audubon Magazine 44 (September-October, 1942): 259-265; Aldo 
Leopold, “A Biotic View of Land,” Journal of Forestry 37 (1939): 727-730. 

 
 
 
 
50 
 
somewhat congruent with Apache spiritual bonds with non-human nature and their belief that humans 
are a part of nature. Furthermore, Leopold‟s “land ethic” recognizes the dynamic, unpredictable qualities 
of ecosystems that encouraged the value of adaptability in Apache culture. In the “land ethic,” he called 
for human technological aspirations to fall more in line with the rhythms of nature; instead of pursuing 
technocratic control, create adaptive technologies that work with nature.53 However, the values of 
biodiversity, wilderness, aesthetics, recreation, and participatory democracy were foreign to the White 
Mountain Apache in the 1930s. Nonetheless, they would eventually adopt versions of these ideas for 
their political cause.  
In sum, Euro-Americans brought a diversity of values to the table during the Indian New Deal. To 
varying degrees, many of these values influenced the nature of ecological restoration on the Fort Apache 
Indian Reservation. Interaction between Apache values and Euro-American values intensified after 
1933. The Western values of economy, recreation, paternalism, democracy, biodiversity, ecology, 
wilderness, and aesthetics intermingled with Apache visions of the past. Some of these values fit well 
with the Apache notions of spirituality, communalism, subsistence, and adaptability. Others conflicted 
with these values. Together they formed multiple baselines for restoration.  
Prior to 1933, and to a certain extent thereafter, Euro-American values dominated those of the 
Apache. However, the Indian New Deal laid the foundation for a more even playing field between Euro-
Americans and the Apache. Instead of domination, Apache values slowly gained acceptance, then 
legitimacy as paternalism gave way to the democratization of science and technology. This arduous 
journey turned the Fort Apache Indian Reservation into a long-term eco-political experiment involving a 
struggle over competing visions of restoration. John Collier, Commissioner of Indian Affairs from 1933-
                                                 
53 Many contemporary land managers claim that Aldo Leopold is the father of ecosystem/adaptive management. 
For more on this topic, see Bryan G. Norton, Sustainability: A Philosophy of Adaptive Ecosystem Management 
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2005), pp. 65-77. 

 
 
 
 
51 
 
1945, and his allies set this experiment in motion.  The next section explores the values that lay the 
foundations for Collier‟s eco-cultural restoration experiment.  
 
 
The Indian New Deal and a Vision of Eco-cultural Restoration 
 
The Indian New Deal coincided with the broader New Deal programs of the Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt administration. A large number of federal agencies coordinated rebuilding the country‟s 
economic base, including protection, restoration, and improvement of degraded farm land, forests, and 
watersheds. In response to the degradation of these resources, Roosevelt created the Natural Resource 
Board to develop a comprehensive restoration plan.54 As a result, the New Deal era had an air of 
ecological and social restoration to it. The 1930s saw an increase in restoration rhetoric among the 
conservation elite such as Aldo Leopold, Hugh Bennett, Jay “Ding” Darling, and Benton MacKaye. 
Furthermore, Roosevelt initiated the annual North American Wildlife and Resources Conference, with 
its first proceedings titled Wildlife Restoration and Conservation. This conference offered a new venue 
for sorting out conservation problems and restorative solutions. In addition, Congress enacted a number 
of legislative bills associated with natural resource restoration, including the Wildlife Restoration Act.55  
Some Euro-American ecologists, politicians, and bureaucrats also included the revitalization of 
Native American cultures in their visions of restoration. Aldo Leopold‟s experimental vision for 
restoration at the University of Wisconsin Arboretum in the early 1930s serves as a prime example. 
Leopold aspired to transform abandoned farmland back into “a sample of what Dane County looked like 
                                                 
54 Ann L. Riley, Restoring Streams in Cities (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1998), p. 201; A.L. Riesch Owen, 
Conservation under FDR (New York, NY: Praeger Publishers, 1983), pp. 147-148. 
55 On the restorative turn during the 1930s, see Hall, Earth Repair, pp. 134-138; see also Riley, Restoring Streams 
in Cities, pp. 201-204; Reich, “Re-Creating the Wilderness”; Wildlife Restoration and Conservation: Proceedings 
of the North American Wildlife Conference called by Franklin D. Roosevelt (Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, 1936). 

 
 
 
 
52 
 
when our ancestors arrived here.”56 Considered one of the first attempts to restore an ecosystem to its 
pre-European contact condition, this project also held symbolic meaning to some Native Americans.57  
In 1934 the organizers of the arboretum‟s dedication invited Chief Albert Yellow Thunder, a 
Winnebago, to give a speech.  Yellow Thunder‟s oration included a number of messages that embodied 
both resistance to and exchange with Western ideals. Lamenting a sense of loss, he opened the speech 
comparing the decline of his people to the degradation of the Wisconsin forests: “My people are like the 
trees – a dying race, leaving behind them as their only monument the natural forests and streams of 
America.” However, his people had not vanished, as many Euro-Americans had come to believe. 
Perhaps his presence at the dedication even invoked romantic notions of pre-European landscapes full of 
thriving Native American societies. But Yellow Thunder wanted his audience to know that his people 
had not vanished, claiming that “my people are being recreated in this project. It makes me think of 
many winters ago in my home in the wilderness near Wausau. Years ago I left home to mingle with 
civilization. I went back last year. The beauty of my wilderness home was gone. Nothing remained but 
burn-tover [sic] land. I am glad to see the „white Indian‟ reviving the natural instinct.”58  
Yellow Thunder recognized that the salvation of his people lay at the intersection of Western and 
Native American traditions. According to him, Western technologies potentially afforded the 
opportunity to build a positive relationship with non-human nature and Native American societies, 
                                                 
56 Leopold‟s quote taken from Nancy D. Sasche, A Thousand Ages (Madison, WI: Regents of the University of 
Wisconsin, 1965), p. 28. 
57 On the historical importance of this restoration effort see William R. Jordan, III, The Sunflower Forest: 
Ecological Restoration and the New Communion with Nature, (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 
2003); William R. Jordan, III and Marcus Hall, “Ecological Restoration,” in Encyclopedia of World 
Environmental History, S. Krech, III, J.R. McNeil, and C. Merchant, eds. (New York, NY: Routledge Press, 
2004), 371-378. Jordan claims that an earlier restoration effort, although smaller in scale, in the 1920s by Edith 
Roberts at Vassar was actually the first attempt at restoring all components of a disturbed ecosystem. See Edith A. 
Roberts and E. Rehmann, American Plants for American Gardens (Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 
1996 (1929)). 
58 “Dedication Speakers Vision Arboretum as Realization of „Consciousness of Nature,‟” Capital Times (June 18, 
1934): 12. 

 
 
 
 
53 
 
especially if Euro-Americans revived “the natural instinct” – the reestablishment of a reciprocal and 
cooperative relationship between man and nature.59 But at the same time, he chastised Western traditions 
as the source of environmental degradation: “The progress of education is not civilization, because to me 
civilization must be a constructive, conserving, beneficial thing. Too often it has become barbaric and a 
great destructive force.” However, Yellow Thunder hoped this wasn‟t true for all Western science and 
technology. He surmised that ecological restoration had the potential to “be a constructive, conserving, 
beneficial thing” and reverse the destructive tendencies of Western civilization, including the atrocities 
perpetrated on his people. 60  
John Collier, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs under Roosevelt, conceived the Indian New Deal 
and the Civilian Conservation Corp – Indian Division (CCC-ID) to carry out just such a vision. 
Restoration efforts during the Indian New Deal went beyond the Euro-American goals of ecological, 
economic, and social restoration. Projects on Indian reservations contained the seeds for political, 
religious, and cultural restoration of Native American nations.  Indeed, the goal of Collier‟s Indian New 
Deal sought to reform past federal policies that dispossessed Native American‟s of their lands and 
disrupted their cultural traditions. Collier envisioned the Indian New Deal largely as an eco-cultural 
restoration of the Indian people, with the techniques of ecological restoration serving as a time machine: 
“So Time, in the strange way Time has, can move in different directions, the defeated can become the 
victors, the dead can live again, and through creative things that truly can be done, the Indian may once 
more embrace the whole land, and may spiritually reclaim it, from sea to sea.”61  
                                                 
59 My goal here is not to determine whether or not Native Americans had “cooperative” relationships with non-
human nature. I am trying to convey how Leopold‟s restoration project inspired Yellow Thunder. For Yellow 
Thunder, Leopold‟s project inspired a past, perhaps idealistic, when humans and non-humans got along. Indeed, 
Aldo Leopold‟s land ethic embodies this relationship with nature. Furthermore, most Native American legends 
describe times when humans and non-human animals lived together and communicated with each other.  
60 “Dedication Speakers,” p. 12. 
61 John Collier, From Every Zenith: A Memoir (Denver, CO: Sage Books, 1962), p. 246. 

 
 
 
 
54 
 
Collier‟s restoration policy involved three basic goals: First, “the conservation of the biological 
Indian and of Indian cultures, each with its special genius;” second, the conservation of the Indian‟s 
natural resources, mainly “the pitiful remnant of what had once been their vast land;” and third, the 
reestablishment of self-governing Indian nations.62  In essence, the broad infrastructure of his restorative 
goals were eco-cultural, addressing the “world that is not man – the forests, the living soil, the waters, 
and the creature life of the million species – [and a] world that is man – his cultures, institutions, value 
systems, and hopes.”63 Collier designed the CCC-ID to implement this vision of restoration. He also felt 
this program should provide training for Native Americans in Western conservation and restoration 
techniques, with the hope that Native Americans could eventually manage reservation resources for 
themselves. The basis of this program lay with the fact that natural resources constituted the primary 
source of income for most American Indian groups. Indian self-management of these resources was 
integral to economic stability, thus the ability to self-govern. However, achieving this goal meant 
combining a multitude of values from Western and Native American societies.  
Walter Woehlke, Collier‟s close colleague and one of the architects of the Indian New Deal, 
illustrated this vision well. In an article titled “Let‟s Give it Back to the Indians,” Woehlke declared, “It 
is a sensible act to turn over to him [Native Americans] the job of restoring the natural conditions on 
large areas of land. It will take time and cost money to make good the damage done through a century of 
ruthless exploitation, but the money will go to Indian wage earners engaged in the restoration work. And 
when the work is completed, the land will be in such shape that it can support the Indian population 
permanently.”64 Framing his argument with a romantic description of North America prior to Euro-
American arrival, he described “a continent flowing with milk and honey.” Majestic forests covered 
“billions of acres” and prairie grasses that “reached to the stirrups” expanded across the horizon.  
                                                 
62 Collier, From Every Zenith, p. 236. 
63 Ibid. 
64 Walter Woehlke, “Let‟s Give it Back to the Indians?” Indians at Work 2, no. 8 (1934): 13-17, pp. 16-17. 

 
 
 
 
55 
 
Invoking the image of the “ecological Indian,” he claimed that for thousands of years Native Americans 
“possessed this continental area and made a living on it without disturbing the fine balance between the 
constructive and destructive forces of nature.”65 Instead, the fall of nature in the subsequent years solely 
rested on the shoulders of European “vim, vigor, boundless energy and equally boundless stupidity.”66 
Everything from the destruction of the bison, deforestation, to the erosion of top soil into the oceans was 
a consequence of European greed and ignorance. For Woehlke and Collier, Native American societies 
embodied an idealistic return to better days.67 Giving their land back, with a little guidance, meant 
progress.   
However, restoration for Collier and Woehlke had multiple baselines. They believed a complete 
return to the past was impractical, if not impossible. They pulled from the past and the present to 
formulate their goals, combining the land management philosophies of utilitarian conservation and 
wilderness preservation with what they believed were the cultural concerns of Native Americans. In 
essence, their vision of restoration was far from a recreation of Indian lands and societies as they 
appeared prior to European colonization. For them, the problem wasn‟t land use, but improper land use. 
Western technology figured prominently in their plans. For example, when referring to government 
programs that promoted farming in the arid West, Woehlke insisted, “[I]t is perfectly reasonable to 
restore the grass cover on these areas, to reclothe them with brush and timber where possible and to 
practice stock raising in those districts in which the cover can be restored. As a rule these lands became 
                                                 
65 Ibid., p. 13. 
66 Ibid. 
67 Historians of the Indian New Deal have often rightly accused Collier and his allies of holding a romantically 
idealistic view of Native American societies. However, he also had a more complex conceptualization of Native 
American relationships with non-human nature than he is often given credit for. Collier didn‟t see Indians as 
living in harmony with nature. He believed that Native American rituals rather than some modern notion of 
ecology guided an Indian conservationist ethic. See for example, “One aspect of Hopi morality is expressed in the 
Hopi hunting and gathering customs and rites. These rites involve propitiating the particular kind of game animal 
and entreating the „animal people‟ not to become angry but to forgive the hunters who take their lives, inasmuch 
as the hunters kill only because of their great need.” Collier, From Every Zenith, p. 266. 

 
 
 
 
56 
 
„sub-marginal‟ when they were put to an unsuitable use.”68 In addition, they promoted game 
conservation, instituting not only programs to restore popular Euro-American game, but also game 
typically associated with American Indian hunting practices. In some cases, game conservation included 
endangered species such as bison.69 Perhaps one of Collier‟s boldest policy innovations combined 
historically incompatible land management philosophies: wilderness preservation and utilitarian 
conservation.70  
Collier was a staunch wilderness advocate, aware of the potential for establishing roadless areas on 
Indian reservations. Because of the remoteness of many reservations, much of Indian country remained 
relatively free of modern technological influences. In fact the Fort Apache Indian Reservation had a 
primal appeal to Collier. On a visit in August of 1934 to inspect CCC-ID work, he took time to admire 
the “beautiful pine woods.” While eating lunch with Apache enrollees at a CCC-ID camp, he observed 
“a spring that is too idyllic. It bubbles up in a bower of wild flowers. It runs away through rich grass in a 
winding rill, diamond clear and silent. It is too perfect, like an over-ardent painting of still life.”71 Later 
during that same visit, looking from Maverick Lookout, an eighty foot fire tower, he exclaimed, “Here 
we have a view – and what a Paradise this Apache land is!”72  
                                                 
68 Woehlke, “Let‟s Give it Back to the Indians?”, p. 16. 
69Lauritis Krefting and Alton Bramer, “Wildlife Conservation at Grand Portage,” Indians at Work 12, no. 3 
(1944): 19-21; Robert Yellowtail, “Buffalo on the Crow Reservation,” Indians at Work  3, no. 19 (1935): 28-29; 
Robert Yellowtail, “Buffalo Herds Return to Indian Ranges as Forerunner of other Wild Game in Restocking 
Program,” Indians at Work 2, no. 12 (1935): 25-30; Robert Marshall, “Address of Mr. Robert Marshall, of the 
United States Indian Service,” in Wildlife and Restoration: Proceedings of the North American Wildlife 
Conference (Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1936), 224-229. 
70 Collier wasn‟t alone in this experiment. In the late 1920s the Forest Service began experimenting with 
wilderness preservation and expanding its recreational programs to counter the Park Service‟s aggressive land 
grabs. Prior to this, recreation and preservation were the domains of the Park Service, whereas utilitarian 
conservation constituted the dominant philosophy of the Forest Service. See Hal K. Rothman, “‟A Regular Ding-
Dong Fight‟: Agency Culture and Evolution in the NPS-USFS Dispute, 1916-1937,” Western Historical 
Quarterly 20 (May, 1989): 141-161. 
71 John Collier, “Superficial Notes on some IECW Projects and Indians at Work by the Editor,” Indians at Work 
2, no. 2 (1934): 36-42, pp. 39-40. 
72 Ibid., p. 41. 

 
 
 
 
57 
 
In part to carry out a wilderness preservation policy, Collier appointed Robert Marshall, the much-
lauded wilderness advocate and co-founder of the Wilderness Society, Director of the BIA Division of 
Forestry in 1933. Marshall maintained this post until 1937, when he took a position in the Forest Service 
that he felt would better advance his push for wilderness preservation.73 With John Collier sympathetic 
to his wilderness ideals, Marshall used his appointment to survey expansive tracts of potential 
wilderness designations out West – often by foot. The aesthetic qualities of the White Mountains 
became subject to Robert Marshall‟s roadless area program. He visited Fort Apache in September of 
1936, hiking 70 miles across the reservation, setting his personal record for hiking distance covered in a 
day. Marshall surveyed 22 miles of the reservation with Fred Moffat, the Forest Supervisor for Fort 
Apache, and the other 48 miles on his own.74 His musings about this journey exemplified what he 
thought important in the wilderness experience: 
Nothing could possibly ever be more glorious. We looked out through the yellow pines over 
great valleys seeming to stretch infinitely towards the starts, and the horizon, and all bathed in 
the most nebulous, silvery moonlight. The moon was so bright that the pine trees cast black 
patterns across our path. The wind blew wildly through the trees giving the feeling that no 
civilization ever existed in the Apache Mountains. 75 
 
Marshall also took advantage of his post to keep an eye on potential roadless areas. He often 
intervened in CCC-ID work that might affect these areas. In 1935, for instance, he directed changes to 
truck trail work on Fort Apache that seemed “like an unnecessary development which breaks up the 
most important wild area yet remaining on the reservation…  [M]ost of the timber which this truck trail 
taps is not merchantable timber anyway and it can certainly be protected without this mechanical 
                                                 
73 For more on Marshall‟s stay in the BIA see James M. Glover, A Wilderness Original: The Life of Bob Marshall 
(Seattle, WA: The Mountaineers, 1986), pp. 197-213; Diane L. Krahe, Last Refuge: The Uneasy Embrace of 
Indian Lands by the National Wilderness Movement, 1937-1965 (Dissertation, Washington State University, 
2005). 
74 Krahe, Last Refuge, p. 75. 
75 Robert Marshall to John Collier, October 7, 1936 as quoted in Krahe, Last Refuge, p. 75. 

 
 
 
 
58 
 
development.”76 In fact, Marshall, along with other wilderness advocates, remained highly critical of 
CCC truck trail projects through the duration of the program. They saw these projects as “the most 
prevalent destruction of wilderness,” quickly diminishing the acreage of the last remaining roadless 
tracts in the United States.77  
Eventually as a consequence of his efforts, in 1937 the Department of Interior issued Secretarial 
Order 486 establishing 16 roadless areas ranging from 6,000 to 1.59 million acres on various 
reservations in the lower forty-eight states. The Order designated two on Fort Apache: Mount Thomas 
(Mount Baldy) and Black River. Mount Thomas Roadless Area encompassed 130,000 acres of the 
reservation and Black River Roadless area included 325,000 acres of both the Fort Apache Indian 
Reservation and the southerly adjacent San Carlos Apache Reservation (Figs. 3 and 4).78 
The Wilderness Society, established by Marshall and other like-minded individuals such as Aldo 
Leopold, Robert Sterling Yard, Benton MacKaye, Ernest Oberholtzer, and John C. Merriam in 1935, 
heavily influenced the policy set forth in Secretarial Order 486.79 This policy essentially imported the 
values and goals of this society to Indian country. The Order outlined the threat to American wilderness 
from increased “mechanization,” especially automobiles. Non-human nature, which up until the early 
twentieth century, had only been subject to “direct manpower” with the “forces of nature…now 
dominated by machinery.”80 The Order also presumptively addressed the concerns of Native Americans 
who “almost everywhere they go …encounter the competition and disturbances of the white race.”81   
                                                 
76 Robert Marshall, “Changes Urged in Fort Apache ECW Program,” June 8, 1935, NA FAIR, CCC-ID Files, Box 
#96. 
77 As quoted in Neil M. Maher, Nature’s New Deal: The Civilian Conservation Corps and the Roots of the 
American Environmental Movement (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2008), p. 174; Robert Marshall, 
“The Universe of the Wilderness is Vanishing,” Nature Magazine 29, no. 4 (April, 1937): 239. 
78 Secretarial Order 486, NA General Services, File #40999-37, Dec. 308, Box #863, CCF 07-39. The Ft. Apache 
roadless area map is from the same file. For a more extensive discussion of this subject see Krahe, Last Refuge. 
79 Sutter, Driven Wild. 
80 Secretarial Order 486. 
81 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 – A 1937 Map of Roadless Areas on Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
(Courtesy of the National Archives). 

 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 – Mount Thomas in 1941. This area is also known as the 
White Mountain to the Apache and eventually became the Mount 
Baldy Wilderness Area in 1966 (Courtesy of the National Archives). 

 
 
 
 
61 
 
Marshall believed protecting wilderness on reservations also meant maintaining a refuge for Native 
Americans from Western society.  In a limited way, embedded in Collier and Marshall‟s roadless area 
policy was a cultural gesture to Native Americans. However, to the eventual detriment of this policy, 
they imposed this idealistic vision on Native Americans without their consent. 
Collier, Marshal, and Woehlke believed they knew the “proper use” of Indian country, which 
included multiple baselines for eco-cultural restoration: Native American self-governance, Native  
American culture, range management, farming, game protection, sustained-yield timber management, 
recreation mediated through an aggressive conservation program, and wilderness preservation. Guided 
by the unique political circumstances of Native Americans, their vision integrated a variety of historical 
landscapes with present concerns to create a viable future for Native Americans. Drawing on idealistic 
notions of Native American history, the ethos of utilitarian conservation, and the philosophy of 
wilderness preservation, Collier saw potential in the Indian New Deal for the eco-cultural restoration of 
Native American societies. In an unprecedented experiment, Collier combined land management 
philosophies, bureaucratic styles, and political theory that historically were at odds with each other. He 
brought together the values of economy, recreation, participatory democracy, wilderness, and eco-
cultural diversity under a single umbrella. Unfortunately, he and his colleagues guided the Indian New 
Deal from a paternalistic point of view; thus, Native American self-governance during this period 
proved mostly an illusion. Nevertheless, Collier‟s program laid the political infrastructure for the 
eventual political, cultural, and ecological restoration of Native American societies, but it would take 
over sixty tumultuous years for this goal to come to fruition.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
62 
 
Conclusion: Restoration and Culture 
  
Very few historians have explicitly dealt with the practice of ecological restoration. When they do, 
however, they leave unpacked the cultural aspects of this practice. They portray restoration as a 
monolithic idea.82 Ecological restoration as a practice in no way consists of a unified vision from a 
single institutional standpoint. Deconstructed, this practice is actually constitutive of a heterogeneous 
apparatus of multiple discourses concerning how humans should relate to nonhuman nature and human 
living environments. In recent historical works, William Jordan and Marcus Hall begin untangling the 
complex cultural conceptions of ecological restoration.83 In describing how the idea of restoration 
evolved in the distinct contexts of Europe and North America, Hall provides us with three models of 
restoration. For Europe, “maintenance gardening”– fixing environmental degeneration due to natural 
forces - characterized early restoration. For North America, “reparative gardening” – fixing 
environmental degradation caused by human activities - characterized early restoration. In North 
America, where wilderness rapidly declined in the late nineteenth century, land managers began 
incorporating the Clementsian concept of a climax community into their attempts to restore pre-
settlement wilderness landscapes. Hall calls this new innovation “reparative naturalizing” or 
“rewilding.”84 He concludes that by the late twentieth century most European and North American 
restorationists converged upon the idea of “rewilding” as a model of restoration.   
An earlier version of Hall‟s classification system appeared in an article published with Jordan. The 
scheme is exactly the same except in this version, Jordan distinguishes “reparative naturalizing” from 
                                                 
82 See for example, Nancy Langston, “Environmental History and Restoration in the Western Forests,” Journal of 
the West 38 (1999): 45-56; Nancy Langston, Where Land and Water Meet: A Western Landscape Transformed 
(Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2003). 
83 Jordan, The Sunflower Forest; Hall, Earth Repair; Jordan and Hall, “Ecological Restoration.”  There are a few 
forthcoming works worth considering as well. See Marcus Hall‟s compilation of historical, sociological, 
philosophical, and anthropological perspectives on restoration, Greening History: The Presence of the Past in 
Environmental Restoration (New York, NY: Routledge, forthcoming).  
84 Hall, Earth Repair. 

 
 
 
 
63 
 
what he calls “holistic restoration.”85Although the goal of restoring pre-European settlement landscapes 
is often a common goal of these two types of restoration, in contrast, holistic restorationists additionally 
adopt “a studied disregard for human interests in choosing models and defining goals for their 
projects.”86 Hall and Jordan‟s four models of restoration are very useful for highlighting general 
historical trends in how different cultures have broadly defined restoration. However, this general 
theoretical framework tends to oversimplify the culturally diverse reasons why people attempt to restore 
nature. Different cultures further interpret maintenance gardening, reparative gardening, rewilding, and 
holistic restoration in context-specific ways. Furthermore, Hall and Jordan‟s models fail to recognize the 
interactive relationship among these cultures of restoration. As these cultures intermingle, they 
continuously reshape the nature of restoration work.  
Another way to understand the practice of ecological restoration is to highlight the diversity of 
institutional contexts where power/knowledge relations of restorative cultures interact with each other 
and nonhuman nature.87 Historically, a whole host of institutions, communities, and grassroots 
organizations practiced or promoted ecological restoration. Each institution, community, or grassroots 
organization that employed restoration evolved a distinct set of cultural traits. In other words, social, 
political, and environmental context created unique cultures of restoration. For instance, several 
different grassroots cultures practiced and continue to practice restoration:  holistic restorationists, eco-
cultural restorationists, environmental justice groups, therapeutic nihilists, and indigenous peoples. From 
a disciplinary standpoint, landscape ecology, conservation biology, and restoration ecology have 
                                                 
85 Jordan and Hall, “Ecological Restoration.” Holistic restoration is a relatively recent innovation dating back to 
studies done by Edith Roberts and Ellen Rehmann at Vassar College in the late 1920s and Aldo Leopold and his 
cohort at the Wisconsin Arboretum in the 1930s. See Roberts and Rehmann, American Plants for American 
Gardens; Sasche, A Thousand Ages; T. J. Blewett and Grant Cottam, “History of the University of Wisconsin 
Arboretum Prairies,” Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Sciences, Arts, and Letters 72 (1984): 130-144;  
Jordan, The Sunflower Forest.   
86 Jordan, The Sunflower Forest, p. 37. 
87 Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews & Other Writings 1972-1977 (New York, NY: 
Pantheon Books, 1980). 

 
 
 
 
64 
 
embraced restorative techniques to achieve their goals. Most governmental land management agencies 
(i.e., Bureau of Indian Affairs, National Park Service, Forest Service, Fish & Wildlife Service, Army 
Corp of Engineers, and so on), each bringing a unique institutional culture to the fore, has sponsored or 
administered restoration projects. The list isn‟t complete without mentioning the burgeoning restoration 
industry and the large number of environmental NGOs (i.e., Nature Conservancy, Audubon Society, 
Ducks Unlimited) that support restoration projects.88 All these cultures have either directly or indirectly 
interacted with each other to form a heterogeneous network of epistemic cultures - each characterized by 
context-specific values and goals.89 However, these restorative cultures shouldn‟t be regarded as 
internally homogenous. And because they interact, they share a number of common traits. Most 
importantly for this study, several of these institutional types are inevitably found interacting or 
collaborating within a single landscape, with that landscape further constraining and defining the nature 
of ecological restoration. 
The Fort Apache Indian Reservation is no different. The primary agencies of change were the 
Apache, BIA, the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the Arizona Game and Fish Commission 
(AGFC). The restorative values of these historical actors initially intersected during the Indian New 
Deal. Over time, the restorative visions of the BIA, the FWS, and the AGFC co-evolved, significantly 
shaping the eco-cultural landscape of the reservation. Under John Collier, the BIA experimented with a 
mixture of values imported from utilitarian conservation, wilderness preservation, and an idealized 
history of Native American societies: economical, recreational, ecological, educational, aesthetic, 
cultural, and communal (man part of nature). However, this ideal vision gave way to mostly economic 
concerns. Subsequent BIA administrations narrowed Collier‟s complex vision to recreational and 
                                                 
88 Stone Cunningham, The Restoration Economy: The Greatest New Growth Frontier (San Francisco, CA: 
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2002). 
89 Karin Knorr-Cetina, Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1999). 

 
 
 
 
65 
 
economic values. Later in the 1960s and 1970s, the American Indian self determination movement, 
environmentalists, and the FWS forced the BIA once again to expand their notion of restoration. In the 
1930s the FWS dabbled in biodiversity restoration, but primarily focused on economic and recreational 
goals. However, in the 1960s the FWS‟s role on the reservation dramatically changed, balancing their 
emphasis on recreation with biodiversity issues. The AGFC experienced a comparable philosophical 
evolution to the FWS, although recreation remained a primary emphasis.   
The Apache, on the other hand, came into the Indian New Deal in a disadvantaged position, with 
their knowledge production system and cultural practices unjustly discredited. Initially they desired an 
eco-cultural restoration to pre-reservation life ways.  However, tribal leaders quickly realized the 
untenability of a complete return to the past.  Eco-cultural restoration eventually became a vehicle for 
recovering some lost traditions but also a vehicle for fitting these traditions into a new framework that 
would compete with Western society. For any chance at asserting the values they cherished (community, 
adaptability, spirituality, flexible subsistence), the Apache had to force a change in the knowledge 
production system on the reservation from paternalism to democratic participation.  Over a sixty year 
period they largely succeeded at this task. However, adopting modern technologies involved trade-offs.   
As Apaches regained control over their eco-cultural resources, they integrated the past with the 
present and Apache traditions with Western traditions to revitalize the historically mismanaged 
landscape of the reservation. The tension between recovering ancestral Apache ways and modernizing 
the reservation was inherent in the Apache‟s appropriation and adaptation of ecological restoration as a 
technology of survival . This process resulted in a great deal of tension both internally within the Tribe 
and externally in the Tribe‟s dealings with the dominant society. Nonetheless, once the Apache began 
playing a more active role in restoration work, Apache cultural and political values began influencing 

 
 
 
 
66 
 
the nature of restoration. This drove restoration away from a single species, market driven model to a 
more community-based, adaptive model of restoration.  
In sum, from the Indian New Deal on, multiple visions of restoration collided, affecting the outcome 
of restoration projects and the evolution of natural resource management on the reservation. The vision 
that eventually emerges is a product of the political struggle for control of knowledge production and 
resource management decisions on Fort Apache. As a consequence, the political manner in which the 
BIA, FWS, AGFC, and the Apache produced knowledge - paternalistic or democratic - had an immense 
impact on how the practice of ecological restoration impacted the Apachean landscape in  the second 
half of the twentieth century. This struggle in effect blurred the boundaries among the competing ideals 
of restoration. Initially aspects of Euro-American visions dominated. Later, as the White Mountain 
Apache took control of resources, a hybridization of Euro-American and Apache visions emerged. In 
general, this political journey reconfigured Apache relationships with land management agencies, setting 
in motion a process of resistance and exchange that eventually resulted in Apache autonomy. The next 
chapter argues that the Indian New Deal provided an uncomfortable political foundation for this 
emerging relationship.  

 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 The Political Origins of White Mountain Apache Eco-cultural Restoration:  
The Indian New Deal 
 
 
All of the shamans were holding a council at the Sun‟s house. They were all there. When they 
were through holding the council, they got a paper from above. On it were written words, just 
like a letter. The shamans wanted to read the letter and know what it said. One of them said he 
would try. They had a chair there and they told him to sit in it and take the paper. The shaman sat 
down and took the paper. He looked it all over, but could not read it. Then another shaman sat 
down and tried, but without success. One after another they sat in the chair and tried to read the 
paper, but could not. Finally Coyote, who was a shaman, was the only one left. They said, “You 
ought to be able to read this paper, Coyote.” Coyote sat down in the chair and took the paper. He 
looked at it a while and then started to read it. He rested his head on one hand and held the paper 
before him with the other hand. Coyote read the paper right off without trouble. He knew how.1 
 
 
In this Apache story, Coyote imitates the “self-important Euro-American official at his desk,” 
providing his White Mountain Apache brethren with comic relief.2 This imitation symbolized Apache 
misgivings about Euro-American society. In particular the Apache troubled over the way Euro-
American‟s conveyed knowledge, which arrived in the form of written word from a place far removed 
from Apache living circumstances. Since the Apache practiced an oral-based knowledge system, the 
letter represented an alien form of knowledge production. Even if the letter‟s content was clear, it would 
mean nothing to the Apache. Knowledge from Washington, D.C. had no bearing on Apache needs. Ever 
since they began reservation life, the Apache struggled with foreign Euro-American ideals structured to 
further Euro-American interests at the cost of Apache eco-cultural degradation.  
On a broader level, this story represents tension between the Apache and modernity. This story 
would continue to hold meaning as the Apache experienced the modernization programs of the Indian 
New Deal. Although with the intention of encouraging self-governance, John Collier imposed a 
                                                 
1 Francis Drake, “Coyote Reads the Letter as he Sits,” in Grenville Goodwin, Myths and Tales of the White 
Mountain Apache (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1994), p. 173. 
2 Goodwin, Myths and Tales of the White Mountain Apache, p. xvii. 

 
 
 
 
68 
 
Western-style democratic government on the White Mountain Apache.  This alien form of government 
was analogous to the letter in the story, the Apache initially failed to understand it. They would struggle 
with its application for decades, but eventually would learn how to wield its power to the Tribe‟s 
benefit.  
The Apache struggle with understanding this new governmental structure played a significant role in 
their twentieth century quest to control reservation resources. Western-style self-governance provided a 
foundation from which the Tribe could begin to culturally appropriate Western science and technology. 
In essence, before examining the nature of White Mountain Apache ecological restoration, we need to 
understand the knowledge production structure from which it was born. Although the Apache adopted a 
constitution under the Indian Reorganization Act, the BIA would remain in control of Apache affairs for 
several decades to come. The BIA, therefore, defined the nature of early ecological restoration efforts. 
Nonetheless, with a mandate to self-govern, the Apache almost imperceptibly began to redefine 
restoration. This process at first emerged with the Apache‟s struggle to comprehend Western 
democracy, modern science and technology, and governmental bureaucracy. They learned early that 
controlling their own government meant controlling knowledge production on the reservation. However, 
they also realized they first had to understand both Western knowledge and government before 
attempting to control them. The Indian New Deal precariously provided that first step.  
With the institution of modern government came immediate friction between the BIA and the 
Apache. The modernization programs of the Indian New Deal would further disrupt Apache culture, but 
elements of it ironically became a vehicle for cultural survival. In this chapter, I argue this new 
arrangement reconfigured the Apache relationships with the federal government, setting in motion an 
eco-political process of resistance and exchange that would eventually result in Apache autonomy. 

 
 
 
 
69 
 
Resistance to and exchange with Indian New Deal programs would gain its impetus from the 
paternalistic policies of the BIA.  
This chapter, therefore, details the White Mountain Apache‟s initial struggles towards self-
governance. I examine their effort to grapple its implications and define its structure. For the most part, 
the Apache failed to fully grasp Western-style democracy during the Indian New Deal. Nonetheless, this 
struggle represented a new beginning, creating a political foundation from which the Apache eventually 
appropriated ecological restoration to control eco-cultural resources on the reservation. Furthermore, I 
explore the Apache‟s response to the paternalistic policies of the BIA. Throughout the Indian New Deal, 
the BIA regulated knowledge production in two ways: administratively and through education. This 
chapter covers the administrative side of this oversight. Chapter three explores the educational aspect of 
the Indian New Deal. 
 
The Foundations of American Indian Self-Determination and Political Autonomy  
The relationship between the federal government and American Indian nations is based on four key 
doctrines: inherent tribal sovereignty, reserved tribal rights, the federal trust responsibility, and the 
plenary power of Congress. These doctrines originated with treaties signed between American Indians 
and the United States as well as Supreme Court decisions during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 
Later, after the end of the treaty era in 1871, the federal government extended these same rights to 
reservations created by executive order.3 When American Indians signed these treaties, the federal 
government guaranteed that tribes could retain their identity as sovereign nations. In exchange for ceded 
lands, the United States granted many tribes reservations where they had reserved rights – rights not 
relinquished within treaties. Furthermore, as a result of these treaties, the federal government established 
                                                 
3 For all practical purposes, executive order reservations are legally treated the same as treaty organized 
reservations. See Judith V. Royster and Michael C. Blumm, Native American Natural Resource Law: Cases and 
Materials (Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2002), pp. 150-151. 

 
 
 
 
70 
 
a trust responsibility to protect reservation lands, the right to self-governance, and the sovereignty of 
American Indian nations. In the early 1830s the Supreme Court affirmed these first three doctrines in 
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia and Worcester v. Georgia.4 However, the plenary power of Congress limits 
the political autonomy of tribes. Under the commerce clause of the Constitution, Congress has authority 
over government-to-government relationships with American Indian nations. As a consequence, 
Congress has often invoked its plenary power to hinder the political autonomy of tribes, but in some 
cases, Congress used its power to protect tribal rights from encroaching state governments.5  
Since the end of the treaty era in 1871, the federal government has inconsistently abided by these 
doctrines.6 The enactment of the General Allotment Act of 1887 signaled the beginning of a forty-year 
period during which the federal government sought to destroy tribal sovereignty and assimilate Indians 
into Euro-American society. The purpose of the Act was to break up reservation lands held in common 
by American Indians. Furthermore, the architects of this law believed that farming would instill the 
American ethos of individualism and mainstream Indians into Euro-American society, thus relinquishing 
the federal government from its trust responsibilities. Each tribal member received a 160-acre parcel of 
tribal land to which the federal government held the deed of ownership. Remaining Indian land became 
“surplus,” disposed of as the Department of Interior saw fit. Congress reasoned that once Indians 
became Christian farmers they would no longer need their hunting grounds and sacred sites.7 As a 
consequence of this policy, Euro-American farmers and ranchers bought a significant portion of the 
surplus lands, reconfiguring Indian reservations into a checkerboard of Indian and non-Indian lands. In 
                                                 
4 Cherokee Nation v. Georgia 30 U.S. 1 (1831); Worcester v. Georgia 31 U.S. 515 (1832). 
5 David H. Getches, Charles F. Wilkinson, and Robert A. Williams, Jr., Cases and Materials on Federal Indian 
Law (St. Paul, MN: West Group, 1998). 
6 Ibid. 
7 Charles Wilkinson, “Filling in the Blank Spots on Powell‟s and Stegner‟s Maps: The Role of Modern Indian 
Tribes in Western Watersheds,” Journal of Land Resources and Environmental Law 23 (2003): 41-56. 

 
 
 
 
71 
 
the wake of the General Allotment Act, American Indians lost approximately two-thirds of the land-base 
that had been guaranteed to them in treaties.  
Prior to the 1930s, tribes reacted to federal assimilation and allotment policies in various ways. 
During the late nineteenth and early twentieth century‟s, American Indians, in sporadic spurts of 
resistance, attempted to restore control over their cultures and their land. Some tribes ignored restrictions 
on hunting and fishing.8 Others refused to participate in education programs designed to “Americanize” 
Indians.9 While others created religious movements that sought ways to spiritually transcend the white 
man‟s oppression.10 For Indian advocates such as John Collier, these political actions signaled the failure 
of past federal Indian policies. With the publication of the Merriam Report in 1928, the federal 
government officially recognized the declining social and ecological conditions of Indian reservations. 
This publication ushered in a new era of reform. However, John Collier believed the report failed to 
sufficiently address the roots of the “Indian problem.” For Collier, the solution lay with ending forced 
assimilation and allotment, two policies the report‟s analysis neglected.11  In an effort to improve the 
Indian predicament, Collier, with the support of Harold Ickes, Secretary of the Interior from 1933-1946, 
and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, pushed the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) of 1934  through Congress, 
which became the legislative buttress for the Indian New Deal.12 This radical change in federal policy 
                                                 
8 Karl Jacoby, Crimes Against Nature (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2001), pp. 149-192. 
9 Kenneth R. Philp, John Collier’s Crusade for Indian Reform, 1920-1954 (Tucson, AZ: The University of 
Arizona Press, 1977). 
10 Joel W. Martin, “Before and Beyond the Sioux Ghost Dance: Native American Prophetic Movements and the 
Study of Religion,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 59 (1991): 677-701; Joseph G. Jorgensen, 
“Religious Solutions and Native American Struggles: Ghost Dance, Sun Dance and Beyond,” in Religion, 
Rebellion, Revolution: An Interdisciplinary and Cross-cultural Collection of Essays, B. Lincoln, ed. (London: 
MacMillan Press, 1985), 97-128; Grenville Goodwin and Charles R. Kraut, “A Native Religious Movement 
among the White Mountain and Cibecue Apache,” Journal of Anthropology 10 (1954): 385-404. 
11 Lewis Merriam et al., The Problem of Indian Administration (Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1928). 
For Collier‟s views on the Merriam Report see Charles Wilkinson, Blood Struggle (New York, NY: W.W. Norton 
& Company, 2005), p. 59; Philp, John Collier’s Crusade for Indian Reform, pp. 92-113. 
12 IRA (25 U.S.C 461 et seq.) is also known as the Wheeler-Howard Act. Graham D. Taylor, The New Deal and 
American Indian Tribalism: The Administration of the Indian Reorganization Act, 1934-1945 (Lincoln, NB: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1980). 

 
 
 
 
72 
 
provided a framework from which American Indians could begin to restore political autonomy and 
reclaim control over eco-cultural resources on their lands. 
 
John Collier’s Indian New Deal 
The Indian New Deal proved a very ambitious and short-lived policy. World War II‟s funding 
requirements side-tracked Collier‟s vision, and after the war, a conservative Congress looking to undo 
New Deal-era policies ultimately undermined it. Furthermore, as a consequence of the BIA‟s past 
neglect of trust responsibilities, many tribes never fully trusted the intentions of this policy. And 
although one of its main provisions encouraged tribes to write their own constitutions, strive towards 
self-governance, and pursue economic development in such a way that wouldn‟t disrupt cultural 
traditions, the Indian New Deal still tended towards paternalistic oversight of American Indian affairs. 
Finally, Collier‟s policies sometimes unintentionally facilitated the continued Euro-American industrial 
exploitation of reservation lands.13  
Nonetheless, on top of self-determination, Collier sought to revitalize Indian cultures. In early drafts 
of the IRA, he proposed educational programs for “the study of Indian civilization, including Indian arts, 
crafts, skills, and traditions.”14 However, conservative members of Congress and some assimilated 
Indians objected to this language. They claimed the legislation promoted returning Indian societies to 
pre-contact times. To accommodate the conservatives, Collier deleted all references to the study of 
Indian civilization in subsequent drafts, relegating educational funds to vocational training. Regardless, 
Collier still made the “study of Indian civilization” part of the BIA‟s education policy, seeking funds 
elsewhere for programs that promoted the restoration of American Indian culture. He believed Native 
American cultural revitalization was essential to successfully implementing economic development 
                                                 
13 Lawrence C. Kelly, “The Indian Reorganization Act: The Dream and the Reality,” Pacific Historical Review 44 
(1975): 291-312; Taylor, The New Deal and American Indian Tribalism, p. 30. 
14 Kelly, “The Indian Reorganization Act,” p. 297. 

 
 
 
 
73 
 
programs on reservation. According to Collier, cultural traditions provided tribes with a cohesive moral 
and social framework that would allow them to make decisions that were in the best interest of the 
group. Restoring traditional culture countered the earlier assimilation policies that emphasized American 
individualism – a foreign and troubling idea to most Native Americans. However, the assumption that 
all Native Americans would embrace a return to communalism became the undoing of some of Collier‟s 
policies. Despite earlier concessions, many assimilated American Indians continued to resist Collier‟s 
cultural restoration policy. They went as far as to join ranks with conservative Congressmen to 
undermine tribal organization of governments, which they viewed as a foundation for reconstituting 
traditionalism.15 Collier also underestimated the extent that modernization would further influence tribal 
social organization, despite efforts to encourage past cultural traditions. Because of the political 
maneuvering of anti-Collier factions, Collier‟s misconceptions about changing Native American social 
structure, and the cultural influences of modern technology, the cultural restoration work of the Indian 
New Deal fell short of the intended goals.   
More successful than the cultural aspects of the Indian New Deal were several provisions in the IRA 
that set the stage for the restoration of tribal natural resources. To that end, the Act repealed the Dawes 
Allotment Act, thus ending the flow of the Indian land base to Euro-American buyers. In addition to 
ending allotment, the Act authorized “restoring to tribal ownership the remaining surplus lands of any 
Indian reservation.”16 Beyond solidifying tribal ownership of land, the Act also authorized funds for the 
improvement and development of reservation natural resources. Section 466 of the act mandated the 
BIA to develop sustained-yield management strategies and restore ecologically degraded range and 
forest. Even though in many cases the policies of the BIA‟s Branch of Forestry led to continued 
deterioration of reservation lands, this division began to employ American Indians and established a 
                                                 
15 Ibid. 
16 Indian Reorganization Act, 25 U.S.C 461 et seq. 

 
 
 
 
74 
 
modicum of regulatory control over tribal resources where previously there had been none. Moreover, 
the IRA in combination with Civilian Conservation Corp – Indian Division (CCC-ID) programs saw a 
dramatic increase in federal funds devoted to natural resource restoration and management. Some of 
these funds supported studies that developed new ecological restoration techniques (e.g., erosion control, 
juniper eradication, range improvement) that American Indian restorationists still use today.17  Most 
importantly, the Indian New Deal began a trend whereby the BIA slowly relinquished its power over 
tribal resources.   
Historians have subjected John Collier‟s Indian New Deal to much criticism. Namely, they have 
asked to what extent his programs had lasting benefits for Native Americans. Assessments range from 
the positive to the highly negative. Perhaps one of the most devastating critiques comes from Lawrence 
Kelly. He argues that Collier‟s program didn‟t reach a large number of Indians. For example, only 174 
of 252 eligible tribes voted for IRA. Even a smaller percentage accepted constitutions (92) and even 
fewer created business charters (71).18 Tribes that declined to organize governments under the IRA 
risked not receiving funds legislatively appropriated for economic development. Many historians, Kelly 
included, maintain that this stipulation amounted to BIA coercion, an attempt to leverage tribes into 
organizing under the IRA.  However, many tribes that voted against the IRA already had constitutions, 
declining organization on that premise, and still received economic development funds. Kelly, writing in 
the 1970s, claims that the Indian New Deal was generally more of a failure than recognized by earlier 
historians. His argument, although containing some merit, is a bit extreme and obscures the large 
benefits afforded by the Indian New Deal. On many reservations, including Fort Apache, the Indian 
New Deal had positive effects, especially in terms of conservation of eco-cultural resources. The CCC-
                                                 
17 Alan S. Newell, Richmond L. Clow, and Richard N. Ellis, A Forest in Trust (Washington D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 1986), Chapter 3. 
18 Kelly, “The Indian Reorganization Act,” pp. 304-305. 

 
 
 
 
75 
 
ID and the implementation of tribal self-government planted the seed for many Native American 
nations‟ journey towards political autonomy.  
Kelly failed to consider the lasting effects of tribal organization. His assertions that the immediate 
beneficial impacts of organization were few and that tribal governments often became facilitators for 
BIA programs have some merit. However, Kelly‟s work, perhaps suffering from lack of distance from 
the subject, missed the opportunity to analyze the long-term effects of tribal organization. Tribal 
governments matured slowly, each proceeding at a different pace. Many tribes later sought and 
successfully fulfilled business charters, a mechanism for establishing tribally-owned enterprises. The 
IRA created this avenue of economic development. And although some tribal governments are still 
struggling, many others have clearly benefitted from tribal organization.19 For many Indian nations, the 
obvious gains from the Indian New Deal only became evident decades later, when tribal governments 
learned how to exploit the political system of the federal government.  
Apologists for the Indian New Deal claim that this initiative never had a fair chance. Congressional 
opponents continuously looked for ways to undermine Collier‟s programs by cutting funding for 
programs, not appropriating mandated funds, and attempting to repeal provisions in the IRA. 
Furthermore, many conservative Congressional members believed several aspects of Collier‟s program 
encouraged un-American behavior. They even accused him of spreading communism among Native 
Americans. These accusations were in large part a reaction to Colliers attempt to restore communal 
ownership of lands to tribes on allotted reservations. As a remedy to the cultural disruption wrought by 
allotment policies, Collier wanted to consolidate allotted lands, return these lands to tribal ownership, 
and encourage the development of tribal resources through collective action. To carry out this plan, he 
directed reservation superintendents to establish cattle associations, create tribal enterprises (essentially 
                                                 
19 Stephen Cornell and Joseph Kalt, “Where Does Economic Development Really Come From? Constitutional 
Rule among the Contemporary Sioux and Apache,” Economic Inquiry 33 (July): 402-426. 

 
 
 
 
76 
 
viewed as “state” owned by opponents), and build a sense of community through ventures such as the 
CCC-ID.  
Because of this antagonism, Collier and his allies realized that they had a limited time frame in 
which they could have an impact. A new administration was always just four years down the road. 
Knowing this caused Collier to hurriedly implement many of his initiatives. In particular, he rushed 
tribal organization. Collier wanted to ensure that tribes established permanent tribal governments before 
a more conservative administration had a say in the matter. As a consequence, in instances where tribes 
voted to accept the IRA, the BIA created more or less standard constitutions modeled after the U.S. 
Constitution and hastily held elections for tribal councils. In part because of the hurried nature of tribal 
organization, many tribes resisted the process. In addition, tribes distrusted the idea based on past 
experiences with the BIA. They feared that a BIA-established tribal government would become a 
vehicle for rubber stamping previously conceived BIA programs. In other instances, older tribal leaders 
distrusted tribal organization because they failed to understand how the new government would work. 
As they saw it, the structures of the new governments were incongruent with their traditional political 
systems. On a very basic level, many Native Americans questioned why their traditional governments 
required replacement in the first place. They questioned the efficacy of giving further authority to the 
Secretary of Interior, who lived far removed from their circumstances.20 Adding to BIA frustration with 
the organization process, assimilated Indians and Euro-Americans living near reservations generated a 
great deal of misinformation concerning the acceptance of the IRA. Fearing economic losses, whites and 
                                                 
20 The IRA gave the Secretary of Interior final approval on all tribal council decisions. This was a primary reason 
for several tribes rejecting organization under IRA. Oren Lyons of the Iroquois Nation lucidly explained the 
reasoning behind rejecting IRA on those grounds: “Questions have been raised about the wisdom of putting the 
IRA and traditional systems together…The IRA – your ultimate source of authority – is [the Secretary of Interior] 
at this point. He has a lot of authority over what happens on Indian land. That authority was vested in him through 
the IRA. And whoever it is, whoever it comes to be, one of the reasons why the Onondaga nation rejected IRA is 
simply we did not want to vest authority in somebody living some ten states away or in the federal government.” 
Quote from Lyon, Indian Self-Rule, p. 100. See also Vine Deloria, Jr. and Clifford M. Lytle, The Nations Within: 
The Past and Future of American Indian Sovereignty (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1984), p. 232. 

 
 
 
 
77 
 
assimilated mixed bloods informed tribal members considering organization that IRA would force them 
back into their old ways. To what extent such misinformation campaigns had on the number of tribes 
accepting the IRA is unknown, but proponents of the Indian New Deal felt these campaigns clearly had 
an impact. They spent immense amounts of time and energy countering these false claims.21   
These standardized forms of government had lasting implications for the future of many tribes. Early 
on, tribal councils, as many tribal members feared, were pretty much puppet governments, facilitating 
the initiation of many New Deal programs without extensive consultation with the larger reservation 
population.22 Later, tribal councils learned how to obtain what they needed, and on many reservations 
became increasingly autonomous from the BIA. These were more entrepreneurial tribes that 
successfully established and maintained their own eco-cultural resource management programs and 
industries. The White Mountain Apache are one of these tribes. However, many tribes continued to 
flounder under their new governments due to a cultural mismatch between their prescribed constitutions 
and their traditional political structures.23  
On top of a recalcitrant Congress and resistance from Native Americans, Collier‟s program had 
philosophical shortcomings as well. Collier and his allies, although well-meaning, had a very idealistic 
understanding of Native American societies that wasn‟t necessarily in touch with the realities of 
reservation life.24  
The Indian is not a „rugged individualist‟; he functions best as an integrated member of a group, 
clan or tribe. Identification of his individuality with clan or tribe is with him a spiritual necessity. 
If the satisfaction of this compelling sentiment is denied him – as it was for a half a century or 
                                                 
21 Morris Opler, “Report on the Ft. Apache Indians of Arizona,” Office of Indian Affairs Applied Anthropology 
Unit, 1936, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 77, File #17155-52, Box #8. For more on tribal reactions to the IRA 
see Philp, John Collier’s Crusade for Indian Reform, pp. 113-134; Taylor, The New Deal and American Indian 
Tribalism, pp. 39-91. 
22 Duane Champagne, “American Indian Values and the Institutionalization of IRA Governments,” in American 
Indian Policy and Cultural Values: Conflict and Accommodation, Jennie R. Joe, ed. (Los Angeles, CA: American 
Indian Studies Center, University of California, Los Angeles, 1996), 25-31.  
23 Cornell and Kalt, “Where Does Economic Development Really Come From?” 
24 Stephen J. Kunitz, “The Social Philosophy of John Collier,” Ethnohistory 18 (Summer, 1971): 213-229. 

 
 
 
 
78 
 
more – the Indian does not … merge into white group life. Through a modernized form of Indian 
tribal organization, adapted to the needs of the various tribes… it is possible to make use of this 
proverbial latent civic force.25 
 
According to Collier, this “latent civic force” had a binding spiritual character that was absent in the 
dominant society. All tribes had rituals, symbols, and ceremonies that acted as a cohesive force that 
maintained cultural traditions. He believed a revival of these traditions was possible despite years of 
assimilation policies and environmental degradation of their homelands. This idealistic view of Native 
American societies was the foundation for Collier‟s tribal reorganization program, which led to many 
misconceptions and overgeneralizations about the needs of American Indians.26  
Nonetheless, the thrust of the Indian New Deal focused on modernization, not revitalizing past 
traditions. Collier realized that for American Indians to persist as cultures, some degree of 
modernization had to occur. However, he severely opposed the old method of forced assimilation. 
Rather, “[a]ssimilation, not into our culture but into modern life, and preservation and intensification of 
heritage are not hostile choices, excluding one another, but are independent through and through. It is 
the continuing social organism, thousands of years old and still consciously and unconsciously imbued 
with and consecrated to its ancient past, which must be helped to incorporate the new technologies. It is 
the ancient tribal, village, communal organization which must conquer the modern world.”27 Collier 
believed that Western technology guided by indigenous life ways improved how Euro-American society 
applied technology. So in essence, he attempted to institute programs that brought together the best of 
both worlds, hybridizing modernity with traditional Native American culture. Although his programs 
fell short of this goal, late twentieth-century tribal governments, including the White Mountain Apache, 
put these same goals to the test with much greater success.   
                                                 
25 Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Annual Report, 1934-35, p. 114, RG 75, Records of John Collier. 
26 Taylor, The New Deal and American Indian Tribalism, p. 40. 
27 Emphasis is Collier‟s. John Collier, From Every Zenith (Denver, CO: Sage Books, 1962), p. 203. 

 
 
 
 
79 
 
Collier requested that BIA officials on the ground abide by this social philosophy. Perhaps the most 
important aspect of Collier‟s hybridization experiment was the establishment of “autonomous” tribal 
governments. The BIA attempted to design tribal governments in a context-specific manner, reflecting 
the varied traditional tribal socio-political structures in existence. In practice, this plan faltered, perhaps 
in part because of the perceived urgency of completing the task.28 Ultimately, however, the lack of BIA 
expertise on tribal political systems, the inability of the BIA to accommodate the diversity of traditional 
governments, and the unwillingness of assimilationist-minded superintendents to integrate Indian culture 
into governments, created a situation where facilitation of Indian New Deal programs rather than 
cultural congruence guided the design of tribal governments. Collier also established the American 
Indian Arts and Craft Board in 1935 in an attempt to revive traditional arts to “increase income to the 
Indian from the sale of his arts and crafts.”29  On a limited basis, the BIA implemented a number of 
cultural restoration projects ranging from reestablishing ceremonial dances, to rehabilitating shrines, to 
rebuilding ancient ruins.30  
Most Indian New Deal programs, however, remained decidedly Western. For instance, development 
and restoration of eco-cultural resources proceeded exclusively through Western land management 
practices, ignoring or discounting most indigenous knowledge. Practical education in various Western 
trades, including natural resource management, became a focal point of the Indian New Deal. Despite 
Collier‟s good intentions, the Indian New Deal led to some highly paternalistic policies with unintended 
negative consequences, the most famous of which was the stock reduction program on the Navajo 
Reservation. According to Bureau of Reclamation officials, overgrazing on the Navajo Reservation was 
causing extensive erosion of soils into the Colorado River, which in turn greatly increased sedimentation 
                                                 
28 Taylor, The New Deal and American Indian Tribalism, p. 40. 
29 Collier, From Every Zenith, p. 194. 
30 See for example, J.H. Mitchell, “The Pipestone Quarry or Restoring an Ancient Indian Shrine,” Indians at Work 
2, no. 8 (1934): 25-29; E.J. Carlson, “Indian Rice Camps White Earth Reservation,” Indians at Work 2, no. 7 
(1934): 16-18; John Collier, “Ancient Ceremonials Revived,” Indians at Work 12, no. 2 (1944): 28-30. 

 
 
 
 
80 
 
behind the Hoover Dam. In order to mitigate this threat to the Hoover Dam and restore ranges on the 
reservation, the BIA reduced domestic livestock herds against the will of the Navajo. In the end, the 
program failed to restore reservation ranges, consequently increasing Navajo dependence on the federal 
government. This is perhaps the most extreme example of paternalism during the Indian New Deal. 
Most reservations never experienced such drastic policies. The Navajo situation remained unique in that 
the BIA tied it to a national natural resource “emergency.”31 In reality, the impact that IRA had on 
American Indian nations varied considerably.32 But according to many Native Americans, the major 
problem with IRA lay with the authority it gave to the Department of Interior over tribal governments. 
The Secretary of Interior had final approval concerning most tribal council decisions; therefore the 
promise of self-governance rang hollow.33   
As a consequence, the BIA still maintained tight control over the governance of all tribal financial 
matters and economic resources. Given past Native American mishaps with modern finances during the 
allotment era, Collier and most reservation superintendents lacked confidence that tribal councils could 
effectively manage their financial affairs. Although the ultimate goal of the Indian New Deal sought 
tribal self-sufficiency in all matters, Collier and many of his superintendents were slow to relinquish 
control. From their perspective, leaving inexperienced tribal councils in complete control jeopardized 
the overarching goal of restoring an economic base.34 This meant the BIA would continue to administer 
natural resource development on Indian reservations for the foreseeable future.  
                                                 
31 Richard White, Roots of Dependency (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1983), pp. 259-265. 
32 On the varied impacts of the Indian New Deal, see Harry A. Kersey, Jr., The Florida Seminoles and the New 
Deal, 1933-1942 (Boca Raton, FL: Florida Atlantic Press, 1989); Laurence M. Hauptman, The Iroquois and the 
New Deal (Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1981); Kenneth R. Philp, “The New Deal and Alaskan 
Natives, 1936-1945,” Pacific Historical Review 50 (August, 1981): 309-327; Paul C. Rosier, “‟The Old System is 
no Success‟: The Blackfeet Nation‟s Decision to Adopt the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934,” American Indian 
Culture and Research Journal 23 (1999): 1-37; White, Roots of Dependency, pp. 250-314.  
33 For Native American opinions of IRA see Kenneth R. Philp, ed., Indian Self-Rule (Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 
1986),  pp. 27-110. 
34 Taylor, The New Deal and American Indian Tribalism, p. 93. 

 
 
 
 
81 
 
Overall, the Indian New Deal proved a mixed blessing for Native Americans. On the one hand, these 
programs attempted to revitalize Native American traditions, ended allotment, established tribal 
governments with limited powers, introduced modern natural resource management technologies to 
reservations, and increased the Native American skill-base in Western trades. On the other hand, Indian 
New Deal programs unintentionally facilitated the exploitation of tribal lands, haphazardly imposed 
Western-style governments onto American Indian nations, and continued the legacy of paternalism. 
Despite this, good would emerge from the Indian New Deal.  The rest of this chapter outlines the general 
administrative effect the Indian New Deal had on the White Mountain Apache. 
 
The Indian New Deal and the White Mountain Apache  
Evolution in White Mountain Apache Political Organization, Pre-reservation to 1933 - Prior to 
confinement on the reservation, the Western Apache political system was organized around bands and 
local groups within bands. The White Mountain Apache and the Cibecue Apache constituted two of 
several bands that inhabited east-central Arizona.  These bands defended territories, protecting vital eco-
cultural resources from other Western Apache bands or non-Apaches. Each band consisted of several 
semi-nomadic local groups that functioned as self-sufficient political units. Coordination among local 
groups rarely occurred, but they respected each other‟s settlement boundaries. At most, local groups 
held loosely protected hunting areas that covered a 3-8 mile radius surrounding farm settlements; 
however, outside these localities Apache considered all the land within the band‟s territory common 
property. 35 Local groups selected a local chief who organized group activities such as hunting forays, 
gathering expeditions, raiding and war parties, and ritual ceremonies. In general, individuals became 
                                                 
35 Winfred Buskirk, The Western Apache (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1986), p. 117. 

 
 
 
 
82 
 
local chiefs because of their overall knowledge about community survival and their ability to resolve 
disputes within the settlement.36  
Once isolated on the reservation in 1870, band territories dissolved and the local group level of 
organization became less important. Sedentary family clusters replaced the local group as the coherent 
political unit. Family clusters represented a sedentary remnant of the mobile local group that 
characterized Western Apache life before the reservation days. Family clusters that lived in proximity to 
each other worked together to support themselves. When hard times fell on one or several families, the 
better off would supply those with what they needed to survive. Politics, however, remained local. 
Members of a family cluster still “elected” local chiefs to organize group activities, especially farming 
and ceremonial practices. Prior to 1927, the Apache rarely organized politically beyond the family 
cluster; however, this would change with the arrival of Superintendent William Donner in 1927. 37  
On November 1, 1927 Donner replaced Charles Davis as the reservation superintendent. He brought 
with him a mix of old notions of assimilation with a new measure of political reform in line with Hoover 
administration Indian policy and the Merriam Report. Donner whole-heartedly believed the ultimate 
goal of the BIA was to facilitate the assimilation of Indians into American society; however, he 
disagreed with past approaches. Donner felt that insufficient time, money, and emphasis had been placed 
on converting Apaches into farmers and ranchers. His vision of transforming the Apache involved a 
major transformation of the Apachean landscape. Donner recommended removal of all commercial 
timber from the reservation, believing railroad costs would “make it impossible to log at a profit” 
otherwise: 
It would be decidedly poor business judgment to put all of the earnings derived from logging 
operations back into maintenance and protection of a forest for a prospective income one 
                                                 
36 Grenville Goodwin, The Social Organization of the Western Apache (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 
1969). 
37 Keith Basso, The Cibecue Apache (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, Inc., 1970),  p. 29; Goodwin, The 
Social Organization of the Western Apache. 

 
 
 
 
83 
 
hundred years from now for the benefit of the Indians. The phrase „benefit for Indians‟ should be 
eliminated and „benefit for posterity‟ substituted. I am convinced that the Apache problem will 
be a problem for the next 20 or 25 years, but I am not convinced that it will be a problem 100 
years from now. Rather am I convinced that there will be no Ft. Apache Reservation by the time 
the second growth comes on, but that it will be a National Forest in which the Apache, if there be 
any remaining, will have no more interest than any of our other citizens. I say by all means let us 
protect the timber; let us build sufficient roads and trails to give it proper protection, but in doing 
so let us be broad enough to forget about the Apache and his remote future asset.38  
 
Removing all the merchantable timber would have the added benefit of increasing the amount of grazing 
and arable land on the reservation; thus clearing the Apache path towards assimilation.39  
In order to enact his assimilationist agenda, in 1927 Donner organized an informal tribal 
government. For the first time in history, the Apache would operate politically on the tribal level. In 
contrast to past assimilation policies, Donner believed the first step towards “progress” entailed forming 
a representative body that would facilitate implementing economic development policies on the 
reservation. This new government also functioned as vehicle for communicating with a large number of 
isolated family groups. To improve communication and build cohesion among tribal members, Donner 
selected a representative from several localities that roughly coordinated with the population centers of 
family clusters. This pre-IRA Tribal Council consisted of approximately eleven at large members and 
one Head Chief of Council, Baha Alchesay.40  
By 1933, Donner‟s vision ran head long into Indian New Deal policies, tempering his aggressive 
plan to transform the Apache along with the reservation landscape. From the outset, Donner fought 
aspects of the Indian New Deal that he believed compromised Apache assimilation. For instance, 
Donner initially felt Apache participation in CCC-ID conservation programs would disrupt the 
                                                 
38 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, July 21, 1932, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 339, File 
#1654-32, Box #63; Jo Baeza, “Water…‟Lifeblood of our people,‟” Fort Apache Scout 17 (January 27, 1989): 12. 
39 On Donner‟s aggressive timber policies see CCF 40-56, Dec. 339, File #32406-41, Box #25 and File #1050-56, 
Box #26. 
40 This number fluctuated considerably as the Council evolved. I counted eleven at large members plus Chief 
Baha Alchesay in a 1934 council meeting. Council of Fort Apache Indians at White River, Arizona,” March 5, 
1934, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 3339, File #18-34, Box #63. 

 
 
 
 
84 
 
assimilation process, drawing Apache away from their farms and ranches. Eventually though,  Donner‟s 
administration of the Apache evolved with the Indian New Deal, but his policy decisions never totally 
aligned with this program. Even though Donner‟s views often conflicted with Collier‟s, he remained the 
superintendent of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation until 1946.  
 
White Mountain Apache Political Organization under IRA - On Fort Apache, from 1933 to 1938, BIA 
personnel aggressively lobbied tribal members to organize a government under IRA. As a result, pre-
IRA Tribal Councils embodied a measure of resistance to Indian New Deal policies; however, they also 
realized that modernity resided at their doorstep, requiring preparation of future generations for the 
encroaching dominant society. This ambivalence manifested itself in a five-year deliberation before the 
Tribe organized under IRA in 1938. While the Apache struggled with adopting a Western-style 
government, Indian New Deal programs still came on line, heightening anxiety on the reservation.  For 
the first time, this program exposed the Apache, on a large scale, to elements of modernity. For example, 
at a 1934 tribal council meeting concerning the sale of the Maverick timber unit to the Cady Lumber 
Company, many tribal members expressed concern about the BIA‟s intentions concerning the Indian 
New Deal. The deliberations of this meeting also illustrate the tension between those reluctant to change 
and those willing to embrace the Indian New Deal.  
Adopting a constitutional government concerned the Council for several reasons. First, they 
admittedly didn‟t understand the operations of an-IRA organized government. 41 Past negative 
experiences with U.S. Indian policy gave tribal leaders good reason to distrust any new policies they 
failed to comprehend. Nonetheless, Chief Wallace Altaha of the Cedar Creek District cautiously 
embraced the potential benefits of self-governance: “This is the first time the Apache have been given 
                                                 
41 Morris Opler, “Report on the Ft. Apache Indians of Arizona,” Office of Indian Affairs Applied Anthropology 
Unit, 1936, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 77, File #17155-52,  Box #8. 

 
 
 
 
85 
 
the opportunity to have things done the way they want them…This is the first time it [timber contracts 
and other uses of their land] has been brought out like this. Before we never knew what was going on. It 
was between the Superintendent and the Indian Office. We want everything brought up before the 
Indians, then we can make our decisions on it.”42 But reinforcing the reasons for distrust, John Ethelbah 
of Carrizo cautioned William Donner, “It would be very mean of our agent to use this money [from the 
timber contract] for work on the roads and bridges, or the ditches. It would be better for him to give the 
money to fellows that need it, the fellows that do not have any money coming from anywhere and let 
them use it.”43   
Second, they worried that accepting IRA would facilitate the exploitation of their resources. This 
meeting represented one of the first times the BIA consulted the Tribe on Euro-American use of tribal 
natural resources. The Tribal Council had previously taken this opportunity to reject a Maverick Unit 
timber contract. This rejection symbolized the tribal leaders‟ fears of continued exploitation of 
reservation resources. John Taylay, Chief of the Cibecue District expressed this concern on behalf of the 
entire Tribal Council: “It is the wish of the chiefs that we do not want anyone else [after Cady Lumber 
Co.] to come on our reservation to buy or lease anything. They have spoiled much of our grazing land 
and much of our timber already. We should make it so they should never bother us about our 
reservation.”44 Despite this ambivalence, younger, “educated” tribal members who spoke English 
persuaded the Council to accept the contract because of the desperate economic conditions on the 
reservation. As an enticement, the BIA proposed that tribal members would receive per capita payments 
for the money the Tribe received for timber. Younger tribal members would later influence the Tribe‟s 
adoption of a government under IRA.  
                                                 
42 “Council of Fort Apache Indians at White River, Arizona,” March 5, 1934. 
43 Ibid. 
44 “Council of Fort Apache Indians at White River, Arizona,” March 5, 1934, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 339, 
File #18-34, Box #63. 

 
 
 
 
86 
 
Baha Alchesay, the Head Chief, recognized the need to resist certain elements of Western 
civilization, mainly the ecological degradation of the Apache homeland associated with Western 
technology. But he also recognized cultural survival necessitated exchange with Euro-Americans: 
 
I want to hold the White Mountain timber and sell only the Maverick Lake timber. Cutting on 
this White Mountain might cause the river to dry up. This is the only mountain we get water 
from. From the water that we get from the White Mountain, even the white people down below 
grow things with water from this river. They come up here with vegetables and fruit. These 
vegetables and fruit come from soil irrigated with water from the White Mountain. We feel that 
those people are our friends and we do not want them to lose water from the White Mountain. 
Many people have benefitted from that mountain so we do not want to lose the water from this 
mountain.45 
 
With this statement, Baha demonstrated political savvy.  Beyond an emphasis on the drawbacks of 
degrading the White Mountain watershed for his people, Baha also extended the analysis to Euro-
American circumstances.  Baha cleverly attempted to appeal to the potential negative consequences of 
over-logging to Superintendent Donner‟s own culture. The survival of both Euro-American and Indian 
cultures in the Salt River Valley depended on proper protection of the reservation watershed. In essence, 
he wanted Donner to understand the practical limits of resource exploitation.  
John Ethelbah reminded Donner that maintaining tribal sovereignty was tied to protecting the White 
Mountain: “Nobody wants to let the White Mountain go, and it is my wish too that they fence our White 
Mountain in and not let any timber go. Any white man outside here that sees that land wishes he could 
use it and we never want them to have it. We feel that that land has been put aside and reserved for our 
cattle and no one else should claim that land or lease that land.”46 Historical experience with outside 
interests played a strong role in White Mountain Apache resistance to economic development of 
reservation resources. Past encroachment engendered a fear that accepting the terms of one timber 
                                                 
45 Ibid. 
46 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
87 
 
contract would eventually lead down the slippery slope of complete domination of their land, a fate the 
Apache had heretofore escaped due to their relative isolation. Leasing too much land to Whites meant 
losing what control they had over their homeland, thus their identity as a sovereign nation. 
The legal details of the IRA failed to relieve these anxieties. One of the Apache‟s strongest 
objections to organization stemmed from the fact that section 466 of IRA delegated final authority to the 
Secretary of Interior. Donner reported to Collier that the Apache felt this authority “is taking the 
management [of forests and range] entirely out of their hands.”47 In essence, the Apache believed IRA 
gave too much power to the Department of the Interior. In Collier‟s response to this situation, he 
explained that in terms of natural resource management, the Apache had to abide by the same rules as 
Euro-Americans. Mismanagement of the land “may have such a disastrous effect on people living far 
away in place in time,  [sic] that is now generally recognized that the Government must have some voice 
in the management of private resources.” Because of the potentially devastating effects of poor 
management, the government maintains the “final voice in conservation matters.” As a consolation, 
Collier assured the Apache that the BIA would “respect the ideas of the Indian,” but that they wouldn‟t 
relinquish final authority.48 With such reasoning, the Apache continued to question whether accepting 
IRA granted them the right to self-govern. But in the final analysis, the Apache saw no appealing 
alternative – any promising path forward seemed to involve some level of acquiescence to Euro-
American society. Unfortunately, despite the rhetoric of political autonomy, the paternalism of 
utilitarian conservation still loomed.    
Ultimately, the BIA maintained their paternalistic oversight through the structure of governments 
organized under IRA. This happened for three reasons. First, a representative government was 
                                                 
47 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, January 5, 1934, RG 75 FAIR, Tribal Organization, E-
1012, File #9580, Box #12. 
48 John Collier to William Donner, February 13, 1935, RG 75 FAIR, Tribal Organization, E-1012, File #9580, 
Box #12. 

 
 
 
 
88 
 
incongruent with past governing practices of the Apache.49  The Apache‟s unfamiliarity with Western-
style governments and management techniques required that they blindly trust BIA proposals, efficiently 
running a government would require years of education. Second, the Apache had limited financial 
resources from which to operate a government. Because of this, they would remain dependent on the 
whims of BIA policy for years to come.  They realized that to support a government bureaucracy they 
needed a stabile economic infrastructure. Finally, authority over natural resource management lay with 
the Department of Interior. The Secretary of Interior could reject any Apache proposal.50 
The BIA attempted to create a legitimate government, but accommodating the intricacies of 
traditional Apache political system proved cumbersome. Morris Opler of the Office of Indian Affairs 
Applied Anthropology Unit suggested in a 1936 report that the elective body of the Tribal Council 
should consist of 32 members: “To many this will seem somewhat large and unwieldy. There are special 
conditions which justify such a sizable body however. In the first place the reservation is large and some 
of its inhabitants live at great distance from the agency… [T]he reservation does have these many 
separate and distinct residential districts and a fairly large population. It would be difficult to faithfully 
represent all the people and all the autonomous districts by a small group.”51 Although Opler admitted 
that a smaller tribal council was more efficient concerning matters that needed tribal approval, he 
believed that the Apache would view such a council as illegitimate. In addition, tribal members would 
interpret all council decisions as “a rubber stamp to serve official purposes,” decreasing the likelihood 
that the Apache would embrace BIA programs, policies, and advice.52 
Blatantly disregarding Opler‟s recommendations, BIA officials created a much more “tenable” tribal 
council of 9 elected officials and one at large seat filled by Chief Baha until his death. They cited 
                                                 
49 Basso, The Cibecue Apache. 
50 In general see RG 75 FAIR, Tribal Organization, E-1012, File #9580, Box #12. 
51 Opler, “Report on the Ft. Apache Indians of Arizona,” p. 18. 
52 Ibid. p. 18. 

 
 
 
 
89 
 
difficulty in achieving approval for BIA initiatives with such a large and cumbersome governmental 
structure. This move was largely congruent with the pre-IRA council Donner established.  Eventually, 
the White Mountain Apache voted to accept a constitution in August of 1938. The change of heart came 
at the behest of younger tribal members more educated in Western ways. The younger generation 
convinced the elders that to survive as a culture and transcend their impoverished condition, the Tribe 
had to develop tribally-owned businesses. In essence, they believed that organizing under IRA 
facilitated economic development that would benefit the Tribe.53 Despite this, many tribal members 
remained ambivalent and worried that the Tribal Council would become a vehicle for rubber stamping 
the desires of the BIA – to a certain extent this was the case at first. Nonetheless, even with the smaller 
tribal council, council members resisted approving BIA programs. And when the Council approved 
proposals, they half-heartedly and reluctantly did so. As the next section depicts, BIA paternalism 
reigned during the Indian New Deal. The paternalistic philosophy affected three major areas of Apache 
life in relation to natural resource management: decision-making power of the tribal government, 
dismissal of historic and local knowledge, and land use. 
 
Paternalism and the White Mountain Apache  
Decision-making Power - BIA officials forced the Tribal Council‟s hand on most issues concerning 
eco-cultural resources on the reservation. Council meetings often became forums of frustration and 
confusion for the Apache. For instance, a young Lester Oliver, at the time the tribal treasurer and later to 
become an influential tribal chairman, vehemently opposed the BIA‟s control over tribal funds. William 
Donner, Superintendent of the Fort Apache Agency, claimed that Oliver couldn‟t adequately fulfill this 
                                                 
53 RG 75 FAIR, Tribal Organization, E-1012, File #9580, Box #12. 

 
 
 
 
90 
 
role “because of his status and limited education.”54 Such suppositions about Apache governing abilities 
were common during the Indian New Deal. And they had a great deal of influence on the decision-
making powers of the tribal government. The following scene that played out at a Tribal Council 
meeting in May of 1937 vividly captures the tortured logic of BIA administration of Apache affairs.   
William Donner called this meeting to discuss the inclusion of the Horse Mesa timber unit in an 
already approved sale of the Smith Park timber unit. From the outset, council members expressed 
misgivings over how the timber cut in this additional area would affect their cattle. Chief Baha and other 
council members were reluctant to approve this additional sale. Baha‟s people grazed their cattle at 
Horse Mesa. Furthermore, they had already made a concession to tolerate cutting activity in another area 
where their horses foraged, the Smith Park unit. Now the superintendent wanted more trees.55  
At the behest of the Southwest Lumber Mills, Inc., Superintendent Donner claimed that the Smith 
Park unit wasn‟t sufficient in size to yield a profitable cut. To sell the idea to the Council, Donner 
suggested that removing “the big timber [would] help the range.” 56 Currently the canopy of the large 
trees shaded out grass. However, Chief Baha contested this idea, deflecting the conversation back to his 
primary concern, the safety of his people‟s cattle: “Although there are lots of trees there is plenty of 
grass in the shade. It will be pretty hard to keep our cattle right together. They will stray away on 
account of the cutting.”57 Donner subsequently side-stepped this bit of local knowledge, pursuing his 
agenda of securing the Tribe‟s approval of the sale. He responded by claiming, “The cattle are up there 
only about four months of the year. In September or October they will come back again. These people 
will cut there all winter. If there are any cattle killed they will pay for them and they have to keep the 
                                                 
54 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, June 5, 1940, RG 75 FAIR, Records of the CCC-ID, Dec. 
932, File #77733-39, Box #97. 
55 “Minutes of the Council Called for Approval of the Horse Mesa Timber Unit,” May 19, 1937, RG 75 FAIR, 
CCF 07-39, Dec. 339, File # 10157-36, Box #63. 
56 Ibid. 
57 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
91 
 
fences up.”58 The conversation continued through several more frustrating iterations, with neither Baha 
nor Donner acknowledging the other‟s concerns. Beyond the lack of communication, what was 
remarkable about this exchange was Donner‟s complete dismissal of local knowledge. The validity of 
Baha‟s claim was irrelevant to Donner. Baha‟s knowledge about his territory contradicted the BIA‟s 
mission to sell timber for the “benefit of the Apache.” Ignoring or neglecting the potential benefits of 
Apache local knowledge became intertwined with truncating Apache decision-making power; thus 
hindering the Tribe‟s quest to control their eco-cultural resources.  
For all practical purposes, curtailment of Apache decision-making power still left the Tribe 
dependent on the whims of off-reservation interests. The BIA believed that leasing timber land on Fort 
Apache was one of the best ways to help alleviate the poor economic conditions on the reservation. 
Because of this belief, Donner proceeded with a single-minded approach to securing approval from the 
Tribe for sales. This blinded Donner to potentially legitimate concerns of the Tribe. With great hubris, 
he assumed he had all the angles covered. However, his approach helped nurture a climate of distrust 
between the Apache people and the BIA. To Donner‟s frustration, Chief Baha wasn‟t comfortable with 
the structure of the new tribal government. He felt that his people were being rushed into important 
decisions, leaving inadequate time for proper consultation.  The following exchange concerning the sale 
of the Horse Mesa unit exemplifies how the BIA imposed a government structure on the Apache that 
they weren‟t accustomed to.59 
 
Chief Baha: “Although I represent all Indians of my district they should come in and consider it, 
those that have cattle there.” 
 
Supt. Donner: “The Council represents the tribe. This Council represents the tribe until the new 
Council is approved by the Office.” 
 
                                                 
58 Ibid. 
59Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
92 
 
Baha: “We should have notified all the Indians and they could pass on it.” 
 
Donner: “The North Fork Indians selected you as a Council-man.” 
 
Baha: “Before this I think I should have had a meeting with the North Fork Indians to discuss the 
matter.”  
 
Donner: “I cannot agree with you on that. In order to do business, the tribe selects a Council and 
we do business with the Council. That is why we had an election several weeks ago.” 
 
A representative government was incongruent with past governing practices of the Apache.60  
Historically, local groups consisting of several households within a small territory made decisions by 
consensus with the advice of the local chief. Local chief‟s had little influence over other local groups. 
Each local group was a self-sufficient unit making their own decisions about farming practices, cattle, 
ceremonies, hunting, and so on. Baha‟s adamant wish to consult his people reflects this tradition. 
Donner‟s imposition of Western-style government compromised the consensus-driven decision process 
of the traditional Apache political system. By admonishing Baha, Donner forced him into a politically 
vulnerable position, perhaps causing him to lose credibility with his people. However, Baha‟s credibility 
wasn‟t necessarily Donner‟s concern. He had his own agenda, albeit presented as doing what was in the 
best interest of the Tribe. Donner was determined to force the contract through.  
The Council backed Baha‟s reluctant decision at a high social and economic cost. At the time, the 
Apache received more money from cattle than timber. So they were understandably concerned about 
potential harm to their cattle. John Taylay defended Baha‟s concerns and asserted to Donner, “If Head 
Chief Baha wants to give up this timber it is all right, but you better put a couple of men up there to ride 
the range for him. Baha thinks more of the cattle than the timber…”61 With this idle compromise, the 
Tribal Council eventually half-heartedly approved the sale of the timber, but perhaps at the cost of being 
                                                 
60 Basso, The Cibecue Apache. 
61 “Minutes of the Council Called for Approval of the Horse Mesa Timber Unit.” 

 
 
 
 
93 
 
perceived as a puppet government. The way Donner presented the contract left the Council with little 
choice.  
 
Dismissal of Historic and Local Knowledge – A number of Apache men received training in Western 
conservation techniques through the CCC-ID. These skills would especially be useful as the Tribe 
developed its own recreational program in the 1950s. Unfortunately, CCC-ID personnel disseminated 
knowledge from the top down. Educators assumed that Western conservation techniques were superior 
to Apache knowledge about wildlife. Clifford Presnall, a Fish and Wildlife Biologist, suggested that 
CCC-ID programs provided an excellent opportunity to educate Indians on “genuine [my emphasis] 
conservation,” implying that past Apache traditions were primitive or ineffective.62  
BIA personnel were quick to blame the Apache for the decline in deer populations without 
considering other causes.  And when species of wildlife such as turkey or Arizona native trout were 
abundant, it was only because the Apache had “taboos” against eating these animals.63 No one 
considered that aspects of the historical Apache hunting social structure may have limited overhunting. 
Furthermore, BIA and FWS land managers never considered that the past assimilation policy, which 
eroded Apache social structure that regulated against overhunting, might have had something to do with 
declining deer populations. Nor did anyone adequately investigate the nature of the social “taboos” 
against hunting certain species.  
Ritual taboos have played a strong role in moderating the wildlife and fish harvests of other 
indigenous groups. To date, I am unaware of any anthropological or ecological study that has taken a 
serious look at the relationship between traditional Apache social structure, including taboos, and the 
                                                 
62 Clifford C. Presnall, Suggestions for Wildlife Management on Fort Apache Indian Reservation, August 20, 
1941, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 932, File # 35362, Box #88,  p. 24. 
63 Fred R. Moffat, “Report on Wildlife, Fort Apache Indian Reservation,” April 8, 1940, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-
39, Dec. 932, File # 35362, Box #88. 

 
 
 
 
94 
 
mitigation of overhunting practices.64 Unfortunately, because anthropologists paid so little attention to 
hunting behaviors before Apache culture significantly evolved in the twentieth century, we may never 
know. However, clues in the anthropological literature suggest that Apache social structure could have 
regulated against overexploitation of wildlife. 
The Apache cultural relationship with wildlife was inseparable from their subsistence use of animals. 
The Apache, living in an unpredictable and ecologically heterogeneous landscape, relied on a flexible 
style of subsistence. Hunting amounted to one of five modes of food acquisition, which also included 
wild plant collection, farming, trading, and raiding. The period of most intense hunting pressure 
occurred between November and early spring, when food garnered from farming and wild plant 
collection was less available.65 Although not with the same intent as the hunting season associated with 
Western game regulation practices, the seasonal hunting patterns of the Apache might have served a 
similar function. Hunting parties generally consisted of 3-5 adult men. Less frequently larger numbers 
hunted together, usually in connection with the apprenticeships of adolescents. Prior to the introduction 
of rifles, Apache pursued game with a wide assortment of weapons and tools, including bow and arrow, 
slings, fire, clubs, and spears. However, the bow and arrow was the most important weapon for 
apprehending large game.66 
The Apache exploited a wide array of game, thus limiting pressure on any one species. Deer, the 
most popular game, inhabited a number of Apache hunting myths, indicating their revered status in 
Apache culture. Historically three species of deer occurred in the White Mountains: black-tailed, white-
tailed, and Mexican. Besides deer, the Apache also pursued pronghorn antelope, elk, rabbits, squirrels, 
wood rats, jack rabbits, turkey, quail, pigeons, dove, and to a certain extent mountain lions, wolves, and 
                                                 
64 The only study that significantly touches on Apache hunting life prior to the 1940s is Winifred Buskirk‟s The 
Western Apache. He only describes hunting techniques and the animals the Apache hunted. Taboos are only 
explored cursorily and seemingly written off as emerging from episodes of eating diseased or tainted meat. 
65 Buskirk, The Western Apache; Goodwin, Social Organization of the Western Apache. 
66 Buskirk, The Western Apache, pp. 116-160. 

 
 
 
 
95 
 
bear (only by religious practitioners with “bear power”). Beyond a source of nourishment, hunting 
provided materials for clothes, shelter, tools, blankets, shoes, and weapons.67  
Cultural relationships with animals probably regulated hunting among the Apache people. The 
cultural significance of turkey provides an example of how hunting rituals may have prevented 
overhunting. Because turkey was so abundant on Fort Apache, BIA officials felt obligated to explain 
this phenomenon. Their explanation invoked the supposed Apache taboo against turkey hunting.68 
However, he was either ignorant of Apache traditions or prejudiced against the idea that the Apache 
could judiciously hunt a species. All Western Apache groups, including the White Mountain Apache, 
had long hunted turkey. According to Winifred Buskirk, an anthropologist who interviewed Apaches 
about their subsistence system in the 1940s, “Turkeys were hunted during the day and also at night. In 
the daytime a „gobbler tail‟ was sometimes held as a mask before the hunter‟s face. This was said to 
attract pugnacious turkey gobblers. The favored hunting technique for turkeys was to locate a roosting 
place and return at night to kill the birds.”69 The White Mountain Apache even used fire to flush turkeys 
from their roosts. Unfortunately, Buskirk‟s work is only descriptive, with no inclination towards 
ecological theory. Even though he notes the historical abundance of turkey on the reservation, he offers 
no explanation for the prevalence of this species, despite turkey being a popular game item among the 
Apache.  
Because of their intimate historical connection with wild turkey, the Apache must have had some 
valuable knowledge about the natural history of this species. Indeed, Turkey was a cultural hero among 
the Apache. In the Western Apache story, “Turkey Makes the Corn: Coyote Plants Cooked Corn,” 
Turkey was the historical source of corn and showed early people how to farm: 
                                                 
67 Ibid. 
68 Moffat, “Report on Wildlife, Fort Apache Indian Reservation.”  
69 Buskirk, The Western Apache, p. 138. 

 
 
 
 
96 
 
Turkey made food for our people. That was long ago when all the animals talked like people. A 
boy and his sister were living together. They were talking to one another about how they had no 
food. Turkey overheard them talking and came to that place. “What does your little brother 
want?” he asked the girl. “He wants something to eat, but we have nothing,” the girl said. When 
Turkey heard this, he shook himself all over and all kinds of fruits and wild food dropped out of 
his body. Then they ate these up. Turkey shook himself again and big corn (a variety of corn) 
dropped out of his feathers. Then he shook himself again and yellow corn dropped out. A fourth 
time he shook himself and white corn dropped out of him. The boy and girl did not use up all of 
this corn. Some was blue corn, and they hid it away for seed.70 
 
In another version of the this story that includes a great flood that ravages the Earth, Turkey helps 
orchestrate the restoration of the land back to a point where it can sustain the Apache people again.71  
The cultural importance of turkey to the Apache probably figured prominently in the way they 
hunted the species. Buskirk does not report any specific rituals associated with turkey; however, he also 
admits that by the 1940s when his research took place, significant knowledge about hunting rituals had 
been lost due to several generations of BIA assimilation policies. Nonetheless, hunting rituals were 
prevalent among the Western Apache, and it‟s not implausible that Apache historically had elaborate 
rituals specific to turkey.   
A general ritual that the Apache extended to all kills was sharing the take with those less fortunate. 
Apache custom dictated that successful hunters should divide meat among their neighbors, families 
without men to provide for them, or the hunter‟s relatives by marriage. This idea of sharing plays out in 
“Turkey Makes the Corn,” the great flood version. As Turkey directs the restoration of the Earth, he 
realizes that no one has had meat for a long time.  
He said, “Why don‟t you go out and hunt deer so we can eat meat? But don‟t skin the deer too 
quickly. Be careful and skin it out right to the hoofs. That‟s the way Big Owl does when he kills 
deer.” Gray Fox spoke in the same way: “When I go along with you the deer all come together 
and I will make them easy for you to kill. But for doing this I want you to give me some meat.”  
 
                                                 
70 Anna Price, “Turkey Makes the Corn: Coyote Plants Cooked Corn,” in Goodwin, Myths and Tales of the White 
Mountain Apache, pp. 61-63. 
71 Ibid., pp. 50-61. 

 
 
 
 
97 
 
Other rituals and prayers pervaded Apache culture, conveying their respect and kinship relationships 
with animals they relied upon for subsistence. Many anthropologists, ecologists, and historians have 
long held that such rituals, especially those that require the sharing of meat, regulated over-hunting 
practices among indigenous cultures.72 
Although sharing food has nothing to do with modern conservation practices that rely on knowledge 
of a species‟ population ecology, evidence exists that such relationships functioned to conserve species. 
This is especially true, for example, for the James Bay Cree of Manitoba, Canada. Frikit Berkes, an 
anthropologist who worked with the James Bay Cree, believes that Cree fishery societies have a built in 
self-limiting principle foreign to the Western concept of conservation. He attributed this to sharing 
among families of surplus catches. If one family caught more than needed, they generally dispersed the 
surplus to less fortunate families.73 Such social structures certainly broke down at times, especially in 
the wake of modern capitalism and Indian assimilation policies, but one can‟t conclude from this that 
pre-modern hunting societies couldn‟t have been a source of knowledge or practiced alternative forms of 
efficacious game management.  
Sharing the take and hunting rituals aren‟t the only Apache social mechanisms that were in place that 
could have regulated hunting. On a regional scale, Western Apache bands guarded territories from 
outside intruders. Second, within bands, local groups held loosely protected hunting areas that covered a 
3-8 mile radius surrounding farm settlements. Individuals from other local groups often hunted in these 
                                                 
72 See for instance, Frikit Berkes, “Common-property Resource Management and Cree Indian Fisheries in 
Subarctic Canada,” in The Question of the Commons, B.J. McCay and J.M. Acheson, eds. (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press, 1987), 66-91. Berkes claims that Cree fishery societies have a built in self-limiting 
principle foreign to the Western concept of conservation. He attributed this to sharing among families of surplus 
catches. If one family caught more than they needed, they generally gave the surplus to families that did not catch 
enough. Joseph Taylor, in Making Salmon, presents an excellent historical overview of pre-contact relationships 
of Pacific Northwest groups with salmon. Environmental historian Richard White, in The Roots of Dependency, 
noted such behavior among the Choctaw before their integration into the capitalist market. He also claimed that 
hunting territories delineated among bands possibly had the secondary effect of regulating over-hunting.  
73 Berkes, “Common-property Resource Management,” p. 84.  

 
 
 
 
98 
 
areas, but usually asked permission from the local chief before proceeding.74 According to Greenville 
Goodwin, perhaps the anthropologist who earned  the greatest trust among the Apache,  “Apache, in 
general, repeatedly deny the existence of individual, family, or local group hunting tracts, asserting that 
a man had a right to hunt where he wished. Apache vehemently denies any claim to individual land 
ownership or sole rights, outside farming sites, and explains that it is for everyone. He points with 
resentment to the variance between the concept of landownership of white people and his own.”75  
Within a locality, the local chief determined when and where hunts would take place. The 
anthropological literature doesn‟t indicate how local chiefs determined this, but presumably they 
possessed knowledge about the best times and places to hunt. And given their special status in the 
community, they probably had acquired special powers such as “Black-tailed Deer Power” or “Wolf 
Power,” which bestowed upon them insight into the best hunting grounds and techniques. Those 
individuals perceived by band members to have harnessed “power” often garnered widespread respect, 
especially if they used “power” to benefit others. Once recognized, these people often earned leadership 
roles in the community. 76  
Another way that Apache indirectly regulated hunting was through age-dependent hunting practices. 
Local chiefs disallowed hunting until men reached twenty years of age. Even then, most individual‟s 
first kill waited until after they were married. Adolescents sometimes participated in hunts, but only as 
apprentices – to learn rituals and observe hunting techniques. Apparently experienced hunters rarely 
instructed youth on actual hunting methods. Young Apaches learned these methods mostly through 
observation. However, learning rituals was a different story. Apache considered hunting rituals a form of 
powerful knowledge. Once Apache boys reached maturity, adult men took great care to personally 
convey this wisdom. An individual without this knowledge was typically at a disadvantage, attempting 
                                                 
74Buskirk, The Western Apache, p. 117. 
75 Goodwin, Social Organization of the Western Apache, pp. 149-150. 
76 Basso, The Cibecue Apache, p. 44. 

 
 
 
 
99 
 
to acquire prey would most likely result in failure. This special category of knowledge included  “simple 
ritual practices such as placing a shed antler in a tree, praying to a raven flying overhead, setting aside a 
certain internal organ as an offering to Raven, method of skinning – all of which brought good luck to 
the hunter.” 77  
Acquiring such knowledge was a mentally and physically challenging activity, requiring extensive 
memory, intellectual dexterity, and endurance. For example, earning “Black-tailed Deer Power” entailed 
memorizing fifty or more chants that include as many as twenty six verses each in a specific sequence – 
deviation from the proper order risked offending the power, rendering it ineffective.78 Rituals, therefore, 
imbued power upon the hunter - a power that Apache elders considered too dangerous for the 
emotionally unstable adolescent. They maintained that “hunting power” was for the mentally mature, 
physically strong, and socially stable individual. Otherwise “his heart would not be strong enough to 
stand it; it could make him ill or even kill him.”79 The age-dependent hunting structure of the Apache 
thus functioned to monitor reckless and wasteful behavior often found among young people. By not 
allowing certain age groups to hunt, the Apache reduced hunting pressure and perhaps unnecessary 
waste of wildlife that might result from unskilled pursuits of game.  
As mentioned previously, no studies of the ecology of Western Apache hunting practices exist. 
Nonetheless, the above speculations are not far-fetched considering the Apache had similar social 
conventions as other indigenous cultures that successfully regulated against overhunting. Because of 
these similarities, the Apache may also have successfully regulated against wildlife overexploitation 
prior to cultural disruption. Indeed, as late as 1946, in response to the BIA‟s insistence that the Tribe 
needed to adopt a modern game code for tribal members, the Tribal Council proposed that Apache 
religion regulated hunting, negating the need for such a code. In support of the Councils proposal, 
                                                 
77Goodwin, Social Organization of the Western Apache, p. 476. 
78 Basso, The Cibecue Apache, p. 43. 
79Goodwin, Social Organization of the Western Apache, p. 476. 

 
 
 
 
100 
 
Thomas Thompson claimed most Apaches “have some religious beliefs [about hunting] and are 
superstitious about hunting year round anyway.” He further explained that his people believed “they 
should not hunt during… the season they [deer] mate.” Fearing that an outright rejection of the 
Council‟s idea would damage his agenda to bring “conservation of wild game” to Fort Apache, 
Superintendent Holtz, who replaced Donner in late 1946, side-stepped the issue by replying that a 
proposal “of this sort should be given considerable study on… results that may come.”80  Apparently 
any serious consideration of an Apache religious-based game code fell on deaf ears. Superintendent 
Holtz eventually convinced the Tribal Council to adopt a Western-style game code in 1947. This subtle 
act of paternalism neglected a possible innovative management strategy. Holtz, Donner, Moffat, and 
other BIA officials never seriously entertained such proposals - partly because such inquiries were 
before their time, but also because they religiously believed that Western conservation practices were 
superior to those of indigenous cultures.  
 
Land Use – The implementation of John Collier and Robert Marshall‟s roadless area policy in 1937 
represented another manifestation of paternalism. Without tribal government consent, they imposed a 
rigid environmental philosophy on culturally diverse Native American groups across the United States.81 
Once again, a bureaucratic agenda trumped Native American rights. Without direct knowledge of the 
policy, the Apache “donated” over 300,000 acres of their homeland to a Euro-American cause, 
confirming their fears that Section 466 of IRA would further erode tribal control of reservation lands. 
                                                 
80 Minutes of the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Meeting, March 5, 1951, RG75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 
54, File #10197-46, Box #5. 
81 Diane L. Krahe, Last Refuge (Dissertation, University of Washington, 2005); Philp, John Collier’s Crusade for 
Indian Reform, pp. 185-186. 

 
 
 
 
101 
 
According to Secretarial Order 486, the Apache, except as a last resort, no longer could develop the 
resources within the boundaries of the Mount Thomas and Black River Roadless Areas.82  
An analysis of Collier and Marshall‟s beliefs about indigenous societies reveals how they arrived at 
what they thought was a reasonable rationalization for establishing roadless areas on Indian reservations. 
From the standpoint of the Indians, it is of special importance to save as many areas as 
possible from invasion by roads… Most of them desire some place which is all their own. 
If, on reservations where the Indians desire privacy, sizable areas are uninvaded by roads, 
then it will be possible for the Indians of these tribes to maintain a retreat where they may 
escape from constant contact with white men.83 
 
This statement, however, seems to somewhat contradict one of the central tenets of the Indian New 
Deal, restoring an economic base to Native Americans. In an odd juxtaposition with overall Indian New 
Deal policy, the statement also denies Native Americans modernity, suggesting that all they want is 
refuge from Western civilization. However, Collier and Marshall‟s intention maintained that roadless 
areas would offer an escape from the modernizing process taking place on reservations as a consequence 
of Indian New Deal programs.  
Regardless of this statement, Collier and Marshall demonstrated sensitivity to the evolving economic 
needs of Indians. Marshall, for his part, realized, “It is one of the most important objectives in the 
program of John Collier…that the Indians should be helped not to an unearned income but to the 
opportunity of working for their own livelihood. Nevertheless, if the Indians used every acre of their 
land themselves and stopped renting altogether, they yet would not have enough land to support 
themselves at an adequate standard.”84 Despite this, Marshall felt that balancing economic and 
ecological concerns through conservation “exerts a helpful influence.”  
The solution, according to Marshall and Collier, given that the Indian use of resources on 
reservations would eventually exceed the carrying capacity of their lands, was increasing the Indian land 
                                                 
82 Secretarial Order 486. 
83 Ibid. 
84 Robert Marshall, “Ecology and the Indians,” Ecology 18 (1937): 159-161, p. 161. 

 
 
 
 
102 
 
base – one of the programs of the Indian New Deal that essentially failed because Congress never 
appropriated sufficient funds for acquiring lands. Furthermore, Marshall knew this solution was fraught 
with problems because little surplus land remained in the West. Furthermore, federal agencies and 
private land owners wouldn‟t relinquish land easily. Moreover though, he saw the Indian predicament 
inextricably linked to “the dominant economic problem of how to make all of the United States yield all 
of its citizens a reasonable standard of living.”85 Setting aside roadless areas on reservations, therefore, 
was no different from doing the same on National Forests or other public lands. Unfortunately, this 
thought process overlooked the fact that due to the relatively small land holdings of Native Americans, 
they would shoulder a disproportionate burden relative to the dominant society for “their” sacrifice. 
As an inadequate economic compensation for their troubles, Marshall envisioned that roadless areas 
would provide tribal members with jobs as guides: “One important potential source of enjoyable and 
remunerative work is for the Indians to guide parties on camping and pack trips. It is obvious that no one 
is going to require a guide to travel down a road. The possibility for Indians to make money through 
guiding lies [sic] in maintaining portions of their reservations in a wild enough condition so that 
someone visiting them might conceivably need a guide.”86 Marshall perhaps overestimated the 
economic potential of this idea in the 1930s, but eventually many tribes, including the White Mountain 
Apache, have since developed robust recreational programs where paid guides are a significant source of 
income.  
Collier recognized the deleterious effect that permanent economic restrictions might have on the 
already tenuous economic conditions of Native Americans. So he added a provision in Secretarial Order 
486 that maintained roadless conditions except when “the requirements of fire protection, commercial 
                                                 
85 Ibid. 
86 Ibid; See also John Collier, Ward Shepard, and Robert Marshall, “The Indians and Their Lands,” Ecology 31  
(1933): 905-910. 

 
 
 
 
103 
 
use for the Indians‟ benefit or actual needs of the Indians clearly demand otherwise.”87 In addition, 
American Indians could also continue cattle grazing and other commercial activities that didn‟t require 
roads, which seemed to fit the contemporary wishes of the White Mountain Apache. In addition, Mount 
Thomas Roadless Area also served the function of protecting the watershed from timber cutting, 
although this was not the expressed reason for establishing this management policy.   
Despite these concessions to modernity and the potential conservation benefits, Collier and 
Marshall‟s justification was seriously flawed from the Native American political standpoint.  It became 
evident in the 1950s that not all Native Americans desired a wilderness refuge from Western 
Civilization. At the request of affected tribes trying to build their economic bases through the lumber 
industry, including the White Mountain Apache, the Department of Interior declassified all but two 
roadless areas on Indian reservations.88 Unfortunately, Marshall and Collier idealized a certain type of 
Native American to justify the establishment of roadless areas. Providing a critique of mainstream 
society for Marshall and Collier, Native American society supposedly represented all the good things 
that civilization left behind. According to Paul Sutter, Marshall “mistook tribalism for organic socialism; 
he assumed that Native Americans were single-minded avatars of his critique of modern America.”89 
This thought process held severe misconceptions about the political, social, ecological, and economic 
needs of Native Americans. It also fed into a paternalistic mindset that led to their biggest mistake 
concerning roadless areas, failing to consult any tribes about the establishment of these areas.  
This policy proved ironic considering Collier wanted tribes to govern their own affairs. But in this 
instance, Collier and Marshall clouded the goal of wilderness preservation with what they ideally 
believed Native Americans wanted. After all, based on his extensive experience with native cultures, 
Marshall believed that Native Americans trusted his wisdom. This trust wasn‟t a figment of his 
                                                 
87 Ibid. 
88 Krahe, Last Refuge.  
89 Paul Sutter, Driven Wild (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2002), p. 229. 

 
 
 
 
104 
 
imagination either. In the mid-1930s, a Pueblo community in New Mexico wanted to purchase land long 
held sacred to their people.90 In order to justify the purchase to the Department of Interior, the Governor 
of the Pueblo knew he would have to reveal knowledge about the sacred site. He wanted as few non-
Pueblo to know about this site as possible. So he told Collier, “Let Marshall come here. We will take 
him with us to the place we want to buy, and we will tell him everything, in confidence, and he can tell 
you and Secretary Ickes, in confidence.”91 Supposedly Marshall was the first Euro-American told that 
the Pueblo deemed this place in the Eastern Rocky Mountains a sacred shrine. His journey with the 
Pueblo into the wilderness of the Rocky Mountains led to a successful purchase of this land. 
Experiences such as this could have easily led Marshall to believe he knew how Native Americans 
generally felt about the North American wilderness.  The problem was, however, that he generalized 
specific experiences to all Native Americans. After Ickes signed Secretarial Order 486 in late 1937, 
Marshall wrote to William Zeh, the director of the Regional Indian Office in Phoenix, in a fit of 
romantic projection that “[I]t is not necessary for the Indians to approve…Obviously, the Indians 
themselves will not use their own funds to build such roads.”92   
The Order even survived a legal review to determine if it violated the Indian Reorganization Act and 
other federal mandates. William Zimmerman, also a wilderness advocate, prepared a legal justification 
of the Order for Collier to pass on to the Solicitor‟s Office of the Department of Interior. Acting 
Solicitor Frederic Kirgis criticized the first draft of this justification stating outright that the Order 
violated constitutional guarantees to tribal councils that the BIA had to advise and consult with them 
prior to activities that may affect the tribe in question. Zimmerman responded by claiming that the Order 
                                                 
90 This story about Marshall comes second-hand from John Collier‟s From Every Zenith, pp. 259-261. Many of 
the details of this story are generalized because Collier purposefully left vague the actual Pueblo involved, the 
timing, and the location of the purchase because he respected the culturally sensitive nature of the sacred area 
being purchased. 
91 The emphasis is Collier‟s. Ibid., pp. 259-260. 
92 Robert Marshall to William H. Zeh, November 18, 1937 as quoted in Krahe, Last Refuge, p. 93. 

 
 
 
 
105 
 
was “merely an announcement of policy” and that establishing roadless areas did not constitute a 
“positive action that in any way interferes with these rights.”93 He went on to suggest that “the status 
quo is maintained in the areas in question. Certainly the Secretary of the Interior is not breaching any 
agreement or understanding when he notifies the tribes that such status quo is to maintain respect to the 
areas in question.” 94 Therefore, since these areas were already roadless, BIA personnel hadn‟t changed 
anything. This tortured logic suggested that the policy couldn‟t affect tribes because the BIA took no 
action concerning “any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal lands, interest in lands, tribal 
funds, or other tribal assets” that would infringe upon the power of tribal councils “to veto.”95 Kirgis 
reviewed this response and concluded: 
In so far as the proposed order is simply an announcement of policy guiding departmental action 
in matters properly within the jurisdiction of the Department, there is no legal objection to such a 
statement. Unfortunately the language of the proposed order is not limited to such a statement. 
The declaration which is particularly criticized in the proposed memorandum transmitted for 
your consideration asserts “There may be constructed absolutely no routes passable to motor 
transportation.” This statement is not justified by existing law. Under existing law allotted lands 
may be condemned regardless of the approval of the Secretary of the Interior and roads may 
therefore be built through reservations regardless of the proposed order establishing “roadless 
and wild areas.”96  
 
Kirgis finally concurred with Zimmerman‟s justification, but found holes in the attempt to 
permanently establish roadless areas. Tribal rights within constitutions had been defined quite narrowly 
to limit the powers of any given Tribe. Mainly, Collier reasoned, to protect tribes against themselves in 
the early stages of self-governance.97 Nonetheless, Collier and Marshall took advantage of those 
restrictions to push through policies that fulfilled their personal agendas. In this case, the hubris of a 
                                                 
93 William Zimmerman, “Memorandum for Acting Solicitor Kirgis,” July 17, 1937, RG 75 General Service, CCF 
07-39, Dec. 308, File # 40999, Box #863. 
94 William Zimmerman, “Memorandum for Acting Solicitor Kirgis,” July 17, 1937, RG 75 General Service, CCF 
07-39, Dec. 308, File # 40999, Box #863. 
95 Ibid. 
96 Frederick L. Kirgis, “Memorandum for the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs,” July 21, 1937, RG 75 
General Service, CCF 07-39, Dec. 308, File # 40999,  Box #863. 
97 Talyor, The New Deal and American Indian Tribalism. 

 
 
 
 
106 
 
paternalistic policy blinded Collier and Marshall. In hindsight, their restriction of economic activities on 
reservations that already had limited resources was a social injustice – ironically, something that 
Marshall and Collier fought against their entire careers.  
 
Conclusion 
Federal paternalism would permeate BIA policy for the next forty years, creating perpetual tension 
between the Apache and federal land management agencies. According to Native American leaders that 
experienced the tumultuous early days of modern self-governance, the problem with organizing under 
IRA was it granted ultimate authority over tribal affairs to the Department of Interior. The Secretary of 
Interior would extensively exercise this authority in the coming years to restrict the decision-making 
power of tribal governments. Nevertheless, over time tribal councils would learn to manipulate the 
system to their benefit, increasingly exercising greater control over reservation affairs. Especially for the 
Apache, paternalistic policies gave impetus to the eco-political process of resistance and exchange that 
would eventually result in political autonomy.  
While the IRA precariously created a political foundation from which the Apache eventually 
appropriated ecological restoration to control eco-cultural resources on the reservation, the CCC-ID 
would open the epistemological gateway that made this appropriation possible. Once again, though, 
paternalism would limit the educational potential of this program. The federal government not only 
controlled knowledge production through administrative policies, but they also controlled it through 
CCC-ID education programs. The next chapter explores the role of federal paternalism in CCC-ID 
efforts to educate Native Americans about Western land management techniques.  

 
 
 
 
107 
 
Chapter 3 
 
The Civilian Conservation Corp – Indian Division: Acquiring Expertise and 
Knowledge in Western Restoration and Conservation Techniques 
 
About the school, we want higher grades added to the school. We want a senior high school for 
the Indians. We do not want our children to go off to get an education. … After the children 
graduate from the boarding school here we want them to learn a trade here without going away 
to get a higher education. We want them to get it here.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wallace Altaha, 1934 
 
 
Prior to the Indian New Deal, the isolation of the White Mountains tempered the effects of Euro-
American society on the Apache people. Pre-IRA Tribal Council members such as Wallace Altaha 
recognized, however, that maintaining tribal integrity in the wake of modernity would require educating 
Apaches on the reservation, not sending them away to boarding schools all over the United States. In 
general, with the imminent arrival of New Deal programs, tribal leaders realized that avoiding modernity 
was impossible. Although most members of this council spoke only Apache and had little formal Euro-
American education, they acknowledged the imperative for younger Apaches to have adequate 
education in both the Apache and Euro-American way. Otherwise, the Tribe would have little control 
over the process of modernization; thus ending any chance of cultural survival.  
Council members reasoned that by educating Apache youth on the reservation the cultural 
connection to their homeland would remain intact. Furthermore, young Apache would more likely apply 
their newly acquired skills to benefit the reservation community. Ostensibly, this was the intended goal 
of Collier‟s Indian New Deal education programs. Even though the BIA failed to establish a school of 
“higher education” on Fort Apache during the Indian New Deal, the Civilian Conservation Corp – 
Indian Division (CCC-ID) in many ways partially fulfilled Altaha‟s request.  
                                                 
1 Council of Fort Apache Indians at White River, Arizona,” March 5, 1934, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 339, 
File #18-34, Box #63. 

 
 
 
 
108 
 
While the Indian Reorganization Act set the political stage for a delayed Apache eco-cultural 
revitalization, the CCC-ID introduced the Apache to restorative tools that would make this journey 
possible. For the first time, the CCC-ID immersed the Apache people in Western land management 
techniques.  Unfortunately, the CCC-ID was a double-edged sword, maintaining a top-down knowledge 
production structure while introducing these new technologies. The CCC-ID focused on practical skills 
that the Apache could apply to the management of their farms, ranges, livestock, game, and forests. In 
essence, Collier believed that the basis of Native American self-sufficiency only required a rudimentary 
understanding of Western land management techniques. From there, communal native societies would 
coalesce around this educational foundation and thrive.  
This pragmatic educational philosophy was all well and good, but by proceeding in this manner, 
Collier relegated American Indians to a marginal role in management decisions. Because CCC-ID 
training programs contained no theoretical and technical content, American Indians remained unable to 
develop comprehensive management plans. Furthermore, since they couldn‟t create their own plans, 
they had no choice but to “trust” BIA experts to manage tribal resources. Although Collier wanted to 
instill self-sufficiency and political autonomy, his program left Native Americans dependent on the 
federal government. In essence, paternalism begot paternalism. Despite the maintenance of a 
paternalistic relationship between the BIA and Native Americans, the CCC-ID opened a gateway for 
some native nations to controlling knowledge production on their reservations. This chapter explores 
both the positive and negative consequences of CCC-ID educational programs on the White Mountain 
Apache. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
109 
 
The Philosophical and Sociological Foundations of the CCC-ID 
The CCC-ID was an offshoot of the Civilian Conservation Corp (CCC). The Roosevelt 
Administration designed the CCC to relieve high unemployment rates during the Great Depression. This 
program also handled a large portion of the conservation and restoration work associated with the New 
Deal Era. The CCC not only tackled ecological and economic restoration, this organization also targeted 
the social restoration of America‟s men.2 Drawing on the philosophy that rugged individualism emerged 
through the struggle of taming the Western frontier, this social project attempted to restore the body and 
mind of the Anglo-American male. Working with nature was an integral ingredient in this restorative 
process. Robert Fechner, Director of the CCC stated, “Our purpose is not only to rebuild forests and 
lands, but to build men.”3 Both physically and mentally degraded by the Depression, men joining the 
CCC supposedly experienced a revitalization of their body and spirit within weeks of participation.4  
Soon after the formation of the CCC in 1933, Collier secured funds for a separate division of the 
CCC for Native Americans. This program of the Indian New Deal provided training in conservation and 
restoration techniques to numerous Native Americans until 1942, when Congress terminated the 
program in the wake of World War II. Before Collier took his post in late 1933, J.P. Kinney, Robert 
Marshall‟s predecessor as director of forestry, lobbied the CCC (then known as the Emergency 
Conservation Work program) advisory council to include Native Americans in the program.5 Although 
the BIA hadn‟t been formally invited to the CCC organization meeting, he realized the opportunity this 
program would provide to address urgent conservation matters on Indian reservations. He suggested to 
Commissioner Arthur Rhoads, Collier‟s predecessor, that someone from the BIA should attend the 
                                                 
2 Neil M. Maher, Nature’s New Deal: The Civilian Conservation Corps and the Roots of the American 
Environmental Movement (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2008). 
3 Robert Fechner, “Fechner Clarifies Civilian Status of CCC,” American Forests 45, no. 10 (October, 1939): 511. 
4 Maher, Nature’s New Deal. 
5 J.P. Kinney, Indian Forest and Range: A History of the Administration of the Redman’s Heritage (Washington, 
D.C.: Forestry Enterprises, 1950), p. 75-76. 

 
 
 
 
110 
 
meeting. Rhoads in return sent Kinney, who “was privileged to present the urgent need for conservation 
measures on Indian reservations.”6 Kinney struck up interest among the various agencies involved and 
opened the door for negotiations concerning the exact conditions that CCC work would take place. Once 
tapped Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Collier also saw funding from the CCC as a way to facilitate the 
implementation of his policies, especially Native American practical education and the restoration of the 
heavily degraded reservation landscapes.  
The CCC-ID philosophically differed and ran separately from the general CCC program. The BIA 
took all administrative responsibilities for CCC-ID programs, mainly because of the unique political and 
social conditions on Indian reservations. Harold Ickes justified this separation on the basis that 
“although reservations needed conservation work, Indians would resent the presence of white enrollees 
and wish to live with their families rather than in regular CCC camps.”7 It is not clear that this was 
actually the case on Fort Apache, but on a similar note, initially the Apache protested the importation of 
Native Americans from other reservations. 
The general CCC program required recruits that were single, unemployed men between the ages of 
18-25. Enrollees also had to live in camps of 200 men away from their homes. Fechner relaxed these 
requirements for the CCC-ID. Given the special circumstances of the Indians, the BIA administered this 
program, including project supervision, medical examinations, discipline, and camp maintenance. The 
CCC-ID labor pool on reservations consisted mainly of Native Americans – in rare exceptions, BIA 
officials recruited whites when the workload exceeded the number of Native Americans available 
necessary to complete projects.  Before hiring Euro-Americans, program supervisors recruited Native 
Americans from other reservations to fill positions. Because of a limited number of eligible Native 
                                                 
6 Ibid., p. 75. 
7 Donald L. Parman, “The Indian and the Civilian Conservation Corp,” The Pacific Historical Review 40 
(February, 1971): 39-56, p. 40. For another general overview of the CCC-ID, see Calvin W. Gower, “The CCC 
Indian Division: Aid for depressed Americans, 1933-1942,” Minnesota History (Spring, 1972): 3-13. 

 
 
 
 
111 
 
Americans under the regular CCC rules, Fechner allowed the BIA to enroll married individuals and 
individuals over the age of 25. In fact, one Apache enrollee was 67 years of age.8 Furthermore, many 
Native American men didn‟t actually live in camps because they often had duties maintaining farm land 
and livestock. This was especially true on Fort Apache. According to Superintendent Donner, the only 
way the CCC-ID would succeed on Fort Apache was if the Central Office of the BIA implemented the 
program with some flexibility: 
I hope, however, for the benefit of the Indians who have established homes, small farms, a few 
cattle and other assets that might suffer if Indians went into the work [CCC] for a six-month 
period, the Office will be able to make special arrangements whereby our people may be able to 
work during the time when they are not needed to work on their farms, care for their cattle, etc., 
…My thought is that the work be not too hastily planned and inaugurated, but that in planning 
this work for the benefit  of the Indians on reservations you make it possible for Indians to go 
home as their individual interests demand.9 
 
Perhaps the biggest difference between the CCC and CCC-ID was the significance of geographic 
place. Regular CCC enrollees had no prior personal connections with the areas in which they worked. 
Most were transplants from city life with little experience working with nature.10 Native Americans in 
the CCC-ID, however, often worked to restore and improve their traditional homelands. This was 
certainly the case for the White Mountain Apache. Many projects on Fort Apache directly impacted the 
Apache‟s daily life, especially since most Apache during this period relied on either farming or cattle for 
their subsistence. For instance, enrollees carried out irrigation projects that improved and restored 
farmlands; removed rodents and predators to protect cattle; built fences, water tanks, and reservoirs to 
improve cattle ranges; and conducted erosion control and reseeding projects to restore grazing ranges 
and waterways (Fig. 5). A significant number of Native Americans had access to these programs.11 In  
                                                 
8 John Collier, “Superficial Notes on some IECW Projects,” Indians at Work 2, no. 2 (1934): 36-42, p. 41. 
9 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, May 4, 1933, RG 75 FAIR, Records for the CCC-ID, Dec. 
344, Box #93. 
10 Maher, Nature’s New Deal. 
11 Overall, it is difficult to ascertain how many White Mountain Apache enrolled in the CCC-ID program because 
accurate records by reservation are unavailable. Plus, even though in some cases reports refer to numbers of 

 
 
 
 
112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
individuals enrolled in camps, they don‟t distinguish among the various tribal groups often mixed within a given 
camp. I refer to actual numbers of Apache enrolled when possible. Nevertheless, it does seem that a significant 
proportion of the male White Mountain Apache population had access to this program. 
 
Fig. 5 – CCC-ID work projects in 1936: (Top) Apache rodent control crew. (Bottom) 
Apache men building a bridge for the North Fork truck trail (Courtesy of National 
Archives). 

 
 
 
 
113 
 
 
1933, the BIA recruited 25,000 American Indians. The peak number enrolled at any one time was 
13,000; and over the nine-year span of its existence, out of a population of 300,000 American Indians, 
85,000 individuals enrolled in the CCC-ID program.12 The initial quota for Fort Apache was 800 men, 
approximately a third of the reservation population at the time. This number reflected the vast extent of 
conservation work required on a reservation twice the size of Rhode Island. Despite the apparent 
opportunities to provide jobs and training, Superintendent Donner worried about how CCC-ID work 
would impact reservation farms and herds. At the time, he believed CCC-ID work distracted Native 
Americans from maintaining farms and livestock, which he considered their primary route towards 
assimilation. Resisting this “distraction,” he claimed that with a reservation population of 2,700, “We 
will not be able to put in 800 men…for a six-month period and at the same time take care of our crops, 
cattle, etc.”13  At most, he felt 450 to 500 men would be available to work on projects at any one time. 
Eventually Native Americans from nineteen other reservations were brought in to cover the perceived 
shortfall.  
In the first six-month period, 450 Apache men, 75 Navajos, 25 Pima, 25 Camp Verde Indians, and 
“25 Indians from „Indian Town‟ near Prescott” worked on thirty-eight separate projects that began a 
major transformation of the Apachean landscape.14 They strung out 53 miles of telephone lines; built 86 
miles of truck trails and 29 miles of horse trails; erected 290 miles of range fence; constructed 25 units 
of springs and wells; and dug 13 reservoirs. These efforts were on top of erosion control, fire 
suppression, forest cleanup (hazard reduction, snag removal, roadside cleanup), and rodent control 
projects initiated at this time. As a result of these achievements, Fort Apache was one of ten reservations 
                                                 
12 Parman, “The Indian and the Civilian Conservation Corp,” p. 43. 
13 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, June 23, 1933, RG 75 FAIR, Records for the CCC-ID, 
Dec. 344, Box #93. 
14 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, September 7, 1933, RG 75 FAIR,  Records for the CCC-
ID,  Dec. 344, Box #93. 

 
 
 
 
114 
 
selected for a special commendation. Collier pointed out that although the labor force on Fort Apache 
was double that of most reservations, “your work completed is in the same scale. As of casual interest it 
is noted that you report a larger number of work projects than any other Agency with an I.E.C.W. [CCC-
ID] allotment.”15 
As projects matured, Apaches moved into supervisory roles. It was CCC-ID policy to increase as 
much as possible the ratio of Indian to non-Indian supervisors on projects. Fort Apache had one of the 
better records of “inducting Indians” into leadership roles. As an audit of CCC-ID work indicated, “The 
Apache Indians have shown a fair degree of efficiency in their work, and as individual Indians have 
demonstrated their capability, their duties and responsibilities have been increased.”16 In July 1933, 
when CCC projects began on Fort Apache, no Indians held leadership roles. In November, one took on a 
supervisory role and by the next month Native Americans held 15 of 55 supervisory positions. This 
number increased to 31 in September of 1934.17 Project supervisors promoted individuals who mastered 
skills as carpenters, powdermen, truck drivers, stone masons, and heavy equipment operators.  Early on, 
leadership roles involved camp organization, field project team supervision, and group foreman (the 
highest field position).18  
One of the expressed purposes of the CCC-ID program was to give American Indians on-the- job 
training that they could use as a stepping stone to future employment on or off the reservation. On the 
conservation front, John Collier, Ward Shepard, and Robert Marshall believed that Indians required re-
training in the care of their lands. They envisioned a system of vocational education that would re-instill 
a positive relationship with the land among Native Americans. They believed “that with proper 
                                                 
15 John Collier to William Donner, May 10, 1934, RG 75 FAIR, Records for the CCC-ID, Dec. 344, Box #93. 
16 C.C. Mather to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, February 20, 1935, RG 75 FAIR,  Records for the CCC-ID, 
Dec. 344, Box #93. 
17 Ibid. 
18 Claude C. Cornwall to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, August 1, 1934, RG 75 FAIR, Records for the CCC-ID,  
Dec. 344, Box #93. 

 
 
 
 
115 
 
professional training, there is no reason why Indians cannot become expert land managers and gradually 
take over the administration of their community forests, grazing ranges, and farm lands.”19 Expanding 
on this idea, Ward Shepard, the BIA‟s land policy specialist and a close friend of Collier‟s, asserted the 
need for Native American education in practical skills. He wrote in Indians at Work that “we must put 
the main emphasis not on fitting Indians to enter into the white man‟s industrial world, in competition 
with the white worker and the unemployed, but fitting them to enter into their own world and make it a 
success.” And this training should focus on “common sense training in land use, whether by farming, 
livestock or forestry.”20  
At first glance, Shepard‟s statement may seem demeaning to Native Americans – suggestive that 
they are incapable of competing with Euro-Americans for off-reservation jobs. However, the intent of 
the statement was quite forward thinking at the time. Shepard‟s idea represented a break from the 
assimilationist policies of past administrations. Collier, Marshall, and Shepard wanted to empower 
Native Americans within the context of their homelands. They recognized then what many Native 
Americans began to claim in the late twentieth century: that place played an important role in the 
cultural integrity of indigenous groups. Historically, Native American cultures were deeply tied to their 
lands. Consequently, forced assimilation severed these ties, resulting in cultural malaise. By providing 
them with modern skills that would enhance and protect their landscape, Native Americans could once 
again rule over “golden lands.”21  
The initial step of this training program was to take place through CCC-ID Leader Schools. In 1934 
the CCC-ID set up four such schools, enrolling approximately 200 men each from various reservations. 
The BIA established a leader school at Fort Apache, where men received instruction in forestry, range 
                                                 
19 John Collier, Ward Shepard, and Robert Marshall, “The Indians and Their Lands,” Ecology 31 (1933): 905-910, 
pp. 906-907. 
20 Ward Shepard, “Reorienting Indian Education and Extension in the Wake of the Wheeler-Howard Act,” Indians 
at Work 2, no. 1 (1934): 8-11, p. 9. 
21 John Collier. From Every Zenith (Denver, CO: Sage Books, 1962), p. 185. 

 
 
 
 
116 
 
management, irrigation work, and game protection. Other important training opportunities involved 
heavy equipment operation, blacksmithing, carpentry, machine operation, landscaping, and telephone 
maintenance. Besides nine Apaches, members of fifteen other tribes received training, including 
Blackfeet, Assiniboine, Crow, Pima, Shoshone, Creek, Northern Cheyenne, Chippewa, Papago, and 
Arapohoe among others.22 From the Apache ranks, Purcell Kane and Fred Larzelere eventually became 
tribal chairman and Byde Amos, a mixed-blood, became an employee of the Bureau‟s Forestry Branch 
on Fort Apache. Despite this early push for education, Collier, Marshall, and Shepard‟s romantic 
idealisms about American Indians assuming a greater caretaking role of their lands came into conflict 
with paternalistic policies and on-the-ground skepticism of the potential for Native Americans to assume 
full responsibility.  
 
Idealism versus Reality: Early Apache Conservation Education, 1933 – 1937 
Local supervisor‟s and superintendent‟s focus on production results rather than education hindered 
the early establishment of educational programs. Most leaders rationalized that on-the-job work 
experience infused enrollees with adequate skills to excel in later endeavors. Even Collier paid little 
attention to formal education early on. And he also put great stock in the benefits of on-the-job training. 
On his visit to Fort Apache in 1934, he observed CCC-ID work crews in action. Group Foreman 
Techantz showed Collier a young Apache‟s work on a culvert as an example of on-the-job training. 
Waxing poetic about the work and its implications for Indian New Deal policies, Collier reported:  
This is a culvert… I know nothing of culverts, but I can feel purpose, despatch [sic] and 
intelligence in this job. How unfortunate that I am not a road engineer. How unfortunate, for that 
                                                 
22 This number is not the total. The number is taken from a follow up report on the leadership school. Only 53 of 
the approximately 200 Native Americans that attended the school made it into the report. Claude Cornwall, author 
of the report, admitted “this report is only a partial summary covering the present status of the Indian boys who 
were enrolled in the E.C.W. Leader School held at Fort Apache…It has not been possible for us to contact all the 
men.” Claude C. Cornwall, “Present Status of Fort Apache E.C.W. Leader School Students,” RG 75 FAIR,  
Records Concerning Enrollee Program, Dec. 346, File #31355-38,  Box #9. 

 
 
 
 
117 
 
matter, that I am not a teacher, a physician, a property administrator, a forester, a psychiatrist, a 
financial expert, an agriculturalist and some more things. I wonder if in any government bureau 
there are to be found more phases of the New Deal, as it has come to be so conveniently called, 
than in the Indian Service, where there are opportunities for rehabilitation along so many lines – 
human and property. That was an excellent culvert.23   
 
Clearly proud of the perceived accomplishments of his program, Collier was enthralled with the 
potential that CCC-ID work had for advancing the betterment of Native Americans. The skill that the 
young Apache demonstrated in constructing a culvert symbolized the self-determination and 
reconstruction of a culture that had hitherto been suppressed by forced assimilation policies. Collier 
perhaps exaggerated the educational benefits, but his enthusiasm for and faith in the “rehabilitation” of 
the Apache was genuine. The White Mountain Apache, in general, impressed Collier. Later in his 
memoir, written in 1962, he commended the Tribe for their “most democratic of economic 
venture…More perhaps than any other Indians, the Apaches were supposed to be „backward,‟ „all-but-
irreconcilable‟ to modern ways, and in the pat, colonial phrase, „not ready for independence.‟ The White 
Mountain Apache “are today self-governing, and economically cooperative and progressive.”24  
Because of the early failure of the CCC program to provide formal education, Congress enacted the 
CCC Act of 1937, which mandated ten hours of formal training per week. The BIA created the Enrollee 
Program to carry out this mission. Robert Paterson, the BIA‟s first educational director, failed to 
implement the Enrollee Program in the field. Unfortunately not much progress occurred in Indian 
education until 1938, when Collier tapped Claude C. Cornwall, previously the Southwest‟s supervisor 
for CCC-ID programs, to lead the Enrollee Program. Cornwall unabashedly criticized previous 
manifestations of enrollee education, explaining to Collier that although the CCC-ID had a tremendous 
record on the production front, “it had failed miserably as an instrument of Indian rehabilitation.”25 
                                                 
23 Collier, “Superficial Notes on Some IECW Projects,” p. 40. 
24 Collier, From Every Zenith, pp. 180-181. 
25 Parman, “The Indian and the Civilian Conservation Corps,” pp. 47-49. 

 
 
 
 
118 
 
The CCC-ID program followed this general pattern on Fort Apache. Production supervisors insisted 
that Apaches were receiving adequate education from on-the-job training. In fact, very little in the way 
of off-the-job training – formal education classes, films, demonstrations -  occurred on Fort Apache 
prior to 1938. Most supervisors shared the opinion that “the Apache Indian‟s attitude toward and 
aptitude for educational regeneration is generally slower than that of some other Southwest Indian 
Tribes.”26 In addition, foreman and supervisors claimed that scarcely any educational opportunities arose 
because very few Apache stayed in camp. They went home to tend their farms and cattle, “making it 
difficult to have camp or group solidarity.”27 Lack of time and deficient aptitudes, however, weren‟t the 
real reasons for neglecting education. Foremost, foreman worried that formal education would cut into 
project productivity. 
 Dewayne Kraeger, Camp Supervisor on Fort Apache, advised the Central Office in Washington that 
if they desired educational programs, they needed to assure production supervisors that the program 
wouldn‟t interfere with construction projects. Furthermore, the success of educational programs 
“depends largely on the appointment of permanent camp assistant who has enough enthusiasm for his 
work to overcome obstacles to its development.”28 Essentially passing the buck, Kraeger implied 
establishing education programs beyond on-the-job training would require much labor and coaxing of 
production supervisors. Evident here was the priority production work and the perceived achievements 
of production supervisors took over the welfare of the Apache. However, this would change with Claude 
Cornwall‟s appointment to head the national Enrollee Program. 
Even prior to Cornwall‟s appointment, evidence suggests that Apaches were more enthusiastic about 
education than supervisors led on. For example, one area where Apaches learned with fervor was 
                                                 
26 Dwayne Kraeger, “Discussion of CCC-ID Enrollee Program with Reference to Fort Apache Reservation,” RG 
75 FAIR, Records Concerning Enrollee Program, Dec. 346, File #31355-38,  Box #9. 
27 Ibid. 
28 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
119 
 
forestry. As early as 1936, Si Davis, Senior Forest Ranger on Fort Apache, succeeded at training Apache 
in forest protection and fire suppression techniques. Davis, a strong advocate for the Apache, genuinely 
liked working with Native Americans, dedicating his life to their betterment. In 1952, he would become 
the first head of the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise – an Apache business that would 
eventually employ hundreds of tribal members in eco-cultural resource management-related jobs. He 
would remain at this post until his death in 1959. 29  
However, Davis‟s work toward that end began with CCC-ID education programs.  In a letter to 
Collier in 1936, Cornwall highlighted Davis‟s work: “One of the important activities of E.C.W. [CCC-
ID] during these months was fire fighting and the reports indicate that this activity resulted in a most 
effective fire suppression program, and the saving of much valuable timber, and wild life on the Fort 
Apache reservation.”30 Because of these successes, Cornwall suggested conducting a Fire School on 
Fort Apache, with “instruction …to be under the direction of Mr. S.O. Davis.” Between 1937 and 1941 
the BIA held three Fire Schools on Fort Apache. Si Davis instructed Apache and other Native 
Americans in fire prevention and suppression techniques. As a consequence, by 1940, all fire control 
personnel on Fort Apache were Apache. Even the pessimistic Dewayne Kraeger claimed, “The success 
of this program [Si Davis‟s work] is important to the enrollee programs because it indicates that the 
Apache Indian can be taught to assume responsibility, and to perform responsible tasks on his own 
reservation with efficiency and dispatch equal to that of white employees now on the job” (Fig. 6).31  
 
 
 
                                                 
29 Harry Kallander to Harold Weaver, July 28, 1952, FHS, Harold Weaver Papers, Folder #8. 
30 Claude C. Cornwall to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, October 21, 1936, RG 75 FAIR, Records Concerning 
Enrollee Program, Dec. 346, File #31355-38, Box #9. 
31 Kraeger, “Discussion of CCC-ID Enrollee Program with Reference to Fort Apache Reservation.” 

 
 
 
 
120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 – Fort Apache Fire School in 1937: (Top) Fire School students receiving 
on-the-job experience on a fire line. (Bottom) Si Davis leading a course on fire 
control equipment use (Photos courtesy of the National Archives). 

 
 
 
 
121 
 
Appealing to the public‟s fear of fire at the time, the BIA even promoted the importance of the fire 
schools to the off-reservation public – a public threatened by the potential for tribal self-government and 
opposed to large government expenditures that didn‟t directly benefit them. In a 1938 article that 
appeared in the Arizona Republic, the BIA reasoned that “the irrigation water that keeps the valley fresh 
and green comes from…the divides in Indian forest lands [Fort Apache and San Carlos Reservations]. 
And it is the Indians of the Indian division who protect those forests form the worst menace of all – 
fire.”32 The article then emphasized that fire suppression and protection prevented erosion that would 
eventually clog dams and rivers, the source of water for valley agriculture. Moreover, in the near future, 
these schools would become quite relevant to forest restoration. Fort Apache eventually became the site 
of important controlled burn experiments, which the BIA also justified as a tool for the betterment of the 
valley below the reservation.  
 
A New Direction in Conservation Education, 1938 - 1942 
Cornwall‟s appointment as director of the national Enrollee Program resulted from his strong 
advocacy for educational programs in the Southwest. Prior to his appointment, he spent a good deal of 
time on Fort Apache. Besides prompting the establishment of a fire school, Cornwall worked with 
agricultural extension agents on southwestern reservations. He often wrote reports on extension 
activities such as annual reservation fairs in Indians at Work, the official organ of the BIA during the 
Indian New Deal. Fort Apache was particularly famous for its fairs, which included a rodeo, ceremonial 
dances, reservation-derived food, Apache arts and crafts, and educational exhibits. In one such report, a 
Forestry Branch exhibit in particular struck Cornwall‟s interest.   
                                                 
32 Anonymous, “CCC Indian Division Helps Control Fire,” no date, RG 75 FAIR, Records Concerning Enrollee 
Program, Dec. 346, File #31355-38,  Box #9. 

 
 
 
 
122 
 
The exhibit contained samples of many of the tree species found on the reservation. However, one 
sample in particular drew a great deal of attention from fair attendees, the cross-section of a 420 year old 
giant alligator juniper. Forestry personnel marked the rings every ten and one hundred years to give 
observers a sense of history that had transpired since the germination of the tree. Cornwall reported, “On 
it have been indicated several historic dates. It was a mere three-inch sapling of forty years growth in 
1492. When it was an eighteen-inch tree, the Pilgrim settled Plymouth. When its diameter reach thirty 
inches in 1882, the Apache scouts were organized, and three years later Geronimo came back with them 
from Mexico. The old juniper tree added another four inches in diameter by the time the World War [I] 
had begun.”33  Even though the tree chronicled the demise of Apache culture, Frank Henderson, an 
Apache CCC-ID enrollee attending to the exhibit, proudly claimed the tree “was taken from the right-of-
way on the O-Dart Butte Trail which is being built under the Emergency Conservation Work… I sawed 
it down myself.”34  The tree represented both the past and the future. Cutting down the tree was making 
way for the rebirth of Apache culture – a re-imagined culture taking control of its destiny and coexisting 
with Western society rather than being subsumed by it. 
Despite establishing the fire schools on Fort Apache and working with extension agents, many of his 
early attempts to initiate education programs on southwestern reservations fell on deaf ears. 
Nonetheless, Cornwall‟s persistence paid off. In 1937, he provided Superintendent Donner with an 
outline of the types of educational activities relevant to the enrollee program. Formal studies should 
include fire suppression, forestry, range management, agriculture, the English language, principles of 
government, law and enforcement, and cooperative enterprises. Recreation and entertainment were also 
important features of the program. In the spirit of highlighting both Euro-American and Apache culture, 
“there should be held occasionally evening camp fires, giving opportunity for expression in music, 
                                                 
33 Claude C. Cornwall, “Apache Fair – Whiteriver,” Indians at Work 2, no. 9 (1934): 29-34, p. 32. 
34 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
123 
 
dancing, singing, and speaking, both of Apache culture and American.”35 Recreational activities would 
consist mostly of Euro-American sports, including baseball, which eventually flourished as a 
reservation-wide league, volley ball, basketball, and, horseshoes. Cornwall designed this curriculum to 
build a sense of community among the Apache. Moreover, contrary to the prevailing sentiment at the 
time, Cornwall emphasized that the CCC-ID foremost afforded an educational opportunity for the 
Native American.  
While it will be expected that the ECW work program shall be efficient as a production unit, 
[sic] yet there will be always in mind that this is an enrollee training opportunity. It cannot be 
good training if it is not an efficient producing unit. However, foreman should not express 
annoyance if efficient workmen are taken away and given other jobs. Rather, the foremen should 
feel that this is a compliment to them, as recognition of achievement. We want to get the most 
out of the money invested, not only in “dirt moving” but also in human advancement.36 
 
With his appointment to national director and Collier‟s backing, many of Cornwall‟s proposals came to 
fruition.  
Under Cornwall, the Enrollee Program grew in prestige. In fact, as Congress began to cut funding 
for other CCC-ID programs in 1940, the Enrollee Program received increased support.37 Perhaps one 
drawback of the program, however, was that it taught to the lowest common denominator. Due to the 
high illiteracy rate and lack of formal education among Native Americans at the time, educating Native 
Americans in practical skills seemed like a necessary first step. Collier didn‟t think it necessary to over-
complicate Indian education. Ironically, Collier drew his educational philosophy from Francis E. Leupp, 
an assimilationist-era Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He even reprinted Leupp‟s philosophy in Indians 
at Work:  
Our duty is to adapt education to the Indian‟s immediate and practical needs. To my notion the 
ordinary Indian boy is better equipped for his life struggle on a frontier ranch when he can read 
the simple English of the local newspaper, can write a short letter which is intelligible, …and 
                                                 
35 Claude C. Cornwall to William Donner, May 25, 1937, RG 75 FAIR,  Records Concerning Enrollee Program, 
Dec. 346, File #31355-38, Box #9. 
36 Ibid. 
37 Parman, “The Indian and the Civilian Conservation Corp.”  

 
 
 
 
124 
 
knows enough of figures to discover whether the storekeeper is cheating him. Beyond these 
scholastic achievements his time could be put to its best use by learning… how to do the hundred 
bits of handy tinkering which are so necessary to the farmer who lives 30 miles from a town.38 
 
Collier believed these sentiments concurred with his present education policies, which still held that 
farming was the primary means of subsistence for most Native American‟s.  
Collier‟s reasons for educating Indians in farming and livestock techniques, however, were quite 
different from past administration‟s assimilation policies. He thought that most Native Americans 
desired to remain separate from mainstream American society. The only way this was going to happen 
was if they could make a living on reservations. And given the topography and ecology of most 
reservations, this meant that the majority of American Indians would have to make their livelihood 
through ranching or farming. Collier conceded that Native Americans could thrive in mainstream society 
if they so desired; indeed, he encouraged Indians to work in the BIA. However, he, along with Cornwall, 
pragmatically held that the majority of American Indians wouldn‟t benefit from education in the 
theoretical aspects of natural resource management and other disciplines. They couldn‟t imagine that 
this sort of education might aid Native Americans in rebuilding their societies and maintaining political 
sovereignty.  So Collier‟s policy failed to go beyond “practical education.” Collier and his minions 
never explored the notion that American Indians might have retained knowledge relevant to land 
management. As a consequence, “practical education” left Native Americans dependent on federal 
“experts.”  
The pragmatic Collier is difficult to reconcile with the idealistic Collier. For instance, when 
criticizing Western civilization, he wondered when Euro-Americans would “learn from the Indian the 
age-old knowledge we now, through our acts, reject – the knowledge of the interrelatedness of life, of 
reciprocity and cooperation between man and nature, and between man and man?”39  In fact, Collier 
                                                 
38 John Collier, “Indian Education Should Be Practical,” Indians at Work 2, no. 3 (1934): 13-14. 
39 Collier, From Every Zenith, p. 246. 

 
 
 
 
125 
 
believed that Native Americans, through years of cultural disruption, had lost most of this knowledge. 
Restoration of this knowledge was only possible through educational programs in Western land 
management techniques. But in the end, what his educational program “re-taught” was far from 
“reciprocity and cooperation between man and nature.” Collier‟s and Cornwall‟s educational program 
exposed Native Americans to utilitarian conservation techniques, which encouraged viewing nature as a 
passive object subject to the whims of human needs.  
On Fort Apache, instructors gave lectures and demonstrations using “pictures, illustrations and the 
easiest reading material available on subjects.” Training plans directed instructors to encourage enrollee-
led discussions with “the simplest language possible.” Instructors emphasized reading and writing skills, 
basing their expectations on the enrollees perceived education level. They expected Native Americans 
that attended grade school to be able to write a business letter; multiply, add, and subtract; understand 
market prices for produce and meat; comprehend “simple directions;” use a score card in judging 
livestock; properly plant and cultivate crops; and “take a greater interest in the upkeep of their farms.” 
One exercise involved enrollees corresponding with experts in disciplines of most use to them. For 
example, individuals who raised cattle wrote for pamphlets authored by meat packing companies. 
Farmers wrote for information on erosion control, seed selection, fruit growing, and weed and pest 
control. Instructors also designed this exercise to teach enrollees how to use the postal service and figure 
parcel post rates. Less was expected of enrollees that hadn‟t attended grade school. Instructors focused 
on their ability to sign their names, write numbers, and understand “simple news articles.” They also 
received instruction on stock raising and farming. To facilitate learning, instructors required illiterate 
enrollees to join literate enrollees in discussions about topical newspaper articles. Instructors hoped this 

 
 
 
 
126 
 
strategy would spark interest in reading; another strategy to encourage reading involved having the 
children of illiterates write letters to their parents.40   
Despite these low expectations, a select few enrollees received more technical training. In one 
instance, four enrollees had the opportunity to work with civil engineers surveying truck trails and “learn 
plain engineering.”41 In 1939 sixty-seven enrollees received detailed formal education in forestry 
practices, especially in the intricacies of forest protection. Apache learned techniques in fire detection, 
fire suppression, radio and telephone communication, the “one lick method,” fire damage appraisal, 
mapping burned areas, packing fire equipment, writing fire reports, and first aid. Another hundred 
enrollees received “On-the-fire-training.” In 1940 another fifty-five Apache received similar training. 
Other enrollees, 543 in all, received training in handling and the use of dynamite, truck driving and 
repair, machine operation and maintenance, welding, woodworking, signal communication, telephone 
maintenance and construction, and radio operation and maintenance.42 The CCC-ID employed all these 
newly acquired skills towards building infrastructure for forest improvement, forest protection, and later, 
the development of recreational facilities. 
Even though much of the training involved vocational skills, the stated overall purpose of Fort 
Apache educational programs focused on natural resource protection and restoration. The agenda for the 
1940 Enrollee Program training plan sought “to better equip the enrollee to care for his farm and garden, 
to improve his home, to care for grazing land and livestock, to care for forest land..., and to take a 
greater interest in game preservation.”43 More specifically, instructors from the Forestry Branch, 
Williams Creek National Fish Hatchery, and the extension agency trained Apache men as game 
                                                 
40 William Donner, “Fort Apache Enrollee Training Program, 1940-1941,” RG 75 FAIR, Records Concerning 
Enrollee Program, Dec. 346, File #31355-38, Box #9. 
41 Ibid. 
42 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, July 30, 1940, RG 75 FAIR, Records Concerning Enrollee 
Program, Dec. 346, File #31355-38, Box #9. 
43 William Donner, “Fort Apache Enrollee Training Program, 1940-1941.” 

 
 
 
 
127 
 
wardens, fisheries managers, foresters, range managers, wildlife technicians (especially concerning 
predator and rodent control), fire guards, and irrigation “engineers.” On top of the formal training given 
to Apache enrollees, instructors held approximately eighty community meetings a year that were open to 
the general Apache public. These meetings also stressed the importance of properly managing natural 
resources on the reservation.44 
Perhaps one of the most important CCC-ID projects integrated into the Enrollee Program was the 
construction of the Williams Creek National Fish Hatchery in 1939.45 Williams Creek was the first 
federal fish hatchery built in the state of Arizona and became a pivotal political tool for the White 
Mountain Apache‟s journey towards restoring control over eco-cultural resources. The hatchery also 
became a focal point for the first Apache business – the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise. As I 
detail in the next chapter, the hatchery constituted a site of both cultural and ecological restoration, a 
place where an almost extinct species of fish, the Apache trout, and a culturally decimated people, the 
White Mountain Apache, intersected to save each other.  
 
Conclusion: The Lasting Implications of the CCC-ID and Indian New Deal 
The CCC program in general had a lasting influence on the environment – not only in terms of 
physical changes to the North American landscape, but in socio-political terms. Neil Maher documents 
the movement of many CCC personnel into natural resource professional jobs after World War II. The 
CCC brought a whole generation of men into intimate contact with nature, and this experience created 
lasting impressions. These men would later move into professional positions in the Forest Service, 
National Park Service, and other federal agencies that focused on the protection and management of 
                                                 
44 Ibid. 
45 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
128 
 
nature. They became vital members of the mainstream environmental movement.46 Although with 
different results, the CCC-ID would have a lasting environmental impact on many Indian reservations. 
The BIA enrolled approximately half the eligible White Mountain Apache males, estimated at 400, 
in the CCC-ID over the duration of the program, exposing a large number of these men to conservation 
and restoration techniques. Apaches began filling the limited number of available natural resource 
related jobs on the reservation. For instance, Byde Amos and Hobart Greggs became assistant foresters 
in the forestry branch; many others maintained work as game wardens, fire guards, and fire fighters; and 
a select few acquired work at the fish hatchery.  Later, former CCC-ID enrollees would supply a pool of 
“expertise” for the Tribal recreation program. Moreover, many Tribal Council members during the 
1940s and 1950s spent time in the Enrollee Program. Lester Oliver, Purcell Kane, Fred Larzelere, 
Clinton Kessay, and Roe Clark became Tribal Chairman. Lester Oliver in particular emerged as a strong 
Apache leader during the 1950s and 1960s, nurturing the growth of several natural resource-related 
tribal enterprises. 
However the impact was not immediate. World War II slowed progress on the reservation. Many 
tribal members left the reservation during the War to join the armed forces or to secure jobs in the war 
industries and agriculture. Later, many of these individuals returned to the reservation and applied their 
experiences to economic development projects. Assimilationist-minded anthropologists at the time, such 
as William H. Kelly, suggested that these temporary migrations and the Indian New Deal helped break 
down the isolationist tendencies of southwestern tribes.47 Kelly reported that these migrations placed the 
Apache on a path towards the mainstream of American society, but in the long run, the process he 
described had the opposite effect. Indeed, encounters with Western technology, industry, and business 
operated to educate tribal members in the American way, but the Apache adapted this new knowledge 
                                                 
46 Maher, “Nature‟s New Deal.” 
47 William H. Kelly, Indians of the Southwest: A Survey of Indian Tribes and Indian Administration in Arizona 
(Tucson, AZ: Bureau of Ethnic Research, University of Arizona, 1953), p. 11. 

 
 
 
 
129 
 
towards developing projects that would eventually aid the Tribe in asserting cultural autonomy and 
maintaining tribal sovereignty.  
The Indian New Deal reawakened possibilities for the Apache to reconnect with their homeland. 
Unlike the enrollees from the larger CCC program, the CCC-ID didn‟t inspire Apache enrollees to join 
the environmental movement. Not enjoying the post-War World II economic boom like most regular 
CCC members, the Apache began seeking innovative ways to use their eco-cultural resources to benefit 
the reservation community. Unfortunately as CCC-ID support diminished in 1942, so too did the 
opportunities to apply newly acquired knowledge. Almost ten years transpired before the Apache would 
again have significant opportunities to pursue land management work. While regular CCC personnel 
went on to causes of protecting wilderness from economic development and middle-class communities 
from air and water pollution, most Apache returned to their farms and cattle to earn a meager living. The 
Apache‟s environmental struggle remained intertwined with the political and cultural survival. 
Reestablishing political sovereignty and growing an economic base from which they could support the 
tribal community motivated the future Apache drive for protecting and restoring their resources.  
The Indian New Deal and the CCC-ID provided a starting point for this quest. These programs 
began the restoration of the Apache eco-cultural resource base and developed some of the initial 
infrastructure – fish hatchery, camps, reservoirs, stream restoration, range restoration, forest restoration, 
wildlife restoration, roads, bridges - for the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise. The hundreds of 
miles of roads constructed during this time frame exposed the reservation population to new economic 
opportunities; however, these roads also required a more vigilant defense of their homeland from 
opportunistic non-Indian business ventures.  To properly defend their homeland, the Apache still 
required further education. The Apache obtained “practical” knowledge of Western land management 
techniques, but without the theoretical and technical knowledge behind these management techniques, 

 
 
 
 
130 
 
the Apache still depended on federal “experts” to manage and protect their homeland. Because of this 
technical advantage, the Apache were at the mercy of federal personnel that may or may not have the 
best interests of the Apache community in mind when implementing management plans. This 
disadvantage eventually left the Apache vulnerable to state and federal watershed “restoration” projects 
construed under the auspices of “benefitting the Indians.” 
In sum, the Indian New Deal marked an era of major cultural and ecological transformation of the 
Fort Apache landscape. Initially these improvements increased non-Indian exploitation of reservation 
resources. The Apache would require another fifty years to regain significant control of their eco-
cultural resources. For all its shortcomings, the Indian New Deal sparked what eventually ignited the 
eco-cultural restoration of many Native American groups. The thirteen years of Collier‟s tenure proved 
inadequate to carry out his goals and subsequent Congressional political interventions temporarily side-
tracked his aspirations. In a 1938 report, Collier even predicted the restoration of native cultures “will 
not happen tomorrow; perhaps not in our lifetime.”48 Nevertheless, by the 1990s many native societies 
had begun restoration efforts that embodied Collier‟s vision – a hybridization of past cultural traditions 
with carefully selected aspects of modernity.  Native American‟s even expanded eco-cultural resource 
management beyond reservation boundaries onto federal and state lands.49  
In the following chapters, I trace the evolution of eco-cultural restoration on Fort Apache through 
fish and wildlife management. Wildlife restoration is only one of four strains of restoration techniques 
                                                 
48 Report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 1938, p. 210,  RG 75, John Collier Papers. 
49 Catherine S. Fowler, Pauline Esteves, Grace Goad, Bill Helmer and Ken Watterson, “Caring for the Trees: 
Restoring Timbisha Shoshone Land Management Practices in Death Valley National Park,” Ecological 
Restoration 21(4) (2003): 302-306; Curt Mack, Jim Holyan, and Isaac Babcock, Restoration and Management of 
Gray Wolves in Central Idaho: Progress Report 2004 (Lapawai, ID: Nez Perce Tribe, Department of Wildlife 
Management, 2005); Elizabeth Grossman, “Nez Perce Tribe Welcomes Wolves Back to Idaho,” Orion Afield 6 
(Spring 2002): 18-19; Dave Egan and M. Kat Anderson, eds.,  “Theme Issue: Native American Land 
Management Practices in National Parks,” Ecological Restoration 21 (2003): 245-310; United States Fish and 
Wildlife Service, “Fish and Wildlife Service and Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribal Governments Sign 
Annual Funding Agreement,” Federal Register 70 (February 1, 2005): 5205-5210. 

 
 
 
 
131 
 
that emerged out of the Indian New Deal. The other three - forest, range, and watershed restoration - 
each had roots in the programs of the Indian New Deal and CCC-ID. I focus on wildlife restoration 
because this is the first form of restoration that the White Mountain Apache acquired significant control 
over. The story of wildlife restoration ties together the political struggle to control all four strains of 
restoration. Their work with wildlife, especially the Apache trout, formed the eco-political foundation of 
the Tribe‟s quest for political autonomy. Under Apache control, the paths of all four strains of 
restoration converged in the 1990s. The next chapter explores the ironic role a CCC-ID fish hatchery 
project had in eco-cultural restoration of the White Mountain Apache Tribe.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
132 
 
Chapter 4  
 
 The Ironic Foundation of Eco-cultural Restoration:  
The Williams Creek Fish Hatchery 
 
 
 
The White Mountain Apache, like most Native American groups, historically had intimate links to 
wildlife on their homeland. Not only was wildlife a source of food, animals also played a significant role 
in Apache culture. Most Apache stories and myths include animal characters that act as guides, moral 
arbiters, and teachers of life lessons. The actions of these animal characters also explain the historical 
development of Apache society – the creation of their homeland, the birth of agriculture, how they 
learned to hunt, the origins of curing and puberty ceremonies, the source of mystical powers, and the 
emergence of sacred places.1 Furthermore, animals represent a source of “power,” a “set of abstract and 
invisible forces” that Apache can acquire for a variety of purposes. For instance, “Bat Power” derived 
from a war dance blesses each person with a bat‟s ability to maneuver in the dark. The Apache 
employed this power as recently as 1942, when the Tribe conducted a war dance for seven Apache men 
leaving for combat in World War II. The Apache billed the ceremony a success because all seven men 
returned from the war alive (although two were badly wounded).2 The use of animal characters to 
illustrate the cultural development of the White Mountain Apache or as a source of “power” is indicative 
of their relationship with the nonhuman world. Unlike in Western society, Apache history privileges the 
human/nonhuman relationship. 
Currently, the restoration of wildlife on Fort Apache, therefore, takes on a different meaning than 
your typical wildlife restoration project that Euro-Americans might undertake. In general, Apache eco-
cultural restoration involves rediscovering Apache history and the Apache community‟s ancestral 
                                                 
1 For a sample of White Mountain myths and stories see Grenville Goodwin, Myths and Tales of the White 
Mountain Apache (Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona Press, 1994). 
2 Keith H. Basso, The Cibecue Apache (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, Inc., 1970), p. 32 

 
 
 
 
133 
 
connections to the land. Restoring wildlife on the Apache homeland thus reawakened cultural history. It 
also conjured up political power, providing leverage for not only regaining control of natural resources 
on the reservation, but also for maintaining and strengthening sovereignty. Ironically, wildlife 
restoration on Fort Apache received a jump start from an endangered species of fish that had little 
cultural significance to the Tribe – the Apache trout (Oncorhynchus apache).  
The irony resides in the fact that fish aren‟t mentioned in Apache stories like other wildlife – turkey, 
deer, coyote, bear, wolf, and mountain lions. Historically, White Mountain Apache considered eating 
fish taboo. Albert Regan, an anthropologist who worked with the Apache from 1901-1902, surmised that 
the Apache wouldn‟t eat trout because worms infected them in the summer months. When he asked a 
medicine man why the Apache refused to eat fish, the medicine man replied: 
They are the spirits of wicked women. Do you see the spots on the fish. [sic] Once, a long time 
ago all our people got an „awful sick.‟ They were hot. They were burning up with fever. The 
medicinemen took them all down by the river‟s brink and there they gave them the „sick‟ 
sweatbath, the hot steam bath of purification.… Then emerging from the sweathouse, [the sick] 
plunged themselves into the invigorating waters of the river, only to come out on the opposite 
bank and die.… The people were enraged against the medicinemen. They thought they had 
intentionally killed the sick. They rose, as one man, to annihilate them all, when the dead people 
began to turn spotted just like the fish in the river. The explanation was simple. The bad spirits of 
the fish had entered the people who had bathed and had killed them all. From that day to this no 
Apache has eaten fish.”3 
 
Apparently, according to an Apache medicine man, the taboo arose not necessarily from an illness 
derived from the trout, but as a consequence of bathing with the fish; however, the taboo failed to persist 
among the Apache. Some reports depicted a growing interest among young Apache in fishing as early as 
the 1910s, but the skill wasn‟t common among tribal members until the 1930s. And even then, younger 
Apache made up the bulk of Indian participants. Elder Apache still disliked the taste of fish.4 
                                                 
3 Albert B. Regan, Notes on the Indians of the City of the Fort Apache Region (New York, NY: The Trustees, 
1930), p. 295. 
4 Winfred Buskirk, The Western Apache (Norman, OK: The University of Oklahoma Press, 1986), p. 143. See 
also D.E. Brown, “Fishing for Speckled Mountain Beauties in Old Newspapers and Journals,” Arizona Wildlife 
Views 46 (2003): 12-17. 

 
 
 
 
134 
 
Nonetheless, Apache trout became culturally important, not just as a source of food, but eventually as a 
recruit in the Apache struggle for political autonomy. Arguably, this relatively small, inconspicuous 
trout is a significant reason why the White Mountain Apache reached their current circumstance where 
they have the economic flexibility to restore culturally significant species and places. 
  The fate of the White Mountain Apache and the Apache trout became intertwined during the Indian 
New Deal. This developing relationship is a metaphor for the evolution and revitalization of Apache 
society in the second half of the twentieth century. Both the Apache and the Apache trout experienced a 
resurrection as a consequence of their interaction. However, this rejuvenating relationship did not result 
in a return to the past. It resulted in a process that blended the past with the present to create new 
possibilities, hence sending both the White Mountain Apache and the Apache trout on new potentially 
viable evolutionary pathways. The Apache trout struggled through the perils of natural selection as 
populations adapted to newly shaped environments, introduced competitors, and artificial breeding 
conditions.5 Simultaneously, the White Mountain Apache experienced a cultural evolution ignited by an 
intense interaction with Western society, resulting in a selective process that allowed for the persistence 
of some Apache traits while acquiring new Western traits.  
The relationship between the Apache trout and the Tribe is symbolic of the Apache‟s ability to adapt 
to changing environments. Not only did this emerging relationship signify a change for the better in the 
physical environment of the reservation, this relationship also signified a change in the intellectual 
environment. Both the White Mountain Apache and the Apache trout experienced and stimulated a 
transformation of knowledge production practices. As the Apache gained entrance into the halls of 
                                                 
5 Although no studies to my knowledge have been completed to assess how artificial breeding has altered the 
genetic constitution of this species, there is a distinct possibility that the restoration of Apache trout has involved 
unintentionally altering the evolutionary trajectory of this species. For a compelling example of how artificial 
propagation affects the evolutionary pathway of fish species, see Joseph Taylor, III, Making Salmon: An 
Environmental History of the Northwest Fisheries Crisis (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 1999), 
pp. 203-204. 

 
 
 
 
135 
 
Western science, they slowly influenced the production of knowledge on the reservation.  As knowledge 
production moved away from the top-down, paternalistic form common in the first eighty years of the 
twentieth century towards a more inclusive, democratic structure, the fate of both the Apache and the 
Apache trout improved. The intimate, successful bond that developed between the Apache and the 
Apache trout provided the Tribe with political leverage that allowed them to begin to break the bonds of 
dependency with the BIA and other federal agencies. The relationship for both parties meant eventual 
self-sufficiency.  
This journey also held significant implications for the nature of ecological restoration. As the 
Apache forced a change in the knowledge production on the reservation, they also influenced the 
practice of ecological restoration. Early on, the market economy defined restoration on the reservation. 
Most projects on Fort Apache initially focused on economically important natural resources such as 
timber, grazing lands, and game. The BIA compartmentalized projects. Restoration work for one species 
was largely disconnected from the restoration work of another species. For instance, very little 
coordination occurred between forestry and wildlife restoration work. Forestry restoration focused on 
creating conditions that would generate the highest economic yield of timber possible, with little regard 
to other components of the surrounding ecosystem. Whereas trout restoration focused on the 
productivity of streams, and only then in terms of producing high yields of game fish without 
consideration of how increasing populations might affect the functional ecological relationships of the 
entire stream community.  
Tracing the historical path of Apache trout restoration, therefore, helps us understand how the nature 
of restoration work evolved on the reservation. Beginning with the Indian New Deal, ecological 
restoration evolved from a focus on many disconnected single-species projects to an ecosystem 
approach, integrating a diversity of restorative goals. In parallel, the perceived relationship of the 

 
 
 
 
136 
 
Apache trout to its environment evolved over this same time span. During the Indian New Deal, the land 
managers viewed the Apache trout as an economically important game species, designing management 
plans to optimize its reproduction.  Later, land managers protected this species because they believed its 
existence was integral to the ecological health of the reservation‟s watersheds.  
Ironically, the empowerment of the White Mountain Apache and the recovery of the Apache trout 
involved a CCC-ID fish hatchery project conceived to stock Fort Apache streams with non-native trout 
species. Beginning with the construction of the hatchery, the Apache initiated a long and delicate 
negotiation with the dominant society and a move towards participating in the capitalist economy. The 
BIA, the predominant definers of restoration during the Indian New Deal, foresaw the reservation‟s 
wildlife as a source of revenue for the Tribe. The Apache path towards autonomy, therefore, would 
involve recreational restoration and development. BIA and Bureau of Fisheries personnel worked 
quickly to convince the Tribe of this potential and establish a means for wildlife restoration. The 
unlikely empowering relationship between the White Mountain Apache Tribe and the Apache trout 
emerged through a maze of interactions with the BIA, the Bureau of Fisheries (now part of the Fish and 
Wildlife Service), the Arizona Fish and Game Commission (AFGC), sportsmen, and a number of 
introduced trout species. All of these actors were involved in establishing William Creek National Fish 
Hatchery.  
To understand how Apache trout became culturally important to the White Mountain Apache, we 
must explore the political interaction among these actors. In essence, this chapter documents the creation 
of the unlikely partnership between a rare species of fish and the White Mountain Apache through the 
construction of a fish hatchery. First, I review the natural history of the Apache trout‟s decline in the 
first half of the twentieth century. Second, I outline the BIA‟s, Bureau of Fisheries‟, the AGFC‟s, and 
the Apache‟s political justifications for requesting the construction of a federal fish hatchery on Fort 

 
 
 
 
137 
 
Apache. Third, I argue that the hatchery became a focal point for converting Fort Apache into a 
“recreational playground” for non-Indians, which eventually precipitated the tribally-established 
business, the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise. And last, I explore the early political, social, and 
cultural consequences of developing the recreational potential of the reservation.   
 
The Path toward an Unlikely Partnership  
Prior to 1972, biologists and fishers knew the Apache trout was endemic to Arizona, but it had been 
tentatively classified with another species, the Gila Trout. As early as the 1930s fisheries biologists 
commonly referred to this species as the Arizona native trout. By the 1960s, the Apache trout persisted 
only in a couple of streams on Mount Baldy. Extensive efforts to preserve this species did not 
commence until the White Mountain Apache closed Apache trout streams to fishing in the 1950s. Even 
though concentrated recovery efforts didn‟t begin until the 1950s, the White Mountain Apache, the 
Bureau of Fisheries, and the BIA all expressed concerns about the fate of the Apache trout as early as 
the mid 1930s; yet an ironic twist laid the groundwork for the recovery of the Apache trout. The CCC-
ID constructed a federal fish hatchery for the purpose of restocking non-natives to the streams of the 
White Mountains.6 Ultimately this hatchery became the propagating grounds for the endangered Apache 
trout, but not until the 1980s.  Before telling this story, I need to delve into the complex history of the 
Apache trout‟s near extinction.   
 
The Decline of a Native Species - The Apache trout populations flourished at the end of the nineteenth 
century, inhabiting 800 miles of streams at elevations above 1800 meters in the White Mountains. These 
                                                 
6 I consider fish cultures a form of restoration. Not a form of restoration recognizable perhaps by today‟s 
standards, but a technique for restoring or renewing human created environments such as the recreational streams 
of Fort Apache. This form of restoration is what Marcus Hall would call maintenance gardening. Hall, Earth 
Repair. For the general rationale of early twentieth century fish hatcheries, see Taylor, Making Salmon, p. 78. 

 
 
 
 
138 
 
streams constitute the headwaters of two major watersheds: the Little Colorado River to the north and 
the Salt River to the southwest.7 In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the Apache trout was 
popular among fishers venturing into the wilderness of the White Mountains. With the construction of 
the railroad through the highlands from Albuquerque to Flagstaff came sportsmen and tourists looking 
for adventure and plentiful fish and game. The White Mountains‟ remoteness provided all three.  
As early as 1876, fishing enthusiasts advertised in Arizona newspapers that the Apache trout, then 
known as the speckled mountain trout, afforded “rare sport to followers and devotees of Izaak Walton.”8 
In 1910, on an expedition into the White Mountains for the Boone and Crockett Club, Dillon Wallace 
declared, “This, [sic] indeed is one of the most attractive regions for the sportsmen in the United States. 
An ample open season is offered, and for deer and turkey hunting it is unsurpassed, while every stream 
of the White Mountains is abundantly stocked with trout. The fish are comparatively small, to be sure, 
but they are plentiful enough to satisfy the most ambitious angler.”9 E.C Becker, an early twentieth 
century resident of Springerville, a town just northeast of the Fort Apache Reservation boundary, 
reminisced in 1939 about his younger days exploring the streams of the White Mountains: “I personally 
remember that from 1898 to 1916 the fish were so plentiful that it was no trick for a boy to catch 100 in 
a few hours or 200 in a full afternoon. These fish were all of one kind; „Yellow Bellies‟ [Apache trout] 
we called them. The Apache Indians did not eat fish and did not catch them. A superstition concerning 
them saved them for the white man.”10  
                                                 
7 United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Draft Apache Trout Recovery Plan, Second Revision (Albuquerque, 
NM, 2007), p. 5. See also John N. Rinne, “Variation in Apache trout populations in the White Mountains, 
Arizona,” North American Journal of Fisheries Management 5 (1985): 1465-1468.  
8 Quoted in Brown, “Fishing for Speckled Mountain Beauties,” p. 12. 
9 Ibid., pp. 16-17. 
10 E.C. Becker to Carl L. Hobbs, June 30, 1939. The entire letter reprinted in the Appendix of Robert R. Miller, 
“Classification of the Native Trouts of Arizona with the Description of a New Species, Salmo apache,” Copeia 
(September 8, 1972): 401- 422, p. 421. 

 
 
 
 
139 
 
Until 1917, the Apache trout remained the only resident trout in the White Mountain streams. During 
the first three decades of the century, however, Euro-American fishers, many of whom were lumbermen 
working for timber companies operating on Fort Apache, quickly overexploited the Apache trout, 
causing the near extirpation of the native trout population early in the 1900s.11 By the twentieth century, 
artificial propagation of fish populations was the “natural” solution to such a problem. To facilitate this 
process, fish culturists had settled on a standard set of species for the continuous renewal of sportfish 
populations. As a consequence, native fish species, like native people, gave way to economic progress 
and efficiency.12 The aquaculture movement, which began in the 1850s in the United States, came late to 
Arizona. Nonetheless, the movement, guided by the latent philosophy of “manifest destiny,” replicated 
its accomplishments in other regions of the United States and replaced native aquatic species with more 
economically viable and ecologically pliable non-native species. Historian Darin Kinsey observed that 
in the eastern United States the aquaculture movement turned “seemingly natural places where 
commercial fishermen, angling tourists, and average citizens came to fish … [into] hybrid ecosystems – 
part ecology and part human artifice.”13 This was no less true for the Southwest by the 1920s. Following 
the path of federal and state agencies that sought to enhance the recreational qualities and economic 
potential of other regions of America, the fledgling state of Arizona constructed its first fish hatchery 
just outside of Springerville in 1922.14  
                                                 
11 “Council of Fort Apache Indians at White River, Arizona,” March 5, 1934, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 339, 
File #18-34, Box #63. 
12 Taylor, Making Salmon; Darin Kinsey, “„Seeding the Water as the Earth‟: The Center and Periphery of a 
Western Aquaculture Revolution,” Environmental History 11 (2006): 527-566; Robert R. Stickney, Aquaculture 
in the United States: A Historical Survey (New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  1996); Jerry Frank, “Fishing 
for Tourists: Greenbacks, Cutthroats, and Remaking the Aquatic World of Rocky Mountain National Park, 1860-
1936,” Paper given at the American Society for Environmental History, 2008.  
13 Kinsey, “‟Seeding the Water as the Earth,‟” p. 553. 
14 John H. Rinne, Larry Riley, Rob Bettaso, Roger Sorenson, and Kirk Young, “Managing Southwestern Native 
and Nonnative Fishes: Can We Mix Oil and Water and Expect a Favorable Solution?” American Fisheries Society 
Symposium 44 (2004): 445-466, p. 453. 

 
 
 
 
140 
 
Shortly thereafter, Euro-American fish culturists began restocking White Mountain streams with 
non-native species: eastern brook trout, rainbow trout, Yellowstone cutthroat, and later brown trout (loch 
leven).15 Until the mid-1930s, the state only restocked off-reservation streams. However, the introduced 
fish didn‟t recognize arbitrary human boundaries and migrated into the reservation. These introductions 
impacted the already depleted native Apache trout in two ways. First, the closely related rainbow trout 
hybridized with Apache trout populations, thus genetically swamping out and contaminating a large 
proportion of the remaining pure populations. Second, larger non-native species out-competed the 
smaller Apache trout for limited food sources, pushing the native out of their preferred habitat - places 
where the stream undercut the bank, leaving a small shelf that hid individuals from predators.16 On top 
of fishing pressure and restocking programs, a growing regional economy had consequences for the 
struggling Apache trout. Increased livestock grazing, timber harvests, road building, water diversions, 
and reservoir construction contributed to stream bank erosion and altered stream flow and volume, all 
compromising Apache trout habitat.17  
The fate of the Apache trout took a turn for the better in the early 1930s. Because the state hatcheries 
couldn‟t keep up with the increasing demand for sportsfish, several political sectors in Arizona began 
calling for the establishment of a federal hatchery on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation.  Although the 
primary focus for establishing a hatchery on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation initially had little to do 
with restoring the Apache trout, eventually it would. In the meantime, the Arizona Game and Fish 
Commission (AGFC), the BIA, the White Mountain Apache, and the Bureau of Fisheries all clamored 
                                                 
15 Miller, “Classification of the Native Trouts of Arizona,” p. 408. 
16 John N. Rinne and W.L. Minckley, “Patterns of Variation and Distribution in Apache Trout (Salmo apache) 
Relative to Co-occurrence with Introduced Salmonids,” Copeia (1985): 285-292. 
17 USFWS, Draft Apache Trout Recovery Plan, p. 1. 

 
 
 
 
141 
 
for federal funds to build a hatchery. The AGFC and Bureau of Fisheries even conducted a series of 
preliminary studies that suggested Fort Apache was the best site for the hatchery.18  
As each of these agencies pushed for a hatchery throughout the mid to late 1930s, a number of 
AGFC biologists, and later M.C. James of the Bureau of Fisheries, proposed that the construction of the 
hatchery occur at the head of Williams Creek, located on the north central edge of the reservation. At an 
elevation of 7500 feet, fisheries biologists deemed Williams Creek an optimal spot for rearing fish stock 
due to its relatively large size, constant flow, and uniform daily temperature fluctuations. Fort Apache 
also contained one of the few remaining populations of the Arizona native trout. In addition, the location 
of Williams Creek was appealing, running approximately half a mile from the Rice-Springerville 
Highway, now state route 73, and four miles from McNary, an upstart lumber town (Fig. 7).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
18 M.J. Madsen, A Biological Survey of Streams and Lakes of Fort Apache and San Carlos Indian Reservations, 
Arizona (Washington, D.C.: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Fisheries, May, 1935); C.R. Foster, “Report on 
Williams Creek Hatchery Site, Fort Apache Indian Reservation, Arizona,” December 5, 1938, RG 75 FAIR, 
CCC-ID, Dec. 931, File #58631-36, Box #53. 
Fig. 7 – Williams Creek prior to construction of the hatchery in 1939 (Courtesy of National Archives). 

 
 
 
 
142 
 
Justifying a Hatchery - Diverse political and social motivations drove the various advocates for the 
hatchery. Arizona‟s interest in a federal fish hatchery was clear. State hatcheries lacked the capacity to 
stock the abundance of high elevation fishing streams found in Arizona. In the 1930s, the state‟s 
growing population resulted in an increased demand for recreational fishing, which was becoming an 
important aspect of the state‟s tourist economy. However, the BIA‟s motivation for building the 
hatchery wasn‟t as straight forward.  
On the surface, Superintendent Donner‟s proposal for a hatchery mirrored the AGFC‟s proposal. He 
admitted a lack of regulation of non-Indian fishers and poor management of reservation streams prior to 
the Indian New Deal led to the depletion of native trout and non-native trout species. Due to this past 
neglect, Donner claimed Fort Apache needed a hatchery to restore and maintain a stock of “mountain 
trout” within reservation streams. However, a 1935 letter from Donner to John Collier reveals another 
motive for establishing a hatchery on the reservation.  
We have at various times considered the advisability of closing the reservation to fishing, but 
because… of the protest that the representatives of this state would be compelled to make, to 
satisfy their constituents, would be so extensive that in the interest of harmony we would 
probably not be able to close the reservation. We, therefore, consider it advisable to keep the 
mountain streams stocked and permit trout fishing through regulation.19 
 
External political pressure from the state, therefore, clearly drove the BIA to request a federal hatchery.  
Donner also saw the hatchery as an opportunity to improve the economic conditions on the 
reservation. With the proposed hatchery began a push to turn Fort Apache into a “recreative 
playground.” In 1935, fishing permits generated $3000 in revenue for the Tribe. In the same letter where 
Donner admitted state pressure drove the need for a hatchery, he went on to offer that Fort Apache was 
recreationally superior to the Grand Canyon, “because in addition to its primeval forests, mountains and 
canyons, it contains the necessary trout streams which are lacking in other sections of the Southwest.” 
                                                 
19 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, February 18, 1935, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-30, Dec. 338, 
File #3501-35, Box #53. 

 
 
 
 
143 
 
Donner also suggested “the Apache Indians themselves, who have not been fish eaters, are annually 
becoming more and more accustomed to the use of fish in their diet and they take advantage of the 
recreative sport in getting the same.”20  
Donner explained that the establishment of a hatchery on the reservation would have indirect 
benefits as well. For instance, the hatchery would aid the restoration of grazing lands. He proposed that 
“wild” horses could serve as a source of feed for fish broods, connecting the hatchery to the BIA‟s wild 
horse removal program to reduce overgrazing on rangelands. Euro-American ranchers leasing 
reservation lands had persistently implicated the estimated 7,000 to 11,000 head of wild horses in 
contributing to the poor quality of range on Fort Apache. Donner perceived the hatchery as a way to 
persuade Apaches to sell their horses, thus reducing the number on the range.21 
The White Mountain Apache, for their part, also outlined the benefits they would derive from a 
hatchery on the reservation. In a letter to John Collier dated February 15, 1935, the Tribal Council (not 
under “official” IRA constitution yet) stated: 22  
We are favorable to granting for an indefinite period the use of the location desired by the 
Federal Bureau of Fisheries on condition that a reasonable effort will be made to keep all streams 
on the reservation well stocked with mountain trout; that insofar as possible Indians of this 
reservation be favored with such labor as they can perform at commercial wages; that in the 
purchase of worthless ponies the Hatchery give Indians preference in supplying the same. 23  
 
Chief Baha (Alchesay), John Ethelbah (Chief, Carrizo District), Charley Shipp (Chief, Canyon Day 
District), Yahit Kane (Chief, Cedear Creek District), John Bigelow, Isaac Gaas (Chief, Turkey Creek 
District), Floyd Toggy (Chief, Eastfork Distric), Jack Keyes (Chief, Eastfork District), John Taylay 
                                                 
20 Ibid. 
21 Ibid. 
22 This was an important distinction at the time. One way the BIA applied pressure to tribal governments to accept 
IRA constitutions was to ignore or discount tribal council wishes until they developed a constitution, especially 
when a tribe‟s request countered BIA goals. See Kenneth R. Philp, John Collier’s Crusade for Indian Reform 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1977). 
23 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, February 15, 1935, RG 75 FAIR, 
CCF 07-39, Dec. 338, File #3501-35, Box #53. 

 
 
 
 
144 
 
(Chief, Cibecue District), and Will Lupe (Chief, Oak Creek District) either signed or put their mark 
(thumb print) on this letter. In 1937, testing the dimensions of their newly instituted self-governance 
under IRA, the Tribal Council took another bold step towards affirming their desire for a hatchery. 
When the North Fork timber unit went up for sale, the Tribal Council requested the designation of 
several hundred acres of land around Williams Creek for Indian use. In essence, the Tribe sacrificed 
potential revenue from timber to ensure that the land necessary for building a hatchery remained 
available in the future. Superintendent Donner and Forest Supervisor Moffat both agreed with the 
Tribe‟s proposal, which in turn led to the Secretary of Interior authorizing the proposal.24  
Even though Superintendent Donner aggressively pursued the establishment of the hatchery on the 
Apache‟s behalf, the Tribe wanted to make sure that their interests weren‟t overlooked. Increasingly 
during the Indian New Deal and in later years, the Tribe began corresponding directly with officials in 
Washington D.C., asserting their wishes for land use on the reservation. These subtle actions were early 
marks of tribal autonomy. Despite the Council‟s emerging political determination, the letter to Collier 
and the decision to set aside land for the hatchery certainly bore the mark of the BIA. Both Donner and 
Moffat previously advised the Council on the economic benefits of the hatchery. They convinced the 
Council that fishing license fees, potential labor, and wild horse removal would generate desperately 
needed revenue for the Tribe. Furthermore, the congruence between BIA and Apache goals most 
certainly facilitated the authorization to set aside land for the hatchery. Nonetheless, the Tribe went out 
of their way to articulate what they wanted from the hatchery. The fact that they sent the letter and asked 
to have land designated for the hatchery illustrated the importance of the project to the Tribe – not only 
                                                 
24 “Minutes of the Fort Apache Tribal Council on the Proposed North Fork Unit,” RG 75 FAIR; see also Veronica 
E. Tiller and Arthur R. Gómez, Fort Apache Forestry: A History of Timber Management and Forest Protection 
on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation, 1870-1985 (Washington, DC: Bureau of Indian Affairs, 1990), p. 56.  

 
 
 
 
145 
 
as a source of revenue, but as a form of subsistence among younger tribal members.25 Such political 
volition became more independent of BIA influence and commonplace in the years to come.  
 
The Political Fight for the Hatchery - In the mid 1930s, Senator Carl Hayden of Arizona, on behalf of 
the AGFC and the White Mountain Apache, pushed the first effort to fund the hatchery through 
Congress. Hayden ostensibly advocated for federal projects on the reservation for the next 30 years. He 
would eventually bring federal dollars to the reservation for a massive juniper eradication program, 
which was essentially a water development project, in the 1950s and the construction of a second 
hatchery on the reservation in the 1960s. In general, he was politically savvy at using Native American 
tribes in Arizona to justify federal funds for projects that benefitted non-Indian populations more than 
Indians.26 This was certainly the case in the 1950s with the controversial Corduroy Creek and Cibecue 
Creek Watershed projects on Fort Apache, which in the guise of range restoration diverted water off-
reservation. Doubtless, the same motivation drove Hayden to sponsor S. 813, which sought to benefit 
Arizona fishers at the expense of the federal government and Native Americans. 
Nonetheless, Hayden introduced S. 813 in 1935 “to provide for a five-year construction and 
maintenance program for the United States Bureau of Fisheries.” The bill sought to authorize the 
Secretary of Commerce to construct a “fish cultural station” in Arizona and to appropriate $60,000 to 
carry out the project.27  Hayden produced several versions of the bill, most of which never made it 
through Congress, despite the popularity of conservation measures during the New Deal era. In the fall 
of 1938, a version of the bill actually landed on President Roosevelt‟s desk; however, Roosevelt vetoed 
                                                 
25 “Minutes of the Council Called for Approval of the Horse Mesa Timber Unit,” May 19, 1937, RG 75 FAIR, 
CCF 07-39, Dec. 339, File # 10157-36, Box #63. 
26 Jack L. August, Jr., Vision in the Desert: Carl Hayden and Hydropolitics in the American Southwest (Forth 
Worth, TX: Texas Christian University Press, 1999), p. 60. 
27 William Zimmerman to William Donner, February 8, 1935, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 338, File #3501-35, 
Box #53. 

 
 
 
 
146 
 
it.28 President Roosevelt‟s office advised the Secretary of Commerce “that this proposed legislation 
would not be in accord with the financial program of the President.”29 Since Roosevelt was a 
conservation-minded president, it is not clear why he vetoed the bill. Two factors might have 
contributed to his decision. First, a great deal of political tension existed between the federal government 
and the state of Arizona over water development issues associated with the Colorado River. Arizona, 
driven by its hardcore state‟s rights Governor Moeur, refused to sign the Colorado Compact with the 
five other states appropriating water from the Colorado River, effectively hindering federal reclamation 
projects along the river. By vetoing the bill, Roosevelt may have been “punishing” Arizona for its lack 
of cooperation.30 Second, on a more mundane note, Roosevelt simply may have rather had conservation 
work such as the construction of a fish hatchery funneled through the CCC than the Bureau of Fisheries. 
And indeed, the CCC-ID eventually funded the project.  
Despite this legislative setback, Donner and the White Mountain Apache persisted in their quest to 
establish a federal fish hatchery on Fort Apache. As it became apparent that receiving funds from 
Congress was a long shot, Donner turned to Collier and requested CCC-ID funds to construct it. In July 
of 1937, he reiterated to Collier earlier arguments for the merits of establishing a federal fish hatchery on 
the reservation.31 Again, he billed the hatchery as a centerpiece for the development of a recreational 
program that would generate sorely needed revenue for the reservation population – in essence, it 
“would initiate a stream and fish development program on this Reservation which would result in the 
                                                 
28 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, December 27, 1938, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 931, 
File #58631-36, Box #97. 
29 D.W. Bell to Secretary of Interior, April 15, 1935, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 338, File #3501-35,  Box 
#53. 
30 August, Jr., Vision in the Desert, pp. 142-148. 
31 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, July 20, 1937, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 931, Box 
#88. 

 
 
 
 
147 
 
most desirable recreational area in the Southwest.”32 The overarching reason for the hatchery, however, 
was to reduce the State‟s role in restocking reservation streams. Donner reported to Collier that “this 
State does not have sufficient fish hatcheries to stock them fully and there is not a Government fish 
hatchery in Arizona. Since the area is heavily fished the streams are always understocked [sic]; in spite 
of the excellent cooperation from the State and the large areas reserved from fishing on headwaters of 
our streams.”33  
While Donner continued attempts to secure funds for the hatchery, reservation streams remained 
vulnerable to overfishing. Demand for game fish was on the rise. As a stop gap measure, Donner 
requested 500,000 brown trout from the state hatchery at Pinetop, Arizona, for restocking reservation 
streams. The Pinetop hatchery agreed to rear the fish so long as the Bureau of Fisheries supplied the 
eggs for free. The Bureau of Fisheries complied and collected the requested stock from wild fish 
populations in Montana.34 Until the BIA obtained funds for the hatchery, the BIA, AGFC, the Bureau of 
Fisheries, and the White Mountain Apache cooperatively worked together to restock reservation 
streams. The state hatchery at Pinetop continued to serve in this capacity until the Williams Creek 
Hatchery opened for operations in 1941. However, at times, the state hatchery had difficulty producing 
enough fish to stock both state and reservation streams. 
The tenuous agreement between the state and the BIA led to worries among reservation personnel 
that the state someday might have to make a choice between supplying its streams or reservation 
streams.  Fred Moffat wrote in the 1938 Annual Report for Fort Apache that “Altho we have splendid 
cooperation from the Hatchery at Pinetop, it is only natural that the interest of the State Fish and game 
                                                 
32 Fred Moffat, “Narrative Section: Annual Report, Fiscal Year 1938, Fort Apache Indian Reservation,” RG 75 
FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 031, File #54158-38, Box #2, p. 5. 
33 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, July 20, 1937, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 931, Box 
#88. 
34 Charles E. Jackson to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, August 21, 1937, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 931, 
Box #88. 

 
 
 
 
148 
 
[sic] Commission and Arizona sportsmen is centered in State rather than Reservation streams. We 
cannot expect increased help from the State Hatchery toward stocking of our streams.”35 Even though 
the state was willing to help, they had limits. They claimed they couldn‟t both adequately restock 
reservation streams, which technically weren‟t in their jurisdiction, and state streams on a long-term 
basis. Accordingly, the AGFC placed pressure on the BIA to find a way to fund a federal hatchery. 
Indeed, included in Moffat‟s rationale for the hatchery was to “eliminate our present insecure 
dependence on the State Hatchery” and also “preclude the possibility of criticism by Arizona officials 
and residents toward stocking of Reservation streams by an agency [AGFC] which is not equipped to 
care fully for State streams.”36 From the states end, A.W. Yoder of the AGFC continued to assert the 
need for a federal hatchery, maintaining that Fort Apache was the ideal location because the reservation 
“comprise[d] one third of the trout water of our state.”37  
Even before Collier approved CCC-ID construction funds, Donner began working with the Bureau 
of Fisheries to develop plans for the hatchery. As late as June of 1938, Donner received word from the 
Central Office that the project had not been approved because a “[f]inal decision has not been reached as 
to location nor is it know [sic] definitely that construction can begin the present year.”38 Donner 
reminded the Central Office that both Bureau of Fisheries and AGFC personnel already deemed 
Williams Creek a suitable site for a hatchery. He also asserted that, if funded, construction could begin 
as early as spring of 1939. Despite previous setbacks, Donner must have had reason to believe he could 
eventually convince Collier to fund the project. He corresponded with the Bureau of Fisheries and began 
arrangements for the construction of the hatchery. By February of 1939, Charles E. Jackson, Acting 
Commissioner of the Bureau of Fisheries, dispatched M.C. James, Assistant Chief of the Division of 
                                                 
35 Fred Moffat, “Narrative Section: Annual Report,” p. 5. 
36 Ibid., p. 5. 
37 A.W. Yoder to Bureau of Fisheries, September 15, 1937, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 931, Box #88. 
38 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, December 27, 1938, RG 75 FAIR, CCC-ID, Dec. 931, File 
#58631-36, Box #97. 

 
 
 
 
149 
 
Fish Culture, for another inspection of Williams Creek. In a letter dated March 4, 1939 Jackson 
informed Donner that Williams Creek “meets with the approval of the Bureau of Fisheries…As soon as 
practicable, we will forward to you blueprints of the hatchery building, a dwelling, rearing ponds, water 
supply intake, and other details which may serve as a basis for the preparation of detailed plans by your 
engineers.”39 
In the same letter, Jackson also suggested that the Bureau of Fisheries and the BIA draw up a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) outlining each agency‟s responsibility in the project. 
Essentially, the BIA agreed to supply “the entire funds for material and labor necessary for the 
construction of the hatchery.” For their part, the Bureau of Fisheries offered the services of a technical 
assistant to draw plans for the hatchery and oversee the construction.40 Donner passed a draft of the 
MOU on to the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council, now ruling under an IRA Constitution and 
ostensibly viewed as a legitimate government in the eyes of the Department of Interior, for their 
approval. Having already expressed an interest in a hatchery in the past, the Tribal Council, now 
consisting of Chief Baha, Roe Clark, Silas Tenijieth, Purcell Kane, James Dehose, Hinkey Tosca, Lester 
Oliver, and Laurence Johnson, approved the MOU on March 31 with the understanding that “the 
construction of [the] hatchery [is] for the benefit of the reservation.”41   
Before the Tribal Council granted formal approval of the MOU, Donner and Jackson 
presumptuously proceeded to prepare for the construction of the hatchery. On March 10 Jackson mailed 
a preliminary draft of the hatchery plan to Donner. Subsequently Donner relayed this plan and a labor 
cost proposal to the Central Office on March 15. Pressuring Collier, Donner explained, “We are very 
anxious to start preliminary work on the hatchery site at the earliest possible moment. This proposed 
                                                 
39 Charles E. Jackson to William Donner, March 4, 1939, RG 75 FAIR, CCC-ID, Dec. 931, File #58631-36, Box 
#97. 
40 Memorandum of Understanding: Fish Hatchery Development – Williams Creek, Arizona (Fort Apache Indian 
Reservation), April 21, 1939, RG 75 FAIR, CCC-ID, Dec. 931, File #58631-36, Box #97. 
41 Approval of Agreement, March 31, 1939, RG 75 FAIR, CCC-ID, Dec. 931, File #58631-36, Box #97. 

 
 
 
 
150 
 
project is not only an important one for improvement of our stream life, but also, in the preliminary 
stages, almost 100% hand labor [CCC-ID enrollees] which we are depending on to assist us… It is also 
a fact that our two best working months are May and June, when summer rains are not the interfering 
factor they become later on.”42 In other words, the project would not only supply conservation benefits, 
but educational opportunities to Native American enrollees. After rejecting several overtures from 
Donner in the past year, Collier must have been impressed with Donner‟s latest bureaucratic assault. On 
April 19, 1939 Collier allocated $10,000 to begin work on the Williams Creek Fish Hatchery. Two days 
later the BIA and Bureau of Fisheries signed off on the Memorandum of Understanding.  
 
Building a Hatchery, Expertise, and Fish Populations - CCC-ID enrollee labor built the hatchery with 
Bureau of Fisheries (soon to be the Fish and Wildlife Service) personnel supplying technical assistance. 
A crew of approximately 40 men – Apaches, members of several other Native American tribes, and a 
technical supervisor from the Bureau of Fisheries - began work on April 24, 1939. On this first day, the 
crew cleared the area for the hatchery and cleaned out a brooding pond site (Fig. 8).43 
Initially, on top of tasks that required minimal skill such as clearing brush and digging brooding 
ponds, White Mountain Apache enrollees received on-the-job training in three primary disciplines: 
carpentry, concrete work, and fishery management. The carpenters built fishing troughs for the hatchery 
building, rearing ponds, residence quarters, and a garage; the cement workers constructed Foster Lucas 
rearing ponds and dams; and the fisheries workers learned how to raise the brood stock of various  
 
 
                                                 
42 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, March 15, 1939, RG 75 FAIR, CCC-ID, Dec. 931, File 
#58631-36, Box #97. 
43 Charles E. Jackson to William Donner, April 25, 1939; William Donner to Jackson, April 19, 1939, RG 75 
FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 931, Box #88. 

 
 
 
 
151 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 – Rearing ponds at Williams Creek Fish Hatchery in 1941 (Courtesy of the 
National Archives). 

 
 
 
 
152 
 
species of trout.44 Once the hatchery was on line, training opportunities diversified. Not only did several 
Apaches receive training in fish culturing, but also instruction in technical skills such as stream 
restoration, stream restocking, construction of “natural” rearing ponds, and hatchery equipment 
maintenance. Eventually, once Congress terminated the CCC-ID program, the hatchery permanently 
employed “[t]hree boys…to assist in keeping ponds clean. They also butcher horses, feed fish, and 
various other required duties to keep up the hatchery.”45 
The White Mountain Apache CCC-ID workers, the BIA, the Bureau of Fisheries (now part of the 
Fish and Wildlife Service) had the hatchery operating within two years. From 1940 to 1941 CCC-ID 
labor completed six large cement rearing ponds, capable of holding 12,000 fish each of six inches or less 
in size, and “several natural rearing ponds.” The enrollees worked hard to complete these tasks during 
the spring before the heavy rains of summer made work more difficult. W.B. McMillan, regional 
assistant CCC-ID camp supervisor from the Phoenix regional office, noted, “On days when the crew is 
pouring concrete in one of the rearing pond forms at the hatchery it keeps the entire kitchen crew very 
busy feeding them, as they work two shifts in order to complete each pond in a day.”46 During this same 
time frame, they also built a Girl Scout camp and began work on a truck trail from the hatchery to state 
route 73.  
Early restocking activities focused on non-native species. By June 15th of 1941 enrollees planted the 
first 700,000 rainbow and brown trout in reservation streams, with another 500,000 eggs and small fish 
                                                 
44 “Enrollee Program, Fort Apache Indian Reservation, 1940-1941,” RG 75 FAIR, Records Concerning Enrollee 
Program, Dec. 346, File# 31355-38, Box #9. 
45 Fred R. Moffat to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Monthly CCC-ID Progress Report, June 1942, RG 75 FAIR, 
CCC-ID, File #032, Box #92. 
46 W.B. MacMillan to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, August 2, 1941, RG 75 FAIR, Records Concerning 
Enrollee Program, Dec. 346, File# 31355-38, Box #9. 

 
 
 
 
153 
 
waiting in the hatchery troughs for dispersal.47 Over the next three years, the Fish and Wildlife Service 
(FWS), the Tribe, and the BIA planted almost two million non-native individuals (brown, rainbow, 
black spotted, and brook trout).48 At the time, FWS biologists also tentatively planned to rear Arizona 
native (Apache) trout at the hatchery – several hundred individuals “were caught in headwater streams 
[of Mount Baldy] for use as brood stock in the fish hatchery.” In the 1941 Annual Report on Fort 
Apache Indian Reservation, Fred Moffat claimed, “It is planned to have our hatchery specialize in the 
hatching of Arizona Natives. This is the original type in our Mountain [sic] streams and the most 
desirable from any viewpoint; the gamest [sic], best acclimated and most edible.”49 Furthermore, 
hatchery officials had begun to make arrangements with the AGFC and the Forest Service to restock 
state and national forest streams. Even though FWS personnel made several overtures to the restoration 
of the Apache trout in the early 1940s, annual restocking reports show no evidence that they carried 
through with these plans. In the 1940s, the FWS - with the aid of the BIA and White Mountain Apache - 
restocked reservation streams with large numbers of rainbow trout and moderate numbers of German 
brown trout. According to official wildlife reports, no agency restocked streams with Arizona natives 
until the 1960s.50  
 Why the early plans to restock reservation streams with Apache trout never came to fruition isn‟t 
entirely clear. However, the BIA and FWS‟s economic goals for the hatchery probably contributed to 
the failure to use the hatchery for the rehabilitation of Arizona native trout populations. In essence, plans 
for restoring the Apache trout were lost in the shuffle of turning the hatchery into a centerpiece for 
                                                 
47 “Proposed CCC-ID Program for Fiscal Year 1943,” June 30, 1942, RG 75 FAIR, CCC-ID, Box #95; Fred 
Moffat, Narrative Section: Annual Report, Fiscal Year 1941, Fort Apache Indian Reservation, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 
40-56, Dec. 31, File #55302-41, Box #1. 
48 Clarence M. Aldous, “Fort Apache Investigations, November 27-29, 1944,” RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 
931, File #4561, Box #45. 
49 “Proposed CCC-ID Program for Fiscal Year 1943,” p. 8. 
50 Annual Forestry and Grazing Reports, Fort Apache, 1946-1959, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 31, Box #2; 
Agency Annual Reports: Branch of Land Operations Range and Wildlife Management, 1960 – 1969, RG 75 
FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 31, Box #‟s 1-3. 

 
 
 
 
154 
 
recreational activities. The Tribe, on the other hand, expressed concern for declining fish populations in 
general. As early as 1934, the Tribal Council considered closing streams to outside fishers because they 
felt non-Indians overfished streams, decreasing the availability of fish to the increasing number of young 
Apaches taking an interest in fishing. Superintendent Donner advised the Tribe against this action, 
however, because he feared that it would cut off a source of growing tribal revenue.  Again, the year 
before the hatchery went into production the Tribal Council discussed the possibility of closing streams. 
This time Donner convinced the Council that the hatchery would soon produce “a great many fish to 
stock the streams,” including Arizona natives.51 According to the records, the Tribe took no action to 
close streams at this time. Apparently the BIA discouraged any such action because they didn‟t want to 
reduce the recreational potential of the reservation. 
Once the hatchery went into production, Donner, Moffat, and FWS personnel took every opportunity 
to promote the recreational potential of the hatchery. For instance, in a 1941 inspection report of the 
hatchery completed for the Commissioner‟s office, Randolph Hellwig, an assistant forester stationed at 
Fort Apache, suggested that Williams Creek Hatchery was quite amenable to day visitors: “Considerable 
thought should be given to the establishment of picnic grounds. The public will be attracted to this 
inviting area and would hardly attempt the long drive without planning on a picnic lunch. No doubt, 
there are many who will camp out near this site.”52 Statements such as this were very common in CCC-
ID reports in the late 1930s and early 1940s. In general, by the 1940s, the CCC-ID shifted their goals on 
Fort Apache. In the first seven years of the program, very few projects had a primary emphasis on 
recreational development, whereas in the last few years of the program, many CCC-ID activities focused 
on conservation and development of resources for the sake of attracting tourists. While the BIA still 
                                                 
51 “Special Meeting, White Mountain Apache Tribal Council,” May 17, 1941, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 
339, File #32406-41, Box #25. 
52 Randolph W. Hellwig to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, August 21, 1941, RG 75 FAIR, Records Concerning 
Enrollee Program, Dec. 346, File# 31355-38, Box #9. 

 
 
 
 
155 
 
considered the restoration of timber and range lands a priority, increasing numbers of projects centered 
efforts on protecting resources that would enhance the recreational potential of Fort Apache. BIA policy 
also shifted in terms of promoting timber exploitation on the reservation. In rare instances land managers 
considered the bigger picture, especially when timber extraction or cattle grazing might impact the 
aesthetics of recreational hotspots on the reservation. Toward the end of the Indian New Deal, leaving 
“scenic strips” along streams, roads, and in areas with recreational potential became BIA policy on Fort 
Apache, even, in some cases, against the wishes of the Apache.53  
The FWS‟s and the BIA‟s focus on developing recreational infrastructure on the reservation left little 
time and resources for doing the research required to develop new techniques for rearing a trout species 
that fish culturists never artificially propagated before.54 The immediate concern became restocking 
streams for the growing number of fishermen exploiting the wilderness environment of Fort Apache. 
                                                 
53 William H. Zeh to J.D. Lamont, June 20, 1941; William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, May 21, 
1941, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 339, File #32406-41, Box #25; See also RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 
339, File #10157-36, Box #63 and CCF 40-56, Dec. 339, File #32406-41, Box #25. 
54 The FWS‟s interest in the Apache trout reflected a shift in federal wildlife policy away from a singular focus on 
the management of game species. Influences from the field of ecology began to trickle into the federal agencies as 
a new generation of personnel began to replace the Progressive Era efficiency experts. For instance, more nuanced 
understandings of predator/prey dynamics guided decisions on predator eradication programs. In the first twenty 
years of the twentieth century all predators were bad. They competed with big game hunters for valuable game. 
The Bureau of Biological Survey eliminated predators in the name of efficiency so as to maintain game 
populations at a sustained yield level for hunters. When game populations began to outstrip the food resource base 
of their habitats, game managers witnessed a severe decline in game species. These early twentieth century 
“natural” experiments revealed that predators played an important regulatory role in animal communities. This 
wisdom began to play itself out in the 1930s. Predator control programs continued, but the realization that the 
indiscriminate killing of predators was detrimental to sustaining healthy animal communities and that non-game 
species were important to the maintenance of communities began filtering into federal policy (See File #s 53608 
and 20324 in RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, Box #45 for detail of this shift in BIA and FWS. For instance, 
these files mention the work of Adolph Murie, prominent in influencing FWS‟s view on predator control, on the 
San Carlos Apache Reservation. Murie‟s work angered Donner.). Hence forth, the BIA and FWS administered 
predator control programs with a measure of caution and in the case of FAIR, only nuisance animals were killed – 
predators that threatened livestock. This sort of mentality led to interest in species such as the Apache trout. But 
this interest was fickle and didn‟t necessarily lead to a commitment to saving a species. In the end, the FWS‟s 
interest in the Apache trout was probably linked to utilitarian concerns rather than a new policy that considered 
rare, endemic species. Nonetheless, the FWS‟s interest in the Apache trout demonstrated a growing interest in 
non-game species. Thomas R. Dunlap, Saving America’s Wildlife: Ecology and the American Mind, 1850-1990 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988), pp. 79-83; Timothy J. Farnham, Saving Nature's Legacy: 
Origins of the Idea of Biological Diversity (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007), pp. 61-80. 

 
 
 
 
156 
 
Fortunately, the establishment of Mount Thomas roadless area helped protect, even if unintentionally, 
the headwaters where the last remaining pure breeding populations of Apache trout persisted until the 
Apache directed more attention toward them in the 1950s. 
 
 
Shaping the Fort Apache Landscape as a Euro-American Recreational Playground 
In the early 1940s, the BIA intensified plans to divert ecological restoration and conservation 
measures to turn Fort Apache into a “recreative playground” for non-Indians. BIA officials realized that 
the land they held in trust for the White Mountain Apache amounted to a diamond in the rough. Fred 
Moffat proudly claimed, “The White Mountains are one of the few summer vacation areas of Arizona. A 
considerable, and probably the most beautiful portion of these mountains, are contained within the Fort 
Apache Reservation. Clear mountain streams and cienagas in the midst of perfect recreational settings 
provide ideal camping spots. The person who wishes to spend a vacation in mountain solitudes with 
good fishing, a cool climate and satisfying scenery, need not look beyond the White Mountains.” 55  
In the 1930s and 1940s the Apache permitted non-Indians to fish and camp on the reservation, but 
disallowed non-Indian hunting. The BIA, for the time being, focused their efforts on creating improved 
campgrounds and providing ample fishing opportunities to alleviate Apache concerns over the growing 
problem of uncontrolled use of reservation lands. As fisher traffic increased, BIA personnel found 
numerous “dirty campgrounds” scattered randomly throughout the reservation, stream pollution, and a 
“very definite increase in fire hazard.”56 To avoid these problems, Moffat proposed a restriction of 
vacationers to specially located, improved campgrounds. In 1940 the Donner adopted a two-year plan to 
develop a series of “modern campgrounds.”  
                                                 
55 Fred Moffat, “Narrative Section: Annual Report, Fiscal Year 1941, Fort Apache Indian Reservation,” RG 75 
FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 31, File #55302-41, Box #1, pp. 2-3. 
56 Ibid., p.9. 

 
 
 
 
157 
 
Clifford Presnall, a FWS biologist, wrote a report in 1941 titled Suggestions for Wildlife 
Management on the Ft. Apache Indian Reservation. This report detailed an early proposal for turning 
Fort Apache into a recreational haven for non-Indians. Presnall praised the general potential of the 
reservation as a recreational hotspot, and in particular highlighted what he believed were the educational 
and economic benefits of Williams Creek Fish Hatchery to the Apache people: 
It was evident that the area has unusual possibilities, both as regards natural wildlife resources 
and willingness of the Indians to practice genuine [my emphasis] conservation. It was also 
apparent that considerable progress has already been made in developing a fish management 
program, and that with thorough study and zealous application the Reservation can become a 
demonstration area for the entire Indian Service, primarily to show what can be done in 
management of sport fishing. 57  
 
This rhetoric clearly was not new, but Presnall‟s claim was significant because he believed that the 
hatchery program on Fort Apache deserved replication on other reservations. Presnall also suggested 
pushing the boundaries of recreational activities beyond camping and fishing.  
Although the White Mountain Apache and BIA prohibited non-Indian hunting, Presnall felt that 
allowing hunts on a limited permit system would generate more revenue and also help solve predator 
control problems. He surmised that such a system would alleviate problems with non-Indian poachers 
and regulate the increasing numbers of tourists visiting the reservation. On a related note, Fred Moffat 
observed over the past seven years that because of the prohibition against non-Indian hunting on the 
reservation, “wildlife on the Reservation [sic] is abundant, compared to the adjacent country, and we are 
faced with a game protection problem. The temptation to kill wild turkey and to fish on the headwaters 
of our streams is especially inviting and constant patrolling to control such poaching is necessary.”58 
Moffat claimed, however, that by 1941, because of several competent Apache game wardens, poaching 
                                                 
57 Clifford C. Presnall, Suggestions for Wildlife Management on Fort Apache Indian Reservation, August 20, 
1941, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 932, File # 35362, Box #88, p. 24. 
58 Moffat, “Narrative Section,” pp. 7-8. 

 
 
 
 
158 
 
by non-Indians had subsided “to such an extent that it is no longer serious.”59 The reservation even 
became a source of wildlife for game restoration programs taking place in other parts of Arizona. For 
instance in 1940, because of the abundance of turkey on the reservation, the Tribal Council gave 
permission to the FWS to trap turkey for restocking depleted populations elsewhere in the state.60 
Despite the improving wildlife conditions, Presnall recommended, because of the growing 
reservation and state population, that a more structured monitoring system was necessary to maintain the 
bounty of wildlife on the reservation. The first step towards more efficient management of wildlife 
resources required a “thorough survey of all game resources…with emphasis on the ecological factors 
locally affecting game populations, especially turkey and deer.”61 Second, he recommended that the 
Tribal Council and Superintendent Donner work out expanding administration and law enforcement 
concerning game and fish management. Third, the BIA needed to initially provide enough funds to make 
a recreational program self-supporting. Fourth, apply the recreational program as an educational tool to 
teach “genuine conservation to the Indians.” 
For this latter goal, Presnall felt the Williams Creek Hatchery would be particularly useful: “Every 
effort should be made to realize the full value of the fish management program as an educational 
demonstration project. Members of Tribal Councils, Indian Service personnel, and Indian School groups 
should whenever possible be routed to the Williams Creek hatchery when visiting or traveling through 
the Southwest, and no effort should be spared in explaining the operation and benefits of both the 
hatchery and the fish management of the entire Reservation.”62 The BIA had already taken advantage of 
the hatchery for this purpose through CCC-ID training programs and the employment of Apaches as 
                                                 
59 Ibid., p. 1. 
60 Fred R. Moffat, “Report on Wildlife, Fort Apache Indian Reservation,” April 8, 1940, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-
39, Dec. 932, File # 35362, Box #88, p. 5. 
61 Presnall, Suggestions for Wildlife Management on Fort Apache Indian Reservation, p. 24. 
62 Ibid., p. 25. 

 
 
 
 
159 
 
game wardens and fisheries workers. Groups of Native American girls also frequently used the Girl 
Scout camp next to the hatchery and took tours of the facilities (Fig. 9).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In terms of wildlife regulation, Presnall offered up several specific suggestions that the BIA and 
Apache eventually adopted. He recommended increasing recreational services in the form of 
campgrounds monitored by wardens who would collect fees earmarked specifically for wildlife 
conservation. He also suggested a beaver restoration program. This would serve two purposes. First, 
beaver would create natural fish rearing ponds, thus increasing the number of fish available to tourists.  
Second, Apache game wardens could trap surplus beaver for fur, thus generating further revenue for the 
 
Fig. 9 – A group of Apache girls learning “genuine conservation” at Williams 
Creek Fish Hatchery in 1941 (Courtesy of National Archives). 

 
 
 
 
160 
 
tribe. Given the considerable interest from non-Indian game hunters in the increasing elk population, 
Presnall also argued for the creation of a hunting license program. Further, by offering permits to kill 
bear, this program would also alleviate the problem with bears killing reservation cattle. To further 
financially capitalize on the hunting program, Presnall also proposed requiring hunters to acquire a 
reservation license and the accompaniment of a tribal guide. Hunting equipment not already owned by 
the licensed hunter “must be rented from the guide or other Indians.”63 By 1952 when the Tribe 
established the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise, the BIA and the Apache had implemented 
many of these suggestions. 
 
 
A Pathway of Ambivalence toward Eco-cultural Restoration and Modernization 
Despite the potential economic benefits of an emerging recreational thrust to the White Mountain 
Apache, a flip side to this story emerged. The reservation population didn‟t evenly benefit from the 
program and some segments of the population resisted the social, political, ecological, and economic 
changes occurring as a result of inviting more non-Indians onto the reservation. In effect, although the 
development of a recreational program on the reservation would eventually confer an overall benefit to 
the Apache, the path towards this development often furthered cultural disruption and threatened tribal 
sovereignty. In the following pages, I illustrate the socio-politically bivalent nature of modernization and 
eco-cultural restoration that directly resulted from the BIA encouraging non-Indian tourism on the 
reservation.   
 
Cultural Disruption – When the BIA linked Williams Creek Fish Hatchery to the wild horse removal 
program, this action caused frustration and hard feelings among some tribal members. Ownership of 
horses conferred prestige among the White Mountain Apache - the more horses one owned the more 
                                                 
63 Clifford C. Presnall, Suggestions for Wildlife Management on Fort Apache Indian Reservation.   

 
 
 
 
161 
 
prestige. According to BIA officials, whose agenda involved increasing the carrying capacity of grazing 
lands for cattle, most Apache-owned horses consisted of “inferior animals that they neither rode nor 
worked.”64 These herds appeared unkempt and wild. Moreover, the horses competed with cattle for 
limited grazing. In essence, the BIA instituted what current restorationists would call a passive 
restoration program to rehabilitate damaged grazing lands. Passive restorationists remove the 
disturbance, in this case “wild” horses, and subsequently let nature heal itself. Ultimately this action 
alone didn‟t restore grazing lands on the reservation, but it amounted to the BIA‟s first attempt among 
many – all of which were controversial among the Apache.65 Shortly after the initiation of the horse 
removal program, the CCC-ID began an experimental juniper eradication program to restore grazing 
lands and increase water yield.66 The horse removal program created friction between Apache cattlemen, 
Apache horse owners, and the BIA.  
In order to garner support for the removal program, BIA officials exaggerated the extent to which 
wild horses competed with cattle, claiming that as many as 10,000 horses roamed the White Mountains. 
Later, in the 1950s, BIA officials admitted that this was an overestimate and the number was closer to 
4,000 head. Nonetheless, beginning in the 1930s, Superintendent Donner began offering Apaches one 
dollar a head for rounding up and killing “wild” horses. To receive their money, tribal members had to 
bring the tip of the tail as evidence to the Fort Apache Agency office. Once the hatchery was operating, 
                                                 
64 Buskirk, The Western Apache, p. 57. 
65 In the 1950s, the BIA would employ active restoration techniques such as juniper removal, reseeding, and 
prescribed burns. The BIA, Forest Service, and a number of university-based hydrologists and ecologists designed 
this project with two goals in mind: 1) restore grazing land on the reservation, 2) increase water yield to non-
Indians in the Salt River Valley. Ultimately this program, which ran during the 50s and 60s, became the subject of 
hotly contested water rights battle in the 1970s and 1980s.  
66 William L. Schroeder, “History of Juniper Control on Fort Apache Reservation,” Arizona Cattlelog 8 (1953): 
18-25. 

 
 
 
 
162 
 
the BIA provided further monetary incentives for Apaches to round up horses and sell them as fish 
food.67 
Even though the Tribal Council approved the program in 1939, not all Apache agreed with horse 
removal. In 1934 when the program began, Gail Massey, a Tribal Council member, expressed concern 
about Apaches losing too many of their horses:  “A long time ago we paid $80.00 and $90.00 for horses. 
Now after they have increased they have been driven away. This must never happen again. We do not 
want our horses taken away from us. We are using them to round up our cattle.”68 According to Massey, 
the BIA encouraged the eradication of too many horses, which in turn caused eager Apache horse 
wranglers to confuse “wild” horses with work horses. The latter problem apparently wasn‟t uncommon. 
Horses, wild or not, tended to be free range, adding to the confusion of which horses were legitimate 
problems. Eva Watt of Oak Creek remembered an instance when Apache cowboys killed one of her 
stepfather‟s horses for fish food: 
They were killing horses. They were killing wild horses for fish food. Somebody told the 
[Apache] cowboys from Cibecue that there was lots of wild horses at Oak Creek and Chediskai, 
so they came over there looking for them. If they killed one they got paid. When my stepfather 
knew the cowboys were down there, he called to the horses. „Here! Here!‟ They all came down 
the mountain by themselves and stood at the gate. He told them, he said, „They‟re hunting you, 
so don‟t show yourselves out here in the open.‟ He said, „Go to Do‟ Bi Gowa and stay there.‟ So 
they did. They understood. They marched down there and stayed „till all the cowboys were gone. 
See, sometimes they don‟t know if a horse was wild or if it belonged to somebody. That‟s what 
happened to us – they killed one of my stepfather‟s horses.69  
 
The horse eradication program in the 1930s and early 1940s proved mostly unsuccessful. Even 
though the program never removed large numbers of horses, it still frustrated some Apache. Much to the 
                                                 
67 Thomas R. McGuire, Mixed Bloods, Apaches, and Cattle Barons: Documents for a History of the Livestock 
Economy on the White Mountain Reservation, Arizona (Tucson, AZ: Arizona State Museum, Archeological 
Series No. 142, 1980), pp. 175-176. 
68 “Council of Fort Apache Indians at White River, Arizona,” March 5, 1934, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 07-39, Dec. 339, 
File #18-34, Box #63. 
69 Eva Watt, Don’t Let the Sun Step Over You (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2004), p. 188. 

 
 
 
 
163 
 
chagrin of the BIA and Apache cattlemen, many tribal members resisted pleas from the BIA to sell 
surplus horses and continued to keep large herds. In the 1950s, the BIA finally made headway in 
reducing horse numbers on the range; however, this proved only a temporary reprieve. Wild horse 
grazing on and off the reservation continued to periodically aggravate Apache and non-Indian ranchers. 
Even today, non-Indian cattlemen, under pressure from the Forest Service to limit the head of cattle they 
graze on leased lands within Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, complain about “large” numbers of 
wild horses migrating from Fort Apache and degrading the range.70  
 
Threatened Tribal Sovereignty – With modern conservation came modern game and fish regulations – 
many of which the White Mountain Apache weren‟t accustomed to. The Apache, through Article VI of 
their constitution, reserved the right to regulate hunting and fishing on the reservation; however, up until 
1947 failed to mandate any regulations.71 To better protect wildlife on the reservation, the BIA 
persuaded the Tribal Council to adopt the Arizona game and fish laws, at least in terms of seasons and 
bag limits. According to BIA wisdom, synchronizing White Mountain Apache code with state laws 
would facilitate prosecuting both non-Indian and Indian violators. However, by doing this, BIA officials 
realized they might compromise tribal sovereignty – in essence, give Arizona authority on matters 
within the reservation.  
Because many tribal members recognized implementing Arizona game regulations on Fort Apache 
threatened tribal sovereignty, instituting state laws on the reservation proved an extremely sensitive 
issue. In a wildlife report to the Commissioner‟s Office that considered this problem, Moffat warned 
                                                 
70 McGuire, Mixed Bloods, Apaches, and Cattle Barons,” p. 176; “‟They Shoot Horses, Don‟t They:‟ Tribal 
Council seeks Predator Control,” Fort Apache Scout 27 (March 10, 1989): 17; “Round-up of Loose Horses 
Planned,” Fort Apache Scout 19 (April 17, 1981): 1, 13; “Wild Horses Causing Problems,” Fort Apache Scout 15 
(February, 1976): 11. 
71 Constitution and By-laws of the White Mountain Apache Tribe of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation, August 
26, 1938, p. 4. 

 
 
 
 
164 
 
against imposing state regulations on the Apache. He believed that establishing state fish and game laws 
on the reservation “would be a decisive factor toward attaining a greater degree of conservation; 
however, adoption should proceed gradually and through independent action by the Tribal Council.” By 
doing this, Moffat felt that the White Mountain Apache would take ownership of the law and more 
responsibility for ensuring its enforcement. He also warned that implementing the laws before properly 
educating the Apache about their merits would only result in resistance to these laws and pervasive 
enforcement problems. Moffat provided an anecdote to support his point.72  
A bad hatching season and poor weather in 1938 resulted in a decline in the reservation wild turkey 
population. The Tribal Council reacted by closing the regular hunting season. Tribal members accepted 
this closure without protest. When Thanksgiving arrived, a group of tribal members wanted a turkey for 
their celebration. Instead of breaking the law, they requested an exception to the law. The Tribal Council 
granted their wish. Moffat opined, “The acceptance of, and spirit toward, this regulation would not have 
been the same had it originated from a State Fish and Game Commission rather than from their Tribal 
Council.”73 He finished his recommendation by asserting that BIA officials and Apache game wardens, 
not state officials, should enforce fish and game laws on the reservation. Along the reservation boundary 
where unclear jurisdiction over violations undoubtedly would occur, Arizona and the BIA should 
cooperate enforcing the game code. Indeed, the AGFC deputized Apache game wardens to facilitate 
dealing with incidents adjacent to reservation lands. 
To further mitigate against the perception that Arizona had control over game regulation on the 
reservation in the 1930s and 1940s, the BIA adopted Moffat‟s recommendations and persuaded the 
Tribal Council to officially approve a slightly modified version of the state regulations as a separate 
Tribal code – once again, using the Council to facilitate the BIA‟s agenda. The Tribal code only 
                                                 
72 Moffat, “Report on Wildlife, Fort Apache Indian Reservation.” 
73 Ibid., pp. 2-3. 

 
 
 
 
165 
 
diverged from state code mainly in terms of delineating who had the privilege of hunting and fishing on 
the reservation. The Council only allowed tribal members and BIA employees hunting privileges. Non-
Indians could fish and camp on the reservation, but the Tribe prohibited non-Indians from taking game. 
The Apache and BIA considered any hunting by non-Indians poaching. However, the Apache couldn‟t 
prosecute violators in tribal court, only tribal members were subject to this court. Instead, Moffat 
instructed Apache game wardens to send non-Indian violators to Superintendent Donner, who in turn 
decided the fate of these perpetrators. But Donner very rarely submitted violators to state court.74 And 
official records don‟t indicate what types of punishments Donner doled out to non-Indian poachers; 
however, the fact that the BIA prohibited subjecting non-Indians to tribal court bothered many Apache.  
During the 1940s, two brewing areas of controversy with the state foreshadowed the war between 
Arizona and the White Mountain Apache over the state‟s right to enforce conservation laws on Fort 
Apache that took place in the 1970s. First, the Tribal Council approved a bear removal program on the 
reservation to protect the Apache cattle industry. This program targeted bears that killed cattle. Some 
local non-Indian residents and the AGFC believed the removal of bears proved excessive. However, the 
Apache and BIA maintained that there had never been an open season on bear on the reservation, 
resulting in an overpopulation problem and predation on cattle. Second, non-Indian game hunters 
wanted access to the reservation, especially for the reservation‟s abundant wild turkey populations. The 
rest of the state had suffered a severe decline in turkey populations, leaving Fort Apache as one of the 
few prime turkey hunting grounds in the state. Since wild turkey was in such high demand, opening the 
reservation would expose the turkey population to an onslaught of hunting enthusiasts, which in turn 
would decimate the population.  And for the Apache, the turkey at the time still held cultural 
significance. They had “no intention of ever opening the reservation to wild turkey hunting.” And from 
                                                 
74 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
166 
 
the BIA‟s standpoint, the Tribe‟s position amounted to a “fortunate policy for the entire State, since the 
reservation is a source of supply for all adjacent areas.”75 
Moffat presented these issues as minor problems in his report to the Commissioner‟s Office. 
However, tensions between the state and the Apache would only grow. In the 1950s, as the White 
Mountain Recreational Enterprise struggled to gain an economic foothold, water rights issues boiled 
over and remained a source of tension for the rest of the century. In the 1970s, the White Mountain 
Apache would initiate an elk management program that rankled the feathers of the AGFC, resulting in 
protracted legal battles in state and federal court. Nonetheless, despite the potential threat to sovereignty 
that implementing Arizona game regulations represented to the Apache, instituting these laws provided a 
governing infrastructure that helped the Tribe better monitor their valuable wildlife resources. Game 
regulation, along with the campgrounds, the fish hatchery, and the restoration work completed by the 
CCC-ID, established the infrastructure necessary for the creation of a tribal recreation program. The 
development of the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise in turn initiated a long road towards 
economic, political, and environmental self-sufficiency, a self-sufficiency that would later empower the 
Tribe to fight Arizona‟s later attempts to control wildlife management on the reservation.  
 
Conclusion  
Despite the Euro-American origin of Williams Creek Fish Hatchery, it served several critical 
purposes that aided the White Mountain Apache‟s quest for political autonomy. First, the Apache, FWS, 
and AGFC had a high yield source of game fish to restock reservation and off-reservation streams for 
recreational purposes. Unfortunately, even though the FWS had tentative plans to use the hatchery 
mainly for raising the native trout, during the 1940s, the Apache trout remained a low priority. Second, 
the hatchery provided a training site for the Apache in modern conservation techniques. A number of 
                                                 
75 Ibid., p. 4. 

 
 
 
 
167 
 
individuals through the CCC-ID helped build the hatchery and learned how to raise fish and restock 
streams. Third, and perhaps most importantly, the hatchery provided a springboard from which the 
Apache could restore economically valuable resources and build their own recreational enterprise. 
Although the impact was slight at first, the hatchery generated interest on the reservation in 
conservation-oriented jobs. Furthermore, the products of the hatchery drew more non-Indians to the 
reservation, providing a justification to build recreational infrastructure such as campgrounds and picnic 
areas. 
No doubt the modernization of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation through the Indian New Deal 
was a double edged sword for the Apache. During this time period, the program financially benefited a 
large number of tribal members, but this was only a temporary and marginal reprieve from dire 
economic conditions on the reservation. When Congress cut the program to divert funds to the war 
effort, life on the reservation, in many ways, returned to pre-New Deal era circumstances. Capital 
improvements on the reservation slowed to a lull and very few Apache retained jobs outside of 
farming.76 Some individuals who had gained skills through the CCC-ID went to work for the war 
industry, while others joined the military. Others held on to jobs as game wardens, foresters, and 
fisheries workers. But the majority went back to farming their lands. One thing is certain: far more 
Apaches had a rudimentary understanding of Western conservation and restoration techniques than 
before the implementation of the Indian New Deal.   
Unfortunately, for all the good the Indian New Deal provided, it lacked a sustained emphasis on 
maintaining Apache cultural traditions; instead, the program worked to further assimilate Apaches into 
Euro-American society. The Indian New Deal fell short of creating a blend between the best of Western 
society and indigenous society that Collier intended. Nonetheless, the White Mountain Apache had 
                                                 
76 William H. Kelly, Indians of the Southwest: A Survey of Indian Tribes and Indian Administration in Arizona 
(Tucson, AZ: Bureau of Ethnic Research, University of Arizona, 1953). 

 
 
 
 
168 
 
made a large step towards Westernization that would continue throughout the rest of the twentieth 
century. Ironically, limited Apache assimilation into the dominant society would ultimately create the 
economic and political leverage by which they could focus on restoring lost cultural traditions rather 
than solely survival as a people. From the standpoint of restoration and conservation, the further 
Westernization of the White Mountain Apache occurred with the incorporation of the White Mountain 
Recreational Enterprise in the 1950s. Through this entrepreneurial endeavor the Apache trout and the 
White Mountain Apache would find the economic and political foundation for eco-cultural restoration. 
In the 1940s, the Apache trout‟s cultural significance to the Tribe was in its infancy, but the relationship 
between the two would only grow. Together, the trout and the Apache would revitalize each other. 
Neither would find themselves returning to pre-Columbian geographic ranges or life ways. But they 
would spark the re-creation of the eco-cultural landscape of the reservation, a hybridization of the past 
and present and of Western culture and Apache culture.  
 

 
 
 
 
169 
 
Chapter 5  
 
 Institutionalizing Resistance and Exchange: The White Mountain Recreational 
Enterprise 
 
 
We‟re not dying off…We‟re growing. 
 
Nelson Lupe, Sr.1 
 
In 1960 D‟Arcy McNickle, the famous Salish scholar, activist, and writer, predicted that  American 
Indians will “probably use the white man‟s technical skills for Indian purposes” and that “Indians are 
going to remain Indian… a way of looking at things and a way of acting which will be original, which 
will be a compound of these different influences.”2 The White Mountain Apache establishment of the 
White Mountain Recreational Enterprise (WMRE) preceded this prediction. By 1952, the cultural 
hybridization and recreation of Indian identity that McNickle spoke of had already begun for the 
Apache.   
The WMRE became the foundation for resistance to and exchange with Euro-American society. For 
the first time, the Apache formed an independent institutional boundary between themselves and the 
dominant society. On the surface, the WMRE embraced the ideals of Western land management and 
business techniques, developing reservation resources to generate revenue and supply jobs for the 
Apache. Upon a closer look, however, the WMRE embodied the Tribe‟s quest to restore control over 
reservation resources. This enterprise made it possible for the Apache to appropriate Western science 
and technology for the benefit of the tribal community, becoming an economic cornerstone from which 
they could rebuild their society. Furthermore, the WMRE became a platform from which the Apache 
                                                 
1 Robert Cantwell, “The Happiest Fishing Ground,” Sports Illustrated 31(August 4, 1969): 37-42, p. 37. 
2 Quote taken from Peter Iverson, “Building toward Self-Determination: Plains and Southwestern Indians in the 
1940s and 1950s,” The Western Historical Quarterly 16 (April, 1985): 163-173,  p. 173; original source, “The 
Indian and State Government,” 6th annual conference on Indian affairs, Institute of Indian Studies, University of 
South Dakota, June 17-18, 1960, I.D. Weeks Library, University of South Dakota. 

 
 
 
 
170 
 
could begin asserting control over knowledge production on the reservation. It provided restoration and 
land management training programs that expanded the pool of Apache expertise. Some of these 
programs led to long-term career opportunities in natural resource management, contributing to a 
measure of economic stability for some tribal members.  
In essence, this chapter argues that the WMRE became the institutional foundation for resistance to 
and exchange with Euro-American society that propelled the Apache‟s quest to control eco-cultural 
resources on the reservation.  To understand how this happened, I first outline the social and political 
context in which the WMRE emerged. Second, I describe the Tribe‟s internal political struggle to 
establish the WMRE. And third, I demonstrate how the Apache employed the WMRE as a tool of 
resistance against non-Indian attempts to exploit their water resources and a tool of exchange with Euro-
American society to acquire knowledge, expertise, and economic stability.  
 
The Social and Political Context (1945 – 1960) 
Restoration and conservation work on the reservation lulled during the 1940s. Nonetheless, the 
Apache trout stubbornly persisted, partly because of the de facto protection Mt. Thomas Roadless Area 
provided for remaining populations and partly because steep grades in the upper reaches of the 
watershed acted as natural barriers to rainbow trout migration. No active management of the Apache 
trout occurred at this time. The BIA, Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the White Mountain Apache 
had meager funds for the restoration and management of economic resources. As a consequence, the 
BIA reduced conservation activities to a minimum - mostly centered on fire suppression as a national 
security imperative and timber sales for the war effort. Williams Creek Fish Hatchery, which remained 
in operation, still stocked reservation streams with non-natives. The BIA also continued range 

 
 
 
 
171 
 
improvement through horse removal and juniper eradication. The emphasis on turning Fort Apache into 
a “recreational playground” died down with the end of the CCC-ID and the onset of World War II.  
The war put a dent in non-Indian visits to the reservation and federal funding for conservation work. 
Through 1944 fishing permits only generated $1,000 dollars in annual revenue, down from a high of 
$3000 in the mid 1930s. During the war, the BIA and White Mountain Apache had little choice but to 
deemphasize recreational development, with annual funding allotments for this program averaging well 
below $1,000 a year.3 Lack of personnel and funds restricted recreational management efforts to 
cleaning up campgrounds and low-level monitoring of campers and fishers.  
Even after the war, when visitation rates increased, the BIA and the Tribe devoted little attention to 
developing the recreational potential of Fort Apache. Furthermore, pessimism among BIA staff 
concerning the potential for the Apache to run a recreational program also hindered progress. 
Nonetheless, in the second half of the decade fishing permit revenue increased, generating between 
$4,000 and $8,000 per year. However, half of that money went towards maintaining Williams Creek 
Fish Hatchery, leaving little for further recreational development.4 In 1946 the Tribe also opened the 
reservation to non-Indian elk hunts for the first time, but this action failed to pay immediate economic 
dividends.5  
A 1951 BIA report from the regional forester on the reservation‟s recreational facilities provides 
further evidence of neglect. The author claimed that the campgrounds built by the CCC-ID were 
“inadequate…and shortage of personnel and funds prevents proper maintenance and policing. For the 
                                                 
3 Post War Program 10-Year Plan, White Mountain Apache Tribe, Fort Apache Indian Reservation, June 1, 1944, 
RG 75 FAIR, SMCO, Entry 797K, Box #2 
4 R.D. Holtz to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, July 24, 1947, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-
43, Box #45. 
5 Tribal Resolution #176, October 14, 1946, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, Box #45; R.D. 
Holtz to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, January 22, 1947, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, 
Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
172 
 
same reason fire patrol and law enforcement are inadequate.”6 This same report went on to claim that 
Fort Apache personnel left the Mont Thomas and Black River roadless areas largely unprotected. With 
only a few foresters and game wardens on the reservation, “it is impossible even to maintain the horse 
trails necessary for travel through such areas.”7 Because of low funds, an insufficient number of game 
wardens, and an increased visitation rate by both authorized and un-authorized non-Indian “tourists,” the 
Apache game wardens and BIA land managers lacked the resources to adequately respond to poaching, 
other game code violations, and fishers without permits. As a consequence, the Tribe suffered from 
unnecessary wildlife depletion and lost potential revenue. The lack of protection in the highlands also 
left the Apache trout more vulnerable to exploitation.  
In general, Apache life on the reservation seemed to regress in the 1940s from its temporary brush 
with modernization during the Indian New Deal. For some Apache, especially the young adults 
receiving skills from CCC-ID programs, this was agonizing; economic opportunities on the reservation 
dwindled, with timber, cattle, and farms remaining the main forms of subsistence. Until the 
establishment of the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise, most families supported themselves 
through raising livestock and farming. Local Euro-American timber operations provided the only wage 
labor. In 1952, for example, of the 986 self-supporting families on the reservation, 951 worked in 
farming or cattle, leaving only 35 families subsisting off of wage work. However, for many Apache, the 
regression from modernization offered a welcome retreat.8  
John O. Crow, Superintendent of Fort Apache in the early 1950s, commented on this division among 
tribal members: “While many are still pitifully poor their plight is slowly improving and they do not yet 
                                                 
6 Harold Weaver, “Problems Involved in Wildlife Management and Recreational Development on Indian 
Reservations,” 1951, FHS, Harold Weaver Papers, Folder #8. 
7 Ibid., p. 4. 
8 For an Apache account of this time frame see Eva Watt, Don’t Let the Sun Step over You (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press), pp. 251-257. I obtained the data from Post War Program 10-Year Plan; William H. 
Kelly, Indians of the Southwest: A Survey of Indian Tribes and Indian Administration in Arizona (Tucson, AZ: 
Bureau of Ethnic Research, University of Arizona, 1953). 

 
 
 
 
173 
 
have any general or specific dissatisfaction with their way of life or standard of living which would 
drive them to more rapid progress.”9  Of the 3,700 individuals residing on Fort Apache in 1952, 800 
spoke no English at all.10 Many communities, especially Cibecue on the drier western side of the 
reservation, remained quite isolated from the reservation‟s political capital, Whiteriver. As a 
consequence many traditional Apache rituals and ceremonies thrived and remained central to local 
family cluster social organization.11 Even though earning a living remained difficult and people lacked 
material wealth on par with Euro-American standards, Eva Watt remembers that people were happy: 
“We had lots of fun „cause we were always doing something. And you know, it seems like every day 
something different happened.… Chediskai [a community on the west end of the reservation] was a 
really good place.”12 Despite this content, tension between the Apache way and the Euro-American way 
would again heighten with the establishment of the WMRE.  The tribal population‟s uneven cultural 
acceptance of modernization made developing reservation enterprises difficult, as Nelson Lupe, Sr., 
Tribal Chairman from 1950-1954 and the main advocate for the WMRE, found out.  
However, a far more ominous specter than budget cuts and cultural tension over modernization 
loomed on the post-World-War-II horizon. Native Americans experienced the post-war economic boom 
quite differently from the general American population. While most Euro-Americans experienced a rise 
in economic status, most Native Americans did not. On top of that, prospects for termination of tribal 
sovereignty and the inadequate economic support they received from the federal government, made 
already bleak conditions on Indian reservations seem bleaker. For American Indians, the time roughly 
between the end of Collier‟s tenure as Commissioner of Indian Affairs until the early 1960s is known as 
                                                 
9 John O. Crow to A.L. Miller, June 18, 1953, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 77, File #17155-52,  Box #8. 
10 Kelly, Indians of the Southwest. 
11 Charles R. Kaut, “Notes on Western Apache Religious and Social Organization,” American Anthropologist 61 
(1959): 99-102. 
12 Watt, Don’t Let the Sun Step Over You, p. 149. 

 
 
 
 
174 
 
the Termination Era. 13 This time frame received its name from Congress‟s infamous termination policy 
and the enactment of Public Law 280, which were the products of a major conservative backlash against 
New Deal era policies in general. Congress cut funding for many Collier programs intended to last 
indefinitely, including crucial health and education services.  Some Congressional proposals even called 
for the immediate liquidation of the BIA. To further dissolve federal responsibility for Native 
Americans, Congress enacted Public Law 280 in 1953, which authorized states to assume jurisdictional 
control over criminal and civil law on reservations. Despite this assault on tribal sovereignty, this threat 
had the effect of injecting a political energy into reservation life not seen since the dawn of the 
reservation era. 
Although Congress had informally practiced termination policy since the late 1940s, the House of 
Representatives, with the Senate concurring, formally promulgated this policy on August 1, 1953 
through House Concurrent Resolution 108. In a complete one-eighty degree reversal from Collier‟s 
solution to the “Indian problem,” conservatives put forth their own plan:  
Whereas it is the policy of Congress, as rapidly as possible, to make the Indians within the 
territorial limits of the United States subject to the same laws and entitled to the same privileges 
and responsibilities as are applicable to other citizens of the United States, to end their status as 
wards of the United States, and to grant them all of the rights and prerogatives pertaining to 
American citizenship.14 
 
Turning the clock back once again, Congress sought to assimilate Indians into mainstream American 
society.  Their solution essentially entailed terminating the federal government‟s trust responsibility. To 
                                                 
13 Major works on the Termination Era include Clayton Koppes, “From New Deal to Termination: Liberalism and 
Indian Policy, 1933-1953,” Pacific Historical Review 46 (1977): 543-566; Kenneth R. Philp, “Termination: A 
Legacy of the Indian New Deal,” The Western Historical Quarterly 14(2) (1983): 165-180; Kenneth R. Philp, 
Termination Revisited: American Indians on the Trail to Self-Determination, 1933-1953 (Lincoln, NE: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1999); Charles F. Wilkinson and Eric R. Biggs, “The Evolution of Termination Policy,” 
American Indian Law Review 5 (1977): 139-184; Larry W. Burt, Tribalism in Crisis: Federal Indian Policy, 
1953-1961 (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1982); Thomas Cowger, “‟The Crossroads of 
Destiny‟: The NCAI‟s Landmark Struggle to Thwart Coercive Termination,” American Indian Culture and 
Research Journal 20 (1996): 121-144; Donald L. Fixico, Termination and Relocation: Federal Indian Policy, 
1945-1960 (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1986).  
14 House Concurrent Resolution 108. 

 
 
 
 
175 
 
promulgate their policy, President Truman and President Eisenhower based subsequent appointments of 
Commissioners of Indian Affairs on their ability to frugally cut and consolidate programs; thus 
efficiently “freeing” Indians from government control. Commissioners Dillon Myer (1950-1953) and 
Glenn Emmons (1953-1961), the prime movers for Congress‟s policy, proved efficient at their jobs.15 In 
particular, Myer, best known for his work incarcerating, removing, and relocating Japanese-Americans 
as the director of the War Relocation Authority, had a desirable resume. Myer saw the liquidation of the 
Japanese concentration camps as analogous to his current task, eliminating the BIA. He planned to 
transfer BIA social services “either to the Indians themselves if the service involves the handling of their 
own economic affairs or other governmental agencies if it is the type of service normally rendered by 
government to citizens generally.”16  
As a consequence of this policy, Native Americans experienced a complete swing in the 
administrative philosophy from one of paternalism during the New Deal era to one that demanded their 
release from federal supervision. Despite differing ideological foundations, both policies espoused a 
form of autonomy for Native Americans. The Indian New Deal attempted to restore and maintain tribal 
communalism whereas termination policy found its roots in the individualist ethos of liberal economics.  
Congress, reasserting Allotment Era politics, viewed almost any governmental intervention in personal 
affairs as an affront to individual freedom.  They believed they were doing the right thing by “liberating” 
the Indian.  
Arthur V. Watkins, United States Senator from Utah, led the charge. He truly believed that future 
generations would judge the Termination Era as a critical turning point in American Indian history. He 
equated federal supervision of Native Americans to the slavery of African-Americans: “Following in the 
footsteps of the Emancipation Proclamation ninety-four years ago, I see the following words 
                                                 
15 Robert M. Kvasnicka and Herman J. Viola (eds.), The Commissioners of Indian Affairs, 1824-1977 (Lincoln, 
NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1979), pp. 293-310. 
16 Quote taken from Kelly, Indians of the Southwest, p. 128. 

 
 
 
 
176 
 
emblazoned in letters of fire above the heads of the Indians – „THESE PEOPLE SHALL BE FREE!‟”17  
According to Watkins, Native Americans under the current system lacked incentives to work and 
provide for themselves. Promulgating the erroneous perception that American Indians lived solely off 
federal handouts, Watkins asserted that Native Americans would only learn responsibility if they had no 
choice but “to work and to take care of their own affairs.”18 Apparently he failed to realize that most 
Native Americans since the beginning of the reservation era worked to make a meager living off of 
substandard land. Furthermore, when American Indians had natural resources, the BIA neglected to 
educate them in natural resource management and development until the Indian New Deal. It never 
occurred to Watkins, or any of his colleagues, to consider the situation from the Native American 
standpoint. They assumed with self-evident confidence that their fulfillment of the American dream was 
accessible to all, regardless of cultural, economic, and geographic circumstances.19   
Tribes considered “self-sufficient” would have their lands taken out of federal trust, making them 
taxable, and would have federal support withdrawn, including basic services such as health care and 
education.20  Critics of termination policy claimed that even the most economically advanced nations 
would have difficulty paying taxes on their land; thus creating further loss of the Native American land 
base. This prediction, unfortunately, came true. Reminiscent of the Allotment Era, terminated tribes‟ 
lands, especially the Klamath, began to fall into the hands of Euro-American investors once again. As 
for withdrawal of services, this action made already vulnerable tribes even more susceptible to 
epidemics and led them further into economic depression. In 1969, as this policy was in its twilight, 
                                                 
17 Arthur V. Watkins, “Termination of Federal Supervision: The Removal of Restrictions over Indian Property 
and Person,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 311 (May, 1957): 47-55, p. 55. 
18 Statement by Senator Arthur V. Watkins on May 10, 1954, 83rd Congress, 2nd sess.,  Congressional Record 
100, pt. 5: 6253. Quote taken from Charles Wilkinson, Blood Struggle (New York, NY: W.W. Norton & 
Company, 2005), p. 69. 
19 Wilkinson, Blood Struggle, pp. 68-69. 
20 Charles Wilkinson, “Filling in the Blank Spots on Powell‟s and Stegner‟s Maps: The Role of Modern Indian 
Tribes in Western Watersheds,” Journal of Land Resources and Environmental Law 23 (2003): 41-56. 

 
 
 
 
177 
 
Vine Deloria, Jr. described the termination program as “a combination of the old systematic hunt and the 
deprivation of services…. In the old days blankets infected with smallpox were given to the tribes in an 
effort to decimate them…. [D]uring the past twenty years federal medical services have been denied 
various tribes, resulting in tremendous increase in disease…. Yet this policy was not conceived as a 
policy of murder. Rather it was thought that it would provide that elusive „answer‟ to the Indian 
problem. And when it proved to be no answer at all, Congress continued its policy, having found a new 
weapon in the ancient battle for Indian land.”21 
Many Native American tribes feared the consequences of termination. Not only would it represent 
an abrogation of treaty rights, withdrawal of federal services could devastate the cultural integrity and 
tribal sovereignty of even the most economically advanced nations. And tribal members ubiquitously 
feared the loss of tribal lands. Detailed plans for the termination process emerged out of a hostile Senate 
Post Office and Civil Service Committee hearing in 1947. The Committee subpoenaed acting 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs William Zimmerman, a supporter of the Indian New Deal, to testify on 
ways that the BIA could save money. The Committee also ordered Zimmerman to assess the potential 
“readiness” of all tribes for release from federal supervision.  Zimmerman outlined three categories that 
indicated different levels of self-sufficiency. The first level included groups ready for immediate 
withdrawal. The second level of sufficiency constituted those tribes that needed at least ten more years 
of BIA assistance. The third level consisted of tribes that indefinitely required the services of the BIA. 
He based his taxonomy of tribal “readiness” on each tribe‟s degree of acculturation (assimilation), 
economic condition, and willingness to dispense with federal aid. A fourth criterion involved the ability 
of a state in which a tribe resided to take on some responsibility for essential tribal programs. 
Zimmerman‟s proposal provided several safety nets for terminated tribes, including long-term tax 
                                                 
21Vine Deloria, Jr., Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 
1969), p. 54. 

 
 
 
 
178 
 
exemptions on tribally held assets. But in the end, Congress ignored all of his recommendations except 
for the list of tribes ready for immediate termination: Klamath, Menominee, Flatheads, Iroquois of New 
York, Potawatomi of Kansas, several California groups, Osages, and, conditionally, the Turtle Mountain 
Chippewa.22    
Thus was the national political climate in which the White Mountain Apache and the Apache trout 
found themselves in the early 1950s. Zimmerman‟s list didn‟t include the Apache, nor did Congress or 
the BIA subject them to an aggressive path towards termination. Nonetheless, the Congress and the BIA 
Central Office in Washington conducted several studies to assess the withdrawal status of the Tribe. In 
1953 the House Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs submitted a questionnaire to Superintendent 
Crow concerning the potential release from federal supervision of the Apache. Crow‟s conclusion 
suggested the Tribe was far from ready. Lack of business, legal, and political experience on top of a 
persisting “low level of educational achievement” would leave the Tribe vulnerable to economic failure 
and the liquidation of their assets, pushing them further towards destitution. He warned that due to the 
Apache‟s relative geographical and cultural isolation from the non-Indian world “at best, assimilation 
will be a slow process.”23 He also added that tribal members demonstrated no interest in federal 
withdrawal of services. Most importantly, the Apache “fear the possibility of losing their land.”  A 1956 
report basically came to the same conclusion: “Complete withdrawal of Federal services for the White 
Mountain Apaches should be a gradual process. The present need has not changed in adult education, 
home demonstration, and business management.”24 Nevertheless, this report indicated improvements in 
the Tribe‟s economic self-sufficiency. By then, the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise and another 
upstart Apache enterprise, the Apache Mercantile Company (tribal sawmill and hardware supplier), had 
                                                 
22 Deloria, Custer Died for Your Sins; Donald L. Parman, Indians and the American West in the Twentieth 
Century (Bloomington, IN: University of Indian Press, 1994), Ch. 8; Wilkinson, Blood Struggle, Ch. 3. 
23 John O. Crow to A.L. Miller, June 18, 1953, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 77, File #17155-52,  Box #8. 
24 “Summary Statement of Withdrawal Status,” April 1956, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 77, File #17155-52, 
Box #8. 

 
 
 
 
179 
 
several years under their belts and maintained some economic headway. Combined with the Tribe‟s 
cattle industry and sources of revenue from timber, these enterprises created a foundation from which 
the Tribe could work towards federal withdrawal.  
Fortunately for the White Mountain Apache, the time frame in which termination policy remained at 
the forefront of Congressional concerns proved short. The heyday of termination policy roughly lasted 
15 years (1950s – early 1960s). Also, the Apache didn‟t fit the profile of tribes that Congress sought to 
terminate. Regardless of a tribe‟s self-sufficiency, Congress focused on tribes they could intimidate 
either due to their small size and limited resources or those seeking Indian Claims Commission (ICC) 
settlements. For instance, the Menominee of Wisconsin were due an ICC award of $8.5 million for 
federal mismanagement of their lands. All ICC settlements required Congressional approval for 
distribution. So Congress threatened to withhold the Menominee‟s settlement unless they agreed to 
termination. Because of this ultimatum, the Menominee rejected their settlement but Congress forced 
withdrawal on them anyway. Congress lacked this sort of leverage on the White Mountain Apache. The 
Apache had filed an ICC suit for the mismanagement of tribal natural resources in 1950, but the Tribe 
wouldn‟t receive an opinion until the late 1960s and an award until 1995, which became the foundation 
for a watershed restoration fund.25 
Despite the overall negative tone of the Termination Era, Native Americans achieved a modicum of  
political and economic progress in the 1950s.  Noted American Indian historian Peter Iverson once 
pointed out that “[i]n overdramatizing the difficulties of the time, we may not give sufficient credit to 
the enduring nature of Indians in this country. By the end of the 1950s, tribal resources were more 
                                                 
25 The White Mountain Apache‟s case actually outlived the ICC and was transferred to the U.S. Claims Court in 
the late 1970s. The White Mountain Apache contested several court rulings and rejected several award offers as 
inadequate. They stubbornly challenged the court‟s findings until they received 20 million dollars in 1995, of 
which 20% went towards setting up a watershed restoration program. See White Mountain Apache Tribe of 
Arizona v. The United States, Docket No. 22-H, 11 Cl. Ct. 614, February 6, 1987. 

 
 
 
 
180 
 
studied and better understood; tribal council leadership was often more effective.”26 This 
characterization indeed fits the White Mountain Apache experience.  No doubt the Tribe was troubled 
by the possibility of termination, but the development of the WMRE illustrated their ability to persevere 
and adapt during difficult times.  
 
 
Building towards a Recreation Development Program 
During most of the 1940s the BIA and the Apache worked little towards developing the recreational 
potential of Fort Apache, but by the late 1940s, a few key personnel changes and the implementation of 
several new land management projects helped set the stage for a more comprehensive recreational 
program. This time frame saw the initiation of a prescribed burn program, the intensification of the 
juniper eradication project, and the implementation of a beaver management plan. All of these projects 
had both positive and negative consequences for the Apache. On the one hand, these programs exposed 
the White Mountain Apache once again to new conservation techniques and provided educational 
opportunities. In some cases, they even temporarily improved the condition of the Fort Apache 
landscape and generated modest amounts of income for the Tribe. On the other hand, these programs, 
especially juniper eradication and prescribed burns, increased the exploitation of Apache resources by 
non-Indian interests. Both of these programs, while pitched to the Tribal Council as means to improve 
the forests and range of the reservation, in practice increased run-off to the rapidly developing Salt River 
Valley communities below the reservation watershed. Furthermore, the science behind the prescribed 
burn and juniper eradication programs was far from airtight. De facto, Fort Apache became an 
experimental testing ground for newly developed, untested conservation and restoration techniques. Like 
the conservation work associated with the CCC-ID, these new BIA programs had two faces – one 
                                                 
26 Iverson, “Building toward Self-Determination,” p. 173. 

 
 
 
 
181 
 
presented to the Tribe and one presented to those looking for opportunities to exploit the bounties of the 
reservation at the expense of the Apache. Along with these projects, two people in particular would have 
lasting impacts on management of natural resources on the reservation: Harold Weaver, a BIA forester, 
and Lydo Harvey, a White Mountain Apache game warden. 
 
Harold Weaver – As the newly appointed Phoenix Area Forester in 1948, Weaver brought with him 
from the ponderosa pine ecosystem of the Pacific Northwest his controversial prescribed burn 
experiments and a demonstrated interest in recreational development, extensively critiquing all aspects 
of forest and range management on Fort Apache.27 Weaver, who was on the cutting edge of the 
ecological science, employed a more ecosystem level approach to viewing the landscape. Weaver also 
bucked the system, challenging the efficacy of federal fire management and predator control policies. 
Protecting their reputation from the controversial nature of controlled burn research, the BIA required 
Weaver to use a disclaimer on all his published articles. Although he only held the Area Forester post 
for just over two years, his research had lasting implications for the Fort Apache landscape. His research 
was ultimately a mixed blessing, both improving the management of the forest, but also justifying 
increased exploitation of Apache water resources. Besides as a tool to reduce fire hazards, Weaver 
justified his prescribed burn program to watershed experts as a technique for increasing water yield.28  
                                                 
27 Harold Weaver, “Observed Effects of Prescribed Burning on Perennial Grasses in the Ponderosa Pine Forests,” 
Journal of Forestry 49 (1951): 267-271; Harold Weaver, “Fire as an Ecological Factor in Southwestern Pine 
Forests,” Journal of Forestry 49 (1951): 93-98; Harold Weaver, “Fire as an enemy, friend, and tool in forest 
management,” Journal of Forestry 53 (1955): 499-504; Harold Weaver, “Fire and Its Relationship to Ponderosa 
Pine,” Proceedings of the Tall Timber Fire Ecology Conference 7 (1957): 127-149; H.H. Biswell, H.R. Kallander, 
R. Komerek, R.J. Vogl, & H. Weaver, Ponderosa Pine Management: A Task Force Evaluation of Controlled 
Burning in Ponderosa Pine Forests of Central Arizona (Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research Station, 1973); 
For an overview of Harold Weaver‟s career, see David Carle, Burning Questions: America’s Fight With Nature’s 
Fire (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2002), pp. 57-80. 
28 For the goals and rationale of the program see George W. Barr, ed., Arizona Watershed Program (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona, 1956). The idea was that fire would reduce the litter layer in the forest, thus reducing the 
water retention capability of the soil. Also, prescribed burns would eliminate much undergrowth, thus reducing 

 
 
 
 
182 
 
In Weaver‟s defense, he criticized past management of Indian forests and suggested sweeping 
restoration efforts through forest thinning and prescribed burns:  
Can anybody deny that we have profoundly changed the old Indian country, even the 
reservations he now occupies? The formerly grassy, park-like ponderosa pine stands, to cite only 
one instance, are now largely grown up over extensive areas to dense understories of 
reproduction. Such has apparently been brought about by overgrazing in earlier days and, as a 
necessary prerequisite to sustained yield forestry practice, by attempted total exclusion of fire, 
which once swept these forests periodically, at fairly frequent intervals. Many silviculturalists 
view those crowded young stands with satisfaction. The writer wonders, however, if we can 
continue to protect them from fire and if, in many cases, they aren‟t too crowded for optimum 
growth.29  
 
His remedy for this situation, of course, was to restore fire as a legitimate component of forest and range 
management.   Weaver also immediately challenged the efficacy of the predator control program on Fort 
Apache. Under Clifford Presnall‟s guidance, who now was a field agent in the FWS‟s Predator and 
Rodent Control branch, the BIA implemented the most recent manifestation of predator control policy in 
the early 1940s.30  
Predator control, mostly on behalf of Indian and non-Indian ranchers, had been part of wildlife 
management policy on the reservation since the 1910s. Presnall‟s plan proved more systematic and 
destructive than previous efforts; thus Weaver felt that it was excessive. Presnall had a reputation for 
violating FWS policies that restricted the extent of predator control. Clarence Cottam, a critic of 
predator control policies within the FWS, once complained about, “instances where there were flagrant 
violations of Service [FWS] policy by field personnel of the Service and I believe in every case 
[Clifford] Presnall and  [Dorr] Green were not only sympathetic with these violations but gave support 
                                                                                                                                                                         
the amount of water used by the rapid growth and respiration rates of seedlings, saplings, and other understory 
plants. 
29 Harold Weaver, “Problems Involved in Wildlife Management and Recreational Development on Indian 
Reservations,” 1951, FHS, Harold Weaver Papers, Folder #8. 
30 Clifford C. Presnall, “Report on Predation in the Ft. Apache Indian Reservation, Arizona,” August 21, 1941, 
RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #53608, Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
183 
 
to the field men who violated the regulations.”31 Weaver also condemned the once wanton policies of 
predator extermination promulgated by the FWS (before reorganization in 1940, the Bureau of 
Biological Survey) in the interwar years. The FWS had tamed this policy in recent years, but the old-
guard attitude remained strong,  in particular with Presnall.  
Moved by a gut feeling about the situation, Weaver felt obligated to challenge what he saw as 
excessive predator control on Fort Apache. Although he approved of control when “excessive losses” to 
domestic livestock occurred, he vehemently disagreed with “campaigns of extermination.”  Partly 
drawing from Aldo Leopold‟s ecological worldview, Weaver viewed with “extreme suspicion any 
attempt to improve on nature‟s methods in management of our wild lands.” He believed that too much 
undocumented “shooting, trapping, and poisoning,” had taken place on Fort Apache in recent history, 
perhaps resulting in unnecessary and ecologically damaging depletion of wildlife. To bring the problem 
under control, Weaver argued that the predator control program should justify additional efforts through 
empirical reports.32 Fortunately, L.D. Arnold, the Chief of the Branch of Forest and Range Management, 
took Weaver‟s recommendation seriously. In subsequent years, the BIA tightened the regulation of the 
predator control program on Fort Apache, an action that would prove valuable to the Tribe‟s 
establishment of a recreational enterprise.33  
Weaver also encouraged recreational development on Fort Apache. In a 1951 report, Weaver argued 
that the mountainous portions of the Fort Apache and San Carlos Reservations had exceptional 
possibilities for development. Like Collier and Marshall before him, the scenery of the region charmed 
him: “The eastern portions of these reservations include the White Mountains, a region of magnificent 
                                                 
31 Clarence Cottam to Starker Leopold, February 8, 1956, quote taken from Dunlap, Saving America’s Wildlife, p. 
118. 
32 Harold Weaver to Walter V. Woehlke, “Memorandum: Sections of White Mountain Tribal Council Resolution 
No. 51-4 pertaining to control of juniper and elimination of predatory animals,” February 20, 1951, RG 75, NA 
FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, Box #45. 
33 L.D. Arnold to D‟Arcy McNickle, “Memorandum: White Mountain Apache Resolution # 51-4,”March 13, 
1951, RG 75, NA FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
184 
 
forests, clear, running streams and high mountain meadows. Wild turkeys abound in the pine woods, elk 
herds are increasing and moderately good fishing may be had in the streams.”34 Weaver‟s optimism 
about recreational development was tempered by his general skepticism about Native American abilities 
to widely accept the principles of natural resource conservation. Like his predecessors, he adopted a 
paternalistic view towards Indian affairs but was nonetheless sympathetic to their needs for economic 
development. He believed Native American participation in wildlife management was important, 
“[a]fter all he owns the reservations.” But he also strongly believed that “our efforts should be channeled 
towards teaching him conservation [my emphasis].”  Only when Native Americans had a firm grasp of 
Euro-American management techniques, could the BIA “turn over to him intact the land, forests, range 
and wildlife.” Weaver disapproved of integrating the “accustomed manner” in which Native Americans 
hunt and fish because “as a result wildlife suffers.”35  Weaver‟s skepticism was partly based on reality 
but also partly based on misconceptions, not unlike his predecessors‟ assessments of Native American 
land management capabilities.  
Weaver asserted, and rightly so, that most reservations remained too small to accommodate both 
large populations of game and the growing populations of Indians. Since Native Americans lacked 
access to their historically large hunting territories and were generally restricted to reservation wildlife 
for subsistence, resuming traditional hunting practices would quickly deplete wildlife populations on 
smaller reservations. However, he may have taken his hypothesis too far when he claimed, “Even the 
larger reservations are too small to permit hunting by the Indian in his accustomed manner, as he did 
before [the] coming of the white man…. The writer has never been elsewhere, for instance, a region 
comparable in area to the Navaho that is so devoid of wildlife.”36 Weaver offered no evidence to support 
                                                 
34 Weaver, “Problems Involved in Wildlife Management,” pp. 3-4. 
35 Ibid., p. 4. 
36  Ibid., p. 5. 

 
 
 
 
185 
 
this last assertion.37 He simply correlated the presence of Native Americans with the depletion of 
wildlife. Again, largely repeating Fred Moffat‟s attitudes towards Indians and recreation, Weaver boiled 
traditional Apache wildlife management practices down to primitive customs: “Towards recreation, so 
called, he is most apt to take the extremely practical viewpoint. He hunts and fishes for subsistence, not 
primarily for recreation, though there can be little doubt that he enjoys such activity. Relative scarcity 
and abundance of certain animals ...can be attributed to Tribal taboos and superstitions.”38 Not much had 
changed in the ten years since Moffat offered his assessment of traditional Apache land management 
practices. 
Nevertheless, Weaver optimistically stressed the potential for educating the Indian; the problem 
remained a matter of convincing Native Americans that the white man‟s way was the proper way to 
manage natural resources. In implementing such an educational program, BIA personnel must 
understand that a strong aura of distrust towards Euro-American ideals existed among Native Americans 
due to the faulty logic and the unjust nature of past BIA policies. Confidently convinced that current 
policies and science were logically sound and more just, Weaver offered the following advice, “Indian 
Service efforts towards improving Indian wildlife management and recreation, particularly hunting and 
fishing, are directed largely towards education and towards attempts to persuade the Indian to adopt and 
enforce more restrictive game codes. In such attempt [sic] the Service is encouraging some success, but 
many disappointments. The Indian has at least the average I.Q., and when he can be convinced that 
game conservation is in his own interest, it is most likely that he will cooperate. It should be 
                                                 
37 According to Richard White, the depletion of wildlife on the Navajo reservation was related to a complex set of 
factors that essentially boil down to the disruption of their subsistence system. Like the White Mountain Apache, 
the Navajo had a flexible subsistence system that depended on farming, hunting, gathering, livestock (sheep), and 
raiding. Once the reservation era began, the Navajo lost their ability to raid, which diminished a source of food 
and supplies. This in turn forced them to rely more on sheep herding, but with less grazing territory than during 
pre-reservation times. Several things happened as a result of this. The sheep out-competed wild ungulates for 
grass. Hunting on the reservation also increased because of frequent droughts that disrupted farming. Richard 
White, The Roots of Dependency (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1983), pp. 245-246.   
38 Weaver, “Problems Involved in Wildlife Management,” pp. 5-6. 

 
 
 
 
186 
 
remembered, however, that many of them were „pushed around‟ in the early days, that they haven‟t 
forgotten it and that they view any attempt to modify their rights to hunt and fish with extreme 
suspicion.”39  
According to a 1948 Weaver memorandum, the BIA‟s educational system had failed the Indian in 
this respect. Because Indian schools, especially in the primary grades, didn‟t teach the “principles of 
conservation,” Indian children grew up not caring about this valuable way of life. Like the greater 
American public, the American Indians were becoming alienated from the environment in which they 
subsisted. People, and especially Native Americans dependent on government services, were no longer 
“fully cognizant of the fact that real wealth originates from food crops, forage, timber and wildlife 
growing on the surface of the earth.” Weaver surmised that if the BIA had put more effort towards 
conservation education among Native Americans, then they would have been more willing to cooperate 
with forest and range conservation measures. Moreover, Weaver proffered that “the Indian Service 
Forestry Division might be manned largely by Indians having degrees in forestry from various colleges 
and universities. Instead they can probably be counted on the finger of one hand.” He concluded his 
condemnation of the Indian education system by chastising American Indians for taking “little interest in 
such matters,” even though many tribes derive a “livelihood… from forests and ranges.”40 What was 
obvious to Weaver, however, was also obvious to most Native Americans. Weaver had underestimated 
the extent that past BIA policies had undermined the functional capacity of traditional social systems.  
In an attempt to promote empathy for the Indian situation among his peers, Weaver finished his 1951 
report on recreational development on a condescending note, calling for more toleration for the reluctant 
attitude of Indians to adopt modern conservation techniques: “Remember that he is a natural hunter who 
                                                 
39 Ibid., p. 7. 
40 Harold Weaver to George G. Wells, “Memorandum: Need for Elementary Training of Children in Appreciation 
of Forest and Range Lands and Problems Related Thereto,” June 13, 1948, FHS, Harold Weaver Papers, Folder 
#8. 

 
 
 
 
187 
 
only a few decades ago had to make his living largely by such practice. He now strews the landscape 
with tin cans and bottles, instead of with deer and fish bones. Before condemning him for such, look at 
the examples set by some of his white brothers. After all, tidiness is a habit that must be learned. If 
asked to he can probably present an interesting „bill of particulars‟ against the white man.”41 The 
statement is in some ways progress from previous BIA views on the Apache, but at the same time 
remains ignorant of and unwilling to explore past and even contemporary Native American knowledge 
of the land. Knowledge production remained a one way street, diffusing from the pool of federal land 
management experts that brought with them universalist, non-local models of how nature works. With 
the establishment of the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise, this rigid knowledge production 
structure would begin to unravel. 
Unlike his attitude towards most Native American groups, however, Weaver remained cautiously 
enthusiastic about the White Mountain Apache‟s ability to develop their resources. For him, the reason 
the Apache stood out was that since tribal organization in 1938, they had already established a tribal 
game code for their own people, cooperated with the FWS and AFGC on fishery management, insisted 
that timber companies leave scenic strips along roads and streams, and had “embarked on a 
conservative, sustained yield beaver cropping plan.” In short, he viewed the White Mountain Apache as 
a relatively progressive tribe.42 Despite Weaver‟s prejudices, his feelings about the potential for Native 
Americans to grasp Western science and technology represented an improvement over the general 
pessimism that existed within CCC-ID educational programs. To that effect, Weaver was willing to give 
his full support to the development of the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise: “A well-planned and 
orderly-developed recreational program should be of considerable importance to tribal income, as well 
as afford employment and enterprise opportunities to individual tribal members. Every encouragement 
                                                 
41 Weaver, “Problems Involved in Wildlife Management,” p. 7. 
42 Ibid. p. 4. 

 
 
 
 
188 
 
and assistance consistent with proper management and undiminished future yield should be offered to 
the Indians in their endeavor.”43 Toward that end, in 1948 the BIA, FWS, and the Tribe provided Lydo 
Harvey, the first full-time game warden for the WMRE, an in-depth education in Euro-American land 
management techniques. 
  
Lydo Harvey – Twenty-three and freshly back from his war-time service in the Marines in 1948, Lydo 
Harvey became the first White Mountain Apache to receive comprehensive education in Western-style 
conservation and ecological principles. From the WMRE‟s inception in 1952, his newly found expertise 
contributed to its success. Harvey, a grandson of Chief Alchesay who would work for the WMRE until 
his death in 1977, helped save the Apache trout from extinction. His education in conservation and 
restoration techniques came by way of a short-lived beaver management project that the FWS suggested 
as a lucrative way of increasing tribal revenues. The project amounted to another federal paternalistic 
endeavor born from experts in the FWS, but nonetheless, it provided Harvey with invaluable experience 
and knowledge that he combined with his local knowledge of the reservation gained during his teenage 
years while helping his family manage cattle.44 
Before his beaver management training course, Harvey worked with Bill Schroeder, a range 
supervisor for the BIA, and Clarence Aldous, a FWS biologist and the designer of the beaver 
management plan, on a survey of beaver colonies within the reservation. Aldous praised Harvey for his 
work on the survey: “I believe the Indian boy is going to be able to handle the work in good shape as he 
has been extremely interested in the work and willing to undertake any work that was assigned to 
                                                 
43 Harold Weaver (for L.D. Arnold) to Ralph M. Gelvin, March 12, 1953, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, 
File #3940-43,  Box #45. 
44 James D. Sparks, “Lydo Harvey – 20 Years of Service and Satisfaction,” Fort Apache Scout 11 ( June, 1972): 
6. 

 
 
 
 
189 
 
him.”45  Harvey took his training course at the local Veterans Training School in 1949.  The course 
entailed both a field and classroom component, involving some of the most rigorous education on 
conservation techniques that any Apache had ever received, far more than any CCC-ID program. Harvey 
learned from Edward Royal Warren‟s, The Beaver (1927), Ira Gabrielson‟s Wildlife Conservation 
(1941), Ernest Thompson Seton‟s Lives of Game Animals (1929), and even the seminal text on game 
management of the time, Aldo Leopold‟s Game Management (1933).46 The course covered basic 
ecological principles in population dynamics: predator prey relationships, disease, food, habitat 
requirements, and interspecific and intraspecific competition. Conservation principles discussed 
included protection of breeding stocks, stocking, range protection, estimating populations, and sustained 
yield harvesting. More specifically on beaver, Harvey learned about the species‟ life history, behavior, 
effects on water resources, habitat requirements, predation, stocking, harvesting, care of pelts, and sale 
of pelts. His fieldwork for the course involved examining beaver habitat to estimate the carrying 
capacity of local populations, estimating population size, trapping practice, skinning and preparation of 
pelts, and pelt grading.47 
After completing the training course in the summer of 1949, Harvey went to work on the beaver 
management program. This program had two basic purposes. First, the project entailed restoring beaver 
populations to desirable locations on the reservation so the Tribe could make money off of pelts. 
Second, the project removed nuisance populations  that damaged Apache farms.  Clarence Aldous also 
claimed that the Apache would derive a number of fringe benefits from the program. Most notable for 
our purposes, he predicted that beaver dams would conserve reservation water and create natural ponds 
for trout, essentially producing more opportunities for recreational fishing: “The building of dams by 
                                                 
45 Clarence Aldous to Director, FWS, “Memorandum: Beaver Survey Fort Apache Reservation,” November 22, 
1948, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #4561, Box #45. 
46 N.W. Hosley to R.D. Holtz, April 12, 1948, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #4561, Box #45. 
47 “Outline for Veteran‟s course in Beaver Management,” RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #4561, Box 
#45. 

 
 
 
 
190 
 
beaver on most of the streams on the reservation is an asset to fishing values. Dams impound water thus 
creating pools along the streams where fish such as trout can find cool or cold water in the bottom of 
such pools in the hottest of summer days. Flood areas encourage the growth of aquatic plants which in 
turn support aquatic insects upon which fish depend for a great deal of their food… Here on this 
reservation, then, beaver are a valuable asset to the fisheries resources.”48 The BIA pushed Aldous‟s 
plan within the tribal government. Desperate for revenue, the Tribal Council, under the leadership of 
Lester Oliver, accepted the plan in February of 1949.49 
After Harvey‟s training, the Tribe created the paid position of Wildlife Aide for him. In general his 
duties covered working with the FWS on beaver management and fish culture at Williams Creek 
Hatchery. He began “beaver transplanting activities” in September of 1949. He made preparations at 
Pistol Creek, Bull Creek, and Diamond Creek for releasing beaver by constructing small water 
impoundments and temporary dens to acclimate beaver before release.50 Economically, his three years 
of work yielded decent returns relative to the amount of effort employed. He trapped approximately 250 
beaver a year, receiving $65 a piece on the market.  However, the knowledge he acquired from this 
experience is hard to estimate in monetary value.  His ecological expertise later helped build a multi-
million dollar a year enterprise, making his knowledge an invaluable asset.  
In 1949, when Harvey took his post as Wildlife Aide, the potential for developing a recreational 
enterprise seemed a long shot. Both the Apache and BIA officials, for different reasons, were less than 
optimistic about recreational development on Fort Apache. Harold Weaver, despite lending 
                                                 
48 Clarence M. Aldous, “Beaver Survey and Management Plan, Fort Apache Indian Reservation, Whiteriver, 
Arizona,” January 1944, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #20324, Box #45. 
49 The text of the resolution reads, “Be it resolved by the Council of the White Mountain Apache Tribe of the Fort 
Apache Indian Reservation that, in order to provide protection for fields and orchards being damaged by beaver 
and to provide for adequate distribution of beaver on the Fort Apache Reservation that the report and management 
plan submitted by Mr. C.M. Aldous of Fish and Wildlife Service dated January, 1949 be hereby approved subject 
to such revision as may be justified at a later date.”White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Resolution No. 282, 
February 7, 1949, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #4561, Box #45. 
50 Aldous, “Beaver Survey and Management Plan.” 

 
 
 
 
191 
 
“enthusiastic” support for the endeavor, pessimistically offered that the available recreational 
infrastructure remained “inadequate or at least „spotty.‟” He attributed this situation to “entirely 
inadequate funds and to lack of personnel.” He held little hope for improvement, “unless desirable 
changes happen to attract favorable attention of local whites of political influence.” Most importantly, 
Weaver believed that successful recreational development required the Apache to demonstrate 
initiative.51 This prediction proved partly right and partly wrong. Local Euro-American political clout 
wasn‟t the catalyst for recreational development; however, Apache initiative indeed played a strong role 
in the establishment of the WMRE. Against seemingly low odds, the friendship between a White 
Mountain Apache, Nelson Lupe, and a BIA forester, Silas Davis, provided the political and technical 
will to move a recreational development program forward.  
 
The Birth of an Eco-cultural Enterprise  
The fate of the Apache trout lay in the hands of the White Mountain Apache. Ironically, a measure 
of Western economic development tempered with Apache wisdom would be the savior of White 
Mountain Apache culture and the Apache trout. In general, the Tribal Council hesitated to invite non-
Indians on to the reservation, but the newly elected tribal chairman in 1950, Nelson Lupe, eventually 
convinced the Tribe that it was in their best interest to develop tribal resources. If they failed to do so, 
somebody else would, and not necessarily with the best interests of the Apache people in mind.   
Lupe wasn‟t new to Tribal politics. He had served on the Tribal Council prior to World War II. 
According to Lupe, when he returned to the reservation after the war, he had no plans to run for 
reelection because of his frustration with the anti-progressive nature of tribal politics. However, his wife 
convinced him otherwise. She believed that “one of these days the people are going to thank you” for 
                                                 
51 Weaver, “Problems Involved in Wildlife Management,” pp. 7-8. 

 
 
 
 
192 
 
advancing progressive ideas in the tribal government.52 When he was reelected to the Tribal Council, the 
council members selected him to be Chairman. Before 1958, the Council chose the Chairman from the 
pool of elected members. Tribal Chairman only served two-year terms on a part-time basis. Lupe, 
knowing the extent of work required to improve the economic and ecological condition of the 
reservation, convinced the Council to turn the position into a full-time job.  
 Even though the BIA and FWS promoted the recreational potential of the reservation during the 
Indian New Deal, they did little towards developing recreational resources after the termination of the 
CCC-ID.  In 1950 Nelson Lupe picked up where the BIA had dropped the ball , initiating an earnest 
push to promote the business. He had acquired some business acumen while working off-reservation 
during World War II. He worked in Nevada on the construction of an air base and later worked at the 
Phelps Dodge Copper Company smelter plant in Morenci, Arizona. After his return to the reservation, 
these experiences indirectly inspired the recreational enterprise: “The manpower shortage was awful; we 
worked 16 hours a day, six days a week. And then on Sunday, golly, you wanted to get out of that dreary 
place.”53 Lupe and his family had an old pickup truck which they used to escape from Morenci. They 
drove up into the mountains along the Coronado Trail. The pastoral beauty of the mountains impressed 
the Lupe family:  
When you get on top there, you get beautiful springs, you know, and oak trees and beautiful 
shade. The kids loved that place. We did that every weekend. Four years I worked there. And I 
kind of thought about this place [Fort Apache]. I didn‟t think about it as outdoor recreation at the 
time. I just wanted to go to a place where there was a stream, where I could lay down just in the 
shade somewhere and get a little snack and a picnic and take the kids out there.54  
 
Lupe‟s original vision involved converting Fort Apache into a haven for working-class non-Indians. He 
realized that Arizona had very few upland vacation areas and that the Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
encompassed a great deal of what little there was in Arizona. He believed establishing a recreational 
                                                 
52 Cantwell, “The Happiest Fishing Ground,” p. 37. 
53 Ibid., p. 37. 
54 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
193 
 
enterprise would prove an excellent economic opportunity for the Tribe, providing sorely needed wage 
labor. 
Lupe wasn‟t the sole visionary behind the new venture. He worked with Silas Davis to revive the 
recreation idea on the reservation. They dreamed big. Lupe and Davis knew they were sitting on a 
potential gold mine. Perhaps more importantly, their friendship marked a new level of exchange that 
went beyond paternalism or the top-down model of knowledge production. Their relationship was built 
on a more even playing field: Lupe provided the political will and ability to convince a reticent Tribal 
Council of the worthiness of recreational enterprise and Davis shared his knowledge of the Fort Apache 
landscape and conservation techniques.  
Davis enjoyed a great reputation within the BIA. Harold Weaver considered him “to be the best fire 
suppression man in the Indian Service.”55 He also received a meritorious honor award from the BIA for 
his development of a fire protractor for employment in fire suppression work (Fig. 10). A native of 
Texas, he began his professional career as a forester for the BIA in 1926, receiving an appointment at 
the Klamath Agency.  He transferred to Fort Apache in 1935, where he organized the fire control 
program and led fire suppression training courses for the BIA Fire Schools. He worked in this position 
until 1944, when the BIA transferred him to the Colville Reservation to improve their fire suppression 
crew.56  Not long after Weaver assumed his post as Phoenix Area Forester, he requested for Davis‟s 
return to Fort Apache. In 1948, the fire hazard condition of the reservation forest had reached a critical 
condition. According to Weaver, “the fire hazard has increased tremendously since early days due to 
profound ecological changes resulting from the activities of whitemen. Where the early rangers used to 
suppress fires with a few hand tools, and small crews of men, it now requires hundreds of men and 
                                                 
55 Harold Weaver to William H. Zeh, “Memorandum: Forestry Situation on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation,” 
June 1, 1948, RG 75, NA FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 339, File # 14237-48, Box #26. 
56 L.D. Arnold, “Proposed meritorious honor award for Mr. Silas O. Davis,” March 7, 1952, FHS, Harold Weaver 
Papers, Folder #5. 

 
 
 
 
194 
 
heavy fire trail building equipment to stop fires sweeping through dense reproduction and pole stands.”57 
Weaver alerted Washington of the fire danger on Fort Apache, proposing that part of the remedy 
included Davis‟s services. Weaver got his wish, and in 1948 Davis returned to Fort Apache to work with 
Harry Kallander (who replaced Fred Moffat as Forest Supervisor in 1949) on Weaver‟s experimental 
prescribed burn program.  
Two decades of forestry work allowed Davis to build an intimate relationship with the White 
Mountain landscape. He also earned a solid reputation with the Apache through his days of training fire 
guards and fire fighters during the Indian New Deal. Truly enjoying his work with the Apache, Davis 
relished the idea of devoting his services full-time to the Tribe‟s recreation program. For Davis, unlike 
many of his colleagues, helping the Apache amounted to much more than a job. Harry Kallander, his 
supervisor at the time, projected his own pessimism about working with the Apache onto Davis‟s new 
charge, but admitted, “Si has a new burden of handling the tribal game wardens which he likes tho 
[sic].”58 In the early stages of developing the recreational program, Davis performed double duty, as he 
remained obligated to manage fire control activities on the reservation. Nonetheless, he revealed his 
passion for developing the WMRE when he selflessly labored extra hours to help Lupe. As a show of 
appreciation for his “long record of service” to the Apache people, the Tribal council “granted a lifetime 
free privilege of hunting and fishing on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation.”59 
Davis provided many suggestions to Lupe concerning the location of good campgrounds and the 
places that would draw the largest number of fishers. He also moved Lupe to remember his days of 
pastoral refuge along the Coronado Trail from a week‟s hard work at the smelter plant. According to 
Lupe, in the 1940s Davis even encouraged some fishers to visit the reservation to drum up revenue.   
                                                 
57 Weaver to Zeh, June 1, 1948. 
58 Harry Kallander to Harold Weaver, July 28, 1952, FHS, Harold Weaver Papers, Folder #8. 
59 Resolution of the White Mountain Apache Tribe, No. 53-22, June 4, 1953, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, 
File # 10197-46, Box #6. 

 
 
 
 
195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10 – Silas Davis working on his fire protractor (Courtesy of National Archives). 

 
 
 
 
196 
 
As a result, the Tribe sold a few more permits than usual, but not enough to matter. Lupe reminisced that 
“most people who came here fished for free. It was just a summer sport for them, and they didn‟t pay 
anything to the tribe. It was Sy [sic] Davis who kind of pictured the whole thing to me. We‟d talk about 
the streams. We‟d drive out, and he‟d say, „Wouldn‟t it be wonderful, Nelson, to have a campground in 
here? We could sell fishing licenses and stock the stream with fish, so fishermen can come back here 
and give us some money in the summertime.‟ And right then and there, my mind went back to Morenci. 
That was the thing I was thinking about there.”60 
From the Apache standpoint, establishing the WMRE involved walking a political tightrope. 
According to Lupe, the “oldtimers” were resistant to the idea. One of the biggest issues revolved around 
distrust of Euro-Americans: “All the subchiefs were opposed. All the medicine men… objected to it. 
They said, „We been giving the white people a free hand and we been losing our land.‟ They said, „Our 
land used to go beyond Springerville, way back behind that white mountain [sic], and the other way the 
boundary went way back toward Tonto, Camp Verde, Flagstaff, all over that place.‟” The “oldtimers” 
remembered how they ended up on the reservation. They feared that a major influx of white people 
would repeat the process of disenfranchisement from their homeland. In essence, they believed Euro-
Americans would see the value of reservation land and want it for themselves.  
Lupe argued that by allowing non-Indians onto the reservation, the Tribe could begin to 
economically compensate itself for past losses. He also asserted, “As long as we develop our land, from 
corner to corner, we‟ll have something to hold and something to be proud of and something that we can 
claim as our own and something that we have done ourselves in developing the resources.”61 Through 
selling fishing and hunting permits, building hotels and gas stations, and creating lake resorts, the Tribe 
could assume control of their own economic future. They wouldn‟t have to rely exclusively on the 
                                                 
60 Cantwell, “The Happiest Fishing Ground,” p. 38. 
61 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
197 
 
whims of the BIA and outside business interests. Lupe‟s economic argument implied that for the Apache 
to maintain their sovereignty and restore their cultural identity, they had to develop an independent 
economic base. Only from this standpoint would the tribal government acquire any political sway in 
their own affairs. Lupe‟s proposal represented a bold step towards breaking the bonds of dependency 
and paternalism.  
The Tribal Council, influential medicine men and elders, and Apache ranchers balked at the 
proposal. Lupe labored for two years to convince these factions, especially the ranchers, that the WMRE 
was a sound idea. The ranchers feared that white tourists would interfere with the reservation‟s cattle 
industry, which aside from revenue from timber leases, remained the single most lucrative enterprise on 
the reservation. Lupe sympathized with their claim, not denying that they might have to sacrifice some 
rangeland to support the recreational enterprise. At the same time, he presented the alternative. He 
explained that the reservation population was growing, approximately from 3,000 in the 1930s to near 
4,000 in the 1950s. He predicted that revenue generated from the cattle industry couldn‟t accommodate 
all these new tribal members. In essence, an increasingly smaller proportion of the reservation 
population would derive income from raising cattle. What would this growing population of Apaches do 
to support themselves? Lupe reasoned, “Cattle raise us money, all right. But we got to think about the 
members of the tribe that don‟t have cattle. The day might come when they going to tell you they might 
tax you for the income from your cattle. The cattle belong to you. The grass the cattle eat belongs to 
you. But the grass belongs to them, too. They might tell you they are going to tax you for the grass so 
they can get some money from the cattle you have.‟”62 The Apache ranchers eventually succumbed to 
this logic. The Tribe needed to diversify their economic base so as to not overburden the cattle industry. 
Apache ranchers figured they had far more to lose through taxes than the loss of a few acres of land. 
 
                                                 
62 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
198 
 
The First Year 
After considering the proposal for two years, in 1952 the Tribal Council finally gave Lupe and Davis 
the go ahead to start working with tribal members to improve the existing recreational facilities and 
begin building new ones on the reservation. Initially, the Tribe had very limited funds to invest in the 
program. Despite this, Davis and five Apache exhibited resourcefulness, accomplishing an amazing 
amount of work in the first year. Davis‟s crew included three game wardens, a carpenter, and a “helper.” 
The game wardens, Lydo Harvey, Dewey Lupe, and Jones Adley, doubled as law enforcement officers 
and game managers. On top of this, they assisted Davis with maintenance and construction duties.   
On the law enforcement front, in the first year Harvey and the other game wardens patrolled 27,083 
miles by car and another 700 miles by horse. They checked and interviewed 3,383 fishers, campers, and 
hunters. They also issued 71 warnings for violations and made 53 arrests, which resulted in 43 
convictions in Tribal Court, 2 convictions in State Court, and the collection of $821 in fines.63 The game 
wardens had very few resources from which to protect the entire 2,600 square mile reservation. For 
example, Harvey‟s equipment consisted of a horse and saddle, a 1942 Ford coupe, a skinny bedroll “and 
lots of determination to back up the shiny new badge he wore.”64 Harvey, along with Dewey Lupe and 
Jones Adley, monitored the fish and game on the entire reservation, requiring many lonely days and 
nights patrolling the often roadless regions of the reservation.  
While patrolling, they occasionally encountered belligerent non-Indians who resented having to 
abide by tribal game laws. On one occasion, Lydo Harvey confronted a businessman of high standing 
and much political clout from a local non-Indian town about illegal hunting practices. As a consequence, 
the businessman threatened to harm Harvey if he didn‟t let him hunt on the reservation as he saw fit. The 
                                                 
63 Silas O. Davis to John O. Crow, “Memorandum: Accomplishments – White Mountain Recreation Enterprise – 
Season 1952,” January 15, 1953, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 339, File #3940-43, Box #45; James D. Sparks, 
“White Mountain Rec. Enterprise Story of Modern Apache Progress: Completion of 7th Year of Operations 
Marked,” Fort Apache Scout 1 (July 1962): 4. 
64 Sparks, “Lydo Harvey.” 

 
 
 
 
199 
 
perpetrator thought because of his high status, he was immune to the laws on Fort Apache. Harvey 
called his bluff, stood his ground, and turned him away. James Sparks, his boss for two decades, proudly 
described Harvey as a man “that never let threats of bodily harm or political reprisal sway him from his 
duty.” Besides enforcing game laws, the game wardens also spent much of their time looking for lost 
tourists, a task that frequently involved multiple days of camping, horseback riding, and walking. In 
Harvey‟s case in particular, Sparks claimed that “many persons owe their lives to his tracking skills and 
determination.”65 
On the recreational and land management front, Davis and his crew focused on attracting the angler 
crowd, since trout fishing was the biggest potential draw at the time. To facilitate the visiting fisher‟s 
experience, Davis and his crew constructed access roads and trails and built campgrounds near prime 
fishing spots. Tribal funds also went towards erecting hundreds of directional and informational signs, 
orienting the less wilderness savvy. They helped distribute non-native trout and catfish from Williams 
Creek Fish Hatchery to reservation streams and conducted an extensive survey of game animals. They 
also developed a fish tank that the FWS “thought very adequate.” FWS personnel at the hatchery were 
so impressed that they asked Davis‟s crew to build one for them. Much of their work in the first year, 
however, involved developing recreational infrastructure. They cleaned up 62 campsites, cleared one 
lake area of debris and trash, bulldozed 11 garbage pits, planted 18 stock tanks, dug and filled 2 fish 
ponds, constructed and placed 115 camp tables, and installed 15 camp toilets.66 
  On top of restocking reservation streams with fish, the rudiments of White Mountain Apache-
directed ecological restoration projects appeared during the WMRE‟s first year of operation. A good 
deal of experimental transplantations involving plants and animals occurred. To improve wildlife 
habitat, the WMRE imported huckleberries from the state of Washington, planting them at six different 
                                                 
65 Ibid. 
66 Davis to Crow, “Memorandum: Accomplishments.” 

 
 
 
 
200 
 
sites. Davis reported, “We reviewed some 300 plants and if they survive and produce fruit we expect to 
plant some 50,000 in the future. Black Cap raspberries should do well in some localities and we plan to 
try a few plants this coming season.” They also released nine mink originally from New York on 
Cibecue, Big Diamond, and Bonito Creeks. The Tribal Council even established a game preserve to 
serve as a refuge for breeding populations of game animals.67  
The most important restoration work initiated at this time involved the Apache trout. Despite 
recurring interest from the Tribal Council since the late 1930s to close Apache trout streams on Mount 
Baldy to fishing, the FWS and BIA took no action. In 1952 R.D. Holtz, formerly the Fort Apache 
Agency Superintendent and currently the Phoenix Area Forester (Weaver‟s replacement), admitted, 
“The matter of closing the headwaters of some of the high streams… was discussed sometime ago,” but 
a representative from the FWS claimed that native trout “were abundant” and believed that it was 
unnecessary “to close these streams to fishing.”68  The Apache trout remained a low priority for the 
FWS. Even though the FWS had tentatively considered raising native trout at Williams Creek Hatchery 
for restocking in 1941, they failed to follow through with this proposal. Also, Clarence Aldous‟s beaver 
management program in the late 1940s and early 1950s only considered the effects that beaver dams 
would have on non-native trout, not the Apache trout: “Occasionally very high dams obstruct the 
upstream movement of trout, but in the reservation where stocking of legal sized fish are planted each 
year on most of the streams, high dam obstructions are not too serious for fish planting can be made 
above such dams as well as below them.”69 Using Aldous‟s logic, beaver dams could reproductively 
isolate native trout populations, further jeopardizing their existence. No evidence exists to suggest that 
this program had an adverse effect on the Apache trout, but the fact that Aldous didn‟t consider the 
                                                 
67 R.D. Holtz to John O. Crow, March 21, 1952, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, Box #45; 
Davis to Crow, “Memorandum: Accomplishments.”; Resolution of the White Mountain Apache Tribe, No. 52-30, 
RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, File #10197-46, Box #6. 
68 R.D. Holtz to John O. Crow, March 21, 1952. 
69 Clarence M. Aldous, “Beaver Survey and Management Plan.” 

 
 
 
 
201 
 
potential consequences of his project to Apache trout lends credence to the notion that the FWS treated 
the conservation of this species with low priority. As a result of this neglect, Apache trout populations 
continued to decline. Fortunately, White Mountain Apache interest in this species persisted. Because the 
Apache trout were “in danger of extinction,” the Tribal Council ordered the closure of six streams to 
fishing and camping in the headwaters of Mount Baldy that contained pure populations. Davis and his 
crew even erected a fish screen on one of the streams to prevent the migration of non-native trout into 
pure populations of the native trout.70  
The Tribal Council officially established the WMRE by tribal resolution in 1954.71 Although most of 
the early work had little cultural significance to the tribe, the WMRE‟s projects did have economic, 
educational, and political significance. The WMRE provided an opportunity for a whole generation of 
Apache people to gain knowledge in Western management techniques – more so than during the Indian 
New Deal. This time around the Tribe received obvious direct economic and technical benefits from the 
venture. By 1958, the first profitable year, the enterprise employed twelve people and generated 
$119,000. By 1964, the enterprise boasted sixty permanent employees and raked in $1,200,000. And 
these numbers would only increase through time.  As the WMRE expanded, so too did its 
responsibilities for the construction of roads and the management of hotels, stores, and gas stations. 
However, its primary mission remained the protection and conservation of “wildlife, recreational, and 
natural resources of the White Mountain Apache Indian Reservation for the members of the Tribe and 
the general public.” The WMRE also furnished the Tribal Council with fish and wildlife population 
estimates so they could establish seasons and bag limits. And perhaps most importantly, the enterprise 
                                                 
70 Special Meeting, White Mountain Apache Tribe, March 24, 1952; Resolution of the White Mountain Apache 
Tribe, No. 52-9, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, File #10197-46, Box #6. 
71 Resolution of the White Mountain Apache Tribe, No. 53-50, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, File #9990-49, 
Box #6. 

 
 
 
 
202 
 
served as a “liaison… with State and Federal Agencies concerned with… wildlife and recreational 
resources.”72   
With the growth of the WMRE came resource battles with Euro-Americans. At the same time, the 
WMRE provided the Tribe with political and economic leverage that they had never experienced before. 
As revenues increased, the Tribe reinvested in the recreational infrastructure of the reservation and, 
more significantly, the restoration of their homeland. Until 1957 the enterprise derived most of its 
revenue from fishing permits and a few hunting permits. The WMRE‟s revenue source greatly increased 
with the construction of Hon-Dah , the first tribally owned recreational complex, which included a 
motel, gas station, and tackle store. Strategically positioned at the northwestern reservation entrance, 
these facilities functioned to capture the growing number of tourists entering Fort Apache. Income 
generated by Hon-Dah fed back into the development of the enterprise, allowing the construction of 
more recreational facilities. Another big boost to the WMRE‟s income was the construction of Smith 
Park Reservoir, later renamed Hawley Lake in honor of Albert M. Hawley, the reservation 
superintendent of Gros Ventre heritage that helped the Tribe overcome legal hurdles involving the 
construction of the reservoir.73 The construction of Smith Park Reservoir represented the Tribe‟s first 
significant sovereign struggle to resist non-Indian influence over reservation resources (Fig. 11).  
 
Resistance: The Battle over Hawley Lake 
The Smith Park Reservoir (Hawley Lake) controversy held major political implications for the 
White Mountain Apache. This water resource controversy represented the Tribe‟s largest show of 
resistance to date against outsider attempts to control their natural resources.  For the first time, the Tribe 
led the way to protect their resources, while the BIA remained in the background, mainly in an advisory  
                                                 
72 “Plan of Operations for the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise,” RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, File 
#9990-49, Box #6. 
73 “Hawley Given Int. Dept. Highest Service Award,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (April 1966): 8. 

 
 
 
 
203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11 – Hawley Lake and Smith Park Dam (Photos taken by author). 

 
 
 
 
204 
 
role. The political and economic leverage emerging with the establishment of the WMRE meant the 
Tribe could take on institutions that had historically exploited the Tribe‟s resources with little resistance 
and consequence.   
The battle over Smith Park Reservoir began in 1954, when the Tribe laid plans to build the dam as 
their first major project for the WMRE. The Salt River Valley Water Users‟ Association (SRVWUA) 
objected to the construction of the dam on the grounds that the Tribe was impounding water that they 
had claimed prior rights to. However, much of the conflict came to a head in 1957 when lurid reports 
circulated through non-Indian communities about the construction of the lake taking place under the 
protection of armed Apache guards.  These stories inflamed racist images of the Apache as aggressive 
warriors, conjuring up visions of the Apache wars of the nineteenth century. Of course, though, 
journalists blew these stories out of proportion. Even the Apache County Sheriff admitted, “There were 
no hard words…They were just doing their job.” Contrary to rampant rumors, “there has been absolutely 
no violence in connection with any actions of the tribe relating to Smith Park Dam, nor has any physical 
force been brought to bear upon any person to prevent his entering the construction area.”74 Lester 
Oliver, a Tribal Council member at the time, remembered the events differently. He claimed that the 
Sheriff pulled a gun on the guards, only retreating after realizing he was in the sights of an Apache 
rifleman perched on a nearby cliff. Later that evening, Oliver received an anonymous phone call 
threatening that if the Apache remained on the “war path,” the state would “send in the National 
Guard.”75  Regardless of the true circumstances, tensions ran high between the Apache and the 
SRVWUA. 
The Arizona Republic, the primary Phoenix newspaper, covered much of the affair. The citizens of 
Phoenix were interested in the controversy because they resided in the Salt Valley, the place supposedly 
                                                 
74 F.M. Haverland to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, May 15, 1958, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 341.7, File 
#14871-56,  Box #30. 
75 Jo Baeza, “Former Chairman to be Marshall,” Fort Apache Scout 27 (August 26, 1988): 17. 

 
 
 
 
205 
 
being “victimized” by the construction the reservoir.  Articles both sympathetic to and against the 
Apache appeared. Ben Avery, a columnist who was often critical of the Apache, chastised the federal 
government for overstepping its bounds by encouraging the Apache not to enter into agreements with 
the state of Arizona over water development. However, Avery had little understanding of Indian law, 
never mentioning the Winters Doctrine of 1908, the product of a Supreme Court case that ruled that 
Native Americans have prior use rights to water on reservations.76 In an article sympathetic to the 
Apache, Paul Simmons, a non-Indian working as the tribal clerk, defended the rights of the Apache: “I 
seem to have read some place where the Apaches were shoved back farther into the hills from Globe 
area when white men located gold there. Now the Apaches are expected to give up waters from their 
springs…Times haven‟t changed much for the Redmen – only the names of white men who have pushed 
the Apache almost to the limit.”77 And surprisingly, one article even accurately described the legal 
implications of the conflict: “The government is expected to maintain that it is not a valid party to the 
suit against the Apaches; and that Arizona, when it became a state, took no jurisdiction over the Indian 
nation or Indian reservation lands.”78  Essentially the battle over Smith Park Reservoir boiled down to a 
sovereignty issue over the rights of the Tribe to manage resources on the reservation without outside 
interference. Although this battle didn‟t involve an act of restoration, it had a significant bearing on 
future restoration efforts. The construction of Smith Park Reservoir represented a successful assertion of 
tribal sovereignty, thus a gain in political and economic leverage to manage resources on the reservation 
as the Apache saw fit. To see this political evolution, we need to trace the struggle from the beginning. 
In 1954 the Tribal Council voted to use tribal monies for the construction of the Smith Park 
Reservoir. Simply out of respect and partly misinformed (they were probably incorrectly advised to do 
                                                 
76 Ben Avery, “Indian Water Rights Big Issue,” The Arizona Republic (June 16, 1957): 1-2. 
77 Jack Karle, “Apaches‟ New Lake First Step In Creating Vacation Paradise,” The Arizona Republic (June 9, 
1957): 1. 
78 Gig Kneeland, “Vital Issue Raised by Apaches,” The Arizona Republic (June 9 1957): 1. 

 
 
 
 
206 
 
so – misunderstandings about water rights were common within the BIA), the Tribe sought permission 
from the SRVWUA to build the reservoir. The SRVWUA believed that according to the Kent Decree 
(also known as Hurley vs. Abbott et al.), a court case in 1910 that supposedly adjudicated water rights in 
Arizona, they had rights to all water in the Salt River Watershed. However, the Decree never considered 
the Apache, whose reservation encompassed the headwaters of the Salt River. So in reply, the 
SRVWUA stated that they would allow the construction of the dam under the condition that the White 
Mountain Apache Tribe signed an agreement recognizing the Water Users‟ claim to all the water in the 
Salt River Basin. The BIA later advised the Tribe against entering any agreement with the SRVWUA. 
Phoenix Area Director Haverland described the SRVWUA‟s request as “unconscionable.”79 After all, 
even though no tribe in Arizona to date had challenged the Kent Decree, the Winter‟s Doctrine of 1908 
gave Native Americans prior use rights to water on their reservations.  
In 1955 the SRVWUA threatened court action if the Tribe proceeded to construct Smith Park Dam. 
Si Davis, Lester Oliver, and Nelson Lupe joined A.B. Melzner and Geraint Humphreys, field solicitors 
for the BIA, to determine whether or not SRVWUA had a solid case. Melzner and Humphreys believed 
“that the Salt River Valley Water Users‟ would not be in a position to sustain any action against the Fort 
Apache Tribe for the construction of Smith Park Dam.” Three major conclusions emerged from the 
meeting: first, the construction of the dam would only minimally impact the flow of the Salt River; 
second, the Tribe held water rights equal to or above those of the SRVWUA due to the Winter‟s 
Doctrine; and third, the contested watershed resided entirely within the bounds of Fort Apache, thus 
giving the Tribe clear jurisdiction over the construction site. Based on these conclusions, Haverland 
informed Commissioner Emmons that he advised the Tribe to proceed with the project. He also warned 
                                                 
79 F.M. Haverland to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, May 15, 1958, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 341.7, File 
#14871-56, Box #30. 

 
 
 
 
207 
 
the Apache not to enter into any agreement with the SRVWUA because “such action might jeopardize 
Indian rights to water on the reservation.”80 
Believing the law was on their side, the Tribal Council hired a construction company owned by 
Thomas Mulcaire. Work commenced in August of 1956, only to be halted five weeks later. The 
SRVWUA, after filing a law suit, obtained a court injunction to stop construction “on the justification 
that the dam would result in undue water loss on account of evaporation.”81 On September 7, 1956 the 
Deputy Sheriff of Apache County served Mulcaire a temporary restraining order. Mulcaire subsequently 
ceased operations and removed his equipment. The timing of the injunction was not entirely damaging 
to the Tribe‟s efforts. The imminent approach of winter, which comes early in the White Mountains, 
would have temporarily suspended all construction work until the spring anyway. However, the Tribe 
immediately realized that their water rights had been thrown into jeopardy. Because of the limited legal 
resources of Superintendent Hawley and Area Director Haverland, the Tribe sought the advice of the 
BIA‟s Central Office and the Solicitor‟s Office of the Department of Interior (DOI). Unfortunately, the 
DOI and the BIA responded slowly.  
This caused Clinton Kessay, the current Tribal Chairman, to fire off a letter to Commissioner 
Emmons stating the Tribe‟s dire concern about the situation: 
We, as members of the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council, know that the right to utilize our 
water will determine whether or not we are to exist and we therefore firmly desire to protect the 
water that was set aside for our use…We are also aware, that if our water rights are not 
adequately protected by the Department of the Interior and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the 
water rights of all Indian reservations in Arizona will be in jeopardy. We have never been given 
a clear cut understanding just what the positions of the Department of the Interior and the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs were in the protection of these water rights. Our tribal attorney has been unable 
to secure any definite information as to the role of the Solicitor‟s office…Our water and the right 
to use our water to develop our resources is vitally important to use as a tribe, and we are 
therefore very anxious to know just what the Bureau of Indian Affairs position is and what action 
                                                 
80F.M. Haverland, “Memorandum for the records,” December 13, 1955, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 341.7, 
File #14871-56, Box #30. 
81 Fred H. Massey to White Mountain Apache Tribal Council, March 7, 1957, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 56, 
File #7593-56, Box #8. 

 
 
 
 
208 
 
we can expect from the Solicitor‟s office regarding the present pending lawsuits and what we can 
expect if in the future the White Mountain Apache Tribe‟s water development program is 
harassed by outside agents.82 
 
Kessay‟s letter conveyed the Tribe‟s inherent distrust in the BIA‟s ability to protect their resources. The 
Tribe was troubled by the BIA and DOI‟s lack of response to the Hawley Lake litigation. They had 
backed the project, but had given the Apache very little guidance on how to proceed if the SRVWUA 
pursued a litigious path. And up to this point concerning the injunction, the Solicitor‟s Office told the 
Apache, “In view of the present status of the Mulcaire case, you should, of course, not attempt to cause 
further construction work on the dam.”83 The Tribe received that information approximately a month 
after the issuance of the court injunction, and by the first of the year, they had received no further news. 
The lack of action on the part of the Washington officials wasn‟t surprising given the political climate of 
the Termination Era. An administration seeking the eventual dissolution and assimilation of all tribes 
into the mainstream society probably was not in a hurry to defend the sovereignty of the White 
Mountain Apache. Fortunately, however, the Apache had the law and determination on their side. And 
because of the controversial nature of termination policy, tribal lawyers and Native American political 
groups increasingly held the BIA under a legal microscope. They were compelled to act.84  
With the DOI dragging their feet, Barry DeRose, the Tribal Attourney, and the Tribal Council felt 
they had to push the issue, especially since they wanted the dam constructed by the summer of 1957. 
The Tribe had already invested $30,000 in the project and feared further financial losses if resumption of 
the project didn‟t occur by spring. On February 5, 1957, Derose, along with a tribal delegation, traveled 
to Washington to discuss the matter face to face with BIA officials and representatives from the 
                                                 
82 Clinton Kessay to Glenn L. Emmons, January 8, 1957, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 341.7, File #14871-56, 
Box #30. 
83 Edmund J. Fritz to F.M. Haverland, October 18, 1956, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 341.7, File #14871-56,  
Box #30. 
84 On outside political pressure forcing the hand of the BIA see Thomas W. Cowger, “‟The Crossroads of 
Destiny‟: The NCAI‟s Landmark Struggle to Thwart Coercive Termination,” American Indian Culture and 
Research Journal 20 (1996): 122-144. 

 
 
 
 
209 
 
Solicitor‟s Office. Derose and the Tribe presented a loophole they found in the case. The lawsuit failed 
to name the White Mountain Apache or the BIA. Because of this, the Tribe believed they could continue 
building the dam as long as they constructed it themselves. The DOI, after some muddling around, 
eventually concurred with the Tribe.85 On April 15, 1957 the Tribal Council passed a resolution 
authorizing “the Chairman and the Secretary of the Council …to negotiate and sign lease rental 
agreements for equipment that is needed in the construction of the Smith Park Dam.”86 At last, the 
Apache took the matter into their own hands and built the dam themselves.  
The Tribe didn‟t know what to expect given the tension between them and the SRVWUA, so under 
armed guard, they moved forward with the construction of the dam. Lydo Harvey, with his usual quiet 
skill and confidence in handling difficult situations, supervised the tribal peace officers.87 The 
SRVWUA got wind of this soon after construction recommenced. On June 4, 1957, they attempted to 
serve legal documents to the Tribe, Area Director Haverland, and Superintendent Hawley. To avoid 
being served, Chariman Kessay, Vice Chairman Lupe, and other tribal leaders fled to New Mexico.88 In 
addition, Harvey and the armed guards rebuffed the Apache County‟s Sheriff‟s office attempt to serve 
the restraining order to the Tribe at the construction site. The Tribal Council had instructed them not to 
admit anyone on to the construction site “unless authorized by the tribal council.” By this point, though, 
                                                 
85 On March 7 the Tribe received a letter stating they couldn‟t proceed because the money for the project “is under 
control of the Superintendent [who] would not be justified in advancing further funds until the injunction is 
removed.” In this same letter, after being told in 1955 not to negotiate with the SRVWUA, they were told to 
negotiate with the SRVWUA. In a second letter dated March 28, the Central Office gave the Tribe permission to 
proceed. Fred H. Massey to White Mountain Apache Tribal Council, March 7, 1957, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, 
Dec. 56, File #7593-56, Box #8; Fred H. Massey to F.M. Haverland, March 28, 1957, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, 
Dec. 341.7, File #14871-56, Box #30. 
86 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Resolution No. 57-31, April 15, 1957, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 
341.7,  File #14871-56, Box #30. 
87 Sparks, “Lydo Harvey.” 
88 “Yesterday‟s Leaders are Today‟s Elders,” Fort Apache Scout 18 (April 13, 1979): 18. 

 
 
 
 
210 
 
the Apache had completed the dam, with the reservoir commencing to fill. State officials returned the 
next morning with armed “body attachments” to find the worksite deserted.89   
Finally, through a jungle of legal and bureaucratic hassles, the Tribe had dammed Trout Creek to 
create Smith Park Reservoir. They built the reservoir at an elevation of 9,000 feet above sea level within 
an appealing forest setting dominated by ponderosa pine and Engelmann spruce. The lake impounded 
252 surface acres of water with a maximum depth of 40 feet. The Tribe expected the lake to 
accommodate the increase in fishing activity on the reservation. Jack Hemphill, a FWS biologist 
working on the reservation, predicted that the new lake would “absorb the displaced anglers during the 
dry years when stream flows are poor.” Further, he believed the stability of the lake would allow 
fisheries biologists to “determine each fall what management measures are required to provide 
maximum lake harvest the following spring.” The lake eventually served two major purposes: diversify 
fisheries management options and increase the profitability of the WMRE. Because the lake attracted an 
additional 48,000 man-days of angling and other recreational uses, an early estimate predicted that 
Hawley Lake would generate an extra $100,000 a year. 90   
The Tribe built the spillway for Smith Park Reservoir in 1958, two years ahead of schedule. The lake 
filled by March 1958 because of a heavy snow the previous winter.  The first planting of rainbow trout 
occurred in 1958, and the lake was open for business that same year. The Tribe constructed three more 
dams (Hurricane, Pacheta, Drift Fence) in 1959 and another in 1960 (Earl Park), all while the Hawley 
Lake incident remained in court. A total of seven reservoirs existed on Fort Apache by 1960, with more 
                                                 
89 F.M. Haverland to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, May 15, 1958, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 341.7, File 
#14871-56,  Box #30. 
90 Jack E. Hemphill, “Fishery Management Report: Smith Park Lake, Ft. Apache Indian Reservation, Arizona,” 
November 15, 1956, Branch of Game & Fish Hatcheries, Albequerque NM, FWS, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 
931, File #3940-43, Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
211 
 
in the offering. In 1960 the Tribal Council conducted another feasibility study to determine the best sites 
for future reservoir development on the reservation.91 
The SRVWUA continued, to no avail, efforts to have the Smith Park Dam removed. Eventually, 
these attempts devolved into negotiations seeking compensation for “water loss.”92 To ease the tension 
between the Apache and SRVWUA, Superintendent Hawley and the BIA suggested that the Tribe lease 
land around the lake to potential Euro-American home owners.93 Unfortunately for the Apache, the BIA 
structured the deal such that they offered leases at less than the going market value. Furthermore, the 
BIA discouraged the Apache from adding a clause that would allow the Tribe to periodically raise rent. 
Given that the Tribe had legal rights to the water anyway, nothing legally bound them to make this 
concession.  Whether the Tribe decided to make the concession because of pressure from the BIA and 
the SRVWUA or because of mounting legal costs is not known, but the case eventually went away. But 
the compromise clearly indicated another situation where non-Indian interests exploited the Apache. 
Even when the Tribe developed water resources to their benefit, non-Indians found a way to 
disproportionately benefit themselves. This compromise, however, would lead to another major 
controversy in 25 years, when a politically stronger Tribal Council decided not to renew the leases, 
much to the chagrin of many non-Indians who had built homes around the lake. 94 
 
 
 
                                                 
91 The BIA constructed two small reservoirs in the 40s, Tonto Lake (1943) and Bog Creek (1946). F.M. 
Haverland to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, August 15, 1960, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 341.7, File 
#14871-56, Box #30. 
92 Barry DeRose to Albert Hawley, September 19, 1960, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 341.7, File #14871-56,  
Box #30. 
93 Albert Hawley to F.M. Haverland, February 11, 1958, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 339, File #3295-58, Box 
#17. 
94 Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner: Hawley Lake is another Example of How Indians must Live under a Double 
Standard,” The Fort Apache Scout 35 (May 10, 1996): 2. 

 
 
 
 
212 
 
The WMRE: Foundation for Cultural Exchange  
With resistance came increased exchange. The more the White Mountain Apache pushed back, the 
more respect they received. Before and after the battle for Hawley Lake, as the Tribe diversified its 
economic base, natural resource development on the reservation was on the increase. Even before the 
Tribal Council officially adopted the Plan of Operations for the WMRE in 1954, the non-Indian public 
and BIA personnel began to notice positive changes in Fort Apache‟s recreational infrastructure. Only 
after a year of work, Ralph Gelvin, the Phoenix Area Director, commented that “The public that has 
used the facilities at the Fort Apache Reservation has been complimentary on the improvement in the 
facilities and the high caliber of enforcement of local game and reservation ordinances.”95 L.D. Arnold 
also commended the Apache on “the progress made in utilizing the very important fish, wildlife, and 
recreational resources of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation.” Arnold also noted with particular interest 
the enterprise‟s emphasis on restoring the Tribe‟s natural resources, “not only for proper and wise use 
…, but also for their orderly development and the expansion of their productivity.”96   
Despite the early positive press, the Apache needed to counter bad press as a result of the Hawley 
Lake controversy, their reputation as isolationists, and the circulation of myths about the aggressive and 
unfriendly nature of Apache people that persisted among the non-Indian public. 97  Soon after 
establishing the WMRE, the Tribe immediately began work on public relations by advertising in and 
soliciting articles for newspapers and magazines such as The Arizona Republic, The New York Times, 
Arizona Highways, and American Legion Magazine.  These articles often described Fort Apache as a 
primeval wilderness, as if the Apache and white man had left it untouched. In one article “white hunters 
                                                 
95 Ralph M. Gelvin to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, March 4, 1953, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File 
#3940-43, Box #45. 
96 L.D. Arnold (Harold Weaver signed) to Ralph M. Gelvin, March 12, 1953, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, 
File #3940-43, Box #45. 
97 For an example of popular renderings of Apache stereotypes see Robert M. Hyatt, “Apacheland Welcomes 
White Man,” American Legion Magazine, (March 1962): 14-15, 38-39. 

 
 
 
 
213 
 
stalk[ed] the wilderness for bobcat, fox, elk, deer, javelin, and migratory waterfowl.”98 Arizona 
Highways referred to the White Mountains of Fort Apache as “the last remaining perfect wilderness area 
in the state.”99 In another article found in American Legion Magazine titled “Apacheland Welcomes 
White Man,” the author depicted the Hawley Lake area as “virgin forests of spruce, fir, and aspen.” The 
author went on to say, “We spent two hours driving to this beautiful lake, but could have made it in half 
that time had we not paused so often to rhapsodize over the glorious scenery and gape at animals we‟d 
never seen at such close range.” 100 Of course, though, this area of the reservation had been grazed, 
logged, and dammed. Nonetheless, the Apache remained rightly proud of the relatively good ecological 
health of their homeland. And if outsiders perceived it as a wilderness, this only increased its appeal. 
After all, middle-class Americans began developing a love affair with the wilderness ideal in the 
1950s.101  
Another tactic for exposure involved Nelson Lupe, Lydo Harvey, Chairman Oliver, and other tribal 
officials spending time with journalists visiting the reservation. Following one such visit, Richard 
Dunlop of the Saturday Evening Post wrote an article describing the recreational “playground” of Fort 
Apache. Playing off of old Apache stereotypes, the article‟s subtitle read “A family of palefaces from 
the Midwest spends its vacations on an Arizona reservation and learns Indian outdoor lore from Apaches 
whose ancestors once shot it out with U.S. Troopers.” By turning such stereotypes on their head, the 
White Mountain Apache used them to redraw Indian-non-Indian boundaries to their advantage. Clearly 
welcoming the characterization of the Wild West, Nelson Lupe traveled along with Dunlop‟s family and 
                                                 
98 Richard Dunlop, “Apache Camp-Out,” Saturday Evening Post, undated, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, File #2602, 
Dec. 931, Box #45. 
99 Charles W. Hebert, “Land of the White Mountain Apaches,” Arizona Highways 37 (July, 1962): 1-43, p. 13. 
100 Hyatt, “Apacheland Welcomes White Man.”  
101 On the rise in the public popularity of the wilderness ideal see Roderick Frazier Nash, Wilderness and the 
American Mind (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001), pp. 200-237; Samuel P. Hays, Beauty, Health, 
and Permanence: Environmental Politics in the United States, 1955-1985 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1987), pp. 99-172. 

 
 
 
 
214 
 
showed them “cliffs from which Apache snipers once shot down blue-coated troopers.” At the same 
time, Lupe wasn‟t shy about delivering a message of Apache independence and perseverance: “Apaches 
have always lived around here…We always will. We fought hard to keep this country. We know that 
whites are still trying to take it away from us. If we fail to develop our reservation, sooner or later 
outsiders will do it. It would be for their benefit, not ours. We know that the more tourists that come, the 
more secure our country will be for our kids.”102 Lupe blatantly erected a boundary, albeit a porous one. 
The Tribe welcomed Euro-American science, technology, and economic strategies, but on Apache 
terms.  
Lydo Harvey practiced a different type of exchange.  He took the Dunlop family up to Mount Baldy 
and showed them how to fish the “Indian way.” Demonstrating the cultural adaptability of his people, he 
explained, “Apaches never fished in the old days. We ate no cold-blooded animals.” He fashioned a 
fishing rod out materials found on the spot and in “less than a minute…flipped a rainbow trout onto the 
bank.”103  This demonstration symbolized the Apaches broader achievements in adopting new 
technologies and adapting them to local conditions.  
Later the family met with Chairman Oliver, the first college-educated Tribal Chairman.  Dunlop 
wanted to know how the WMRE benefitted the average tribal member. Oliver used this opportunity to 
dispel the common myth that all Native Americans were on a federal dole at the taxpayers‟ expense: 
“We‟re trying to better our personal lot in life just like everybody else. Eventually we intend to use 
Indian investments to give individual Indians opportunities for advancement – scholarships to college, 
public housing, when we can afford it… You tourists are helping individual Apaches to achieve 
independence from welfare handouts.”104 In a similar vein, because Arizona was a haven for 
                                                 
102 Richard Dunlop, “Apache Camp-Out.”  
103 Ibid. 
104 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
215 
 
conservative Americans, the Apache had to overcome the impression they were socialists or 
communists.  
Oliver found a comment in the 1958 Annual Report of the Tonto Soil Conservation District 
concerning land management practices on the reservation that illustrated this misconception very well. 
But the comment wasn‟t all negative. In fact it endorsed the Tribe‟s management efforts: 
We have a rather ironic situation in Gila County. The Whiteriver Apache Indian Reservation lies 
across a fence from the Tonto Soil Conservation District. Their conservation efforts (in my 
personal view) are handled in a semi-democratic, semi-fascistic manner. Ours are strictly on the 
democratic principle. In conservation, restoration, water yield and water salvage, the Reservation 
is years ahead of us. Why should lands under the trusteeship of the Department of Interior come 
up with answers to present day land management problems so far ahead of lands administered 
under the U.S.D.A.??? [sic] At the start of their conservation program, their lands were in worse 
condition than the Forest lands are today. The White Mountain Apache Reservation is the most 
encouraging spot on the Salt River watershed. Congratulations and encouragement are in 
order.105 
 
Cleverly, Oliver co-opted the comment for double duty. In a letter to George S. Kephart, BIA Chief of 
Forestry, Oliver policed the political and environmental boundaries of the Apache homeland with subtle 
wit: “I sincerely hope that our Tribe deserves these remarks, except perhaps for the one „semi-
democratic, semi-fascistic,‟ whatever that means, and we will continue to use all of our available means 
to improve our natural resources.”106 While correcting political misconceptions about the tribal 
government, he made clear to Kephart that restoration and management work on the reservation 
exceeded in quality off-reservation efforts, a delineation the Tribe would increasingly employ to defend 
their sovereignty.  
The Tribe also reinforced and created new relationships with federal and state natural resource 
management agencies. With the new Oliver administration in May of 1954, the Tribal Council renewed 
the cooperative agreement with the FWS and AGFC concerning the operation of the Williams Creek 
                                                 
105 Lester Oliver to G.S. Kephart, April 17, 1959, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 339, File #3295-58, Box #17. 
106 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
216 
 
Fish Hatchery.107 Under the new agreement, the Apache recommitted the land and water for fish-cultural 
operations and took on more responsibility for distributing fish from the hatchery to waters on the 
reservation. Of course, the FWS wanted complete control of restocking efforts, asserting that “any 
distribution done by the Tribe will be in accordance with schedules and programs prepared by the 
Service.”108 Federal paternalism still ruled the relationship between the Apache and the FWS.  
Nonetheless, the Apache would receive further technical training from their relationship with the 
FWS. More specifically, young Apache assistants learned fishery management techniques and Creel 
census methods for measuring fisher and hunter resource consumption. This training was particularly 
important because the Tribal Council had assumed the responsibility for determining bag and take limits 
on the reservation. In this new arrangement, the Tribal Council depended on information from the 
WMRE on available fish and wildlife. So the WMRE needed accurate estimates of fish and game 
populations.  In the Council‟s determinations, Tribal members received first consideration. Any surplus 
game, without depleting populations, became available to non-Indian recreational hunters. The Council 
also determined which species non-Indians could hunt; deer, turkey, and the Apache trout, for the most 
part, remained off limits to non-Indians until the 1970s.109  
One of the most important fishery management tools taught was sampling fish populations to 
determine to the extent streams needed restocking. Estimating fish populations involved stunning fish by 
circulating electricity through streams with a 110 volt A.C. generator. A crew consisted of one person 
handling the electrodes, another handling the cord, and three others extracting temporarily stunned fish 
with dipping nets. They typically sampled ten 500 foot stretches of streams, including areas of heavy 
                                                 
107 White Mountain Apache Tribal Resolution 54-15, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #3940-43, Box 
#45. 
108 “Memorandum of Agreement Between the Arizona Game and Fish Commission, The White Mountain Apache 
Tribe, and the Fish and Wildlife Service for the Operation of the Williams Creek (McNary) Fish Hatchery” 
(Revised), May 27, 1954, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #3940-43, Box #45. 
109 “White Mountain Recreational Enterprise Plan of Operation,” RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, File #9990-
49, Box #6. 

 
 
 
 
217 
 
and light activity to determine how fishing intensity affected fish distribution. After measuring and 
tagging each fish with a unique number, Apache assistants returned rainbow trout and brown trout to the 
stream. However, they removed desert suckers and spike dace (listed as a threatened species under the 
Endangered Species Act in 1984), which constituted the majority of the catch, presumably because they 
were a source of competition for game fish.110 Eliminating species that competed with economically 
important species remained common practice among FWS biologists into the 1980s.111 In the WMRE 
and FWS‟s efforts to develop the recreational potential of the reservation, they shaped the White 
Mountain ecosystem in specific ways unnoticeable to the average tourist.  
In order to enhance the perception of the reservation as a hunter‟s paradise, the WMRE participated 
in a pronghorn antelope transplant project with the AGFC in 1959.  Antelope had all but disappeared 
from the reservation in the late 1930s, with only occasional sightings of two or three individuals in any 
year since. Lydo Harvey, Reidhead Cosay, Jim Gilbert, and Pat Johnson, all White Mountain Apaches, 
along with Jim Sparks, who replaced Si Davis as the manager of the WMRE upon his untimely death 
from a heart attack in 1958, worked with Paul Webb of the AGFC.They trapped and transported 
pronghorn antelope from viable populations around Flagstaff, Arizona and reintroduced them to Bonita 
Prairie on the reservation.112 Within four years, the transplanted population increased to a size sufficient 
                                                 
110 Joe E. Huston, “ Trout Shocking Study, Fort Apache Indian Reservation, Arizona,” June 20, 1956, RG 75 
FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File # 3940-43, Box #45. 
111 According to Joseph Taylor, since the late nineteenth century, fish culturists divided nature into two categories: 
economically useful and useless. The idea was to simplify systems so as to maximize the productivity of 
economically important species. In theory to do this fish culturists removed many “useless” predators and 
competitors, dramatically altering the community structure of streams. Unfortunately this practice led to a loss of 
freshwater fish biodiversity and genetic diversity within populations of economically important species. Joseph E. 
Taylor, III, Making Salmon: An Environmental History of the Northwest Fisheries Crisis (Seattle, WA: University 
of Washington Press, 1999), pp. 203-236. 
112 “To Greener Pastures: Fleet Antelope Trapped for White Mountain Transplant,” The Arizona Republic, 
October 1, 1959, RG 75 FAIR, File #3940-43, Box #45, CCF 40-56. 

 
 
 
 
218 
 
enough to allow a limited hunt.113 Once again, the Tribe sought means to restore its resource base so as 
to improve the economic conditions of the reservation.  
On top of building relationships with federal and state agencies, the Apache found themselves in a 
position of leadership among Native American groups concerning natural resource management. The 
success of the WMRE inspired other tribes to begin similar programs. According to Jack Hemphill, due 
to “the effective program in progress on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation,”114 the FWS experienced a 
general increase in demand for their services for initiating recreational development programs on 
southwestern reservations in the late 1950s. 115 These programs failed to come into fruition until the 
early1960s though. The San Carlos Apache began their program in 1963, with the Navajo, Papago, Salt 
River, Gila River, and Colorado River reservations following shortly thereafter. In 1962, the White 
Mountain Apache received national attention. The Nez Perce Tribe, based in Idaho, requested a visit 
from Chairman Oliver and Superintendent Hawley to advise them on starting a recreational program. In 
subsequent years representatives from another forty tribes, including the Blackfeet and Ute, visited Fort 
Apache to study the inner workings of the WMRE.116   
 
Conclusion 
As the 1950s drew to a close, the WMRE had become a profitable business supplying a growing 
number of jobs to the Apache people. For the Apache trout, the business provided a temporary safety 
net. The establishment of the WMRE also represented a modest step forward in the long-term Apache 
goal of controlling all eco-cultural resources on the reservation. Through the WMRE, the Tribe began 
                                                 
113 “Antelope Herd Increase Noted,” Fort Apache Scout 1 (August, 1962): 1. 
114 Jack E. Hemphill, “Fishery Management Report, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Phoenix, Arizona,” December 11, 
1957, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File # 3940-43, Box #45. 
115 Hemphill, “Fishery Management Report”; David C. Smith, “Editorial,” (originally appeared in the Wall Street 
Journal) Fort Apache Scout 1 (April-May 1963): 2. 
116 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Minutes, February 7, 1962, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 339, File 
#2369-61, Box #18; Hebert, “Land of the White Mountain Apaches,” p. 39.  

 
 
 
 
219 
 
positioning themselves as competent land managers. The WMRE became a tool for expanding control of 
reservation resources, securing economic security, and establishing political autonomy. Restoration of 
the landscape and its inhabitants proved an important part of this political exercise. The ecological 
health of their homeland was imperative to a successful enterprise. If tourists ceased to see primeval 
conditions and a wealth of fishing and hunting opportunities, the Tribe held no basis for economic and 
political independence. First, Apache leaders such as Nelson Lupe and Lester Oliver grasped this notion 
and later, a growing number of tribal members came on board. They realized they needed expertise in 
Western land and business management techniques, demonstrating the Apache traits of flexibility and 
adaptation. Resistance to certain Western ideals remained important, but exchange with the dominant 
society remained a necessity. 
As a result of exercising tribal sovereignty, ecological, economic, and political conditions on the 
reservation slowly improved by the end of the 1950s. However, the Tribe had a long way to go. 
Although they had gained a modicum of control over management of fish and wildlife on the 
reservation, the Apache game and fish code remained subject to Arizona state laws. These laws still 
required non-Indian hunters and fishers to purchase Arizona permits on top of reservation permits, 
subjected the Tribe to state seasons, and limited tribal flexibility in terms of setting bag limits. In 
addition, the Apache still lacked sufficient technical expertise. Improvement in this area was evident, but 
the Apache had very few college-educated tribal members. In terms of controlling eco-cultural 
resources, the BIA continued to dominate forest, rangeland, and watershed management. Other attempts 
to create wage labor on the reservation proved less successful than the WMRE. For instance, the Apache 
Mercantile Company had been largely unsuccessful to this point, creating very few job opportunities and 
failing to utilize a profitable level of timber. As a consequence, the Tribe still leased most of their 
timberland to non-Indian timber companies.  

 
 
 
 
220 
 
Nonetheless, the WMRE created a solid foundation for growth. The road to autonomy still presented 
many obstacles, but the path forward was more obvious than a decade earlier. The Tribal Council, 
having learned through its experiences with the WMRE, continued to look for ways to wrest control of 
eco-cultural resources away from the BIA.  Furthermore, after a decade of termination policy, socially 
and environmentally, the political climate of the 1960s would break in favor of the White Mountain 
Apache and the Apache trout. As the general American public became more interested in environmental 
issues and protecting wilderness, the federal government took note. Suddenly, the fate of the Apache 
trout became a hot topic. And the White Mountain Apache Tribe‟s previous restoration work on this 
species would bring them more political clout and notoriety as efficacious land mangers. 

 
 
 
 
221 
 
Chapter 6  
 
 The 1960s: Ecological Restoration as a Mediator between Economic 
Development and Eco-cultural Degradation  
 
The Apaches will get ahead much faster in the future through hard work, education and 
economical living, using whatever they can produce from the soil or find in the fields and forests. 
 
 
 
 
Mary Riley, First woman elected to White Mountain Apache Tribal Council1 
 
 
The future of the native trout … of Arizona lies entirely with the Whitemountain [sic] Apache 
Tribe.  
 
 
 
 
John K. Anderson, FWS Fisheries Management Biologist2 
 
 
Despite White Mountain Apache efforts to protect the Apache trout, the species continued to lose 
ground. By the early 1960s, genetically pure populations survived only in two headwater streams on 
Mount Baldy. Coincidentally, the Apache trout‟s sharp decline paralleled the fading of White Mountain 
Apache culture. As the Tribe sought more avenues for economic development, further degradation of 
their traditional social organization, ceremonies, and religion occurred. This in turn led to greater social 
problems, including the breakdown of community networks and increased rates of alcoholism and crime 
on the reservation.3 Just as economic development threatened Apache trout habitat, it also threatened 
White Mountain Apache culture.   
Nevertheless, in 1959 the Tribal Council published a pamphlet for public consumption boasting of 
the Tribe‟s economic successes. The Council was “proud of the progress” they were making towards 
                                                 
1 Charles W. Hebert, “Land of the White Mountain Apaches,” Arizona Highways 37 (July, 1962): 1-43, p. 15. 
2 John K. Anderson, “Preliminary Management Proposal for Salmo gila (The Gila Trout) on the Fort Apache 
Indian Reservation,” September 8, 1964, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 931, File #2602, Box #45. 
3 Comptroller General of the United States, Better Overall Planning Needed to Improve the Standard of Living of 
White Mountain Apaches of Arizona (Washington, D.C.: Department of Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 1975), 
pp. 42-56; Keith H. Basso, The Cibecue Apache (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1970), pp. 17-33. 

 
 
 
 
222 
 
creating for the Apache people “an economically stable existence.” Tribal enterprises such as the White 
Mountain Recreational Enterprise (WMRE) proved that “the Indian is capable of thinking and acting for 
himself.” Perhaps prematurely, the Council advertised that the Tribe‟s development of natural resources 
meant the Tribe was “entirely on [its] own financially, with the Federal Government providing technical 
advisory assistance.” At the very least, the suggestion reaffirmed their determination to break the 
shackles of dependency. The Council viewed economic self-sufficiency as an imperative, so that the 
“White Mountain Apache, collectively, [could] assume a place in this Nation as a full citizen, not only 
with the rights and prerogatives, but also with all the duties and responsibilities.”4  
These affirmations were all well and good, but the Tribe had a dilemma on their hands. Economic 
development brought with it a whole new set of problems, including continued cultural disruption. On 
the one hand, if they refused to interact economically with the dominant society, poverty and social 
disenfranchisement would worsen. On the other hand, continued economic development risked further 
degradation of the “Apache way.” Either way, cultural survival was tenuous at best and isolation wasn‟t 
an option. History showed the Apache that the modern world would overrun the reservation whether 
they wanted it to or not. Furthermore, the Tribe had become dependent on Euro-American industry for 
their livelihood. Since returning to the pre-reservation days wasn‟t an option, the trick, then, was to 
assume control of the process, balancing economic development with cultural survival. 
This chapter follows two routes that the White Mountain Apache took to strike this balance.  First, I 
explore the role that economic development and ecological restoration played in the acquisition of 
technical expertise, thus more control of knowledge production on the reservation. Second, I describe 
how the Apache employed ecological restoration to ameliorate cultural disruption. Through the Apache 
trout restoration program and the establishment of Mount Baldy Wilderness Area, the Apache 
demonstrated their ability to manage their own resources and slow the pace of cultural extinction. 
                                                 
4 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council, White Mountain Apache Indians (Whiteriver, AZ, 1959), p. 1. 

 
 
 
 
223 
 
Ecological restoration also became more than a tool to address economic, aesthetic, and recreational 
values. In the 1960s the Tribe expanded the definition of restoration to include biodiversity and Apache 
cultural values. Additionally, the Tribe began, for the first time, to circumvent the authority of the BIA 
by exploiting economic development funds from other government agencies. These efforts not only 
amounted to the restoration of eco-cultural resources, but showed effective administration of an 
economy and the efficacious allocation of both human and natural resources. These endeavors also 
represented experiments in understanding Western science and technology. Moreover, coincident with 
economic development was a subtle shift in power dynamics on the reservation. Despite the growing 
cultural crisis, the 1960s saw the significant expansion of tribal authority. Politically, they gained 
tremendous leverage for future battles over the right to control eco-cultural resources on the reservation. 
Moreover, the BIA and Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), almost imperceptibly, began to lose control of 
the reigns of knowledge production on the reservation. In essence, the Apache continued to slowly 
whittle away the paternalistic policies of the BIA.   
Facilitating the White Mountain Apache and Apache trout‟s quest for eco-cultural survival was yet 
another shift in the political tide in Indian policy in Washington. After over a decade of termination 
policy, the Kennedy administration appointed Philleo Nash Commissioner of Indian Affairs, an official 
whose pro-development and anti-terminationist policies became quite popular with Native American 
leaders. Upon taking the position, he quickly reestablished policies that assisted Native American 
aspirations for cultural autonomy and economic-self sufficiency rather than supporting the withdrawal of 
federal services.5 A new era emerged as Native Americans began fighting the rhetoric of termination 
with the rhetoric of self-determination.  
 
                                                 
5  Margaret Connell Szaz, “Philleo Nash,” in The Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 1824-1977, Robert M. 
Kvasnicka and Herman J. Viola, eds. (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1979), p. 311-323. 

 
 
 
 
224 
 
The Social and Political Context (1960 – 1970) 
From the Native American perspective, the 1960s represented a transition from the heyday of 
termination policy to the era of self-determination that culminated in the Indian Education and Self 
Determination Act of 1975.6 Fortunately, termination policy never really gained a major foothold. 
Although Congress terminated over 100 tribes, most were small bands in Utah, California, and Oregon. 
Larger tribes, such as the Klamath, mixed-blood Ute, and the Menominee, proved exceptions to this 
general rule. As Native Americans of the time feared, almost all terminated tribes except the Menominee 
lost title to their lands. According to Charles Wilkinson, a former attorney with the Native American 
Rights Fund, “Most found themselves poorer, bereft of health care, and suffering a painful psychological 
loss of community, homeland, and self-identity.”7 Fortunately, some terminated tribes, such as the 
Menominee, eventually had their federally recognized status restored.8 Native Americans forged a trail 
towards political restoration in the 1960s when a nationwide American Indian rebellion against 
termination policy erupted, leading to the policy‟s official demise. 
Termination policy posed a serious threat to treaty rights, tribal sovereignty, and the remaining 
Native American land base. Since American Indian identity remained closely tied to these fundamental 
rights, the extinction of hundreds of cultures was at stake.9 At its very base, however, withdrawal of 
federal services put into jeopardy the integrity of what was left of tribal homelands and their eco-cultural 
resources. As a collective, cultural survival depended on fighting for each Native American tribe‟s right 
to exist as a sovereign nation and for the protection of their homelands. Native Americans could not 
withstand the further erosion of their land base.  Essentially, the Termination Era provided Native 
Americans with the political fuel to fight for self-determination while protecting their cultural and 
                                                 
6 For more on this transition period, see Christopher K. Riggs, “American Indians, Economic Development, and 
Self-Determination in the 1960s,” Pacific Historical Review 69 (3): 431-463. 
7 Wilkinson, Blood Struggle (New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2005), p. 81. 
8 The Menominee Restoration Act of 1973, 25 U.S.C. 903. 
9 Riggs, “American Indians, Economic Development, and Self-Determination,” p. 436. 

 
 
 
 
225 
 
ecological assets. The irony of termination policy was that it incited the opposite of what Senator 
Watkins intended; instead of mobilizing Native Americans towards assimilation into Euro-American 
society, the policy ignited political activism throughout Indian country. Suddenly representatives from 
tribes all over the country sought to protect their rights. The emergence of the first generation of college-
educated Indian leaders in the 1950s aided this upswing in political activism, providing Indian nations 
and organizations with the intellectual tools to defend themselves against the whims of the federal 
government.10  
The National Congress of American Indians (NCAI), founded in 1944, proved one of the first 
forums in which Native Americans collectively resisted termination.11 The NCAI passed resolutions 
objecting to HCR 108 and Public Law 280. Further lobbying efforts led to Secretary of the Interior, Fred 
Seaton‟s repudiation of coercive termination in 1958. However, Seaton‟s repudiation failed to address 
the entire problem, leaving the door open for termination by “consent.” This allowed the “shadow of 
termination” to persist into the 1960s. Most importantly, under the guidance of Helen Peterson (Oglala 
Sioux) and Joseph Garry (Coeur d‟Alene), the NCAI developed a tri-partite vision of self-determination 
that many tribes would emulate, including the White Mountain Apache.12 They designed this definition 
to eliminate any confusion between what American Indians viewed as self-determination versus the 
federal government‟s goals, which often equated self-determination with assimilation into the dominant 
society. 13  
                                                 
10 Wilkinson, Blood Struggle, p. 86. 
11 Donald Parman, Indians and the American West in the Twentieth Century (Bloomington, IN: University of 
Indian Press, 1994), Ch. 8; Riggs, “American Indians, Economic Development, and Self-Determination,” p. 436; 
Philip S. Deloria, “The Era of Indian Self-Determination: An Overview,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, 
ed. (Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986), pp. 191-207. Thomas W. Cowger, “‟The Crossroads of Destiny‟: The 
NCAI‟s Landmark Struggle to Thwart Coercive Termination,” American Indian Culture and Research Journal 20 
(1996): 122-144. 
12 Lester Oliver and other tribal leaders frequently participated in NCAI meetings. See various Tribal Council 
Minutes, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56 and CCF 58 – 75, Dec. 54. 
13 Cowger, “‟The Crossroads of Destiny.‟” 

 
 
 
 
226 
 
First, the cornerstone of self-determination remained the preservation of treaty rights, thus the legal 
status of tribal lands and sovereignty. Anything short of maintaining a sovereign status with the right to 
self-govern would lead to the extinction of Native American cultures. Second, in order to encourage 
self-governance, the onus was on American Indian nations to establish a government-to-government 
relationship with local, state, and federal governments. The NCAI saw participation in policy 
development as essential to gaining recognition as a sovereign nation, a step towards breaking the 
shackles of paternalism. Third, tribal governments should strive towards economic self-sufficiency. The 
only way to assure some level of permanency as a sovereign nation and resilience against the whims of 
the federal government was to become politically and economically independent.14  This tri-partite 
vision of self-determination became a guiding principle for many Native American tribes. For instance, 
the White Mountain Apache implemented all three of these tenets in natural resource related endeavors 
during the 1950s: treaty rights with the battle of Hawley Lake, the continued relationship with the FWS 
and Arizona Game and Fish Commission (AGFC), and the establishment of tribal enterprises. 
In terms of Native American history, the 1960s are probably more famously known for the rise in 
Indian activism and the Red Power movements that lead to the occupation of the BIA building in 
Washington, the sit-in at Alcatraz, the Trail of Broken Treaties, the fish-ins in the Pacific Northwest 
protesting violations of treaty rights, and Wounded Knee II.15 Activists groups such as the American 
Indian Movement garnered much media attention for their travails, thus temporarily bringing Native 
American issues to the forefront of American political affairs. Many of the Native Americans that 
participated in these events had been relocated to cities, were members of tribes not recognized by the 
federal government, or their reservations suffered termination. As a result, overt activism became their 
                                                 
14 Riggs, “American Indians, Economic Development, and Self-Determination in the 1960s,” pp. 438-442; 
Cowger, “‟The Crossroads of Destiny,‟” pp. 139-141. 
15 On Native American activist movements in the 1960s see Dean J. Kotlowksi, “Alcatraz, Wounded Knee, and 
Beyond: The Nixon and Ford Administrations Respond to Native American Protest,” Pacific Historical Review 
72 (2): 201-227; Kenneth R. Philp, ed., Indian Self-Rule (Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986), pp. 228-241. 

 
 
 
 
227 
 
only viable recourse of action.16 Several historians claim that the actions of these activists pushed the 
federal government to advance self-determination legislation.17 No doubt this was the case. However, 
most Native Americans lived on reservations with their leaders pursuing other means of self-
determination. For example, no less significant were some of the more mundane political efforts to take 
advantage of War on Poverty legislation that encouraged economic self-sufficiency and to block 
legislation that threatened tribal sovereignty and self-determination.18  
Some of the most influential economic and educational development programs of the decade came 
from outside the BIA. For many Native Americans, the opportunity to implement their own community 
service programs proved far more substantial than the shock tactics of Red Power activism. For instance, 
tribal leaders found a refreshing philosophical approach towards economic development with the Office 
of Economic Opportunity (OEO), a War on Poverty program created by the Johnson administration in 
1964.19 The OEO offered tangible gains in terms of acquiring technical expertise for economic 
development on reservations. American Indian tribes forged some of their first government-to-
government contracts during this time frame, leaving the BIA out of the loop on significant projects. For 
tribal governments, the OEO amounted to an opportunity to practice true self-governance. Philip 
Deloria, a Standing Rock Sioux lawyer, claimed, “The Great Society programs were the first major 
instance in which Indian tribal governments had money and were not beholden for it to the Bureau of 
                                                 
16 Ramona Bennett, “Activism and Red Power,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed. (Chicago, IL: Howe 
Brothers, 1986), 234-237. 
17 Kotlowksi, “Alcatraz, Wounded Knee, and Beyond.”  
18 One of the more salient battle grounds for defining American Indian self-determination was economic 
development legislation that targeted Indian reservations, namely, according to historian Christopher Riggs, 
Stewart Udall‟s Indian Resources Development Bill. Many Native American tribes opposed this bill because they 
believed it threatened the trust status of tribal lands, giving the Secretary of Interior too much power. After all, the 
overriding authority of the Secretary was one of the main problems with self-governance under the Indian 
Reorganization Act. The bill, according to Indian critics, would only increase the paternalistic tendencies of the 
BIA. Riggs, “American Indians, Economic Development, and Self-Determination,” p. 447. 
19 RG 381, The Records of the Community Services Administration, Office of Economic Opportunity, Job Corps. 

 
 
 
 
228 
 
Indian Affairs. This created an enormous change in the balance of power on reservations and in 
Washington.”20  
The shift in power that Deloria referred to was related to who controls knowledge and expertise on 
reservations. Previously the BIA had a monopoly on expertise. Tribal governments had no choice but to 
trust BIA decisions, despite a long history of bureaucratic mismanagement. Additionally, BIA training 
programs, even the CCC-ID, for the most part only prepared American Indians for low-skilled labor and 
held very low expectations for Indians. In contrast, the OEO‟s philosophy contended that past economic 
development programs of federal agencies such as the BIA failed because they were strictly 
paternalistic, top-down endeavors. OEO personnel criticized the BIA for not encouraging Native 
American participation in the design and implementation of projects, further increasing dependency on 
the BIA. How could anyone learn to take responsibility and strive for self-sufficiency if someone else 
always did it for you?21 This philosophy engendered tension between the BIA and OEO. James Officer, 
Associate Commissioner of Indian Affairs during this shift in power (1962-1967), witnessed growing 
hostility of local BIA officials towards OEO programs because they threatened local official‟s monopoly 
over expertise on the “Indian problem.” Historically, most federal agencies deferred to the BIA “as more 
knowledgeable about Indian ways.” However, this was not the case with “the young, community 
development-minded representatives of the OEO.” They saw the BIA as the “enemy, privately branding 
them as anti-Indian, unimaginative, and overly paternalistic.”22 OEO field workers often disregarded 
BIA opinions and in many cases didn‟t even consult reservation officials before implementing projects. 
                                                 
20 On OEO and Native Americans see Deloria, “The Era of Indian Self-Determination,” p. 196; Wilkinson, 
“Blood Struggle,” pp. 191-194; D‟Arcy McKnickle, Native American Tribalism: Indian Survival and Renewals 
(New York: NY: Oxford University Press, 1973), pp. 119-120; Deloria, Custer Died for Your Sins (Norman, OK: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1970), pp. 138-140. 
21 Deloria, “The Era of Indian Self-Determination,” p. 197. 
22 James E. Officer, “The Bureau of Indian Affairs since 1945: An Assessment,” Annals of the American Academy 
of Political and Social Science, 436 (March, 1978): 61-72, pp. 65-66. 

 
 
 
 
229 
 
Regardless of this tension, Native Americans welcomed the change in philosophy and risked alienating 
the BIA.23 
From the start, American Indians noticed a difference between BIA training programs and the OEO. 
LaDonna Harris, Barry Commoner‟s running mate for the Citizen‟s Party in 1980, highlighted, for 
example, the differences between the OEO and IRA: “Under the Indian Reorganization Act, tribal 
governments never really functioned. But when OEO was established, tribal governments had the funds 
to begin Headstart programs and reservation economic development…. OEO taught us to use our 
imagination and to look at the future as an exciting adventure. It taught us that there are other ways of 
doing things.”24  In essence, the OEO had higher expectations for Native Americans. The purpose of the 
program was not only economic development but expertise development. Major universities in the West 
helped train Native Americans with the management and planning skills to implement the community 
action programs. McNickle, a rare optimist within the ranks of the BIA during the 1940s and 1950s and 
a charter member of the NCAI, welcomed the effects of OEO programs in the mid-1960s: “The very 
tasks which over the years the Indian bureau failed to accomplish, explaining away its failure as a 
reflection of the incapacity or inexperience of Indian leadership, were found not to be insurmountable. 
Indian communities quietly took control of their own advancements.”25  
Amazingly, a positive environment gave positive results. Tribal governments all across the United 
States began establishing programs on reservations independent of the BIA. Furthermore, technical 
expertise became more accessible. To be fair, many failures occurred. But the greatest significance of 
the OEO to tribal governments was that the program helped establish the bureaucratic infrastructure 
                                                 
23 OEO programs received a great deal of support from Native American leaders, including Vine Deloria, 
Executive Director of the NCAI at the time, Alfonso Ortiz (San Juan Pueblo), Helen M. Schierbeck (Lumbee), 
LaDonna Harris (Comanche), Robert Burnette (Rosebud Sioux), D‟Arcy McKnickle (Salish), and Philip Deloria 
(Standing Rock Sioux). See Philp, Indian Self-Rule. 
24 LaDonna Harris, “The War on Poverty,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed. (Chicago, IL: Howe 
Brothers, 1986), 222-224, p. 223. 
25 McKnickle, Native American Tribalism, p. 119. 

 
 
 
 
230 
 
necessary to deal with federal and state agencies on a government-to-government basis. They acquired 
the rudimentary administrative and bureaucratic skills necessary to write federal grants, negotiate with 
federal agencies, and manage tribal human, cultural, and natural resources.  
For better or worse, the 1960s saw the rise of tribal bureaucracies. Within the context of predominant 
federal policy and the capitalist system, building bureaucracies to deal with federal agencies was a 
necessary evil, a survival strategy and a critical step towards economic self-sufficiency. Many Native 
Americans criticized this phase of tribal development as continuing and exacerbating the ongoing social 
and cultural decay on reservations. Unfortunately, cultural erosion proved a temporary bi-product of 
these programs. Robert Burnette remembered people running “over each other to get jobs….They forgot 
all of the things that they had learned as Indian people.” But he also admitted that the OEO “did a lot of 
good” and helped train a new generation of effective tribal leaders.26 Ultimately, according to many 
tribal leaders, the development of tribal bureaucracies gave tribal governments a chance to move 
towards self-sufficiency. Through OEO programs, Native American governments became legitimate 
governments in the eyes of federal agencies, moving beyond, according to Philip Deloria, “tribes as an 
administrative convenience of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, governmental only in Supreme Court 
esoteric.” 27  
Building on this logic, White Mountain Apache tribal leaders countered the Apache naysayers of 
development by arguing that cultural restoration and maintenance could only occur if tribes were 
economically self-sufficient. Otherwise, the Apache people would remain vulnerable to the 
assimilationist philosophy of the BIA. Only through self-sufficiency would tribal governments acquire 
the power to protect tribal homelands.  In the following section, I argue that the establishment of White 
                                                 
26 Robert Burnette, “The War on Poverty,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed. (Chicago, IL: Howe 
Brothers, 1986), 226-227. 
27 P. Deloria. “The Era of Indian Self-Determination,” pp. 199-200. 

 
 
 
 
231 
 
Mountain Apache governmental bureaucracies to manage tribal resources became essential to the 
eventual eco-cultural restoration of the Apache homeland.  
 
Building Expertise and Government-to-Government Relationships  
With a population just over 4,000 and growing in 1962, the White Mountain Apache were coming to 
the realization they had to create a more robust wage earning economy. This realization was not new, 
but was reinforced by the fact that their reliance on timber and cattle for economic self-sufficiency had 
its limitations. By the beginning of the 1960s, the White Mountain Apache Tribe owned three tribal 
enterprises: the WMRE, the Fort Apache Timber Company (FATCO), and the White Mountain Tribal 
Herd Enterprise, with a fourth in the planning stages – the Tribal Maintenance and Construction 
Enterprise. They also contemplated expanding the operations of the WMRE to include a ski resort. 
Additionally, the Tribe extensively explored options for mineral exploitation on the reservation. They 
leased land for a marble quarry and asbestos mine in the late 1950s and contracted with industries to 
survey the reservation for oil, natural gas, and iron ore in the early 1960s.28  
As a consequence of economic development, the reservation slowly moved towards a wage 
economy. By 1962, the WMRE permanently employed 35 tribal members, with additional 40 slots filled 
part-time during the summer months. FATCO employed 53 tribal members. The Tribal Herd Enterprise 
facilitated the growth of the tribe‟s cattle industry, which still supported 50% of the reservation 
population. Non-Indian timber companies, mainly Southwest Forest Industries, trading posts, mining, 
missions, and fire-fighting in the summer months provided other major sources of income. Besides with 
the WMRE, some tribal members found land management work with the BIA and FWS. Forty-six 
Apache held positions with the BIA, and Albert Lavender became the first full-time Apache employee 
                                                 
28 White Mountain Apache Tribe, Overall Economic Development Program, Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
Redevelopment Area, Arizona, 1962, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 70, File #12552-61, Box #8. 

 
 
 
 
232 
 
for the FWS in 1963.29 Unfortunately, economic development failed to evenly benefit everyone on the 
reservation. For instance, the community of Cibecue, in the western, more isolated portion of the 
reservation, only retained one employee from the WMRE, a game warden (three Cibecue Apache 
worked for the BIA forestry department).30 Most recreational activities, other than hunting and some 
fishing, occurred on the eastern portion of the reservation. However, this discrepancy was not unique to 
the WMRE. Relatively speaking, the tribal government neglected the western part of the reservation in 
terms of economic development, an issue that would continue to plague the Tribal Council into the 
twenty-first century.  
Regardless, unemployment and poverty constituted a major challenge for all members of the White 
Mountain Apache Tribe. Because Fort Apache was a recently emerging wage-earning economy, 
determining the unemployment rate proved difficult. However, the Tribe‟s Overall Economic 
Development Program (OEDP), a product of the Area Redevelopment Act of 1962, estimated that the 
total labor force on the reservation at 1,300 strong. Of this number, 985 obtained employment, but only 
30% of the employed enjoyed full-time jobs. Essentially, the Tribe estimated the full-time 
unemployment rate at 77% in the early 1960s. And the average household, which amounted to 4.6 
individuals, earned only $916 per year. 31 
Most jobs available on the reservation required low skill, promised little earning potential, and 
offered few opportunities for advancement. Even if good-paying jobs were available, most Apache still 
lacked the skills to handle such jobs. The BIA offered the Relocation Program, but these training 
opportunities generally focused on skill sets destined for low-wage jobs: auto mechanic, diesel 
mechanic, power sewing machine operator, cosmetology, dry cleaning, welding, and practical nursing. 
Furthermore, the BIA designed this Termination Era program to encourage Native Americans to leave 
                                                 
29 Ibid. 
30 Basso, The Cibecue Apache, p. 22 
31 White Mountain Apache Tribe, Overall Economic Development Program. 

 
 
 
 
233 
 
reservations to find jobs, thus undermining tribal sovereignty and economic self-sufficiency.32 A 
Harvard study conducted in 1967 concluded that the BIA “has not been willing to sacrifice efficiency in 
the short term for a long-term creation of skills and responsibility among Indians.” This attitude led to 
frustration with many of the BIA‟s training programs and subsequently their cancellation, reducing 
training opportunities for Native Americans.33 With few viable opportunities, education in technical and 
management skills remained a major problem on the reservation.  
The Apache knew they lacked expertise in business, human resource, and land management. When 
starting tribal enterprises, they quickly found out they had to depend on educated non-Indians to fill 
management positions.  Initially in 1954 the Tribal Council hired Apaches to run the WMRE, which 
almost led to its failure. Nelson Lupe, who helped establish this enterprise, became quite frustrated with 
the inability of tribal members to properly handle money, keep financial records, and manage human 
resources. He realized that the WMRE would not become a vehicle for self-determination if the Tribe 
depended on non-Indians to run it. He admitted, “[T]his is where we need education. To take over our 
business. This recreation [enterprise] is getting to be a pretty big business for the tribe. We need our own 
tribal members to take responsible positions as managers or clerks or something, to really make it go.” 
Not until the mid-1960s did Lupe believe “we‟re taking hold of the thing that I envisioned” when the 
Tribe established the WMRE.34 Even though the Apache improved their business acumen by the mid-
1960s, the Tribe was far from solving the education problem. Mary Riley, a major force behind the 
establishment of FATCO and the growth of the WMRE, asserted in a speech given before BIA Phoenix 
Area officials, “We still do not have the education and technical skills in many areas.” Nonetheless, like 
Lupe, she was under the impression that “[t]he process of learning to do things for ourselves… is 
                                                 
32 Donald L. Fixico, Termination and Relocation: Federal Indian Policy 1945-1960 (Albuquerque, NM: 
University of New Mexico Press, 1986). 
33 Warren H. Cohen and Philip J. Mause, “The Indian: The Forgotten American,” Harvard Law Review 81 
(January, 1968): 1818-1858, p. 1848. 
34 Cantwell, p. 41. 

 
 
 
 
234 
 
growing among my people. We do more for ourselves each year, including providing more opportunities 
for Apache youth to prepare for and attend college and post-secondary school vocational institutions.”35 
The Tribe took several measures to rectify the expertise problem on the reservation. In 1956 
Superintendent Hawley and the Tribal Council started a Summer Youth Camp Program that focused on 
providing land management skills for teenagers. Profits from tribal enterprises funded the program and 
technical experts from the various BIA land management departments on the reservation instructed the 
students. By the early 1960s, the popular program could no longer accommodate all requests. Each 
summer for eight weeks hundreds of Apache teenagers built erosion control structures, learned juniper 
eradication techniques, reseeded rangelands, and thinned and pruned young trees. Although these skills 
weren‟t highly technical, the exposure to natural resource work acted as a gateway of interest, leading 
some young Apaches towards professional training.36 In 1961 the Tribal Council initiated a scholarship 
program, providing ten Apache with college scholarships and supporting another eleven participating in 
post-high school vocational training.37 The number of scholarships given from year to year depended on 
the availability of funds, but the program became a permanent tribal service. And 1962 marked the 
inauguration of the tribal newspaper, The Fort Apache Scout. For the first time, the Tribal Council and 
tribal members had an independent organ to voice opinions, educate the populace about federal policies, 
and build a sense of community. BIA staff and Tribal Council submissions dominated the early years of 
the paper. But by the late 1960s, as the first generation of college educated tribal members returned to 
the reservation, the Apache voice emerged.  With the establishment of The Fort Apache Scout, the 
                                                 
35 Mary Riley, “Mary Riley Praises Poverty Program,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (November, 1965): 2. 
36 “Tribal Boys Discover Camping at Paradise Creek,” Fort Apache Scout 1 (July, 1962): 6; White Mountain 
Apache Tribal Council, White Mountain Apache Indians, pp. 31-32.  
37 Overall Economic Development Program, p. 8. 

 
 
 
 
235 
 
White Mountain Apache turned a tool of Euro-American exploitation, the written word, on its head, 
further empowering the Tribe‟s courageous navigation into the Euro-American world.38   
The Tribe also applied for federal economic development programs independent of the BIA. 
Throughout the 1960s, as soon as Congress enacted economic development legislation, tribal leaders 
shot letters off to the administering agencies.39 Lester Oliver, Tribal Chairman from 1958-1966, heavily 
pushed economic development for the Apache in the 1960s. Having participated in the tribal 
government since the 1930s, he also witnessed a political evolution in the Tribal Council: 
The progress of the Tribal Council as such was at a slow pace during the first ten years, as this 
was something new to them. They had never had to make serious decisions for themselves or for 
the tribe on any major issues. The Bureau of Indian Affairs who acted as a guardian and trustee 
for the Tribe had always made decisions for them. Nevertheless the White Mountain Apache 
Tribal Council has come a long way in the second ten years, even though they had to overcome 
many factors such as tribal beliefs, tribal customs and traditions and have learned to operate as a 
business council and as a democratic body.40  
 
Oliver‟s characterization only partially rang true. The Tribal Council of the 1960s depended far less on 
the BIA than in its early years. But Oliver‟s dismissal of tribal culture reflected a simplistic view - 
prevalent among BIA personnel and many pro-development tribal leaders at the time - that Native 
American traditions impeded economic progress.41 A new generation of tribal leaders would eventually 
purge that attitude in the late 1960s as they innovatively worked to combine Apache cultural values with 
economic development.  
                                                 
38 On Native American empowerment through the printed press, see McNickle, Native American Tribalism, p. 
xxi. 
39 Lester Oliver to Eugene P. Foley, November, 1965, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 70, File #12552-61,  Box 
#8. Fred Banashley to Eugene P. Foley, January 19, 1966, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 70, File #12552-61, 
Box #8. 
40 Lester Oliver, “Progress of the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council,” The Timberline 8 (April, 1961): 2, 4.  
41 David L. Vinje, “Cultural Values and Economic Development,” in American Indian Policy in the Twentieth 
Century, Vine Deloria, Jr., ed. (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985), 155-176; Vine Deloria, Jr., 
“The Evolution of Federal Indian Policy Making,” in American Indian Policy in the Twentieth Century, Vine 
Deloria, Jr., ed. (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985), 239-256. 

 
 
 
 
236 
 
In the mean time, in contrast to Oliver‟s views, positive economic experiences with the WMRE in 
the 1950s proved more important to the evolution of the Tribal Council than the outright dismissal of 
tribal culture. Based on this experience, the Council felt comfortable exploiting multiple avenues of 
economic development in the 1960s. They worked with Area Redevelopment Administration (ARA), 
Economic Development Administration (EDA), the Accelerated Public Works Program (APWA), and 
the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO). Mirroring the pattern at the national level, the White 
Mountain Apache circumvented the authority of the BIA, instituted tribal bureaucracies, and learned 
how to operate as a government.  
In a variety of ways, these federal programs contributed to the development of natural resources on 
the reservation. President Kennedy‟s APWA, a smaller-scale version of the New Deal Era‟s Public 
Works Administration, provided 150 temporary jobs for Apaches with the BIA‟s Branch of Land 
Operations and the Forestry Division in the early 1960s. A large number of these jobs involved range 
and forest restoration and management: juniper eradication, brush control, forest improvement, 
cottonwood control, construction of cattle guards, and stock tank sealing. In 1965 the Tribe started a 
Head Start program, a Neighborhood Youth Corps, and a Job Corps program, which Nelson Lupe along 
with Raymond Kane organized, with OEO funds. The Neighborhood Youth Corps, like the APWA, 
provided experience for 450 young Apache between the ages of 16 and 21, many of whom worked on 
forest and range restoration projects. In 1966 the OEO gave the Tribe another $100,000 grant to employ 
tribal members in WMRE improvement projects. 42   
More importantly, however, these economic development programs helped the White Mountain 
Apache gain a measure of independence from the BIA. For example, the EDA funded a sorely needed 
                                                 
42 “Tribe Receives $99,402 O.E.O. Project Grant,” The Fort Apache Scout, 5 (September, 1966): 2; “Reservation 
Unemployment Eased,” Fort Apache Scout, 1 (February-March, 1963): 1-2; “Openings Available for Youth at 
Job Corps Centers,” Fort Apache Scout 5 (December, 1966): 2; “OEDP Annual Report, Fort Apache Indian 
Reservation,” April, 1968, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 70, File #12552-61, Box #8. 

 
 
 
 
237 
 
forest inventory, which hadn‟t been conducted since 1952, that created more jobs on the reservation and 
allowed the Tribe to predict “accurate long-range utilization of the Tribe‟s vast forest resources.” The 
grant allowed the Tribe to hire a private consulting firm to conduct the inventory, independent of the 
BIA, to get a second opinion on how to manage their forests.43 These sorts of independent assessments 
would eventually lead the Tribe to more overtly and authoritatively question the BIA‟s management 
history.  Overall, these programs pleased the Apache people. Mary Riley pointedly described the OEO 
programs to BIA officials at a Phoenix Area Office meeting as “the most wonderful programs we have 
had on the White Mountain [Fort Apache] Reservation in many years.”44 For the first time the Apache 
people held the reigns of administration for their own community service and economic development 
programs.   
By administering these programs, tribal leaders assumed greater confidence to take matters into their 
own hands. Tribal officials learned to lobby directly to local Congressman, Representative George F. 
Senner and Senator Carl Hayden, for additional economic development funds. The Alchesay National 
Fish Hatchery, a second reservation hatchery, was a product of these efforts. Fishing demands increased 
dramatically on the reservation in the late 1950s as the Tribe created more lakes and the WMRE gained 
more notoriety with the public. Williams Creek Hatchery couldn‟t keep up with the pace; consequently 
the Tribe requested a second federal hatchery.45 The FWS and the Tribe completed Alchesay, which 
became the second largest hatchery in the state of Arizona, in October of 1962. Similar to the 
relationship the Tribe maintained with the FWS for Williams Creek, the FWS agreed to allocate two-
thirds of the fish produced at the hatchery to the Apache in return for the use of the land. The hatchery 
                                                 
43 Economic Development Administration, News Release, “EDA Funds to Help Set Up Forest Management Plan 
for Fort Apache Council,” May 10, 1967; Application for Technical Assistance, White Mountain Apache Tribe, 
March 31, 1967; White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Resolution 67-49, March 20, 1967, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 
58-75, Dec. 339, File #2296-67, Box #23. 
44 Riley, “Mary Riley Praises Poverty Program,” p. 2. 
45 “Statement of Objectives: Tribal Delegation‟s Proposed Visit to BIA Central Office, Washington, D.C. March 
26 through April 2, 1960,” RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 56, File #17897-57, Box #8. 

 
 
 
 
238 
 
also provided game fish to other Arizona tribes and the surrounding national forests. Originally, the 
Tribe wanted to name the hatchery in honor of Hayden, who was integral in obtaining funds to finish the 
project. Hayden, who failed to show up for the dedication, humbly suggested that the Apache should 
name the hatchery in honor of his “long-time friend” Chief Baha Alchesay, the last White Mountain 
Apache hereditary chief who had passed away in 1952. The new hatchery officially began operations in 
January of 1963 with the transplant of six tons of rainbow trout to its breeding ponds. 46 
Often frustrated with BIA bureaucracy, tribal leaders also sent letters to Senner and Hayden to shake 
up the BIA when requests became mired in red tape.47 In one letter Chairman Oliver wryly surmised 
about a long-lost request to Hayden: “I assume that our original request [for a mineral survey] of a year 
and a half ago has been routed through the proper channels for action. However, it would seem that in 
this length of time we should have been advised as to the status of our request.”48 Another avenue of 
protest was to bypass normal BIA channels and direct requests directly to Secretary of Interior Stewart 
Udall. In 1964 Chairman Oliver sent a long letter to Udall detailing infrastructural, educational, housing, 
and economic needs, politely highlighting the government‟s neglect of trusteeship on the reservation. 
One of the most surprising areas of neglect was that the Fort Apache Indian Reservation still lacked an 
accurate cadastral survey of their lands and the reservation boundary. Non-Indians were beginning to 
build homes near the reservation boundary, raising questions of rightful ownership of land. Oliver 
diplomatically closed the letter by clearly stating the deficiencies in no way comprised “complaints but 
barriers to our future development.” Perhaps attempting to incite interagency competition, Oliver also 
                                                 
46 “Alchesay Hatchery Slated For Completion in Fall,” The Fort Apache Scout 1(June, 1962): 1; “Hayden 
Hatchery Rite Set Saturday,” The Fort Apache Scout 1(September, 1962): 1; “Hatchery Dedication Crowded to 
Overflow,” The Fort Apache Scout 1(October, 1962): 1-2, 4; “Trout Planted in New Hatchery,” The Fort Apache 
Scout (January, 1963): 3. 
47 Lester Oliver to Carl Hayden, December 4, 1964; Lester Oliver to Carl Hayden, November 30, 1964; Charles P. 
Corke to George F. Senner, January 25, 1965, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 77, File #6700, Box #8. 
48 Oliver to Hayden, November 30, 1964.  

 
 
 
 
239 
 
noted that the Tribe had successfully worked with the OEO.49 Clearly, by the mid-1960s, the Tribe 
showed obvious signs of overt political engagement, rather than an obligatory dependent relationship.  
Despite the relative success of the White Mountain Apache and their willingness to exploit multiple 
pathways of development, tension between the “Apache way” and Western science and technology 
continued to fester. The tribal government and the Apache people struggled with the implications of 
economic development. While most Apaches, especially the younger generation, wished to move out of 
wickiups into modern housing, experience the benefits of modern medicine, and earn a comfortable 
living, they also understood the potential consequences of adopting a capitalist economic system. 
Tradeoffs, they came to realize, were a part of all adaptations. And as the Apache adapted to their new 
circumstances, their social life would change forever.  
The rise of the wage economy on the reservation had profound implications for Apache social 
organization and cultural traditions. Prior to the 1950s, family clusters living in close proximity to each 
other worked together to support themselves. Family clusters represented a sedentary remnant of the 
mobile local group that characterized Western Apache life before the reservation days. When hard times 
fell on one or several families, the better off would supply those with what they needed to survive. As 
wage labor more permanently infiltrated the Apache economy in the 1950s, the unit of economic 
subsistence devolved into the nuclear household. This unit generally consisted of a married couple, their 
children, and sometimes other close relatives living in dwellings within a few feet of each other.  Older 
Apache, witnessing a break from traditional practices, complained about wage earners not sharing their 
wealth. Nuclear households began accumulating material goods when others suffered. Keith Basso, an 
anthropologist who earned the respect of the Apache and worked with them for over thirty years, 
captured this change through one of his elder informants living in Cibecue in the 1960s:  
                                                 
49 Lester Oliver to Stewart Udall, December 29, 1964, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 77, File #6700, Box #8. 

 
 
 
 
240 
 
When I was growing up I lived at Oak Creek and there were about ten gowa [households] shared 
with each other. If some of those people had no food they could get it from another gowa. One 
time in the winter the men went hunting. But they had bad luck and didn‟t kill any deer. The next 
day it was the same way. The same again, the day after that. Then all those men went out again. 
All except one had bad luck. The man that had good luck killed four deer – all at the same place. 
It took him all day to butcher them. That night, he took the meat from three deer and went 
around with it to all those other gowa. He gave meat to the people who were hungry. Some were 
not his relatives, but he gave it to them anyway because he knew they were hungry.… Today 
some of these gowa in Cibecue have money. Some of them own lots of cattle and have good 
jobs. But they keep their money and don‟t share it. If they gave it away, they say, their babies 
would starve, but they could spare some of it. I know that.50 
 
Because of the breakdown in Apache social organization, Eva Watt, another Apache elder, believed 
“[t]here‟s lots more fighting nowadays. People get jealous of each other, jealous of what they own, and 
they get mad and say mean things and then they want to fight.”51 This sort of resentment towards wage 
earners would also play a major role in the Tribe‟s ability to start businesses. In fact, the cultural value 
of reciprocity has remained one of the main reasons why most entrepreneurial endeavors continued to be 
tribally owned. Almost all Apache individuals who have attempted to start a business have failed.52  
The tribal government and the Apache people saw the breakdown of social organization and cultural 
traditions as a major problem. They understood that the preservation, restoration, and integration of 
Apache cultural values into the economic development plans of the reservation remained paramount to 
the Tribe‟s survival. Part of the solution lay in restoring a sense of place for tribal members, 
reconnecting them to their traditional relationships with the homeland. Fortunately, even with the 
intensification of economic development on the reservation, the 1960s saw the Tribe move towards eco-
cultural restoration, going beyond preparing natural resources solely for material consumption. First, 
however, before instituting a plan for cultural restoration, the Tribe had to take back lands they “lost” 
during the Indian New Deal, the Mount Thomas and Black River Roadless Areas.  
 
                                                 
50 Basso, The Cibecue Apache, pp. 25-26. 
51 Eva Watt, Don’t Let the Sun Step Over You (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2004), p. 166. 
52 The Comptroller General, Better Overall Planning, pp. 42-56.  

 
 
 
 
241 
 
Resistance: Not your Wilderness, But our Wilderness 
 The White Mountain Apache established the Fort Apache Timber Company (FATCO) in 1961, 
which signaled the beginning of the end for outside exploitation of the reservation forest ecosystem. 
FATCO experienced two iterations of existence before finally settling as a successful enterprise. The 
first manifestation, the Apache Mercantile Company, and the second manifestation, Fort Apache 
Wholesale Lumber Company, proved un-profitable.53 Nonetheless, decisions associated with these 
businesses solidified the Apache‟s determination to control their forest resources. In 1959 the Tribal 
Council voted against a pending contract with Western Forest Sales Corporation to construct a plywood 
plant on the reservation. Essentially, the Council feared that all forest resources on the reservation would 
end up in the hands of two non-Indian companies: Western Forest Sales Corporation and Southwest 
Lumber Mills. Their production operations combined would leave nothing for the Tribe‟s budding 
timber company. Chairman Oliver believed that only through controlling their own resources and 
through “pride and ownership” would his people “have a greater opportunity to develop and to gain 
experience in management and know how.”54 Eventually, the operations of FATCO reached the capacity 
to efficiently and profitably develop all timber resources on the reservation.  By the 1970s, the Tribe no 
longer needed the revenue from non-Indian timber contracts and ended all leases with other timber 
companies55 The growth of FATCO was paramount to the Tribe‟s quest to control their forest resources. 
However, this wouldn‟t have happened if they hadn‟t challenged the federal government and a growing 
wilderness movement to regain control of the roadless areas on Fort Apache. 
 
                                                 
53 “Memorandum: Return on Investment, White Mountain Apache Tribal Enterprises,” June 29, 1961; Carthon R. 
Patrie to Area Director, Phoenix Area Office, June 2, 1961, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 339, File #3295-58, 
Box #17. 
54 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Resolution, 59-39, July 1, 1959; Lester Oliver to Roger Ernst, October 
23, 1959, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 339, File #3295-58, Box #17. 
55 For an administrative history of FATCO, see Veronica E. Tiller and Arthur R. Gómez, Fort Apache Forestry: A 
History of Timber Management and Forest Protection on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation, 1870-1985 
(Washington, DC: Bureau of Indian Affairs, 1990). 

 
 
 
 
242 
 
In the late 1950s, the Tribe worked to declassify the roadless areas on Fort Apache “in view of the 
good market conditions and the need for revenue by the tribe.”56 On the surface, such an action seemed 
to counter attempts to protect the Apache trout and compromise the “wilderness” qualities of the 
reservation that attracted so many tourists. But the motivation for declassification wasn‟t entirely 
economic. While economics played a role, tribal control of reservation resources played a bigger role. 
Wilderness advocates‟ inclusion of Mount Thomas (Baldy) and Black River Roadless Areas on an early 
version of the federal wilderness system bill (S. 4028) aroused Apache concerns over resource control. 
In fact, almost all tribes with roadless areas established under Secretarial Order 486 during the Indian 
New Deal, except the Arapaho and Shoshone on the Wind River Reservation and the Ute Mountain 
Utes, opposed this bill. Lester Oliver, like other tribal leaders, worried about the potential for increased 
federal oversight on reservation lands. Essentially, tribal leaders across the nation saw the bill as a threat 
to tribal sovereignty. Under Secretarial Order 486, tribes could use timber resources within the bounds 
of a roadless area if dire economic circumstances required it. In contrast, the wilderness bill eliminated 
this option.57 
In 1958 Oliver testified at a Wilderness Bill Congressional hearing held in Albuquerque. He stated 
that if the federal government designated national wilderness areas on reservations, the rules governing 
their management required flexibility and consideration of the special economic conditions of Native 
Americans. The White Mountain Apache couldn‟t afford to lose access to what amounted to 14% of 
their timber resources (approximately 897 million board feet).58 While not necessarily opposed to the 
                                                 
56 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Resolution 56-26, June 5, 1956, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, 
File #9990-49, Box #6. 
57 For a detailed analysis of Native American resistance to the Wilderness bill, see Diane L. Krahe, “Last Refuge” 
(Dissertation, Washington State University, May 2005), Ch. 5. 
58 Prior to the delisting of Mount Thomas and Mount Baldy, the Tribe had access to approximately 619,000 acres 
of timber. The addition of the roadless areas to this pool added another 178,150 acres of which only 
approximately 100,000 acres were commercially harvestable, for a total of 719,686 acres. To calculate the 
percentage of forested area the roadless areas constituted, I used data from “Master Forest Management Plan,” 

 
 
 
 
243 
 
idea of wilderness areas, they needed assurance that they would have control over the resources within 
the boundaries of wilderness areas designated on their reservation. Oliver added, though, that perhaps 
“as a possible solution to this problem we could, as the old saying goes, give it back to the Indians.” 59  
Even though a subsequent bill, S. 1123, included the language of tribal consent, momentum for 
declassification overwhelmed any hope of including tribal lands in the legislation.60 Oliver‟s latter 
suggestion prevailed. Almost all affected tribes still asked for the declassification of roadless areas on 
their reservations. In response, Congress dropped reservation roadless areas from later versions of the 
bill. Commissioner Emmons supported the Indians and funneled their request to Secretary of Interior 
Seaton. The DOI delisted Black River in 1959 and Mount Thomas in 1960, claiming that “[t]he 
respective tribes requested the elimination of these areas to facilitate the economic development of the 
areas.”61 The support of the BIA and DOI was not surprising given their pro-development stance during 
the Termination Era. Prior to the delistings, the BIA had already allowed tribes to exploit resources in 
roadless areas. 
 As early as November 1951 the Tribal Council on Fort Apache requested permission from the 
Central Office to open up Black River Roadless Area to logging. To justify their position, they cited the 
provision in Secretarial Order 486 that stated logging was prohibited unless “the requirements of fire 
protection, commercial use for the Indians‟ benefit or actual needs of the Indians clearly demand 
                                                                                                                                                                         
Fort Apache Indian Reservation, Arizona, 1954, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 339, File #3269-55,  Box #29;  
Comptroller General of the United States, Management of Indian Natural Resources (Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office, 1976), p. 7. 
59 Statement of Lester Oliver, Chairman, White Mountain Apache Tribal Council, in Senate Committee on 
Interior and Insular Affairs, National Wilderness Preservation Act: Hearings on S. 4028, Part 2, 85th Cong., 1958, 
1003-1004. 
60 Statement of Lester Oliver, Representative of the White Mountain Apache, in Senate Committee on Interior and 
Insular Affairs, National Wilderness Preservation Act: Hearings on S. 1123, 86th Cong., 1959, 448-449. 
61 “Elimination of 325,000 Acres on Black River Area from List of Roadless Areas,” Federal Register 24, 64 
(April 2, 1959): 2559-2560; “Elimination of 105,000 Acres on the Yakima Reservation Known as Goat Rocks 
Roadless Area, 130,000 Acres on Fort Apache Reservation Known as Mount Thomas Roadless Area, and 48,000 
Acres on Yakima Reservation Known as Mount Adams Wild Area,” Federal Register 25, 183 (September 20, 
1960): 9002-9003; see Krahe, “Last Refuge,” pp. 180-205. 

 
 
 
 
244 
 
otherwise.” They also concluded that logging “would not materially detract from the scenic value of the 
area, and the limited logging trails necessary to harvest the timber would greatly facilitate protection of 
this and adjacent areas from fire.”62 Commissioner Dillon Myer denied their request not on the grounds 
of protecting the wilderness qualities of Black River, but for legal and administrative reasons. He felt the 
additional work load would stress the “small forestry staff” on Fort Apache. Furthermore, the staff had 
yet to complete a comprehensive sustained-yield management plan for the reservation, thus jeopardizing 
the legality and economic potential of further timber sales. And lastly, the sale of timber would 
compromise the status of the contract with Southwest Lumber Mills, Inc. for the Maverick logging unit 
just north of Black River. Southwest Lumber Mills had built the only roads that could feed into Black 
River. So advertising the Black River unit would prove difficult because either a new lumber company 
would have to finagle a way to use roads built by Southwest or the new contract would automatically go 
to Southwest, which again presented legal issues. Myer concluded his remarks by reassuring the Apache 
and Superintendent Crow that “[w]hen you can cover the above points with sufficient clarity and in 
sufficient detail, we will be glad to give further consideration to the proposed Black River timber sale.”63 
Ultimately, inadequate BIA staffing caused the denial of the request; thus holding back the economic 
progress of the Apache.   
Eventually in 1956, under Commissioner Emmons, the BIA and DOI allowed logging operations to 
ensue in the Black River Roadless Area.64 Eliminating roadless areas fell in line with termination policy, 
chipping away at federal control over Native Americans and as some critics would argue, free up tribal 
resources and land for the exploitation of Euro-American industry. The BIA position at the time, after 
                                                 
62 White Mountain Apache Tribal Resolution 51-45, November 5, 1951, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 339, File 
#17753-51, Box #28. 
63 Dillon S. Myer to Ralph Gelvin, March 11, 1952; Ralph Gelvin to Dillon S. Myer, January 8, 1952, RG 75 
FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 339, File #17753-51, Box #28. 
64 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Resolution 56-26; H. Rex Lee to Frederick M. Haverland, September 
6, 1956, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, File #9990-49, Box #6. 

 
 
 
 
245 
 
all, maintained that economic development would hasten assimilation and reintroduce the notion of 
private property on reservations, which historically led to the diffusion of tribal land to Euro-American 
entrepreneurs and investors.65 
To legally justify the declassification, Emmons conveniently referred to IRA, which as whole was 
rejected by the termination-minded DOI and BIA as a valid policy. He used the fact that John Collier 
and Robert Marshall failed to consult tribal councils upon establishing roadless areas, thus violating the 
basic premise of IRA of including tribal governments in the decision-making processes concerning their 
lands.66 John Collier, incensed by the action and a staunch critic of termination policy, felt “invoking of 
that Act [IRA] to justify its hurried destruction of the roadless areas was ignorant if not insincere.” In a 
letter to George Marshall, Robert Marshall‟s brother and an advocate for a national wilderness system, 
Collier admitted that he did not consult tribes and regretted that they didn‟t have the chance to do so 
because “the consent [of a tribal council] would have had a persuasive value; and the educational 
effort… would have been all to the good.” He claimed, however, that such an exercise wasn‟t feasible at 
the time because they “literally were drowned, hemmed-in, sometimes crushed, by hundreds of jobs 
which were technically necessary.”  
Furthermore, he remarked that Secretarial Order 486 had been exhaustively vetted through the DOI‟s 
Solicitor‟s Office and was found not to be in violation of IRA (see Chapter 2).  Ultimately, because the 
consultation wasn‟t legally necessary and constituted one more burden in an already over-burdened 
agency, Collier and Marshall sacrificed it. Later in the letter, Collier reversed Emmons‟s accusation and 
insinuated that the BIA, under the auspices of Commissioner Emmons, encouraged the tribes to fight the 
                                                 
65 On the tendency of private property to end up in the hands of Euro-Americans see, for example,  Deloria, 
Custer Died for Your Sins; Wilkinson, Blood Struggle; Parman, Indians and the American West; Fixico, 
Termination and Relocation. 
66 Krahe, “Last Refuge,” p. 185. 

 
 
 
 
246 
 
wilderness bill.67 In the end, however, tribal governments involved in the battle viewed Collier‟s 
implementation of roadless areas as paternalistic and un-democratic. They came to resent the 
designations and used the wilderness bill as an opportunity to air their grievances.68 In addition to past 
issues with roadless areas, Native Americans at the same time were reacting in general to the DOI‟s 
paternalistic propensity to withdraw federal services from tribes without consultation. The battle over 
roadless areas on reservations came on the heels of the forced termination of several tribes, a move that 
most Native Americans saw as paternalistic because Congress passed the legislation without tribal 
consent.69   
Regardless of the legal haggling between opposing BIA administrations, American Indians remained 
adamant about the declassification of roadless areas for economic and political reasons. Neither Collier 
nor Emmons had the best interest of Native Americans in mind. They were too busy defending the 
legacy of their policies. For Collier‟s part, claiming Emmons coerced tribes into breaking up the 
reservation wilderness system denied American Indians agency in their own affairs. On the same token, 
Emmons used the fact that Collier didn‟t gain tribal consent as a justification to eliminate one policy, 
while pursuing another policy without tribal consent, demonstrating a lack of respect for the political 
will and intellect of Native Americans. In both scenarios, American Indians became political dupes. 
Wising up to such ploys, Native Americans took matters into their own hands. They learned to use the 
system to their benefit. For them, a national wilderness system imposed on reservations meant more 
federal control over tribal resources; clearly, a political and economic reality tribal governments didn‟t 
                                                 
67 John Collier to George Marshall, July 7, 1962 reprinted in Collier, From Every Zenith, pp. 273-275. 
68 On the Native American backlash, see James Glover, A Wilderness Original (Seattle, WA: The Mountaineers, 
1986), p.212; Theodore Catton, Inhabited Wilderness: Indians, Eskimos, and National Parks in Alaska 
(Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1997), p. 142; Krahe, “Last Refuge,” pp. 180-205. On the 
roadless policies‟ paternalistic roots see Paul Sutter, Driven Wild (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 
2002), p. 229; Philp, John Collier’s Crusade, pp. 185-186. 
69 On the tendency for Native Americans to see forced assimilation as another form of paternalism see Parman, 
Indians and the American West, pp. 146-147. 

 
 
 
 
247 
 
desire. Lester Oliver and other tribal leaders recognized this. Even though the official reason for 
delisting published in the Federal Register stated economic liberalization of resources, ultimately threats 
to tribal sovereignty played a greater motivating role for Native Americans.  
Even though Emmons supported the declassification of roadless areas because it ostensibly 
corresponded with termination policy, tribal governments co-opted his support to reassert tribal 
sovereignty. Forced termination reawakened their awareness of the economic and cultural importance of 
maintaining a land base through treaty rights.  Tribal governments capitalized on the opportunity to 
remove federal policy from the books that inhibited their autonomy. In addition, they failed to exploit 
the roadless areas according to Emmons‟s expectations. Many tribes began logging operations, but not 
to the maximum extent possible. And some tribes left these areas alone. The Shoshone and Arapahos on 
the Wind River Reservation never asked for the declassification of their roadless area.70 And several 
other tribes, including the Salish and Kootenai and the Yakima, eventually reestablished wilderness 
areas on their reservations. Almost as soon as the DOI declassified the Mount Thomas roadless area, the 
White Mountain Apache initiated a five-year feasibility study on creating a primitive area on Fort 
Apache.  
The White Mountain Apache became the first tribe to put aside land for wilderness protection that 
the BIA designated as roadless areas under Secretarial Order 486. Unlike during the Indian New Deal, 
the Tribe defined the terms of the designation. In 1966 the Tribal Council set aside 7,400 acres of what 
was formerly the Mount Thomas Roadless Area (Fig. 12). The Tribe significantly reduced the size of the 
new wilderness, but its establishment marked another political victory for the Apache. The Tribal 
Council reaffirmed Mount Baldy (Mount Thomas) as a sacred site for tribal members on the assurance 
that “all resource advisors have agreed that non-use of this specific area will not detract from the 
development of timber or other resources or otherwise conflict with the management of the Fort Apache  
                                                 
70 Krahe, “Last Refuge,” p. 187. 

 
 
 
 
248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12 – Map of the Mount Baldy Wilderness Area – shaded area adjacent to 
Apache National Forest (Courtesy of National Archives).   

 
 
 
 
249 
 
Timber Company during the period specified.”71 Asserting tribal control over this resource, the WMRE 
and its tribal game wardens assumed jurisdiction for management and protection of the wilderness area.  
The Apache‟s further illustrated their new-found control by reaffirming their cultural connections 
with the wilderness area. Instead of having the land defined by outsiders, they developed their own 
definition of wilderness. The Tribal Council considered multiple values when studying the possibility of 
reestablishing a “wilderness” area on the reservation. Besides Mount Baldy‟s wilderness quality, three 
other values influenced the Tribes decision: biodiversity, economics, and religion.72 First, although the 
Tribe failed to articulate their reasoning in the vernacular of biodiversity, their efforts to restore the 
Apache trout clearly demonstrated their concern for biodiversity loss. Mount Baldy remained the last 
refuge for the Apache trout. Having already limited fishing and camping along streams in the wilderness 
area, they more recently had erected fish barriers to prevent the migration of the non-native rainbow 
trout into Apache trout habitat. Creating Mount Baldy wilderness area provided another layer of 
protection, buffering the trout‟s habitat from timber and grazing activities.  
Second, as was evident from the Tribal Council resolution that established Mount Baldy, economic 
concerns delineated the extent and duration of the wilderness area. The approximately 100,000 acre 
reduction in size from the original roadless area resulted from the Tribe‟s determination of the economic 
value of timber resources in the Mount Thomas area. Even as the Tribal Council passed the resolution, 
some tribal members, such as Councilman Ronnie Lupe, questioned the wisdom of restricted use of 
timber resources when a majority of tribal members lived in poverty.73 Furthermore, the Tribal 
resolution was temporary. The Tribal Council would revisit the status of Mount Baldy Wilderness area 
                                                 
71 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council Resolution 66-20, January 17, 1966, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 
54, File #3991-62, Box #4. 
72 “Tribal Council Sets Mount Baldy Wilderness Area,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (February, 1966): 3; White 
Mountain Apache Tribal Council Resolution 66-20. 
73 “Minutes of the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council,” November, 1965, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 54, 
File #3991-62, Box #4. 

 
 
 
 
250 
 
in five years. In essence, if economic conditions required it, the Tribe could still vote to reopen the area 
to logging. Besides timber, the WMRE stood to benefit from the wilderness area. Even though the Tribal 
Council made the wilderness area off-limits to non-Apache except under special permit, Mount Baldy 
constituted a reservoir for much of the game that attracted hunters and wildlife watchers to the 
reservation. James Sparks, Manager of the WMRE, and tribal land managers held out hopes that if the 
Apache trout restoration proved successful, someday people might travel to the reservation because it 
remained the last location in Arizona one could angle for the state‟s only native trout. As early as 1959, 
the Tribe advertised in public relations pamphlets that the “wily Arizona native trout” had its “last 
stronghold in the high wilderness areas” of Fort Apache.74   
Finally, the Apache religion perhaps played the strongest role in the decision. The “White 
Mountain,” as it is known by the White Mountain Apache, had long been a sacred site – the “home of 
the wind” and spirits important in Apache religion. The mountain also provided a source of medicinal 
and ceremonial plants and contained a number of shrines, burial sites, and natural features of religious 
importance. Mount Baldy, to the White Mountain Apache, was, and still is, somewhat analogous to a 
Christian church as a place of worship. When the Tribal Council established the wilderness area, they 
intended to restore for some and preserve for others a place of spiritual song and prayer. From her Tribal 
Council seat, Mary Riley pushed for the protection of the “White Mountain.” Believing in its sacredness 
and its symbolism of Apache cultural persistence, she was “always stingy with the White Mountain,” 
drawing the line against the pro-development faction of the Tribe. For Riley, the preservation of Mount 
Baldy symbolized the cultural survival of the Tribe. She certainly advocated for economic development, 
but she also insisted that development proceed through the “Apache way.” She felt that the mountain 
                                                 
74 “Apaches Help Native Trout in Fight for Survival,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (December, 1965): 3; “Anglers 
Harvesting Fish on Christmas Tree Lake,” Fort Apache Scout 8 (October 1969); 1, 3; White Mountain Apache 
Tribal Council, White Mountain Apache Indians, p. 23. 

 
 
 
 
251 
 
humbled and reminded her to “pray [and r]emember in the Apache way, there is someone bigger than 
we are. Never forget God, and remember the White Mountain, and all that is sacred.”75  
In 1970 the Tribe once again voted to “maintain and manage” Mount Baldy as a “Primitive Area.”76 
More importantly, this resolution added ecological integrity to their list of values. New language in the 
resolution clarified the ecological importance of the Mount Baldy watershed: “[D]evelopment and 
disturbance in this area could have detrimental effects on wildlife, water resources, stream flow and 
cause severe erosion problems.”77 This statement reflected the Tribe‟s move towards ecological 
principles as a guiding management philosophy, which affirmed Mount Baldy‟s connection to the rest of 
the reservation. The health of tribal herds, timber, and recreational resources all started with the 
comprehensive management of the reservation watershed. Fred Banashley, Sr., Tribal Chairman from 
1970 to 1974, claimed, “Who more than the Apache should be a fervent ecologist? The Apache knows 
from history how important the environment is for survival. Who more than the Indian should 
understand that exploitation, no matter how great the need, does not have to mean spoliation.”78 So the 
designation of Mount Baldy wilderness area was an extension of a larger plan attempting to integrate 
cultural, economic, and ecological concerns. Ecology didn‟t mean walking lightly on the land; the term 
had a broader meaning for the Apache. The early 1970s marked the time when the Tribe began to 
cognizantly combine Western ecological principles with their pre-reservation tradition of active 
management of their homeland, a pattern that would become more evident in the future. The cultural 
meaning of Mount Baldy continued to diversify as the White Mountain Apache gained more control 
over reservation resources. 
                                                 
75 “After 20 Good Years, Riley Leaves Political Arena,” Fort Apache Scout 17 (April 21, 1978): 8, 11. 
76 White Mountain Apache Tribal Resolution 70-193, December 9, 1970, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 54, File 
#346-67,  Box #7. 
77 White Mountain Apache Tribal Resolution 70-193. 
78 “Ecology Upper-Most in Apache‟s Planning,” Fort Apache Scout 10 (November, 1971): 9. 

 
 
 
 
252 
 
Later in the 1970s, the restoration of mental and physical health of tribal members became a focal 
point of the sacred mountain. Leroy Lupe, director of the Alcoholism Rehabilitation Program on the 
reservation, revived yearly pilgrimages up the mountain as a measure to address the alcohol problem 
among tribal members. He wanted “to show people that there is more than just hanging around 
Whiteriver waiting to get drunk.”79  Lupe believed alcohol rehabilitation involved re-building a sense of 
place – for too long the culturally disruptive forces of Western society had physically, spiritually, and 
emotionally alienated the Apache from their own lands even though they still lived on them. Poverty and 
cultural disruption dissolved community ties and stability, thus respect for the land and oneself.  Lupe 
remarked that “[t]he most precious feeling one cherishes is the feeling of being wanted, welcomed and 
being at home. This is how it should be for all the Apache Tribal members … for them to enjoy what we 
have here on our reservation, and not to be deprived of the things which are theirs. … They should be 
made to feel proud of their beautiful reservation.”80 Not only did the preservation of the “White 
Mountain” embody a spiritual restoration, but it also became a tool for the restoration of health among 
the Apache. 
The establishment of Mount Baldy Wilderness Area foremost was an act of resistance, but it also 
contained elements of exchange. The action represented the Tribe‟s continued quest to culturally, 
politically, and physically define boundaries. These boundaries, however, remained fluid and porous, 
reflecting the Apache propensity for adaptation.  A shift in power relations changed the process by 
which the hybridization of Apache and Western values occurred. Instead of the historical pattern of 
imposition of Western values, which required the Apache to react and resist, political actions such as the 
designation of Mount Baldy signaled a preemptive, controlled acquisition of Western values. Mount 
Baldy also symbolized the restoration of Apache health and cultural and spiritual values, while 
                                                 
79 “Journey up a Sacred Mountain,” Fort Apache Scout 15 (July 1976): 6. 
80 Leroy Lupe, “Help Makes Hike Possible,” Fort Apache Scout 16 (August 19, 1977): 2. 

 
 
 
 
253 
 
simultaneously embracing the Euro-American values of wilderness and economic development. Its new 
incarnation represented the possible coexistence of both social worlds. The continued restoration of the 
Apache trout, whose efforts intensified in the 1960s, further exemplified this political spirit.  
 
Exchange: Apache Trout Restoration 
Despite the closing of Apache trout streams to fishing and camping in 1952, their populations 
continued to decline, suggesting passive restoration wasn‟t the solution; clearly, other factors besides 
overfishing caused the demise of this species. The White Mountain Apache and FWS biologists had 
long known that overfishing led to a restriction in the Apache trout‟s distribution, but other 
environmental forces inhibited the recovery of these remaining populations to their original range. 
Logging and grazing had destroyed habitat, hybridization with rainbow trout had compromised the 
genetic integrity of the species, and competition with the larger introduced game species for food and 
microhabitat that offered protection from predators had further reduced their former geographic range.81  
This realization led the White Mountain Apache to two important political decisions that proved 
significant to the Apache trout in the 1960s; first, the creation of Mount Baldy wilderness area, which 
included the headwaters that amounted to the last refuge for the species; and second, their decision to 
solicit the FWS for technical assistance in the restoration of the species.  
The political impetus to save the Apache trout came from the White Mountain Apache. However, a 
fortunate turn of events on the national scale aided their decision to consult with the FWS: working with 
endangered species became in vogue. Previously, the FWS showed limited interest in the Apache trout. 
Throughout the 1940s and 1950s when the Tribe worked to preserve the Apache trout, the FWS played 
an advisory role. After the proposal in the early 1940s to turn Williams Creek Fish Hatchery into a 
breeding ground for the struggling species died, the FWS‟s financial support for the Apache trout 
                                                 
81 John K. Anderson, “Preliminary Management Proposal for Salmo gila (The Gila Trout) on the Fort Apache 
Indian Reservation,” September 8, 1964, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 931, File #2602, Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
254 
 
waned.  Over the next twenty years, their conservation effort consisted of the discontinuance of stocking 
headwater streams on Fort Apache, preventing “further contamination of waters containing the native 
trout with other species that may hybridize or otherwise dilute this pure strain.”82  
In general, despite the FWS‟s brief flirtation with endangered species during the New Deal, World 
War II and relatively a conservative Congress after the War discouraged further concentrated interest in 
endangered species until the 1960s. The revived concern closely tracked with the American public‟s 
new-found concern about non-game species threatened with extinction.83 Furthermore, research 
conducted by academic ecologists and zoologists emphasizing the complexity of ecosystems, and the 
importance of non-game species garnered more attention from FWS personnel at this time. The 
confluence of increasing scientific support for the urgency and importance of protecting non-game 
species and the growing public concern drove Congress and the FWS towards a more active role in the 
recovery of endangered species. To kick this initiative off, the FWS created the Committee on Rare and 
Endangered Wildlife Species in 1964, which published the first official list of endangered species in the 
United States, including the Apache trout.84 Eventually, the FWS capitalized on the “headline value” of 
endangered species as a useful ploy to increase the agencies funding opportunities.85 For their part, 
politicians began accumulating political capital by investing time in promoting and seeking funds for 
endangered species restoration projects. Relative to the Apache and the efforts of the WMRE, the FWS 
                                                 
82 “Memorandum: Region 2 – Report of Activities – July 1962 (Arizona Native Trout),” Lewis Garlick, Chief, 
Division of Sports Fisheries, Albuquerque, New Mexico to Director, Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, 
Washington, D.C., October 23, 1962, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 339, File #3295-58, Box #17. 
83 Samuel Hays, Beauty Health and Permanence (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1987), pp. 112-
113; Thomas R. Dunlap, Saving America’s Wildlife (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press), pp. 141-155. 
84 Committee on Rare and Endangered Wildlife Species, Rare and Endangered Fish and Wildlife of the United 
States (also known as The Red Book) (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, Resource 
Publication 34, 1966), p. F-12. 
85 Steven L. Yaffee, Prohibitive Policy: Implementing the Federal Endangered Species Act (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1982), p. 38. 

 
 
 
 
255 
 
and politicians came late to the game. All of the sudden, partly out of legitimate concern and partly out 
of political expedience, the Apache trout received unprecedented levels of attention.86  
In December of 1964, Congressman George F. Senner, Jr., a Democrat from Arizona, noticed 
“considerable interest had been generated regarding” the preservation of the Apache trout.87 He 
announced through a press release, without knowing the details and history of past Apache work to save 
this species, that the FWS, the White Mountain Apache, and the Arizona Department of Fish and Game 
(ADGF) planned to work together to save the Apache trout. Lamenting the trout‟s predicament, he 
pointed out the precipitous decline of the species from its former distribution of 360 miles of streams 
down to two streams on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. He stated with alarm, as if the information 
were new, that “[o]fficials of the Bureau of Sports Fisheries [FWS] have warned the rare trout are in 
danger of being wiped out and that a single forest fire could destroy all trace of the high-spirited fish.”88  
The DOI also rushed to gain positive press through the project. In a news release titled “Program 
Speeded to Save Rare Arizona Trout,” Interior officials gave the impression that the FWS was on top of 
the matter.89 The news release claimed that in the summer of 1964 the White Mountain Apache Tribe 
asked the FWS to recommend a program to save the Apache trout. If someone didn‟t know better, the 
news release made it sound as if the effort to save the endangered Apache trout had just begun. Hidden 
from the reader was the long history of the Tribe‟s struggle to convince the FWS that rescuing the 
Apache trout was a worthy endeavor. 
                                                 
86 For background on this time period, see Dunlap, Saving America’s Wildlife, pp. 119-123; Yaffee, Prohibitive 
Policy, pp. 32-39; Brian Czech and Paul R. Krausman, The Endangered Species Act: History, Conservation, 
Biology, and Public Policy (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001), pp. 118-121; Timothy J. 
Farnham, Saving Nature’s Legacy (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007), pp. 78-96. 
87 John S. Gottschalk to George F. Senner, January 15, 1965, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 931, File #2602, Box 
#45. 
88 “Arizona Trout to be Saved,” The Fort Apache Scout  2 (1964): 1. 
89 Department of Interior News Release, Fish and Wildlife Service, “Program Speeded to Save Rare Arizona 
Trout,” December 6, 1964, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 931, File #2602, Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
256 
 
Science also confirmed what had long been suspected by local land managers and Apaches that had 
closely worked with the Apache trout: the Apache trout and the Gila trout were separate species. Prior to 
the 1960s, the Apache trout had a muddled taxonomic history. In the 1940s, Robert Miller, a zoologist 
from the University of Michigan, took on the unenviable job of straightening out the taxonomy of 
western trout species. No zoologist before him had attempted a comprehensive taxonomy of 
southwestern trout. Miller admitted that the historic extent and  “notorious variability” of southwestern 
trout species “may never be securely clarified” due to poor records, lost specimens, overfishing, 
introduction of non-native trout, and habitat destruction. Despite numerous reports since the late 
nineteenth century indicating that a species of trout endemic to Arizona existed in the White Mountains, 
Miller “tentatively referred all Arizona trout” to the Gila trout.90  “Official” confusion about the status of 
the Apache trout began clearing up in 1964, when Dan Regan, a graduate student at Colorado State 
University, studied what he assumed were a number of Gila trout populations, one of which was from 
Ord Creek on Fort Apache. He discovered significant morphological differences among the study 
populations. The Fort Apache population had shorter fins, proportionally smaller bodies, and fewer and 
larger spots than other Gila trout populations. Regan concluded that the Fort Apache population might 
be a separate species.91 Consequently, this information led the FWS to consider the Apache trout a 
separate species. Later studies would uncover genetic differences between Apache trout and Gila trout 
populations. However, not until Robert Miller published a paper in Copeia in 1972 did the Apache trout 
                                                 
90 Robert R. Miller, “Classification of the Native Trouts of Arizona with the Description of a New Species, Salmo 
apache,” Copeia (September 8, 1972): 401- 422; Robert R. Miller, “Notes on the Cutthroat and Rainbow Trouts 
with the Description of a New Species from the Gila River, New Mexico,” Occasional Papers of the Museum of 
Zoology, University of Michigan 529 (1950): 1-42. 
91 Dan M. Regan, “Comparison of Morphometric Measurements for Gila Trout and Ord Creek Trout” (Report 
Fed. Aid Project F-22-R, New Mexico Department of Game and Fish, 1964). 

 
 
 
 
257 
 
officially receive its new scientific name, Salmo apache, in honor of White Mountain Apache efforts to 
save the species.92  
The “new” taxonomic status of the Apache trout made protecting it all the more imperative. No 
longer a subspecies of the Gila trout, which the FWS also considered threatened with extinction, the 
Apache trout “officially” had a sudden reduction in its geographic range.93 Around the same time Regan 
made his morphometric measurements, the FWS, WMRE, and the ADGF conducted a population survey 
that revealed that the Apache trout only inhabited two streams on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation: 
Ord Creek and East Fork. Because of these surveys and with the encouragement of the FWS, in 1962 the 
White Mountain Apache asked the ADGF for assistance in an experimental propagation program. The 
federal hatcheries on the reservation, which had their hands full raising game fish, hadn‟t been allocated 
any funds for experimental work with endangered species. For the time being, the state had to handle 
any research on Apache trout propagation.94 The state quickly agreed to cooperate with the Tribe. 
Subsequently, tribal game wardens helped the ADGF collect breeding stock from Ord Creek for transfer 
to Sterling Springs Hatchery, a state facility, near Flagstaff. Within a year, the ADGF successfully raised 
a brood and planted a population in North Canyon in the Kaibab National Forest, which incidentally was 
outside the historic range of the species. ADGF biologists chose this site because of its proximity to the 
hatchery and because fisheries managers had never introduced non-native trout to this stream. In 1965, 
after this population persisted for two years, the state began a vigorous breeding program, which over 
                                                 
92 Miller, “Classification of the Native Trouts of Arizona,” p. 403. 
93 The taxonomic status of the Apache trout is still controversial. Recently the American Fisheries Society 
classified the Apache trout as a subspecies of Gila trout based on more recent genetic comparisons. The FWS 
continues to consider the Apache trout a separate species for management purposes. E.J. Loudenslager, J.N. 
Rinne, G.A.E. Gall, and R.E. David, “Biochemical genetic studies of native Arizona and New Mexico trout,” 
Southwestern Naturalist 31 (1986): 221-234; R.J. Behnke, “Native trout of western North America,” American 
Fisheries Society Monograph 6 (1992); J.S. Nelson, E.J.  Crossman, H. Espinosa-Pérez, L.T. Findley, C.R. 
Gilbert, R.N. Lea, and J.D. Williams, Common and Scientific Names of Fishes from the United States, Canada, 
and Mexico (Bethesda, MD: American Fisheries Society, 2004); U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Draft Apache 
Trout Recovery Plan, Second Revision (Albuquerque, New Mexico, 2007). 
94 “Memorandum: Region 2 – Report of Activities,” Garlick to Director. 

 
 
 
 
258 
 
the next forty years would introduce 486,000 pounds of Apache trout into thirty-five streams, with most 
reintroductions occurring within the species historic geographic distribution.95 
The success of the state propagation program, however, lay in the hands of the White Mountain 
Apache. The only existing genetically pure strains of the Apache trout survived on Fort Apache. If these 
populations perished, saving the Apache trout would become a futile exercise. In 1964 the Apache, with 
the support of the ADGF, once again requested technical assistance from the FWS to design a 
restoration plan for the disappearing trout. The FWS complied and dispatched John K. Anderson, a 
fishery management biologist from their Springerville operation, to assist the Apache.  Anderson had 
helped conduct creel censuses on the reservation for the past few years, so he was familiar with the 
reservation landscape. He completed his assessment in September of 1964 and submitted it to the Tribal 
Council. Reflecting the tentative taxonomic status of the Apache trout, Anderson entitled the report 
“Preliminary Management Proposals for Salmo Gila (the Gila Trout) on the Fort Apache Indian 
Reservation.” Still referring to the Apache trout as the Gila trout, he reaffirmed what had been known by 
the Apache for over decade, “It appears that the future of the Gila Trout is more in doubt than was 
earlier surmised.” 96  In an odd parallel with federal bureaucrats concerned about the White Mountain 
Apache‟s dire socioeconomic conditions, Anderson stated the obvious: the survival of the Apache trout 
was in peril. Only in this instance, ironically, the federal government focused on restoring pure 
populations of the species, rather than encouraging assimilation. Unlike with federal plans for the White 
Mountain Apache and other Native American tribes, the complete assimilation or annihilation of one 
species for the sake of economic gain had become ethically untenable. The Apache effort to save the 
                                                 
95 John N. Rinne, Larry Riley, Rob Bettaso, Roger Sorenson, and Kirk Young, “Managing Southwestern Native 
and Nonnative Fishes: Can We Mix Oil and Water and Expect a Favorable Solution?” American Fisheries Society 
Symposium 44 (2004): 445-466; Gary J. Carmichael, James N. Hanson, James R. Novy, Kelly J. Meyer, and 
Donald C. Morizot, “Apache Trout Management: Cultured Fish, Genetics, Habitat Improvements, and 
Regulations,” American Fisheries Society Symposium 15 (1988): 112-121; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 
Arizona Trout (Apache Trout) Recovery Plan (Albuquerque, NM, 1983). 
96 Anderson, “Preliminary Management Proposal for Salmo gila.”  

 
 
 
 
259 
 
Apache trout spoke to this hypocrisy. The Tribal Council adopted the plan “in principle” by a vote of 9 
for and 0 against through Tribal Resolution on November 10, 1964. And by agreeing to “protect and 
preserve the native trout for future generations,” the Apache implicitly drew a connection between their 
fate and that of the Apache trout. Seeing the project as an investment in the future, the Tribal Council 
decided to fully fund the restoration project and directed the WMRE to carry out the restoration.97  
Anderson recommended both short-term and long-term goals. In the short-term the Tribe should 
continue to close Ord Creek and the East Fork of the White River to fishing. The Tribe should also 
construct fifteen-foot vertical barrier dams on the lower reaches of these streams to prevent the 
migration of rainbow trout into the upper reaches of these streams. In order to reduce competition and 
the potential for further hybridization, Anderson suggested the removal of all non-native trout. The 
Tribal Council rejected a fourth recommendation on the grounds that it would compromise tribal 
sovereignty: the inclusion of the tribal regulation to close Ord Creek and East Fork in the Arizona Game 
and Fish regulations. The long-term goals entailed a geographic expansion of the short-term goals. 
Anderson went on to recommend the exclusion, with barrier dams, and removal of non-native trout from 
the entire Bonito Creek Drainage, including Hurricane Lake, upper Big Diamond Creek, and upper 
Paradise Creek.  Lastly, he recommended the Tribe construct a lake at the confluence of restored Apache 
trout streams. This lake would function to protect and enlarge the breeding population of the species. 
Furthermore, the lake would become a source of eggs for hatchery propagation. Anderson left the Tribe 
                                                 
97 The complete text of the resolution is “Whereas, the Salmo Gila (Arizona Native Trout) is considered to be a 
rare and endangered species, and Whereas, this fish is found only in the headwaters of certain streams on the Fort 
Apache Indian Reservation, and Whereas, the White Mountain Apache Tribe wishes to protect and preserve the 
native trout for future generations. Be It Resolved that the [preliminary management plan] … be adopted in 
principle, and Be It Further Resolved that the White Mountain Recreation Enterprise Board of Directors be 
authorized to designate closed and open streams or stream sections in the implementation of the plan.” Resolution 
of the White Mountain Apache Tribe No. 64-123, November 10, 1964, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 931, File 
#2602, Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
260 
 
with the hope that someday “limited fishing may and should be permitted by horseback and back pack 
fishermen,” thus emphasizing the potential economic benefits of the project. 98  
In a show of responsibility and tribal sovereignty, the Tribal Council decided to construct the barrier 
dams and Christmas Tree Lake with tribal funds. The OEO also kicked in some funds to hire labor 
through the Job Corps program. These individuals received on-the-job technical training from Anderson, 
Branch of Land Operations officials, and WMRE game wardens. 99 Work began in 1965, with the crew 
first tackling Ord Creek and the East Fork of the White River. Then they moved on to Bonita, Sun, and 
Moon Creeks. The WMRE and Branch of Land Operations constructed the breeding lake in 1965 at the 
confluence of Sun and Moon Creeks, which filled with water by spring of 1967. The Tribe named the 
reservoir Christmas Tree Lake, after the blue spruce the Tribe had harvested from that location for 
Lyndon B. Johnson as the Nation‟s Christmas tree in 1965.100   
After the lake filled, tribal game wardens, including Lydo Harvey, and volunteers from the Arizona 
Flycasters Association made trips on horseback into the Mount Baldy Wilderness Area to capture brood 
stock from Ord Creek and upper East Fork. They temporarily stunned the fish with “electro fishing 
devices,” collected them with dipping nets, and placed the fish in old-fashioned milk cans for transport 
down the mountain. Reidhead Cosay, who had worked for the WMRE since 1958, had the difficult job 
of keeping the pack horses calm as they descended the mountain with milk cans full of Apache trout 
draped over their backs. From there, a “fish truck” transported the captured Apache trout to Christmas 
                                                 
98 Anderson, “Preliminary Management Proposal for Salmo gila.”  
99 “Openings Available for Youth at Job Corps Centers,” Fort Apache Scout 5 (December, 1966): 2; James E. 
Officer to George F. Senner, Jr., January 18, 1965;  J.A. Wagner, “Memorandum: Report to Associate 
Commissioner Officer,” January 12, 1965; John S. Gottschalk to George F. Senner, January 15, 1965, RG 75 
FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 931, File #2602, Box #45. 
100 United States Department of Interior, News Release, December 10, 1965, “White Mountain Apaches Plan Full 
Week in Nation‟s Capital,” RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 920, File #6693, Box#27; “Apache „Tree‟ to White 
House,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (November, 1965): 1-2. 

 
 
 
 
261 
 
Tree Lake.101 Once the transplanted population had a chance to grow, the ADGF transported many of 
these fish to the state propagation program at the Sterling Springs Hatchery. By 1972, the ADGF and 
WMRE had reintroduced the Apache trout into eleven stream systems, nine of which were part of their 
historic range in the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, Tonto National Forest, and Fort Apache, and 
two of which that weren‟t within their historic range, Kaibab National Forest and Coronado National 
Forest. According to subsequent surveys, eight of the eleven plants persisted through at least 1983. And 
further work on the reservation allowed for the spread of “natural populations of pure” Apache trout into 
an additional twelve streams on the reservation and the easterly adjacent Apaches-Sitgreaves National 
Forest.102 
On the federal level, in 1967 the FWS listed the Apache trout as endangered under the Endangered 
Species Preservation Act of 1966, the first formal federal act to mandate the conservation, protection, 
restoration, and propagation of endangered species.103 This Act represented a significant step towards 
preserving endangered species, but it contained major flaws. Early critics of this act considered it 
“toothless” because it failed to limit the taking of endangered species and offer any significant 
incentives for habitat protection.104 In many ways, the Act proved only a symbolic gesture to the 
public‟s growing concerns about endangered species. Nonetheless, the limitations of the Act didn‟t 
define the White Mountain Apache‟s restoration program. Their efforts exceeded the mandates of the 
Act. Both closing Ord Creek and East Fork to fishing and establishing Mount Baldy Wilderness Area 
demonstrated the Tribe‟s serious interest in restoring the species. The Tribe was under no legal 
                                                 
101 “Apaches Help Native Trout in Fight for Survival,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (December, 1965): 3. 
102 After the enactment of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the ADGF were prohibited from introducing 
Apache trout outside its historic range. FWS, Arizona Trout (Apache Trout) Recovery Plan, pp. 4-7. 
103 The FWS listed the Apache trout under the common and scientific name “Arizona (Apache) trout, Salmo sp. 
See “Native Fish and Wildlife: Endangered Species,” Federal Register 32 (March 11, 1967): 4001. 
104 See for example, Daniel J. Rohlf, The Endangered Species Act: A Guide to Its Protections and Implementation 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford Environmental Law Society, 1989), p. 21. For a legal overview of the Act see Michael J. 
Bean and Melanie J. Rowland, The Evolution of National Wildlife Law (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997), pp. 194-
196. 

 
 
 
 
262 
 
obligation to adhere to the FWS‟s recommendations, but they implemented them anyway. And despite 
the Tribe‟s relatively impoverished condition, they chose to fund the Apache trout restoration project. 
As with the development of the WMRE, the Tribe rejected short-term gains for what they perceived as 
long-term economic and moral benefits. This act of self-determination also paid political dividends for 
the Tribe in future battles over reservation resources with the state and federal governments.  
By the end of the 1960s, the Apache trout had come a long way from its once restricted range of two 
streams on Fort Apache. Christmas Tree Lake opened for the first time to fishing in September 1969 for 
two weeks. Three hundred twenty seven anglers from Arizona, California, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and 
Indiana descended on the reservation for the opportunity to cast their lines for the rare Apache trout. On 
the first day Emmon T. Wright of Phoenix caught a state-record-sized Apache trout at fifteen inches and 
one pound, five ounces. However, the record failed to persist long, several hours later another lucky 
angler caught a one-pound, six-ounce fish.105 Of course the fact that the opening of Christmas Tree Lake 
offered the first opportunity to fish for the Apache trout in three decades didn‟t hurt one‟s chances to 
break a record. The opening generated great press for the Apache because Christmas Tree Lake became 
one of the few places in Arizona fishers could find the increasingly prized Arizona native.  
As early as 1965, praise for the Tribe‟s work began to appear in the primary newspaper in Phoenix, 
the Arizona Republic. John Horne, a reporter who enjoyed fishing exclaimed, “Now, perhaps in the nick 
of time, the Apache Indians have embarked on a program designed to save and preserve this beautiful 
fish.”106 On the national level, the Apache received the DOI‟s Conservation Service Award in 1970. 
Interior Secretary Walter J. Hickel singled out Nelson Lupe, Sr., Lydo Harvey, and Mary Riley for their 
historic efforts to save the Apache trout. Hickel also acknowledged that the Tribe began restoration 
                                                 
105 “Anglers Harvesting Fish on Christmas Tree Lake,” Fort Apache Scout 8 (October, 1969); 1, 3. 
106 John Horne, “Gila Trout Back in Apache Streams,” The Fort Apache Scout Vol. 4 (August, 1965): 6. 

 
 
 
 
263 
 
efforts as early as 1952 through the WMRE and applauded “the wise use of limited numbers of these 
fish in the Reservation‟s fishing program.”107  
Despite this positive attention, fresh trouble lay on the horizon. The White Mountain Apache‟s 
mounting prestige in the conservation world would soon take a turn for the worse. Their seemingly good 
relationship with the FWS would be tested with the enactment of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) in 
1973. And likewise, as the tribal government continued to fight for more control over fish and game 
management on the reservation, a jurisdictional battle with the state would ensue. When the FWS 
formally listed the Apache trout as an endangered species in 1973, this action foreshadowed bigger 
troubles to come. This new listing carried with it greater restrictions than the old listing under the 1966 
Act. Most importantly for the recovery of the Apache trout, the ESA prohibited the taking of the species 
for sports fishing and bureaucratically hampered the propagation program. Under the ESA, the state and 
the WMRE had to seek special permits to proceed with a program that had been successful for a decade. 
Suddenly, not only did the Act halt the main means for reestablishing the species, it also curtailed any 
economic benefits the Apache might derive from their restoration efforts.108   
Although a minor event, the Apache trout situation would foreshadow major problems with potential 
critical habitat designations as the Tribe and FWS discovered large numbers of endangered species on 
the reservation in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Fortunately in the current instance, the FWS saw the 
irony in their decision to list the species as endangered.  The AGFD and the Apache convinced the FWS 
that the endangered status was counterproductive towards the species‟ recovery. The cooperative efforts 
between the Apache and the AGFD had already restored large numbers of natives to their former 
distribution. In 1975 the FWS downlisted the trout‟s status to threatened, thus facilitating the 
cooperative propagation program and allowing the possibility of limited fishing on the reservation. With 
                                                 
107 “High Award Bestowed On Apache Tribe,” Fort Apache Scout 9 (July, 1970): 1. 
108 Dale Slocum, “Arizona‟s Native Apache Trout is Recognized,” Fort Apache Scout 14 (August, 1975): 10. 

 
 
 
 
264 
 
Apache trout listed as threatened under the ESA, sport fishing became acceptable when employed to 
control overpopulation. In addition, the FWS no longer required special permits to handle specimens for 
the propagation program.109  
 
Conclusion  
 
The White Mountain Apache efforts to save the Apache trout, the establishment of Mount Baldy 
Wilderness Area, and the growing economic strength of Apache enterprises created the political gateway 
through which they assumed greater control of their eco-cultural resources. This pathway wasn‟t without 
its troubles and the struggle remained far from over. Economic opportunities unevenly benefited the 
reservation population, Apache social and cultural values endured further disruption in the wake of 
intensified economic development, and the BIA still partly controlled range, forest, and watershed 
management on the reservation.  
These troubles would continue to persist into the 1970s and 1980s, but the White Mountain Apache 
deliberately and methodically persevered. Restoration and economic development projects in the 1960s 
gave the Tribe future political leverage to take on the federal and state governments. Furthermore, 
although economic development furthered cultural and social disruption among the reservation 
population, restoration work modestly began to reverse the trend.  Entering the 1960s, cultural 
uncertainty plagued the White Mountain Apache‟s social and political milieu and taxonomic uncertainty 
obscured the Apache trout‟s existence. Both, in their own ways, were enduring a crisis of identity. By 
the end of the 1960s, however, their respective identities began to re-solidify. The Apache, through 
efforts like the Apache trout restoration project, found greater political footing with state and federal 
government, increased control over knowledge production on the reservation, and discovered the 
                                                 
109 “‟Threatened‟ Status for Three Species of Trout,” Federal Register 40 (July 16, 1975): 29863-29864; For an 
overview of the Endangered Species Act see Bean and Rowland, The Evolution of National Wildlife Law, pp. 
198-280. 

 
 
 
 
265 
 
rudiments of cultural restoration. The Apache trout acquired recognition as a rare and endangered 
species. Together they continued recreating a new and viable way of life. The Tribe established a 
favorable reputation as natural resource managers and the Apache trout became a valuable ecological 
and economic asset. In this way, the Apache people and the Apache trout endured as co-agents of 
survival.   

 
 
 
 
266 
 
Chapter 7  
 Elk Restoration and Management: The Battle to Control Knowledge Production 
on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
 
Making headways doesn‟t really mean that you are on an easy street… That means we have 
technical people, management, people with certain abilities and qualifications. These are not 
easy to come by, and it‟s a big challenge we have here. I guess our tribe has to keep aggressive in 
modern times, but we have to still hang onto the Apache point of view, rather than the melting-
pot point of view. We want to maintain our identity for centuries to come. We‟d like one day to 
establish Apache as one of the predominant languages in the world, one of the predominant 
societies in the world, not an elimination type, as some people have envisioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ronnie Lupe, Tribal Chairman (1979)1 
 
 
 
Elk is a prominent character in the White Mountain Apache story “The Maiden from Whom They 
Disappeared into the Water: Inside Elk‟s Belly.” This story takes place in a time when all animals 
“talked as we do now.” It is about the first time sickness spread among the Apache people and the 
actions they took to avoid it. To avoid the sickness, the “head man” said the people must move away 
from their homeland, dziłna· hodiłe (northeast of the White Mountains), to find “a different country 
where we will live as long as life exists.” Before leaving, however, the “head man” insisted that one 
family must leave a daughter behind.  No family adhered to the request, so out of urgency, he decided to 
leave his daughter.  The people packed all their belongings and began the journey. When they reached a 
river, they told the girl they had forgotten her toys. So as she returned to the camp to retrieve them, the 
river water rose, revealing a trail. The people followed the trail, disappearing under the water.   
When the girl returned to the edge of the river, she found no evidence of where her people went. She 
desperately searched for tracks on both sides of the river to no avail. From this time on, though, the “girl 
had good luck because she was left behind and God looked after her.” Unaware of her “good luck,” she 
                                                 
1 Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs (ACIA), Control of Natural Resources: Report of the 7th Annual Indian 
Town, November 15-16, 1979 (Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1980), pp. 60-61. 

 
 
 
 
267 
 
began to cry. This is when Elk found her, at which time he offered to help her cross the river. To 
transport her, Elk told her to crawl inside his belly through his anus. Fording the river killed Elk, but the 
girl survived and used Elk‟s body for food and protection. She later encountered Coyote searching for 
food. Luckily at this time she turned into a porcupine, which afforded her protection from Coyote. 
Nonetheless, Coyote still harassed her for food. Losing her patience, she killed Coyote with Elk‟s hip 
bone. From then on she was safe and happy.2   
Elk in this story is a symbol of protection and sacrifice. In a modern story that originated in the 
1970s, Elk would again help the Apache cross another barrier. Elk would become a significant player in 
the White Mountain Apache‟s restoration of sovereignty over their homeland. The restoration of this 
species would also generate a significant source of income for the Tribe through the development of a 
world-class trophy elk hunt program.  
The 1970s signified a time of exploration for the White Mountain Apache, exploration of what it 
meant to be a sovereign Native American nation. Tribes across the country tested the extent of tribal 
sovereignty through legislation, the courts, and cooperative agreements with federal and state 
authorities. In addition to these routes to political autonomy, the White Mountain Apache also explicitly 
challenged Western methods of knowledge production. In the Apache quest to control game and fish 
management on their homeland, they claimed that the Arizona Game and Fish Department‟s (AGFD) 
management practices proved ineffective. If this was the case the Apache asked, then why do the AGFD 
have the authority to interfere with Apache game and fish regulations and management strategies?   As 
part of the Apache‟s strategy to control game management, the 1970s marked the first time that the 
Tribe articulated a division between Apache knowledge production and Western knowledge production.  
                                                 
2 I paraphrased the story told by Bane Tithla in Goodwin‟s, Myths and Tales of the White Mountain Apache, pp. 
116-119.  

 
 
 
 
268 
 
During the 1970s and 1980s, however, the Apache employed this rhetoric more as a political tool 
than as an actual application of Apache knowledge in restoration work. At this time, the notion of 
Apache knowledge remained vague. Western land management philosophies and techniques still pre-
dominated on the reservation. Nonetheless, while delineating between Apache and Western knowledge, 
Apache leaders and land managers worked towards rediscovering and reinventing the meaning of 
Apache knowledge. Nevertheless, this early expression of Apache knowledge would set the stage for 
later conflicts with federal and state agencies concerning water rights, watershed restoration, endangered 
species, and fire management. The most important land management issue during this period remained 
controlling knowledge production on the reservation, rather than clearly articulating the content of 
Apache epistemology. In short, the Apache recognized a clear connection between controlling 
knowledge production on the reservation and restoring sovereignty.  
This chapter focuses on the Apache‟s relationship with the state of Arizona, outlining how the 
federal Indian law of the 1970s and 1980s influenced this relationship. How did tension with the AGDF 
affect White Mountain Apache efforts to restore and manage wildlife on the reservation?  How did the 
Apache use this battle to control knowledge production on the reservation? In essence, I argue that the 
battle with the AGFD over the development of the trophy elk hunt program and the restoration of elk not 
only solidified White Mountain Apache sovereignty, but also legitimized Apache control over 
knowledge production on the reservation. This incident also presented the first obvious instance of the 
Tribe publicly defining the “Apache way” in conjunction with science. For the Apache, controlling 
knowledge production on the reservation proved a necessary hurdle to realizing self-determination and 
re-legitimizing Apache knowledge. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
269 
 
The Social and Political Context (1970 – Present) 
 
 Political momentum for self-determination and assertion of tribal sovereignty that had built up in 
the 1960s reached a visible climax in the 1970s.  Suddenly with high profile events such as Alcatraz, 
Wounded Knee II, and the occupation of the BIA building in Washington, D.C., Native American rights 
and plights came to the public forefront. The President and Congress paid more consideration to 
American Indian affairs at this time than any time since the Indian New Deal. Despite all this attention, 
as we have seen and Philip Deloria observed, “Indians did not discover they were Indians in the early 
1970s. We were not reborn: we were simply noticed.”3  Nonetheless, Native Americans experienced a 
time of unprecedented change.  
A Department of Labor report to Congress in 1969 stood as a prime example of the profound change 
in attitude among government agencies towards Native Americans in the late 1960s. The report 
indicated Department of Labor officials “grew to admire the Indians tremendously as a group, to marvel 
at their courage and dignity even in the midst of abject poverty.” The report went on to say “[w]e 
realized what a tremendous loss to mankind would be the obliteration of this culture…We became 
strong partisans of the belief that the Indians should be encouraged and helped to preserve their 
culture.”4 Far from an assimilationist stance, the Department of Labor declared support for the cultural 
revitalization and self-determination of the American Indian people. In his last year of office, President 
Johnson delivered a rousing message to Congress that gave cautious hope to many Native Americans. 
                                                 
3Philip Deloria, “The Era of Indian Self-Determination,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed. (Chicago, IL: 
Howe Brothers, 1986), 191-207, p. 204. For overviews of this time frame, see Vine Deloria, Jr., Behind the Trail 
of Broken Treaties: and Indian Declaration of Independence (New York, NY: Delacorte Press, 1974); Paul Chaat 
Smith and Robert Allen Warrior, Like a Hurricane: The Indian Movement from Alcatraz to Wounded Knee (New 
York, NY: The New Press, 1996); Peter Iverson, “We Are Still Here” (Wheeling, IL: Harlan Davidson, Inc., 
1993), pp. 139-174; Parman, Indians and the American West (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1994), 
pp. 148-168; Alvin M. Josephy, Now That the Buffalo’s Gone: A Study of Today’s American Indians (Norman, 
OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1984).   
4 U.S. Congress, Toward Economic Development for Native American Communities, Joint Economic Committee, 
vol. 1, part I, 91st Congress, 1st sess., 1969, 125. 

 
 
 
 
270 
 
Reprinted in the Fort Apache Scout, Johnson outlined the federal government‟s responsibility to move 
American Indian nations towards self-sufficiency and political autonomy. Most importantly, 
governmental assistance, he asserted, “means partnership – not paternalism.”5 
Native Americans renewed their skepticism of the federal government with the inauguration of 
Richard Nixon in 1969, as he served as Vice President under Eisenhower, a supporter of termination 
policy. They were pleasantly surprised to find Nixon quite receptive to Native American concerns. 
During his tenure, Nixon supported a large number of Indian initiatives, starting with the return of Blue 
Lake to the Taos Pueblo in March of 1970.  He also attempted to squelch any doubts about his sympathy 
for Native Americans in a message to Congress on July 8, 1970. With an uncharacteristically stirring 
call for compassion, he repudiated the deplorable history of the United States relationship with Indian 
nations. Nixon charged that forced termination “produced considerable disorientation among the 
affected Indians and has left them unable to relate to a myriad of federal, state, and local assistance 
efforts.” Demonstrating an understanding that what lay at the root of past failed Indian policy was the 
disruption of Indian culture, he stated that Congress should seek “to strengthen the Indian‟s sense of 
autonomy without threatening his sense of community.” Nixon finished with a statement of strong 
support for tribal sovereignty. Clarifying what his administration meant by self-determination, he 
directed Congress to support tribal independence of “federal control without being cut off from federal 
concern and federal support.”6  
Clearly politicians and bureaucrats had heard the outcries of Native Americans. The content of these 
messages accurately reflected their needs, but now it was time to follow through. Thus began the Self-
Determination Era, a period to this day that has generated an unprecedented amount of pro-Indian 
                                                 
5 “The Forgotten American: President Johnson Presents Indian Message to Congress,” Fort Apache Scout, 8 
(April, 1968): 6-7, 12. 
6 Message from the President of the United States, House of Representatives Document No. 91-363, 91st 
Congress, 2nd session, July 8, 1970. 

 
 
 
 
271 
 
legislation and court decisions. As for Native Americans, Indian-drafted legislation and Indian-initiated 
legal challenges became the two-pronged strategy employed to further solidify sovereignty and gain 
more control over affairs on reservations.  
In many ways, the courts proved the major battle ground for Native American rights from the 1970s 
on. Native Americans needed resolution on long-standing jurisdictional, natural resource management, 
and water rights issues caused by years of misguided, negligent, and exploitative Indian policy. 
Arguably, court cases proved more important than legislative gains at the time. The period saw an 
“emerging litigation capability” not seen before in Indian country, with the number of American Indian 
lawyers increasing from twenty five in the late 1960s to over one thousand by the 1990s.  Once again an 
OEO program, legal support services, aided the Native American cause. The OEO funded legal offices 
on reservations that provided much more advice and support than had ever been available. This program 
led to the establishment of effective national advocacy groups such as the Native American Rights 
Fund.7  
For our purposes, one of the most significant cases involved the fishing rights battle in the Pacific 
Northwest.  This struggle led to a series of major federal court cases that outlined Native American 
access to fish and wildlife on and off reservations. Perhaps the most famous case was United States v. 
Washington or more commonly referred to as the “Boldt decision.” Much to the chagrin of the fishing 
industry, in 1974 Judge George Boldt of the United States District Court for the Western District of 
Washington ruled that Native Americans living in the Pacific Northwest had rights to 50% of fish on 
and off their reservations.8 This decision, which Boldt based on long-standing treaty rights, failed to 
settle all jurisdictional matters, since state authority over reservation fish and wildlife remained 
                                                 
7 Charles Wilkinson, Blood Struggle (New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2005), pp. 241-267. 
8 Charles Wilkinson, Messages from Franks Landing: A Story of Salmon, Treaties, and the Indian Way (Seattle, 
WA: University of Washington Press, 2000). 

 
 
 
 
272 
 
ambiguous. The White Mountain Apache were involved in a series of cases that settled the fate of that 
situation in the late 1970s and early 1980s.9   
On the legislative front, the Taos Pueblo of New Mexico signaled a change in how Congress 
constructed Indian legislation with the Blue Lake Restoration Act of 1970. Like Mount Baldy for the 
White Mountain Apache, Blue Lake held significant religious meaning to the Taos Pueblo. 
Unfortunately, the federal government dispossessed the Taos, who trace their ancestry in the region back 
12,000 years, from their sacred place of worship for conservation purposes in the early twentieth 
century. The Taos official ownership of Blue Lake ended when Teddy Roosevelt designated the land 
surrounding the lake part of the Carson National Forest in 1906. The Pueblo‟s fight for Blue Lake began 
in the early 1920s with the help of John Collier and ended with Richard Nixon signing the Blue Lake 
Restoration Act into law, returning 48,000 acres back to the Taos. Now, other than special tribal fire 
wood collection permits and use for religious ceremonies, the Pueblo manage the site according to the 
terms of the Wilderness Act of 1964. The return of Blue Lake ushered in an era when Native American 
nations as a whole have seen a 15% increase in their land base. 10 
The legislative onslaught continued with the formulation of the Indian Self-Determination and 
Educational Assistance Act of 1975. Native Americans played a major role in writing this legislation, 
with its provisions reflecting their contemporary needs. Within the body of this Act, Congress clarified 
the federal government‟s role in Indian affairs, specifically mandating the BIA to implement a self-
determination policy. Congress found, “the Indian people will never surrender their desire to control 
their relationship both among themselves and with non-Indian governments, organizations, and 
                                                 
9 For a more detailed presentation of the relationship between federal, state, and tribal wildlife law see Micahel 
Bean and Melanie Rowland, The Evolution of National Wildlife Law (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997), pp. 449-464. 
10 The Native American land base in the lower 48 reached a low of approximately 50 million acres in the 1930s. 
Since then the land base increased to 58 million acres. R.C. Gordon-McCutchan, The Taos Indians and the Battle 
for Blue Lake (Santa Fe, NM: Red Crane Books, 1995); Dabney Otis Collins, “Battle for Blue Lake: The Taos 
Indians Finally Regain their Sacred Land,” American West 8 (September, 1971): 32-37. 

 
 
 
 
273 
 
persons.”11 In this statement Congress implicitly recognized ongoing tribal resistance to assimilation 
policies. And because of this resistance, they admitted that assimilation policy would never work. 
Instead, Congress believed the best way to move forward involved reestablishing the government-to-
government relationship between tribes and the United States first outlined in treaties and reaffirmed by 
Worcester v. Georgia in 1832. Only through self-determination, and ultimately self-governance, would 
tribes become self-sufficient.  
In theory, the Self-Determination Act diminished the BIA‟s power over Native Americans from a 
role of paternalistic oversight to one of technical advisor.12 The major provision in the Act designed to 
encourage Native American self-governance mandated contracting the administration of federal 
services, including BIA schools, to willing tribes. These became known as 638 contracts – named after 
the public law designation of the Act, PL 93-638.  
Although the Act failed to explicitly address the management of natural resources, self-governance 
implied that tribes should have control over all affairs on their reservations. And through this Act many 
tribes have moved closer to eco-cultural self-determination, including final approval rights on all land 
management activities on reservation lands.13 For instance, a number of tribes used 638 contracts to 
assume control of timber management on their reservations.  The Quinault of the Olympic Peninsula of 
Washington did so in the 1970s and have since gained recognition as running one of the most 
ecologically responsible timber companies in the western United States.14 Similarly, in the mid-1980s 
                                                 
11 The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975, 25 U.S.C. 450 [a] [2]. 
12 Robert A. Nelson and Joseph F. Shelley, "Bureau of Indian Affairs Influence on Indian Self-determination," in 
American Indian Policy in the Twentieth Century, Vine Deloria, Jr., ed. (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1985), pp. 177-196. 
13 Wilkinson, “Filling in the Blank Spots on Powell‟s and Stegner‟s Maps”; Rebecca Tsosie, “Tribal 
Environmental Policy in an Era of Self-determination: The Role of Ethics, Economics, and Traditional Ecological 
Knowledge,” Vermont Law Review 21 (1996): 225-336. 
14 Gary S. Morishima, “Indian Forestry: From Paternalism to Self-Determination,” Journal of Forestry (1997): 4-
9. 

 
 
 
 
274 
 
the White Mountain Apache began incrementally taking the reins of forest management from the BIA 
through 638 contracts.15  
Over the next thirty years, the Self-Determination Act‟s clarification of federal trust responsibilities 
and government-to-government relations also led to a large number of legislative acts concerning the 
restoration and management of Native American eco-cultural resources.16 Starting with the American 
Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978, the federal government recognized the legitimacy of Native 
American religions and their access rights to sacred and spiritual sites on federal lands. Subsequent 
legislation protected burial grounds on federal land and returned Native American cultural artifacts and 
skeletal remains that public and private museums, universities, and historical societies had previously 
confiscated.17 Congress also enacted a number of laws concerning the restoration and management of 
Native American fisheries, wildlife, forests, and agriculture. All of these laws had provisions for 
technical training and mandated cooperative efforts between tribes and federal agencies as a means to 
increase the level of Native American expertise on reservations.18 Lastly, Tribes saw the enactment of a 
whole slew of water settlement acts that abided by the Winters Doctrine and once and for all outlined 
favorable water rights for many tribes, including, finally, the White Mountain Apache Tribe in 2008.19  
None of this legislation is perfect and much of it is underfunded, but at the very least, this legislation 
represented Native American societies taking control of their own affairs. Instead of well-meaning, ill-
                                                 
15 “Contract Thinning Program Offered to Tribal Members,” Fort Apache Scout 23 (August 3, 1984): 1, 8-9; 
Dallas Massey, Sr., “Chairman‟s Vision: 638 Programs for the Continuance of Growth of our Forests and Natural 
Resources,” Fort Apache Scout 39 (March 9, 2001): 2. 
16 For a review of Native American eco-cultural legislation see Tsosie, “Tribal Environmental Policy in an Era of 
Self-determination”; Wilkinson, “Filling in the Blank Spots on Powell‟s and Stegner‟s Maps.” 
17 See the National Museum of the American Indian Act of 1989 and the Native American Graves Protection and 
Repatriation Act of 1990, 25 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.  
18 See for example the National Indian Forest Resources Management Act of 1990, 25 U.S.C. 3101 et seq.  
19 White Mountain Apache Tribe Rural Water System Loan Authorization Act of 2008, PL 110-520. See also the 
Arizona Water Settlements Act, PL 108-451. For a general assessment of water settlement acts, see Daniel 
McCool, Contemporary Indian Water Settlements and the Second Treaty Era (Tucson, AZ: The University of 
Arizona Press, 2002).  

 
 
 
 
275 
 
informed outside interests, or as often was the case, interest groups with ulterior motives writing 
legislation for them, Native Americans began writing their own legislation.  
Since the early 1970s Congress has remained faithful to self-determination policy. The federal courts 
have for the most part followed suit as well, with only a few exceptions.20 Even during the Reagan 
years, with budget cuts to job training programs and the Indian Health Service, Congress and the courts 
stayed the course.21 Unfortunately, the impacts of assimilation and termination policies would continue 
to scar Native American communities, while serving as disconcerting reminders of why Native 
American nations had to remain vigilant. Nonetheless, from the 1970s until present, American Indians 
have experienced the longest and most consistent national policy of self-determination and self-
governance in their history under federal trusteeship. This only happened through strong leadership 
though. The next section examines the emergence of two important White Mountain Apache leaders in 
the late 1960s and the early 1970s: Ronnie Lupe, who became Tribal Chairman in 1966 and remained in 
the position for the better part of the next thirty years, and Phil Stago, Jr., the first White Mountain 
Apache director of the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise (WMRE).  
 
 
Transition in Power on Fort Apache 
 
While many tribes went down the path of inviting industry onto reservations to solve their 
unemployment problems in the 1960s and 1970s, the White Mountain Apache mostly focused on 
                                                 
20 See Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe 435 U.S. 191 (1978) for an example of a case that challenged the 
sovereignty of Native American nations. In this case tribal police officers arrested a non-Indian (Oliphant) and 
charged him in tribal court. Oliphant challenged the tribe‟s jurisdiction and eventually the Supreme Court heard 
the case and ruled that the Squamish did not have jurisdiction over non-Indians on their reservation. For more on 
this case see Wilkinson, Blood Struggle, pp. 253-255. See also Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protection 
Association 485 U.S. 439 (1988), which compromised Native American religious rights to protect sacred sites 
from development on federal lands. 
21 On the Reagan years, see Iverson, “We Are Still Here,” pp. 190-191; Philp, Indian Self-Rule, pp. 265-322. 

 
 
 
 
276 
 
developing their own enterprises.22 In fact, the White Mountain Apache went in the opposite direction, 
ending long-term relationships with non-Indian timber companies to focus on the growth of  the Fort 
Apache Timber Company (FATCO).23 This led the White Mountain Apache down a different path of 
self-determination than most tribes. For instance, when Congress enacted the Self-Determination Act in 
1975, the Tribe didn‟t immediately seek 638 contracts. They already partly controlled the management 
of their resources through tribal enterprises. Also, to a certain extent, the Apache handled technical 
education through the enterprises, for that fulfilled one of the primary reasons for their establishment.  
And although the education of children would remain a problem for years to come, they maintained their 
relationship with the public school system, BIA schools, and mission schools, preferring to alter 
educational philosophy through that framework.  In essence, the Tribe worked towards self-sufficiency 
and self-governance through their business enterprises. The WMRE and FATCO would become the 
focal point of sovereignty challenges for years to come.24  
Vine Deloria, who equally criticized Native Americans and the federal government, was quite 
complimentary of the White Mountain Apache in the late 1960s. In a New York Times article and in 
Custer Died for Your Sins, he pointed to the tribally-owned enterprises, especially the WMRE, as the 
major reason for their relative success.25 The Apache‟s initiative, ability to adapt, and strong tribal 
cohesiveness set them apart from many other American Indian nations at the time:  
Concern among the Apaches is…tribal. There is little sense of a “lost identity.” Apaches could 
not care less about the anthropological dilemmas that worry other tribes. Instead they continue to 
work on the massive plans for development which they themselves have created. Tribal identity 
is assumed, not defined, by the reservation people. Freedom to choose from a wide variety of 
                                                 
22 On the trend in encouraging non-Indian companies to locate on reservations, see Iverson, “We are Still Here,” 
p. 166. 
23 George W. Hedden to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, January 12, 1968, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 339, 
File #6485-65, Box #21; Comptroller General of the United States, Management of Indian Natural Resources 
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1976), p. 12. 
24 ACIA, Annual Report, 1975-1976 (Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1976), pp. 13-26.  
25 Vine Deloria, Jr., “The War Between the Redskins and the Feds,” New York Times (December 7, 1969): SM47; 
Deloria, Custer Died for Your Sins, p. 84. 

 
 
 
 
277 
 
paths of progress is a characteristic of the Apaches; they don‟t worry about what type of 
Indianism is “real.” Above all, they cannot be ego-fed by abstract theories and hence unwittingly 
manipulated.26 
 
So according to Deloria, the White Mountain Apache were relatively self-assured and didn‟t waste time 
worrying about what adopting large development projects said about their “Indianness.” They knew who 
they were, with their leadership at the time reflecting this confidence. In fact, the Apache harnessed an 
age-old Apache cultural trait of adaptability to successfully navigate the twentieth century. Accepting of 
the inevitability of change, they concerned themselves more with the economic stability of the Apache 
community and the ecological health of the land they depended on for survival. This meant cautiously 
appropriating Western science and technology, resisting federal policies that might hinder their path 
towards economic self-sufficiency, and maintaining political autonomy.  
Because of their focus on reservation affairs, the Apache also didn‟t involve themselves with the 
high-profile Native American protests and occupations of the time. Even though these events played a 
larger role in national affairs, they received little play on Fort Apache.27 In fact tribal leaders actively 
downplayed the contribution of national Indian movements to White Mountain Apache success. 
Contrasting Apache progress with the high-profile political movements, Lafe Altaha, a Tribal Council 
member in the 1970s, pridefully explained that the Apache people achieved great economic strides 
“without a single demonstration [or] march[ing] on anybody.” He went on to say, “We don‟t believe in 
things like that. The Apaches don‟t believe in violence.”28 Indeed, the Tribe accomplished success 
through hard work, deliberation, persistence, and networking with politicians and bureaucrats. However, 
their pathway to self-sufficiency also eventually involved strong political rhetoric and actions from tribal 
leaders.  
                                                 
26 Deloria, Custer Died for Your Sins, p. 84. 
27 I surveyed the entire run of the Fort Apache Scout (1962 – present) and only found two articles on Native 
American activism in the 1960s and 1970s. 
28 A.V. Gullette, “Wickiups Vanishing: Tourist, Lumber Enterprises Provide Jobs and Modern Homes for 
Apaches,” Fort Apache Scout 10 (July, 1971). 

 
 
 
 
278 
 
Ronnie Lupe‟s assumption of Tribal Chairmanship in 1966 marked a major transition in tribal 
politics and attitude toward the BIA. When Lupe took office, the BIA was already reeling from the 
effects of federal agencies such as the OEO on their control over tribal governments. Adding insult to 
injury, Lupe told the BIA that they no longer could attend Tribal Council meetings unless invited. Lupe 
also ended the BIA practice of opening Tribal Council member‟s mail. 29 Lupe meant business and 
wanted to distance himself from the Oliver administration‟s policies concerning the BIA. He felt that 
Oliver was an apologist for the BIA, historically demonstrating a “lack of leadership,” which allowed 
the BIA and other agencies to “completely control and dominate” him.30 In essence, according to Lupe, 
Oliver‟s close relationship with BIA officials hindered the Tribe‟s progress.  
Oliver took a very diplomatic approach towards asserting tribal rights, often seeking BIA approval 
before proceeding with controversial plans such as the development of Hawley Lake. His campaign 
platform in 1966 consisted of maintaining a cooperative relationship with the BIA and other federal 
agencies. He claimed that Apache progress wouldn‟t “have been possible had it not been for the fine 
working relationship the Tribal Council has with the BIA.”31 This to a certain extent was the case, but 
the BIA hadn‟t always made decisions in the best interest of the Tribe. On the natural resource front, 
tribal members began questioning the efficacy of some of the BIA land management projects, such as 
the Cibecue Watershed Project, that Oliver defended and promoted over the years.32 Oliver also tended 
to downplay the importance of Apache culture in tribal affairs, even at times emphasizing that his people 
actively worked towards being “assimilated in our great American society.”33 He seemed out of touch 
                                                 
29 Stephen Cornell, Miriam Jorgensen, Joseph P. Kalt, and Katherine A. Spilde, Seizing the Future: Why Some 
Native Nations Do and Others Don’t (Joint Occasional Papers on Native Affairs No. 2005-01, Native Nations 
Institute and Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development, 2005), p. 2. 
30 Ronnie Lupe, “Election Candidates Statements,” Fort Apache Scout 9 (March, 1970): 6. 
31 Lester Oliver, “Lester Oliver: Candidate for Tribal Chairman,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (March, 1966): 3. 
32 Lester Oliver, “Chairman Answers Salt River Attack on Apaches,” Fort Apache Scout 2 (November, 1964): 2; 
Lester Oliver, “Rebuttal to KRUX Editorial July 24, 1963,” Fort Apache Scout 2 (August, 1963): 2. 
33 “New Indian „Rights‟ Laws Sought,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (July, 1965): 1. 

 
 
 
 
279 
 
with the frustration building among the Apache people towards his large-scale economic development 
initiatives. The “Apache way” remained important to the people, and although Oliver achieved 
economic progress during his eight year chairmanship that would facilitate some of Lupe‟s cultural 
restoration goals, neglect of the cultural consequences of economic development perhaps wore thin with 
the Apache people by 1966. 
In contrast, Lupe tapped into his people‟s tension with modernization. He didn‟t position himself as 
a traditionalist rejecting modernization. Instead, he acknowledged that “much to our dismay…our slow 
transition from the Reservation life, as we know it, to „modern times‟ with introduction from the outside 
of new scientific development and technology, further complicates our otherwise simple home life and 
community.” He went on to characterize the Tribe‟s current predicament where “confusion has set in 
and our behavior shows attitudes of defiance and depression.”  Lupe presented himself as a moderate 
leader who could guide the Apache people through the transition, insisting that modernization required 
proper supervision so as to avoid the elimination of “age-old traditions, customs and Apache 
language.”34 For Lupe, modernization was necessary, but the maintenance and restoration of Apache 
culture remained integral to Apache survival as well. Furthermore, the path to Apache self-
determination required independence from the BIA.  From here on out, the Tribe had to reduce the 
BIA‟s role in tribal affairs to that of a technical advisor. 
In 1966 Lupe won “one of the hottest Tribal political races” in years by a slim margin: 810 to 714. 
The results reinforced the reality of divided tribal feelings towards economic development.35 
Nonetheless, Lupe would solidify his role as a prominent tribal leader in the years to come. He served as 
Tribal Chairman for the better part of the next forty years (1966-1970, 1974-1986, 1990-1998, 2006 – 
present), establishing unprecedented political stability for the Tribe. Lupe‟s assumption of office marked 
                                                 
34 Ronnie Lupe, “Ronnie Lupe: Candidate for Tribal Chairman,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (March, 1966): 3. 
35 “Ronnie Lupe Wins,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (April, 1966): 1. 

 
 
 
 
280 
 
a trend towards cultural revitalization, which his political discourse reflected. He deeply appreciated the 
historical and cultural context of the American Indian people. Unlike Oliver, who diplomatically 
protected Apache sovereignty, Lupe asserted tribal rights and refused to wait for permission from the 
BIA to proceed with controversial endeavors. He forcefully and intelligently took hold of White 
Mountain Apache affairs.  
Thirty-six when he first took office, Ronnie Lupe‟s life in the western, more conservative part of the 
reservation shaped his perspective. He could relate to his people‟s anxiety about modernization because 
as late as 1963 his family lived in a wickiup. However, being the son of Nelson Lupe, who pioneered the 
establishment of the WMRE, probably had a major influence on his political views concerning the 
introduction of science and technology to the reservation community. Another significant influence on 
his views was his service with the Marines in the Korean War. After serving in the military, Lupe went 
on to receive extensive training in the Business Administration program at Arizona State University. He 
furthered his administrative experience in 1964 when he won the Cibecue district Tribal Council seat. At 
the same time he served as the director of the reservation‟s Neighborhood Youth Program, another OEO 
program that focused on developing skills in young people.36   
Lupe was well aware of the problems that faced his people. When he took office, the unemployment 
rate still stood around 50%, with many of the employed holding low-paying, part-time jobs. And non-
Indians occupied most management positions within the tribal enterprises. Lupe believed that the best 
way to solve these pressing issues was increasing tribal control over eco-cultural resources on the 
reservation.  Initially he pushed for greater control of timber resources through FATCO. He led a 
movement on the reservation to discontinue long-term timber contracts with non-Indian companies, 
                                                 
36 The biographical information on Ronnie Lupe was taken from a number of articles from the 1960s and 1970s in 
the Fort Apache Scout. 

 
 
 
 
281 
 
modernizing and increasing the capacity of FATCO to handle the entire annual allowable cut.37 Also he 
followed through on earlier plans to build a ski resort on Mount Ord, increasing the recreational 
potential of the reservation.38 Both of these actions led to more jobs. Eventually he would tangle with 
both the state of Arizona and the federal government to increase control over natural resources on the 
reservation. On the state level, the Tribe challenged the AGFD over whether the state had the right to 
require state permits on the reservation. On the national level, Lupe battled the Fish and Wildlife Service 
(FWS) concerning the impediment critical habitat designation had on economic development. He also 
led the way and took most of the heat from local non-Indian communities when the Tribe decided not to 
renew Euro-American homeowner leases around Hawley Lake.  
For Lupe, controlling resources constituted only one facet of the problem. The Tribe needed 
homegrown expertise to manage these resources. They would only curtail BIA mismanagement and 
inefficient use of tribal resources when Apaches assumed management positions within tribal 
enterprises. The tribal enterprises had benefitted from the expertise of several well-meaning and 
dedicated non-Indians, but to maximize benefits to the Apache people and minimize exploitation, the 
Tribe had to master Western science and technology. They had to be proficient in both Apache and 
Western ways of thinking. According to Lupe, the educational system on the reservation failed to 
address this bi-cultural need; thus education as it currently stood represented an impediment to 
progress.39 A 1968 survey revealed a disturbing trend on the reservation. Apache college students 
                                                 
37 George W. Hedden to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, January 12, 1968, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 339, 
File #6485-65, Box #21; Comptroller General of the United States, Management of Indian Natural Resources 
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1976), p. 12. 
38 “Construction Begins on White Mountain Sunrise Park,” Fort Apache Scout 9 (June, 1970): 12. 
39 For an Apache account of Euro-American education in the first half of the twentieth century see, Eva Watt, 
Don’t Let the Sun Step Over You (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2004), pp. 127-145. For a detailed 
treatment of a boarding school some Apaches attended during the twentieth century, see Robert A. Trennert, Jr., 
The Phoenix Indian School: Forced Assimilation in Arizona, 1891-1935 (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1988). For a general treatment on Indian education see, David Adams, Education for Extinction: American 
Indians and the Boarding School Experience, 1873-1928 (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1995); 

 
 
 
 
282 
 
experienced an extremely low success rate, with only 3% of the reservation population completing some 
formal college training.40 The scholarship program started in the early 1960s had not yet paid dividends. 
On this matter, Lupe believed tribal members needed to take educational opportunities more seriously, 
because for them, unlike non-Indians, education “might very well men survival or oblivion.”41   
Stressing education had been tribal policy since the late 1950s, but what Lupe added to the 
conversation was an emphasis on culturally appropriate education. At the root of the problem in Indian 
education, he believed, was the marginalization and subjugation of White Mountain Apache heritage 
and traditions.  Education for Native Americans “must be related to the child‟s own world. The educator 
must know something about that world and he must become involved in the Indian community life … 
must learn something about and learn to appreciate the Indian heritage and culture.…INDIANS, as a 
rule, are very proud of their heritage and culture. This pride must be developed to give the Indian child 
self-confidence and confidence in his ability to meet the demands placed upon him during his school 
years.”42  In essence, if a child grows up learning that his culture is inferior to American culture, then the 
child will lack the self-esteem required to succeed. The foundation for progress lay with restoring 
cultural pride through the bi-cultural education of students. To survive, the Apache needed to learn from 
the best of both worlds. The establishment of a permanent Education Coordinator‟s Office, which 
provided guidance to students with college aspirations, fulfilled a major goal of Lupe‟s first four years. 
                                                                                                                                                                         
Margaret Connell Szaz, Education and the American Indian: The Road Toward Self-Determination Since 1928 
(Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1999). 
40 One has to believe that this survey was an underestimate. It surveyed less than 50% of the adult population. 
And we know that some tribal members had completed college by that time (i.e., Lester Oliver).The survey did 
focus on the reservation population. So any Apaches receiving a degree and choosing to live off the reservation 
would not have been counted in the survey. Even though the survey missed the few Apaches with college degrees, 
it reflected the expertise problem on the reservation. Benjamin J. Taylor and Dennis J. O‟Conner, Fort Apache 
Reservation Manpower Resources (Tempe, AZ: Bureau of Business and Economic Research, Arizona State 
University, 1969). 
41 Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman Reports on Indian Education,” Fort Apache Scout 8 (April, 1968): 4. 
42 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
283 
 
His focus on education proved worthwhile, as approximately 100 Apaches enrolled in college by 1970.43 
Perhaps the most influential natural resource manager in the history of the Tribe, Phil Stago, Jr., was 
part of this wave of college-educated Apaches.  
Much of Lupe‟s success in regaining control over reservation eco-cultural resources wouldn‟t have 
come without the help of Stago. The son of Phil Stago, Sr. a forester that worked with Harry Kallender 
on the reservations prescribed burn program in the 1950s and 1960s, Phil Jr. became the first White 
Mountain Apache manager of the WMRE. He graduated from Northern Arizona University in 1974 with 
a BS in Recreation Land Management and a minor in Anthropology.44 Right off the bat he tackled tasks 
that non-Indians avoided or ignored. A man proud of his Apache heritage, Stago was an innovative 
force. Early in his tenure, he laid the groundwork for a trophy elk hunt program. In doing so, he reduced 
the number of non-Indian hunters allowed to hunt elk on the reservation, thus creating a healthier herd 
for his people and more demand from non-Indian hunters. He believed that by reducing the number of 
non-Indian hunters, the Tribe could restore the health of the elk herd and eventually raise more revenue 
for the WMRE.  However, this meant challenging state game and fish law and state jurisdiction over 
reservation wildlife resources. Like Lupe though, he refused to wait for permission. He established the 
program first, believing that federal law would support the sovereignty of the White Mountain Apache 
to manage wildlife as they saw fit. By 1977, tension between the Apache and AGFD had escalated. 
After a few “run-ins” with state officials and AGDF attempts to hamper the trophy elk hunt program, the 
Tribe took the state to court.45 The rest of this chapter deals with the legal battle over whether the state 
had authority over game and fish management on Fort Apache. But in order to understand the legal 
struggle in full, we need to review the history of elk management on the reservation prior to the 1970s.  
                                                 
43 Lupe, “Election Candidates Statements.”  
44 “Phil Stago, Jr. Receives Degree,” Fort Apache Scout 13 (October, 1974): 8. 
45 White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Arizona 649 F.2d 1274 (1981); “Tribe Sues State Over Game Jurisdiction,” 
Fort Apache Scout 16 (December 2, 1977): 1-2, 4, 9; “Jurisdiction over Animals Questioned,” Fort Apache Scout 
15 (April, 1976): 3. 

 
 
 
 
284 
 
 
 
The History of Elk on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
 
Elk had a similar story to the Apache trout in that the species experienced a serious decline in the 
late nineteenth century at the hands of Euro-American hunters and cattlemen, as well as Mexican 
squatters and sheep herders. In fact, they collectively extirpated Merriam‟s elk (Cervus elaphus 
merriami), the sub-species native to Arizona, from the White Mountains by 1906.46 Although 
historically, Native American groups participated with Euro-American market hunters and sportsmen in 
causing the near extinction of large ungulates, several lines of evidence indicate that the White Mountain 
Apache had little to do with the demise of Merriam‟s elk.47   
First, the White Mountain Apache hunted elk, but the species was secondary in importance to deer as 
source of food, clothing, and tools. By most accounts of hunters, naturalists, and Apaches that visited or 
lived in the region in the late nineteenth century, deer remained very common.  Because the Apache‟s 
primary game flourished, they probably didn‟t hunt elk any more extensively than before Euro-
Americans began settling the region in the 1870s.48 Further, elk became less significant as a source of 
food by the 1900s, when a number of Apaches fell ill from eating the meat. From that point until late in 
                                                 
46 Edward W. Nelson, “New Species of Elk from Arizona,” Bulletin of American Museum of Natural History 16 
(1902): 1-12; Larry D. Bryant and Chris Maser, “Classification and Distribution,” in Elk of North America: 
Ecology and Management, Jack W. Thomas and Dale E. Toweill, eds. (Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1982), 
1-59, pp. 30-31; Donald F. Hoffmeister, Mammals of Arizona (Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona Press, 
1986), p.536. 
47 For example, some of the more famous instances include the many Eastern groups pulled into the deer economy 
during the 18th and 19th centuries or the Plains tribes and the slaughter of bison in the 19th century. White, Roots of 
Dependency; Andrew Isenberg, The Destruction of the Bison: An Environmental History, 1750-1920 (Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000). 
48 On Apache preference for deer and elk hunting habits see, Winfred Buskirk, The Western Apache (Norman, 
OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1986), pp. 159-160; Richard E. McCabe, “Elk and Indians: Historical Values 
and Perspectives,” in Elk of North America, Jack W. Thomas and Dale E. Toweill, eds. (Harrisburg, PA: 
Stackpole Books, 1982), 61-124, p. 77. On the abundance of deer see John Rope‟s (a White Mountain Apache) 
story about an Apache Scout trip along the Mogollon Rim in the 1878 in Grenville Goodwin (Keith Basso, ed.), 
Western Apache Raiding and Warfare: From the Notes of Grenville Goodwin (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press, 1971), pp. 117-126. See also M.E. Morford, “White Mountains of Arizona,” Forest and Stream 6 (August 
3, 1876): 415; E.W. Nelson, “Forest Reserves as Game Reserves,” Forest and Stream 58 (May 17, 1902): 385-
386; A.T. Jerome, “In Lonesome Canyon,” Forest and Stream 25 (November 12, 1885): 303. 

 
 
 
 
285 
 
the twentieth century hunting elk remained taboo.49  Second, Arizona Territory remained relatively 
unexplored and isolated in the late nineteenth century, so the Apache had little incentive to kill elk for 
money. Third, by 1871, all Western Apache groups had been corralled onto reservations, restricting their 
movements; however, White Mountain Apache strayed off the reservation, much to the consternation of 
the Army. And on the reservation, they occasionally served as guides to hunters in the late nineteenth 
and early twentieth century. Aside from occasional guide work, though, the Apache rarely participated 
in the Merriam‟s elk hunting economy.50   
Very few reliable records exist of Merriam‟s elk, but purportedly it was significantly larger, with a 
more massive skull and broader nasals, than other subspecies.51 Edward Nelson, the renowned zoologist 
and naturalist, first described Merriam‟s elk in a 1902 paper in The Bulletin of American Museum of 
Natural History. He based his description on a specimen he collected at the head of the Black River in 
the White Mountains in 1886. He even claimed that the elk living in the White Mountains (and all along 
the Mogollon Rim) were a separate species from other North American elk due to the animal‟s unusual 
size, coloration, and skull structure.52 The stature of Merriam‟s elk made it a highly desirable trophy for 
those who could afford a treacherous long journey to the isolated realms of Arizona Territory, even 
before it‟s recognition as a separate species.  M.E. Morford, a hunter from the East, arranged a special 
trip into the “rugged” White Mountains in 1875 when he presumptuously believed he “should certainly 
kill a dozen elk.” Alas he was “somewhat annoyed” when failed to drop a single elk, but his companion 
“Lieutenant B” fell two – including a “four-pronged buck” that would have “run over” Morford if the 
                                                 
49 I am not certain when Apache began eating elk again. Tribal members began hunting elk again as early as the 
1960s because the game code set limits for tribal members at that time. See for example, “1966-67 Tribal Hunting 
Regulations,” Fort Apache Scout 5 (July, 1966): 2. On Apache historic use of elk, see Buskirk, The Western 
Apache, p. 213. 
50 See for example Morford, “White Mountains of Arizona.”  
51 Nelson, “New Species of Elk from Arizona”; Bryant and Maser, “Classification and Distribution”; Hoffmeister, 
Mammals of Arizona, p.536. 
52 Later taxonomists revised the status of Merriam‟s elk to a subspecies of Cervus elaphus. Nelson, “A New 
Species of Elk from Arizona.” 

 
 
 
 
286 
 
Lieutenant hadn‟t shot it first.53 Such adventures became common lore of the White Mountains, drawing 
hunters from the East to the region.  
At the time of Morford‟s adventure, elk still “were very plentiful and could be found in large bands 
in the White Mountains.”54 However, John Rope, a Cibecue Apache working as a scout with the U.S. 
Army in the late nineteenth century, noticed a decline in elk in the Mogollon Mountains just east of the 
reservation by 1880. On an expedition to track down the “renegade” band of Warms Spring Chiricahua, 
Rope witnessed at least four elk, but deplored upon seeing a “mother elk” and her calf that “[t]here used 
to be lots of elk over at the Mogollon Mountains.”55 Pressure coming from the east would soon impinge 
upon the elk population on the reservation. But in the 1870s and 1880s, sports hunters remained 
relatively rare and probably had less of an impact on elk than the migration of cattlemen, sheep herders, 
and Mexican squatters into the region. The exact cause of the extirpation is unclear, but Edward Nelson 
surmised that competition for forage with cattle and sheep along with subsistence hunting from local 
residents “levied heavily upon all large game in the White Mountains.”56  
By 1902, Arizona Territory had implemented game laws to protect elk, but due to the remoteness of 
the species‟ range the law was “more nominal than real.”  For Edward Nelson, the fact that “the last of 
the large game mammals of America to become known to science [was] already on the verge of 
extinction” was disturbing.57 So much so he even proposed that the region should serve as a national 
                                                 
53 Morford, “White Mountains of Arizona.” 
54 D.B. Rudd to Forest Service, May 26, 1906, reprinted in Vernon E. Bailey, Mammals of New Mexico 
(Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Biological Survey, 1931), p. 41. The 
Wheeler Expedition also found elk abundant in the White Mountains in 1873. George M. Wheeler, Report upon 
United States Geographical Surveys West of the 100th Meridian, Vol. 1, Topography (Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office, 1878). 
55 Rope in Basso‟s Western Apache Raiding and Warfare, p. 122. At this point, Fort Apache and San Carlos 
Reservations were still one large reservation until 1897 when the DOI divided them along the Black River 
56 E.W. Nelson to E.A. Mearns, sometime in 1890s, reprinted in Hoffmeister, Mammals of Arizona, p. 536. See 
also Victor H. Calahane, “The Mammals of the Chiricahua Mountains, Cochise County, Arizona,” Journal of 
Mammalogy 20 (1939): 418-440. 
57 Nelson, “A New Species of Elk from Arizona,” p. 1. 

 
 
 
 
287 
 
game preserve. Much of the region was already part of the Black Mesa Forest Reserve (the precursor of 
Apache, Tonto, and Sitgreaves National Forests that currently surround Fort Apache) and held 
“probably the best game country in Arizona,” abounding with wild turkey, black-tailed deer, “Arizona 
white-tailed deer,” black bears, “silver-tipped” bears, mountain lions, wildcats, timber wolves, and 
coyotes. However, in terms of elk, “it is now [1902] a question whether any survive or not” in what was 
once their “favorite summer country.” He believed a few still survived in the upper elevations of Mount 
Thomas and Mount Ord, but unfortunately, according to Nelson, this land resided in “the most serious 
menace to successful preservation of game,” the Fort Apache Indian Reservation.  
Troubled by the Apache practice of setting fires to round up game, he claimed that they “kill large 
numbers of breeding deer, and at the same time destroy considerable areas of forest.” The only way to 
save the game from “these destructive inroads” was to extend the boundaries of the forest reserve to 
include “Ord and Thomas peaks.”58 The possibility that the best game habitat in Arizona had something 
to do with the Apache use of fire eluded Nelson. His reasoning can‟t even be reconciled with his own 
research findings. Several times in his own published works he noted that game, including Merriam‟s 
elk, was more abundant along the border of and inside of the reservation. Other accounts said as much.59 
Clearly prejudices of the “savage Indian” common in his day infiltrated his thought process. The fact 
that he wanted Mount Ord and Mount Thomas (Mount Baldy) included in his proposed game preserve 
                                                 
58 Nelson, “Forest Reserves as Game Preserves,” p. 386. 
59 Theodore B. Dixon and Arthur Dodwell of the USGS conducted a survey of the forests in the Black Mesa 
Preserve in the early 1900s that contradicts Nelson‟s assertion that Native American fire use destroyed the large 
areas of forest: “There has been very little damage to the timber of this reserve by fires, for the reason that there is 
so little underbrush and litter.” Theodore F. Dixon and Arthur Dodwell (Prepared by F.G. Plummer), Forest 
Conditions in the Black Mesa Forest Preserve, Arizona (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, USGS, 
Professional Paper no. 23, 1904), p. 20. See Nelson, “Forest Reserves as Game Preserves”; Nelson, “A New 
Species of Elk from Arizona”; Bailey, Mammals of New Mexico; Morford, “White Mountains of Arizona”; 
Jerome, “Lonsome Canyon”; Oliver Enochs, “A Turkey Hunt,” Forest and Stream 64 (January 8, 1910): 59. 

 
 
 
 
288 
 
undoubtedly further played into his criticism and perhaps exaggerations of Apache hunting practices.60 
His game preserve proposal never came to fruition, but it wouldn‟t be the last time a Euro-American 
wanted to control the management of game on the reservation or take the most “beautiful” part of 
Arizona from the White Mountain Apache.  
By 1913, most naturalists and sportsmen had given up any hope of finding Merriam‟s elk in the 
White Mountains. The occasional unsubstantiated sighting failed to give avid elk hunters in the region 
much reason to believe that elk would return without intervention.61 In response, the Winslow Elk‟s 
Lodge #536 translocated eighty-six Rocky Mountain elk, a different subspecies (C. e. nelsoni), from 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, to Cabin Draw in Sitgreaves National Forest, just north of Fort Apache. This 
restoration effort, unbeknownst to the Apaches, planted the seeds for a battle for state control over fish 
and game management on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation.62 The newly established Arizona Game 
and Fish Commission (AGFC) closely monitored this herd and by 1935 the elk population reached 
sufficient numbers in the White Mountains to allow a limited hunt.63  Naturally, as elk populations 
increased, they migrated onto Fort Apache where they became a “menace” to Apache cattlemen because 
they commenced “eating all the grass.”64 
                                                 
60 Boosters promoting the establishment of National Parks often used the “hostile Indian” stereotype to justify 
their removal. For example, on removal efforts at Yellowstone National Park see Mark David Spence, 
Dispossessing the Wilderness (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1999), pp. 55-71. See also Robert H. 
Keller and Michael F. Turek, American Indians and National Parks (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 
1998); Philip Burnham, Indian’s Country, God’s Country (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2000). For a 
contemporary example of Euro-Americans using the “savage Indian” stereotype to limit Native American treaty 
rights see, Larry Nesper, The Walleye War: The Struggle for Ojibwe Spearfishing and Treaty Rights (Lincoln, 
NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2002). 
61 On occasional sightings, see Hoffmeister, Mammals of Arizona, p. 536. 
62 Currently, all elk in Arizona are descendants of transplanted herds. On translocation of Rocky Mountain elk, 
see Arizona Game and Fish Department, Arizona Big Game Bulletin: Elk (Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Game and Fish 
Department, 1972), pp. 1-4; Bryant and Maser, “Classification and Distribution,” p. 39; Hoffmeister, Mammals of 
Arizona, p.534. 
63 Arizona Game and Fish Department, “Annual Report Issue,” Wildlife Views 23 (1976): 28. 
64 White Mountain Apache Tribe, “Minutes to the Regular Council Meeting,” October 6, 1941, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 
40-56, Dec. 54,  File #00-41, Box #5. 

 
 
 
 
289 
 
Nelson Lupe made this accusation in 1941 at a Tribal Council meeting. In order to rectify the 
situation, Lupe proposed selling twenty permits to non-Indian residents of the reservation - Apache still 
had an aversion to hunt elk at this time - to cull elk from the Cibecue range.65  Even though the Tribal 
Council had the right to regulate game on the reservation through IRA, Superintendent Donner advised 
against the measure.66 He admitted that in most cases the Tribe had the authority, but because elk 
weren‟t “generally native to the reservation,” the Council couldn‟t issue permits for elk hunts. Only the 
AGFC had jurisdiction in this situation. The elk currently migrating onto the reservation originated from 
herds reintroduced by the AGFC and private hunting lodges, thus the state owned them. To mitigate the 
situation, Donner arranged for the AGFC to issue permits.67 Not much came of this first attempt to 
control the elk population, with records not indicating whether the Tribe followed through with their 
request.  
Nevertheless, Donner was wrong about state jurisdiction in this case. He likely misunderstood what 
was meant by “state-ownership.” In federal and state law, state-ownership implied that the state had the 
right to control the taking of wildlife, but in no way meant the state owned “that which belonged to no 
one in particular, but was common to all.”68 Even if the state actually “owned” the elk, then that 
ownership would technically cease when the elk crossed into the reservation. The situation on Fort 
Apache was no different than if elk migrated into New Mexico. Arizona would no longer lay claim to 
the elk in this instance. Unfortunately, very few BIA officials at the time understood that tribal 
sovereignty was legally on par with state sovereignty, a problem that would plague Indian governments 
                                                 
65 Ibid. 
66 Prior to IRA, non-Indians had to get permission from the Superintendent to hunt on Fort Apache. 
67 William Donner to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, October 11, 1941, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, File 
#00-41,  Box #5. 
68 In 1896 the Supreme Court defined state authority to regulate wildlife in Greer v. Connecticut, 161 U.S. 519. 
For more information on state jurisdiction of wildlife, see Bean and Rowland, Evolution of National Wildlife Law, 
pp. 7-15. 

 
 
 
 
290 
 
for the next forty years.69 It remains unclear if anyone corrected Donner on this matter, but it would not 
be the last time that outside interests used the state-ownership argument in an attempt to control elk on 
Fort Apache – this argument reoccurred in the 1970s. 
In October, 1946, under a new superintendent, R.D. Holtz, the Council diverged from Donner‟s 
advice. In Tribal Resolution #176 the Council opened the northwestern portion of the reservation to the 
general public and the southeastern portion only to non-Indian reservation residents and employees. The 
resolution required Arizona residents hunting in the northwest to have only a state license, but the 
Council required reservation residents and employees to acquire both a state and reservation license. 
Requiring reservation residents to have tribal permits went against the state-ownership argument. This 
precedent went relatively unnoticed as the state never objected to the permits and Walter Woehlke, an 
assistant commissioner now, approved the resolution.70 The Tribal Council, however, still abided by 
state law and required state permits along with coordinating hunting seasons with the state agency, but at 
the same time asserted its authority to collect permit fees.  
In 1947 Holtz convinced the Tribe that they should develop an official tribal game code for tribal 
members that covered all game species. He believed a game code was necessary for two reasons. First, 
the Tribe for the first time had allowed non-residents to hunt on the reservation. Second, elk had become 
“quite a problem,” requiring “a more efficient method of controlling animal numbers” than outlined in 
Resolution #176.71 Even though various FWS and BIA land managers had suggested a comprehensive 
game code since the early 1940s, the Council had yet to implement one. Because they believed religious 
practices regulated hunting and that prior to 1947 they reserved all reservation game for tribal members, 
                                                 
69 Francis Paul Prucha, The Indians in American Society (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1985), pp. 
80-104. 
70 Resolution of the White Mountain Apache Tribe no. 176; Walter Woehlke to Fred Larzelere, Chairman, 
November 27, 1946, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, Box #45. 
71 R.D. Holtz to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, January 22, 1947, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File 
#35419-43, Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
291 
 
the Council didn‟t feel a comprehensive code was necessary. Up to this point, the Council had regulated 
game in a piecemeal fashion, authorizing closed seasons for reservation residents or special permits for 
outsiders when deemed necessary. This time, however, the Tribe heeded Holtz‟s advice and submitted a 
game code proposal for BIA approval.  In this proposal, the Council boldly advanced the claim that 
Arizona residents hunting on the reservation should be subject to tribal courts for game code violations.  
This assertion opened up a whole new can of worms: did the Apache have the right to regulate non-
members? The answer at this point, according to the BIA, was “no.”72 
A variety of officials from the Central Office down to the Phoenix District Forester vetted the 
legality of the proposed game code.  L.D. Arnold, the Director of Forestry for the BIA, concluded, 
“Since non-Indians are not subject to tribal laws and can be apprehended only for violation of state and 
federal laws, it is suggested that the tribal regulations conform closely to the fish and game laws on 
white-owned lands. If the tribal regulations are made to conform to state laws, much confusion would be 
eliminated in the minds of both hunters and law enforcement officers. It should make law enforcement 
easier for Indian police who can eject white violators from Indian lands.”73 Raymond Bitney, Phoenix 
District Forester, more specifically pronounced his objections. He claimed that the “Tribe would not 
have the authority to set up certain rules and regulations in conflict with Arizona state laws …because 
members of the Tribe have certain treaty rights they cannot extend to non-members.” He also took issue 
with “repeated references” in the code that subjected non-Indians to the tribal court for fish and game 
violations. He asserted, “Frankly, I consider this a bad thing and one that will lead to further trouble and 
confusion.”74 Instead of advocating for the White Mountain Apache, both Arnold and Bitney worried 
about “confusion” that might complicate the lives of Euro-American hunters and the BIA. As was 
                                                 
72 Raymond H. Bitney to William H. Zeh, April 14, 1947, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, 
Box #45. 
73 L.D. Arnold to R.D. Holtz, May 2, 1947, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, Box #45. 
74 Raymond H. Bitney to William H. Zeh, April 14, 1947. 

 
 
 
 
292 
 
typical of the time, the Tribal Council backed off on passing a game code that submitted non-Indians to 
the tribal court. Like with Resolution #176, the Council divided the reservation into two hunting 
jurisdictions due to limited tribal resources; the AGFC would administer the northwestern half and tribal 
game wardens would enforce the tribal game code and state law on the southeastern half. The Council 
required reservation employees and residents to obtain a separate elk permit above the state requirement 
but didn‟t require this of Arizona residents hunting in the northwest.75 Once again though, the BIA 
provided bad advice. 
Either because BIA officials conveniently cherry-picked or were ignorant of Indian law, they 
founded this bad advice on a common “misinterpretation” of the time that the legal status of Indian trust 
lands equaled federal lands.76 By that analysis, Arnold and Bitney followed the general rule that states, 
not the federal government, regulated fish and game on federal lands. In reality Indian land was not 
federal or state land, but land set aside for Indians held in trust by the federal government either under 
treaty or executive order. Although the legal infrastructure for such a distinction had been in place since 
1832, it wouldn‟t be until the 1980s that the Supreme Court would review the special circumstance of 
jurisdiction over fish and game on Indian lands, rendering a decision that tribal governments have the 
                                                 
75 Resolution of the White Mountain Apache Tribe no. 222, September 29, 1947, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 
931, File #35419-43, Box #45. 
76 Most Native American lawyers and historians believe it was both ignorance and deliberate misinterpretation of 
Indian law. Philip Deloria did a study of two different editions of Felix Cohen‟s A Handbook of Federal Indian 
Law (1942 and 1958), known as the ultimate authority on Indian law, and found that the DOI (they initially 
commissioned the study under the Indian friendly administration of John Collier) had deliberately changed, 
among other things, the word “sovereignty” to “quasi-sovereignty” in the 1958 edition. Consequently, Native 
Americans and lawyers follow the earlier edition. For more on deliberate BIA violations of Indian law, see V. 
Deloria, Custer Died for Your Sins; V. Deloria and Lyttle, The Nations Within, and a very funny but serious 
speech given by Philip Deloria at the 2nd Indian Town Hall Meeting in Arizona in 1974, ACIC, Sovereignty and 
Inter-governmental Relations with Arizona Indian Tribes: A Report on the 2nd Indian Town Hall (Phoenix, AZ: 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1975), pp. 41-48. On state wildlife laws and federal lands, see Bean and 
Rowland, Evolution of National Wildlife Law, pp. 7-15. 

 
 
 
 
293 
 
right to regulate fish and wildlife on reservations independent of state law; thus obtaining the legal 
authority to subject non-Indians to reservation game laws and courts.77  
Although tribal officials invited Arizona hunters onto the reservation, as of 1950, they failed to come 
in sufficient numbers to diminish the elk over-population problem. Elk numbers consistently hovered 
around 1,000 individuals during the late 1940s early 1950s, and most elk concentrated in grazing lands 
in the northwest corner of the reservation.78 According to tribal members in this area, elk continued 
eating crops, knocked down range fences, and competed with cattle for forage. Ironically, the Tribal 
Council noted, “[W]e have killed a lot of wild horses to make room for more cattle, instead they are just 
making room for the elk.”79 The problem persisted, but after the establishment of the WMRE in 1952, 
the Tribe initiated a public relations campaign that would boost the number of hunters visiting the 
reservation. Also with the founding of the WMRE came greater tribal control over wildlife on the 
reservation, including elk. In August, the Tribal Council authorized Nelson Lupe to inform the AGFC 
that the Tribe no longer required their assistance with the northwest half of the reservation. The Council 
declared the entire reservation a “separate zone for elk hunting,” now requiring Arizona hunters to 
obtain a tribal elk permit.80 R.D. Holtz, now the Area Director, once again advised against issuing a 
tribal permit on top of the state permit, doubting that elk hunters would willingly pay an extra fee.81 
Against Holtz‟s advice, the Tribe required an additional permit for Arizona elk hunters to help support 
WMRE programs, which contrary to Holtz‟s belief, didn‟t dissuade elk hunters from coming to the 
                                                 
77 Montana v. United States, 450 U.S. 544 (1981); New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe, 462 U.S. 324 (1983); 
Bean and Rowland, Evolution of National Wildlife Law, pp. 463-464; Shelley D. Turner, “The Native American‟s 
Right to Hunt and Fish,” New Mexico Law Review 19 (Spring, 1989): 377-423; Laurie Reynolds, “Indian Hunting 
and Fishing Rights: The Role of Tribal Sovereignty and Preemption,” North Carolina Law Review 62 (April, 
1984): 743-793. 
78 Annual Forestry and Grazing Reports, Fort Apache, 1946-1950, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 31, Box #2. 
79 Minutes of the Regular Council Meeting, October 16, 1950, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 54, File #10197-46, 
Box #5. 
80 “Briefs of the Regular Meeting, White Mountain Apache Tribe,” August 4, 1952, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, 
Dec. 54, File #10197-46, Box #6. 
81 Holtz to Crow, March 21, 1952, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 40-56, Dec. 931, File #35419-43, Box #45. 

 
 
 
 
294 
 
reservation.  WMRE game wardens also assumed responsibility for patrolling the entire reservation. 
However, at the behest of the BIA, the Tribal Council still required a state license and administered 
game regulations that closely mirrored state regulations.  
From the establishment of the WMRE until 1960, reservation visitation rates dramatically increased. 
By the 1960s, the reservation had become a very popular hunting ground. The Tribe had expanded the 
number of species one could hunt on the reservation. They sold a large number of relatively inexpensive 
elk permits during this period (i.e., 700 permits at $30 each in 1968) along with permits for javelina, 
bear, antelope, dove, waterfowl, quail, predatory animals such as mountain lions, and small game.82 As 
the popularity of Fort Apache increased, tribal wildlife populations began to suffer, calling into question 
the sustainability of offering so many permits. When Phil Stago assumed control of the WMRE in 1974, 
he addressed this issue with the establishment of a controversial trophy elk program, which sparked a 
jurisdictional battle between the state and the White Mountain Apache Tribe. 83 
 
 
Resistance: The White Mountain Apache Tribe vs. Arizona Game and Fish Department 
 
The White Mountains of Arizona are gentle mountains. They rise through gentle morning mists, 
and pull the sun down behind them in the rich rosy red glow of the day‟s last light. In the spring 
gentle slopes and flat cienagas are resplendent with grass, ferns, flowers and beautiful weeds. 
Soft winds blow through the forests, intoxicating the senses with the scents of pine, juniper and 
earth-born spores breaking the sylvan carpet of last year‟s fallen leaves.84  
 
By the early to mid-1970s, portrayals of the Fort Apache landscape such as the one above became 
common fodder for travel magazines, hunting and fishing magazines, and the travel sections of national 
newspapers. Features on the WMRE appeared in Outdoor Life, Sports Illustrated, Desert Life, Arizona 
Highways, Field and Stream, Arizona Wildlife and Sportsmen, Western Outdoors, the New York Times, 
                                                 
82 “Tribal Hunting Regulations, ‟68-‟69,” Fort Apache Scout 8 (January, 1969): 6-7. 
83 For a more condensed version of this political battle see Stephen Kent Amerman, “‟This is Our Land‟: The 
White Mountain Apache Trophy Elk Hunt and Tribal Sovereignty,” Journal of Arizona History 43 (Summer, 
2002): 133-152. 
84 Raymond Carlson, “Summer is Born of May,” Arizona Highways (May, 1971): 1. 

 
 
 
 
295 
 
the Wall Street Journal, the Chicago Tribune, the Christian Science Monitor, and the Arizona Republic 
among numerous other lesser-known publications.85 Representatives of the WMRE would visit civic 
clubs, hunting clubs, and go as far as Southern California to attend travel shows to advertise the 
“primitive flavor” of Fort Apache. For example, in 1973 Lafe Altaha, Assistant Manager of the WMRE, 
spoke to a crowd at a civic club about recreational development of the reservation. In the spirit of active 
management, he claimed that Indian reservations contained “all of the diverse ingredients that attracts 
travelers and tourists.” These landscapes were “primed and ready for development …and ready for use 
and enjoyment by an appreciative public.” He went on to warn the crowd of the negative environmental 
consequences of “‟overdevelopment,‟ under planning, and development without proper steps being 
taken to protect the environment.” But Altaha reassured the audience that the Apache people were 
making sure this didn‟t happen to their homeland, the “last frontier of beauty and golden 
opportunities.”86 This also meant fighting for the right to manage fish and wildlife without state and 
federal interference. 
The exposure paid off  as every spring droves of hunters, fishers, hikers, wildlife lovers, boaters, 
horseback riders, sight seers, and campers got “the gypsy urge to get away from tensions, pressures and 
the unending challenges of everyday realities” and sought “serenity and fishing” in the “cool White 
Mountains.”87 Celebrities visited the reservation as well, including of all people John Wayne, the star of 
                                                 
85 See for example, James E. Cook, “You Ought to see What the Apaches are up to Now,” New York Times 
(August 1, 1971): XX3; Jack Goodman, “The Hospitable Apaches in Arizona‟s Highlands,” New York Times 
(November 26, 1967): XX15; Richard Joseph, “Indians Doing a Snow Dance: Apache-owned Ski Resort,” 
Chicago Tribune (February 11, 1973): C21; William W. Blunt, Jr., “Staying with U.S. Indians,” Chicago Tribune 
(January 26, 1975): C1; Robert Cantwell, “The Happiest Fishing Ground,” Sports Illustrated 31(August 4, 1969):  
37-42; “‟Hon-Dah‟: White Mountain Vacationland” (entire issue) Arizona Highways (May, 1971): 1- 46; Sharon 
St. Germain, “Camping on an American Indian Reservation,” Christian Science Monitor reprinted in Fort Apache 
Scout 13 (January, 1974): 7. I derived part of this periodical list from “Reservation Receives Publicity,” Fort 
Apache Scout 9 (February, 1970): 8.  
86 Lafe Altaha, “Reservation Recreation Enterprise Plays Important Role,” Fort Apache Scout 12 (March, 1973): 
10. 
87 Carlson, “Summer is Born of May.” 

 
 
 
 
296 
 
many Westerns denigrating to Native Americans. Despite this, the Apache greeted him with a pit 
barbecue, put on an exhibition of Apache Crown Dancers, and declared the day he visited “John Wayne 
Day.” This didn‟t prevent him from jesting in front of a crowd of White Mountain Apache “that he had 
killed so many Apaches in his films that he was fearful of visiting the Reservation for fear of being 
scalped.”88 An editorial in the Fort Apache Scout later pointed out, insensitive remarks aside, if Wayne 
had his “Apache lore” correct, he would have known that “Apaches respected a brave and courageous 
warrior.”89 Nonetheless, he left without incident, promising that he would return. 
The Apache had tolerated worse. Encouraging Euro-Americans to visit the reservation also involved 
dispelling misconceptions, stereotypes, and myths about their culture.90 They could only hope that as the 
Tribe gained more exposure that the cultural disconnects would dissipate.  Fortunately for their business, 
non-Indian attraction to the “primitive flavor” of the reservation only grew. Branch of Land Operation‟s 
recreational use statistics indicate a rapid rise in tourist activity in the 1960s. In 1960, when detailed 
recreation statistics were first taken, the records show 104,000 man-days of fishing and hunting with an 
estimated 326,000 people visiting the reservation. By 1969, these numbers had risen to 356,000 and 
1,541,900 respectively. WMRE revenue almost tripled in the same time period, starting at $543,000 in 
1960 and increasing to $1,585,175 in 1969. During this decade, the Tribe invested heavily in the 
reservation‟s recreational infrastructure. As of 1969 one could find 1,277 campsites, 760 picnic areas, 
744 cabin sites, 3 boat ramps, and 3 boat marinas. The WMRE also built an additional 19 lakes in the 
                                                 
88 “John Wayne Visits White Mountain Apaches,” Fort Apache Scout 9 (August, 1970): 1. 
89 “Editorial: Wayne Should Have Known,” Fort Apache Scout 9 (August, 1970): 2. 
90 Most of the articles written about the Apache contained some stereotypical reference about their transformation 
from a warlike culture to modern business people. One article refers to the pains Apache representatives had to go 
through at a southern California Travel Show to convince people the reservation was safe. See Cook, “You Ought 
to See What the Apaches are up to Now.” The subtitle to the following article gives an example of the warrior 
stereotype: “Once a pale face entered Apache country at great risk. Today this happy hunting land is open to 
him.” Robert M. Hyatt, “Apacheland Welcomes White Man,” American Legion Magazine, March, 14-15, 38-39. 

 
 
 
 
297 
 
1960s, increasing the total to 26.91 All of this activity provided many full-time and part-time jobs. In 
1968, the WMRE employed 130 Apaches year-round and another 75 during the summer. The increase in 
tourism also necessitated the expansion of retail stores and gas stations on the reservation. And in 1969, 
when the Tribe finally secured funds to build the Sunrise Ski Resort on Mount Ord, they decided to 
divide the WMRE into two divisions. The WMRE remained in charge of game and fish regulation and 
the maintenance of recreational facilities, while the Tribe created the White Mountain Apache Enterprise 
to handle the retail businesses.92   
As the WMRE expanded and Fort Apache became a popular vacationland for Euro-Americans from 
all over the United States, tension between the state and tribal governments heightened over issues of 
sovereignty. The efficacious operation of the WMRE in many ways depended on the White Mountain 
Apache maintaining and enhancing tribal sovereignty, especially in terms of asserting their water rights 
and control over fish and game regulation. In the early 1970s, with the backing of the federal 
government, the Apache and other Arizona tribal governments intensively explored and attempted to 
augment their political autonomy. This meant challenging state control over a number of jurisdictional 
issues, including the state‟s right to tax reservation businesses, enforce state laws, control liquor, access 
water, and regulate fish and game. States in general were less enthusiastic than the federal government 
about Native American self-determination, especially Arizona, which had the largest Native American 
population in the United States.93 Indian Town Hall Meetings, initiated by the Arizona Commission of 
Indian Affairs (ACIA) in 1973, provided a release valve for this building tension. The Arizona 
legislature established the ACIA in 1953 to facilitate dialogue between the state government and tribal 
                                                 
91 The recreation data came from a series of Agency Annual Reports: Branch of Land Operations Range and 
Wildlife Management, 1960 – 1969, RG 75 FAIR, CCF 58-75, Dec. 31, Box #‟s 1-3. According to the reports, the 
definition of “man-days equals eight hours spent by sportsmen,” not including tribal members. 
92 Altaha, “Reservation Recreation Enterprise Plays Important Role.”  
93 The exponential growth in the number of court cases between American Indian tribes and states in the 1960s, 
1970s, and 1980s is evidence of this trend. See also, Wilkinson, Blood Struggle, pp. 241- 252.  

 
 
 
 
298 
 
governments. The Indian Town Hall meetings, usually held on reservations, brought together tribal 
leaders, state officials, and federal officials from the BIA and Department of Interior on an annual 
basis.94  
The first meeting in 1973 appropriately took place at the newly opened Sunrise Ski Resort on Fort 
Apache and focused on water rights, an issue near and dear to the WMRE and the White Mountain 
Apache Tribe. With Arizona‟s growing population, the state‟s desire for Indian water never ceased. 
With the construction of the Central Arizona Project looming, Indian concerns about water rights 
heightened. The impacts of the project on Arizona tribes‟ water rights and their equitable access to 
additional water generated by the project remained unclear.95 Ronnie Lupe pointed out that the Bureau 
of Reclamation conducted an impact statement on “wildlife, on birds, on fish, on vegetation …on 
fishermen, and wildlife fanciers… [but no] statement on what the project impact will be on the Navajos, 
and the Hopis, and the Pimas, and the Apaches.” He followed this observation by asserting, “[L]et‟s not 
allow the lawyers and the land operators and the politicians and the bureaucrats the kind of atrocities on 
Indians that used to be left to the cavalry.”96 According to Lupe and many other tribal leaders, 
clarification of the issue before Congress funded the project was paramount to avoiding injustice. Of 
course Lupe and the White Mountain Apache were thoroughly familiar with water rights struggles, as 
the SRVWUA unsuccessfully continued to pressure the Tribe through state courts to curtail the 
WMRE‟s lake building program.  
                                                 
94 ACIC, Sovereignty and Inter-governmental Relations with Arizona Indian Tribes: A Report on the 2nd Indian 
Town Hall (Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1975). 
95 Federally approved in 1968, the Central Arizona Project involved the construction of a canal to deliver 
Arizona‟s water allocation from the Colorado River to Phoenix and Tucson. Some Arizona tribes worried that 
they would be left out of the allocation, while others hoped it would relieve pressure on their water supplies. The 
White Mountain Apache fell in the latter category. ACIA, Report on: Arizona Indian Water Rights Conference 
(Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1974).  
96 Ronnie Lupe, Federal Protection of Indian Resources, Part 5: Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 92nd 
Congress (January 4, 1972), 1048-1055, p. 1049. 

 
 
 
 
299 
 
In 1974 hostilities between the state and tribal governments remained evident during the second 
Town Hall meeting. As tribal leaders, state officials, and federal officials debated the meaning of tribal 
sovereignty, two definitions of self-sufficiency and sovereignty emerged: one the state defined and one 
the tribal governments defined. The state‟s vision of self-sufficiency, evident in Governor Jack 
Williams‟ opening remarks, remained far from an endorsement of tribal sovereignty. Their definition of 
self-sufficiency contained overtones of assimilation.  Almost sounding resentful, perhaps due to eight 
years of dealing with water rights issues and an increasing number of jurisdictional challenges, 
Williams‟ speech was pedantic and condescending. With patriotic vigor, he counseled tribal leaders, 
In your quest for a definition of Indian Sovereignty never forget that you live in the only 
Sovereign Nation in this world that goes to every extreme to protect personal freedoms and to 
afford the opportunities of equality. If you equate your definition of sovereignty to the formation 
of a Nation, you have not only chosen the wrong political goal – but the wrong goal in every 
sense of responsibility to the Indian people to whom this Town Hall is dedicated. You already 
have citizenship in the greatest republic which the world has ever known… Don‟t ever let 
anyone mislead you into believing that culture and heritage are only inherent to the American 
Indian people. The great Nation was peopled by waves of immigrants who brought their own 
special culture and heritages…[Furthermore], [d]o not let the glamour of the word sovereignty 
snare you in a semantic mesh that prevents your continual progress towards the goals of equal 
opportunity in the fields of employment, education, and economic development.97 
 
His comments were tame relative to the terminationist rhetoric of the 1950s, but the code words of 
assimilation inhabited the message. References to full American “citizenship,” “personal freedoms,” 
“equal opportunity,” and “economic development” that compromises sovereignty, had long been catch 
phrases employed by anti-Indian factions.  Moreover, his philosophical attempt to equate Native 
Americans to later immigrants offered a veiled suggestion that Native Americans should join the 
“melting pot” of America like everyone else. These insinuations weren‟t missed by the tribal leaders 
present. Daniel Peaches of the Navajo nation detected that the “Siren song of assimilation is loud and 
                                                 
97 ACIA, Sovereignty and Inter-governmental Relations with Arizona Indian Tribes, pp. 4-5. 

 
 
 
 
300 
 
persuasive.” And he reminded everyone, “We have learned to survive, however, by learning to ignore 
that song and to listen instead to an older song which runs through our heritage.”98  
For the Arizona tribes, the definition of sovereignty depended on the size of the tribe and their 
economic resource base. The smaller tribes, such as the Ak-Chin with a population of around 100 
individuals, conceded that their size necessitated sharing resources with the state. They simply didn‟t 
have the manpower or economic recourse to fully maintain a tribal police force, run schools, and provide 
a full complement of social services. Regardless, tribal leaders emphasized that out of mutual respect, an 
invitation for shared jurisdiction from the tribe should be a prerequisite of good inter-government 
relations. They further asserted that an agreement with one tribe did not give the state blanket authority 
on all affairs on a reservation or a non-participating reservation.99 
According to Daniel Peaches, for the larger tribes like the White Mountain Apache, San Carlos 
Apache, Navajo, and  Papago (currently the T‟ohono Odham),  “[t]he shortest way to state the Indian‟s 
position on the Indian-state relationship is that there should be no state control over Indian 
reservations.”100 Referring to the vast amounts of land Native Americans had relinquished through 
treaties in exchange for services such as “health, education, and public safety,” Jacob Escalante 
cautioned Arizona officials that the state doesn‟t have “the right to tax and collect money from our 
people to pay for services that our people had paid in full, many times over.”101 Explaining why 
sovereignty was too important to compromise for any old economic development project, Ronnie Lupe 
instructed, “We the Apaches claim, and always have claimed, that no money in the world will ever buy 
this land from us. It‟s …priceless. It‟s worth a lot more than anyone can offer us, because we live and 
breathe every piece of air on our land. The grass, the valley, the rivers is [sic] a part of us, is a part of our 
                                                 
98 Ibid., p. 16. 
99 Ibid. 
100 Ibid., p. 14. 
101 Ibid., p. 17. 

 
 
 
 
301 
 
unique ways.”102 So unlike Williams‟ European immigrants, the Apache people‟s identity and culture 
had long been tied to the land. Without a homeland, the Apache people and their culture would cease to 
exist. At the same time, contrasting the state‟s long history of disrespect towards his people, Lupe stated 
that the White Mountain Apache had always honored “your land, your ways.” He stipulated that in 
return the state should “respect our rights and respect our ways.”103  
This request included a whole slew of jurisdictional issues where the state either taxed businesses or 
required permits under the auspices that the state provided tribes with significant social and 
environmental services. In terms of game and fish management, the White Mountain Apache, San 
Carlos Apache Tribe, and the Quechan, ran into trouble with state permit requirements, issuing tribal 
permits, and prosecuting non-Indian violators of tribal game and fish codes.104 Buck Kitcheyan, a San 
Carlos Apache, complained, “We tried to enforce these [tribal game codes] on non-Indians who… 
destroyed our land resources… [but w]e are told [by the state] we cannot enforce our laws on the 
violators.”105  
Shortly after that Town Hall, Phil Stago assumed his post as director of the WMRE. In the midst of 
such jurisdictional controversies, he almost immediately tested the bounds of White Mountain Apache 
sovereignty. At the same time, he also worked to protect tribal sovereignty on the federal and tribal 
fronts. With the FWS, he made sure the Tribe remained a central player in Apache trout restoration work 
as various state and federal entities formulated the recovery plan. The role of the Apache in early drafts 
was ambiguous, prompting him to assert that the Tribe “will be the contact for research conducted on 
                                                 
102 Ibid., p. 1. 
103 Ibid. 
104 Ibid., p. 2. On the Quechan situation, see page 22. In the 1960s, they actually won a court case that conferred 
they had the right to detain non-Indians hunting without a tribal permit. In the early 1970s, the White Mountain 
Apache established in their tribal law and order code that they could prosecute non-Indians in tribal court. 
105 Ibid., p. 20. 

 
 
 
 
302 
 
tribal lands.”106 He also took on the Tribal Council when they passed a resolution extending the deer 
season for tribal members without consulting the WMRE. Concerned about recent game ranger 
observations indicating that deer populations had decreased, Stago chastised the Council: “Good game 
management recognizes the need to allow wildlife the opportunity to repopulate itself under natural 
conditions. This extended season interferes and overlaps into the initial stages of the breeding season … 
[resulting] in a decrease of next year‟s fawn crop.”107 Stago brought to the fore something the White 
Mountain Apache never experienced since it undertook fish and game management: an Apache 
scientific expert in a leadership role.  
Stago‟s expertise made a big difference in terms of defending Apache natural resources, thus tribal 
sovereignty. James Sparks and Si Davis, the first two managers of the WMRE, both honorably served 
the White Mountain Apache, but they remained outsiders who could never fully understand the 
significance of defending tribal sovereignty. They weren‟t fighting for the survival of their culture and 
the ecological integrity of their homeland. In other words, their vested interest only went so far. As 
Ronnie Lupe knew and vigorously worked towards in the late 1960s, it would take Apache experts 
assuming leadership roles in Apache enterprises to truly achieve tribal self-sufficiency. Almost 
immediately, the investment in Stago‟s expertise proved Lupe right. Stago recognized quickly that 
although the WMRE had been profitable, the business lacked measures to sustain that profitability. Most 
importantly, he noticed that proper monitoring of game species hadn‟t taken place in over fifteen years. 
The Branch of Land Operations, the division in the BIA that provided technical support for the 
WMRE, ceased quantitative surveys of game in 1959. That year they estimated that 800 elk resided on 
the reservation. Later reports contained qualitative assessments derived from casual field observations. 
Observations on species fell into four categories: “animal not found, very few animals, commonly seen, 
                                                 
106 Stago to R.J. Stephens, Regional Director, FWS, March 28, 1978, reprinted in Apache Trout Draft Recovery 
Plan.  
107 “Extended Deer Season Violates Good Management Practices,” Fort Apache Scout 14 (January, 1975): 7.  

 
 
 
 
303 
 
many animals seen every day.”108 Field agents generally considered deer and elk as common.  However, 
Stago noticed otherwise. Both deer and elk populations showed signs of decline. For instance, the 1974 
hunting season saw an extremely low elk hunter success rate. Of a total of 349 permits issued in that 
year, hunters only killed 34 animals. Stago believed many factors played into the low success rate. 
Unfortunately for the hunters, BIA forestry conducted prescribed burns coincident with the hunting 
season, creating an abundance of smoke that obscured visibility. A major storm also moved through the 
area, limiting the time one could hunt. But ultimately Stago felt that a lack of field surveys and that no 
requirement existed for hunters to check in or out made it difficult to determine “which way our elk herd 
is going.” With the increase in recreational use of tribal resources over the previous fifteen years, Stago 
emphasized the need for “research so we can do some planning.”109 
Along with conducting more game surveys, Stago had another idea: sponsoring trophy elk hunts. 
After observing that people traveled to Fort Apache from all across the United States to hunt trophy-
sized bull elks, he intuited that the Tribe could probably generate more money from hunting permits 
than the $30 per elk permit they had been issuing.  He piloted the program with a couple of special 
guided hunts during the 1975 hunting season. The WMRE limited the special hunt permits to twenty at 
$750 each. They only filled eighteen applications in the first year, but that would be the last time that 
happened. More importantly, utilizing the local knowledge of Apache guides, the hunters had a 100% 
success rate. Success was paramount to building demand for a trophy elk program.110 Ever since, with 
hunters coming from as far away as Europe and New Zealand, the popularity of the program required 
                                                 
108 Annual Reports: Branch of Land Operations Range and Wildlife Management, 1960 – 1969. 
109 “Elk Hunter Success Low,” Fort Apache Scout 14 (January, 1975): 12. 
110 “Elk Hunt Hailed as Very Successful,” Fort Apache Scout 14 (November, 1975): 1, 12. 

 
 
 
 
304 
 
the WMRE to institute a waiting list. The next year the WMRE raised the permit to $1500, continuing to 
raise the fee in subsequent years. Currently the fee is $17,000 per permit.111   
Stago reasoned that the trophy hunt would restore the health of the elk herd in two basic ways. First, 
obviously fewer hunters would mean less pressure on the population. Second, bull-only hunts wouldn‟t 
affect the breeding potential of the herd. According to Stago, “after reaching an age where they [bulls] 
can no longer fend off the younger bulls the older bulls are driven away from the cows and either drift 
around by themselves or join other bulls who are unable to hold together a harem of cows.” As further 
support for his hypothesis, he reported that one of the bulls killed in the 1975 excursion had very few 
teeth left, thus reducing its chance of surviving the winter. He believed that most individuals taken 
during trophy hunts wouldn‟t live until the next breeding season anyway.112 
Even though the guided hunts proved prosperous, the regular hunt continued to yield poor results. 
News circulated that elk populations on the reservation were in decline. As a consequence, the WMRE 
sold fewer permits than the previous year. A 1975 WMRE survey supported this notion, reporting that 
the population size was “fair” but smaller than in previous years. The survey also indicated that wild 
horse numbers had increased, meaning that the horses possibly competed with the elk for forage. 
Because of the Wild Horse and Burro Protection Act, the WMRE, for now, couldn‟t cull the horse 
population.113 With this survey information in hand, Stago convinced the Tribal Council to raise hunting 
and fishing fees in general, reduce the number of hunters allowed on the reservation, and permanently 
support the trophy elk hunts. The WMRE needed to raise more revenue to properly manage fish and 
wildlife populations: “[I]f the outdoorsmen want to continue enjoying the reservation‟s fishing, hunting 
                                                 
111 The Tribe eventually created a trophy hunt for pronghorn antelope in the 1980s and big horn sheep in the 
1990s. They also have an auction for a couple of bids a year that bring in as much as $40,000 each. In total, 
trophy hunts bring in close to half a million dollars a year now. For more on permit fees see the White Mountain 
Apache Tribe Outdoor and Recreation website, http://www.wmatoutdoors.org/new%20trophy%20elk.shtml  
112 “Elk Hunt Hailed as Very Successful.” 
113 “W.M.R.E. Completes Summer Elk Survey,” Fort Apache Scout 14 (July, 1975): 10. 

 
 
 
 
305 
 
and camping they are going to have to pay a little more, or lose the privilege of using this outdoor 
paradise. The Tribe just cannot afford to finance the program for them.”114 By implication, the tourists, 
hunters, and fishers had been receiving a bargain. Stago wanted to explore the true recreational “value” 
of the reservation. He believed if the Tribal Council increased camping, fishing, and hunting fees, 
outdoor enthusiasts would still come, and they did.  
Stago justified the hike in fees and reduced number of permits on several other grounds as well. 
Other than the technical support provided by the BIA, which the Tribe often partly paid for out of the 
tribal coffers anyway, the WMRE received no federal or state aid. Unlike the AGFD, the WMRE was 
ineligible for Dingell-Johnson Act money for fisheries management or Pittman-Robertson Act funds for 
game management and restoration.115 He also defended the reduced number of permits at higher prices 
on the grounds that his game warden staff remained too small to properly enforce the game code. If 
fewer hunters roamed the reservation, the game wardens increased their chances of catching any 
violations.  Lastly, recent escalation in hunting and fishing pressure degraded the reservation‟s 
ecosystems. Restoring populations and habitat entailed reducing the number of individuals attempting to 
take fish and wildlife - either that or institute closed seasons. But Stago submitted that no one wins in the 
latter option, plus “this is wasteful and not good game management as many of the animals would not 
survive [the winter] anyway.”116 
Predictably Stago encountered resistance from hunters, fishers, the press, and the AGFD. The 
hunters and fishers were the least of his worries, though, with many conceding that the price hike was 
                                                 
114 “New Fishing, Hunting and Camping Fees Announced for 1976,” Fort Apache Scout 15 (January, 1976): 1, 12. 
115 These acts provide states with funds derived from federal taxes on hunting and fishing gear to protect and 
conserve game and fish species. 
116 “New Fishing, Hunting and Camping Fees Announced for 1976.” 

 
 
 
 
306 
 
justifiable.117 The bad press was unpleasant, but it failed to affect business; however, it served to create 
tension between Arizonans and the Apache. The main instigator was Ben Avery of the Arizona 
Republic, whose opinions about the WMRE had long vacillated back and forth depending on the extent 
the Tribe presented a threat to what he perceived as state resources.118 In an editorial in the spring of 
1976, soon after the Apache released their new hunting and fishing regulations, he incorrectly applied 
the “state-ownership” argument in defense of the AGFD‟s position, a position the AGFD didn‟t even 
bother to take.  He invoked the Winslow Elk‟s Lodge introduction of Rocky Mountain elk in 1913 as 
evidence of state jurisdiction over the game. He also accused the Apache of creating a “private… fishing 
and shooting preserve.” He went on to question the legitimacy of tribal sovereignty by asking, “when 
you get serious, who is an Indian? There are millions of us of mixed Indian blood of varying degrees.” 
However, what the permit issue boiled down to was a threat to state sovereignty. Using scare tactics, 
Avery implied that the Arizona tribes strived to take everything away from Arizonans. “In recent years 
both the courts and the Congress are doing drastic things,” Avery wrote, “Now Sen. Ted Kennedy has 
introduced a bill that would give all of Arizona‟s water to Indians.”119  
Also sensing this threat, the AGFD immediately challenged the efficacy of the trophy elk hunt 
program. The AGFD by law had no recourse against the tribal permit fee, but they objected to two other 
aspects of the program. First, the program violated the state‟s mandatory three-year waiting period for 
elk hunters. Under state rules, a hunter would have to wait another three years before participating in the 
program again. But Stago wanted repeat business from those who would pay the WMRE‟s fee. On 
                                                 
117 For example, see letter to editor, Fort Apache Scout 15 (March, 1976): 2; Tom Barnes‟ (Game Branch 
Supervisor, AGFD) talk at ACIA, Control of Natural Resources: Report of the 7th Annual Indian Town, November 
15-16, 1979 (Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1980), p. 25-26. 
118 Avery had been writing about the White Mountain Apache in the Outdoor section in the Arizona Republic 
since the 1950s. He was highly critical of the Tribe‟s efforts to build Hawley Lake (see chapter 6). However, he 
later praised the Tribe‟s entrepreneurship and was particularly enamored with Lydo Harvey. When Harvey died, 
he wrote a very complementary piece on him. He certainly wanted the Apache to succeed, but not at the cost of 
non-Indians. He saw economic development as a pathway towards assimilation. 
119 Ben Avery, “Apache Set Up „Private‟ Nation,” Arizona Republic (May 13, 1976): D8. 

 
 
 
 
307 
 
March 7, 1976 he met with the AGFD and after a “heated discussion,” they granted a waiver for the 
three-year wait. The second issue would result in a protracted court battle. Stago informed the AGFD 
that the WMRE no longer required a state permit for hunting and fishing on the reservation, thus 
challenging the state‟s authority to enforce their regulations. Although the state hadn‟t directly 
challenged the fee hikes and the reduction in the number of permits, Stago believed that the state‟s 
requirement for non-Indians to possess a state permit violated the Tribe‟s sovereignty. Moreover, state 
permits represented a lingering threat to more important aspects of game and fish management. If the 
state “has the power,” maintained Stago, “we wouldn‟t have any control. The state could tell us when to 
have our seasons, how many permits to issue, and what to charge.” To quell any doubts, the Apache had 
to extinguish all extensions of AGFD‟s authority, state permits included.120  
The stakes were high for the Apache. They saw the issue as a battle for the sovereign right to control 
eco-cultural resources on their homeland. For the state, the stakes seemed equally high. For the past 
fifteen years their jurisdiction had been whittled away through similar battles with the Navajo, by the 
federal government through the Endangered Species Act, and by local judges failing to enforce state 
game laws.121 The AGFD also stood to lose financially. Permits from the thousands of hunters and 
fishers visiting Fort Apache generated a lot of revenue. They argued the costs could be devastating if all 
the reservations in Arizona went the way of Fort Apache and Navajo. Indian reservations constituted 
more the 50% of the land area and much of the prime hunting and fishing spots in Arizona. Although the 
financial loss claim proved to be an exaggeration, the AGFD decided to draw the line in the fall of 1977.  
As part of the trophy elk fee, the WMRE agreed to ship trophy racks (antlers) to participants 
traveling great distances. The AGFD got wind of a set of antlers the WMRE sent to a customer in Texas 
via train through Show Low, Arizona. They confiscated the antlers, claiming the hunter that killed the 
                                                 
120 “Jurisdiction over Animals Questioned,” Fort Apache Scout 15 (April, 1976): 3. 
121 Amerman, “‟This is Our Land,‟” pp. 144-145.  See also Barnes‟ talk in ACIA, Control of Natural Resources, 
pp. 23-29. 

 
 
 
 
308 
 
animal had done so illegally without a state permit. However, shortly thereafter the Navajo County court 
ordered the AGFD to return them to the Tribe. This action led the White Mountain Apache Tribe to file 
suit against the AGFD for interfering in the Tribe‟s jurisdiction in the Federal District Court. The White 
Mountain Apache‟s attorney, Kathleen Rhir, also argued on the grounds that the WMRE was self-
supporting , receiving no state funds to enhance recreational infrastructure or manage fish and game. 
Therefore, the state didn‟t have the right to regulate game and fish on the reservation. The Tribe also 
provided evidence that since they forced the state‟s hand and took full control of management on the 
reservation, the condition of the reservation ecosystem had improved. The new game policy resulted in 
larger and healthier big game herds, reduced the trampling effect caused by large numbers of elk 
hunters, and a diminished the level of poaching.122 
Besides asserting tribal authority, Stago and the White Mountain Apache also delineated cultural and 
scientific boundaries. In a deposition given for the District Court, Chairman Lupe answered doubts 
about whether the Tribe was capable of managing their own resources. He claimed that the White 
Mountain Apache had “always practiced conservation.” He went on to explain, “It‟s an Apache 
philosophy that we rely upon game as our livelihood. Since time began we look upon game as part of 
our life, our everyday life.  We are mindful of the existence of game being very important because it 
does provide food, it does provide existence to the White Mountain Apache Tribe.” When asked about 
why the Tribe reduced the number of permits for “whites,” Stago informed the Court that the policy had 
nothing to do with excluding or limiting “non-Indians.”   First and foremost, the purpose of wildlife 
management on Fort Apache was “for the Tribal members.” Fish and game provided a livelihood for the 
                                                 
122 For an overview of the case history, see White Mountain Apache Tribe v. State of Arizona, Department of 
Game and Fish, 649 F.2d 1274 (1980). “Tribe Sues State over Game Jurisdiction,” Fort Apache Scout 16 
(December 2, 1977): 1-2, 4, 9. 

 
 
 
 
309 
 
reservation population in two ways.123 First, the WMRE provided jobs and revenue for the reservation 
economy. Second, fish and game remained an important source of food for some tribal members. 
Ultimately, Stago reminded the Court that tribal members “invite people on the reservation to hunt as 
long as the game population will permit.”124 
In June of 1978 the U.S. District Court of Arizona ruled in favor of the AGFD and determined that 
non-Indian hunters had to purchase a state permit to legally hunt on Fort Apache. The District Court 
side-stepped the sovereignty issue and claimed that the Tribe failed to demonstrate financial hardship 
resulting from state regulations.125 Rhir and Stago claimed they weren‟t surprised by the decision. As a 
consequence, the White Mountain Apache almost immediately appealed the case in the United States 
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. Rhir believed the case would probably end up in the Supreme Court 
unless one of a number of similar cases reached there first. In particular, the Tribe had their eye on New 
Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe, which at the time was being heard at the district level as well. This 
case also challenged state interference with tribal game management.126 The Tribe also had another case 
pending in the Supreme Court that would weigh in on the sovereignty issue. White Mountain Apache 
Tribe v. Bracker turned on the issue of whether the state of Arizona had the right to tax an independent 
logging company contracted by FATCO to do work on the reservation. In 1980 the Supreme Court ruled 
in favor of the Tribe because it determined that the state didn‟t provide any regulatory services that 
would warrant taxes. In general the case provided a framework for judging “preemption” battles (in the 
                                                 
123 Although tribal members had to adhere to bag limits and seasons, the Council didn‟t require them to pay for 
permits until 1989. 
124 “Tribal Sovereignty Asserted in Game Suit Hearings,” Fort Apache Scout 17 (May 18, 1978): 1. 
125 White Mountain Apache Tribe v. State of Arizona, Department of Game and Fish, 1277. 
126 This case eventually beat the Apache case to the Supreme Court, New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe, 462 
U.S. 324 (1983). “Federal Judge Rules Against Tribe in Suit,” Fort Apache Scout 17 (June 23, 1978): 1, 9. 

 
 
 
 
310 
 
AGFD case, whether the court had the right to stop Arizona from requiring state permits) between states 
and tribal governments, giving weight to “the tradition of Indian sovereignty over the reservation.”127  
In the meantime, however, the White Mountain Apache had to deal with the AGFD case. Stago 
stood his ground, asserting that the “1976 code will be honored.” With the backing of the Tribal 
Council, he instructed the game wardens not to check for state permits and refused to let state officials 
on the reservation. He also demanded that the state “honor” the Tribe‟s trophy elk hunting season, which 
didn‟t necessarily coincide with the state elk hunting season. Emphatic about his position, Stago 
cautioned that if “the state insists on creating problems … it may become necessary to close hunting (but 
not fishing) to non-Indians.” The issue clearly went beyond money for the Tribe. They stood to lose 
$75,000 alone from the trophy-elk hunt if the state interfered.128 The state retreated; instead 
implementing the strategy of waiting off-reservation to apprehend any violators of the state permit law. 
Eventually, Stago backed down on the permit issue so as to not cause any problems for their trophy elk 
clients, paying the required state permit fees in protest.  
While the White Mountain Apache worked on their appeal, in 1979 another face-off between the 
AGFD and the Tribe occurred at the Ninth Indian Town Hall Meeting held at the Sunrise Ski Resort. In 
the presence of AGFD officials and a number of tribes (the San Carlos Apache, Navajo, and Hualapai all 
had trophy hunts by now) dealing with similar jurisdictional issues over game and fish, Stago made his 
intentions clear. He came prepared to battle. Anticipating the tension in the audience while playing the 
role of moderator in a session on “Game and Fish Management,” Stago opened with a joke: “It is pretty 
lucky that you have all just about finished eating now, because what I am going to say may upset you or 
                                                 
127 White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 448 U.S. 136, 143 (1980). For more on the significance of this case 
to federal Indian law see, Judith V. Royster and Michael C. Blumm, Native American Natural Resources Law: 
Cases and Materials (Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2002), pp. 356-379. 
128 “Federal Judge Rules Against Tribe in Suit,” p. 9. The Tribe wouldn‟t discontinue fishing due to the fact that 
both the state, through Apache trout propagation, and federal government contributed significant funds for 
restocking reservation streams.  

 
 
 
 
311 
 
ruin your appetite.”129  He followed the joke with some welcoming remarks but quickly dove into the 
thick of the matter, claiming “[i]t has been recorded in history that we are the kind of people that cannot 
be pushed around. We have fought many people of different races, throughout the years; we have been 
in many Indian wars, and even fought in World War I.”130 He went on describing the sacrifices of his 
fellow Apache who fought and died in World War II, Korea, Vietnam, and “if necessary Iran” to protect 
what “they loved… their origination, the point of origination from the sacred Mountain [Mount Baldy].” 
After emphasizing the lengths to which his people would go to defend their homeland, he rehashed the 
status of the court battle with the AGFD. Conceding that they had lost the “first bout,” he reassured 
everyone that the Tribe would do “[w]hatever is necessary, whatever it takes” to restore their sovereign 
right to manage tribal resources. 131 
Tom Barnes, Game Branch Supervisor of the AGFD, followed Stago. He admitted to being 
“apprehensive” about giving his presentation in front of tribal officials who whole-heartedly disagreed 
with his agency‟s position. Nonetheless, he diplomatically reasserted the state‟s position: that state 
wildlife laws applied on Indian reservations. Expressing the AGFD‟s frustration with the standoff, he 
claimed, “if things were any more confused or if Department and tribal relationships deteriorate any 
further on some reservations, both sides might as well give up and start over.” Barnes believed the root 
of the problem lay with the segregationist policies of the tribal governments. Until “we, as a people, 
decide that we are one nation… willing to establish one law that is equally applicable to all people 
without respect to race, sex, or creed,” no solutions to the problem will emerge. After admonishing tribal 
game wardens for misinforming non-Indians about state permit requirements on reservations, he made 
an emotional appeal to the predominantly Native American audience: “I would like to express my love 
                                                 
129 ACIA, Control of Natural Resources: Report of the 7th Annual Indian Town, November 15-16, 1979 (Phoenix, 
AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1980), p. 22. 
130 Ibid., p. 23. 
131 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
312 
 
and appreciation to the Indian people. I can sincerely do this because I, as a Mormon, firmly believe the 
Indian people are a choice people in the eyes of God and that you are presently preparing yourselves to 
fulfill a major responsibility in His behalf.” Although what he said probably came “from the heart,” 
Barnes, like so many before him, underestimated the importance of sovereignty to Native Americans.132  
After Barnes‟s appeal for brotherhood, William Lavell, the Solicitor for the DOI, took the podium. 
Lavell essentially backed the tribal government‟s position, predicting that the Supreme Court would 
eventually weigh in on the White Mountain Apache case along with the Mescalero Apache case. Once 
there, he believed, the sovereign right of the Indian nations to regulate fish and game without state 
interference would be upheld. Given that probable outcome and that it would take several years to 
resolve, he suggested that the state immediately find ways to “coordinate and cooperate” with tribal 
governments. Belittling the state‟s position, he accused them of being petty, fighting for a miniscule 
amount of permit revenue and the authority to control “a few [trophy elk] hunts that don‟t coincide with 
the state season.”133 In a historical role reversal, the situation looked quite grim for state rights. The 
Native Americans for once seemed to have the upper hand, and they planned on capitalizing on it. 
Besides restating their legal position, the White Mountain Apache had a few other boundaries to 
regulate as well. Having long been dependent on the expert knowledge of the AGFD, BIA, and FWS, 
Stago and Chairman Lupe sought to reestablish the White Mountain Apache intellectual contribution to 
natural resource management and restoration. They wanted the audience to know that governmental 
experts weren‟t the only people capable of managing public resources. They also presented themselves 
as experts working within their own “Game and Fish Department” on par with or better than state and 
federal land managers. In Chairman Lupe‟s opening remarks, he pointed out that the game wardens “are 
                                                 
132 Ibid., pp. 24-29. 
133 Ibid., pp. 29-33. 

 
 
 
 
313 
 
very well in tune with the reservation‟s topographic terrain, and very intelligent.”134 In his closing 
remarks, Stago boasted about the Tribe‟s ability to manage the elk herd: “I will bet with my right arm,” 
he wagered, “that 50 years from now, or maybe 100 years from now, there will be elk, and I predict also 
that there will be wildlife on these mountains here on the reservation.” And of course this would happen 
because he was “a professional man… highly trained as a game naturalist, along with being a biologist.” 
Stago also explained that as a White Mountain Apache connected to the land through heritage, it 
obligated him to protect Apache resources. His responsibility and allegiance was to his people just like 
the state was responsible for their land. In the long run, the Apache homeland was better served by the 
local knowledge that came with being a White Mountain Apache. Therefore, in no way did Stago “need 
the [Arizona] Game and Fish people to tell me how to do things or what to do.”135  
Stago‟s assertion of expertise ran deeper than the right and ability to produce legitimate knowledge. 
While criticizing the efficacy of state management techniques, he leveled a philosophical challenge to 
the foundations of Western science. He revealed problems with knowledge production and application 
from afar.  First, Stago claimed that the AGFD issued more permits than appropriate, which exerted too 
much pressure on game populations. Responding to earlier AGFD claims that the jurisdictional 
squabbles may “result in harm to wildlife resources,” Stago replied, “If you really love and care for 
wildlife, you don‟t sell thousands and thousands of permits.” According to Stago, the source of the 
AGFD‟s management problems arose out of their fundamental belief in a universalist, top-down mode 
of knowledge production: 
They have to consider what‟s out there in the woods. You can be a biologist down in a Phoenix 
Game and Fish Office, with a Ph.D. in biology, and make all kinds of decisions… but you also 
have to know what is going on in the mountains. You don‟t learn that from a book, believe me. 
That is where we [AGFD and the Tribe]… differ. We see it and we live it every day by being out 
                                                 
134 Ibid., p. 2. 
135 Ibid., pp. 33-36. 

 
 
 
 
314 
 
in the field… You have to have wildlife control now in this day and age, otherwise…it is going 
to be gone forever. 
 
While drawing a distinct philosophical line between the management ethos of the Tribe and the AGFD, 
he maintained, “We have better and more wildlife on this reservation than any place in the southwest, 
because we do not over-kill, we do not have excessive hunters and everything is controlled.” His 
essential message contended that the formula of mixing White Mountain Apache wisdom and local 
knowledge with training in the Western sciences made for a superior management philosophy. 
Employing the delineation between Apache knowledge and Western knowledge as a political tool, he 
attempted to turn the relationship between the AGFD and the WMRE on its head, by implying that the 
AGFD had something to learn from the “Apache way.”136 
Gaining respect for White Mountain Apache expertise became a long-term project, but Stago and 
Lupe had taken the first step. The act of pronouncing that Apache‟s could understand and apply Western 
knowledge created an epistemological foundation from which the Tribe could continue to legitimize 
Apache knowledge in the eyes of Western science.  At this time, the notion of Apache knowledge 
remained vague. According to Stago, it simply entailed a mix of intimate knowledge of their homeland, 
“ancient” Apache land management traditions, and Western science. Although this mix of 
epistemological standpoints lacked clear definition, the 1979 Indian Town Hall meeting embodied the 
political pathway of a rediscovery process. Since the late 1960s, Stago, Lupe, and the rest of the Apache 
were experimenting with expressions of Apache identity. This meant relearning, then applying their 
history, ancestral knowledge, ethical frameworks, and technologies in a variety of eco-political contexts 
to reassert their cultural identity and tribal autonomy.  Throughout the next thirty years, the Apache 
would continue to experiment with the notion of Apache knowledge as they assumed control over 
knowledge production on the reservation.  
                                                 
136 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
315 
 
In the meantime, the federal courts finally rendered a decision on the jurisdictional battle in 1983, 
which furthered the Apache‟s quest to control resources and knowledge production on Fort Apache. In 
1980 the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held White Mountain Apache Tribe v. AGDF in abeyance until 
the Supreme Court handed down the decision on New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe. The Supreme 
Court ruled in favor of the Mescalero Apache, affirming that New Mexico‟s fish and game department 
had no jurisdiction over the Mescalero Apache Reservation. Furthermore, the Court decided that the 
Mescalero Apache could prosecute non-Indian violators of their game code in tribal court.137 Based on 
this decision, on October 24, 1983 the U.S. District Court for the District of Arizona decreed that “the 
application of Arizona‟s hunting and fishing laws to the Fort Apache Indian Reservation… interferes 
with Tribal self-government” and that the AGFD lacked the authority to “manage or control” game and 
fish on the reservation. The Court also ordered Arizona to pay the Tribe $9,029.56 in court costs, 
$45,000 in attorney‟s fees, and $27, 656 plus interest that the Tribe paid under protest to the AGFD for 
state licenses for hunters participating in trophy elk hunts from 1977 through 1983.138 Shortly after the 
White Mountain Apache ruling, the AGFD changed its policy to generally reflect the findings of the 
White Mountain Apache case. As of spring of 1984, it no longer required the purchase of state permits 
to hunt on any reservation in the state.139  
 
Exchange: Return to a Frontier Hunter’s “Paradise” 
 
The court victory allowed an already successful recreational program to flourish. The trophy elk 
hunt was particularly in demand. The revenue generated by the trophy hunt increased every year. By 
                                                 
137 New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe. 
138 “White Mountain Apache Tribe Wins Game and Fish Lawsuit,” Fort Apache Scout 22 (November 11, 1983): 
1-2; White Mountain Apache Tribe v. State of Arizona, Arizona Game and Fish Department (1983). 
139 “Expected Change in State Wildlife Rule will Help All Reservations,” Fort Apache Scout 22 (March 2, 1984): 
1. 

 
 
 
 
316 
 
1983, the WMRE charged $5,000 for a five day permit and $7,000 for a seven day permit.140 The Tribe 
invested these funds back into the WMRE, which influenced the nature of ecological restoration in two 
relevant ways. In essence, the Tribe‟s battle to define sovereignty also was in part a battle to define 
restoration. First, the elk hunt helped staff the WMRE with college educated, non-Indian, wildlife 
biologists. Despite Lupe and Stago‟s claims at the 1979 Indian Town Hall, expertise remained in short 
supply among tribal members. Under the wings of Phil Stago, these biologists trained White Mountain 
Apaches in increasingly sophisticated wildlife management and restoration techniques. Second, the 
trophy elk program provided - for a privileged portion of the hunting population - a taste of the past, a 
past where big game hunters such as Teddy Roosevelt ventured into the “wilderness” to test their 
character and bring home legendary kills. In other words, the WMRE restored a sense of rugged 
individualism and the wilderness experience for the wealthy sport hunter.   
In terms of building expertise, the trophy elk hunt meant a great deal. In the 1970s, Stago relied on 
the CETA Manpower Program, a product of the Self-Determination Act of 1975, to train game wardens. 
However, by the 1980s, Reagan-era budget cuts considerably diminished the effectiveness of this 
program.141 Because significant numbers of Apache youth still weren‟t pursuing college degrees in 
wildlife management, Stago had no recourse but to continue training his game wardens through informal 
means. The trophy elk hunts created enough revenue to begin adding college-educated wildlife 
biologists to his staff. In return for on-the-job experience that would propel their careers, non-Indians 
helped the WMRE develop more sophisticated management techniques and train Apaches.   
For instance, in 1982 John Caid and John “Punt” Cooley (both went on to careers in the AGFD), 
Euro-American wildlife biologists employed by the Tribe‟s Game and Fish Department (now a division 
                                                 
140 “Elk Survey Provides Game Management Information,” Fort Apache Scout 22 (June 10, 1983): 1. 8-9. 
141 ACIA, Indian Self-Determination and Barriers to Realization”: The 9th Annual Indian Town Hall Report, 
October 28-30, 1981 (Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1982), pp. 60-61. 

 
 
 
 
317 
 
of the WMRE), helped introduce a radio telemetry elk-tracking system on the reservation.142 They also 
trained tribal game wardens in the techniques used to carry out the program. Prior to this method of 
monitoring elk, the Tribe relied upon less accurate game warden sightings and helicopter herd censuses. 
The monitoring system involved trapping elk, taking a blood sample, tagging the ear, and placing a color 
coded collar or numbered transmitting collar around the elk‟s neck. The blood samples allowed the 
Department to determine the health of the herd. The transmitting collars permitted tribal game wardens 
and biologists to track the movements of individuals. Knowing more about their movements gave 
specific information about habitat requirements, the home range of individuals, and migration patterns. 
Caid, Cooley, and the game wardens in turn used this information to assess potential problems, targeting 
areas for restoration. The tags helped determine the survival rate, age distribution, and sex ratio of the 
reservation population, which they applied to make inferences about future trends in the elk 
population.143 For example, in the late 1980s, the surveys revealed that cow elk numbers had decreased 
on the West End, creating a high bull-to-cow ratio, which indicated that this population would continue 
trending downward. To rectify the situation, game wardens Victor Larzelere and Roland Ethelbah and 
wildlife biologist Joe Jojola trapped thirty young cows in the northeastern portion of the reservation, 
where they remained abundant, subsequently releasing these cows in the West End. 144 
Other training opportunities presented themselves through habitat restoration. In particular, the 
Game and Fish Department with the aid of the BIA Forestry Department, which employed mostly White 
Mountain Apache, conducted controlled burns to restore the grazing capacity of elk habitat.145 Prior to 
                                                 
142 Cooley in particular had a vested interest in the ecological health of the Fort Apache landscape. He was one-
eighth Apache, but according to tribal rules failed to qualify as a tribal member.  Nonetheless, he grew up in 
McNary and felt a sincere attachment to tribal lands. 
143 “Elk Survey Provides Game Management Information,” Fort Apache Scout 22 (June 10, 1983): 1, 8-9. 
144 “Cow Elk moved as Part of Game Management,” Fort Apache Scout 28 (June 16, 1989): 6. 
145 “Controlled Burning Reduces Fire Hazard, Increases Game Forage,” Fort Apache Scout 27 (November 4, 
1988): 4; “Game and Fish: 1988…a year of wildlife improvement, business profit,” Fort Apache Scout 27 
(December 30, 1988): 9. 

 
 
 
 
318 
 
the fire suppression policies of the BIA and the Forest Service of the early twentieth century, natural and 
man-induced fire shaped the Ponderosa pine ecosystem, creating large open spaces of lush grass 
between mature pines.146 Increasing elk forage was part of a larger reservation-wide prescribed burn 
program, which attempted to restore forest and range damaged by past BIA fire suppression and grazing 
policies. The Game and Fish Department also subjected juniper and piñon pine, which also benefitted 
from fire suppression policies, to eradication projects that also aimed to expand the foraging capacity of 
the reservation.147 As a result of these restoration efforts, by 1989, the reservation elk herd became so 
large, that the Game and Fish Department had to institute a cow elk culling program. The tribal 
government began receiving complaints from neighboring ranchers about elk moving into off-
reservation winter habitat, where they damaged range and farmland.148  
All of this restoration work contributed to the growth of one of the most prestigious trophy elk hunts 
in the United States. Over the years the hunt has drawn celebrities such as Jack Nicklaus, George Strait, 
Dale Earnhardt, and Kurt Russell. Other clientele consisted of wealthy, white male executives of large 
corporations like Coca Cola. A fair number came from royalty in Europe as well.149 In short, the 
participants have been privileged, white, male hunters, a breed not so different from those who started 
the Boone and Crockett Club in the late nineteenth century. In a sense, the White Mountain Apache 
offered, and perhaps even restored, a past way of life – that of the Progressive Era adventurer sportsmen. 
From recreating elk herds with record setting bulls, to maintaining a wilderness setting, to providing 
                                                 
146 Peter Friederici, ed., Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests (Washington, D.C.: 
Island Press, 2003); Thomas R. Vale, ed., Fire, Native Peoples, and the Natural Landscape (Washington, D.C.: 
Island Press, 2002). 
147 Game and Fish Department, “Wildlife and Fire,” Fort Apache Scout 29 (June 1, 1990): 12; Rolan Hartzell, 
“You can‟t See the Forest for the Trees,” Fort Apache Scout 29 (March 23, 1990): 1, 5. 
148 “Council Approves Tribal Member Hunting Fees, Cow Elk Hunt,” Fort Apache Scout 28 (June 30, 1989): 1, 7. 
149 Punt Cooley, “The Many Faces of Maverick,” Fort Apache Scout 40 (March 22, 2002): 7; “Sealed Elk Hunt 
Bids Awarded,” Fort Apache Scout 27 (April 7, 1989): 18. 

 
 
 
 
319 
 
White Mountain Apache guides, cooks, and skinners, the Tribal Game and Fish Department (formerly 
the WMRE) sparked the romantic imaginations of the rugged individualist.150  
Like in the late nineteenth century with the wealthy easterner M.E. Morford who sought the perfect 
elk in the White Mountains, once a year since 1975 the Apache have sponsored a select group of rich 
hunters embarking on their own adventures into the wilds of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. In the 
early days of the trophy program, a hunter came from California claiming, “This has been my dream.” 
He had never seen elk so big. His previous experiences in Colorado paled in comparison. The elk there 
“were not like this!”151 Another hunter marveled in the fact that on his first day, “I saw twenty five elk 
that most hunters would be proud to have taken. I could have gone on a hunt in Colorado for ten days 
and never seen that.”152 A CEO from a textile manufacturer in Mexico City saw Fort Apache as a way 
“to get away from everything.” Another hunter from California characterized the reservation as “one of 
the best places in the country to hunt, relax, and enjoy the beauty.”153 As of 1999, Jack Nicklaus, who 
opted to bow hunt, participated in the program five times. He liked the isolation of the reservation, being 
able to spend a few weeks out of the limelight: “I don‟t have to shoot anything. I come up just to have 
fun and enjoy the outdoors.”154 All the participants had one thing in common, a desire to escape the 
confines of civilization.  
Hunter success has been a required part of the trophy-elk program experience as well. To augment 
this success, the Game and Fish Depart maintained elk populations that steadily yielded trophy-caliber 
bull elks. In most years, hunters experienced a 70-80% success rate, with many of them passing up sure 
                                                 
150 On the character of the Progressive Era sportsmen, see John F. Reiger, American Sportsmen and the Origins of 
Conservation (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985); Louis S. Warren, The Hunter’s Game: 
Poachers and Conservationists in Twentieth-Century American (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997), 
pp. 13-14. 
151 “Tribe Stages Successful Elk Hunt,” Fort Apache Scout 16 (October 14, 1977): 1, 6. 
152 “Trophy Elk Hunt Best in the United States,” Fort Apache Scout 19 (October 17, 1980): 1, 5. 
153 “Trophy Elk Hunt,” Fort Apache Scout 28 (October 20, 1989): 10-11. 
154 Stewart Nicholas, “Trophy Elk Hunt Offers Relaxing Atmosphere,” Fort Apache Scout 38 (October 22, 1999): 
1. 

 
 
 
 
320 
 
kills because they would rather wait for a chance at a record-sized elk. The actual height and weight of 
the animal wasn‟t what determined a record. They sought elk with unblemished six- to eight-point 
antlers, of which one hunter claimed that Fort Apache had more “than anywhere else in the world.”155 
Essentially, most participants only killed bull elks that would land them in the Boone and Crockett 
record book. As of 1987, fifty two record-sized bull elks had been taken on Fort Apache.156 Currently, 
the Tribe claims over a hundred kills from Fort Apache have landed in the Boone and Crockett record 
book. Although the hunters benefitted from some modern conveniences, they in a sense experienced a 
hunting opportunity not available since the late nineteenth century. The staff of the Fish and Game 
Department worked endlessly to recreate the abundance of six-point “monster elk” that roamed the 
White Mountains prior to the arrival of hunters, ranchers, sheep herders, and the military in the 1870s. 
They couldn‟t bring back Merriam‟s elk, but perhaps they brought back the “ideal” elk.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Stago‟s challenge to the state of Arizona offers an example of how earlier successes with restoration 
and natural resource management endowed the White Mountain Apache with political leverage to win 
battles for the right to manage resources for the benefit of the tribe. Without these early demonstrations 
of management capabilities, the Tribe would have experienced more difficulty substantiating claims that 
they could manage fish and wildlife without the state‟s interference. Stago‟s overt politicization of 
science also played a vital role in establishing Apache sovereignty over their eco-cultural resources. 
Even before the movement to resurrect the legitimacy of traditional ecological knowledge emerged in 
the 1990s, he drew a line between Western knowledge and White Mountain Apache knowledge. Stago 
                                                 
155 Bennett Cosay, “While the Rest of Us Hustle and Bustle through Our Daily Lves, Somewhere Up in the 
Mountains a Small Group of People are Having the Time of Their Lives,” Fort Apache Scout 33 (October 14, 
1994): 6. 
156 “Trophy Elk Hunt.” 

 
 
 
 
321 
 
challenged the validity of the philosophical foundation of Western science, the efficacy of the distant 
“detached observer” to manage natural resources.157 In so doing, he reinstituted Apache control over 
knowledge production on Fort Apache.  The fact that the Apache trout and elk restoration and 
management projects yielded positive results made his distinction all the more powerful. At the very 
least, non-Indian land managers had little choice but to acknowledge the Apache voice in the world of 
wildlife management. 
Reestablishing sovereignty over fish and game meant that non-Indians had to contend with the 
existence of a newly legitimized form of local knowledge. The power of local knowledge, as Stago 
articulated it, was that it incorporated the eco-cultural concerns of the Apache community, a group of 
people who had long been dismissed as irrelevant to the larger society in which they were embedded.  
This is something that organizations such as the AGFD could never accomplish from its universalist 
perspective. Its mission focused on the protection of Arizona resources for the benefit of its citizens, a 
mission that regularly failed to address the needs of the Apache people. But beginning in the 1970s, the 
Apache reasserted their culture‟s relevancy.  
Although the WMRE (Tribal Game and Fish Department) and the Tribe borrowed heavily from 
Western science and technology to fulfill their natural resource management goals, they were beginning 
to develop their own brand of knowledge, a hybridization between the “Apache way” and the Western 
way. Even though the “Apache way” of managing eco-cultural resources remained vague, the fact that 
Stago and other Apaches articulated the rebirth of this knowledge in their political dialogues with non-
Indians furnished the “Apache way” with a substrate from which to grow. In its early form, Apache 
knowledge simply comprised local knowledge of the reservation, intimate understandings of its natural 
history, animal behavior, plant distributions, and environmental idiosyncrasies. In time though, Apache 
                                                 
157 For more on Native American criticisms of Western science, see Vine Deloria, Jr., Red Earth, White Lies: 
Native Americans and the Myth of Scientific Fact (Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing, 1997), pp. 40-42. 

 
 
 
 
322 
 
knowledge incorporated past traditions, including philosophical dispositions towards land management, 
land management techniques, stories that contain history of the White Mountain landscape, cultural 
relationships with non-human nature, and moral frameworks that tell people how to live on the land. But 
the evolution of Apache knowledge also involved the appropriation of Western science for the benefit of 
the Apache people. In essence, Apache knowledge is simply local knowledge produced by the Apache 
people for the benefit of the Apache people, regardless of the cultural origin of the techniques.  
In the next chapter I examine how White Mountain Apache knowledge production moved beyond 
vague assertions of past practices and critiques of Western science. Ronnie Lupe‟s message to Apache 
students in 1983 serves as an example of how Apache knowledge production would grow:  
White Mountain Apache students might question why we, as Tribal elders, stress the need for 
education. It does not mean that we want you to join the mainstream. On the contrary, we want 
you to remain White Mountain Apaches, retain the beautiful songs that replenish your spirit and 
maintain our strong way of life. But we know that as the world changes so must the weapons we 
use to defend ourselves and preserve our cultural identity and homeland. The weapons of today 
and the future are first acquired within your Tribal culture and are then honed in the classrooms 
of the schools and universities. 158 
 
In essence, delineating between Western and non-Western knowledge was part of the recovery process, 
but cultural exchange remained integral to the recovery process as well. As the Tribe began 
rediscovering their landscape, customs, and stories, they attempted to integrate this knowledge into 
restoration projects. As a result, the Apache notion of local knowledge became more robust, 
sophisticated, and unique. In other words, the Apache voice rang progressively more clear as they 
continued to appropriate Western science and technology for their own benefit. 
 
                                                 
158 Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner,” Fort Apache Scout 22 (August 5, 1983): 2. 

 
 
323 
 
Chapter 8 
 
The 1990s:  Moving Towards an Epistemological Restoration 
 
 
There‟s lots of Apaches in there and all they were doing, so you can see what happened to them 
and know what they were thinking. It‟s like their tracks, lots of tracks. Those stories are like 
those people‟s tracks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eva Watt, 20041 
 
 
 
Although Eva Watt was speaking about Apache history, her thoughts on this subject are highly 
relevant to the restoration of Apache knowledge. Apache stories contain Apache knowledge. As she 
stated, these stories are her people‟s “tracks” – their mark on the world. In Don’t Let the Sun Step Over 
You, a collection of Watt‟s memories from her life on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation, she criticized 
most Euro-American historians for not including Apache stories in their representations of Western 
Apache history. By doing this, these historians created knowledge from afar (universal standpoint), 
leaving the impression that “everybody was just lying around doing nothing, just waiting around for 
rations.”2 These histories, especially histories of military conquest, reinforced the notion of the 
“vanishing Indian.” On the contrary, Watt asserted, “Lots was going on. See, people were busy every 
day – going here, going there, doing this, doing that. They had to „cause those rations don‟t last very 
long… It‟s not in those books, though. Lots is missing in those books „cause there‟s hardly no Indians in 
there. You can‟t see hardly nothing in there about how we used to live.”3  
In a sense, Watt‟s collection of stories constituted a work of epistemological restoration. Through 
her stories, she beckoned future historians to include Apache knowledge in the forefront of Apache 
histories: otherwise these histories would fail to legitimately represent the Apache people. History 
                                                 
1 Eva Watt, Don’t Let the Sun Step Over You (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2004), p. xv. 
2 Ibid., p. xvi. 
3 Ibid. 

 
 
324 
 
wasn‟t the only act of knowledge production that maintained a universal standpoint on the reservation. 
Historically, the BIA, Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the Arizona Game and Fish Department 
(AGFD) subjected the White Mountain Apache to paternalistic land management and bureaucratic 
schemes that failed to fully account for their needs. From the Apache standpoint, these schemes suffered 
from a lack of local knowledge, either ignoring or actively denigrating Apache knowledge. Some land 
management projects even erased Apache knowledge from the landscape through the destruction of 
culturally important places. From the application of New Deal projects until the late 1980s, the Apache 
struggled to reassert their voice in management decisions concerning their homeland. By the 1990s, they 
had assumed almost full control of reservation eco-cultural resources, prepared to defend themselves 
against further assault. The coincidence between the restoration of Apache eco-cultural resources and 
Apache knowledge wasn‟t an accident.  
The connection between eco-cultural restoration and history became obvious to the Apache. 
Reviving Apache history went hand in hand with restoring the Apache homeland. It also spoke to the 
importance of controlling knowledge production on the reservation. The White Mountain Apache 
learned that reclaiming knowledge production meant revitalizing their past, not only the ecological 
aspects of the past, but also the cultural aspects. Because Apache culture is deeply embedded in the land 
through stories and legends, restoration of the physical landscape also meant restoration of Apache 
knowledge – local knowledge that tied together the moral, social, political, and cultural framework of 
the Apache people.4  
The White Mountain Apache spent the greater part of the last seventy years struggling to reach the 
point where they could adapt all knowledge production - whether Apache or Western - to the needs of 
the Apache people and the local environment. The focus of restoration work in the 1990s strived 
towards this goal. The process of resistance and exchange facilitated this goal, serving as a filter that 
                                                 
4 Keith Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1996). 

 
 
325 
 
partitioned Western knowledge into categories delineating what was useful and irrelevant to the Apache 
people. The Tribe‟s cultural appropriation of ecological restoration embodied this dual political function. 
Apache resistance to the foibles of Western society delineated legal and cultural differences, reasserted 
cultural identity, reestablished cultural autonomy, and helped maintain tribal sovereignty. At the same 
time, the Apache depended on cultural exchange with federal land management agencies to successfully 
manage their eco-cultural resources. Exchange also facilitated the development of a labor force 
conversant with Western science and technology, which aided communication across cultural 
boundaries.  
By the 1990s, the Apache had earned the political capital to resist universal applications of federal 
land management policies such as the Endangered Species Act, while simultaneously creating 
opportunities for cultural exchange with federal agencies, state agencies, NGOs, and academic 
institutions that benefitted the Tribe. The physical and social results of exchange formed eco-cultural 
hybridizations of science, technology, and the landscape. Unfortunately though, because the Apache 
held jurisdiction over valuable natural resources, they remained subject to outside perspectives – 
environmentalists, federal agencies, private industry – that didn‟t always have the Apache people‟s best 
interests in mind, constituting a perpetual threat to tribal sovereignty. The Tribe had long learned that 
their continued survival required a sustained vigilance in terms of protecting their eco-cultural resources.  
Even though the Apache continued to acquire Western traits, they always employed Western science 
and technology to ensure the continuity of the Apache way. Furthermore, concealed under this Western 
veneer, the Apache hybridized the Apache way with the Euro-American way.  In the 1990s the White 
Mountain Apache intensified this process, while fashioning a distinct cultural mark on the reservation 
landscape. Foremost, they began erasing past eco-cultural atrocities. As they gained almost complete 
control over eco-cultural resources, a whole slew of new restoration projects emerged: the Watershed 

 
 
326 
 
Restoration Program, Western Apache Placenames Project, and a number of endangered species 
restoration projects, to name a few. Instead of the BIA, FWS, and the AGFD, the Apache controlled the 
future appearance of their homeland.   
Apache restoration projects began incorporating Apache local knowledge, land management 
philosophies, historical knowledge of the landscape, and cultural traditions. For instance, many members 
of the White Mountain Apache Tribe viewed ecological restoration as a logical extension of traditional 
Apache agricultural practices. In a sense, they perceived themselves as coming full circle with their 
history when participating in restoration work. As the Apache gained control of natural resources, they 
even tweaked some Western-designed techniques such as controlled burns to better accommodate tribal 
needs. In addition, all Apache restoration projects addressed cultural concerns. Whether restoring entire 
sacred sites, endangered species, or the ecological function of a stream, the Tribe consulted local Apache 
about the possibility of including cultural elements into a project.  Most importantly restoration projects 
incorporated Apache local knowledge, intimate understandings of the reservation‟s natural history, 
animal behavior, plant distributions, and environmental idiosyncrasies. Although a substantive 
hybridization of Apache and Western knowledge emerged in the 1990s, the Apache continued to grapple 
with defining the nature of this new knowledge production system.  
The restoration of the Apache‟s economic base and eco-cultural resources, although much different 
from their historic subsistence lifestyle, expanded their capacity to self-govern. During the 1990s the 
White Mountain Apache built the bureaucratic capability to deal with both managing and restoring eco-
cultural resources on a large scale. Moreover, this capability allowed the tribe to monitor and develop 
relationships with federal, state, academic, and private sectors. The tribal government divided the 
WMRE into several divisions, including the Tribal Game and Fish Department. They created a Tribal 
Forestry office to monitor the Fort Apache Timber Company (FATCO) and the BIA‟s management of 

 
 
327 
 
tribal forest resources. And they established the Resource Planning Division to coordinate the growing 
number of tribal enterprises and natural resource management projects.  
Through their increased capacity for self-governance, the White Mountain Apache elaborated on the 
process of resistance and exchange, soliciting more partnerships with land management agencies, 
academic institutions, and private consultants (Fig. 13). These partnerships in turn buttressed and 
increased the Tribe‟s technical expertise. More importantly, the Apache controlled the dialogue. For the 
most part, they set the terms, insisting on a respectful, equal engagement between themselves and their 
partners.  Of particular note, the Tribe increased reliance on non-governmental entities to evaluate 
federal agency trust responsibilities and legal interventions into tribal affairs. For example, the Tribe 
partnered with the Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development (HPAIED) to increase 
the efficacy of their enterprises and natural resource management departments. In terms of restoration, 
the Tribe worked with HPAIED to conduct studies that defined the constraints the Endangered Species 
Act would impinge on tribal economic development, designed a more efficient and culturally relevant 
natural resource management program, and developed a permanent Land Restoration Fund.5   
As the Apache assumed almost full control of restoration and management of tribal resources, new 
responsibilities and struggles emerged. The discovery of a large number of threatened and endangered 
species on the reservation, an increased frequency of cataclysmic wildfires, a growing distrust among 
the Apache people of tribal bureaucracy, and funding all the necessary restoration work emerged as new 
challenges for the Tribe. These struggles along with others, therefore, necessitated that resistance to and 
exchanges with Western society continue. Ronnie Lupe articulated this circumstance well when he 
                                                 
5 Dan Sieman, Overcoming Conflicts with the Endangered Species Act (John F. Kennedy School of Government: 
Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development, 1993); Jonathan W. Long, Building Connections: A 
Strategy to Integrate Resource Management (John F. Kennedy School of Government: Harvard Project on 
American Indian Economic Development, 1994); Russell A. Calleros and Anna Ling, Maximizing the Impact of 
the Restoration Fund: Policies the White Mountain Apache Tribe Can Use to Manage the 22-H Fund (John F. 
Kennedy School of Government: Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development, 1997). 

 
 
328 
 
 
White Mountain Apache: 
1. Cultural appropriation of 
Western S & T 
2. Political autonomy – 
maintaining sovereignty 
3. Moving towards self-
sufficiency (restoration 
of natural resources – 
economic base) 
4. Training of skilled labor 
(WMAT become experts) 
5. Cultural, Religious, and 
Ecological restoration 
Federal Government: 
1. WMAT local knowledge 
& management 
philosophy 
2. A place to work on 
research problems 
3. Wilderness preservation 
4. Endangered species 
conservation 
5. Model of collaborative 
research/decentralization 
of knowledge production 
Ecological 
Restoration:  
S & T site of 
resistance and 
exchange 
Government to Government Relationship 
Fig. 13 – Ecological Restoration became a site of resistance and exchange that helped create and 
stabilize a government-to-government relationship with state and federal land management agencies. 

 
 
329 
 
remarked, “We must take the best of the white man‟s world and blend it with ours. We must develop our 
resources and become strong. Only then can we expect to retain our traditional ways. A strong man can 
make his own path.” 1  
The rest of this chapter illustrates how the Apache built upon their long-term survival strategy of 
resistance and exchange to create a sophisticated mediating system that allowed the Apache to continue 
adopting Western science and technology while reinforcing the Apache way. To ensure a continuity of 
Apache traditions with the past, an epistemological restoration proved necessary. In terms of ecological 
restoration, this meant increasingly hybridizing tribal knowledge and culture with Western science. I 
present four examples of how the Tribe accomplished this in connection with the restoration of their 
homeland, the survival of the Apache way, and the maintenance of tribal sovereignty. First, I examine 
the cultural significance of the Apache adopting the ecosystem management philosophy as a guiding 
framework for restoration work. Second, I demonstrate how the Tribe turned the potential threat to 
sovereignty associated with the Endangered Species Act into an opportunity for cultural restoration. 
Third, I outline how the Tribe redirected financial compensation derived from a lawsuit to fund long-
term watershed restoration work, build expertise, and integrate Apache traditions into restoration 
projects. Fourth, through an analysis of several cultural revitalization projects, I reinforce the close 
connection between cultural and ecological restoration for the Apache people.  
 
The Connection between the Philosophy of Ecosystem Management and the Traditional Apache 
Subsistence System  
According to Eva Watt, a tribal elder and watershed restoration project advisor, many techniques 
currently employed in watershed restoration projects have historical homologies in Apache farming and 
                                                 
1 Quote taken from Bill Hess, “The White Mountain Apache: Seeking the Best of Two Worlds,” National 
Geographic 157 (1980): 272-290, p. 275. 

 
 
330 
 
horticultural traditions. Reseeding, transplanting plants, thinning and removal of vegetation, protecting 
culturally important plants from animals, crop rotation, prescribed burns, and erosion control all had 
precedents in Apache land management practices.2 Despite this continuity with the past, cultural 
intrusions modified the historical Apache farming and horticultural techniques. For instance, solar-
powered electric fences, bulldozers, radio telemetry, and electronic aquatic monitoring devices were all 
twentieth-century Western technologies that infiltrated the Apache way of life. However, according to 
cultural advisors, it‟s not a matter of what was traditional or non-traditional or the form of technological 
intervention, but the “mindset” of the person using these tools. Apache reason dictates that “patience, 
commitment, and adaptability” are key features of a proper “mindset.” An Apache heavy equipment 
operator working on a recent restoration project explained this philosophy: “You go to a place and do 
some work for it. You let it rest, and then you come back to it to see what it has done. Then it thanks 
you.” From there you make adjustments and decide the next line of action.3 
This Apache disposition towards the land embodies the Tribe‟s cultural fit with the philosophy of 
ecosystem management. This land management practice and philosophy began to emerge as federal 
policy within Euro-American land management agencies in the early 1990s. Ecosystem management, 
broadly defined, is a pragmatic attempt to flexibly manage ecosystems through social and ecological 
experimentation by bringing together local stakeholders with the intent of seeking ecologically 
sustainable management decisions. This philosophy takes as a given that different interest groups project 
multiple values onto the land. Furthermore, it assumes that ecosystems are dynamic and subject to 
                                                 
2 Jonathan W. Long, Aregai Tecle, and Benrita Burnette, “Cultural foundations for ecological restoration on the 
White Mountain Apache Reservation,” Conservation Ecology 8 (2003): 4. [online] URL:  
http://www.consecol.org/vol8/iss1/art4. 
3 Ibid. 

 
 
331 
 
unpredictable social and environmental events. Therefore, any attempt to manage natural resources 
through long-term predictive models proves untenable.4  
The philosophy of ecosystem management evolved as a result of the failures of utilitarian 
conservation practices, which sought to create simplified, efficient ecosystems based on linear models of 
nature.  Land managers that projected these models of nature onto highly complex, unpredictable, and 
dynamic systems yielded disastrous ecological results that our society continues to contend with today. 
Utilitarian conservationists also tended to operate from a universalist position, neglecting local social 
and cultural needs, which often led to community discontent and marginalization. Their management 
schemes also tended to benefit a small subset of the communities affected.5 Indeed, the history of land 
management on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation has been a testimony to the failure of such a 
management strategy. As a result of these failures, the Apache have abandoned the sustained-yield 
management practices initiated by the BIA during the Indian New Deal and adopted the ecosystem 
management philosophy. However, unlike with Western land management agencies, the adoption of this 
philosophy made immediate sense. Many aspects of this philosophy felt compatible with Apache 
traditions.  
The Apache came to realize that restoring the eco-cultural resources of their homeland required 
incorporating a diversity of values into restoration work. Historically for the Apache, balancing 
economic, cultural, religious, and ecological values proved integral to their survival. Because of the 
unpredictable and diverse nature of their homeland, the Apache evolved a highly flexible and adaptive 
subsistence system. Embedded in Apache culture is a flexible outlook for dealing with the uncertainty of 
                                                 
4 Hannah J. Cortner and Margaret A. Moote, The Politics of Ecosystem Management (Washington, D.C.: Island 
Press, 1999); Bryan G. Norton, Sustainability: A Philosophy of Adaptive Ecosystem Management (Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 2005). 
5Paul Hirt, A Conspiracy of Optimism: Management of the National Forests since World War II (Lincoln, NE: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1994); Nancy Langston, Where Land and Water Meet: A Western Landscape 
Transformed (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2003). 

 
 
332 
 
acquiring resources.6 Past White Mountain Apache adaptive behavior to a variable and unpredictable 
mountainous environment created a social disposition compatible with the ecosystem management 
philosophy.  
Prior to the reservation era, White Mountain Apache bands alternated seasonally among four basic 
subsistence strategies: raiding, farming, gathering, and hunting. Through many generations of living in 
the same region they learned how they could best exploit and manage their local environments (See 
Chapter 1). Michael Graves, an archaeologist who studies Apache subsistence systems, argues that 
Apache irrigation technology associated with this adaptive survival strategy was more environmentally 
congruent with the ecological dynamics of the White Mountains than the previous occupants of the 
region, a mix of Mogollon and Anasazi cultures. They only maintained the structures during the summer 
and fall months, thus preventing significant erosion and siltation problems. Furthermore, the Apache 
learned to adjust their four-tiered subsistence system to the local conditions of their settlements. For 
instance, some bands relied more on farming with a mix of hunting and collecting, whereas others 
depended more on the latter strategies. The mix of strategies a particular band employed depended upon 
the availability of resources.7 These adaptations probably required a trial and error (learn as you go) 
experimental approach that adjusted the local subsistence system to a heterogeneous environment. This 
complex system of indigenous management in many ways mimicked the natural flows of the local 
ecosystem. Arguably, the Apache subsistence system is akin to current ecosystem management 
philosophies.8 This contrasts with settlers and later land managers of the Western tradition, who insisted 
                                                 
6 Michael W. Graves, “Apache Adaptations to the Mountains,” In Cholla Project Archaelology: The Q Ranch 
Region, Vol. 3, J. Jefferson Reid, ed. (Tucson, Arizona: Arizona State Museum, 1982) , pp. 193-215; P. Bion 
Griffin, Mark P. Leone, and Keith H. Basso, “Western Apache Ecology: From Horticulture to Agriculture,” in 
Apachean Culture, History, and Ethnology, Keith H. Basso and Morris E. Opler, eds. (Tucson, AZ: The 
University of Arizona Press, 1971), 69-76. 
7 Graves, “Apache Adaptations to the Mountains,” pp. 212-214. 
8 Frikit Berkes and Carl Folke, “Back to the Future: Ecosystem Dynamics and Local Knowledge,” in Panarchy: 
Understanding Transformations in Human and Natural Systems, Lance H. Gunderson and C.S. Holling, eds. 

 
 
333 
 
on imposing an order incongruent with the range of possible sustainable practices for a given 
environment. In essence, the White Mountain Apache may have been practicing a rudimentary form of 
ecosystem management that treated the environment as complex, variable, unpredictable, and multi-
linear.9   
In the 1990s this same philosophy resurfaced as the Tribe attempted to integrate a large number of 
restoration projects that operated on multiple scales and addressed multiple social, political, cultural, and 
ecological concerns. The nature and efficacy of this integration remains in flux. As the Apache seek to 
restore their watersheds, forests, grazing lands, along with maintaining a “wilderness” feel for their 
tourist clients, they continue to struggle with what works and what doesn‟t. Challenges from past 
mismanagement of their lands, political confrontations with the federal government, persisting water 
rights struggles, ongoing issues with budget shortfalls, poverty, education, alcoholism, and drug abuse 
all work against the Apache goal of integrating restoration work into an ecosystem management 
framework. Nevertheless, while many of these issues remain obstacles to progress, ecological 
restoration acts as a counter to these impediments.  Furthermore, the fact that the Apache employed the 
                                                                                                                                                                         
(Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2002), 121-146. See also, Charles R. Menzies, ed., Traditional Ecological 
Knowledge and Natural Resource Management (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2006); Iain 
Davidson-Hunt and Frikit Berkes, “Learning as You Journey: Anishinaabe Perception of Social-ecological 
Environments and Adaptive Learning,” Conservation Ecology 8 (2003): 5 [online] URL: 
http://www.consecol.org/vol8/iss1/art5; Erin Sherry and Heather Myers, “Traditional Environmental Knowledge 
in Practice,” Society and Natural Resources 15 (2002): 345-358; Frikit Berkes, Johan Colding, and Carl Folke, 
“Rediscovery of Traditional Ecological Knowledge as Adaptive Management,” Ecological Applications 10 
(October, 2000): 1251-1262; Frikit Berkes, Mina Kislalioglu, Carl Folke, and Madhav Gadgil, “Exploring the 
Basic Ecological Unit: Ecosystem-like Concepts in Traditional Societies,” Ecosystems 1 (1998): 409-415.  
9 Of course this sort of flexibly adaptive management of local environments was not unique to the White 
Mountain Apache. Documentation of native culture‟s intimate understanding of their homelands is extensive. In 
particular, Frikit Berkes advocates that the ecosystem management philosophy, although not in modern ecological 
terms, was an inherent part of the Algonquin people. At the very least, most Native American groups had 
developed complex management systems that both shaped and mimicked the natural flows of their respective 
ecosystems. For examples of the Algonquin people in the northeast see Cronon, Changes in the Land; Berkes, 
“Common-property Resource Management and Cree Indian Fisheries in Subarctic Canada.” For tribes in the 
Southeastern United States see Timothy Silver, A New Face on the Countryside: Indians, Colonists, and Slaves in 
South Atlantic Forests, 1500-1800 (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 1990); Merrell, “The Indians‟ 
New World: The Catawba Experience.” For the Plains Indians see White, Roots of Dependency. For the 
California Indian see Anderson, Tending the Wild. 

 
 
334 
 
ecosystem management philosophy earned them political capital in battles with the federal government 
to control natural resources on the reservation.  For instance, adhering to this philosophy aided the 
Apache in their battle with the FWS to control endangered species restoration. 
 
The Endangered Species Act, Sovereignty, and Apache Culture  
Environmental legislation enacted prior to the 1980s failed to specifically address Indian country, 
leaving ambiguous the implementation of these laws on reservations. Because Indian tribes are 
sovereigns and the federal government has limited powers on reservations, many court battles ensued 
over how and whether environmental laws should apply to reservation lands.10 Furthermore, 
environmental legislation became a double-edged sword for American Indians. On the one hand, it 
helped them protect and restore resources, but on the other hand, the application of this legislation to 
tribal lands often threatened tribal sovereignty, cultural traditions, and economic development. In many 
cases, legislation such as the National Environmental Policy Act and the Clean Water Act amounted to a 
net benefit for tribes. For instance, beginning in the 1970s, NEPA endowed tribes with a voice that they 
previously didn‟t have with respect to federal projects within Indian country, especially in instances 
when projects jeopardized cultural resources.11 Yet, the Endangered Species Act (ESA) also burdened 
Native American nations with a disproportionate responsibility for the restoration and protection of 
plants and animals nearing extinction. This situation resulted from the fact that many reservations 
remained relatively undeveloped, isolated from large cities, or had been managed to enhance eco-
tourism potential, turning them de facto into the last haven for many threatened and endangered species. 
                                                 
10 Dean Suagee, “Tribal Governments and the Protection of Watersheds and Wetlands in Indian Country,” St. 
Thomas Law Review 13 (2000): 35-64. 
11 Dean Suagee, “NEPA in Indian Country: Compliance Requirement to Decision-Making Tool,” in Justice and 
Natural Resources: Concepts, Strategies, and Applications, K.M. Mutz, G.C. Bryner, and D.S. Kenney eds., 
(Washington, DC: Island Press, 2002), 225-252. On the Clean Water Act, see the EPA website for the numerous 
programs funded by the EPA for water quality and wetland restoration on reservations. 

 
 
335 
 
The irony in all this was not lost on Native Americans.12 The White Mountain Apache in particular have 
pointed out that the environmental harms that caused the decline of most endangered species originated 
with activities associated with non-Indian economic development.  
Despite the White Mountain Apache‟s continued success with Apache trout restoration under the 
ESA, this law became a major economic impediment for the Tribe in the early 1990s. Once again the 
federal government threatened tribal sovereignty, and moreover, hindered the ability of the Apaches to 
sustain their culture and economy. Because the Fort Apache Indian Reservation remained remote, less 
developed, and less exploited than many other areas in the Southwest, it provided a refuge for many 
species of plants and animals that had been extirpated in more developed regions. This situation, 
therefore, presented both a blessing and a curse to the Tribe. On the one hand, relatively healthy 
ecosystems attract tourists, a major source of revenue for the Apaches. On the other hand, critical habitat 
designations potentially restricted the development of recreational infrastructure such as roads, 
sanitation systems, and reservoirs. A critical habitat designation was the tool that Congress provided the 
FWS for protecting threatened and endangered species. Through these designations, if the FWS 
determined that a human activity may harm a threatened or endangered species, they exercised their 
authority to halt that activity.13 
                                                 
12 Endangered Species Act 16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq Charles Wilkinson, “The Role of Bilateralism in Fulfilling the 
Federal-Tribal Relationship: The Tribal Rights-Endangered Species Secretarial Order,” Washington Law Review 
72 (1997): 1063-1088, p. 1072; Sandi B. Zellmer, “Indian Lands as Critical Habitat for Indian Nations and 
Endangered Species: Tribal Survival and Sovereignty Come First,” San Diego Law Review 43 (1998): 381-437. 
Oddly enough, after requesting for habitat protection under ESA, several Native American groups have had 
trouble receiving support from the FWS. See Ruth Langridge, “The Right to Habitat Protection,” Public Land and 
Resources Law Review 29 (2008): 41-62.   
13 For an overview of the ESA, see Bean, The Evolution of National Wildlife Law, pp. 193-283; Czech and 
Krausman, The Endangered Species Act. 

 
 
336 
 
Historically, several tribes in the Pacific Northwest and Southwest had already experienced 
significant disputes with the FWS over the implementation of ESA on tribal lands.14 Because of this 
history, the White Mountain Apache braced for a conflict with the FWS when university and FWS 
biologists began discovering threatened and endangered species on Fort Apache in the late 1980s. The 
Council‟s initial response to this imminent confrontation was to restrict access to the reservation to non-
tribal biologists, halt all Tribal Game and Fish Department non-harvestable flora and fauna surveys, and 
orders the BIA not to disseminate plant and wildlife data to other governmental agencies. The Council 
believed that restricting data flow from the reservation lessened the chance that the FWS would take 
action. However, even limited knowledge about the presence of threatened and endangered species was 
enough for the FWS to act. In fact, as was later determined by a HPAIED consultant, this strategy 
created a worse situation for the Tribe, the ESA mandated the FWS to act on the basis of the “best 
available data.” In the eyes of the FWS, less data required more drastic measures. 15  
As of 1993, thirty-one threatened, endangered, candidate, or proposed species resided within the 
reservation boundaries.16 Several of these species – Arizona willow, Mexican spotted owl, and loach 
minnow – received a great deal of attention because university biologists and local environmental 
groups pressured the FWS to protect them from further harm. The proposed critical habitat designations 
involved potentially dire economic and health consequences for the Apache. The Tribe not only 
expressed economic concerns, but they also believed that the FWS had called into question their ability 
to manage reservation lands. In essence, the FWS‟s actions potentially threatened the “Apache way,” 
                                                 
14 Robert J. Miller, “Speaking with Forked Toungues: Indian Treaties, Salmon, and the Endangered Species Act,” 
Oregon Law Review 70 (Fall, 1991): 544-584; Adrian N. Hansen, “The Endangered Species Act and Extinction of 
Reserved Indian Water Rights on the San Juan River,” Arizona Law Review 37 (1995): 1305-1344; Robert 
Laurence, “The Bald Eagle, The Florida Panther, and the Nation‟s Word: An Essay on the „Quiet‟ Abrogation of 
Indian Treaties and the Proper Reading of United States v. Dion,” Journal of Land Use and Environmental Law 4 
(Summer, 1988): 1-21. 
15 Sieman, Overcoming Conflicts with the Endangered Species Act, p. 4.  
16 Ibid., p. 2. 

 
 
337 
 
thus tribal sovereignty. According to the Apache, “The pressures of environmentalists and the 
Ecological Services Branch of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to manage our lands for a single 
species was a contradiction to our view of life.” In response, the Tribe once again challenged Western 
management philosophy. Echoing one of the main criticisms of the ESA at the time, the Tribe claimed 
an ecosystem approach to land management was more effective than managing for a single species: “In 
our Apache tradition… we strive to protect the land and all the life forms that it supports… The diversity 
of our land provides habitat for a wide variety of plants and animals and each is important to us.” 17 
Ultimately, however, because of their sovereign status, the Apache strongly asserted that the ESA 
shouldn‟t apply to them or any other Native American group, a position that would, in part, prevail. 
In 1993 critical habitat designations jeopardized one major infrastructure project and the revenue 
generating potential of two tribal enterprises. The proposed designation for the loach minnow along the 
White River impeded the Miner Flats water works project, a project tribal officials claimed was 
necessary for providing better sanitation and much-needed water to drier areas of the reservation. Two 
species, the Arizona willow and Mexican spotted owl, threatened the operations of the Tribe‟s two 
largest employers and revenue generators: the Sunrise Ski Resort and FATCO. Together these 
enterprises supplied the Tribe with 85% of their revenue and over 500 jobs.18 FWS warned that the Tribe 
might have to shut down portions of the Ski Resort and stop further development due to the close 
proximity of Arizona willow populations to the resort‟s ski slopes and snow making machine. Of even 
greater concern was the potential shutdown of FATCO because of spotted owl habitat. The Tribe 
                                                 
17 Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner: Congress Hears about our Relationship with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service,” Fort Apache Scout 34 (August 4, 1995): 2. 
18 Ibid., p. 1; “Two-thirds of Tribal Income Threatened by Endangered Species Act,” Fort Apache Scout 31 (April 
2, 1993): 1. 

 
 
338 
 
estimated, depending on the nature of the shutdown, that FATCO could lose between 10 and 30 million 
dollars.19  
Ronnie Lupe found irony in this situation. Legislation designed to save endangered species from 
extinction would possibly hasten the extinction of his people. Relating this concern to a college audience 
in the early 1990s, Lupe stated, “Miner Flat started long ago, and I can‟t even get it off the ground. This 
was subsidized by your money and my money, too. I need help. I have a very long ways to go. I am the 
endangered species. If all of these endangered species can stop projects, we are in trouble with our 
development on our reservation.”20 In this speech and several appearances before Congress, Lupe 
assured everyone that the Apache people cared about threatened and endangered species. However, the 
issue on the reservation was not about whether to protect these species – they had always planned to do 
so. In his view, it remained about infringement upon the Tribe‟s sovereign right to manage their 
resources. History and current actions demonstrated that the Tribe had both economic and cultural 
interests in preserving and restoring endangered species on Fort Apache. The Apache trout restoration 
project offered a prime example. And eventually, the Tribe would demonstrate that their past 
management practices in general were a major reason for the survival of Mexican spotted owls, loach 
minnows, and Arizona willows. Another irony that Lupe noted was that primarily Euro-American 
economic expansion into the West impoverished the populations of these species. And now that some of 
the few remaining places that these species thrived happened to be on Indian reservations, Euro-
                                                 
19 “Known as a Great Predator, The Spotted Owl may make Logging on the Reservation its next Victim,” Fort 
Apache Scout 31 (March 19, 1993); “Tribe Protests Agency‟s move to Declare Reservation Land Critical Habitat 
for Willow,” Fort Apache Scout 31 (February 19, 1993): 1; Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner: U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, The Latest Trespasser trying to Seize our Resources,” Fort Apache Scout 32 (March 18, 1994): 
2. 
20 Ronnie Lupe, “Comments of the Chairman of the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council,” in Indian Water – 
1997 Trends and Directions in Federal Water Policy, Ted Olinger, ed. (Boulder, CO: Report to the Western 
Water Policy Review Advisory Commission, 1997), 38-44. 

 
 
339 
 
Americans desired the preservation of these places.21 According to Lupe, the whole situation amounted 
to another Euro-American attempt to seize valuable tribal land. 
Feeling that his people would suffer an undue burden from the ESA, Lupe‟s actions went beyond 
orations at Congressional hearings, speeches at natural resource management conferences, and public 
appearances at major universities. First, the Tribal Council passed a resolution in March of 1994 
prohibiting FWS officials from entering the reservation without a tribal permit. According to Lupe, this 
official pronouncement forced the hand of the FWS, sending the message that “they had generated a 
potentially serious tribal-federal confrontation and sought ways of ameliorating the situation.”22  
Through this window of opportunity and in consultation with the HPAIED, Lupe pioneered one of 
the most forward thinking mechanisms for negotiations between federal land management agencies and 
tribal governments. Lupe began a dialogue through an intermediary, Joseph Kalt of the HPAIED, with 
Mollie Beattie, Director of the FWS. Kalt helped set up a meeting between Lupe and Beattie at a 
“neutral site” in Washington, D.C. They met in a park, as Lupe requested, with “the sound of trees and 
flowers, with the sounds of birds mingled with laughing children.”23 With no attorneys present, the two 
hashed out their differences. In terms of management philosophy, Lupe found a like mind. Beattie, the 
first woman director of the FWS, had a reputation for establishing amiable relationships with ranchers, 
farmers, hunters, and timber interests, despite her allegiance to the ESA. She also brought to the FWS an 
ecosystem management philosophy that had just emerged as a solution to the volatile spotted owl 
                                                 
21 Testimony of Chairman Ronnie Lupe, White Mountain Apache Tribe, Endangered Species Act 
Reauthorization: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Drinking Water, Fisheries, and Wildlife of the Senate 
Committee on Environmental Public Works, 104th Congress (1995). 
22 Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner: The Exercise of Tribal Sovereignty Lies at the Heart of Healthy 
Ecosystems,” Fort Apache Scout 35 (May 24, 1996): 2. 
23 Quote taken from David H. Getches, Charles F Wilkinson, and Robert A. Williams, Jr., Cases and Materials on 
Federal Indian Law (St. Paul, MN: West Group, 1998), p. 732. 

 
 
340 
 
controversy in the Pacific Northwest.24 Working from that common ground, Lupe used past 
management successes, such as the Apache trout recovery effort and the technical abilities of the Tribe‟s 
Game and Fish Department, as evidence that the Tribe was capable of managing vulnerable species 
without FWS interference.  
Lupe also presented a number of current plans that indicated that past Apache land management 
decisions were primary reasons why threatened and endangered species continued to thrive on the 
reservation. For instance, the Mexican spotted owl flourished there because the Tribe voluntarily cut 
back on the allowable cut from 90 million board feet to 55 million board feet in the mid-1980s. This 
decision wasn‟t based on a single species, but for consideration of the entire reservation ecosystem, 
which the Apache depended on for their livelihood. With the Tribe‟s growing capacity to understand and 
monitor the BIA‟s management strategy, they realized that the Bureau had been recommending 
unsustainable allowable cuts.25 At this time, the Tribe also adopted an uneven aged timber management 
strategy, thus leaving a more diverse array of young to old growth habitats for all species on the 
reservation. Furthermore, Lupe stressed that tribal traditions also served as an effective management 
tool: “For Apaches any owl is a „messenger‟ [of death] and we leave them all alone. In fact, we go out of 
our way to avoid them.” Lupe also relayed to Beattie similar plans that applied the ecosystem 
management approach for the loach minnow and the Arizona willow.26 
                                                 
24 Barry Walden Walsh, “The Ecosystem Thinking of Mollie Hanna Beattie,” American Forests (May/June, 
1994): 13-16; Patrick Leahy, “Tribute to Mollie H. Beattie,” Vermont Law Review 21 (1996-1997): 735-736.  
25 On the decision to decrease allowable cut see White Mountain Apache Tribe v. United States; Ronnie Lupe, 
“Chairman‟s Corner,” Fort Apache Scout 29 (December 14, 1990): 2. 
26 Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner: Our Tribe‟s Ability to Stay Ahead of the Game is Why we are still Logging 
our Forests,” Fort Apache Scout 34 (September 15, 1995): 2; Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner: The Exercise of Tribal 
Sovereignty Lies at the Heart of Healthy Ecosystems.” On the Arizona willow see Fish and Wildlife Service, 50 
CFR Part 17,  “Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Withdrawal of Proposed Rule to List the Plant 
Salix arizonica (Arizona willow) as Endangered With Critical Habitat,” Federal Register 60 (April 28, 1995): 
20951-20952; On the loach minnow see Fish and Wildlife Service, 50 CFR Part 17,  “Endangered and Threatened 
Wildlife and Plants; Proposed Designation of Critical Habitat for the Spikedace and Loach Minnow,” Federal 
Register 71 (October 4, 2006): 58574-58575. 

 
 
341 
 
From this dialogue came a Statement of Relationship between the Tribe and the FWS. Lupe and 
Beattie signed it in the Tribal Council Chambers on Fort Apache on December 6, 1994.27 Ultimately, the 
agreement reaffirmed a government-to-government relationship: 
Tribal sovereignty [White Mountain Apache Tribe] and Service [FWS] legal mandates, as 
applied by the Service, have appeared to conflict in the past, but both the Tribe and the Service 
believe that a working relationship that reconciles the two within a bilateral government-to-
government framework will reduce the potential for future conflicts.28 
 
The “Guiding Precepts” of the Statement emphasized that the FWS recognized “the Tribe‟s aboriginal 
rights, sovereign authority, and institutional capacity to self-manage the lands and resources within the 
Fort Apache Indian Reservation.” The Statement also laid out the responsibilities of the Tribe to 
continue updating their wildlife management program and develop management plans under 
consultation with the FWS that “will direct the assessment, management, and restoration of ecosystems 
in accordance with tribal values.”29 Once the Tribe presented an adequate management plan to the FWS, 
the restrictions of critical habitat designations no longer applied. Currently, all critical habitat 
designations that address species on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation make exceptions for the 
Apaches. For instance, in a recent federal register notice (October 4, 2006), the FWS stated: 
We determined that the following tribes have lands containing features essential to the 
conservation of the spikedace and loach minnow: Yavapai Apache, San Carlos Apache, and 
White Mountain Apache. We also proposed to exclude lands of the San Carlos Apache Tribe and 
lands of the White Mountain Apache Tribe based upon our relationship with the Tribes and their 
management plans developed for the spikedace and loach minnow.30  
 
                                                 
27 Charles Wilkinson, “The Role of Bilateralism in Fulfilling the Federal-Tribal Relationship.” 
28 The entire text of the “Statement of Relationship” can be found in Getches et al., Cases and Materials on 
Federal Indian Law, 733-734. In general, the Clinton Adminstration emphasized cooperating and establishing a 
government-to-government relationship with Native American groups during the 1990s. See “Presidential 
Memorandum on Government-to-Government Relations with Native American Tribal Governments,” Federal 
Register 59 (May 4, 1994): 22951; “Executive Order 13084: Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal 
Governments,” Federal Register 63 (May 14, 1998): 27655. 
29 “Statement of Relationship.” 
30 FWS, “Proposed Designation of Critical Habitat for the Spikedace and Loach Minnow.”  

 
 
342 
 
As hinted at in the above notice, the Statement of Relationship, which was specific to the White 
Mountain Apaches, would eventually hold implications for tribes all across the United States. Despite 
the Apache‟s successful negotiation with the FWS, other American Indian groups continued to struggle 
with the implementation of ESA on tribal lands. Soon after Ronnie Lupe signed the Statement of 
Relationship, a large number of tribal representatives, including Lupe, gathered at a series of summits 
held by the American Indian Resources Institute. The Institute organized the summit with the intention 
of finding a solution for the ESA problem within Indian country. After much deliberation, this working 
group decided that the White Mountain Apache‟s Statement of Relationship provided an exemplary 
model of how to effectively diffuse potential conflicts between the FWS and tribes. They fashioned a 
proposal and presented it to Secretary of Interior Bruce Babbitt in 1996.31 In June 1997, after another 
long series of negotiations between tribal representatives and federal officials, Babbitt and Bill Daley, 
Secretary of Commerce, signed Secretarial Order 3206, “American Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribal 
Trust Responsibilities, and the Endangered Species Act.”32 The agreement struck between the FWS and 
Lupe became the template for nation-wide policy concerning Native Americans and the ESA. Early 
indications suggest this historic agreement hasn‟t proved effective for all Native American groups, but 
for Tribes with robust management capacities, it has helped smooth poor relations with the FWS.33  
Currently, endangered species programs and associated restoration work flourish on many reservations, 
including the Fort Apache Indian Reservation.34 
                                                 
31 Charles Wilkinson, “The Role of Bilateralism in Fulfilling the Federal-Tribal Relationship.” 
32 Ken Burton, “Babbitt, Commerce Secretary Daley Sign Historic Order on Native Americans,” Fish & Wildlife 
News (September, 1997): 5; Jeff Barker, “Indians Agree to Species Pact,” Arizona Republic (June 12, 1997): A1, 
A12. 
33 Marren Sanders, Implementing the Federal Endangered Species Act in Indian Country: The Promise and 
Reality of Secretarial Order 3206 (Tucson, AZ: Joint Occasional Papers on Native Affairs, 2007). 
34 See especially Curt Mack, Jim Holyan, and Isaac Babcock, Restoration and Management of Gray Wolves in 
Central Idaho: Progress Report 2004 (Lapawai, ID: Nez Perce Tribe, Department of Wildlife Management, 
2005); Elizabeth Grossman, “Nez Perce Tribe Welcomes Wolves Back to Idaho,” Orion Afield  6 (Spring 2002): 
18-19;  S. Torbit and J. McNaught, Restoring the Prairie, Mending the Sacred Hoop: Prairie Conservation and 

 
 
343 
 
 For instance, the White Mountain Apache partnered with the FWS and a number of environmental 
groups on restoration work for the razorback sucker, the Southwestern willow flycatcher, and the bald 
eagle, just to name a few.35 In perhaps one of their most controversial moves, the Tribe agreed to 
participate in the Mexican Wolf Recovery Program led by the National Wildlife Federation and the 
FWS. Initially, White Mountain Apache ranchers and the Tribal Game and Fish Department raised 
serious objections to participation in the Program. In 1995 the Tribal Council outlined these concerns in 
the draft Environmental Impact Statement, stating that they would not participate. The Tribal Game and 
Fish Department feared wolves would cut into the trophy bull elk population and the ranchers worried 
about wolves preying on cattle.  Moreover, the tribal government remained concerned about potential 
threats to sovereignty.36 In order to participate, the Tribe demanded a great deal of latitude to address 
potential problems arising from accepting wolf populations, mainly with protecting elk herds and cattle. 
If they had a problem wolf, they didn‟t want to be hamstrung by FWS regulations.37  
As early as October 1997, the Tribe began to change its mind. To learn more about the Wolf 
Recovery Program, Lupe, along with the Tribal Attorney Robert Brauchli, visited the Mexican Wolf 
Management Facility in Sevilleta, New Mexico. Upon arriving, Lupe heard the wolves howl, and the 
sound invoked ancient memories: “[I]t was a beautiful and eerie sound, one that I had not heard since I 
was a boy in Cibecue.”38  In March of 1998, the FWS released eleven wolves into Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forest. Two of these wolves wandered onto Fort Apache. After much deliberation, the Tribal 
Council allowed them to stay. In further negotiations, the Tribe stipulated that their inclusion in the Wolf 
                                                                                                                                                                         
Restoration of the Cheyenne River Reservation (National Wildlife Federation and Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, 
2003). 
35 Sarah E. Rinkevich and Stuart C. Leon, “Stakeholders Assist Species Recovery in the Southwest,” Endangered 
Species Bulletin 25 (2000): 1-2. 
36 Steve Pavlik, “San Carlos and White Mountain Apache Attitudes toward the Reintroduction of the Mexican 
Wolf to Its Historic Range in the American Southwest,” Wicazo Sa Review 14 (Spring, 1999): 129-145. 
37 Jo Baeza, “Chairman Negotiates with Fish & Wildlife on Wolf Management,” Fort Apache Scout 36 (January 
20, 1998): 1. 
38 Baeza, “Chairman Negotiates with Fish & Wildlife on Wolf Management.” 

 
 
344 
 
Recovery Program would require that the Tribe maintain full control of operations on Fort Apache, 
financial resources to hire a full-time Apache wildlife biologist to monitor reservation wolf populations, 
and compensation for any cattle loss due to wolf predation.  The FWS and the Wildlife Federation 
agreed to these demands and in 2000, the Tribal Council approved the release of captive-bred wolves 
onto Fort Apache. Currently over twenty wolves either reside on or move through the reservation.39 The 
Program, however, to this day remains controversial among tribal members, especially the ranchers. In 
2006 the Tribe asked for the removal of one of the wolf packs that killed at least six cows. Even though 
the FWS removed this pack, the Apache still contemplated pulling out of the Program entirely, but 
instead decided to remain a partner.40  
Despite the controversial nature of the Program, the Tribe capitalized on the project‟s potential 
relevance to Apache cultural restoration efforts. Prior to cultural disruption and the Mexican wolf‟s 
extirpation from the United States, the Apache held a spiritual connection to this species. According to 
Krista Beazley, a White Mountain Apache wildlife biologist who monitors the wolves on the 
reservation, Apache warriors in the past sometimes asked for “wolf power” prior to hunts and battles. 
They would perform a ceremony that involved imitating wolf-stalking behavior and singing a ritual song 
to wolves. After completing the ceremony, Apache warriors could borrow the hunting ability of wolves. 
Restoring the Mexican wolf afforded the Tribe with an opportunity to teach Apache youth past 
relationships with nature. Although the ceremony lacked relevant application in current times, it 
demonstrated that the Apache had always derived spiritual benefits from wildlife. In essence, the 
                                                 
39 Daniel Glick, “Leader of the Pack,” Audubon Magazine (March, 2006).  
40 Allison Gerfin, “Mexican Wolves Face a Rocky Road to Recovery,” High Country News (June 12, 2006): 6; Jo 
Baeza, “Agencies Recommend Continuing with Wolf Reintroduction,” White Mountain Independent (June 26, 
2006). 

 
 
345 
 
Program created just one of many opportunities arising from restoration activities to reconnect Apache 
youth to their homeland.41 The Tribal Watershed Program would result in yet another such opportunity.  
 
Watershed Restoration: Healing Past Discretions, Building Respect for Apache Knowledge  
The BIA had long promoted policies that encouraged the overexploitation of timber, overgrazing, 
and increased run-off of water to the Salt River Valley. As a consequence, the reservation‟s watersheds 
were in bad shape by the 1980s. One of the most controversial BIA programs was the Cibecue and 
Corduroy Watershed projects of the 1950s and 1960s (Fig. 14). The BIA, in conjunction with the 
Arizona Water Resources Committee and the Forest Service, designed this multi-purpose program to 
slow erosion resulting from overgrazing, improve timber lands, and provide more water to reservation 
ranchers and Euro-Americans in the Salt River Valley. This combined restoration and water 
management experiment ended in controversy in the early 1970s. Instead of repairing degraded land, the 
experiment exacerbated erosion problems and negatively impacted plant communities along targeted 
waterways, including the eradication of locally coveted cottonwoods.42  
The permanent destruction of the Apache landscape that occurred as a result of the Cibecue and 
Corduroy Watershed projects represented a desecration to Apache culture. For instance, cottonwood 
trees provided landmarks for the names of places. When invoked, these place-names relayed moral  
                                                 
41 Brian T. Kelly and Cynthia Westfall, “White Mountain Apache Tribe Welcomed as Partner in Wolf Recovery,” 
Fish and Wildlife News (April/May/June, 2001): 1; Glick, “Leader of the Pack”; Laura Tangley, “Restoring Lost 
Heritage,” National Wildlife Magazine 41 (December/January, 2003). 
42 For the goals and rationale of the program see George W. Barr (ed.), Arizona Watershed Program (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona, 1956).  On damages resulting from the program see Basso, The Cibecue Apache; White 
Mountain Apache Tribe v. The United States; Environmental Protection Agency, Watershed Analyses and 
Management Guide for States and Communities (Washington, D.C.: Office of Water Resources, U.S.E.P.A., 
2003), p. VE-12; Bureau of Indian Affairs, Report on Cibecue Watershed Project (Whiteriver, AZ: Branch of 
Land Operations, BIA, Fort Apache Agency, 1970); Jonathan W. Long, “Cibecue Watershed Projects: Then, 
Now, and in the Future,” in Land Stewardship in the 21st Century: The Contributions of Watershed Management, 
Proceedings RMRS-P-13, P. Ffolliot et al., technical coordinators (Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 2000), 227-233.  

 
 
346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 14 – Corduroy Watershed Project in 1956: (Top) A picture depicting a treated area in the 
foreground and an untreated area in the background. The treated area represents “restored” 
grazing land. (Bottom) An Apache man uprooting an alligator juniper with a bulldozer 
(Courtesy of the National Archives). 

 
 
347 
 
stories of how one should act in the world. These stories also stored knowledge about changes in the 
landscape, natural history, and lessons on how to treat the land. One such place was one of six origin 
sites for White Mountain Apache clans, “cottonwoods joining.”43 In some cases they signified local 
group and clan identities, such as the “cottonwoods extending to the water people” or “at the standing 
cottonwood people.” In essence, the eradication of cottonwoods literally represented the eradication of 
Apache identity, moral and social structure, and knowledge about the landscape.44 Therefore, watershed 
restoration in the 1990s went beyond an ecological imperative to include a cultural significance as well. 
Restoring all the lost cultural connections to the land remained a tall order, but the Tribal Watershed 
Program represented a modest beginning towards that end.  In addition to the cultural significance of 
these projects, demonstrating effective restoration and management of wetlands, streams, and rivers 
endowed the Tribe with more political clout in water rights disputes. 
The Tribal Watershed Program originated from a 1995 Indian Claims Court settlement awarded to 
the White Mountain Apache. In 1950 the Apache filed this lawsuit against the federal government for 
mismanagement of their natural resources prior to1946. In the 1980s, after mounting evidence suggested 
this negligence continued after 1946, the Tribe amended the old suit to include damages accrued after 
1946. The Claims Court, however, only awarded the Apache damages for pre-1946 indiscretions, which 
amounted to $22 million. Subsequently, the tribal government redirected twenty percent of the 
settlement to create a permanent Land Restoration Fund.45 A Tribal Council resolution mandated that 
the fund support the restoration of “tribal ecosystems to a condition that better reflects their condition 
                                                 
43 Goodwin, Social Organization of the Western Apache, p. 152. For more on the significance of place-names, see 
Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places, pp. 105-151. 
44 For examples of both place-names and clan names associated with cottonwood trees see Goodwin, Social 
Organization of the Western Apache, pp. 574, 604, 606, 608, 613, 615. 
45 In 1950, the White Mountain Apache Tribe filed a lawsuit (White Mountain Apache Tribe v. The United States, 
11 Cl. Ct. 614 [1987]) against the federal government under the Indian Claims Commission Act of 1946 (25 
U.S.C. 70). The United States Claims Court made its final ruling in 1987. Because the Tribe wasn‟t satisfied with 
the award, they appealed their case in the United States Circuit Court of Appeals (5 F.3d 1506 [1993]), finally 
receiving a settlement in 1995. 

 
 
348 
 
prior to suffering damage from the mismanagement [by federal agencies] and to fund the education of 
Tribal members in the disciplines related to natural resource management.” In addition, the Council gave 
funding priority to projects that developed comprehensive watershed planning activities, incorporated 
community-based efforts, and included “activities that promote traditional cultural practices, the Apache 
language, and the education of tribal members.” Unlike the BIA watershed projects, tribal restorationists 
always explicitly addressed the eco-cultural concerns of the Apache community in the planning and 
funding of restoration projects.46 Ronnie Lupe foresaw the Watershed Program as a long-needed healing 
process: 
Without a doubt, there is a strong relationship between the damage to our ecosystems and the 
tremendous social problems our Tribe has experienced…And that suffering will continue until a 
healing process is set in motion. Our younger generations, who have witnessed this destruction, 
will now [be] able to learn the true value of our land. They will be able to establish the same 
relationship with our sacred land as our ancestors…Let‟s go forward with this sacred 
obligation.47  
 
Exchange with Western institutions proved key to launching the Watershed Program. A prerequisite 
of these arrangements, however, was that partnerships had to benefit the Tribe. As was often the case, 
outsiders would receive an opportunity to do research on the reservation that might further their careers 
in exchange for knowledge, training, and restoration of tribal eco-cultural resources. Jonathan Long, a 
Euro-American hydrologist and a product of the HPAIED, became the Watershed Program‟s advisor. 
Long helped train tribal members in wetland and stream restoration techniques and worked with a new 
generation of college-educated tribal ecologists. One product of this relationship resulted in co-
authorships on a number of published papers in scientific journals and proceedings for Delbin Endfield 
(Cibecue Project Manager), Benrita Burnette (Director), and Candy Lupe (Field Supervisor), all 
                                                 
46 White Mountain Apache Tribal Council, White Mountain Apache Land Restoration Code, available at 
www.wmat.us/Legal/LandRestorationCode.html. For information on how the HPAIED assisted the Tribe in this 
matter see, Calleros and Ling, Maximizing the Impact of the Restoration Fund.    
47 Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner: The Restoration Fund will Help us Restore our Ecosystems the Apache 
Way,” Fort Apache Scout 35 (June 7, 1996): 2. 

 
 
349 
 
members of the White Mountain Apache Tribe. Along with many other members of the tribal 
community, they worked to restore ecologically damaged wetlands and streams. Using modern 
technology guided by Apache knowledge of past plant communities, they attempted to reconstruct past 
ecosystems and cultural traditions within the limits of contemporary environmental and social 
constraints. 48  
In the late 1990s, the Cibecue Bridge Project combined elements from the present and past to restore 
culturally important plant communities and water flow disrupted by sedimentation.  This project took 
into consideration the local needs for passable roads, livestock grazing, traditional use of plants (e.g., 
replanting cattails important for curing ceremonies and girl‟s puberty ceremonies), and a hydrologically 
functional stream flow. The project required heavy earthmoving equipment to clear channels and reduce 
sedimentation. Restorationists erected solar-powered electric fences to protect wetlands from cattle and 
elk. Local White Mountain Apache students cleared overgrowth and planted native vegetation along the 
streams near bridges. More importantly, these students learned from Apache elders about the ecology of 
the stream bank. Elders served as eco-cultural advisors, using their intimate knowledge of Fort Apache 
natural history to help reconstruct long degraded stream-side plant communities. Their knowledge was 
rooted in the variety of ways the Apache exploited these plant communities for ceremonial and 
medicinal purposes. This newly constructed landscape, therefore, took aspects of the past (functioning 
                                                 
48 Jonathan W. Long and Benrita M. Burnette, “Cibecue Watershed Projects: Then, Now, and in the Future,” in 
Land Stewardship in the 21st Century: The Contributions of Watershed Management, Proceedings RMRS-P-13, P. 
Ffolliot et al., technical coordinators (Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, 2000), 361-362; Jonthan Long and Candy S. Lupe, “A Process for Planning and 
Evaluating Success of Riparian-wetland Projects on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation,” Hydrology and Water 
Resources in Arizona and the Southwest 28 (1998): 68-74; Jonathan Long, Delbin Endfield, Candy Lupe, and 
Mae Burnette, “Battle at the Bridge: Using Participatory Approaches to Develop Community Researchers in 
Ecological Management,” in Proceedings of the Fifth Biennial Conference on University Education in Natural 
Resources, Natural Resources and Environmental Issues, volume XII , Thomas E. Kolb, ed. (Logan UT: Quinney 
Library, College of Natural Resources, Utah State University, 2004); Jonathan W. Long, Aregai Tecle, and 
Benrita M. Burnette, “Marsh Development at Restoration Sites on the White Mountain Apache Reservation, 
Arizona,” Journal of the American Water Resources Association (December, 2004): 1345-1359.  

 
 
350 
 
stream flow, traditional plants) and fused them with modern features of the landscape (cattle grazing, 
bridges, electric fences).  
During the same time frame, the restoration of Soldier Spring, a sacred site important for ceremonial 
performances, symbolized the restoration of Apache knowledge (Fig. 15).49 Long and Burnette 
employed an Apache legend about Soldier Spring to reconstruct the plant community that occurred there 
prior to disturbance. Soldier Spring is sacred because it is a source of water, thus a source of life. Ronnie 
Lupe explained, “The Apache way is to bless ourselves with water… the life blood of my people. It has 
sustained us from time immemorial. It nourishes and sustains the plants, the animals, and the ecosystem 
– to use a modern word – upon which we live and survive.”50  Thus, uncontaminated, free-flowing water 
remained imperative to Apache cultural and spiritual survival. The cultural significance of the site 
moved Al Medina of the Rocky Mountain Forest Experiment Station to design more subtle interventions 
for erosion control and stream flow restoration. In order to accommodate Apache customs, instead of 
using metal, a material often used to construct erosion abatement structures in stream restorations, 
Medina, Long, Burnette, and a tribal youth group installed check dams and riffle structures constructed 
of local rocks and plants. The tribal community appreciated this innovation as metal compromises the 
spiritual integrity of ceremonially significant streams.51 
Tribal restorationists such as Benrita Burnette played an important mediating role in these projects. 
Her expertise in both the Apache way and Western land management techniques allowed her to set 
appropriate boundaries between Apache and Euro-American culture. Her presence required non-Indian 
experts to address local cultural and environmental concerns. Although Burnette stood to learn from 
non-Indian restorationists, her level of expertise was sufficient enough to earn the respect of non-Indian 
experts.  Furthermore, her epistemological capacity allowed her to determine whether the interests of  
                                                 
49 Long and Burnette, “Cibecue Watershed Projects: Then, Now, and in the Future.” 
50 Ronnie Lupe, “Comments of the Chairman of the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council.” 
51Ibid. 

 
 
351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 15 – Restoration of Soldier Spring: (Top) An electric fence serving as an 
ungulate exclosure. (Bottom) Soldier Spring approximately ten years after 
restoration work began (Photos taken by author).  

 
 
352 
 
non-Indian restorationists were in line with Apache interests. As a consequence, she could absorb new 
knowledge, while simultaneously protecting Apache assets.  She and other tribal restorationists now 
embodied the process of cultural exchange that cautiously erected selective boundaries that delineated 
between knowledge that would benefit the Apache and knowledge that lacked application to Apache 
circumstances. In the 1990s, all restoration projects operated under this exchange process.  
In sum, the Watershed Program began restoring a whole host of ecological, epistemological, 
philosophical, and cultural elements of the Apachean landscape. The program applied tribal elder‟s 
knowledge concerning past plant community structures, restored native plants and animals, restored 
damage due to channel down-cutting (results from increased water flow due to road construction, 
wildfires, excessive animal trampling), restored culturally important plants used in traditional 
ceremonies, restored culturally important places and sacred sites, instilled a sense of community 
participation, and became a venue for acquiring skills and dispensing knowledge. Indeed, the Watershed 
Program embodied a hybridization of the “best of the white man‟s world” with the Apache way. This 
program marked a significant departure from the culturally sterile programs of the BIA. It signaled 
Apache control over reservation resources. The next section serves to reinforce how important the 
integration of Apache culture into ecological restoration is to the Apache people. 
 
Cultural Restoration: Reconnecting Apaches to the Land 
For a place-based people such as the White Mountain Apache, separating culture from ecological 
concerns is a contradiction to their life way. If the reservation ecosystems remained ecologically 
unsound, Tribal traditions would go extinct. Apache ancestors inscribed stories, legends, moral 
guidance, and spirits into the White Mountain landscape.  For the Apache, therefore, ecological and 
cultural restoration went hand in hand. Even projects characteristically classified as cultural restoration, 

 
 
353 
 
also addressed ecological issues. For example, in 1993 the Tribal Council developed a plan to transform 
Fort Apache (the historic fort) from an icon of oppression, where missionaries and the BIA forcibly tore 
Apache cultural traditions from their ancestor‟s lives, into a symbol of cultural restoration and 
autonomy. The old fort became the Apache Cultural Center and Museum. The Center hosted classes 
where White Mountain Apache students began to relearn what tribal elders saw missing from recent 
generations: the connections between the “land and mind,” culture and nature. By teaching Apache 
children about past traditions, stories, and customs, tribal leaders hoped that the experience would 
initiate a healing process of the physical and social rift between nature and culture that non-Indians 
imposed on the Apache people. Once healed, the Apache would reestablish a reciprocal relationship 
with the land that encourages stewardship. In essence, the Center became a powerful symbolic statement 
of resistance and reconciliation, a place to confront and transcend past atrocities inflicted on the Apache 
people and homeland. Ultimately, tribal elders hoped that reconnecting to the land would foster a 
responsibility to restore the Apachean landscape. 52   
 The Apache initiated another project in 1990s designed to heal the relationship between the land and 
mind, the Western Apache Placenames Project. This work not only illustrated the impossibility of 
separating culture and nature for the Apache people, but also held a restorative quality to it.53 Partially 
inspired by Keith Basso‟s research in the early 1980s on the cultural and ecological importance of 
Western Apache place-names, the Project collected ethnographic data about Apache place-names and 
the stories associated with those places. According to Basso, the origin of his research idea rested with 
Ronnie Lupe. Basso had finished several research projects and was searching for new ideas. In a 
conversation with Lupe, he got his answer. Lupe posed, “Why don‟t you make maps over there… Not 
                                                 
52 John R. Welch and Ramon Riley, “Reclaiming Land and Spirit in the Western Apache Homeland,” American 
Indian Quarterly 25 (Winter 2001): 5-12. 
53 On the importance of place-names for ecological restoration see Ibid., p. 11. 

 
 
354 
 
whitemen‟s maps, we‟ve got plenty of them, but Apache maps with Apache places and names. We could 
use them. Find out something about how we know our country. You should have done this before.” 54 
These stories contain immense amounts of knowledge relevant to the Apache way of life. The 
connection between the Apache people and the land is so strong that destroying places essentially 
eradicates knowledge. A single place-name can evoke an image of a geographical location, call on 
historical tales and legends, validate ancestral moral knowledge, offer personal support, politely remind 
people of indiscretions, apply ancestral knowledge towards solving emotional problems, transform 
negative thoughts into positive ones, and “heal wounded spirits.”55 For instance, stories can call on 
ancestral knowledge that teaches moral lessons about the right way to treat other members of the 
community and the land. The origin of all these stories resides in the Apachean landscape. Therefore the 
land contains knowledge. And each specific location embodies a diverse set of knowledges depending 
on the reason a story is invoked.  
The Apache invoke the power of place through a process they call “speaking with names.” In many 
cases, all one has to do to deliver a moral lesson, information about the past, or help solve a problem is 
mention the name of a place to the targeted person. In turn, that place contains specific knowledge about 
the message one wants to deliver. Lola Machuse, a resident of Cibecue, explained to Basso how this 
works:  
We gave that woman… pictures to work on in her mind. We didn‟t speak too much to her. We 
didn‟t hold her down. That way she could travel in her mind. She could add on to them [pictures] 
easily. We gave her clear pictures with place-names. So her mind went to those places, standing 
in front of them as our ancestors did long ago. That way she could see what happened there long 
ago. She could hear stories in her mind, perhaps hear our ancestors speaking. She could recall the 
knowledge of our ancestors.56 
 
                                                 
54 Quote taken from Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places, p. xv. 
55 Ibid. p. 100. 
56 Ibid., pp. 82-83. 

 
 
355 
 
Because of the powerful social implications of these stories, reviving them for future generations 
remained integral to reestablishing long-fragmented relationships with the land and cultural traditions. 
As a consequence, recovering these stories had implications for ecological restoration on the reservation. 
Place-names and their stories hold vital information about how the local conditions have changed over 
time, making them valuable source of knowledge in the recreation of landscapes for restoration 
projects.57 
Cultural healing also involves restoring control of sacred places outside the reservation. The White 
Mountain Apache are among several Western Apache tribes involved in protests against the University 
of Arizona construction of telescopes on Mount Graham in southeastern Arizona. The White Mountain 
Apache have long held Mount Graham as a sacred place; they view any technological intervention on 
this land as sacrilegious, thus inhibiting their religious freedom. In essence, to the Apache, the 
desecration of Mount Graham equaled someone tearing down a Christian church to build a mall.58 
Saving Mount Graham from desecration also symbolized the Apache struggle with modernization. As 
Mark Altaha of the White Mountain Apache Historic Preservation Office posited, “It is only inevitable 
that we change and adjust with modern technology, but where do we draw the line between what we‟ve 
held sacred for generations and the development of ever changing technology?”59 Since the struggle 
began in 1988, two of seven planned telescopes have been built. The Western Apache opposition has 
stalled the other five, hoping that the rest of the site might be spared from further desecration. In 2005 
                                                 
57 Welch and Riley, “Reclaiming Land and Spirit in the Western Apache Homeland,” p. 11. 
58 John R. Welch “White Eyes' Lies and the Battle for dzi# nchaa si'an,” American Indian Quarterly, Vol. 21 
(1997): 75-109; Elizabeth Brandt, "The Fight for Dzil Nchaa Si An, Mt. Graham: Apaches and Astrophysical 
Development in Arizona" Cultural Survival Quarterly 19 (1996): 50-57; John Dougherty, “Making a Mountain 
into a Starbase: The Long, Bitter Battle over Mount Graham,” High Country News (July 24, 1995); Winona 
LaDuke, Recovering the Sacred: the Power of Naming and Claiming (Cambridge, MA: South End Press, 2005), 
pp. 19-32. 
59 Mark T. Altaha, “Mount Graham – What is Your Opinion?” Fort Apache Scout 45 (January 5, 2007): 2. 

 
 
356 
 
the National Park Service determined that Mount Graham was eligible for the National Register of 
Historic Places. As of yet, however, it remains unlisted.60 
 
Managing Success, Limitations to Progress  
The White Mountain Apache have come a long way in the past seventy years. For the most part they 
have full control over eco-cultural resource decisions on the reservation, they have generated substantial 
revenue by wisely using these resources in tribal enterprises, and they have developed an exceptional 
restoration and management capacity. In essence, the 1990s bared witness to an explosion of restoration 
work on Fort Apache. The examples mentioned above are only a small sample of the projects the 
Apache implemented during this decade. Despite these advances, serious barriers to further progress 
emerged. I briefly touch on two of these limitations below: the growth of bureaucracy and the bounds of 
resource availability. 
 
The Growth of Bureaucracy: Although White Mountain Apache restoration efforts gained prominence 
on the reservation, coincident with this prominence tribal natural resource management bureaucracies 
tended towards a top-down/paternalistic relationship with the Apache people. So as the Tribe shed the 
chains of federal and state paternalism, they ironically were in danger of creating a similar governing 
structure in relation to their own people. Evidence of this sort of relationship emerged in the late 1980s 
as the Tribal Game and Fish Department grew in power. The Department began addressing what they 
felt were growing problems within the tribal population. It is difficult to say how tribal members reacted 
to these criticisms, but the nature of the contentions leans towards paternalism. Game and Fish officials 
accused the Apache community of taking “for granted what we have. They do not respect it. In fact, they 
abuse it.” They were reacting to an increase of wildlife violations among tribal members.  According to 
                                                 
60 Dallas Massey, Sr., “In Support of the Protection of Mt. Graham,” Fort Apache Scout 43 (April 15, 2003): 2. 

 
 
357 
 
the Tribal Game and Fish Department, the root of the problem lay with a loss of Apache values; the 
elders no longer taught young Apache respect for the land. As a consequence, young people lacked 
reverence for Apache culture and religion. Place-names failed to hold meaning, so they didn‟t believe, 
“If you do not take care of the land, it will get mad at you. It will turn on you. Something unnatural will 
happen.” Speaking from a position of authority, Game and Fish officials exclaimed that the Apache 
people needed to “wake up” and start adhering to Apache conservation values, which entailed taking 
care of their homeland.61  
Regardless of the legitimacy of these claims, the Fish and Game Department‟s chastisement of the 
Apache community held similarities with the approach that many environmental groups and federal 
agencies employed in the 1980s and 1990s to motivate the American public. Speaking from a privileged 
position, they passed judgment on the rest of the population‟s motives concerning land use. This 
mainstream environmental rhetoric often led to backlashes such as the Wise Use Movement, pro-
development ranchers, loggers, and farmers in the West who disingenuously employed environmental 
rhetoric to validate liberal forms of resource exploitation on public lands. The mainstream 
environmental movement also overlooked the needs and concerns of minority groups, leading to the 
development of reactionary movements such as the Environmental Justice Movement.62 My main point 
here is not to determine whether Game and Fish officials were right or wrong, but to illustrate a 
tendency towards paternalism, a potential pitfall for any bureaucratic organization.  
The problem extended beyond the Tribal Game and Fish Department‟s management style. As a 
general rule, not all tribal members shared a favorable view of restoration work on the reservation.  
More traditional Apaches opposed the intrusion of Western ideas and technology into Apache culture, 
                                                 
61 Phil Stago, Jr., “An Interview: Phillip R. Stago, Jr., Director, WMAT Game and Fish Department,” Fort 
Apache Scout 27 (November 18, 1988): 11. 
62 Hanna J. Cortner and Margaret A. Moote, The Politics of Ecosystem Management (Washington, D.C.: Island 
Press, 1999); Robert Gottlieb, Forcing the Spring (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2005). 

 
 
358 
 
viewing them with skepticism. This sort of resistance dated back to the Indian New Deal, the 
establishment of the WMRE, and the wide variety of modernization programs introduced to the 
reservation since. The only difference was that in this case some tribal members directed their discontent 
towards tribal bureaucracies rather than the federal government, Euro-American industries, and other 
outside influences. Some among the Tribe believed that any technological intervention was sacrilegious. 
And others, because of past relationships with the federal government, insisted on the elimination of all 
outside influences from tribal affairs, even on an advisory level. Yet others distrusted tribal government-
sanctioned projects. They continued to see the Tribal Council as a puppet of the federal government.  
Fortunately, the tribal government and the White Mountain Apache land management agencies 
recognized the potential of and problems with becoming a paternalistic governing body. The tribal 
government commissioned studies to gain a better understanding of how Apache citizens reacted to 
tribal restoration projects. To that end, demonstration projects such as the Soldier Spring Project 
incorporated community concerns about the cultural incompatibility of using metal in a sacred spring. 
The project also encouraged community participation in the actual restoration work. The Tribal Youth 
Program was particularly active in this respect. Encouraging public participation, especially from 
Apache youth, has been slowly winning tribal members over. Progress is slow, but an increasing number 
of Apaches are beginning to see the importance of restoration work to the sustainability of tribal 
society.63   
 
Resource Availability (Vulnerability to Disaster) - Despite inhabiting one of the wealthiest (in terms of 
natural resources) and largest reservations in the United States, the White Mountain Apache are 
extremely vulnerable to large-scale disasters, such as a wildfire, plant disease, or flooding. This 
vulnerability reveals the still limited financial, human, and technological resources of the Tribe. As a 
                                                 
63 Long, Endfield, Lupe, and Burnette, “Battle at the Bridge.”  

 
 
359 
 
result, the Apache remain highly dependent on outside help, thus the continued need for a vigilant, 
selective process of resistance to and exchange with Euro-American society to sustain their sovereignty 
and cultural identity. Any large-scale disaster could easily swamp the Tribe‟s resources and hamper their 
economy. Since the Apache subsist mainly off a natural resource-based economy, the maintenance of an 
efficacious restorative capacity is vital to their existence.  
In 2002, the Rodeo-Chediski Fire tested the Tribe‟s vulnerability to natural disaster. Past actions that 
weren‟t in the Apache‟s control prefigured the extent of damage the Rodeo-Chediski Fire exacted on the 
Fort Apache landscape. Although efforts had been made to rectify the vulnerability of the reservation 
forest ecosystem to a major fire since the Indian New Deal, a number of environmental factors and 
misguided policies hindered these efforts. For instance, the Tribe never managed to fully employ Harold 
Weaver‟s prescribed burn experiments designed to prevent future major conflagrations. Lack of trained 
manpower, limited funds, and past BIA neglect of the forest ecosystem, prevented the Tribe from 
applying reservation wide treatments.64 Furthermore, prescribed burns held a stigma among the Apache. 
The Apache associated it with attempts to increase water yield to off-reservation interests. This negative 
association almost led to the complete cancellation of the program in the 1990s.65  Even the National 
Indian Forest Resources Management Act of 1990, a proposed remedy to past budget shortfalls and the 
need to modernize management practices within Indian country, failed to fulfill its promise.66 The final 
result of these constraints on restoration efforts resulted in heavy fire damage to 276,000 acres of the 
reservation‟s ponderosa pine ecosystem during the 2002 Rodeo-Chediski Fire, the largest in Arizona‟s 
                                                 
64 Barbara A. Strom, Pre-fire Treatment Effects and Post-fire Dynamics on the Rodeo-Chediski Burn Area, 
Arizona (Master‟s Thesis, Northern Arizona University, 2005); Victoria Yazzie-Durglo, “The Right to Change 
Tribal Forest Management,” Journal of Forestry 96 (1998): 33-35. See also White Mountain Apache Tribe v. 
Bracker, 448 U.S. 136, 1980 on damages by Euro-American timber companies to tribal lands.  
65 “BIA to Resume Control Burning: After a 3-year Tribe-imposed Hiatus, the Bureau will Burn Forest Land 
under much Stricter Guidelines,” Fort Apache Scout 31 (October 16, 1992): 1; Dallas Massey, Sr., “Chairman‟s 
Vision: Tribal Council Approves Plans for Prescribed Burning,” Fort Apache Scout 37 (July 31, 1998): 2. 
66 Ronnie Lupe, Indian Forest Resources Management Acts:  Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, 104th Congress 
(1995): 33-45.; Yazzie-Durglo, “The Right to Change Tribal Forest Management.” 

 
 
360 
 
history (in total, 476,000 acres burned). However, subsequent studies have revealed that less damage 
occurred in areas treated with prescribed burns conducted within ten years of the fire than in untreated 
areas. Fortunately limited prior treatment spared some of the 276,000 acres extensive damage. The same 
couldn‟t be said of the adjacent Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, which never received prescribed 
burn treatments.67  
After the Rodeo-Chediski Fire, the Tribe requested and received federal assistance through the 
federal Burned Area Emergency Response program (BAER). The program initially entailed a 
cooperative action between the BIA fire management office, the Forest Service, the Ecological 
Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University, Tribal Forestry, Tribal Game and Fish, and the 
Tribal Watershed Program. Their charge was to restore watersheds made vulnerable to flooding, 
damaged timberlands, sites of archeological importance, and areas containing sacred burial grounds. 
This collaborative effort, which incorporated cultural, economic, and ecological concerns, was heavily 
reliant on tribal knowledge of the land. Because of the immense work load, Tribal Forestry received 
funds to increase its staff from twenty to sixty-six personnel, many of whom received opportunities to 
take college-level training courses. This staff also employed local knowledge to locate archeological 
sites and sacred burial grounds, communicating with federal authorities cooperating on the project about 
these culturally sensitive places. Once located, they exercised measures to protect and restore these 
places. They also identified areas particularly vulnerable to flooding, evaluated the extent of damage to 
timber resources, and defined restoration priorities. The Apache‟s efficacious work on the recovery 
effort earned them the Forest Service‟s National Fire Plan Award in 2005.68 
                                                 
67 Strom, Pre-fire Treatment Effects; Barbara A. Strom and Peter Z. Fulé, “Pre-wildfire Fuel Treatments Affect 
Long-term Ponderosa Pine Forest Dynamics,” International Journal of Wildland Fire 16 (2007): 128-138. 
68 Mary Stuever, “BAER Fairs Showcase Burn Restoration,” Fort Apache Scout 43 (February 18, 2005): 4; Gail 
Pechuli, “Wildfire Disaster Shakes Apache‟s Economy,” Indian Country Today (January 29, 2003); Gail Pechuli, 
“White Mountain Apache tribe uses BAER to restore charred land,” Indian Country Today (February 3, 2003). 
On the National Fire Plan award see www.fireplan.gov/awards/ (last viewed September 17, 2006).  

 
 
361 
 
Even though the Tribe managed to parlay the disaster into more training opportunities for tribal 
members and positive press, these benefits failed to make up for the fact that the Apache suffered 
serious economic and public safety consequences as a result of the fire. Early successes with restoration 
didn‟t replace the loss of revenue FATCO experienced due to timber damage. And towns in the fire-
ravaged areas remained vulnerable to flooding. The fire destroyed an estimated 400 million board feet of 
timber, sterilized the soil, and killed soil stabilizing vegetation. Tribal Forestry officials also claimed 
that the affected areas would require between 100 and 150 years to recover harvestable levels.  The 
Tribe had the opportunity to generate revenue through timber salvage, but this required expensive 
equipment modifications at FATCO. Furthermore, they lacked the resources to retrieve all salvageable 
timber. As a consequence, the Tribe was forced to hire outside lumber companies to extract damaged 
timber in remote regions with helicopters.69  
Other problems emerged once BAER funds diminished in 2007. The Forest Service designed BAER 
as a five year stopgap funding source for communities suffering from wildfire damage. However, the 
Rodeo-Chediski damage remained so extensive, the initial funds only paid for preliminary restoration 
work. As a final resort, the Tribe began siphoning funds from already taxed tribal enterprises to continue 
necessary work, especially in flood-prone watershed communities such as Carrizo and Cibecue. To this 
day, the Tribe remains financially strapped because of the Rodeo-Chediski disaster. This wildfire not 
only impacted the tribal economy, but also the Apache‟s capacity to continue eco-cultural restoration 
projects.70   
 
                                                 
69 Dallas Massey, Sr., Crisis on the National Forests: Containing the Threat of Wildland Fire to the Environment 
and Communities, Committee on House Resources Subcommittee on Forests and Forest Health, 108th Congress, 
March 7, 2003; Pechuli, “Wildfire Disaster Shakes Apache‟s Economy”; Pechuli, “White Mountain Apache Tribe 
uses BAER to Restore Charred Land.”  
70 Ronnie Lupe, “Update on the Burn Area Emergency Response Program,” Fort Apache Scout 45 (November 24, 
2006): 3. 

 
 
362 
 
Conclusion 
Ronnie Lupe once said that in order for the Tribe to succeed in the modern world his people had to 
operate “in both the Wall Street way and the Apache way.”71 Lupe recognized that a perpetual process 
of resistance and exchange was necessary to maintain cultural identity, sustain political independence, 
and adapt to the ever evolving “dominant” society. Moreover, he realized that controlling knowledge 
production on the reservation would prove paramount to solidifying this process. White Mountain 
Apache wildlife biologists, restorationists, engineers, planners, and land managers had to know the 
language of both worlds. Although tribal members adopted a diverse array of Western skills, they 
worked to balance Western knowledge with Apache knowledge. The White Mountain Apache would 
cease to exist as an autonomous culture otherwise. This was why, once the Apache had built a relatively 
solid economic foundation, the revitalization of Apache culture became a vital element of restoration 
work in the 1990s. 
The Apache connected epistemological restoration to the restoration of the Apachean landscape. The 
Apache weren‟t alone in this endeavor. By the 1990s, a major movement erupted among native 
communities to recover lost knowledge.72 For example, Vine Deloria‟s Red Earth, White Lies, along 
                                                 
71Lupe quoted in Stephen Cornell, Miriam Jorgensen, Joseph P. Kalt, and Katherine A. Spilde. “Seizing the 
Future: Why Some Native Nations Do and Others Don‟t,” in Rebuilding Native Nations: Strategies for 
Governance and Development, Miriam Jorgensen, ed. (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2007), 296-320, 
p. 312. 
72 See for example Dennis Rogers Martinez, “The Sinkyone Intertribal Park Project,” Restoration and 
Management Notes 10 (1992): 64-69; S. M. McCorquodale, R.H. Leach, G.M. King, and K.R. Bevis, “The 
Yakima Indian Reservation: Integrating Native American Values into Commercial Forestry,” Journal of Forestry 
95 (1997): 15-18; Dave Egan and M.Kat Anderson, eds.,  “Theme Issue: Native American Land Management 
Practices in National Parks,” Ecological Restoration 21 (2003): 245-310; A. Garibaldi and N. Turner, “Cultural 
Keystone Species: Implications for Ecological Conservation and Restoration,” Ecology and Society 9(3): 1. 
[online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss3/art1; Robin W. Kimmerer and Frank W. Lake, “The 
Role of Indigenous Burning in Land Management,” Journal of Forestry 99 (1999): 36-41; Anne Moote, 
“Community-Based Forest Restoration,” in Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests, P. 
Friederici, ed. (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2003), 335-352; S. Torbit and J. McNaught, Restoring the Prairie, 
Mending the Sacred Hoop: Prairie Conservation and Restoration of the Cheyenne River Reservation (National 
Wildlife Federation and Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, 2003); See also the Indigenous People‟s Restoration 
Network, www.ser.org (last accessed December 8, 2006); Winona LaDuke, Recovering the Sacred: The Power of 

 
 
363 
 
with offering a scathing critique of Western science, also represented a work of epistemological 
restoration on behalf of a variety of American Indian cultures. The book claimed that local Native 
American knowledge had something to offer Western science, if not in some cases replace completely 
common orthodoxy such as the Paul Martin‟s Pleistocene overkill hypothesis with native memories of 
geologic events that call this knowledge claim into question.73 Most epistemological restorations didn‟t 
involve such high-profile targets, generally focusing on historical land management techniques, 
culturally important species, or (as with the Apache) recovering local knowledge embedded in the 
landscape. Nonetheless, no matter how large the claim, legitimizing local knowledge became a key 
ingredient in the restoration of political autonomy. If you lacked ownership of knowledge production on 
tribal lands, you truly couldn‟t ever control management decisions concerning that land.  
On Fort Apache, ecological restoration remained a locus through which the Apache controlled and 
mediated knowledge production. In essence, the Apache epistemological restoration coincided with 
ecological restoration work. For the Apache, this process entailed a constantly evolving rediscovery 
process, melding newly found Apache knowledge with Western knowledge. This emerging hybrid 
knowledge production system remains in the early stages of development. The Apache continue to 
struggle with reconciling the Apache way with the Western science and technology. Furthermore, they 
have just begun to explore the depths of lost knowledge and how it can be applied to restoration work. 
As this knowledge production system matures, the Tribe will continue to reinvent and further elaborate 
the essence of Apache knowledge, which embodies the Apache values of adaptability, spirituality, and 
community.  
                                                                                                                                                                         
Naming and Claiming (Cambridge, MA: South End Press, 2005); Winona LaDuke, All Our Relations: Native 
Struggles for Land and Life (Cambridge, MA: South End Press, 1999). 
73 Vine Deloria, Jr., Red Earth, White Lies: Native Americans and the Myth of Scientific Fact (Golden , CO: 
Fulcrum Publishing, 1997). 

 
 
364 
 
While creating this hybridized knowledge system, the White Mountain Apache maintained cautious 
boundaries between Western and Apache traditions. Apaches became quite critical of the Western 
traditions (Christianity, technological determinism, science, capitalism) that undermined their pre-
contact culture, a culture that they believe was much more in tune with natural processes than Euro-
American society. As Benrita Burnette explained on behalf of her people, “Apaches see the cause of 
unhealthy ecosystems not as the result of traditional philosophies, but rather as the disruption of those 
philosophies by external influences.”74 Over the past seventy years, the Apache became increasingly 
suspicious of restoration goals that overlooked economic, political, and cultural issues. Following that 
reasoning, Chairman Lupe warned in 1991, “We are not patient with those who disregard our knowledge 
and our love of the land and those creatures that live upon it.”75 In many respects, therefore, what set 
Apache restoration projects apart from non-Indian projects were Western traditions and environmental 
perspectives that failed to take into account local community needs and protecting Apache culture. 
Because of these philosophical differences, the numerous partnerships emerging between the White 
Mountain Apache and outside institutions (BIA, Forest Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, National 
Wildlife Federation, and various academic institutions) remain on fragile ground. Therefore, a dynamic 
tension between cultural resistance to and exchange with outside cultures remains a force that shapes the 
Apache culture and the lands they manage – a subject I explore further in the conclusion. 
 
                                                 
74 Long, Tecle, and Burnette, “Cultural foundations for ecological restoration on the White Mountain Apache 
Reservation.”  
75 Ronnie Lupe, „“Our Land, Our Resources, Our Destiny:‟ Remarks before the Indian Governments of 
Saskatchewan Forum on Indian Perspectives on the Environment and Sustainable Development,” Fort Apache 
Scout 30 (June 14, 1991): 2-3. 

 
 
365 
 
Conclusion 
  
The Ecological and Cultural Significance of White Mountain Apache Restoration 
 
 
The previous chapter demonstrated that ecological restoration represented a political vehicle for 
regaining control of knowledge production and land. If the Tribe could control science on the 
reservation, they could direct its uses towards the ecological and cultural concerns of the Tribe rather 
than those of outsiders. Beyond the epistemological and political implications of restoration, the 
appropriation of this technique acquired a broader social meaning. The concept of restoration for the 
White Mountain Apache became intertwined with a complex array of social, political, cultural, and 
ecological values. Furthermore, the integration of a diverse set of values into restoration work had 
consequences for the land. The values associated with Apache restoration projects over the years not 
only dramatically altered the reservation landscape relative to past conditions, but also shaped the 
ecosystems of the reservation differently from those on adjacent private and federal lands. Because of 
the unique set of values associated with Apache restoration projects, I propose that the White Mountain 
Apache have directed the Fort Apache Indian Reservation ecosystems in a different ecological trajectory 
than the rest of the region.  
In forming a concluding argument, this chapter outlines the values of Apache restoration that 
evolved over the past seventy years and speculates on the consequences these values have had for 
shaping the Fort Apache landscape. First, I review the evolutionary development of the values 
associated with White Mountain Apache restoration projects. Second, I discuss the impacts of these 
values on the Fort Apache landscape. And finally, I explore the implications of White Mountain Apache 
restoration work for the broader concept of ecological restoration.  
 
 

 
 
366 
 
The Meaning of Restoration for the White Mountain Apache 
 
The temptation exists to reduce the majority of White Mountain Apache restoration work to an 
economic motive. But that would not pay due consideration to the complex development of this science 
and technology within the context of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. Restoration‟s roots on the 
reservation certainly evolved from an economic imperative during the Indian New Deal. But the Tribe 
eventually wove other social elements into the fabric of restoration efforts. Hidden beneath the veneer of 
recreational and economic restoration was political, cultural, ecological, biodiversity, and 
epistemological restoration (Fig. 16). In the continuing process of rebuilding their society, the Apache 
integrated a wide array of values while recreating the Fort Apache landscape as a hybrid of the past and 
present.  
By the late 1990s, the White Mountain Apache essentially had developed a land management system 
that entailed a landscape (ecosystem)-scale restoration project that incorporated local, regional, and 
national needs along with considerations for nonhuman nature. On a local scale, restoration projects 
addressed the cultural and ecological needs of the various Apache communities. On a regional scale, 
restoration goals worked to attract tourists and provide ecological services for down-stream Euro-
American populations. On the national scale, endangered species projects assuaged public and scientific 
concerns for biodiversity. Much of this restoration work was a political product of the Tribe‟s struggle 
for sovereignty. Because they reassumed autonomy over their eco-cultural resources and resided in a 
large reservation that drains into two major watersheds, they controlled enough land to develop 
regionally comprehensive plans. As we have seen, restoration projects meant many things to the Apache 
people. Beyond the ecological benefits, restoration became a mechanism for articulating political 
sovereignty; a vehicle for demonstrating self-determination and efficacious self-governance; a forum for 
acquiring and developing Western technical skills and knowledge; a means by which the Tribe  

 
 
367 
 
Fig. 16 – Emphasis on values associated with ecological restoration over time. In 
general, the number of values associated with restoration diversified and 
intensified over time as the White Mountain Apache gained control over 
knowledge production and eco-cultural resources on the reservation. 
Economic 
Education 
Recreational 
Aesthetic 
Biodiversity 
Community Cohesion 
Human Health 
1930s  
1940s  
1950s  
1960s  
1970s  
1980s  
1990s 
Increasing Apache Control of Knowledge Production and Eco-cultural Resources 
Weak 
Moderate 
Strong 
Emphasis on Values 
V l
Religious/Spiritual 
Ecologica

 
 
368 
 
rediscovers and incorporates Apache knowledge, culture and religion; and a venue for maintaining 
community stability and identity. 
This diverse array of benefits helped the White Mountain Apache forge a pathway towards political 
autonomy. The agency of the Apache people converted the nature of restoration from a paternalistic tool 
of exploitation to a diversity of techniques for solving the problems of the reservation community. In 
many ways, if the Tribe hadn‟t appropriated ecological restoration for their benefit, the reservation 
might have ceased to exist – degraded to an uninhabitable point, leaving the Apache without a homeland 
and their basis for existence. Instead, the Apache cultural appropriation and adaptation of ecological 
restoration aided the cultural and political revitalization of the White Mountain Apache nation.  At first, 
restoration of economically important resources proved crucial. Beginning with the Indian New Deal 
and on into the post-war era, restoration worked to restore range, forests, wildlife, and the recreational 
potential of the reservation. Although outside interests continued to exploit Apache timber and water 
resources, the Tribe assumed a modest amount of control over their wildlife and grazing lands. The 
establishment of the White Mountain Recreational Enterprise (WMRE) in the 1950s led to the 
restoration of the Apache trout and many aesthetic qualities of the reservation.  Albeit with Western 
science and technology, the WMRE became a technical and economic foundation for the Apache 
struggle to regain control of the management of Fort Apache.  
 
As the WMRE expanded its purview, the Tribe was able to hire increasing numbers of tribal 
members into natural resource management positions. Through cooperative agreements and programs 
with the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), Branch of Land Operations (BIA), the Office of Economic 
Opportunity, and the Arizona Game and Fish Department (AGFD), select Apache gained expertise in 
Western science and technology. In doing this, they acquired the power and credibility to express local 
knowledge and integrate it with Western science and technology. In addition to these programs, some 

 
 
369 
 
tribal members began returning to the reservation with college educations in natural resource 
management. Acquiring technical expertise served two basic purposes. First, Apache biologists and land 
managers more likely ensured that tribal resources were managed for the benefit of the Tribe. For 
example, Phil Stago‟s battle with the AGFD over the Tribe‟s right to manage elk herds on the 
reservation represented a turning point for the Apache people in terms of managing and restoring 
resources. Second, expertise allowed tribal land managers to mediate and move fluidly between the 
Apache culture and Western culture. Being able to speak both “languages” reduced the chances that 
outside interests would exploit the Tribe in the future.   
 
On top of gaining expertise, successful restoration projects meant building political capital. In 
general the restoration work of the WMRE in the 1950s and 1960s gave the Tribe political leverage in 
later battles to control Apache resources. In particular, cooperative efforts with the AGFD and the FWS 
in the restoration of the Apache trout proved most valuable. For the most part, the White Mountain 
Apache were responsible for saving this species from extinction. They protected the Apache trout for 
more than a decade before the AGFD and FWS took a substantial interest in its survival. Even after 
these agencies began contributing to restoration efforts, the Apache were largely responsible for the 
restoration work that increased Apache trout numbers and expanded its geographic range.  Just as the 
FWS downgraded the Apache trout from endangered to threatened in 1975,   the Apache found 
themselves embroiled in political battles to control elk management and forest restoration in on the 
reservation. Success with the Apache trout demonstrated the legitimacy of the Tribe‟s management 
capacity, aiding their justification to control elk and forest restoration. After assuming control of these 
management endeavors, elk numbers dramatically increased and forest health improved. All of these 
successes fed off of each other, providing the Tribe with political momentum. In short, as restoration 
successes mounted, so did the Tribe‟s political capital. Most recently the Apache used this political 

 
 
370 
 
capital to avoid the economic and cultural constraints of critical habitat designations, finally earning the 
right to build the Miner Flats water works system.  Furthermore, with this political capital and the 
restoration of an economic base, the Tribe reached a level of self-sufficiency and cultural autonomy not 
seen since the beginning of the reservation days.  
As restoration lent itself to increasing the economic and political stability of the White Mountain 
Apache, the Tribe acquired the political and economic flexibility to be more creative with their 
restoration work. The Apache solidified the foundations for self-sufficiency by incorporating tribal 
cultural and economic concerns with ecological goals when designing restoration projects. Over time, 
these projects evolved to perform the tripartite function of healing the negative impacts of Euro-
American overexploitation of reservation lands, establishing a degree of economic freedom from the 
federal government, and restoring and maintaining cultural traditions. To that end, the 1990s saw an 
explosion of restoration projects that widely integrated elements of Apache culture, which often meant 
rediscovering Apache knowledge and applying it to these projects. The new Apache knowledge system 
became a hybrid of past Apache traditions and contemporary Western science and technology.  
Incorporating elements of Apache knowledge and culture became the cornerstone of many 
restoration projects. Restorationists began employing Apache cultural traditions, natural history, land 
management techniques, and philosophies of ecosystem management.  For instance, the Tribe included 
aspects of their pre-colonization land management practices into restoration projects. White Mountain 
Apaches, like most indigenous groups, have their own technological history. This history provided 
inspiration for their restoration efforts. The recognition of a technical continuity with the past became an 
important feature of restoration projects. Many members of the White Mountain Apache Tribe viewed 
ecological restoration as a logical extension of traditional Apache agricultural practices. In a sense, they 
perceived themselves as coming full circle with their history when participating in restoration work.  

 
 
371 
 
In sum, ecological restoration on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation currently is guided by a hybrid 
knowledge system, albeit a hybrid system that Western science and technology still largely dominates. 
This knowledge system has evolved considerably since the Indian New Deal and will continue to 
evolve. As the Apache people continue to rediscover their past and conduct cultural restoration projects, 
the Apache way will become more evident in land management plans. And they will continue to connect 
these cultural traditions with a diverse array of values: biodiversity, religion, ecological, economic, 
aesthetic, recreational, health (mental and physical), political, adaptability, and epistemological. The 
history of ecological restoration on the Fort Apache exemplifies the necessity of acknowledging that all 
restoration work embodies the mark of a context-specific community value system. The very 
incorporation of this value system into restoration goals and other land management practices aided the 
Tribe‟s political quest to regain control of their eco-cultural resources, thus their destiny.  In short, they 
retook ownership and responsibility for their homeland. Although the Apache story makes obvious the 
importance to local communities of including multiple values into restoration projects, we still should 
recognize that integrating social and cultural values into land management strategies has consequences 
for the land. In the next section, I discuss the implication of incorporating a diverse set of values into 
restoration projects for the Fort Apache landscape.  
 
The Geography of Restoration  
The evolution of restoration and land management on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation has had 
consequences for the physical shape and ecological health of the Apache homeland. Restoration since 
the Indian New Deal has evolved from a paternalistically driven practice focused on rehabilitating 
commercially important species to a community-based practice focused on ecosystems as a whole. In 
addition, the philosophical approach to land management has shifted away from one relying on linear, 

 
 
372 
 
mechanistic, sustained yield models that generally created predictions to guide the management of a few 
economically important species or a single ecosystem service such as water yield. For instance, prior to 
the 1970s, reforestation, forest thinning, and prescribed burns had two purposes: ensure the highest 
productivity of Ponderosa pine and increase water yield. And arguably, these practices benefitted 
outside interests more than the Apache. Currently, these practices still exist; however, they serve the 
concerns of the Apache community and restore a wide variety of ecosystem functions and services. For 
example, prescribed burns now are applied to enhance wildlife habitat, protect endangered species, 
improve grazing lands, restore wetlands, return the forest to a pre-twentieth century community 
structure, and not only restore overall ecosystem health, but protect sacred sites and burial grounds from 
wildfires. By gaining control of prescribed burns and other restoration techniques from the BIA and 
other governmental agencies, the Tribe has begun to reconfigure the Fort Apache landscape for the 
benefit of the Apache people.  
The White Mountain Apache are quite proud of their restoration accomplishments. This pride 
manifests itself in tribal land manager‟s employing boundary work that actively delineates Apache land 
from adjacent federal and private lands.  For instance, in addition to the Watershed Program‟s 
restorative duties, its projects became an opportunity to promote the health of the Apache landscape to 
outsiders. In 1996, the Tribe invited University of Arizona ecologists to monitor the reservation‟s 
“pristine” highland springs for comparison to streams in the adjacent Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest.  In exchange for training tribal members in cutting-edge stream analysis technology, the Tribe 
permitted these ecologists to conduct their research on the reservation. Benrita Burnette,  a benefactor of 
the training program, proudly claimed, “Our … visitors said that they liked our stream better than the 
ones they had been to on the Forest Service [National Forest], which they said had smelled bad.” 1   
                                                 
1 B. Mae Burnette, “Studying the Rivers: A Great Adventure,” Fort Apache Scout 35 (November 22, 1996): 1; 
“BIA to Resume Control Burning: After a 3-year Tribe-imposed Hiatus, the Bureau will Burn Forest Land under 

 
 
373 
 
Apache pride for their restoration work remained quite evident during my visit with White Mountain 
Apache restorationists in 2007. Tribal restorationists revealed a number of their successful wetland and 
stream restoration projects. On our stop at Soldier Spring, which flows east off the reservation into the 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, they made a point of showing me the drastic difference between the 
stream bank within the reservation boundary and off-reservation. Indeed, evidence of erosion and down-
cutting was negligible on the reservation, but signs of erosion were considerable as soon we entered the 
national forest. Demonstrating the relative health of the Fort Apache ecosystem and their stewardship 
capabilities remain extremely important to the Tribe for political, cultural, and social reasons. Such 
comparisons bolster the Tribe‟s growing reputation as restorationists and land managers. Furthermore, 
any image of good land management the Tribe can lodge in people‟s minds aids the Apache people in 
their ongoing battles to control their eco-cultural resources.  
Consequently, the political sovereignty of the Apache people over their land has major implications 
for the physical shape and ecological health of the landscape. Ever since the Executive Order that 
established the reservation, the federally defined boundary has played a role in shaping the Fort Apache 
lands relative to off-reservation lands. As early as the late nineteenth century Edward Nelson noticed 
that elk populations flourished on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation, while they declined off-
reservation. Politics, culture, and differing land management regimes caused these differences. The 
Apache preferred deer meat over elk, the reservation Superintendent held non-Indian hunting to a 
minimum, and Euro-Americans remained deathly afraid of the Apache, thus curtailing the extraction of 
elk from the reservation. At the on-set of the Indian New Deal, BIA officials bragged about the 
abundance of wildlife on the reservation relative to adjacent lands.  Because of this, the BIA began 
promoting the recreational potential of the reservation and trained Apaches as game wardens. The 
                                                                                                                                                                         
much Stricter Guidelines,” Fort Apache Scout 31 (October 16, 1992): 1; Dallas Massey, Sr., “Chairman‟s Vision: 
Tribal Council Approves Plans for Prescribed Burning,” Fort Apache Scout 37 (July 31, 1998): 2. 

 
 
374 
 
reservation boundary again delineated ecological differences. The Apache chose not to allow Euro-
Americans to hunt on the reservation until the mid 1947 and not extensively until the 1950s. Deer and 
turkey remained off limits until the 1960s, again reconfiguring reservation wildlife populations relative 
to adjacent lands. The Apache trout benefitted from this cultural and political isolation as well, surviving 
long enough to benefit from the WMRE. Fort Apache became the last refuge of this endangered trout 
and eventually the source for recovery efforts state-wide.  
Fort Apache also became an experimental ground for new restoration and land management 
techniques. These cooperative efforts between the state and federal government had both positive and 
negative consequences for Fort Apache ecosystems. On the negative side, while water conservation 
experiments minimally increased water yields to users in the Salt River Valley, the experiments 
devastated culturally important sites by destroying cottonwood groves along streams. On the positive 
side, on a limited scale prescribed burns recreated a forest less vulnerable to destructive wildfires. The 
highly destructive Rodeo-Chediski Fire of 2002 served as a natural experiment that revealed the benefits 
of prescribed burns, a silver lining in this unfortunate conflagration. Areas on the reservation that had 
been consistently treated received far less damage than untreated areas. Even more telling, the adjacent 
national forest that had never received any treatments experienced far worse damage than reservation 
lands. The Tribal Council‟s decision to continue prescribed burns under a modified regime in the early 
1990s had lasting benefits, even if on a small-scale, to their homeland. The Rodeo-Chediski Fire could 
have wreaked far more havoc if the Tribe had decided to discontinue this practice.2 
The transfer of control over reservation resources didn‟t begin in earnest until the establishment of 
the WMRE in 1952. At this time the Tribe decided to pursue the restoration of the Apache trout and the 
enhancement of their lands for tourism. However, the impact of Apache decisions on reservation 
                                                 
2 Strom, Pre-fire Treatment Effect; Mary Stuever, “BAER Fairs Showcase Burn Restoration,” Fort Apache Scout 
43 (February 18, 2005). 

 
 
375 
 
resources remained minimal relative to the BIA‟s decisions concerning land management until the 
1970s. The creation of the Trophy Elk Program and the decision to reduce allowable cuts for FATCO 
marked a major transition in power from the BIA and the Arizona Game and Fish Department to the 
Tribe. During this period, the Tribe regained substantial control over all reservation eco-cultural 
resources. This time period also signified a change in direction for the ecological destiny of the 
reservation landscape. First, the Tribe ramped up efforts to use ecological restoration to enhance the 
recreational potential of the reservation. Increasing elk populations attracted hunters from all over the 
world, reducing allowable cuts enhanced the “wilderness” quality of the reservation, and restoring 
Apache trout populations turned the reservation into fishing hot spot. In short, eco-tourism became a 
major industry for the Tribe.  
This economic boom also had implications for lands adjacent to the reservation. Towns on the 
northern edge of Fort Apache - Pinetop, Showlow, and Springerville - experienced extensive economic 
growth as a consequence of the WMRE. Motels, restaurants, gas stations, and retail services all swarmed 
to this region to capitalize on the increased tourist activity associated with Fort Apache. With the 
intrusion of these businesses came population growth and suburban and exurban sprawl. While the Tribe 
limited the influx of retail and restaurant chains, the surrounding Euro-American communities didn‟t. As 
a consequence, Apache land use decisions literally created an island paradise for nature seekers. White 
Mountain Apache actions to limit allowable timber cuts, increase elk populations, restore the Apache 
trout and other endangered species,  restore watersheds, build reservoirs, establish a wilderness area and 
game preserve, continue conducting prescribed burns, and limit the intrusion of national business chains 
resulted in a noticeable contrast in landscapes.3  
                                                 
3 ACIA, Report on Proceedings of the 5th Annual Indian Town Hall: Tribal Water Rights – Today’s Concern 
(Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1978), pp. 1-4; “Recreation Enterprises Legal Battle 
Continues,” Fort Apache Scout 18 (March 7, 1980): 1; Ronnie Lupe, “Chairman‟s Corner: Managed tourism 
essential to Tribe‟s economic development,” Fort Apache Scout 36 (August 15, 1997): 2. 

 
 
376 
 
Finally, the economic boom from tourism, along with changes in federal Indian policy, bestowed the 
Tribe with the financial stability to rediscover Apache culture. As early as the 1960s, with the 
establishment of Mount Baldy Wilderness Area, the Tribe began giving consideration to integrating 
Apache culture into restoration and land management projects. However, the 1990s truly marked the 
first time the Tribe obtained the financial capacity to seriously address matters concerning the 
degradation of their culture through ecological restoration work. The significant addition to restoration 
work of Apache cultural elements played a major role in shaping the ecosystems of the reservation. The 
decisions to restore sacred sites such as Soldier Spring, restore culturally important species (cattail, 
medicinal plants, Mexican wolves, pronghorn antelope, elk, and Mexican spotted owls), incorporate 
culturally sensitive materials in restoration work, use the knowledge of elders, reconstruct places based 
on Apache legends, adopt an ecosystem management philosophy, and protect spiritually important 
places such as Mount Graham and Mountain Baldy all had consequences for the reservation landscape.  
In many instances the ways the Apache have begun to reconfigure the land are quite subtle and 
perhaps unnoticeable to a non-Apache, especially in terms of culturally significant places. To the outside 
observer these places may only look like a grove of cottonwoods, or a run of the mill stream, or a 
wetland, but to the White Mountain Apache these places emanate deep historical and cultural meaning. 
In a sense, the act of restoration transcends the physical landscape and enters the mind, promoting the 
less tangible epistemological, moral, mental health, and spiritual aspects of Apache culture. And their 
decisions to restore these culturally important places or keep them intact have a bearing on the 
appearance and ecological function of the land.  In part because the Apache have chosen to protect and 
restore culturally important places, tourists are treated to the aesthetic qualities of a relatively healthy 
ecosystem.  

 
 
377 
 
Beyond local effects, the restoration work on Fort Apache holds fairly broad implications. White 
Mountain Apache ecosystem management decisions impact roughly 1.7 million acres of land. Multiply 
the Apache restoration efforts by the vast amount of restoration work that emerged in Indian country in 
the 1990s and one finds that Native Americans significantly influence over 100 million acres of the 
United States. This number doesn‟t even include the trend towards contracting Native American land 
management agencies to administer restoration programs on federal and state lands.4 Although Native 
American groups broadly shared a culturally disruptive past, attempting to boil all American Indian 
restoration efforts into a single category seems ill-advised. Each culture has endured different 
experiences with the federal government, state governments, municipal governments, and their own 
people. Each culture‟s struggle diverged because they had unique political arrangements (treaties, 
Executive Orders, agreements, status as a federally recognized group) with the federal government. 
Other factors that influence the nature of  Native American restoration efforts is the geography of the 
reservation, size of reservation, what types of lands are adjacent to Indian lands (public or private, city 
or rural), population size, degree of outside exploitation,  the degree of cultural disruption, and so on.  
Because of all of these social, political, cultural, and environmental variables, each Native American 
group embarking on restoration projects is working with unique initial conditions contingent on their 
particular historical circumstances. These unique conditions constrain and shape the outcome of Native 
American projects. 
                                                 
4 Catherine S. Fowler, Pauline Esteves, Grace Goad, Bill Helmer, and Ken Watterson, “Caring for the Trees: 
Restoring Timbisha Shoshone Land Management Practices in Death Valley National Park,” Ecological 
Restoration 21 (2003): 302-306; Curt Mack, Jim Holyan, and Isaac Babcock, Restoration and Management of 
Gray Wolves in Central Idaho: Progress Report 2004 (Lapawai, ID: Nez Perce Tribe, Department of Wildlife 
Management, 2005); Elizabeth Grossman, “Nez Perce Tribe Welcomes Wolves Back to Idaho,” Orion Afield  6 
(Spring, 2002): 18-19; Dave Egan and M.Kat Anderson, eds.,  “Theme Issue: Native American Land 
Management Practices in National Parks,” Ecological Restoration 21 (2003): 245-310; Fish and Wildlife Service, 
“Fish and Wildlife Service and Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribal Governments Sign Annual Funding 
Agreement,” Federal Register 70 (February 1, 2005): 5205-5210. 

 
 
378 
 
As a consequence, Indian lands all across the United States have become eco-cultural islands in the 
ocean of Euro-American society. These patches of land add to the eco-cultural (bio-cultural) diversity of 
the North American landscape. Perhaps one of the biggest questions of the twenty-first century revolves 
around the impact that the cultural mosaic of Native American, Euro-American, and other cultures has 
on the sustainability of North American ecosystems. One possible positive role that Native Americans 
could play as the restoration phenomenon within Indian country matures is that the various cultures 
could operate as a counter force to the homogenization effect of the dominant society‟s economic 
growth.  
My hunch is that a diversity of restoration cultures is a good thing, thus something worth 
encouraging. Native American restoration efforts are a perfect example of this. Since so many Native 
American groups are currently practicing ecological restoration, each representing a unique culture, their 
efforts represent a major contribution to addressing the biodiversity crisis. Links between biological 
diversity and cultural diversity are becoming more evident as anthropologists, ecologists, conservation 
biologists, and social scientists begin to study the context-specific manner in which different cultures, 
especially indigenous cultures, managed their local ecosystems.5 Thousands of human cultures remained 
relatively isolated from each other until 1,000 years ago. As a consequence, the sheer diversity of these 
cultures was partly responsible for creating heterogeneous landscapes across the globe, thus maintaining 
the diversity of flora and fauna that currently are rapidly disappearing. To be clear, I am in no way 
suggesting that humans are responsible for all biodiversity. Obviously biodiversity is a product of 
                                                 
5 Ana Persic and Gary Martin, eds., Links between Biological and Cultural Diversity: Concepts, Methods and 
Experiences (Paris, France: UNESCO, 2008); Frikit Berkes, “Community Conserved Areas: Policy Issues in 
Historic and Contemporary Context,” Conservation Letters 1 (2008): 1-6; Paul E. Minnis and Wayne J. Elisens, 
eds., Biodiversity and Native America (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2000); Martha L. Henderson, 
“American Indian Reservations: Controlling Separate Space, Creating Separate Environments,” in The American 
Environment: Interpretations of Past Geographies, Larry M. Dilsaver and Craig E. Colten, eds. (Rowan and 
Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 1992), 113-134; Arturo Escobar, Territories of Difference (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2008). 

 
 
379 
 
billions of years of natural selection, which involves a variety of selective pressures beyond human 
influence. Nevertheless, what seems plausible is that the arrival of diverse human cultures into a variety 
of ecosystems led to the partial reordering of these systems to suit each culture‟s needs. Some of the 
biodiversity that we see today is an artifact of these relatively local manipulations of ecosystems.  The 
restricted nature of these local interactions with the non-human environment helped maintain and create 
biodiverse ecosystems. However, only in recent history with the global expansion of a few cultures, their 
preferred beasts of burden and domesticated plants, and their accidental hitchhikers did the biodiversity 
crisis emerge. In particular the rapid expansion of Western culture in the last thousand years produced a 
bio-cultural homogenization on a global scale.6  
This homogenization process occurred on both cultural and biological fronts. The indigenous 
movement to sustain their cultures in the wake of this homogenization process functions to rebuff the 
depletion of biodiversity. This resistance to Westernization has direct implications for American Indian 
restoration efforts. In pockets throughout North America, Native Americans, First Nations Peoples, and 
indigenous groups in Latin America are blending their unique cultures and ways of viewing nature with 
the Western science and technology of ecological restoration. The localness and cultural idiosyncrasies 
of these projects provide hope that the species endemic to these places might regain cultural significance 
or acquire cultural importance, thus a greater chance of survival.7 The Apache trout offers a case in 
point. If the White Mountain Apache had not bonded with this species, it‟s extinction may have 
transpired relatively unnoticed due to twentieth-century fish culturist attempts to standardize North 
American streams for the optimal fishing experience. Other Native American groups are accomplishing 
the same – restoring culturally keystone species that don‟t necessarily hold a global economic value.8 
                                                 
6 Alfred W. Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900-1900 (New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press, 1986). 
7 Persic and Martin, Links Between Biological and Cultural Diversity. 
8 Garibaldi and Turner, “Cultural Keystone Species.” 

 
 
380 
 
Each of these groups, by saving locally important species, is combating the standardizing force of 
globalization and Western Eurocentric domination.  
We must note, however, that these cultures interact with other cultures, including Western society. 
The outcome of restoration work, in many ways, is still a product of ongoing tension among federal, 
state, municipal, private, and tribal interests. In short, Native American groups co-evolve with other 
cultures. They incorporate cultural elements, especially knowledge, science, and technology, into their 
own cultures. This process is unstoppable, and we should not attempt to deny modernity to Native 
Americans for the sake of preserving past cultures. Indigenous cultures desire social progress just as 
Western culture does, although on their own terms. 
 
 
Challenges to Euro-American Conceptions of Ecological Restoration 
Beyond their presence as active managers in the pre-European settlement landscape, current 
American Indian restoration efforts complicate, challenge, and potentially enrich Western notions of 
restoration in at least six ways. The first one we already discussed at length in the previous section: the 
integration of cultural and ecological concerns in restoration projects has significant implications for the 
maintenance of biodiversity on a landscape-scale. Second, the eco-cultural emphasis on restoration has 
led to a flexible, context-specific planning approach - the application of an ecosystem management 
philosophy flavored by the local idiosyncrasies of the White Mountain Apache and other Native 
American groups. Moreover, American Indian restoration efforts demonstrate the necessity of locally 
designed restoration goals. For instance, the White Mountain Apache have transcended conflicts over 
which historical landscape to restore, consequently combining many goals and values to produce eco-
culturally hybrid landscapes. The diversity of projects occurring with a limited budget on the Fort 
Apache Indian Reservation illustrates the possibility of developing comprehensive, landscape-scale 

 
 
381 
 
restoration projects that incorporate local, regional, and national needs along with considerations for 
nonhuman nature. On a scale encompassing the entire reservation - an area covering 2,627 square miles 
(slightly larger than the state of Delaware) – the patchwork of local restoration projects, regardless of the 
goals, collectively act to restore the ecosystems of the Apache homeland by incorporating eco-cultural 
elements from both the past and present.  
Third, since Phil Stago‟s proclamation that Apache local knowledge was superior to Arizona Game 
and Fish Department knowledge concerning the management of elk populations on Fort Apache, the 
Tribe has increasingly employed local knowledge about reservation ecosystems to manage their lands 
for the benefit of the Apache people. Local Apache knowledge is practical knowledge developed from 
knowing the idiosyncrasies of the land one lives on. As the Apache continue their quest to control 
knowledge production on the reservation, they find further examples of how the application of universal 
knowledge fails when it is not integrated with local knowledge. Dallas Massey, the Tribal Chairman 
from 1998 to 2006, aptly described the negative consequences of this epistemological misconception at 
the Tri-Area Forestry Meeting in 1999:   
Our wildlife budget plan is currently being developed by a computer software program created 
by federal agencies far removed from our reservations. This program not only confines our costs 
to prevent and fight forest fires, it also bases this cost upon an average value of a stand of timber 
in the southwest [sic] and an average value of machinery and labor necessary to fight and prevent 
forest fires. The program does not consider other conditions which are different from one 
reservation to another, nor does it care about conditions on a particular reservation. Such a 
general, broad-based application of conceived condition results in vastly different outcomes for 
similar reservations, and equal results for very different reservations …Without “hands on” 
experience of preventing and fighting forest fires, no amount of averaging will provide the 
means necessary for each Indian nation represented here. We must break these conventional 
bonds and generic descriptions of the unpredictable costs for these programs, and create 
individual systems to develop wildfire budgets.9 
 
This White Mountain Apache resistance to universal knowledge production serves as a reminder of the 
inadequacies of this epistemological philosophy when applied without complementary local knowledge. 
                                                 
9 Dallas Massey, Sr., “Chairman‟s Vision: Address to Representatives at the Tri-Area Forestry Meeting on March 
16-18,” The Fort Apache Scout 37 (March 26, 1999): 2. 

 
 
382 
 
Native Americans along with other local cultures are all experimenting with the integration of local and 
universal knowledge in a trial and error fashion. We shouldn‟t overlook these bold experiments. 
Fourth, the incorporation of different cultural perspectives is important to the success of restoration 
projects on reservation lands. By the 1990s, the Tribe fused Western science and technology with 
Apache knowledge and culture in all of their projects.  This has been a potentially fulfilling endeavor 
within the reservation setting. However, beyond the reservation, skepticism about the efficacy of Native 
American knowledge remains common. This is despite the efforts of a growing number of Euro-
American advocates, such as Kat Anderson and Nancy Turner, who believe incorporating Native 
American knowledge into Western-based land management strategies can help solve many 
environmental problems. Nonetheless, the National Park Service, the Forest Service, the FWS, 
conservation biologists, and restoration ecologists have recently begun to acknowledge the importance 
of Native American knowledge. However, progress towards incorporating this knowledge into 
management plans is not only slow, but often met with political resistance. This is apparent in the 
FWS‟s recent unprecedented decision in December 2004 to turn half the management duties on the 
National Bison Range over to the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (CKST), a group with a 
respectable record of natural resource management on the Flathead Indian Reservation. Resistance to 
this move, which began well before the transfer of responsibilities, continues today from within the 
ranks of the FWS, environmental groups, science watchdog groups, and conservatives seeking to 
undermine tribal sovereignty. Many of the formal complaints question the scientific competency of the 
CKST, but these criticisms only mask the territorial nature of the dispute. Equally evident are concerns 
about job loss for federal employees, loss of federal control over natural resources, and the special status 
of tribes as sovereign nations. Nevertheless, the successful integration of Native American and Western 
knowledge on some reservations seems to suggest that the resistance to importing Native American 

 
 
383 
 
knowledge into the mainstream of Western science is less about epistemological incompatibility and 
more about power struggles and cultural inflexibility.10 
Fifth, American Indian restoration efforts are explicitly political. Historical and contemporary 
external threats to sovereignty often motivate restoration projects on tribal lands, thus blurring the 
boundaries between science and society. In mixing science with politics, American Indians realize that 
the process of building sustainable societies can‟t rely too much on restoring the past. They must take 
into consideration what has transpired to create their current condition and the constraints that past and 
present conditions put on any plans for cultural or ecological restoration. In essence, this restorative 
mindset doesn‟t seek to return to an ideal past condition, but embarks on a “continuous communal re-
interpretation of conditions from the immediate and long-term past.”11 This process not only involves 
blending past and present physical features of the landscape but different cultural traditions as well. So 
in a sense, the Apache along with other Native American groups are creating hybridized landscapes and 
knowledge systems. In creating these landscapes and knowledge systems, American Indians use 
Western and Native American techniques and knowledge to shape ecosystems in accordance with their 
history and contemporary physical and political constraints. In doing so, they cautiously attempt, while 
protecting their cultural identity, to transcend rigid historical (e.g., the wilderness ideal) and cultural 
barriers (e.g., Western versus non-Western knowledge systems) prevalent in Western society. In sum, 
American Indian resistance to cultural assimilation ultimately entails cultural exchange with Western 
society, which leads to the creation of eco-culturally hybrid landscapes and knowledge systems on 
reservation lands. 
                                                 
10 Jesse Ford and Dennis Martinez, “Traditional Ecological Knowledge, Ecosystem Science, and Environmental 
Management,” Ecological Applications 10 (2000): 1249-1250; Perry Backus, “Report Critical of Bison Range 
Management,” Missoulian (July 7, 2006).  
11 David Cassagrande and Miguel Vasquez, “Restoring for Cultural-Ecological Sustainability in Arizona and 
Connecticut,” in Greening History: The Presence of the Past in Environmental Restoration, Marcus Hall, ed. 
(New York, NY: Routledge, forthcoming). 

 
 
384 
 
Sixth, the political nature of American Indian restoration projects also points to the importance of 
restoring or developing a sense of place. For American Indians, restoring a sense of place is essential to 
recovering eco-cultural sustainability. This is what is truly innovative about indigenous restoration 
projects – they draw from the past to reconstruct eco-cultural ties to the land. This component of 
indigenous restoration projects remain absent from many Euro-American projects, which tend to focus 
solely on ecological or economic issues. Perhaps if Western restoration efforts centered more on 
“becoming indigenous” and eco-cultural survival, these projects would have a lasting public appeal. 
Developing an intimate connection with the land, people would own the process and take responsibility 
for restoring nature. In fact, this phenomenon is beginning to emerge in many places, especially in the 
western United States in areas ravaged by timber over-exploitation, inflicted by desertification, and 
reconfigured by dams.12 Ultimately, like American Indian restoration projects, these community-based 
efforts are tied to cultural survival. More restoration projects must follow this pattern if restoration 
technology is going to have a lasting effect on solving environmental problems. While blending ideas 
from both Native American and Western cultures, Robin Wall Kimmerer, a restorationist of American 
Indian descent, expresses this sentiment well:  
Traditional ecological knowledge is not unique to Native American culture. It is born of long 
intimacy and attentiveness to a homeland and can arise wherever people are materially and 
spiritually integrated with their landscape. The writings of such luminaries as Aldo Leopold 
in “The Land Ethic” and others in the Western tradition express this imperative most 
powerfully. The goal should not be to appropriate the values of indigenous peoples. As an 
immigrant culture, Americans must start to engage in their own process of becoming 
indigenous to this place. 13 
                                                 
12See for example, Freeman House, Totem Salmon: Life Lessons from another Species (Boston: Beacon Press, 
1999); Cecilia Danks, “Community Forestry Initiatives for the Creation of Sustainable Rural Livelihoods: A Case 
from North America,” Unasylva 51 (2000): 53-62; Paul H. Gobster and R. Bruce Hull, Restoring Nature: 
Perspectives from the Social Sciences and Humanities (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2000); William R. 
Jordan, III, The Sunflower Forest: Ecological Restoration and the New Communion with Nature (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2003). 
13 Robin Kimmerer, “Native Knowledge for Native Ecosystems,” Journal of Forestry 98 (August, 2000): 4-9, p. 
9. 
 

 
 
385 
 
Bibliography  
 
 
List of Archival Resources 
 
National Archives and Records Administration (Washington, D.C.)  
 
Record Group 75 (Bureau of Indian Affairs) 
 
 
Central Classified Files – Fort Apache Indian Reservation 
 
Central Classified Files – General Services  
Records Concerning the Enrollee Program 
Records of the Civilian Conservation Corp – Indian Division 
Records of John Collier, 1933-1945 
Tribal Organization 
 
Record Group 381 (Community Service Administration) 
 
 
 
Records of the Office of Economic Opportunity 
 
 
Forest History Society 
 
 
Harold Weaver Papers 
 
J.P. Kinney Oral History 
 
 
Arizona State Library, Archives, and Public Library 
 
 
Fort Apache Scout 
 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs 
 
Arizona Game and Fish Commission 
 
 
Library of Congress 
 
 
Indians at Work 
 
Ecological Restoration (Restoration and Management Notes) 
 
 
Cline Library Archives, Northern Arizona University 
 
 
Various Forest Research Documents Relevant to the Fort Apache Indian Reservation  
 
 
 

 
 
386 
 
List of Periodicals  
 
American Fisheries Society Monograph 
American Fisheries Society Symposium 
American Forests 
American Legion Magazine 
Arizona Cattlelog 
Arizona Daily Star 
Arizona Highways 
Arizona Republic 
Audubon Magazine 
Bulletin of American Museum of Natural History 
Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin) 
Chicago Tribune 
Christian Science Monitor 
Copeia 
Ecology 
Ecological Restoration (Restoration and Management Notes) 
Endangered Species Bulletin 
Federal Register 
Fish and Wildlife News 
Forest and Stream 
Forestry and Irrigation 
Fort Apache Scout (White Mountain Apache tribal newspaper) 
High Country News 
Indian Country Today 
Indians at Work  
Journal of Forestry 
Journal of Mammalogy 
National Geographic 
Nature Magazine 
New York Times 
Proceedings of the Tall Timber Fire Ecology Conference 
Restoration Ecology 
Saturday Evening Post 
Southwestern Naturalist 
Sports Illustrated 
The Timberline 
White Mountain Independent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
387 
 
Legislation 
 
American Indian Religious Freedom Act (1978) 
 
Arizona Water Settlements Act (2004) 
 
Blue Lake Restoration Act (1970) 
 
Federal Aid and Sport Fish Restoration Act (Dingell-Johnson, 1950)  
 
Federal Aid and Wildlife Restoration Act (Pittman-Robertson, 1937) 
 
Endangered Species Act (1973) 
 
Endangered Species Preservation Act (1966) 
 
General Allotment Act (1887) 
 
Indian Claims Commission Act (1946) 
 
Indian Reorganization Act (1934) 
 
Indian Self Determination and Education Assistance Act (1975) 
 
Menominee Restoration Act (1973) 
 
National Indian Forest Resources Management Act (1990) 
 
National Museum of the American Indian Act (1989) 
 
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (1990) 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribe Rural Water System Loan Authorization Act (2008) 
 
Wilderness Act (1964) 
 
 
 
Policy Statements 
 
Executive Order 13084 – Consultation and Coordination with Tribal Governments (1998) 
 
House Concurrent Resolution 108 (Congress, 1953) 
 
MOU: Fish Hatchery Development – Williams Creek, Arizona (Fort Apache Indian Reservation) (BIA, 
FWS, AGFC, and WMAT - 1939) 

 
 
388 
 
 
MOU: Between the Arizona Game and Fish Commission, The White Mountain Apache Tribe, and the 
Fish and Wildlife Service for the Operation of the Williams Creek (McNary) Fish Hatchery (1954) 
 
Presidential Memorandum on Government-to-Government Relations with Native American Tribal 
Governments (1994) 
 
Secretarial Order 486 – Roadless Area Policy on Indian Reservations (DOI, 1937) 
 
Secretarial Order 3206 - American Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribal Trust Responsibilities, and the 
Endangered Species Act (DOI, 1997) 
 
Statement of Relationship (FWS and WMAT, 1994) 
 
 
 
Court Cases 
 
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia 30 U.S. 1 (1831) 
 
Hurley v. Abbott (Kent Decree, 1910) 
 
Greer v. Connecticut 161 U.S. 519 (1896) 
 
Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protection Association 485 U.S. 439 (1988) 
 
Montana v. United States 450 U.S. 544 (1981) 
 
New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe 462 U.S. 324 (1983) 
 
Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe 435 U.S. 191 (1978) 
 
United States v. Washington 384 F. Supp. 312 (Boldt Decision, 1974) 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribe v. State of Arizona, Department of Game and Fish 649 F.2d 1274 (1978) 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker 448 U.S. 136 (1980) 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Arizona 649 F.2d 1274 (1981) 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribe v. The United States 11 Cl. Ct. 614 (Docket 22-H, 1987)  
 
Winters v. United States 207 U.S. 564 (Winter‟s Doctrine, 1908) 
 
Worcester v. Georgia 31 U.S. 515 (1832) 
 

 
 
389 
 
 
Primary Documents  
 
Alcoze, Thomas. “First Peoples in the Pines: Historical Ecology of Humans and Ponderosas,” in 
Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests, P. Friederici, ed., 48-57. 
Washington, DC: Island Press, 2003. 
 
Altaha, Lafe. “Reservation Recreation Enterprise Plays Important Role,” Fort Apache Scout 12 (March, 
1973): 10. 
 
Altaha, Mark T.  “Mount Graham – What is Your Opinion?” Fort Apache Scout 45 (January 5, 2007): 2. 
 
Anonymous. “Dedication Speakers Vision Arboretum as Realization of „Consciousness of Nature,‟” 
Capital Times (June 18, 1934): 12. 
 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs. Report on: Arizona Indian Water Rights Conference. Phoenix, 
AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1974. 
 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs. Sovereignty and Inter-governmental Relations with Arizona 
Indian Tribes: A Report on the 2nd Indian Town Hall. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian 
Affairs, 1975. 
 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs. Annual Report, 1975-1976. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission 
of Indian Affairs, 1976. 
 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs. Report on Proceedings of the 5th Annual Indian Town Hall: 
Tribal Water Rights – Today’s Concern. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1978. 
 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs. Control of Natural Resources: Report of the 7th Annual Indian 
Town, November 15-16, 1979. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs, 1980. 
 
Arizona Commission of Indian Affairs. Indian Self-Determination and Barriers to Realization”: The 9th 
Annual Indian Town Hall Report, October 28-30, 1981. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Commission of 
Indian Affairs, 1982. 
 
Arizona Game and Fish Department. Arizona Big Game Bulletin: Elk. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Game and 
Fish Department, 1972. 
 
Arizona Game and Fish Department. “Annual Report Issue,” Wildlife Views 23 (1976): 28. 
 
Avery, Ben. “Indian Water Rights Big Issue,” The Arizona Republic (June 16, 1957): 1-2. 
 
Avery, Ben. “Apache Set Up „Private‟ Nation,” Arizona Republic (May 13, 1976): D8. 
 
Backus, Perry. “Report Critical of Bison Range Management,” Missoulian (July 7, 2006). 
 

 
 
390 
 
Baeza, Jo. “Chairman Negotiates with Fish & Wildlife on Wolf Management,” Fort Apache Scout 36 
(January 20, 1998): 1. 
 
Baeza, Jo. “Agencies Recommend Continuing with Wolf Reintroduction,” White Mountain Independent 
(June 26, 2006). 
 
Bailey, Vernon E.  Mammals of New Mexico. Washington, D.C.: United States Department of 
Agriculture, Bureau of Biological Survey, 1931. 
 
Barker, Jeff. “Indians Agree to Species Pact,” Arizona Republic (June 12, 1997): A1, A12. 
 
Barr, George W., ed. Arizona Watershed Program. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona, 1956. 
 
Behnke, R.J. “Native trout of western North America,” American Fisheries Society Monograph 6 
(1992). 
 
Bennett, Ramona. “Activism and Red Power,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed. 234-237. 
Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986. 
 
Biswell, H.H., H.R. Kallander, R. Komerek, R.J. Vogl, & H. Weaver, Ponderosa Pine Management: A 
Task Force Evaluation of Controlled Burning in Ponderosa Pine Forests of Central Arizona. 
Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research Station, 1973. 
 
Bureau of Indian Affairs. Report on Cibecue Watershed Project. Whiteriver, AZ: Branch of Land 
Operations, BIA, Fort Apache Agency, 1970. 
 
Burnette, B. Mae. “Studying the Rivers: A Great Adventure,” Fort Apache Scout 35 (November 22, 
1996): 1. 
 
Burnette, Robert. “The War on Poverty,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed., 226-227. Chicago, 
IL: Howe Brothers, 1986. 
 
Burton, Ken. “Babbitt, Commerce Secretary Daley Sign Historic Order on Native Americans,” Fish & 
Wildlife News (September, 1997): 5. 
 
Calahane, Victor H. “The Mammals of the Chiricahua Mountains, Cochise County, Arizona,” Journal of 
Mammalogy 20 (1939): 418-440. 
 
Calleros, Russell A. and Anna Ling. Maximizing the Impact of the Restoration Fund: Policies the White 
Mountain Apache Tribe Can Use to Manage the 22-H Fund. John F. Kennedy School of 
Government: Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development, 1997. 
 
Cantwell, Robert. “The Happiest Fishing Ground,” Sports Illustrated 31(August 4, 1969): 37-42. 
 
Carlson, E.J. “Indian Rice Camps White Earth Reservation,” Indians at Work 2, no. 7 (1934): 16-18. 
 

 
 
391 
 
Carmichael, Gary J., James N. Hanson, James R. Novy, Kelly J. Meyer, and Donald C. Morizot. 
“Apache Trout Management: Cultured Fish, Genetics, Habitat Improvements, and Regulations,” 
American Fisheries Society Symposium 15 (1988): 112-121. 
 
Collier, John. “Superficial Notes on some IECW Projects and Indians at Work by the Editor,” Indians at 
Work 2, no. 2 (1934): 36-42. 
 
Collier, John. “Indian Education Should Be Practical,” Indians at Work 2, no. 3 (1934): 13-14. 
 
Collier, John. “Ancient Ceremonials Revived,” Indians at Work 12, no. 2 (1944): 28-30. 
 
Collier, John. From Every Zenith: A Memoir. Denver, CO: Sage Books, 1962. 
 
Collier, John, Ward Shepard, and Robert Marshall, “The Indians and Their Lands,” Ecology 31 (1933): 
905-910. 
 
Committee on Rare and Endangered Wildlife Species. Rare and Endangered Fish and Wildlife of the 
United States. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, Resource Publication 34, 
1966. 
 
Comptroller General of the United States. Better Overall Planning Needed to Improve the Standard of 
Living of White Mountain Apaches of Arizona. Washington, D.C.: Department of Interior, Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, 1975. 
 
Comptroller General of the United States. Management of Indian Natural Resources. Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office, 1976. 
 
Cooley, Punt. “The Many Faces of Maverick,” Fort Apache Scout 40 (March 22, 2002): 7. 
 
Cornwall, Claude C. “Apache Fair – Whiteriver,” Indians at Work 2, no. 9 (1934): 29-34. 
 
Cosay, Bennett. “While the Rest of Us Hustle and Bustle through Our Daily Lves, Somewhere Up in the 
Mountains a Small Group of People are Having the Time of Their Lives,” Fort Apache Scout 33 
(October 14, 1994): 6. 
 
Deloria, Jr., Vine. “The War Between the Redskins and the Feds,” New York Times (December 7, 1969): 
SM47. 
 
Deloria, Jr., Vine. Red Earth, White Lies: Native Americans and the Myth of Scientific Fact. Golden, 
CO: Fulcrum Publishing, 1997. 
 
Dixon, Theodore F. and Arthur Dodwell (Prepared by F.G. Plummer). Forest Conditions in the Black 
Mesa Forest Preserve, Arizona. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, USGS, 
Professional Paper no. 23, 1904. 
 

 
 
392 
 
Drake, Francis. “Coyote Reads the Letter as He Sits,” in  Myths and Tales of the White Mountain 
Apache, Grenville Goodwin, 173. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1994. 
 
“Elimination of 325,000 Acres on Black River Area from List of Roadless Areas,” Federal Register 24, 
64 (April 2, 1959): 2559-2560. 
 
“Elimination of 105,000 Acres on the Yakima Reservation Known as Goat Rocks Roadless Area, 
130,000 Acres on Fort Apache Reservation Known as Mount Thomas Roadless Area, and 48,000 
Acres on Yakima Reservation Known as Mount Adams Wild Area,” Federal Register 25, 183 
(September 20, 1960): 9002-9003. 
 
Enochs, Oliver. “A Turkey Hunt,” Forest and Stream 64 (January 8, 1910): 59. 
 
Environmental Protection Agency. Watershed Analyses and Management Guide for States and 
Communities. Washington, D.C.: Office of Water Resources, U.S.E.P.A., 2003. 
 
“Executive Order 13084: Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments,” Federal 
Register 63 (May 14, 1998): 27655. 
 
Fechner, Robert. “Fechner Clarifies Civilian Status of CCC,” American Forests 45, no. 10 (October, 
1939): 511. 
 
Ford, Jesse, and Dennis Martinez, “Traditional Ecological Knowledge, Ecosystem Science, and 
Environmental Management,” Ecological Applications 10 (2000): 1249-1250. 
 
Foust, Tom. “White Mountain G&F Head Hopes to Avoid Politics,” The Arizona Daily Star (April 27, 
1995): 8C. 
 
Fowler, Catherine S., Pauline Esteves, Grace Goad, Bill Helmer, and Ken Watterson. “Caring for the 
Trees: Restoring Timbisha Shoshone Land Management Practices in Death Valley National Park,” 
Ecological Restoration 21(4) (2003): 302-306. 
 
Gullette, A.V.  “Wickiups Vanishing: Tourist, Lumber Enterprises Provide Jobs and Modern Homes for 
Apaches,” Fort Apache Scout 10 (July, 1971). 
 
Harris, LaDonna. “The War on Poverty,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed., 222-224. Chicago, 
IL: Howe Brothers, 1986. 
 
Hartzell, Rolan. “You can‟t See the Forest for the Trees,” Fort Apache Scout 29 (March 23, 1990): 1, 5. 
 
Hebert, Charles W. “Land of the White Mountain Apaches,” Arizona Highways 37 (July, 1962): 1-43. 
 
Hess, Bill. “The White Mountain Apache: Seeking the Best of Two Worlds,” National Geographic 157 
(1980): 272-290. 
 

 
 
393 
 
Holsinger, S.J. “The Boundary Line between the Desert and the Forest,” Forestry and Irrigation 8 
(1902): 21-27. 
 
Hyatt, Robert M. “Apacheland Welcomes White Man,” American Legion Magazine, (March 1962): 14-
15, 38-39. 
 
Jerome, A.T. “In Lonesome Canyon,” Forest and Stream 25 (November 12, 1885): 303. 
 
Karle, Jack. “Apaches‟ New Lake First Step In Creating Vacation Paradise,” The Arizona Republic 
(June 9, 1957): 1. 
 
Kelly, Brian T.,  and Cynthia Westfall. “White Mountain Apache Tribe Welcomed as Partner in Wolf 
Recovery,” Fish and Wildlife News (April/May/June, 2001): 1. 
 
Kelly, William H.  Indians of the Southwest: A Survey of Indian Tribes and Indian Administration in 
Arizona. Tucson, AZ: Bureau of Ethnic Research, University of Arizona, 1953. 
 
 
Kimmerer, Robin W. “Native Knowledge for Native Ecosystems.” Journal of Forestry 98 (2000): 4-9. 
 
Kinney, J.P. “Forestry on Indian Reservations,” Journal of Forestry 10 (September, 1912): 471-477. 
 
Kinney, J.P. “Forestry Administration on Indian Reservations,” Journal of Forestry (December, 1921): 
836-843. 
 
Kinney, J.P. “Forest Policy on Indian Timberlands,” Journal of Forestry 25 (April, 1927): 430-436. 
 
Kinney, J.P. “The Administration of Indian Forests,” Journal of Forestry 28 (December, 1930): 1041-
1052. 
 
Kinney, J.P.  Indian Forest and Range: A History of the Administration of the Redman’s Heritage. 
Washington, D.C.: Forestry Enterprises, 1950. 
 
Kneeland, Gig. “Vital Issue Raised by Apaches,” The Arizona Republic (June 9 1957): 1. 
 
Krefting, Lauritis and Alton Bramer, “Wildlife Conservation at Grand Portage,” Indians at Work 12, no. 
3 (1944): 19-21. 
 
Leopold, Aldo. “Grass, Brush, Timber, and Fire in Southern Arizona,” Journal of Forestry 22 (October, 
1924): 1-10. 
 
Leopold, Aldo. “Conservationist in Mexico,” American Forests 43 (1937): 118-120, 146. 
 
Leopold, Aldo. “A Biotic View of Land,” Journal of Forestry 37 (1939): 727-730. 
 

 
 
394 
 
Leopold, Aldo. “Land Use and Democracy,” Audubon Magazine 44 (September-October, 1942): 259-
265. 
 
 Leopold, Aldo. A Sand County Almanac and Sketches Here and There. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press, 1968. 
 
Leopold, Aldo. “Some Fundamentals of Conservation in the Southwest,” Environmental Ethics 1 
(1979): 131-141. 
 
Long, Jonathan W.  Building Connections: A Strategy to Integrate Resource Management. John F. 
Kennedy School of Government: Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development, 
1994. 
 
Long, Jonathan W. “Cibecue Watershed Projects: Then, Now, and in the Future,” in Land Stewardship 
in the 21st Century: The Contributions of Watershed Management, Proceedings RMRS-P-13, P. 
Ffolliot et al., technical coordinators, 227-233. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 2000. 
 
Long, Jonathan W. and Benrita M. Burnette. “Cibecue Watershed Projects: Then, Now, and in the 
Future,” in Land Stewardship in the 21st Century: The Contributions of Watershed Management, 
Proceedings RMRS-P-13, P. Ffolliot et al., technical coordinators, 361-362. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 2000. 
 
Long, Jonathan W., Delbin Endfield, Candy Lupe, and Mae Burnette. “Battle at the Bridge: Using 
Participatory Approaches to Develop Community Researchers in Ecological Management,” in 
Proceedings of the Fifth Biennial Conference on University Education in Natural Resources, 
Natural Resources and Environmental Issues, volume XII, Thomas E. Kolb, ed. Logan UT: Quinney 
Library, College of Natural Resources, Utah State University, 2004. 
 
Long, Jonathan W., and Candy S. Lupe. “A Process for Planning and Evaluating Success of Riparian-
wetland Projects on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation,” Hydrology and Water Resources in 
Arizona and the Southwest 28 (1998): 68-74. 
 
Long, Jonathan W., Aregai Tecle, and Benrita Burnette, “Cultural foundations for ecological restoration 
on the White Mountain Apache Reservation,” Conservation Ecology 8 (2003): 4.  [online] URL:  
http://www.consecol.org/vol8/iss1/art4. 
 
Long, Jonathan W., Aregai Tecle, and Benrita M. Burnette, “Marsh Development at Restoration Sites on 
the White Mountain Apache Reservation, Arizona,” Journal of the American Water Resources 
Association (December, 2004): 1345-1359. 
 
Loudenslager, E.J., J.N. Rinne, G.A.E. Gall, and R.E. David. “Biochemical genetic studies of native 
Arizona and New Mexico trout,” Southwestern Naturalist 31 (1986): 221-234. 
 
Lupe, Leroy. “Help Makes Hike Possible,” Fort Apache Scout 16 (August 19, 1977): 2. 
 

 
 
395 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Ronnie Lupe: Candidate for Tribal Chairman,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (March, 1966): 3. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman Reports on Indian Education,” Fort Apache Scout 8 (April, 1968): 4. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Election Candidates Statements,” Fort Apache Scout 9 (March, 1970): 6. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie.  (Testimony of Ronnie Lupe, White Mountain Apache Tribe/NCAI) Federal Protection 
of Indian Resources, Part 5: Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 92nd Congress, 1972, 1048-1055. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner,” Fort Apache Scout 22 (August 5, 1983): 2. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner,” Fort Apache Scout 29 (December 14, 1990): 2. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. „“Our Land, Our Resources, Our Destiny:‟ Remarks before the Indian Governments of 
Saskatchewan Forum on Indian Perspectives on the Environment and Sustainable Development,” 
Fort Apache Scout 30 (June 14, 1991): 2-3. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. The Challenges of Leadership and Self-Government: A Perspective from the White 
Mountain Apaches. John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University: Harvard Project 
on American Indian Economic Development, October 1992. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, The Latest Trespasser trying to 
Seize our Resources,” Fort Apache Scout 32 (March 18, 1994): 2. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner: Congress Hears about our Relationship with the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service,” Fort Apache Scout 34 (August 4, 1995): 2. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner: Our Tribe‟s Ability to Stay Ahead of the Game is Why we are still 
Logging our Forests,” Fort Apache Scout 34 (September 15, 1995): 2. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie (Testimony of Chairman Ronnie Lupe, White Mountain Apache Tribe) Indian Forest 
Resources Management Acts:  Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, 104th Congress, 1995, 35-49. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie (Testimony of Chairman Ronnie Lupe, White Mountain Apache Tribe). Endangered 
Species Act Reauthorization: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Drinking Water, Fisheries, and 
Wildlife of the Senate Committee on Environmental Public Works, 104th Congress, 1995. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner: Hawley Lake is another Example of How Indians must Live under a 
Double Standard,” The Fort Apache Scout 35 (May 10, 1996): 2. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner: The Exercise of Tribal Sovereignty Lies at the Heart of Healthy 
Ecosystems,” Fort Apache Scout 35 (May 24, 1996): 2. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner: The Restoration Fund will Help us Restore our Ecosystems the 
Apache Way,” Fort Apache Scout 35 (June 7, 1996): 2. 
 

 
 
396 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Chairman‟s Corner: Managed tourism essential to Tribe‟s economic development,” Fort 
Apache Scout 36 (August 15, 1997): 2. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Comments of the Chairman of the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council,” in Indian 
Water – 1997 Trends and Directions in Federal Water Policy, Ted Olinger, ed., 38-44. Boulder, CO: 
Report to the Western Water Policy Review Advisory Commission, 1997. 
 
Lupe, Ronnie. “Update on the Burn Area Emergency Response Program,” Fort Apache Scout 45 
(November 24, 2006): 3. 
 
Lyon, Oren. “Traditionalism and the Reassertion of Indianness,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, 
ed., 244-246. Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986. 
 
Mack, Curt, Jim Holyan, and Isaac Babcock. Restoration and Management of Gray Wolves in Central 
Idaho: Progress Report 2004. Lapawai, ID: Nez Perce Tribe, Department of Wildlife Management, 
2005. 
 
Madsen, M.J. A Biological Survey of Streams and Lakes of Fort Apache and San Carlos Indian 
Reservations, Arizona. Washington, D.C.: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Fisheries, May, 
1935. 
 
Marshall, Robert. “Address of Mr. Robert Marshall, of the United States Indian Service,” in Wildlife and 
Restoration: Proceedings of the North American Wildlife Conference, 224-229. Washington, D.C.: 
United States Government Printing Office, 1936. 
 
Marshall, Robert. “The Universe of the Wilderness is Vanishing,” Nature Magazine 29, no. 4 (April, 
1937): 239. 
 
Marshall, Robert. “Ecology and the Indians,” Ecology 18 (1937): 159-161. 
 
Martinez, Dennis Rogers. “The Sinkyone Intertribal Park Project,” Restoration and Management Notes 
10(1) (1992): 64-69. 
 
Martinez, Dennis Rogers. “Protected Areas, Indigenous Peoples, and the Western Idea of Nature,” 
Ecological Restoration 21 (2003): 247-250. 
 
Massey, Sr., Dallas. “Chairman‟s Vision: Address to Representatives at the Tri-Area Forestry Meeting 
on March 16-18,” The Fort Apache Scout 37 (March 26, 1999): 2. 
 
Massey, Sr., Dallas. “Chairman‟s Vision: Tribal Council Approves Plans for Prescribed Burning,” Fort 
Apache Scout 37 (July 31, 1998): 2. 
 
Massey, Sr., Dallas. “Chairman‟s Vision: 638 Programs for the Continuance of Growth of our Forests 
and Natural Resources,” Fort Apache Scout 39 (March 9, 2001): 2. 
 

 
 
397 
 
Massey, Sr., Dallas. Crisis on the National Forests: Containing the Threat of Wildland Fire to the 
Environment and Communities, Committee on House Resources Subcommittee on Forests and 
Forest Health, 108th Congress, March 7, 2003. 
 
Massey, Sr., Dallas. “In Support of the Protection of Mt. Graham,” Fort Apache Scout 43 (April 15, 
2003): 2. 
 
McKnickle, D‟Arcy. Native American Tribalism: Indian Survival and Renewals. New York: NY: 
Oxford University Press, 1973. 
 
Mearns, Edgar A.  Mammals of the Mexican Boundary of the United States. Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office, 1907. 
 
Merriam, Lewis, et al., The Problem of Indian Administration. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins 
Press, 128. 
 
Miller, Robert R.  “Notes on the Cutthroat and Rainbow trouts with the Description of a New Species 
from the Gila River, New Mexico,” Occasional Papers of the Museum of Zoology, University of 
Michigan 529 (1950): 1-42. 
 
Miller, Robert R. “Classification of the Native Trouts of Arizona with the Description of a New Species, 
Salmo apache,” Copeia (September 8, 1972): 401- 422. 
 
Mitchell, J.H. “The Pipestone Quarry or Restoring an Ancient Indian Shrine,” Indians at Work 2, no. 8 
(1934): 25-29. 
 
Morford, M.E. “White Mountains of Arizona,” Forest and Stream 6 (August 3, 1876): 415. 
 
Nelson, Edward W.  “Explorations in southern Arizona,” Smithsonian Institution Annual Report (1884): 
20-24. 
 
Nelson, Edward W.  “New Species of Elk from Arizona,” Bulletin of American Museum of Natural 
History 16 (1902): 1-12. 
 
Nelson, Edward W. “Forest Reserves as Game Reserves,” Forest and Stream 58 (May 17, 1902): 385. 
 
Nelson, J.S., E.J.  Crossman, H. Espinosa-Pérez, L.T. Findley, C.R. Gilbert, R.N. Lea, and J.D. 
Williams, Common and Scientific Names of Fishes from the United States, Canada, and Mexico. 
Bethesda, MD: American Fisheries Society, 2004. 
 
Officer, James E. “The Bureau of Indian Affairs since 1945: An Assessment,” Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science, 436 (March, 1978): 61-72. 
 
Oliver, Lester (Chairman, White Mountain Apache Tribe). Senate. Committee on Interior and Insular 
Affairs. National Wilderness Preservation Act: Hearings on S. 4028, Part 2, 85th Cong., 1958, 1003-
1004. 

 
 
398 
 
 
Oliver, Lester (Representative, White Mountain Apache Tribe). Senate. Committee on Interior and 
Insular Affairs. National Wilderness Preservation Act: Hearings on S. 1123, 86th Cong., 1959, 448-
449. 
 
Oliver, Lester. “Progress of the White Mountain Apache Tribal Council,” The Timberline 8 (April, 
1961): 2, 4. 
 
Oliver, Lester. “Rebuttal to KRUX Editorial July 24, 1963,” Fort Apache Scout 2 (August, 1963): 2. 
 
Oliver, Lester. “Chairman Answers Salt River Attack on Apaches,” Fort Apache Scout 2 (November, 
1964): 2. 
 
Oliver, Lester. “Lester Oliver: Candidate for Tribal Chairman,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (March, 1966): 3. 
 
Pechuli, Gail. “Wildfire Disaster Shakes Apache‟s Economy,” Indian Country Today (January 29, 
2003). 
 
 Pechuli, Gail. “White Mountain Apache tribe uses BAER to restore charred land,” Indian Country 
Today (February 3, 2003). 
 
Pickett, S.T.A.  and V. T. Parker. “Avoiding the Old Pitfalls: Opportunities in a New Discipline,” 
Restoration Ecology 2 (1994): 75-79. 
 
Pinchot, Gifford. Breaking New Ground. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1947. 
 
“Presidential Memorandum on Government-to-Government Relations with Native American Tribal 
Governments,” Federal Register 59 (May 4, 1994): 22951. 
 
Price, Anna. “Turkey Makes the Corn: Coyote Plants Cooked Corn,” in Myths and Tales of the White 
Mountain Apache, Grenville Goodwin, 61-63. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1994. 
 
Regan, Albert B.  Notes on the Indians of the City of the Fort Apache Region. New York, NY: The 
Trustees, 1930. 
 
Riley, Mary. “Mary Riley Praises Poverty Program,” Fort Apache Scout 4 (November, 1965): 2. 
 
Rinkevich, Sarah E., and Stuart C. Leon. “Stakeholders Assist Species Recovery in the Southwest,” 
Endangered Species Bulletin 25 (2000): 1-2. 
 
Rinne, John N.  “Variation in Apache trout populations in the White Mountains, Arizona,” North 
American Journal of Fisheries Management 5 (1985): 1465-1468. 
 
Rinne, John N. and W.L. Minckley, “Patterns of Variation and Distribution in Apache Trout (Salmo 
apache) Relative to Co-occurrence with Introduced Salmonids,” Copeia (1985): 285-292. 
 

 
 
399 
 
Rinne, John H., Larry Riley, Rob Bettaso, Roger Sorenson, and Kirk Young, “Managing Southwestern 
Native and Nonnative Fishes: Can We Mix Oil and Water and Expect a Favorable Solution?” 
American Fisheries Society Symposium 44 (2004): 445-466. 
 
Roberts, Edith A. and E. Rehmann. American Plants for American Gardens. Athens, GA: University of 
Georgia Press, 1996 (1929). 
 
Rope, John. “John Rope,” in Western Apache Raiding and Warfare: From the Notes of Grenville 
Goodwin, Keith H. Basso, ed., 93-185. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1971. 
 
Schroeder, William L.  “History of Juniper Control on Fort Apache Reservation,” Arizona Cattlelog 8 
(1953): 18-25. 
 
Shepard, Ward. “Reorienting Indian Education and Extension in the Wake of the Wheeler-Howard Act,” 
Indians at Work 2, no. 1 (1934): 8-11. 
 
Sieman, Dan. Overcoming Conflicts with the Endangered Species Act. John F. Kennedy School of 
Government: Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development, 1993. 
 
Simberloff, D.J.,  D. Doak, M. Groom, S. Trombulak, A. Dobson, S. Gatewood, M.E. Soule, M. Gilpin, 
Carlos M. del Rio, and L. Mills. “Regional and Continental Restoration,” in Continental 
Conservation: Scientific Foundations of Regional Reserve Networks, M. E. Soule and J. Terborgh, 
eds., 65-98. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1999. 
 
Sparks, James D. “White Mountain Rec. Enterprise Story of Modern Apache Progress: Completion of 
7th Year of Operations Marked,” Fort Apache Scout 1 (July 1962): 4. 
 
Sparks, James D. “Lydo Harvey – 20 Years of Service and Satisfaction,” Fort Apache Scout 11 ( June, 
1972): 6. 
 
Stago, Jr., Phil. “An Interview: Phillip R. Stago, Jr., Director, WMAT Game and Fish Department,” Fort 
Apache Scout 27 (November 18, 1988): 11. 
 
Strom, Barbara A.  Pre-fire Treatment Effects and Post-fire Dynamics on the Rodeo-Chediski Burn 
Area, Arizona. Master‟s Thesis, Northern Arizona University, 2005. 
 
Strom, Barbara A., and Peter Z. Fulé. “Pre-wildfire Fuel Treatments Affect Long-term Ponderosa Pine 
Forest Dynamics,” International Journal of Wildland Fire 16 (2007): 128-138. 
 
Stuever, Mary. “BAER Fairs Showcase Burn Restoration,” Fort Apache Scout 43 (February 18, 2005): 
4. 
 
Taylor, Benjamin J., and Dennis J. O‟Conner. Fort Apache Reservation Manpower Resources. Tempe, 
AZ: Bureau of Business and Economic Research, Arizona State University, 1969. 
 

 
 
400 
 
Tithla, Bane. “The Maiden from Whom They Disappeared into the Water: Inside Elk‟s Belly,” in Myths 
and Tales of the White Mountain Apache, Grenville Goodwin, 116-119. Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press, 1994. 
 
Torbit, S. and J. McNaught, Restoring the Prairie, Mending the Sacred Hoop: Prairie Conservation and 
Restoration of the Cheyenne River Reservation. National Wildlife Federation and Cheyenne River 
Sioux Tribe, 2003. 
 
United States Congress. Toward Economic Development for Native American Communities, Joint 
Economic Committee, vol. 1, part I, 91st Congress, 1st sess., 1969, 125. 
 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service. “Native Fish and Wildlife: Endangered Species,” Federal 
Register 32 (March 11, 1967): 4001. 
 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service. “‟Threatened‟ Status for Three Species of Trout,” Federal 
Register 40 (July 16, 1975): 29863-29864. 
 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Arizona Trout (Apache Trout) Recovery Plan. Albuquerque, 
NM, 1983. 
 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service. “Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Withdrawal 
of Proposed Rule to List the Plant Salix arizonica (Arizona willow) as Endangered With Critical 
Habitat,” Federal Register 60 (April 28, 1995): 20951-20952. 
 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service. “Fish and Wildlife Service and Confederated Salish and 
Kootenai Tribal Governments Sign Annual Funding Agreement,” Federal Register 70 (February 1, 
2005): 5205-5210. 
 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service. “Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Proposed 
Designation of Critical Habitat for the Spikedace and Loach Minnow,” Federal Register 71 (October 
4, 2006): 58574-58575. 
 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Draft Apache Trout Recovery Plan, Second Revision. 
Albuquerque, NM, 2007. 
 
Valor, Palmer. “Palmer Valor,” in Western Apache Raiding and Warfare: From the Notes of Grenville 
Goodwin, Keith Basso, ed., 41-71. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1971. 
 
Valor, Palmer. “Earth is Set Up,” in Myths and Tales of the White Mountain Apache, Grenville 
Goodwin, 1-2. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1994. 
 
Watkins, Arthur V. (U.S. Congress). Congressional Record. 83rd Cong., 2d sess., 1954. Vol. 100, pt. 5: 
6253.  
 

 
 
401 
 
Watkins, Arthur V.  “Termination of Federal Supervision: The Removal of Restrictions over Indian 
Property and Person,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 311 (May 
1957): 47-55. 
 
Watt, Eva Tulene. Don’t Let the Sun Step Over You: A White Mountain Apache Family Life, 1860-1975. 
Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2004. 
 
Weaver, Harold. “Observed Effects of Prescribed Burning on Perennial Grasses in the Ponderosa Pine 
Forests,” Journal of Forestry 49 (1951): 267-271. 
 
 Weaver, Harold. “Fire as an Ecological Factor in Southwestern Pine Forests,” Journal of Forestry 49 
(1951): 93-98.  
 
 Weaver, Harold. “Fire as an enemy, friend, and tool in forest management,” Journal of Forestry 53 
(1955): 499-504.  
 
Weaver, Harold. “Fire and Its Relationship to Ponderosa Pine,” Proceedings of the Tall Timber Fire 
Ecology Conference 7 (1957): 127-149. 
 
Webb, Sam F.  Report to the Salt River Valley Water Supply Protective Assn. Miscellaneous Collections, 
University of Arizona, 1900. 
 
Wheeler, George M.  Report upon United States Geographical Surveys West of the 100th Meridian, Vol. 
1, Topography. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1878. 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribe, Constitution and By-laws of the White Mountain Apache Tribe of the 
Fort Apache Indian Reservation. August 26, 1938. 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribal Council. White Mountain Apache Indians. Whiteriver, AZ, 1959. 
 
White Mountain Apache Tribal Council, White Mountain Apache Land Restoration Code, available at 
www.wmat.us/Legal/LandRestorationCode.html. 
 
Woehlke, Walter. “Let‟s Give it Back to the Indians?” Indians at Work 2, no. 8 (1934): 13-17. 
 
Wildlife Restoration and Conservation: Proceedings of the North American Wildlife Conference called 
by Franklin D. Roosevelt. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1936. 
 
Yellowtail, Robert. “Buffalo Herds Return to Indian Ranges as Forerunner of other Wild Game in 
Restocking Program,” Indians at Work 2, no. 12 (1935): 25-30. 
 
Yellowtail, Robert. “Buffalo on the Crow Reservation,” Indians at Work 3, no. 19 (1935): 28-29. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
402 
 
Secondary Documents 
 
Adams, David. Education for Extinction: American Indians and the Boarding School Experience, 1873-
1928. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1995. 
 
Allen, Barbara. Uneasy Alchemy: Citizens and Experts in Louisiana’s Chemical Corridor Disputes. 
Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003. 
 
Amerman, Stephen Kent. “‟This is Our Land‟: The White Mountain Apache Trophy Elk Hunt and 
Tribal Sovereignty,” Journal of Arizona History 43 (Summer, 2002): 133-152. 
 
Anderson, M. Kat. Tending the Wild: Native American Knowledge and the Management of California’s 
Natural Resources. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005. 
 
Agrawal, Arun. Environmentality: Technologies of Government and the Making of Subjects. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2005. 
 
August, Jr., Jack L. Vision in the Desert: Carl Hayden and Hydropolitics in the American Southwest. 
Forth Worth, TX: Texas Christian University Press, 1999. 
 
Bahre, Conrad J. “Wildfire in Southeastern Arizona between 1859 and 1890,” Desert Plants 7 (1985): 
190-194. 
 
Basso, Keith. The Cibecue Apache. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, Inc., 1970. 
 
Basso, Keith H., ed. Western Apache Raiding and Warfare: From the Notes of Grenville Goodwin. 
Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1971. 
 
Basso, Keith. “Western Apache,” in Handbook of North American Indians: Southwest (vol. 10), Alfonso 
Ortiz, ed., 462-488. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian, 1983. 
 
Basso, Keith. Wisdom Sits in Places. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1996. 
 
Bean, Michael J. and Melanie J. Rowland. The Evolution of National Wildlife Law. Westport, CT: 
Praeger, 1997. 
 
Bennett, Ramona. “Activism and Red Power,” in Indian Self-Rule, Kenneth R. Philp, ed. 234-237. 
Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986. 
 
Berkes, Frikit. “Common-property Resource Management and Cree Indian Fisheries in Subarctic 
Canada,” in The Question of the Commons, B.J. McCay and J.M. Acheson, eds., 66-91. Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press, 1987.  
 
Berkes, Frikit. “Community Conserved Areas: Policy Issues in Historic and Contemporary Context,” 
Conservation Letters 1 (2008): 1-6. 
 

 
 
403 
 
Berkes, Frikit, and Carl Folke, “Back to the Future: Ecosystem Dynamics and Local Knowledge,” in 
Panarchy: Understanding Transformations in Human and Natural Systems, Lance H. Gunderson 
and C.S. Holling, eds., 121-146. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2002. 
 
Berkes, Frikit,  Johan Colding, and Carl Folke. “Rediscovery of Traditional Ecological Knowledge as 
Adaptive Management,” Ecological Applications 10 (October, 2000): 1251-1262.  
 
Berkes, Frikit, Mina Kislalioglu, Carl Folke, and Madhav Gadgil. “Exploring the Basic Ecological Unit: 
Ecosystem-like Concepts in Traditional Societies,” Ecosystems 1 (1998): 409-415. 
 
Berkhofer, Jr., Robert F. The White Man’s Indian: Images of the American Indian from Columbus to the 
Present. New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1978. 
 
Blewett, T. J.  and Grant Cottam, “History of the University of Wisconsin Arboretum Prairies,” 
Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Sciences, Arts, and Letters 72 (1984): 130-144. 
 
Bordewich, Fergus M.  Killing the White Man’s Indian: Reinventing Native Americans at the End of the 
Twentieth Century. New York, NY: Anchor Press, 1996. 
 
Brandt, Elizabeth. "The Fight for Dzil Nchaa Si An, Mt. Graham: Apaches and Astrophysical 
Development in Arizona" Cultural Survival Quarterly 19 (1996): 50-57. 
 
Brock, Emily. “The Challenge of Reforestation: Ecological Experiments in the Douglas Fir Forest, 
1920-1940,” Environmental History 9 (2004): 57-79. 
 
Brown, D.E. “Fishing for Speckled Mountain Beauties in Old Newspapers and Journals,” Arizona 
Wildlife Views 46 (2003): 12-17. 
 
Bryant, Larry D., and Chris Maser. “Classification and Distribution,” in Elk of North America: Ecology 
and Management, Jack W. Thomas and Dale E. Toweill, eds., 1-59. Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole 
Books, 1982. 
 
Burnham, Philip. Indian Country, God’s Country: Native Americans and the National Parks. 
Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2000. 
 
Burt, Larry W. Tribalism in Crisis: Federal Indian Policy, 1953-1961. Albuquerque, NM: University of 
New Mexico Press, 1982. 
 
Buskirk, Winfred. The Western Apache: Living with the Land Before 1950. Norman, OK: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1986. 
 
Carle, David. Burning Questions: America’s Fight With Nature’s Fire. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2002. 
 
Cassagrande, David, and Miguel Vasquez. “Restoring for Cultural-Ecological Sustainability in Arizona 
and Connecticut,” in Greening History: The Presence of the Past in Environmental Restoration, 
Marcus Hall, ed. New York, NY: Routledge, forthcoming. 

 
 
404 
 
 
Catton, Theodore. Inhabited Wilderness: Indians, Eskimos, and National Parks in Alaska. Albuquerque, 
NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1997. 
 
Champagne, Duane. “American Indian Values and the Institutionalization of IRA Governments,” in 
American Indian Policy and Cultural Values: Conflict and Accommodation, Jennie R. Joe, ed., 25-
31. Los Angeles, CA: American Indian Studies Center, University of California, Los Angeles, 1996. 
 
Clarke, Adele. Disciplining Reproduction: Modernity, American Life Sciences, and The Problems of 
Sex. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1998. 
 
Clow, Richmond L. and Imre Sutton, eds. Trusteeship in Change: Toward Tribal Autonomy in Resource 
Management. Boulder, CO: University of Colorado Press, 2001. 
 
Cohen, Warren H. and Philip J. Mause, “The Indian: The Forgotten American,” Harvard Law Review 81 
(January, 1968): 1818-1858. 
 
Collins, Dabney Otis. “Battle for Blue Lake: The Taos Indians Finally Regain their Sacred Land,” 
American West 8 (September, 1971): 32-37. 
 
Cooper, Charles F. “Changes in Vegetation, Structure, and Growth of Southwestern Pine Forests since 
White Settlement,” Ecological Monographs 30 (April, 1960): 129-164. 
 
Cornell, Stephen and Joseph Kalt. “Where Does Economic Development Really Come From? 
Constitutional Rule among the Contemporary Sioux and Apache,” Economic Inquiry 33 (July, 
1995): 402-426. 
 
Cornell, Stephen, Miriam Jorgensen, Joseph P. Kalt, and Katherine A. Spilde. “Seizing the Future: Why 
Some Native Nations Do and Others Don‟t,” in Rebuilding Native Nations: Strategies for 
Governance and Development, Miriam Jorgensen, ed., 296-320.  Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press, 2007. 
 
Cortner, Hannah J. and M.A. Moote. The Politics of Ecosystem Management. Washington, DC: Island 
Press, 1999. 
 
Cowger, Thomas. “‟The Crossroads of Destiny‟: The NCAI‟s Landmark Struggle to Thwart Coercive 
Termination,” American Indian Culture and Research Journal 20 (1996): 121-144. 
 
Cronon, William. Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New England. New 
York: Hill and Wang, 1983. 
 
Cronon, William.  “The Trouble with Wilderness; or, Getting Back to the Wrong Nature,” in Uncommon 
Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature, William Cronon, ed., 69-90. New York: W.W. 
Norton & Company, 1996. 
 

 
 
405 
 
Crosby, Alfred W. Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900-1900. New York, 
NY: Cambridge University Press, 1986. 
 
Cunningham, Stone. The Restoration Economy: The Greatest New Growth Frontier. San Francisco, CA: 
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2002. 
 
Czech, Brian. “American Indians and Wildlife Conservation,” Wildlife Society Bulletin 23 (1995): 568-
573. 
 
Czech, Brian and Paul R. Krausman. The Endangered Species Act: History, Conservation, Biology, and 
Public Policy. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001. 
 
Danks, Cecilia. “Community Forestry Initiatives for the Creation of Sustainable Rural Livelihoods: A 
Case from North America,” Unasylva 51 (2000): 53-62. 
 
Davidson-Hunt, Iain, and Frikit Berkes. “Learning as You Journey: Anishinaabe Perception of Social-
ecological Environments and Adaptive Learning,” Conservation Ecology 8 (2003): 5 [online] URL: 
http://www.consecol.org/vol8/iss1/art5. 
 
Davis, Rebekah C. Beatty. Conservation and Culture: The Soil Conservation Service, Social Science 
and Conservation on Tribal Lands in the Southwest, 1934-1994. Washington, D.C.: USDA, Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, 1997. 
 
Deloria, Philip S. “The Era of Indian Self-Determination: An Overview,” in Indian Self-Rule: First-
Hand Accounts of Indian-White Relations from Roosevelt to Reagan, Kenneth R. Philp, ed., 191-
207. Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986. 
 
Deloria, Jr., Vine. Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto. Norman, OK: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1970. 
 
Deloria, Jr., Vine. Behind the Trail of Broken Treaties: and Indian Declaration of Independence. New 
York, NY: Delacorte Press, 1974. 
 
Deloria, Jr., Vine. “The Evolution of Federal Indian Policy Making,” in American Indian Policy in the 
Twentieth Century, Vine Deloria, Jr., ed., 239-256. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 
1985. 
 
Deloria, Jr., Vine and Clifford M. Lytle. The Nations Within: The Past and Future of American Indian 
Sovereignty. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1984. 
 
Dougherty, John. “Making a Mountain into a Starbase: The Long, Bitter Battle over Mount Graham,” 
High Country News (July 24, 1995). 
 
Dunlap, Thomas R.  Saving America’s Wildlife: Ecology and the American Mind, 1850-1990. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988. 
 

 
 
406 
 
Egan, Dave and M. Kat Anderson, eds. “Theme Issue: Native American Land Management Practices in 
National Parks,” Ecological Restoration 21(4) (2003): 245-310. 
 
Epstein, Stephen. Impure Science: AIDS, Activism, and the Politics of Knowledge. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1996. 
 
Escobar, Arturo. “After Nature: Steps to an Anti-essentialist Political Ecology,” Current Anthropology 
40 (1999): 1-30. 
 
Escobar, Arturo. Territories of Difference: Place, Movements, Life, Redes. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2008. 
 
Farnham, Timothy J.  Saving Nature's Legacy: Origins of the Idea of Biological Diversity. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2007. 
 
Feenberg, Andrew. Questioning Technology. New York, NY: Routledge, 1999. 
 
Fixico, Donald L. Termination and Relocation: Federal Indian Policy, 1945-1960. Albuquerque, NM: 
University of New Mexico Press, 1986. 
 
Fixico, Donald L. The Invasion of Indian Country in the 20th Century: American Capitalism and Tribal 
Natural Resources. Niwot, CO: University of Colorado Press, 1998. 
 
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Random House, 1977. 
 
Foucault, Michel. Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews & Other Writings 1972-1977. New York, NY: 
Pantheon Books, 1980. 
 
Friederici, Peter, ed. Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forests. Washington, 
D.C.: Island Press, 2003. 
 
Garibaldi, A. and N. Turner, “Cultural Keystone Species: Implications for Ecological Conservation and 
Restoration,” Ecology and Society 9(3): 1. [online] URL: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss3/art1. 
 
Gerfin, Allison. “Mexican Wolves Face a Rocky Road to Recovery,” High Country News (June 12, 
2006): 6. 
 
Getches, David H., Charles F. Wilkinson, and Robert A. Williams, Jr. Cases and Materials on Federal 
Indian Law. St. Paul, MN: West Group, 1998. 
 
Gieryn, Thomas. "Boundary-Work and the Demarcation of Science from Non-Science: Strains and 
Interests in Professional Ideologies of Scientists," American Sociological Review 48 (1983): 781-
795. 
 
Glick, Daniel. “Leader of the Pack,” Audubon Magazine (March, 2006). 

 
 
407 
 
 
Glover, James M.  A Wilderness Original: The Life of Bob Marshall. Seattle, WA: The Mountaineers, 
1986. 
 
Gobster, Paul H., and R. Bruce Hull. Restoring Nature: Perspectives from the Social Sciences and 
Humanities. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2000. 
 
Goldman, Edward A.  “Edward William Nelson – Naturalist, 1855-1934,” The Auk 52 (April, 1935): 
135-148. 
 
Golley, Frank B.  A History of the Ecosystem Concept in Ecology. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1993. 
 
Goodwin, Grenville. “White Mountain Apache Religion,” American Anthropologist 40 (January/March, 
1938): 24-37. 
 
Goodwin, Grenville. The Social Organization of the Western Apache. Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press, 1969. 
 
Goodwin, Grenville. Myths and Tales of the White Mountain Apache. Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press, 1994. 
 
Goodwin, Grenville and Charles Kaut, “A Native Religious Movement among the White Mountain and 
Cibecue Apache,” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 10 (Winter, 1954): 385-404. 
 
Gordon-McCutchan, R.C. The Taos Indians and the Battle for Blue Lake. Santa Fe, NM: Red Crane 
Books, 1995. 
 
Gottlieb, Robert. Forcing the Spring. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2005. 
 
Gower, Calvin W.  “The CCC Indian Division: Aid for depressed Americans, 1933-1942,” Minnesota 
History (Spring, 1972): 3-13. 
 
Graves, Michael W. “Apache Adaptations to the Mountains,” in Cholla Project Archaeology: The Q 
Ranch Region, Vol. 3, J. Jefferson Reid, ed., 193-215. Tucson, AZ: Arizona State Museum, 1982. 
 
Griffin, P. Bion, Mark P. Leone, and Keith H. Basso, “Western Apache Ecology: From Horticulture to 
Agriculture,” in Apachean Culture, History, and Ethnology, Keith H. Basso and Morris E. Opler, 
eds., 69-76. Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona Press, 1971. 
 
Grinde, Donald A. and Bruce E. Johansen. Ecocide of Native America: Environmental Destruction of 
Indian Lands and Peoples. Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Publishers, 1995. 
 
Grossman, Elizabeth. “Nez Perce Tribe Welcomes Wolves Back to Idaho,” Orion Afield 6 (Spring 
2002): 18-19. 
 

 
 
408 
 
Hagen, Joel B.  An Entangled Bank: The Origins of Ecosystem Ecology. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press, 1992. 
 
Hall, Marcus. Earth Repair: A Transatlantic History of Environmental Restoration. Charlottesville, VA: 
University of Virginia Press, 2005. 
 
Hall, Marcus. Greening History: The Presence of the Past in Environmental Restoration. New York, 
NY: Routledge, forthcoming. 
 
Hansen, Adrian N. “The Endangered Species Act and Extinction of Reserved Indian Water Rights on 
the San Juan River,” Arizona Law Review 37 (1995): 1305-1344. 
 
Harding, Sandra. Is Science Multicultural? Postcolonialisms, Feminisms, and Epistemologies. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1998. 
 
Hauptman, Laurence M. The Iroquois and the New Deal. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 
1981. 
 
Hays, Samuel P.  Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency: The Progressive Conservation Movement, 
1890-1920. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959. 
 
Hays, Samuel P. Beauty, Health, and Permanence: Environmental Politics in the United States, 1955-
1985. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
 
Helford, Reid M. “Rediscovering the Presettlement Landscape: Making the Oak Savanna Ecosystem 
„Real,‟” Science, Technology, & Human Values 24 (1999): 55-79. 
 
Henderson, Martha L. “American Indian Reservations: Controlling Separate Space, Creating Separate 
Environments,” in The American Environment: Interpretations of Past Geographies, Larry M. 
Dilsaver and Craig E. Colten, eds., 113-134. Rowan and Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 1992. 
 
Hirt, Paul. A Conspiracy of Optimism: Management of the National Forests since World War II. 
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1994. 
 
Hoffmeister, Donald F. Mammals of Arizona. Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona Press, 1986. 
 
House, Freeman. Totem Salmon: Life Lessons from another Species. Boston: Beacon Press, 1999. 
 
Hoxie, Frederick. The Campaign to Assimilate the Indians, 1880-1920. Lincoln, NE: University of 
Nebraska Press, 1984. 
 
Isenberg, Andrew. The Destruction of the Bison: An Environmental History, 1750-1920. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
 
Iverson, Peter. “Building toward Self-Determination: Plains and Southwestern Indians in the 1940s and 
1950s,” The Western Historical Quarterly 16 (April, 1985): 163-173. 

 
 
409 
 
 
Iverson, Peter. When Indians Became Cowboys: Native Peoples and Cattle Ranching in the American 
West. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1994. 
 
Iverson, Peter. “We Are Still Here”: American Indians in the Twentieth Century. Wheeling, Illinois: 
Harlan Davidson, Inc., 1998. 
 
Jacoby, Karl. Crimes Against Nature: Squatters, Poachers, Thieves, and the Hidden History of 
American Conservation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2001. 
 
Jordan, III, William R.  The Sunflower Forest: Ecological Restoration and the New Communion with 
Nature. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2003. 
 
Jordan, III, William R., and Marcus Hall. “Ecological Restoration,” in Encyclopedia of World 
Environmental History, S. Krech, III, J.R. McNeil, and C. Merchant, eds., 371-378. New York, NY: 
Routledge Press, 2004. 
 
Jorgensen, Joseph G. “Religious Solutions and Native American Struggles: Ghost Dance, Sun Dance 
and Beyond,” in Religion, Rebellion, Revolution: An Interdisciplinary and Cross-cultural Collection 
of Essays, B. Lincoln, ed., 97-128. London: MacMillan Press, 1985. 
 
Josephy, Alvin M. Now That the Buffalo’s Gone: A Study of Today’s American Indians. Norman, OK: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1984. 
 
Kaib, J. Mark. “Fire History in Riparian Canyon Pine-Oak Forests and the Intervening Desert 
Grasslands of the Southwest Borderlands: A Dendroecological, Historical, and Cultural Inquiry.” 
Master‟s Thesis: University of Arizona, 1999. 
 
Kaut, Charles R.  “Notes on Western Apache Religious and Social Organization,” American 
Anthropologist 61 (1959): 99-102. 
 
Keller, Robert H. and Michael F. Turek. American Indians and National Parks. Tucson, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press, 1998. 
 
Kelly, Lawrence C. “The Indian Reorganization Act: The Dream and the Reality,” Pacific Historical 
Review 44 (1975): 291-312. 
 
Kersey, Jr., Harry A. The Florida Seminoles and the New Deal, 1933-1942. Boca Raton, FL: Florida 
Atlantic Press, 1989. 
 
Kidwell, Clara Sue. “Native American Systems of Knowledge,” in A Companion to American Indian 
History, Philip J. Deloria and Neal Salisbury, eds., 87-102. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 
2004. 
 
Kimmerer, Robin W., and Frank W. Lake, “The Role of Indigenous Burning in Land Management,” 
Journal of Forestry 99 (1999): 36-41. 

 
 
410 
 
 
Kingsland, Sharon E. The Evolution of American Ecology, 1890-2000. Baltimore, MD: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2005. 
 
Kinsey, Darin. “„Seeding the Water as the Earth‟: The Center and Periphery of a Western Aquaculture 
Revolution,” Environmental History 11 (2006): 527-566. 
 
Knorr-Cetina, Karin. Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1999. 
 
Koppes, Clayton. “From New Deal to Termination: Liberalism and Indian Policy, 1933-1953,” Pacific 
Historical Review 46 (1977): 543-566. 
 
Kotlowksi, Dean J. “Alcatraz, Wounded Knee, and Beyond: The Nixon and Ford Administrations 
Respond to Native American Protest,” Pacific Historical Review 72 (2): 201-227. 
 
Krahe, Diane L.  Last Refuge: The Uneasy Embrace of Indian Lands by the National Wilderness 
Movement, 1937-1965. Dissertation, Washington State University, 2005. 
 
Kunitz, Stephen J. “The Social Philosophy of John Collier,” Ethnohistory 18 (Summer 1971): 213-229. 
 
Kvasnicka, Robert M. and Herman J. Viola, eds. The Commissioners of Indian Affairs, 1824-1977. 
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1979. 
 
LaDuke, Winona. Recovering the Sacred: the Power of Naming and Claiming. Cambridge, MA: South 
End Press, 2005. 
 
LaDuke, Winona. All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land and Life. Cambridge, MA: South End 
Press, 1999. 
 
Langridge, Ruth. “The Right to Habitat Protection,” Public Land and Resources Law Review 29 (2008): 
41-62. 
 
Langston, Nancy. “Environmental History and Restoration in the Western Forests,” Journal of the West 
38 (1999): 45-56. 
 
Langston, Nancy. Where Land and Water Meet: A Western Landscape Transformed. Seattle, WA: 
University of Washington Press, 2003. 
 
Laurence, Robert. “The Bald Eagle, The Florida Panther, and the Nation‟s Word: An Essay on the 
„Quiet‟ Abrogation of Indian Treaties and the Proper Reading of United States v. Dion,” Journal of 
Land Use and Environmental Law 4 (Summer, 1988): 1-21. 
 
Leahy, Patrick. “Tribute to Mollie H. Beattie,” Vermont Law Review 21 (1996-1997): 735-736. 
 

 
 
411 
 
Lewis, David Rich. Neither Wolf Nor Dog: American Indians, Environment, and Agrarian Change. New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
 
Lewis, David Rich. “Native Americans and the Environment: A Survey of Twentieth-Century Issues,” 
American Indian Quarterly 19 (Summer, 1995): 423-450. 
 
Lowenthal, David. “Reflections on Humpty-Dumpty Ecology,” in Greening History: The Presence of 
the Past in Environmental Restoration, Marcus Hall, ed. New York, NY: Routledge, forthcoming. 
 
Luke, Timothy. Capitalism, Democracy, and Ecology. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1999. 
 
Maher, Neil M.  Nature’s New Deal: The Civilian Conservation Corps and the Roots of the American 
Environmental Movement. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 
Martin, Joel W. “Before and Beyond the Sioux Ghost Dance: Native American Prophetic Movements 
and the Study of Religion,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 59 (1991): 677-701. 
 
Marx, Leo. The Machine in the Garden. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1964. 
 
Maser, Chris. The Redesigned Forest. San Pedro, CA: R. and E. Miles, 1988. 
 
McCabe, Richard E. “Elk and Indians: Historical Values and Perspectives,” in Elk of North America, 
Jack W. Thomas and Dale E. Toweill, eds., 61-124. Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1982. 
 
McCool, Daniel. Contemporary Indian Water Settlements and the Second Treaty Era. Tucson, AZ: The 
University of Arizona Press, 2002. 
 
McCorquodale, S.M., R.H. Leach, G.M. King, and K.R. Bevis, “The Yakima Indian Reservation: 
Integrating Native American Values into Commercial Forestry,” Journal of Forestry 95 (1997): 15-
18. 
 
McGuire, Thomas R.  Mixed Bloods, Apaches, and Cattle Barons: Documents for a History of the 
Livestock Economy on the White Mountain Reservation, Arizona. Tucson, AZ: Arizona State 
Museum, Archeological Series No. 142, 1980. 
 
Meine, Curt. Aldo Leopold: His Life and Work. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988. 
 
Menzies, Charles R., ed. Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Natural Resource Management. 
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2006. 
 
Merchant, Carolyn. Ecological Revolutions: Nature, Gender, and Science in New England. Chapel Hill, 
NC: North Carolina Press, 1989. 
 
Merrell, James H.  “The Indians‟ New World: The Catawba Experience,” The William and Mary 
Quarterly 41 (October, 1983): 537-565. 
 

 
 
412 
 
Mihesuah, Devon A. “American Indian Identities: Issues of Individual Choices and Development,” in 
Contemporary Native American Issues, Duane Champagne, ed., 13-38. Walnut Creek, CA: Rowan 
& Littlefield Publishers, 1999. 
 
Miller, Robert J. “Speaking with Forked Toungues: Indian Treaties, Salmon, and the Endangered 
Species Act,” Oregon Law Review 70 (Fall, 1991): 544-584. 
 
Minnis, Paul E., and Wayne J. Elisens, eds. Biodiversity and Native America. Norman, OK: University 
of Oklahoma Press, 2000. 
 
Moote, Anne. “Community-Based Forest Restoration,” in Ecological Restoration of Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forests, P. Friederici, ed., 335-352. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2003. 
 
Morishima, Gary S. “Indian Forestry: From Paternalism to Self-Determination.” Journal of Forestry 95 
(1997): 4-9. 
 
Mutz, Kathryn M., Gary C. Bryner, and Douglas S. Kenney, eds.  Justice and Eco-cultural resources: 
Concepts, Strategies, and Applications. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2002. 
 
Nabhan, Gary. “Cultural Parallax in Viewing North American Habitats,” in The Great New Wilderness 
Debate, J.B. Callicot and M.P. Nelson, eds., 628-641. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 
1998. 
 
Nash, Roderick Frazier. Wilderness and the American Mind. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
2001. 
 
Nelson, Robert A., and Joseph F. Shelley. "Bureau of Indian Affairs Influence on Indian Self-
determination," in American Indian Policy in the Twentieth Century, Vine Deloria, Jr., ed., 177-196. 
Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985. 
 
Nesper, Larry. The Walleye War: The Struggle for Ojibwe Spearfishing and Treaty Right. Lincoln, NE: 
University of Nebraska Press, 2002. 
 
Newell, Alan S.,  Richmond L. Clow, and Richard N. Ellis. A Forest in Trust: Three Quarters of a 
Century of Indian Forestry, 1910-1986. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, Division of Forestry, 1986. 
 
Norton, Bryan G. Sustainability: A Philosophy of Adaptive Ecosystem Management. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2005. 
 
Nye, David E.  American Technological Sublime. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1994. 
 
Nye, David E.  America as Second Creation: Technology and Narratives of New Beginnings. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2003. 
 

 
 
413 
 
O‟Neill, Catherine A.  “Restoration Affecting Native Resources: The Place of Native Ecological 
Science,” Arizona Law Review 42 (2000): 343-380. 
 
Owen, A.L. Riesch. Conservation under FDR. New York, NY: Praeger Publishers, 1983. 
 
Parman, Donald L. “The Indian and the Civilian Conservation Corp,” The Pacific Historical Review 40 
(February, 1971): 39-56. 
 
Parman, Donald L.  Indians and the American West in the Twentieth Century. Bloomington, IN: 
University of Indiana Press, 1994. 
 
Pavlik, Steve. “San Carlos and White Mountain Apache Attitudes toward the Reintroduction of the 
Mexican Wolf to Its Historic Range in the American Southwest,” Wicazo Sa Review 14 (Spring, 
1999): 129-145. 
 
Perry, Richard J. Western Apache Heritage: People of the Mountain Corridor. Austin, TX: University of 
Texas Press, 1991. 
 
Perry, Richard J.  Apache Reservation: Indigenous Peoples and the American State. Austin, TX: 
University of Texas Press, 1993. 
 
Persic, Ana, and Gary Martin, eds. Links between Biological and Cultural Diversity: Concepts, Methods 
and Experiences. Paris, France: UNESCO, 2008. 
 
Philp, Kenneth R.  John Collier’s Crusade for Indian Reform, 1920-1954. Tucson, AZ: The University 
of Arizona Press, 1977. 
 
Philp, Kenneth R. “The New Deal and Alaskan Natives, 1936-1945,” Pacific Historical Review 50 
(August, 1981): 309-327. 
 
Philp, Kenneth R.  “Termination: A Legacy of the Indian New Deal,” The Western Historical Quarterly 
14(2) (1983): 165-180. 
 
Philp, Kenneth R., ed. Indian Self-Rule: First-hand Accounts of Indian-White Relations from Roosevelt 
to Reagan. Chicago, IL: Howe Brothers, 1986. 
 
Philp, Kenneth R.  Termination Revisited: American Indians on the Trail to Self-Determination, 1933-
1953. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1999. 
 
Pisani, Donald J. “Irrigation, Water Rights, and the Betrayal of Indian Allotment,” in Out of the Woods: 
Essays in Environmental History, C. Miller and H. Rothman, eds., 243-260. Pittsburgh, PA: 
University of  Pittsburgh Press, 1997. 
 
Prucha, Francis Paul. The Indians in American Society. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 
1985. 
 

 
 
414 
 
Pyne, Steven. Fire in America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982. 
 
Reich, Justin.  “Re-Creating the Wilderness: Shaping Narratives and Landscapes in Shenandoah 
National Park,” Environmental History 6 (2001): 95-117. 
 
Reiger, John F.  American Sportsmen and the Origins of Conservation. Norman, OK: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1985. 
 
Reynolds, Laurie. “Indian Hunting and Fishing Rights: The Role of Tribal Sovereignty and 
Preemption,” North Carolina Law Review 62 (April, 1984): 743-793. 
 
Riggs, Christopher K.  “American Indians, Economic Development, and Self-Determination in the 
1960s,” Pacific Historical Review 69 (3): 431-463. 
 
Riley, Ann L. Restoring Streams in Cities. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1998. 
 
Rohlf, Daniel J. The Endangered Species Act: A Guide to Its Protections and Implementation. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford Environmental Law Society, 1989. 
 
Rosier, Paul C. “‟The Old System is no Success‟: The Blackfeet Nation‟s Decision to Adopt the Indian 
Reorganization Act of 1934,” American Indian Culture and Research Journal 23 (1999): 1-37. 
 
Rothman, Hal K.  “‟A Regular Ding-Dong Fight‟: Agency Culture and Evolution in the NPS-USFS 
Dispute, 1916-1937,” Western Historical Quarterly 20 (May, 1989): 141-161. 
 
Royster, Judith V.  and Michael C. Blumm. Native American Natural Resource Law: Cases and 
Materials. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2002. 
 
Sanders, Marren. Implementing the Federal Endangered Species Act in Indian Country: The Promise 
and Reality of Secretarial Order 3206. Tucson, AZ: Joint Occasional Papers on Native Affairs, 
2007. 
 
Sasche, Nancy D.  A Thousand Ages. Madison, WI: Regents of the University of Wisconsin, 1965. 
 
Scott,   James C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have 
Failed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998. 
 
Sherry, Erin, and Heather Myers. “Traditional Environmental Knowledge in Practice,” Society and 
Natural Resources 15 (2002): 345-358. 
 
Silver, Timothy. A New Face on the Countryside: Indians, Colonists, and Slaves in South Atlantic 
Forests, 1500-1800. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
 
Smith, Merritt Roe and Leo Marx, eds. Does Technology Drive History? The Dilemma of Technological 
Determinism. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1994. 
 

 
 
415 
 
Smith, Paul Chaat, and Robert Allen Warrior. Like a Hurricane: The Indian Movement from Alcatraz to 
Wounded Knee. New York, NY: The New Press, 1996. 
 
Spence, Mark D. Dispossessing the Wilderness: Indian Removal and the Making of the National Park. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999. 
 
Star, Susan Leigh and James Greissmer. “Institutional Ecology, „Translations‟ and Boundary Objects: 
Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley‟s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-1939,” Social 
Studies of Science 19 (1989): 387-420. 
 
Stickney, Robert R.  Aquaculture in the United States: A Historical Survey. New York, NY: John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., 1996. 
 
Stokes, Shelly D.  “Ecosystem Co-management Plans: A Sound Approach or a Threat to Tribal Rights?” 
Vermont Law Review 27 (2003): 421-452. 
 
Suagee, Dean. “Tribal Governments and the Protection of Watersheds and Wetlands in Indian Country,” 
St. Thomas Law Review 13 (2000): 35-64. 
 
Suagee, Dean. “NEPA in Indian Country: Compliance Requirement to Decision-Making Tool,” in 
Justice and Natural Resources: Concepts, Strategies, and Applications, K.M. Mutz, G.C. Bryner, 
and D.S. Kenney eds., 225-252. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2002. 
 
Sutter, Paul S.  Driven Wild: How the Fight against Automobiles Launched the Modern Wilderness 
Movement. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2002. 
 
Szaz, Margaret Connell. “Philleo Nash,” in The Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 1824-1977, Robert M. 
Kvasnicka and Herman J. Viola, eds., 311-323. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1979. 
 
Szaz, Margaret Connell. Education and the American Indian: The Road Toward Self-Determination 
Since 1928. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1999. 
 
Tangley, Laura. “Restoring Lost Heritage,” National Wildlife Magazine 41 (December/January, 2003). 
 
Taylor, Graham D. The New Deal and American Indian Tribalism: The Administration of the Indian 
Reorganization Act, 1934-1945. Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press, 1980. 
 
Taylor, III, Joseph. Making Salmon: An Environmental History of the Northwest Fisheries Crisis. 
Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 1999. 
 
Tiller, Veronica E. and Arthur R. Gómez, Fort Apache Forestry: A History of Timber Management and 
Forest Protection on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation, 1870-1985. Washington, DC: Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, 1990. 
 
Tomblin, David. “The Ecological Restoration Movement: Diverse Cultures of Place and Practice,” 
Organization & Environment 22 (June, 2009): xxx-xxx. 

 
 
416 
 
 
Trennert, Jr., Robert A. The Phoenix Indian School: Forced Assimilation in Arizona, 1891-1935. 
Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1988. 
 
Tsosie, Rebecca. “Tribal Environmental Policy in an Era of Self-determination: The Role of Ethics, 
Economics, and Traditional Ecological Knowledge,” Vermont Law Review 21 (1996): 225-336. 
 
Turner, Shelley D. “The Native American‟s Right to Hunt and Fish,” New Mexico Law Review 19 
(Spring, 1989): 377-423. 
 
Vale, Thomas R., ed. Fire, Native Peoples, and the Natural Landscape. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 
2002. 
 
Vinje, David L. “Cultural Values and Economic Development,” in American Indian Policy in the 
Twentieth Century, Vine Deloria, Jr., ed., 155-176. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 
1985. 
 
Walsh, Barry Walden. “The Ecosystem Thinking of Mollie Hanna Beattie,” American Forests 
(May/June, 1994): 13-16. 
 
Warren, Louis S. The Hunter’s Game: Poachers and Conservationists in Twentieth-Century American. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997. 
 
Warren, Louis S. “The Nature of Conquest: Indians, Americans, and Environmental History,” in A 
Companion to American Indian History, Phillip J. Deloria and Neal Salisbury, eds., 287-306. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2004. 
 
Watson-Verran, Helen and David Turnbull. “Science and Other Indigenous Knowledge Systems,” in 
Handbook of Science and Technology Studies, S. Jasanoff, G.E. Markle, J. Petersen, and T. Pinch, 
eds., 115-139. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1995. 
 
Welch, John R.  “White Eyes' Lies and the Battle for dzi# nchaa si'an,” American Indian Quarterly, Vol. 
21 (1997): 75-109. 
 
Welch, John R., and Ramon Riley. “Reclaiming Land and Spirit in the Western Apache Homeland,” 
American Indian Quarterly 25 (Winter 2001): 5-12. 
 
White, Richard. Roots of Dependency: Subsistence, Environment, and Social Change among the 
Choctaws, Pawnees, and Navajo. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1983. 
 
Wilkinson, Charles F. “The Role of Bilateralism in Fulfilling the Federal-Tribal Relationship: The 
Tribal Rights-Endangered Species Secretarial Order,” Washington Law Review 72 (1997): 1063-
1088. 
 
Wilkinson, Charles, F. Messages from Franks Landing: A Story of Salmon, Treaties, and the Indian 
Way. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2000. 

 
 
417 
 
 
Wilkinson, Charles F. “Filling in the Blank Spots on Powell‟s and Stegner‟s Maps: The Role of Modern 
Indian Tribes in Western Watersheds,” Journal of Land Resources and Environmental Law 23 
(2003): 41-56. 
 
Wilkinson, Charles F. Blood Struggle: The Rise of Modern Indian Nations. New York, NY: W.W. 
Norton & Company, 2005. 
 
Wilkinson, Charles F., and Eric R. Biggs, “The Evolution of Termination Policy,” American Indian Law 
Review 5 (1977): 139-184. 
 
Wolfley, Jeanette. “Ecological Risk Assessment and Management: Their Failure to Value Indigenous 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Protect Tribal Homelands,” in Contemporary Native 
American Cultural Issues, Duane Champagne, ed., 293-306. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press, 
1999. 
 
Yaffee, Steven L. Prohibitive Policy: Implementing the Federal Endangered Species Act. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1982. 
 
Yazzie-Durglo, Victoria. “The Right to Change Tribal Forest Management,” Journal of Forestry 96 
(1998): 33-35. 
 
Zellmer, Sandi B. “Indian Lands as Critical Habitat for Indian Nations and Endangered Species: Tribal 
Survival and Sovereignty Come First,” San Diego Law Review 43 (1998): 381-437. 
 
Zontek, Ken. Buffalo Nation: American Indian Efforts to Restore the Bison. Lincoln, NE: University of 
Nebraska Press, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
