6
Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
Working Papers in Southwestern 
Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
Butterflies as Indicators 
of Restoration Progress
November 2003 

Working Papers in Southwestern Ponderosa Pine Forest Restoration
The Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University is a pioneer in researching,
implementing, and monitoring ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine forests.
These forests have been significantly altered through more than a century of fire suppression, live-
stock grazing, logging, and other ecosystem changes. As a result, ecological and recreational values
of these forests have decreased, while the threat of large-scale fires has increased dramatically. The
ERI is helping to restore these forests in collaboration with numerous public agencies. By allowing
natural processes such as fire to resume self-sustaining patterns, we hope to reestablish healthy
forests that provide ecosystem services, wildlife habitat, and recreational opportunities.
Every restoration project needs to be site-specific, but the detailed experience of field practitioners
may help guide practitioners elsewhere. The Working Papers series presents findings and manage-
ment recommendations from research and observations by the ERI and its partner organizations.
This publication would not have been possible without significant staff contributions and funding
from the Bureau of Land Management. The views and conclusions contained in this document are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the opinions or policies of the
U.S. Government. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their
endorsement by the U.S. Government.
1: Restoring the Uinkaret Mountains: Operational Lessons and Adaptive Management Practices
2: Understory Plant Community Restoration in the Uinkaret Mountains, Arizona
3: Protecting Old Trees from Prescribed Fire
4: Fuels Treatments and Forest Restoration: An Analysis of Benefits
5: Limiting Damage to Forest Soils During Restoration

Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress a
Introduction
Ecological restoration treatments can significantly reduce the risk of unnaturally severe
wildfire and increase the health of old-growth trees in southwestern ponderosa pine
forests. Carefully planned thinning and prescribed burning treatments, sometimes fol-
lowed by reseeding of native plant species or control of noxious species, can also pro-
mote the growth of understory plants. As a result, restoration work can have a great
impact on the populations of animal species that rely on forest habitats.
This publication examines the effects of restoration treatments on butterflies. It also
explains how monitoring butterflies—which either professionals or volunteers can do—
can serve as a useful indicator of restoration progress.
Why Butterflies?
Many animals are affected by restoration treatments, but butterflies are particularly use-
ful indicators of ecological changes for several reasons.
They are easy to watch. Although butterflies aren’t as important to pollination in ecosys-
tems as bees, wasps, or flies, they are easier to monitor (Taron 1996). Butterflies tend to
be visible, and most are easily identified in the field.
They are sensitive to habitat changes brought on by restoration. Restoration of pon-
derosa pine forests can create localized habitat changes—including altered light intensity
and air temperatures—that directly affect insects. Butterflies are sensitive to changes in
these microclimatic conditions. Warmer temperatures and stronger light allow males of
some species to fly longer in search of mates, and may also allow adult butterflies to for-
age longer (Meyer and Sisk 2001; Waltz 2001). In addition, increased understory growth
can result in more flowering and nectar production, thereby increasing food supplies for
adult butterflies and other pollinators (Short and Negrón 2003).
They can indicate what’s happening with plants and other animals. Changes in butter-
fly populations can indicate important, yet less easily detected changes in populations of
other organisms. Butterfly larvae—caterpillars—live exclusively on particular species of
grasses, forbs, shrubs, or trees. Therefore, the presence of certain species of butterflies and
moths indicates the presence of specific larval host plants in the area. Adult butterflies,
on the other hand, generally utilize a variety of nectar-producing plants. For that reason,
the number of adult butterflies can reflect the abundance and diversity of nectar-produc-
ing plants.
1

Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
a
How Restoration Treatments Affect Butterfly Habitat
Butterflies react both to short-term and long-term habitat changes caused by restoration
treatments. Short-term changes generally include increased light levels and temperatures
due to lower tree densities; longer-term changes may include higher diversity and abun-
dance in understory vegetation brought about by thinning and prescribed burning.
Understory vegetation may continue to change with time as succession and future
ground fires continue to shape habitat conditions.
Changes in microclimatic conditions and understory vegetation were quickly apparent in
the wake of ponderosa pine forest restoration treatments conducted in the 1990s in the
Fort Valley area, near Flagstaff, and near Mount Trumbull in far northern Arizona. Both
areas were intensively thinned in an effort to return forest stands to a structure resem-
bling that present prior to European-American settlement (Covington et al. 1997). These
treatments removed most young trees. All trees old enough to have been standing prior
to settlement were retained, along with enough younger trees to compensate for preset-
tlement trees lost to earlier logging or to other mortality. The area near Mount Trumbull
also experienced a prescribed burn before butterfly monitoring began.
These treatments dramatically increased sunlight and water available on the forest floor,
and understory plant growth responded favorably. Near Mount Trumbull, treated areas
had 26 times as many flowers available to nectar-feeders as untreated areas (Waltz and
Covington 1999). As a result, Amy Waltz and W. Wallace Covington reported “at least
twice as many [butterfly] species and up to eight times as many individuals” in sites two
years after thinning and burning as in untreated sites. In a study conducted in Fort
Valley, Cecilia Meyer and Thomas Sisk (2001) found that two butterfly species—orange
sulphurs (Colia eurytheme) and pine whites (Neophasia menapia)—flew on sites earlier
in the day at east-facing edges between forest that had been thinned several months earli-
er than they did in unthinned stands, indicating that increased light intensity resulting
from restoration prescriptions influences butterfly behavior. This was especially notice-
able on sunny days, when increased light penetrated openings in the treatment areas.
2
Figure 1. Sample transect
routes through treated
(speckled) and untreated
(white) forest, with routes
set at least 50 meters (164
feet) from habitat edges.

Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress a
3
How to Monitor
Anyone willing to spend a bit of time to learn survey and identification details can sur-
vey butterflies and increase our understanding of restoration’s effects on animals.
Butterflies are particularly well suited for monitoring by volunteers. Such groups as
Audubon societies, garden clubs, Boy and Girl Scout troops, high school or university
science students, and other youth and community groups may all be able to contribute
time to volunteer monitoring projects. These simple steps can convert a small number of
survey hours into meaningful data:
Establish transects. Butterflies are best surveyed along transects, or lines that pass
through particular habitat types (Pollard 1977). There is no set length, but 100 meters
(328 feet) is a good starting point. They do not have to be straight lines, but be sure to
establish transects at least 50 meters (164 feet) away from habitat edges in order to
ensure that the butterflies observed along it are utilizing vegetation typical of the survey
area (Figure 1). Set up transects in treated and untreated areas so that comparisons can
be made; mark them with colored flagging or other signs so that they can easily be relo-
cated.
Walk the transects. Ideally, visit your transects between four and six times during late
spring and summer months, when insects are most active. Butterflies limit their move-
ments on cool, cloudy days, so sunny days are best for observations. Avoid windy days.
The hours from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., when temperatures and butterfly activity are at their
highest, are best. Transects should be walked at a casual but consistent pace, about five
minutes for every 100 meters (328 feet). Scan the area near the transect, and record
whatever is flying within five to ten meters (16 to 33 feet). Don’t be distracted by other
things going on in the woods—such as birds or other animals—and survey transects
alone each so that the effort that goes into each survey is the same.
Identify and count. With a pair of binoculars and a couple of guidebooks (listed below),
identification doesn’t have to be difficult. Many butterflies are distinct and can be identi-
fied in flight. For more difficult species, use a net for catch-and-release identification.
Photographs can also be helpful, particularly sets of photos that feature both the tops
and undersides of the wings. Species that are more difficult to identify from visible fea-
tures, such as skippers, can be lumped together in surveys—for example, “brown skip-
pers.” Do not kill or collect butterflies. Collecting can impact populations. In addition,
several threatened and endangered butterfly species live in southwestern forests, and
harming them is illegal.
Compile the data. It is helpful to have one person or organization in charge of collecting
and interpreting survey data. This might be a land management agency, university, or
nonprofit organization, or it could be a single person. For more details about butterfly
monitoring, see Pollard (1977) or the Web sites listed below.

Butterflies as Indicators of Restoration Progress
a
4
What to Monitor
Much remains to be learned about butterflies and how they respond to changing forest
conditions. Butterfly monitors, whether professional or amateur, could make significant
contributions to science and to forest restoration by pursuing the following directions.
Continued monitoring of restoration sites. Restored areas continue to evolve as under-
story plant composition and microclimatic conditions continue to change. In addition,
year-to-year variability can be very high in the Southwest (for example, wet and dry years
may support very different butterfly populations). For these reasons, butterfly monitor-
ing should take into account not just short-term but also longer-term effects that show
up over the years. As a starting point, consider monitoring one year following treatment
and then two to three years later.
Establishing a baseline. Researchers don’t have a clear picture of what butterfly commu-
nities once looked like in ponderosa pine forests. Surveys in forests that have continued
to experience relatively natural fire regimes, such as in the Gila Wilderness or on parts of
the North Rim of the Grand Canyon, could help establish a baseline for comparison with
forest areas from which fires have been excluded for many years.
Monitor reproduction. Follow and watch adult butterflies for ovipositing (egg-laying)
behavior. When laying eggs, a female butterfly curls her abdomen under and deposits
one or several eggs on host plant stems or leaves, soil litter, tree trunks, or other surfaces.
By flagging the site and returning in the following days and weeks, an observer can mon-
itor hatching success, which is a direct indication of the abundance of the specific host
plants on which butterflies feed.

For More Information
A number of different thinning prescriptions have been proposed for southwestern pon-
derosa pine forests. Read about some on the ERI website at www.eri.nau.edu, or call us at
928-523-7182.
Written by Anne Minard
Reviewed by Peter Z. Fulé, Michele A. James, Patty Kohany, Kimberly Harding, Cecilia Meyer,
Karen Short, Doug Taron, Diane Vosick, and Amy E. M. Waltz.
Series Editor Peter Friederici  
Northern Arizona University is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Institution   
NAU Creative Communications/A52774/1M/11-03
Field Guides
Butterflies Through Binoculars, The West: A Field
Guide to the Butterflies of Western North
America by Jeffrey Glassberg (Oxford University
Press, 2001).
National Audubon Society Field Guide to North
American Butterflies by Robert Michael Pyle
(Knopf, 1981).
The Butterflies of North America: A Natural
History and Field Guide by James A. Scott
(Stanford University Press, 1992).
A Field Guide to Western Butterflies by Paul A.
Opler and Amy Bartlett Wright (Houghton Mifflin,
1999).
Butterflies of Arizona: A Photographic Guide by
Bob Stewart, Hank Brodkin, and Priscilla Brodkin
(West Coast Lady Press, 2001).
Web Sites
For free downloadable software that can help ana-
lyze counts of butterflies or other insects, visit
www.urbanwildlands.org/INCA/.
For a good example of a volunteer monitoring pro-
tocol aimed at restoration sites, see Butterfly moni-
toring guidelines for the Chicago region at 
www.mchenry.cc.il.us/faculty_pgs/mgarriso/but-
terflyproject/aBMG.html#TableofContents.
The North American Butterfly Association
(www.naba.org) serves as a resource for butterfly
fans, and each year seeks volunteers for its NABA
Butterfly Counts, usually held within a few weeks
of July 4. The only NABA chapter in the Southwest
is in southern Arizona;
www.naba.org/chapters/nabasa/home.html.
References
Covington, W. W., P. Z. Fulé, M. M. Moore, S. C.
Hart, T. E. Kolb, J. N. Mast, S. S. Sackett, and M. R.
Wagner. 1997. Restoring ecosystem health in pon-
derosa pine forests of the Southwest. Journal of
Forestry 95(4):23–29.
Meyer, C. L., and T. D. Sisk. 2001. Butterfly
response to microclimatic conditions following
ponderosa pine restoration. Restoration Ecology
9:453–461.
Pollard, E. 1977. A method for assessing changes in
the abundance of butterflies. Biological
Conservation 12:115–134.
Short, K. C., and J. F. Negrón. 2003. Arthropod
responses: A functional approach. Pp. 286–305 in
Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosa pine
forests, ed. P. Friederici. Washington, D.C.: Island
Press.
Taron, D. J. 1996. Insects. Pp. 305–318 in The tall-
grass restoration handbook, ed. S. Packard and C.
Mutel. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Waltz, A. E. M. 2001. Butterfly response to pon-
derosa pine restoration and the efficacy of butter-
flies as indicators of pollinators. Ph.D. dissertation,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff.
Waltz, A. E. M., and W. W. Covington. 1999.
Butterfly richness and abundance increase in
restored ponderosa pine ecosystem (Arizona).
Ecological Restoration 17:244–246.

Ecological Restoration Institute
Northern Arizona University
P.O. Box 15017
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5017
www.eri.nau.edu
2ERI 35AE
NON-PROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
NORTHERN
ARIZONA
UNIVERSITY
