Ecological Restoration 
Institute 
The Ecological Restoration Institute is dedicated to reversing declines in the condition of forested communities throughout the Intermoun-
tain West, particularly those affected by severe wildfires and insect outbreaks. Our efforts focus on science-based research of ecological and 
socio-economic matters related to restoration as well as support for on-the-ground treatments, outreach, and education. 
Ecological Restoration Institute, P.O. Box 15017, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, 928/523-7182, FAX 928/523-0296, www.eri.nau.edu 
 
The Southwest Fire Science Consortium is a way for managers, scientists, and policymakers to interact and share science in ways that can effec-
tively move new fire science information to management practices.  
Southwest Fire Science Consortium, Northern Arizona University, School or Forestry, P.O. 15018, Flagstaff, Arizona 86011 
swfireconsortium@gmail.com, phone: 928-523-1148, http://swfireconsortium.org   
Fact Sheet: Methods for Estimating Surface Live Fuel Loading                      February 2011 
Introduction 
Resource managers often need data about surface live fuels (i.e., grasses, forbs, and shrubs) for a variety of 
purposes. For example, a range manager will want to know about grass biomass to gauge the amount of 
available forage for livestock. Likewise, a wildlife biologist may want to know about shrub biomass to de-
termine the browse available for ungulates.  
Fire managers also need to know about surface live fuels to understand potential fire behavior and fire 
effects of a site. Fire managers commonly need to assess several variables including fuel loading (another 
term for biomass), bulk density (weight per volume), and any inherent flammability that can be caused by 
plant oils and waxes.  However, estimating these variables can be tricky and there are many different meth-
ods for doing so. Choosing the best method for a particular purpose depends on the level of accuracy need-
ed, the resources available, and the level of knowledge in a particular region.  
 
Methods 
Methods for estimating surface live fuels can be described in three categories: 1) direct methods, 2) corre-
lations or allometric equations, and 3) photo series or photo load series. Each method has certain ad-
vantages and disadvantages. 
 
Direct Methods 
Direct methods include any approach where grass, forb, or shrub biomass is assessed exactly and on-site. 
For grasses and forbs, this is often done by clipping the entire above-ground portions of these plants in a 
fixed area (often 0.5 x 0.5 m), drying the clippings in an oven until all the moisture is removed, and then 
weighing. This will give an estimation of fuel weight per area (biomass or loading). Estimated bulk density 
can be obtained by dividing the biomass by the average plant height. It is often more difficult to clip the 
entire above-ground portions of shrubs. Instead, a portion of the shrub can be clipped, dried, and weighed. 
Having made an estimate of the portion of the shrub taken, the fire manager can then multiple the weighed 
biomass by 100 to obtain the shrub’s total biomass. The main advantage of using a direct method for esti-
mating fuel loading is that it provides the most accurate estimate of fuel loading. However, direct methods 
are the most time consuming and labor intensive of all the methods—a significant disadvantage. Given 
enough resources, this method is most appropriate when there is no existing knowledge about fuels in a 
given area or more precise measures of fuel loading are needed. 
 
Correlations and Allometric Equations/Modeling 
Many correlations and allometric equations have been developed to estimate grass or shrub biomass 
without having to use direct methods. For many range systems, for example, there are regression equa-
tions that correlate grass biomass with cover and/or height. In forested systems, regression equations are 
available that correlate grass biomass with tree canopy cover or basal area. In shrublands, allometric 
equations relate shrub biomass to stem density and diameter. A main advantage of regression and  

allometric equations is that they are not labor intensive and they can provide reasonably accurate estimates 
of live fuel biomass. The main disadvantage is that these types of equations are not always accurate. While 
the correlation between biomass and measured variables are strong in some instances, in other situations 
they are relatively weak. In addition, these types of equations are meant to be used in the specific locality 
and/or with the specific species for which they were developed. Allometric equations are not available for 
all shrub species and correlative equations are not available in all ecosystems that may be of interest.  
 
Photo Series 
A number of photo series have been developed for the purpose of making estimates of fuels. A photo series 
consists of several photographs taken of certain vegetation types. Photos are typically taken from a distance 
so that the viewer can see the entire fuel complex representative of a stand (e.g., surface to canopy).  Associ-
ated with each photo in a series is a suite of data about fuel characteristics for that site, including fuel loading 
of various fuel types. Managers can estimate fuel loading in a given area by comparing it to photographs 
available in a photo series. If there is a photo that closely matches the given area, the accompanying data can 
provide reasonable estimates of various fuel characteristics. The photo load method is similar, except the 
photographs in a photo load series are taken at a smaller scale (often 1 x 1 m) and include artificial fuel beds 
with progressively higher fuel loading.  
 
      Example of photo load series from Keane and Dickinson (2007) 
The main advantage of using photo series is that it is relatively easy to learn and doesn’t require a great 
deal of investment in time or resources. A disadvantage of using photo series is that live surface fuels may 
not always be visible in the photographs. For this reason, using the photo load method may be more appro-
priate for live surface fuels. In addition, photo series are not available for all vegetation types and photo load 
series are not available for all plant species. Thus, this method is not available in all instances. Although, 
with the development of the fuel characteristic classification system and the digital photo series, the range of 
vegetation types with associated photo series has greatly expanded. It is important to note that even if a photo 
series is available for vegetation type of interest, it may not reflect the appropriate season or successional 
stage. Thus, it should always be used with caution.  
 
 
       Examples of photos taken from the Digital Photo Series  

Conclusion 
There are three basic methods available for estimating live fuel loading, and no one method is “best.” The 
most appropriate method will be the one that meets a manager’s needs. If more accuracy is needed and re-
sources are available, then direct measures are best as is the case when a manager needs to develop a custom 
fuel model. Direct methods or equations may be appropriate if a manager wants to monitor the effects of fuel 
management activities on live surface fuels. In such cases, a more accurate estimation of fuel loading is need-
ed. Photo series are most appropriate when the level of accuracy is lower. For example, precise estimates of 
live fuel loading are not necessary when a manager is trying to assign an existing fuel model to a particular 
stand. As is often the case, a land manager must determine the level of accuracy needed and the level of re-
sources available before deciding which method to use. 
 
Summary table 
 
 
Resources 
Brown, J.K. 1976. Estimating shrub biomass from basal stem diameters. Canadian Journal of Forest  
 
Research 6(2):153-158. 
Brown, J.K. and M.A. Marsden. 1976. Estimating fuel weights of grasses, forbs, and small woody plants. 
USDA Forest Service Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station Research Note INT-210. 
Brown, J.K., R.D. Oberheu, and C.M. Johnson. 1982. Handbook for inventorying surface fuels and biomass 
in the Interior West. USDA Forest Service Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station Gen-
eral Technical Report INT-129. 
Ffolliott, P.F. 1983. Overstory-understory relationships: southwestern ponderosa pine forests. Pp 13-18 in 
E.T. Bartlett and E.R. Betters, eds. Overstory-understory relationships in western forests. Western Re-
gion Research Publication 1. Colorado Agricultural Experiment Station. 
Keane, R.E. and L.J. Dickinson. 2007. The photoload sampling technique: Estimating fuel loadings from 
downward-looking photographs of synthetic fuelbeds. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Re-
search Station General Technicla Report RMRS-GTR-190. 
USDA Forest Service Fuel Characteristic Classification System. Available online at:  http://www.fs.fed.us/
pnw/fera/fccs/index.shtml. 
USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station, Pacific Wildfire Fire Sciences Laboratory, Fire and 
Environmental Research Application Team. Digital Photo Series. Available online at: http://
depts.washington.edu/nwfire/dps/. 
 
 
This fact sheet was developed and written by Dr. Molly Hunter, assistant clinical professor, School of Forest-
ry, Northern Arizona University; Molly.Hunter@nau.edu. It is a collaborative publications and outreach ef-
fort between the Southwest Fire Science Consortium and the Ecological Restoration Institute. 
 
 
 
Method 
Advantage(s) 
Disadvantage(s) 
Direct methods 
Most accurate method 
Time consuming and labor intensive 
Correlative/
allometric equa-
tions 
Can be accurate; relatively easy 
to use 
Not always accurate; equations not 
available for all species and/or locali-
ties 
Photo/photo load 
series 
Easy to use; little expertise re-
quired 
Provides only rough estimates; not 
available for all species and/or locali-
ties 
