 
 
News Release 
 
 
 
 
Contact:  bonnie.stevens@nau.edu 
Friday, February 12, 2010 
 
 
 
 
    928-523-6228 or  
    928-380-4349 
 
 
NAU ecologists encourage nature lovers to stop and smell  
the rose tick clover 
 
New plant field guide out this spring 
 
FLAGSTAFF, Ariz. – Open the book and step into the creeping, climbing, blossoming 
world of fairy slippers, pink elephants and Arizona kittentails. As amateur and 
professional botanists anticipate nature’s most vivid season, Field Guide to Forest & 
Mountain Plants of Northern Arizona is available now for $30 to aid in scientific study 
and casual enjoyment.     
 
Plant ecologists of the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University 
have invested nearly two decades identifying plants named after animals such as owls, 
mice and monkeys and meticulously categorizing every brown-eyed Susan and blue-
eyed Mary of the Colorado Plateau. They will be available at a book signing scheduled 
for noon to 2 p.m., Thursday, March 4 at the NAU Bookstore. 
 
This comprehensive, up-to-date botanical resource for northern Arizona forests is the 
first book of its kind for the higher elevation ecosystems of northern and eastern Arizona. 
It distinguishes more than 1,400 species, using the scientific and common names of 
conifers, flowering trees and shrubs, grasses and grass-like plants (graminoids), 
wildflowers, cacti and agaves, ferns and fern allies and aquatics.  
 
Distinguished through line drawings, the regional flora is a collection of hardy plants that 
have evolved through millions of years of disturbances including ice ages, tropical 
swamps and volcanic eruptions, and have survived drought, extreme temperatures and 
wildfires.  
    
“My hope is that it will advance our understanding and appreciation of native plant 
species in our backyards and in the forests that surround us as we are faced with 
unprecedented challenges in this century, including the effects of projected climate 
change on the environment,” said ERI plant ecologist Judith Springer.  
 
Blooming from the center of the book is a bouquet of nearly 300 wildflowers captured in 
full-color photographs. 
 
“Our aim was to create an attractive and useful guide to help researchers and the 
general public appreciate the richness and beauty of our local flora,” said ERI botanist 
and ecologist Mark Daniels. “We hope we have succeeded, and that the book will be 
used for a long time to come.” 
 
 

 
 
New field guide/page 2  
 
 
Former U.S. Interior Secretary and Arizona governor Bruce Babbitt says the publication 
marks another significant step in the rich tradition of scientific research at NAU.   
 
“To understand and appreciate our forest surroundings, we begin by identifying the 
individual species that make up the whole ecosystem. That is the essential value of a 
field guide, a book to take into the field and use on-site to help us become familiar with 
the component parts of our surroundings. And for that we have reason to thank the 
authors for their efforts in producing this fine work.” 
 
Babbitt adds that work of the ERI in forest health and restoration has become even more 
urgent as forests are threatened by climate change, invasive species and spreading 
urbanization. 
 
NAU Regent’s Professor and Biological Sciences professor Dr. Thomas Whitham says 
the publication is a comprehensive and welcome field guide. “It is well laid out with keys 
for the more difficult groups, useful notes on ecology and well illustrated.”  
 
Coconino National Forest botanist Debra Crisp says the use of nontechnical language in 
the field guide cuts the time it takes to identify different species. “I can hardly wait to get 
out and look at plants and try it out. Is it spring yet?”  
 
The field guide, compiled by Springer, Daniels and botanist Mare Nazaire in 
collaboration with a number of contributing authors, photographers, researchers and 
artists, also offers a snapshot of the geology, human history and climatic events that 
have shaped the region from the San Francisco Peaks, along the Mogollon Rim and into 
the White Mountains.     
 
“Where floristic manuals for northern Arizona are either outdated or currently lacking, 
this comprehensive and current field guide fills a critical need for Arizona botanists and 
laypeople,” said Nazaire. 
 
Field Guide to Forest & Mountain Plants of Northern Arizona is available for purchase at 
the NAU Bookstore. Log on to nau.edu/bookstore or call 928-523-4041.  
 
### 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
