A Rapid Assessment of the Economic and Ecologic 
Consequences of Alternative Hazardous Fuel Treatments
The Efficacy of Hazardous  
Fuel Treatments: 
May 2013
A Special Report from the Ecological Restoration Institute at Northern Arizona University to the U.S. Department of Interior, Office of Wildland Fire

Authors and Researchers 
Te following authors and researchers contributed to this report: 
 
●
Dr. Yeon-Su Kim, Professor, School of Forestry, Northern 
Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ – Project Lead
 
●
Dr. Wally Covington, Executive Director and 
Regents’ Professor, Ecological Restoration Institute, 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ
 
●
Paul Ervin, PhD student, School of Economic Sciences, 
Washington State University, Pullman, WA
 
●
Ryan Fitch, PhD student, School of Forestry, 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ
 
●
Dr. Elizabeth L. Kalies, Postdoctoral Research Associate, Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 
(currently with Bayer CropScience, Research Triangle Park, NC)
 
●
Dr. Douglas Rideout, Professor and Director of Western Forest 
Fire Research Center, Department of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
 
●
Dr. Kimberly Rollins, Associate Professor, Department 
of Economics, University of Nevada, Reno, NV
 
●
Dr. Andrew Sanchez-Meador, Assistant Professor, 
Ecological Restoration Institute and School of Forestry, 
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ
 
●
Dr. Mike Taylor (Research Professor), Department 
of Economics, University of Nevada, Reno, NV
 
●
Diane Vosick, Director of Policy and Partnerships, Ecological 
Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaﬀ, AZ
 
●
Tong Wu, Center for Forestry and Center for Fire 
Research and Outreach, College of Natural Resources, 
University of California, Berkeley, CA
 
●
Dr. Jonathan Yoder, Professor, School of Economic 
Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
Acknowledgments 
Te following individuals participated in the workshop or provided review and 
comment:
 
●
Krista Gebert, Economist, Northern Region, 
USDA Forest Service, Missoula, MT
 
●
Dr. Gary Snider, Economist, Kaibab 
National Forest, Williams, AZ
 
●
Dr. Elizabeth Reinhardt, National Program Leader for Fire 
Research, USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C. 
 
●
Dr. Peter Teensma and the Oﬃce of Wildland Fire, 
Department of Interior, Washington, DC
We wish to thank the United States 
Department of Interior, Oﬃce of Wildland 
Fire and the Arizona Board of Regents, 
Technology, Research and Innovation Fund 
for their ﬁnancial support for this project. 
Cover:
Center photo courtesy of the U.S. Forest 
Service, Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. 
Background photo courtesy of the Ecological 
Restoration Institute.
 
Design/Layout: 
Ralph Schmid
Please use the 
following citation when  
referring to this report:
Ecological Restoration Institute. 2013. 
Te eﬃcacy of hazardous fuel treatments: 
A rapid assessment of the economic and 
ecologic consequences of alternative 
hazardous fuel treatments: A summary 
document for policy makers. Northern 
Arizona University. 28 pp.
This report is available online. Visit: 
 
http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/collect/ 
erilibra/index/assoc/D2013004.dir/doc.pdf
Ecological Restoration Institute

Table of Contents
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
I. Introduction   
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
II. Background 
6
III. About this Report  
7
IV. Persistent Questions 
8
V. Why are these questions difficult to answer and why do they persist? 
8
VI. Persistent Questions: Summary of Research  
14
VII. Research Recommendations  
24
VIII. References 
25
 

4 
Ecological Restoration Institute
4
Ecological Restoration Institute
Executive Summary
Te Oﬃce of Management and Budget (OMB), Government Accountability Oﬃce (GAO) and the United States Congress have 
repeatedly asked the Oﬃce of Wildland Fire in the Department of Interior (DOI) and the United States Forest Service (USFS) 
to critically examine and demonstrate the role and eﬀectiveness of fuel reduction treatments for addressing the increasing sever-
ity and cost of wildland ﬁre. Federal budget analysts want to know if and when investments in fuel reduction treatments will 
reduce federal wildland ﬁre suppression costs, decrease ﬁre risk to communities, and avert resource damage. 
In order to answer persistent questions related to wild-
ﬁre economics and fuel treatment eﬀectiveness, the Oﬃce of 
Wildland Fire contracted with the Ecological Restoration In-
stitute at Northern Arizona University to conduct a neutral, 
third party analysis. Te research and analysis team includ-
ed university-aﬃliated and independent economists. Te key 
ﬁndings for ﬁve persistent questions are summarized below. 
1. Have the past 10 years of hazardous fuel reduction 
treatments made a difference? Have fuel reduction 
treatments reduced fire risk to communities?
●
Using an evidence-based approach to objectively 
evaluate the relevant literature, researchers found 
that for the forest ecosystems that were examined, 
the evidence suggests that restoration treatments 
can reduce ﬁre severity and tree mortality in the 
face of wildﬁre, and also increase carbon storage 
over the long-term. 
 
●
Studies that use the avoided cost approach 
to examine the cost of ﬁre demonstrate that 
treatments result in suppression cost savings. 
 
●
Modeling studies that evaluate the eﬀectiveness of 
fuels treatments in terms of changes in wildland 
ﬁre size, burn probabilities, and ﬁre behavior 
demonstrate that fuel treatments applied at the 
proper scale can inﬂuence the risk, size, and 
behavior of ﬁre therefore reducing suppression cost.
 
●
Modeling also demonstrates that where treatments 
are suﬃcient to change dynamic ﬁre behavior, 
suppression costs are reduced.
 
●
Modeling demonstrates that fuel reduction 
treatments are eﬀective at reducing ﬁre behavior 
(severity) where implemented, and can successfully 
reduce ﬁre risk to communities. However, it also 
shows that fuel reduction treatments that occur 
at broader scales would have bigger impacts on 
the overall reduction of crown ﬁre. Perhaps most 
Understanding the ecologic and economic eﬀectiveness of 
hazardous fuel and restoration treatments at the national level 
poses challenges that prevent simple answers to these questions. 
Complicating factors include: 
 
●
Scale. Geography, fuels, forest types, and ﬁre 
regimes vary nationally and therefore do not lend 
themselves to an easy comparison for analysis.
 
●
Time and treatment eﬀectiveness. Te 
relationship of a treatment to long-term risk 
reduction is contingent on the quality of 
the treatment at the start, vegetation type, 
maintenance, and additional factors such as climate 
change.
 
●
Fire is inevitable and the choices made to 
suppress a ﬁre will inﬂuence ﬁre cost. Numerous 
analyses have concluded that the most expensive 
ﬁres occur under extreme weather conditions and 
that these ﬁres are a small percentage of the entire 
ignitions that occur in the country.
 
●
Although federal budget analysts are most 
interested in investments in treatments and 
how they may inﬂuence suppression costs 
at the federal level, the damage caused by 
ﬁre is externalized across multiple levels of 
government and the private sector. Analyzing 
the costs and beneﬁts only in terms of federal 
programs is inadequate for understanding the full 
value of restoration treatments, wildﬁre suppression 
cost, and losses avoided. In addition, it will under 
estimate the total cost of inaction. 
 
●
From a theoretical standpoint, the economic 
relationship between investments in treatments 
and a reduction in suppression costs is 
complicated. Te analysis cannot be reduced 
to the simple formula of X dollars invested in 
treatments will yield Y dollars of savings in 
suppression. 

5
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
5
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
importantly, the results show that WUI-only 
treatments result in areas of unchanged crown ﬁre 
potential across the untreated landscape, therefore 
leaving it vulnerable to large, severe, and expensive 
(mega) landscape-scale ﬁre. 
 
●
Although few studies exist on the topic, fuel 
reduction treatments signiﬁcantly enhance the 
price of adjacent real estate, whereas homes in 
close proximity to a wildﬁre experience lower 
property values.
2. What is the relative value of treatment 
programs at the landscape scale? (Reframing 
Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) as an 
economic model.)
 
●
A marginal analysis of beneﬁt can be used to 
compare the relative value of alternative ﬁre 
management strategies on a complex landscape 
instead of calculating actual dollar values. Tis 
approach allows managers to compare diﬀerent 
treatment alternatives and assess which is 
economically more eﬃcient without the need to 
calculate the total cost.
 
●
Using a Colorado study site, it is possible 
to demonstrate that high level treatments 
(approximately 30% of the study site) will 
improve landscape condition by almost 20% over 
the current condition. 
3. How can current and future economic returns 
to restoration-based hazardous fuel reduction 
treatments be improved?
 
●
In the two ecosystems studied (ponderosa pine 
and mountain big sagebrush) it is more cost 
eﬀective to treat degraded systems before they 
signiﬁcantly depart from natural conditions. 
 
●
When short time horizons are used, such as 10 
or 20 years, to evaluate the expected economic 
return from treatments, the value can appear to be 
negative. When the time horizon is lengthened to 
be consistent with the duration of expected eﬀects 
of the treatment, the returns may be positive.
 
●
Te economic return on treatments is inﬂuenced 
by the ability to oﬀset costs through sale of 
byproducts and/or biomass.
4. What are the fuel treatment, Wildland Urban 
Interface, and climate change effects on future 
suppression costs?
 
●
Based on the analysis conducted for this project, 
the number of acres burned and total suppression 
cost increase with the amount of land classiﬁed 
as WUI intermix. Similar but smaller and 
statistically weaker eﬀects are estimated for WUI 
interface.
 
●
Extrapolations of WUI growth and weather 
variables suggest that if trends in these variables 
continue as they did in this analysis, wildﬁre 
acreage and suppression costs will increase in the 
future.
5. In conclusion: When or will investments in fuel 
reduction treatments lead to a reduction in 
suppression costs?
 
●
Assessing the value of restoration and hazardous 
fuel treatments only in terms of reducing 
suppression costs is an inadequate analysis for 
understanding the full economic and ecologic 
value of treatments. 
 
●
Treatments designed to reduce severe ﬁre 
behavior may contribute to a reduction in ﬁre 
suppression costs. 
 
●
Proximity to the WUI and ﬁre size are 
correlated with increases in suppression 
expenditures. A growing body of evidence 
demonstrates that WUI treatments are eﬀective 
for reducing damage to communities. However, 
modeling shows that by failing to invest in 
treatments in the greater landscape, severe, 
landscape-scale ﬁre will persist. 
 
●
By delaying restoration, the cost of treatments 
and the return on investment will be lower. It is 
more cost eﬀective to restore systems before they 
depart signiﬁcantly from desired conditions. 
 
●
If the current trends of development in the WUI 
and weather conditions consistent with the last 
10 years continue, the cost of suppression and 
number of acres burned will likely increase. 
Addressing growth in the WUI and ﬁre risk is 
essential to reducing suppression costs. 

6 
Ecological Restoration Institute
6
Ecological Restoration Institute
Several fire crews from across the country fought around the clock to suppress the Wallow Fire, which ignited on May 29, 2011 in eastern Arizona and 
burned more than 538,000 acres. Photo courtesy of the U.S. Forest Service
I. Introduction
Te Forest Fires Emergency Act of 1908, also known as 
the 1908 Fire Act, authorized the United States Forest Service 
(USFS) to spend whatever was necessary (subject to supple-
mental appropriations) to combat forest ﬁres. It was a logical 
response to the catastrophic ﬁres of the late 19th and early 
20th centuries. Tese unprecedented ﬁres ruined not only 
forested landscapes, but also the economic and social systems 
that depended on them. Worse yet, both ﬁreﬁghters and civil-
ians perished. Te 1908 Fire Act was the ﬁrst time the United 
States Congress opened its checkbook with few constraints 
for ﬁre suppression. 
By 1910, USFS ﬁre prevention and suppression programs 
were ﬁrmly established. Tose early decisions continue to im-
pact discussions about federal ﬁre policy and appropriations 
to this day. 
As a ﬁrst step toward answering key ecologic and eco-
nomic questions about the eﬀectiveness of hazardous fuels 
and restoration treatments, scientists from around the coun-
try were assembled to work across disciplinary boundaries to 
analyze data and provide innovative approaches and analyses 
to answer important questions. Te goal, within time and 
funding constraints, was to ﬁnd, analyze and synthesize 
the best available evidence that policy makers need to make 
decisions about how to spend the limited money available to 
address the nation’s growing ﬁre problem. 
 II. Background
Today, it is widely accepted that past management prac-
tices, in combination with ﬁre suppression and prevention 
policies established in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, 
was the major cause for the ecological degradation and ex-
cessive fuels that choke frequent ﬁre forests and woodlands 
(Covington et al. 1994, Reinhardt et.al 2008, Stephens 
and Ruth 2005). Tese unnatural fuels are the primary 
driver for the increased severity and size of uncharacteristic 
wildﬁre and increasing suppression costs in the past three 
decades. Concern about expanding ﬁre suppression costs 
increased in the 1970s when Congress and the Oﬃce of 
Management and Budget (OMB) began demanding great-
er cost eﬃciency in ﬁre management (Gonzalez-Caban, et 
al. 1984). Early eﬀorts to contain suppression cost focused 
on the strategies, labor, and equipment used to accomplish 
suppression. Te idea that investments in fuel treatments 
could ultimately reduce the need for suppression and lead to 
cost savings was not a central strategy in early discussions 
about cost containment. In 1994, the Report of the Nation-
al Commission on Wildﬁre Disasters (cited in GAO 2000) 
stated:
Te vegetative conditions that have resulted 
from past management policies have created 
a ﬁre environment so disaster-prone in many 

7
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
7
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
areas that it will periodically and tragically 
overwhelm our best eﬀorts at ﬁre prevention 
and suppression. Te resulting loss of life and 
property, damage to natural resources, and 
enormous costs to the public treasury, are pre-
ventable. If the warning in this report is not 
heeded, and preventative actions are not ag-
gressively pursued, the costs will, in our opin-
ion, continue to escalate. 
In 1995, the Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy 
and its update in 2001 set the stage for the federal land man-
agement agencies (as well as other jurisdictions) to take action 
to reduce fuel accumulation in order to avoid larger and more 
damaging ﬁres and escalating ﬁre cost (NWCG 2001). 
Implementation of the recommendations of the National 
Fire Plan1 and the Healthy Forest Restoration Act of 2003 
created the expectations that fuel reduction treatments (some-
times synonymously referred to as restoration treatments—
even though they are diﬀerent) would alleviate the problem of 
landscape-scale wildﬁre and help reduce the need and cost for 
suppression. 
After 15 years of marshaling political will, signiﬁcant 
increases in federal appropriations, and public support for 
action, why do suppression costs continue to escalate and the 
number of acres burned—and burned severely—continue 
to increase? Policy makers are growing impatient and anx-
ious to realize success. Tis report is focused on clarifying 
and addressing important questions on the minds of policy 
makers today: What has been received for fuel treatment dol-
lars? Why do large, landscape-scale ﬁres not only persist, but 
continue to increase in size and severity? Why do suppression 
costs continue to increase? And when will a return on invest-
ment from fuel treatments be seen?
III. About this Report
Repeatedly since 1995, OMB, the Government Account-
ability Oﬃce (GAO), and Congress have asked the Oﬃce of 
Wildland Fire in the Department of Interior (DOI) and the 
USFS to critically examine the role and eﬀectiveness of fuel 
reduction treatments as a means of addressing the increasing 
severity and cost of wildland ﬁre (USDOI 2012). Federal 
budget analysts want to know if and when investments in fuel 
reduction treatments will reduce federal wildland ﬁre suppres-
sion costs, decrease ﬁre risk to communities and avert resource 
damage. 
Nine months after the launch of the National Fire Plan, 
the GAO began assessing and commenting on the ability of 
the federal agencies to implement the plan and to eﬃciently 
use the signiﬁcant increase in funding they received in Fiscal 
Year 2001 (GAO 2001). Since 2001, federal land management 
agencies have been encouraged by the GAO and others to 
improve their coordination, treatment and spending prioriti-
zation processes, and overall organizational management in 
order to fulﬁll the goals of the Federal Wildland Fire Man-
agement Policy and National Fire Plan (GAO 2001, 2003, 
2005, 2007, 2009). Persistent calls for a 
uniﬁed strategy that can eﬃciently use 
limited economic resources to help solve 
the wildﬁre crisis led to a requirement 
in the FLAME Act (2009) that the 
Secretaries of Agriculture and Interior 
develop a Cohesive Wildﬁre Manage-
ment Strategy, or Cohesive Strategy. Te 
departments were speciﬁcally directed to 
develop a strategy that is consistent with 
recommendations of the GAO. Te Co-
hesive Strategy, based on a three-phase 
process, is intended to provide the tools 
necessary to evaluate alternative wild-
land ﬁre management strategies that will 
reduce risk by using a trade-oﬀ approach 
(WFLC 2012). 
In March, 2012, the Oﬃce of Wild-
land Fire contracted with the Ecological 
Firefighters perform blacklining operations, where hand drip torches are used to back-burn fuels 
along a fire’s perimeter to limit its growth. Photo courtesy of the Ecological Restoration Institute
1 The National Fire Plan consists of the Report to the President in Response to the Wildfires of 2000 and the increase in federal appropriations to 
the land management agencies in Fiscal Year 2001.

8 
Ecological Restoration Institute
8
Ecological Restoration Institute
Restoration Institute (ERI) at Northern Arizona University to 
analyze available information in order to answer several per-
sistent questions related to wildﬁre economics and fuel treatment 
eﬀectiveness. Te Oﬃce of Wildland Fire contracted with the 
ERI2 in order to obtain a neutral, third-party analysis external to 
the federal programs. However, it is noteworthy that the analyses 
in this report are meant to complement the ongoing work as a 
part of the Cohesive Strategy. It builds from the considerable 
expertise that has developed over the past 10 years within the 
federal agencies and academia to help provide information need-
ed by decision makers. 
To better identify and clarify the questions of greatest impor-
tance, staﬀ at ERI conducted a series of interviews in January 
2012 with staﬀ from OMB, GAO, and relevant Congressional 
policy and appropriations committees. Following the interviews, 
invitations were extended to the leading experts in ﬁre econom-
ics to attend a writing workshop at Northern Arizona University 
June 6–8, 2012. Te questions were discussed and distributed to 
the attendees. Te in-depth study summarized in this report is 
being submitted to scholarly journals for publication. In order to 
meet the deadlines established by the DOI Oﬃce of Wildland 
Fire, we are providing brief and preliminary summaries of the 
research in this report. 
IV. Persistent Questions
1. Have the past 10 years of hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments made a 
diﬀerence? Have fuel reduction treatments 
reduced ﬁre risk to communities
2. What is the relative value of treatment 
programs at the landscape scale?
3. How can current and future economic 
returns to restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments be improved?
4. What are the fuel treatment, Wildland 
Urban Interface, and climate change 
eﬀects on future suppression costs?
5. When or will investments in fuel 
reduction treatments lead to a 
reduction in suppression costs? 
     V. Why are these questions    
       difficult to answer and why  
       do they persist?
At the heart of these questions are two issues: whether or not 
the investment in hazardous fuel and restoration treatments is 
providing something in return; and, is it possible to determine 
how much investment will be required in restoration and fuel 
reduction treatments before the need for expensive suppres-
sion is reduced (in other words, risk is suﬃciently low that 
suppression decisions can be scaled appropriately). While this 
seems like a straight-forward question, the analysis required 
for a sound answer requires considerable care. For a myriad of 
reasons the question doesn’t lend itself to a tidy answer—espe-
cially at the national scale. 
1. Te economic relationship between investments 
in treatments and a reduction in suppression 
costs is complicated. Economists began 
grappling with how to optimize investments in 
pre-suppression (deﬁned as capital expenditures 
of equipment as well as prevention and detection 
programs), suppression and losses over 75 years 
ago with the goal of ﬁnding the most eﬃcient 
combination for minimizing damage and the 
associated costs of wildland ﬁre (Sparhawk 1925). 
Although Sparhawk’s original model did not 
explicitly address fuel reduction treatments as 
a component of pre-suppression, the economic 
theory based on Sparhawk’s model generated 
a myth that “fuels treatment reduces optimal 
suppression expenditures (including initial attack)” 
(Rideout and Ziesler 2008). Te issue is that 
investments in both treatment and suppression 
reduce ﬁre damage and associated loss of 
ecosystem services (net value change).         
     As decisions that economists consider to be 
made independently in time and space, they 
have synergistic eﬀects in reducing damage and 
cost. In other words, they are both inputs that 
together determine how much damage and loss 
will occur. In order to apply economic methods 
to ﬁnd a point at which suﬃcient investment in 
fuel treatments will lead to reduced suppression 
2 The ERI was authorized by Congress (PL108-317) as a part of the “The Southwest Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention Act” as one of three 
institutes dedicated to assisting the federal agencies, land managers, and other affected entities to achieve landscape-scale restoration. More 
specifically, the Act directs the institutes to: facilitate the transfer of interdisciplinary knowledge required to understand the socioeconomic and 
environmental impacts of wildfire on ecosystems and landscapes.

9
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
9
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
expenditures, changes in loss would need to 
be determined from wildland ﬁres associated 
with a series of diﬀerent fuel treatments and 
ﬁre suppression costs across the landscape and 
diﬀerent vegetation types (to evaluate the trade-oﬀ 
between two components of ﬁre management); 
or outcomes would need to be compared of 
the same wildland ﬁres with and without fuel 
treatments, which would be very hard to do 
empirically. In addition, greater investment 
in both prevention and suppression is likely 
to be needed because ﬁre damage and loss of 
ecosystem services are predicted to increase in 
the foreseeable future for the following reasons:
 
●
Climate change is expected to contribute to 
longer and larger ﬁres (Westerling et al. 2006)
 
●
In order to reduce the size and severity of 
andscape-scale (mega) ﬁre, emerging research 
demonstrates treatments must occur outside the 
WUI (wildland urban interface) (see discussion 
on page 18 for emerging research results) 
 
●
Construction and the value of homes in the 
WUI are positively correlated with higher 
suppression costs. Growth in the WUI, 
which continues, is under the control of local 
and state government and is not a variable 
under the control of the federal government 
(Gude et al. 2012, Gebert et al. 2007). 
2. Scale. Geography, fuels, forest types, and ﬁre regimes vary 
nationally. Calculating the impact of fuels or restoration 
treatments on suppression costs across millions of acres of 
land with diﬀerent site speciﬁc natural and constructed 
assets may be good for a trend-analysis, but does not lend 
itself to inform a national strategy (Calkin et al. 2011). 
However, it may be possible to analyze the question at a 
smaller scale and derive a credible answer that can be used 
to inform national policy.  
Te Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Act, or 
CFLRA (2009), established a program goal of facilitating 
the reduction of wildland ﬁre costs by implementing 
landscape-scale restoration. It requires project proposals 
to analyze any anticipated cost savings from reduced 
wildﬁre management costs, wood utilization and decreases 
in the unit cost of implementing ecological restoration 
treatments over time. In order to assist the Collaborative 
Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) projects 
with this endeavor, National Forest Systems economists, 
the Rocky Mountain Research Station, and the Western 
Wildlands Environmental Treat Assessment Center 
developed the Risk and Cost Analysis Tool, known as 
R-CAT, for estimating wildland ﬁre management cost 
savings (CFLRP 2012). Tis tool is in the early stages 
Fuel treatments adjacent to the 
town of Alpine, Arizona effectively 
lowered the intensity of the crown 
fire burning above and protected 
residential structures below during 
the 2011 Wallow Fire.  Photo 
courtesy of the U.S. Forest Service 
High intensity crown fire
Fuel treatment area
Residential area

10 
Ecological Restoration Institute
10
Ecological Restoration Institute
of application. Separately, the DOI and Colorado State 
University developed the STARFire system (Manley 
2011) to address the value of changes to the landscape 
from implementing a system of fuel treatments aimed at 
hazardous fuel reduction and forest restoration. Principles 
in both R-CAT and STARFire are addressing integrated 
analysis to provide a more holistic assessment of ecological 
treatments over time. 
        Te CFLRP provides momentum for increasing 
the pace of implementing treatments at the scale of 
the problem. Tus far, management actions over the 
last 10 years treat too few acres strategically to achieve 
widespread changes in ﬁre extent and behavior. Schmidt 
and others (2002) estimated that there were nearly 190 
million acres of federal forest and rangeland at risk 
for catastrophic ﬁre. Tis was in addition to millions 
of other state and private lands at equal risk due to 
degraded land health (USDA Policy Paper on Fire and 
Fuels Buildup). Te 2000 Cohesive Strategy (USDA 
Forest Service 2000) recognized the need to increase the 
number of acres treated and proposed ambitious goals 
using 10, 15, and 20-year planning horizons. At full 
implementation, the 2000 Cohesive Strategy 10-year plan 
called for treatments on up to 6.9 million acres per year. 
A reality check on the pace of treatments can be found 
in the performance report included in the USDA Forest 
Service Fiscal Year 2013 Budget Justiﬁcation (2012). It 
reveals that under performance measure 1.1) “Reduce 
the risk to communities and natural resources from 
wildﬁre,” the agency’s target in Fiscal Year 2011 was 
to move 960,000 acres toward desired condition and 
maintain 1.2 million acres in desired conditions. Te 
agency achieved 82% and 86% of the goal, respectively. 
Te number of acres treated in Fiscal Year 2011 is not 
even close to number of acres proposed per year in the 
2000 Cohesive Strategy, or that are needed to reduce 
the threat of catastrophic ﬁre at the landscape scale. 
3. Time and treatment eﬀectiveness. Vegetation grows. 
Without maintenance, the restoration and ﬁre risk 
reduction beneﬁts of a treatment will diminish over time 
(Finney et al. 2005). Many treatments may already be sub-
optimized in an ecological and hazardous fuel sense when 
socio-political inﬂuences such as diameter caps lead to the 
retention of excess trees (Abella 2006). Te relationship 
of a treatment to long-term risk reduction is contingent 
on the quality of the treatment at the start, vegetation 
type, maintenance and exogenous factors such as climate 
change (see “evidence-based approach” on page 14). 
4. Suppression decisions and inevitability. Fire is inevitable 
and the choices made in the process to suppress a ﬁre will 
inﬂuence ﬁre cost. Numerous analyses have concluded 
that the most expensive ﬁres occur under extreme weather 
In this “before” photo, large trees are clearly marked as “leave trees” prior to the implementation of a forest restoration project near Williams, 
Arizona. Photo courtesy of the U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Kaibab National Forest

11
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
11
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
conditions and that these ﬁres are a small percentage of 
the entire ignitions that occur in the country. About 1% 
of all ﬁres account for 97.5% of the total acres burned 
(Calkin et al. 2005) and 85% of ﬁre suppression costs 
(Brookings Institution 2005). Research shows that where 
they occur, restoration and fuel reduction treatments can 
be valuable assets for both suppressing and managing 
ﬁre exhibiting moderate behavior. However, where ﬁre 
behavior is extreme—such as plume-driven ﬁres—the ﬁre 
can overwhelm even the best treatments (Graham 2003), 
leading to expensive damage and ecological harm. 
       Te probability and cost of landscape-scale (mega) 
ﬁres will continue unless more eﬀort is placed on solving 
the problem where it ﬁrst ignites—in the greater forest 
landscape. Te National Fire Policy in 1995 and the 
National Fire Plan in 2000 recognized that in order to 
address the wildﬁre crisis, degraded forest ecosystems 
required ecological restoration. Tese documents 
recognized that the problem was bigger than the WUI 
and would require a strategy that would restore forest 
health and resiliency and in turn would allow ﬁre to 
resume its natural role. In the early 2000s, socio-political 
forces led to increasing investments in WUI treatments 
at the expense of treatments in the greater landscape. 
Congressional report language, the Healthy Forest 
Restoration Act (2003), and directives from OMB all 
pushed the land management agencies to focus treatments 
in the WUI. At the same time, the litigious environmental 
community, with a long history of opposing cutting trees, 
allowed treatments in the WUI to proceed with minimal 
interference.  
       Severe ﬁres are a landscape phenomenon. Tey most 
often occur under extreme weather conditions, which 
limit the eﬀectiveness of suppression eﬀorts (Bessie et al. 
1995). One approach to reverse the trend in increasing 
severe landscape-scale (mega) ﬁre may be to implement 
a suﬃcient number and size of treatments in the greater 
landscape that will reduce fuels and modify ﬁre behavior. 
Modeling research by Finney and others demonstrates 
how it is hypothetically possible to conﬁgure treatments 
in order to change ﬁre behavior (Finney 2007). Cochrane 
(2012) empirically established that even “modest 
quantities” of treatments on the landscape can aﬀect 
the ﬁnal size of wildﬁre. Te problem is that despite 
considerable theoretical support for this solution, the 
land management agencies have been unwilling, unable, 
and/or have lacked the resources and political support to 
move ahead with landscape-scale treatments. Te CFLRA 
(2009) provides a platform for a more comprehensive 
approach to restoring forest health and resiliency while 
simultaneously reducing the risk of severe ﬁre. Assuming 
funding and investments in this approach match the scale 
of the problem, it may be possible to see some eﬀective 
landscape-scale restoration unfold (Wu et al. 2011). 
With overstocked, dense trees now thinned out and surface fuels removed, there is a decreased chance of a high-intensity crown fire occurring in this “after” 
photo of the same restoration project near Williams, Arizona. Photo courtesy of the U.S. Forest Service, Southwestern Region, Kaibab National Forest

12 
Ecological Restoration Institute
12 
Ecological Restoration Institute
5. Although the cost of treatments and suppression 
are internalized in the federal budget, the damage 
caused by ﬁre is externalized across multiple levels 
of government and the private sector. Analyzing 
this problem solely between federal programs is 
inadequate for calculating the value of restoration 
treatments, and wildﬁre suppression cost and 
losses avoided. According to the Western Forestry 
Leadership Coalition (2010), the total or true cost of 
ﬁre is between two and thirty times the suppression 
cost. Te Cerro Grande Fire of 2000 burned nearly 
43,000 acres with an estimated ﬁnal cost of $800 
million (Morton et al. 2003). Te 2010 Schultz Fire 
in northern Arizona on the Coconino National 
Forest provides an insightful case study of how the 
brunt of the ﬁre damage is distributed broadly over 
multiple federal, state, and local units of government, 
nonproﬁt organizations, the private sector, and 
impacted citizens. It also presents an interesting 
example of how citizens, when they understand 
the full cost impact of unnatural ﬁre, may choose 
economically rational approaches to prevent it.  
       Te Schultz Fire ignited in June of 2010 and 
burned approximately 15,000 acres “in major part 
across moderate to very steep Ponderosa pine and 
mixed conifer covered slopes” (Coconino National 
Forest 2012). Te total cost of suppression was 
shared across local and federal ﬁre ﬁghters and was 
estimated at $9.4 million (Coconino National Forest 
2012). However, it was post-ﬁre ﬂooding that caused 
the greatest damage. Te federal agencies involved 
in the ﬁre and post-ﬂood recovery included the 
USFS, Federal Emergency Management Authority 
(FEMA), Natural Resource Conservation Service 
(NRCS), and Federal Highway Commission, 
paying an estimated and projected $30 million. 
Te remaining direct costs were covered by state, 
county, city and local government, private businesses, 
a nonproﬁt, and utilities. Preliminary results from 
a survey conducted of residents impacted by the 
ﬁre and ﬂood, combined with an analysis of lost 
property values and out-of-pocket expenditures 
suggest that the total cost is between $133 and 
$146 million (Table 1). Tis ﬁgure also includes the 
value placed on a 12-year-old who drowned during 
the post-ﬁre ﬂood event (Combrink et al. 2013). 
Total Impact
Loss in Property Value
     $59,353,523 
Government Agencies
     $59,104,394 
Loss of Life
     $6,000,000 
Structural damage
     $3,097,978 
Cleanup
     $1,825,127 
Unpaid Labor
     $1,516,103 
Armoring
     $823,100 
Home Contents
     $548,235 
Fire Evacuation Costs
     $223,572 
Flood Insurance 
Premiums
     $198,034 
Habitat
     $400,000 - $14,200,000      
Total
     $133,090,066 - $146,890,066
Two burn areas from the 2011 Wallow Fire in eastern Arizona experienced 
drastically different fire intensities. The previously treated area (top) had a 
low fire intensity due to the prior removal of excess fuels. This fire burned 
mostly on the ground with a large tree survival rate. The untreated area 
(bottom) experienced a high-intensity crown fire that scorched all of the trees 
and understory. Photo courtesy of the Ecological Restoration Institute 
Table 1. Total estimated impact of the Schultz Fire and ﬂood. 

13
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
13
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
Summary 
A recent synthesis of studies examining public at-
titudes toward fire and forest management, specif-
ically fuel reduction, concluded that some level of 
active management that includes prescribed fire and 
mechanical thinning is acceptable for more than 
three-quarters of the public and is preferred by the 
public over no management action (McCaffrey et al. 
2012). An analysis of polling results from the South-
west further demonstrates that the public supports 
restoration-related activities, specifically prescribed 
fire and mechanical thinning, to achieve a reduction 
fire risk and severity (Abrams and Lowe 2005). In 
order to fully understand the logic and efficiency of 
treatments, a comprehensive analysis should focus 
on what is being received from the investment in 
treatments and how should treatments and wildland 
fire management be integrated to provide a holistic 
solution to restoring degraded landscapes? By framing 
the question this way, there can be improvement on 
the economic and ecologic efficiency of management 
decisions. The following section summarizes the anal-
yses conducted by individual researchers and provides 
some preliminary answers. 
A plume of smoke from the Schultz Fire dwarfs the San Francisco Peaks, north of Flagstaff, Arizona. Photo by Mike Elson, U.S. Forest Service, Coconino 
National Forest
In the aftermath of the 2010 Schultz Fire, heavy flooding carved deep 
channels below the burn area, inundating residential properties below 
with debris, mud, and ash and causing millions of dollars in damage. Photo 
courtesy of the Ecological Restoration Institute 

14 
Ecological Restoration Institute
14 
Ecological Restoration Institute
  VI. Persistent Questions:  
        Summary of Research 
Economic studies that comprehensively evaluate the eco-
nomic eﬃciency of fuel management programs at multiple scales 
are still lacking (Kline 2004, Mercer et al. 2007). Most previous 
research is based on anecdotal case studies and simulated chang-
es in wildland ﬁre size and behavior on fuel treatments at small 
or ﬁne scales. Tis makes it diﬃcult to credibly draw broader 
policy insights about the overall eﬀectiveness of fuel manage-
ment across diﬀerent spatial and temporal scales (Hesseln 2000, 
Prestemon et al. 2002, Fernandes and Botelho 2003). In order 
to inform answers to large-scale economic and fuel eﬀectiveness 
questions, several diﬀerent approaches were used; they are brieﬂy 
described under each section. More detail will be provided in the 
journal articles associated with this report. 
1. Have the past 10 years of hazardous 
fuels reduction treatments made a 
difference? Have fuel reduction treatments 
reduced fire risk to communities?
What is the evidence-based approach?  
      Conventional literature reviews often summarize studies with 
little analytical attention paid to the quality of the sources. As a 
result, the results of conventional reviews are usually qualitatively 
described and often lead the practitioner and the policy maker 
down an unproductive path, e.g., “on the one hand X, on the other 
hand Y.” A more methodical and replicable approach is that of 
evidence-based reviews, including, when possible, the systematic 
review (Pullin and Stewart 2006). Whether in medical, business, 
engineering, or conservation practice, evidence-based approaches 
strive to answer practical questions based on a careful analysis of 
available evidence. Ideally, the goal is to exhaustively search and 
obtain all relevant peer-reviewed journal publications as well as un-
published gray literature and research ﬁndings. In practice, evidence 
(knowledge) search and acquisition is limited by time and resources 
available. No matter how thorough, the ﬁnal review: 1) explicitly 
states how evidence was collected (what was the knowledge search 
strategy?), 2) quantitatively summarizes the ﬁndings, 3) highlights 
areas where additional research is needed, and 4) provides informa-
tion needed by decision makers that incorporate the quality (i.e., 
rigor and strength) of individual science ﬁndings. Evidence-based 
conservation is increasingly used in conservation and environmen-
tal decision making as an objectively rigorous method of accessing 
and synthesizing relevant literature (e.g., Peppin et al. 2010, Kalies 
et al. 2010, Pullin et al. 2009, Pullin and Knight 2009). 
Tis study asked: Are forest restoration treatments eﬀective at 
enhancing or protecting ecosystem services following stand-replac-
ing wildﬁre? None of the studies reviewed were carried out explic-
itly as a study of an “ecosystem service,” but after the sources of 
information were selected, the treatment eﬀectiveness was classiﬁed 
under the relevant ecosystem service categories post hoc. 
Web of Science and Google Scholar databases were searched for 
papers published prior to June 2012, using the keywords: “WILD-
FIRE and EFFECTS and TREATMENT.” Peer-reviewed papers, 
conference proceedings, government documents, and theses and 
dissertations were considered. Based on the full text of each paper, 
studies that met the following four criteria were selected and sum-
marized:
1. Subject: U.S. western dry forests burned in a wildfire; 
study had to be conducted on actual effects of 
wildfire (not predicted effects based on models)
2. Intervention: fuel treatments including tree thinning, 
burning, prescribed burning, or thinning/burning
3. Comparator: untreated (dense) forest stands or sites
4. Outcome: any ecosystem or human response 
variable, including but not limited to fire 
behavior, acres burned, property lost, 
carbon stored/lost, wildlife habitat, etc.
During the interviews, researchers were urged to rigorously 
evaluate the eﬀectiveness of hazardous fuel and restoration 
treatments and go beyond anecdotes. Using an evidence-based 
approach (see description below), the value of landscape-level 
ecological restoration and hazardous fuel treatments subjected 
to wildﬁre was analyzed. Researchers considered the value of 
treatments for addressing the sharp increase in ﬁre suppression 
costs and damages, and perhaps more importantly, in enhancing 
natural resource and ecosystem service values. 
Findings: 
Evidence evaluating the eﬀectiveness of fuel treatments on 
ecosystem services  
 
●
Tirty-three papers were found that compared 
the eﬀects of fuel treatments (thin, burn, or thin/
burn) with untreated sites post-wildﬁre. 
 
●
Restoration treatments (i.e., tree thinning and/
or controlled burning) had a positive impact on 
the ecosystem service under consideration. Tree 
studies found a neutral relationship, and two 
concluded that treatments had a negative impact. 

15
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
15
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
 
●
Te ecosystem services under review were 
grouped into the four categories identiﬁed in the 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment commissioned 
by the United Nations (2006): “provisioning 
services,” “regulating services,” “cultural 
services,” and “supporting services.” 
 
●
For regulating services (ﬁre risk and 
severity reduction, carbon sequestration), 
all relationships were positive. 
 
●
For supporting services (soil, nitrogen cycling, 
understory productivity, biodiversity/wildlife), 11 
were positive, three were neutral (all in understory 
productivity), and two were negative (one each 
in soil formation and nitrogen cycling). 
 
●
Although there are many studies that demonstrated 
fuel treatment eﬀectiveness on protecting watershed 
services, recreation and cultural values (e.g., 
reﬂected in real estate values) and commodity 
values, there has been no study that met the search 
criteria. In other words, no studies were found that 
systematically compared the changes in these values 
with and without fuel treatments after a wildﬁre. 
Tis represents an urgent future research need. 
 
●
For the environments examined in the 
literature, the evidence suggests that restoration 
treatments can reduce ﬁre severity and tree 
mortality in the face of wildﬁre, and also 
increase carbon storage over the long-term. 
For the non-regulating services, although 
the weight of the evidence suggests a positive 
overall relationship between treatments and 
ecosystem services, there is a much larger data 
gap, and the conclusions are less conﬁdent.
 
 
Analyzing the economic eﬃciency of fuels management 
in relation to wildland ﬁre suppression
Only a handful of studies exist to rigorously evaluate 
the long-term impacts of management on wildland ﬁre risk 
and the economic eﬃciency of fuel management. In order to 
analyze the economic eﬃciency of fuel management treat-
ments, researchers synthesized the available literature on the 
topic. 
Modeling studies show a strong correlation between ﬁre 
size, proximity to the WUI, and higher suppression costs. 
Less research has been done to understand the inﬂuence of 
ﬁre behavior characteristics on suppression costs (Gebert et 
al 2007). In order to analyze the relationship between ﬁre 
behavior and suppression costs, a regression analysis was 
conducted on burn severity maps and reported suppression 
costs for 39 historical ﬁres (>1,000 acres) that occurred 
between 2001 and 2009. A procedure similar to the R-CAT 
(Risk and Cost Analysis Tool) model was applied to predict 
the changes in wildland ﬁre suppression costs from a pro-
posed large-landscape restoration project within the Four 
Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) in northern Arizona. 
Wildlife viewing is an ecosystem service enhanced by healthy forests. 
Photo by George Andreijko, Arizona Game and Fish Department
Photo by George Andreijko, Arizona Game and Fish Department 

16 
Ecological Restoration Institute
16
Ecological Restoration Institute
Findings:
 
●
Studies that use the avoided cost 
approach demonstrate that treatments 
result in suppression cost savings. 
 
●
Tere are relatively more modeling studies that 
evaluate the eﬀectiveness of fuels treatments 
in terms of changes in wildland ﬁre size, 
burn probabilities, and ﬁre behavior.
 
●
Tese studies demonstrate that fuel 
treatments applied at the proper scale can 
inﬂuence the risk, size, and behavior of ﬁre 
therefore reducing suppression cost.
 
●
Te USFS is developing and testing the 
R-CAT model to meet the requirements of the 
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Act. 
Te model has been pilot tested on a CFLR project 
on the Deschutes National Forest in central 
Oregon where 46% of the landscape is proposed 
for treatment over 10 years. On an annual basis, 
the results show a substantial treatment eﬀect. For 
ﬁres igniting within treated areas, mean annual 
area burned and suppression costs drop by 36.25% 
and 35.30%, respectively, after treatment.
 
●
Preliminary modeling results of treatments 
proposed under the 4FRI show that ﬁre 
severity is a signiﬁcant factor in explaining 
the variation in ﬁre suppression costs.
 
●
When fuel treatments modify ﬁre behavior 
and reduce ﬁre severity, they may also enhance 
the eﬀectiveness of ﬁre suppression eﬀorts.
Tere are a limited number of studies that rigorously 
evaluate the long-term impacts of fuel management on 
wildland ﬁre risk (e.g., Prestemon et al. 2002, Mercer et al. 
2007, 2008) and the economic eﬃciency of fuel management 
explicitly (Butry 2009). Butry (2009) examined this question 
in Florida and applied propensity score matching to account 
for the treatment selection bias where the sites with high risk 
of wildland ﬁre were more likely to be chosen for fuel treat-
ments, thus skewing the evaluation of treatment eﬀectiveness. 
He evaluated the large-scale eﬀects on landscapes and found 
that every dollar spent on prescribed ﬁre returns $1.53 worth 
of wildland ﬁre damages avoided (with prescribed ﬁre cost 
at $26.30/acre). Tese existing studies use data from Florida 
where prescribed burning is well established as a fuel treat-
ment tool. Tis geographic focus limits the ability to gener-
alize these conclusions to the dry forests of the West where 
many treatments include some type of mechanical thinning. 
In the Southwest, Snider et al. (2006) applied the avoided 
cost approach to ﬁnd that spending $238–$601 per acre 
for hazard reduction treatments can be justiﬁed in terms of 
future suppression cost savings with a number of simplifying 
assumptions to directly link lower ﬁre risk accomplished by 
fuel treatments to lower suppression and rehabilitation costs. 
Tere is a relative abundance of ﬁre modeling studies 
that demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of fuel treatments in terms 
of potential changes in wildland ﬁre size, burn probabilities, 
and ﬁre behavior (e.g., Pollet and Omi 2002, Stratton 2004, 
Finney et al. 2005, Calkin et al. 2005, Finney 2005, Ager et 
al. 2011, Cochrane et al. 2012). Much of the recent literature 
analyzing the suppression costs of large wildﬁres have indi-
cated that the size of the wildﬁre is a consistently signiﬁcant 
explanatory variable in modeling suppression costs (e.g., 
Calkin et al. 2005, Gebert et al. 2007, Liang et al. 2008, 
Prestemon et al. 2008). More research is needed to identify 
the relationship between suppression costs and ﬁre behavior 
in order to assess the overall eﬀectiveness of restoration and 
fuel treatments on suppression costs. 
Tere are three economic studies that considered fuel 
treatments, changes in potential ﬁre behavior, and their 
inﬂuence on wildland ﬁre suppression costs explicitly. Abt et 
al. (2007) simulated wildland ﬁre outcomes of a large land-
scape (400,000 acres) in the Lincoln National Forest in New 
Mexico with and without treatments with a set of models 
(Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) and RangeLg/FlamMap). 
Teir results showed that treating 23% of the landscape over 
10 years would reduce acres burned by 64% and suppression 
costs by 69%. Teir regression model for ﬁre suppression 
costs include burn intensity measures derived from ﬂame 
lengths, as well as ﬁre size classes. Even with high treatment 
costs of $1,100/acre, they estimated the expected saving in 
suppression costs per year would be $2.2 million after treat-
ments are fully in place. 
More recently, a group of USFS researchers, ﬁre mod-
elers, and economists developed a standardized procedure 
that combines ﬁre modeling with an economic model of 
suppression costs for estimating expected changes in suppres-
sion costs due to fuel treatments. Te use of this procedure, 
termed R-CAT (Risk and Cost Analysis Tool), is required for 
all projects funded by the CFLR program. Tis standardized 
procedure will help account the eﬀectiveness of fuel treat-
ments systematically in the future. 
Te Deschutes CFLR project on the Deschutes National 
Forest, Oregon is the ﬁrst demonstration site for the use of 
R-CAT. Te west-central Oregon project area is 145,000 acres 
in size; 112,000 of which are managed by the USFS. Te 
broad treatment goals of the project are restoring forest eco-
systems, promoting resiliency, and protecting highly valued 
resources and assets, and the primary vegetation treatment is 
thinning from below (commercial and non-commercial), with 

17
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
17
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
surface fuels treated through a combination of hand-piling 
and burning, mowing, and prescribed ﬁre. In total 66,808 
acres, or approximately 46% of the landscape, are projected 
to receive treatment during the planning period from 2010 
to 2019. Results of the analysis on the Deschutes show that 
within treated areas, the mean and median ﬁre sizes decrease 
by 17.08% and 22.24%, respectively, with per ﬁre cost reduc-
tions of a similar magnitude. On an annual basis, the results 
also show a substantial treatment eﬀect. For ﬁres igniting 
within treated areas, mean annual area burned and suppres-
sion costs drop by 36.25% and 35.30%, respectively, after 
treatment (Tompson et al. 2012).
Te R-CAT analysis has not been conducted for other 
CFLRP sites. Terefore, a similar procedure was applied to 
predict the changes in wildland ﬁre suppression costs from a 
proposed large-landscape restoration project within the Four 
Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) in northern Arizona 
(Fitch et al. 2013). To understand the eﬀects of ﬁre behavior 
characteristics on wildland ﬁre suppression costs, a regression 
analysis was conducted on burn severity maps and report-
ed suppression costs for 39 recent ﬁres (>1,000 acres) that 
occurred between 2001 and 2009. Preliminary results show 
that ﬁre severity was signiﬁcant in explaining the variation in 
ﬁre suppression costs. Te analysis showed that if the whole 
restoration unit (175,617 acres within the 4FRI analysis area) 
burned under current conditions, wildland ﬁre suppression 
would cost about $25 
million. Treatment costs 
were not incorporated 
into this calculation, 
because ﬁnal costs of the 
proposed treatments are 
highly uncertain at this 
point, depending on the 
rate of biomass utiliza-
tion resulting from the 
treatments. For example, 
past estimates of similar 
mechanical thinning op-
erations in the area were 
$300–433 per acre (Kim 
2010). However, the cur-
rent contractor proposed 
to pay the USFS $22 per 
acre for thinning 300,000 
acres. 
After the proposed 
treatments, the area 
that burned under high 
severity conditions will be 
reduced and ﬁre suppression 
is estimated to cost about $22.5 million. A situation was 
assumed where the ﬁre burns the whole project area in order 
to illustrate the saving of ﬁre suppression cost resulting from 
reduced ﬁre severity. Previous studies report reduced ﬁre size 
due to fuel treatments (e.g., Ager et al. 2010), and therefore 
support the assumption that the saving on ﬁre suppression 
costs would likely be larger due to reduced ﬁre size and en-
hanced eﬀectiveness of ﬁreﬁghting eﬀorts. 
When fuel treatments modify ﬁre behavior and reduce 
ﬁre severity, they may also enhance the eﬀectiveness of ﬁre 
suppression eﬀorts. Mercer et al. (2008) evaluated the trade-
oﬀs between investing in initial attack resource deployment 
and fuel management with an engineering model. Tey 
found that fuel treatments may increase the probability of 
containing a ﬁre during initial attack, although the magni-
tude of the tradeoﬀs is site-speciﬁc. Empirically, ﬁreﬁghting 
eﬀectiveness was reportedly increased by treatments, attribut-
ed to increased visibility in treated areas, and decreased heat 
and smoke (Murphy et al. 2007, Rogers et al. 2008, Bostwick 
et al. 2011). Moghaddas and Craggs (2007) reported similar 
results with treatments resulting in increased penetration of 
retardant to surface fuels, improved visibility between ﬁre 
crew, safe access to the ﬁre, and quick suppression of spot 
ﬁres. Another study also reported that treatments increased 
the speed of evacuations (Rogers et al. 2008), which may have 
helped save human lives.
Research shows that ecological restoration treatments which thin excess trees and remove understory fuel 
loads allow for the reintroduction of more natural fire regimes, like this low-severity ground-fire. Photo 
courtesy of the Ecological Restoration Institute

18 
Ecological Restoration Institute
18 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Te eﬀectiveness of WUI treatments and inﬂuence  
on property values
Tere is growing, albeit anecdotal, evidence that fuel 
treatments have saved homes (Bostwick et al. 2011). 
The overall effectiveness of treatments was evaluated 
in the aforementioned systematic review. In response 
to the 2011 Wallow Fire in Arizona, the Ecological 
Restoration Institute (ERI) was asked to analyze the 
effectiveness of the USFS national prioritization process 
for altering landscape-scale (mega) fire outcomes (Waltz 
Figure 1. Conditional Flame Length data from fire modeling results for pre-Wallow Fire 
forest conditions. Red pixels denote high average probability of larger than 6-feet flame 
lengths and were selected for hypothetical treatment implementation. Treatments were 
implemented by changing the fuel and tree canopy data layers in the input data files for the 
Flam-Map fire modeling software.
2012). The management question the ERI sought to 
answer was: If nationally developed USFS fuel reduction 
priorities had been implemented in the Apache-Sitgreaves 
National Forests prior to the Wallow Fire, would wildfire 
outcomes under large-fire (Wallow-like) conditions have 
different fire severity and probability patterns when 
compared to no implementation (2010 conditions)? 
Because the federal land management agencies have been 
directed to prioritize treatments in the WUI, this project 
became a surrogate for understanding the effectiveness of 
WUI treatments (Figure 1). 
Findings: 
 
●
Te ERI modeling results 
demonstrate that fuel reduction 
treatments are eﬀective at reducing 
ﬁre behavior (severity) where 
implemented, and can successfully 
reduce ﬁre risk to communities. 
 
●
Fuel reduction treatments 
that occur at broader scales would 
have bigger impacts on the overall 
reduction of crown ﬁre. Perhaps most 
important, the results show that 
WUI-only treatments result in areas 
of unchanged crowning potential 
across the pre-treatment landscape.
 
●
Continuous fuels in 
uncharacteristically high loadings 
continue to support high intensity 
and severe (mega) ﬁre at landscape 
scales with losses to ecological 
integrity in forests adapted to more 
frequent ﬁre conditions.  
Eﬀects of fuel treatments  
on property values 
In order to understand the value of 
treatments and ﬁre suppression on prop-
erty values, the ERI synthesized available 
literature. Tere are several studies that in-
vestigate the eﬀects of fuel treatments and 
ﬁre on real estate values. A study by Kim 
and Wells (2005), using a hedonic model, 
found that fuel reduction treatments sig-
niﬁcantly enhance the price of adjacent real 
estate — by approximately $190 per 1,000 
m2 per house. Tis conclusion is support-
ed by another study of the ﬂip-side of the 
forest aesthetics-property value relationship: 

19
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
19
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
Mueller et al. (2009) found that a wildﬁre occurring within a 
1.75-mile radius of a property lowered that house’s value by 
approximately $15,000 (9.71%), while a second ﬁre occurring 
within the same distance causes a further decline of $34,000 
(22.7%). In Montana, the value of homes within 3.1 miles of a 
wildﬁre burned area were 13.7% ($33,232) lower than those at 
least 12 miles from a ﬁre (Stetler et al. 2010).
Findings: 
 
●
Fuel reduction treatments signiﬁcantly 
enhance the price of adjacent real estate.
 
●
Homes located in close proximity to wildﬁre 
experience lower property values. 
2. What is the relative value of treatment 
programs at the landscape scale? 
Reframing Fire Regime Condition Class (FRCC) as an 
economic model
Assessing the value of management alternatives on nat-
ural ecosystems has long challenged resource professionals. 
Te scope of the problem has signiﬁcantly widened from a 
commercial focus to include a full range of ecosystem and 
amenity considerations. Recent reviews demonstrate the im-
portance of addressing the return on investment for ﬁre man-
agement in a restoration context and also note the diﬃculties 
of comparing changes across diﬀerent resource values (US-
DOI Oﬃce of Policy Analysis 2012). 
As discussed previously, the persistent questions, especial-
ly the desire to understand when investment in treatments will 
lead to a reduction in the need for expensive suppression, are 
diﬃcult to answer using a conventional beneﬁt-cost analysis. 
Instead of trying to estimate the total value of ecosystem ser-
vices, changes were estimated in total value with respect to 
changes in restoration and fuel treatments (marginal values). 
In other words, the relative value of a management scenario 
can be evaluated compared to other alternatives in moving 
the ecosystem closer toward the desired ﬁre management con-
dition. Tus, the ﬁre management problem was re-framed to 
connect essential elements of restoration with the economists’ 
deﬁnition of marginal value (the incremental value of addi-
tional management action) without having to attach mone-
tary values. Te extent of restoration achieved is an outcome of 
management actions applied to a given site condition, deﬁned 
in part by the Fire Regime Condition Class, other management 
variables and physical attributes. By estimating and comparing 
the relative value of fuel treatment options researchers were 
able to directly address their relative return on investment. 
The 2012 Waldo Canyon Fire destroyed approximately 346 homes, including several homes in this neighborhood near Colorado Springs, Colorado. 
The Waldo Canyon Fire forced the evacuation of 32,000 residents and burned 18,247 acres. Photo by Kari Greer, courtesy of the U.S. Forest Service

20 
Ecological Restoration Institute
20
Ecological Restoration Institute
A case study application from Colorado’s fire-prone 
Front Range was used to illustrate the potential for in-
tegrating restoration ecology with microeconomics. The 
study site includes diverse values for watershed, WUI and 
wildlife habitat, and is adjacent to the 2012 Waldo Can-
yon fire. The spatial planning system STARFire (Manley 
et al. 2011) was used to implement a series of planning 
alternatives including low and high levels of fuel treat-
ment options to show the difference in the return on 
investment. Burn probabilities and marginal values for 
restoring the site were used to estimate a demand curve 
for the fire management effort for each fire planning al-
ternative. Comparisons of the landscape deviations from 
desired fire management condition were processed to 
show the relative value of each alternative, and these can 
be interpreted as alternative returns on investment. 
The strength and innovation of this approach to 
analysis and application is that it allows consideration 
for the return on investment from planning alternatives 
without requiring total cost information. It also sug-
gests a contextual framework with extensive flexibility 
and refinement for those interested in a more thorough 
development. For this initial integration of ecological 
restoration with the marginal value of fire management, 
researchers were required to make many simplifying as-
sumptions that might benefit from future refinements. 
Findings:
●
A classic economic approach that attempts to 
place a total economic value on management 
outcomes is costly and difficult. This study 
demonstrates that a marginal analysis of 
benefit can be used to compare the relative 
value of alternative fire management 
strategies on a complex landscape. This 
approach allows managers to compare 
different treatment alternatives and assess 
which is economically more efficient without 
the need to calculate the total cost.
 
●
The study site used to demonstrate this 
approach suggests that high level treatments 
(approximately 30% of the study site) 
will improve landscape condition by 
almost 20% over the current condition 
and that combining fuel treatments 
with an aggressive suppression program 
generated an almost 30% improvement 
relative to the current condition. 
3. How can current and future economic 
returns to restoration-based hazardous 
fuel reduction treatments be improved?
In order to understand how to improve the economic 
eﬃciency of treatments, the cost and beneﬁts of diﬀerent treat-
ments can be analyzed in the context of moving an ecosystem 
toward desired conditions. To accomplish this analysis, a uniﬁed 
analytical model was built to evaluate the economic eﬃciency of 
fuel treatments in diverse ecological settings. Tis model simu-
lated long-run wildﬁre suppression costs with and without fuel 
treatments, and then compared the reduction in wildﬁre suppres-
sion costs due to implementing fuel treatments with treatment 
costs to determine economic returns. Tis approach describes the 
economic return of future fuel treatments in terms of expected 
wildﬁre suppression costs averted. Tis model accounts for 1) the 
cumulative cost of fuel treatments over time, 2) the likelihood of 
wildﬁre events with and without treatments, 3) the costs of wild-
ﬁre suppression and post-ﬁre restoration, and 4) the combined 
inﬂuence of wildﬁres and management actions on ecological 
conditions and ecological services over time.
Tis project combined an economic model with a stylized 
ecological state-and-transition model for two ecosystems in the 
western United States: the ponderosa pine forest ecosystem of the 
Southern Colorado Plateau (henceforth the “PIPO ecosystem”) 
and the mountain big sagebrush ecosystem of the Great Basin 
(henceforth the “MBS ecosystem”). 
State-and-transition (STM) models describe an ecosystem as 
being in one of several ecological states, which are separated by 
ecological thresholds (Stringham et al. 2003). Te stylized STM 
consists of ﬁve ecological states for the PIPO system and three 
ecological states for the MBS system. Te stylized STMs are nu-
merically implemented to simulate the beneﬁts of fuel treatment 
with treatment costs, suppression costs, wildﬁre frequencies, and 
the transitions between ecological states in the PIPO and MBS 
systems. It is assumed that both the PIPO ecosystem and MBS 
ecosystem will transition between an ecological state if a ﬁnite 
amount of time passes without either fuel treatment or wildﬁre.
In the two simulation models of PIPO and MBS systems, 
parameters and model assumptions were chosen to avoid either 
overstating the beneﬁts or understating the costs of fuel treat-
ments. Most importantly, only one category of fuel treatment 
beneﬁts—reductions in wildﬁre suppression costs—is considered, 
and, as such, all of the other ecosystem goods and services that 
can potentially beneﬁt from fuel treatments are ignored in the 
analysis. Beneﬁts from fuel treatments not considered include re-
ductions in wildﬁre damage to housing and other infrastructure, 
reduced risk to ﬁreﬁghters, and improvements in wildﬁre habitat, 
erosion control and esthetic beauty. Given that these additional 
beneﬁts from fuel treatments are not considered, the analysis can 
only draw conclusions about the conditions under which certain 

21
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
21
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
fuel treatments are economically eﬃcient. Conversely, the analysis 
cannot draw conclusions about the conditions under which other 
fuel treatments are not eﬃcient.
Findings:
 
●
In the two ecosystems studied, it is more cost 
eﬀective to treat degraded systems before they 
signiﬁcantly depart from natural conditions. 
 
●
Te results indicate that fuel treatments are 
economically eﬃcient in the MBS ecosystems on 
the basis of wildﬁre suppression costs savings alone 
when applied to MBS systems that are in relatively 
good ecological health, before pinyon pine and 
juniper trees reach closed-canopy conditions. 
 
●
Wildﬁre suppression costs averted alone are not 
suﬃcient to oﬀset the expected costs of fuel treatments 
applied to MBS systems that have transitioned to 
closed-canopy systems with pinyon pine and junipers, 
or that have previously burned and transitioned to 
monoculture invasive grass dominated communities. 
 
●
In the PIPO ecosystem, 
fuel treatments aimed 
at rehabilitating dense, 
overcrowded forests are not 
economically eﬃcient on the 
basis of wildﬁre suppression 
cost savings alone. It 
should be emphasized 
that the results on the 
economic eﬃciency of fuel 
treatments for the PIPO 
ecosystem are preliminary 
and further development 
of the state-and-transition 
model may be required 
before ﬁrm conclusions 
about the eﬃciency of 
fuel treatments for this 
ecosystem can be made. 
 
●
A measure of the wildﬁre suppression costs averted can 
only be a lower bound on the return on investment 
for fuel treatments. Where the returns are positive, 
the need to measure the magnitude of other values 
may be avoided—in other words the treatments 
are a worthwhile investment in terms of wildﬁre 
suppression costs averted alone. Where the diﬀerences 
are negative, these results indicate, on a per acre basis, 
the level of the additional beneﬁt necessary for fuel 
treatments to generate expected beneﬁts to suppression 
costs averted are greater than the costs of treatment. 
Tis distinction is important for the PIPO and MBS 
ecosystems, where restoration of ecosystem function 
is one of the primary goals of fuel treatments.
In addition to estimating the long-run economic returns to 
fuel treatments for the PIPO and MBS ecosystems, two issues 
relevant for evaluating the costs and beneﬁts of any fuel treatment 
program or policy were analyzed. First, the appropriate time hori-
zon for evaluating the economic returns to fuel treatments was 
considered. Te time horizon used to evaluate policy is import-
ant because the beneﬁts of restoration-based fuel treatments are 
often relatively long-lived in the two ecosystems studied. Second, 
how the economic returns to fuel treatments are inﬂuenced by 
treatment eﬀectiveness and treatment costs is analyzed. Tis 
information is necessary to evaluate how the current and future 
economic returns to fuel treatments would change as a result 
of anticipated improvements in treatment eﬀectiveness and/or 
reductions in treatment costs due to advances in applied ecology 
and management.
Fire Crew 7 marches toward the fire zone to protect an area of rangeland that was not yet burned by the 
Long Draw Fire. The Long Draw Fire burned more than 557,000 acres in southeast Oregon in July 2012. 
Photo by Kevin Abel, Bureau of Land Management
Findings:
●
Te simulation results illustrate that when short time 
horizons are used, such as 10 or 20 years, the expected 
return from fuel treatment strategies can appear to 
be negative; but when the time horizon is lengthened 
to be consistent with the duration of expected eﬀects 
of the treatment, the returns may be positive. 

22 
Ecological Restoration Institute
22
Ecological Restoration Institute
 
●
Analyzing how economic returns for fuel 
treatments will be inﬂuenced by eﬀectiveness and 
oﬀsets for treatment costs are especially important 
for the PIPO system, because the current costs 
of treatments are quite high due to a lack of 
viable markets for biomass. It is anticipated that 
treatment costs will go down in the near future 
as markets develop for restoration by-products 
coming out of CFLR sites and as new technology 
comes on-line to utilize small diameter wood. 
4. What are the fuel treatment, Wildland 
Urban Interface, and climate change 
effects on future suppression costs?
Te objective of this analysis was to identify and estimate 
eﬀects of fuel treatments and demographic and environmental 
changes on suppression costs and ﬁre outcomes. Te analysis 
used a strategy based on spatiotemporally aggregated data to 
the county level for the western U.S. to estimate the impact of 
county-level fuel treatments, WUI characteristics, and weather 
eﬀects on total county-level suppression cost and acres burned. 
Data on wildﬁres and fuel management derive from three 
primary sources: the National Interagency Fire Management In-
tegrated Database (NIFMID), Incident Command Summaries 
(ICS-209), and the National Fire Plan Operations and Report-
ing System (NFPORS). A random eﬀects Tobit model was used 
to account for censoring of the dependent variables and the 
panel structure of the data. Of the extant published literature 
on this topic, this approach is most similar to Prestemon et al. 
(2002), who examined the eﬀects of prescribed ﬁre on wildﬁre 
activity in Florida based on annual, county-level data. Regres-
sion results were used to extrapolate the eﬀects of treatments, 
WUI, and weather factors to the next decade.
Findings:
 
●
Te number of acres burned and total suppression 
costs increase with the amount of land classiﬁed as 
WUI intermix. Similar but smaller and statistically 
weaker eﬀects are estimated for WUI interface.
 
●
Extrapolations of WUI and weather variables in 
the sample suggest that if trends in these variables 
continue as they did in the sample, wildﬁre acreage 
and suppression costs would increase in the future.
 
●
Results show limited and mixed eﬀects associated 
with fuel treatments. One of the reasons may be 
due to the selection bias of fuel treatments, meaning 
the more wildﬁre prone the areas are, the more 
likely they receive fuel reduction treatments. 
5. In conclusion: When or will investments 
in fuel reduction treatments lead to 
a reduction in suppression costs? 
 
●
Assessing the value of restoration and 
hazardous fuel treatments only in terms of 
The area where forested land and urban homes are interfaced, or side-by-side (left), or intermixed (right) is known as the wildland urban interface, or 
WUI. As population densities increase in WUI areas, a growing body of evidence suggests that fuel reduction treatments are effective in reducing damage 
to property and infrastructure from catastrophic wildfires. Illustrations by Adriel Begay, courtesy of the Ecological Restoration Institute 

23
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
23
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
persist. Increasing treatments in the greater 
landscape can contribute to the reduction of 
uncharacteristically large and severe (mega) ﬁres, 
and therefore ﬁre expenditures, in the future. 
 
●
By delaying restoration action in the mountain 
big sagebrush and ponderosa pine ecosystems, 
the cost of treatments and the return on 
investment will be lower. It is more cost 
eﬀective to restore systems before they depart 
signiﬁcantly from desired conditions. 
 
●
If the current trends of development in the 
WUI and weather conditions consistent 
with the last 10 years continue, the cost of 
suppression and number of acres burned will 
likely increase. Addressing the WUI and ﬁre 
risk is essential to reducing suppression costs. 
reducing suppression costs is an inadequate 
analysis for understanding the full economic 
and ecologic value of treatments. An 
evidence-based systematic review shows that 
fuel and restoration treatments improve the 
value of ecosystem services. Accounting for 
the full economic beneﬁts of the ecosystem 
services enhanced by treatments and the full 
cost of the damage avoided when the risk of 
unnatural ﬁre is averted results in a positive 
economic and ecologic return on treatments. 
 
●
To determine whether, where, and when 
investments in treatments may lead to decreases 
in suppression costs requires a new perspective 
on economic analyses at the national level. By 
analyzing the beneﬁts of management actions 
in terms of moving the ecosystem closer to 
desired conditions, the relative eﬀectiveness of 
diﬀerent management actions can be analyzed. 
Tis approach also allows ecosystem services and 
other important values to be considered. As a 
next step, this framework will be combined with 
the Wildland Fire Management Risk and Cost 
Analysis Tools Package (R-CAT) developed by 
the USFS. With the combined framework, it will 
be possible to provide a robust and consistent 
procedure that can evaluate overall eﬃcacy of 
proposed treatments, incorporating a wide array 
of ecosystem beneﬁts and management costs. 
 
●
A link between ﬁre behavior characteristics 
(severity) and suppression costs was demonstrated 
using a modiﬁed application of the R-CAT tool 
for a treatment area proposed as a part of the 
Four Forest Restoration Initiative in Arizona. 
Treatments designed to reduce severe ﬁre 
behavior may contribute to a reduction in 
ﬁre suppression costs. As a next step, this 
link will be explored further to estimate the 
suppression cost savings resulting from fuel 
treatment focused on mitigating ﬁre severity, 
rather than limiting the extent of ﬁres.
 
●
Proximity to the WUI and ﬁre size are 
correlated with increases in suppression 
expenditures. A growing body of evidence 
demonstrates that WUI treatments are 
eﬀective for reducing damage to communities. 
However, modeling shows that by failing 
to invest in treatments in the greater 
landscape, severe landscape-scale ﬁre will 
Many properties within the wildland urban interface were protected 
from the 2011 Wallow Fire as a result of forest restoration treatments 
implemented adjacent to the homes prior to the fire. Photo courtesy of 
the Ecological Restoration Institute

24 
Ecological Restoration Institute
24 
Ecological Restoration Institute
   VII. Research Recommendations 
  Recommendation #1
Continue investigations that assess the relative marginal 
value of ﬁre management with the Risk and Cost Anal-
ysis Tools Package (R-CAT) developed by the USFS in 
combination with the STARFire model. With this com-
bined framework, it will be possible to provide a robust 
and consistent procedure to evaluate the overall eﬃcacy 
of proposed treatments, incorporating a wide array of 
ecosystem beneﬁts and management costs. Te R-CAT 
and STARFire systems are highly synergistic and they 
leverage certain common input data to integrate R-CAT’s 
cost-avoided estimates with STARFire’s ecosystem and 
restoration metrics of return on investment.
  Recommendation #2
Identify solutions to address the increase in unnaturally 
large and severe (mega) ﬁre. In particular, implement and 
test treatments designed to modify extreme ﬁre behavior 
outside the WUI. 
Recommendation #3
Implement a common or universal ﬁre identiﬁer frame-
work to be used by all units of government in order to 
improve the ability of researchers to analyze data and 
answer research questions. 
Recommendation #4
Although many studies demonstrated fuel treatment ef-
fectiveness on protecting watershed services, recreation, 
cultural values (e.g., reﬂected in real estate values), and 
commodity values, there has been no study that met 
the search criteria. In other words, researchers could 
not ﬁnd any studies that systematically compared the 
changes in these values with and without fuel treat-
ments after a wildﬁre. Tis represents an urgent future 
research need. 
  Recommendation #5
Conduct additional research to identify the relationship 
between suppression costs and ﬁre behavior in order to 
assess the overall eﬀectiveness of restoration and fuel 
treatments on suppression costs.
Studies show that protecting watersheds, recreation opportunities, and cultural values through forest restoration treatments provides valuable 
ecosystem services for all ages. Photo by Evie Bradley, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

25
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
25
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
Calkin, D.E., K.M. Gebert, G.J. Jones and R.P. Neilson. 
2005. Forest Service large ﬁre area burned and sup-
pression expenditure trends, 1970–2002. Journal of 
Forestry 103(4):179-183. 
Calkin, D.E., A.A. Ager, and M.P. Tompson (eds.) 2011. A 
comparative risk assessment framework for wildland 
ﬁre management: Te 2010 cohesive strategy science 
report. General Technical Report, RMRS-GTR-262. 
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 
63 p.
Cochrane, M.A., C.J. Moran, A.M.C. Wimberly, A.D. Baer, 
M.A. Finney, K.L. Beckendorf, C.J. Eidenshink, and 
Z. Zhu. 2012. Estimation of wildﬁre size and risk 
changes due to fuels treatments. International Journal 
of Wildland Fire 21:357-367. 
Coconino National Forest. 2012. Schultz Fire: Coconino 
National Forest Burned Areas Emergency Recovery 
Report. July 8, 2010. Accessed at http://www.rmrs.
nau.edu/awa/schultz_ﬁre/schultz_BAER_report.pdf
CFLRA (Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Act). 
2009. Public Law, 111-11. Omnibus Public Land 
Management Act of 2009. TITLE IV—Forest Land-
scape Restoration or Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Restoration Act.
CFLRP (Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Pro-
gram). 2012. Te Collaborative Forest Landscape 
Program Reporting, Guidance and Directives. http://
www.fs.fed.us/restoration/CFLRP/guidance.shtml 
(retrieved 8/27/12)
Combrink, T., C. Cothran, W. Fox, J. Peterson, G. Snider. In 
Press. A full-cost accounting of 2010’s Schultz Fire. 
Northern Arizona University, Arizona Rural Policy 
Institute and the Arizona Hospitality Research and 
Resource Center. 58 p.
Covington, W.W., R.L. Everett, R. Steele, L.L. Irwin, T.A. 
Daer, and A.N.D. Auclair. 1994. Historical and an-
ticipated changes in forest ecosystems of the Inland 
West of the United States. Journal of Sustainable 
Forestry 2(1/2):13-63.
Ferguson, J. 2012. Second time a charm for public works 
yard. Arizona Daily Sun, November 7, 2012. 
   VIII. References
Abella, S.R., P.Z. Fulé, and W.W. Covington. 2006. Diam-
eter caps for thinning southwestern ponderosa pine 
forests: viewpoints, eﬀects, and tradeoﬀs. Journal of 
Forestry 104:407-414.
Abrams, J., and K. Lowe. 2005. Public perceptions of forest 
restoration in the Southwest—A synthesis of selected 
literature and surveys. Northern Arizona Universi-
ty, Ecological Restoration Institute: Issues in Forest 
Restoration. 15 p.
Abt, K.L., A.A. Ager, R.J., Huggett Jr., J.P. Prestemon, M. 
Finney, and E. Twombly. 2007. Te costs and ben-
eﬁts of large scale treatment programs under condi-
tions approximating real-world ﬁre, climate, vegeta-
tion and economic conditions. Report to the Joint 
Fire Science Program. April 6, 2007. JFSP Project 
Number 06-3-2-24.
Ager, A.A., N.M. Vaillant, and M.A. Finney, M.A. 2010. A 
comparison of landscape fuel treatment strategies 
to mitigate wildland ﬁre risk in the urban interface 
and preserve old forest structure. Forest Ecology and 
Management 259(8):1556-1570.
Ager, A.A., N.M. Vaillant, and M.A. Finney. 2011. Integrat-
ing ﬁre behavior models and geospatial analysis for 
wildland ﬁre risk assessment and fuel management 
planning. Journal of Combustion 2011:Article ID 
572452. 19 p.
Bessie, W.C., and E.A. Johnson. 1995. Te relative impor-
tance of fuels and weather on ﬁre behavior in subal-
pine forests. Ecology 76:747-762. 
Bostwick, P., J. Menakis, and T. Sexton. 2011. How Fuel 
Treatments Saved Homes from the 2011 Wallow 
Fire. USFS-Region 3. 
Brookings Institution. 2005. Te Mega-ﬁre Phenomenon: To-
ward a More Eﬀective Management Model. Center 
for Public Policy Education. Washington, D.C.
Butry, D. 2009. Fighting ﬁre with ﬁre: estimating the eﬃcacy 
of wildﬁre mitigation programs using propensi-
ty scores. Environmental and Ecological Statistics 
16(2):291-319.

26 
Ecological Restoration Institute
26 
Ecological Restoration Institute
Fernandes, P.M., and H.S. Botelho. 2003. A review of pre-
scribed burning eﬀectiveness in ﬁre hazard reduction. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire 12(2):117-128. 
doi:10.1071/WF02042.
Finney, M.A. 2005. Te challenge of quantitative risk analy-
sis for wildland ﬁre. Forest Ecology and Management 
211:97-108. 
Finney, M.A., C.W. McHugh, and I.C. Grenfell. 2005. 
Stand- and landscape-level eﬀects of prescribed 
burning on two Arizona wildﬁres. Canadian Journal 
of Forest Research 35: 1714-1722.
Finney, M.A. 2007. A computational method for optimis-
ing fuel treatment locations. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire 16: 702–711
Fitch, R.A., Y.-S. Kim, and A.E.M. Waltz. 2013. Changes 
in wildland ﬁre suppression costs due to restoration 
treatments. In Review. Northern Arizona University, 
Ecological Restoration Institute—Issues in Forest 
Restoration. 
FLAME ACT. 2009. Federal Land Assistance, Management 
and Enhancement Act of 2009. Public Law 111-88.
GAO (General Accounting Oﬃce). 2000. Reducing Wildﬁre 
Treats: Funds Should Be Targeted to the Highest 
Risk Areas. GAO/T-RCED-00-296.  
http://www.gao.gov/assets/110/108631.pdf
GAO (General Accounting Oﬃce). 2001. Te National Fire 
Plan: Federal agencies are not organized to eﬀectively 
and eﬃciently implement the plan. GAO-01-1022T. 
GAO (General Accounting Oﬃce). 2003. Wildland Fire 
Management: Additional actions required to better 
identify and prioritize lands needing fuels reduction. 
GAO-03-08-05.
GAO (Government Accountability Oﬃce). 2005. Wildland 
Fire Management: Important progress has been 
made, but challenges remain to completing a cohe-
sive strategy. GAO-05-147.
GAO (Government Accountability Oﬃce). 2007. Wildland 
Fire Management: Better information and a system-
atic process could improve agencies’ approach to 
allocating fuel reduction funds and selecting projects. 
GAO-07-1168.
GAO (Government Accountability Oﬃce). 2009. Wildland 
Fire Management: Federal agencies have taken im-
portant steps forward, but additional, strategic action 
is needed to capitalize on those steps. GAO-09-877.
Gebert, K.M., D.E. Calkin, and J. Yoder. 2007. Estimating 
suppression expenditures for individual large wild-
land ﬁres. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 22(3): 
188-196. 
Gonzá1ez-Cabán, A., C.W. McKetta, and T.J. Mills. 1984. 
Costs of ﬁre suppression forces based on cost-ag-
gregation approach. Res. Paper PSW•171. Berkeley, 
CA: Paciﬁc Southwest Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture. 16 p.
Graham, R.T. (Ed.). 2003. Hayman Fire Case Study. General 
Technical Report RMRS-GTR-114. Ogden, UT: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 396 p.
Gude, P.H., J. Kingsfore, R. Rasker, and M.C. Greenwood, 
M.C. 2012. Evidence for the eﬀect of homes on wild-
ﬁre suppression costs. International Journal of Wild-
land Fire. Accessed online at http://www.publish.
csiro.au/?paper=WF11095
Hesseln, H. 2000. Te economics of prescribed burning: A 
research review. Forest Science 46(3):322-34.
Kalies, E.L., C.L. Chambers, and W.W. Covington. 2010. 
Wildlife responses to thinning and burning treat-
ments in southwestern conifer forests: A meta-anal-
ysis. Forest Ecology and Management 259(2010):333-
342.
Kim, Y.-S., and A. Wells. 2005. Te impact of forest density 
on property values. Journal of Forestry 103:146-151.
Kim, Y-S., 2010. Ecological restoration as economic stimulus: 
A regional analysis. Northern Arizona University, 
Ecological Restoration Institute: Issues in Forest 
Restoration. 16 p.
Kline, J.D. 2004. Issues in Evaluating the Costs and Beneﬁts 
of Fuel Treatments to Reduce Wildﬁre in the Na-
tion’s Forests. Research Note PNW-RN-542. Port-
land, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station. 46 p.

27
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
27
Efficacy of Hazardous Fuel Treatments
Liang, J., Calkin, D.E., Gebert, K.M., Venn, T.J., and Silver-
stein, R.P. 2008. Factors inﬂuencing large wildland 
ﬁre suppression expenditures. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire 17:650-659.
Manley, J., D. Rideout, Y. Wei, and S.J. Botti. 2011. Starﬁre: 
Decision support for strategic integration of wildland 
fuels and unplanned ignitions. In Proceedings of the 
3rd Fire Behavior and Fuels Conference. Interna-
tional Association of Wildland Fire, Spokane, WA 
October 25-29, 2010.
McCaﬀrey, S. M. and C.S. Olsen. 2012. Research perspec-
tives on the public and ﬁre management: a synthesis 
of current social science on eight essential questions. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-104. Newtown Square, PA: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northern Research Station. 40 p.
Mercer, D.E., J.P. Prestemon, D.T. Butry, and J.M. Pye. 
2007. Evaluating alternative prescribed burning pol-
icies to reduce net economic damages from wildﬁre. 
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 89(1):63-
77. 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2006. Millennium Eco-
system Assessment Synthesis Reports. http://www.
unep.org/maweb/en/Synthesis.aspx 
(Retrieved 3/10/13)
Moghaddas, J.J., and L. Craggs. 2007. A fuel treatment re-
duces ﬁre severity and increases suppression eﬃciency 
in a mixed conifer forest. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire 16: 673–678
Morton, D.C., M.E. Roessing, A.E. Camp, and M.L.Tyrrell, 
M.L. 2003. Assessing the Environmental, Social 
and Economic Impacts of Wildﬁre. GISF Research 
Paper, Yale University Global Institute of Sustainable 
Forestry, New Haven, CT.
Mueller, J.M., J.B. Loomis, and A. González-Cabán, A. 
2009. Do repeated wildﬁres change homebuyers’ 
demand for homes in high-risk areas? A hedonic 
analysis of the short- and long-term eﬀects of re-
peated wildﬁres on house prices in southern Cali-
fornia. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 
38(2):155-172
Murphy, K., T. Rich, and T. Sexton. 2007. An Assessment of 
Fuel Treatment Eﬀects on Fire Behavior, Suppression 
Eﬀectiveness, and Structure Ignition on the Angora 
Fire. U.S. Department of Agriculture R5-TP-025
National Wildﬁre Coordinating Group. 2001. Review and 
update of the 1995 federal Wildland Fire Manage-
ment Policy. National Interagency Fire Center. Boise, 
Idaho, USA. 
Peppin, D., P.Z. Fulé, C.H. Sieg, J.L. Beyers, and M.E. 
Hunter. 2010. Review: Post-wildﬁre seeding 
in forests of the western United States: An evi-
dence-based review. Forest Ecology and Management 
260(2010):573–586.
Pollet, J. and P.N. Omi. 2002. Eﬀect of thinning and pre-
scribed burning on crown ﬁre severity in ponderosa 
pine forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire 
11(1):1-10.
Prestemon, J.P., J.M. Pye, D.T. Butry, T.P. Holmes, and D.E. 
Mercer. 2002. Understanding broadscale wildﬁre 
risks in a human-dominated landscape. Forest Science 
48(4):685-693.
Prestemon, J.P., K. Abt, and K. Gebert. 2008. Suppression 
cost forecasts in advance of wildﬁre seasons. Forest 
Science 54(4):381-396.
Pullin, A.S., T.M. Knight, and A.R.Watkinson. 2009. Link-
ing reductionist science and holistic policy using 
systematic reviews: unpacking environmental policy 
questions to construct an evidence-based framework. 
Journal of Applied Ecology 46:970-975.
Pullin, A.S. and T.M. Knight. 2009. Doing more good than 
harm: building an evidence-base for conservation 
and environmental management. Biological Conserva-
tion 142: 931-934.
Pullin, A.S. and G.B. Stewart. 2006. Guidelines for sys-
tematic review in conservation and environmental 
management. Conservation Biology 20:1647-1656.
Reinhardt, E.D., R.E. Keane, D.E. Calkin, and J.D. Cohen. 
2008. Review: Objectives and considerations for 
wildland fuel treatment in forested ecosystems of 
the interior western United States. Forest Ecology and 
Management 256(2008):1997-2006.

28 
Ecological Restoration Institute
28
Ecological Restoration Institute
Rideout, D.B., and P.S. Ziesler. 2008. Tree Great Myths of 
Wildland Fire Management. In: Proceedings of the 
Second International Symposium on Fire Economics, 
Planning, and Policy: A Global View. General Tech-
nical Report, PSW-GTR-208.
Rogers, G., W. Hann, C. Martin, T. Nicolet, and M. Pence. 
2008. Fuel Treatment Eﬀects on Fire Behavior, Sup-
pression, Eﬀectiveness, and Structure Ignition: Grass 
Valley Fire, San Bernadino National Forest. United 
States Department of Agriculture R5-TP-026a.35 p.
Schmidt, K.M., J.P. Menakis, C.C. Hardy, W.J. Hann, and 
D.L. Bunnell. 2002. Development of coarse-scale 
spatial data for wildland ﬁre and fuel management. 
General Technical Report, RMRS-GTR-87. Fort 
Collins, CO.USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain 
Research Station. 41 p. 
Snider, G., P.J. Daugherty, and D. Wood. 2006. Te irratio-
nality of continued ﬁre suppression: an avoided cost 
analysis of ﬁre hazard reduction treatments versus no 
treatment. Journal of Forestry 104(8):431-437.
Sparhawk, W.N. 1925. Te use of liability ratings in planning 
forest ﬁre protection. Journal of Agricultural Research 
30(8):693-792.
Stephens, S.L., and L.W. Ruth. 2005. Federal forest-ﬁre 
policy in the United States. Ecological Applications 
15(2):532-542.
Stetler, K.M., T.J. Venn and D.E. Calkin. 2010. Te eﬀects 
of wildﬁre and environmental amenities on property 
values in northwest Montana, USA. Ecological Eco-
nomics 69 (2010):2233-2243.
Stratton, R.D. 2004. Assessing the eﬀectiveness of landscape 
fuel treatments on ﬁre growth and behavior. Journal 
of Forestry 102(7):32 – 40.
Stringham, T.K., W.C. Krueger, and P.L. Shaver. 2003. State 
and transition modeling: An ecological process ap-
proach. Journal of Range Management 56(2):106-113.
Tompson, M.P., N.M. Vaillant, J.R. Haas, K.M. Gebert, 
and K.D. Stockmann. 2013. Quantifying the Poten-
tial Impacts of Fuel Treatments on Wildﬁre Suppres-
sion Costs. Journal of Forestry 111(1):49-58. 
USDA Forest Service. 2012. Fiscal Year 2013 President’s Bud-
get: Budget Justiﬁcation. February 2012. 
USDA Forest Service. Fire and Fuels Buildup. Policy Paper. 
http://www.fs.fed.us/publications/policy-analysis/
ﬁre-and-fuels-position-paper.pdf (retrieved 9/16/12).
USDA Forest Service. 2000. Protecting people and sustain-
ing resources in ﬁre adapted ecosystems: A cohesive 
strategy. Te Forest Service Management Response to 
the GAO/RCED-99-65. October 13, 2000.
USDOI (United States Department of Interior). 2012. Wild-
land Fire Management Program beneﬁt-cost analysis: 
A review of relevant literature. Oﬃce of Policy Analy-
sis. June 2012.
Waltz, A.E.M. 2012. Impacts of ﬁre hazard assessment and 
fuel reduction priorities on mega-ﬁre outcomes: A 
hypothetical test using the Wallow Fire in Arizona. 
Fact Sheet. Northern Arizona University, Ecological 
Restoration Institute. http://library.eri.nau.edu/gsdl/
collect/erilibra/index/assoc/HASH9cc9.dir/doc.pdf
Westerling, A.L., H.G. Hidalgo, D.R. Cayan, and T.W. 
Swetnam. 2006. Warming and earlier spring increase 
western U.S. forest wildﬁre activity. Science 313:940- 
943.
WFLC (Western Forestry Leadership Coalition). 2010. Te 
True Cost of Wildﬁre in the Western U.S. http://
www.wﬂccenter.org/news_pdf/324_pdf.pdf
Wildland Fire Leadership Council. 2012. A National 
Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy—
Phase II National Report. May 2012. http://www.
forestsandrangelands.gov/strategy/documents/
reports/phase2/CSPhaseIIReport_FINAL20120524.
pdf (Retrieved 8/19/12).
Wu, T., Y.-S. Kim, and M.D. Hurteau. 2011. Investing in 
natural capital: Using economic incentives to over-
come barriers to forest restoration. Restoration Ecology 
19(4):441-445.

